OF THE CHURCH, FIVE BOOKS.

BY RICHARD FIELD DOCTOR OF DIVINITY AND SOMETIMES DEANE OF GLOUCESTER.

THE SECOND EDITION VERY MVCH AVGmented, in the third book, and the Appendix
to the same.

^PECCATA^TOLLE^QVI^EMISTI^O^AGNE^DEI^IESV^CHRISTE
ECCE^AGN* DEI*
printer's or publisher's device

AT OXFORD Imprinted by WILLIAM TVRNER, Printer to the famous University. 1628.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE THE DVKE OF BVCKINGAM HIS GRACE LORD HIGH ADMIRAL
OF ENGLAND etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THat especial favor which your Grace was pleased to show unto the Author of
this work while he lived, has imboldned me to commend the work it self as
it is now enlarged unto your Gracious protection. And though the Authors
particular obligement had not directed me in my choice, I know not unto whom I
might more fitly have presented it then unto your Grace, who in a more peculiar
manner then others, have undertaken the protection of Scholars. One example
amongst many this Author might have been, had he lived but a little longer,
of your honorable care, for the advancement of learning, and encouragement of
Scholars. The volume which I present unto your Grace, for the bulk and
bigness is not great, especially if it be compared with the writings of our
Adversaries; whose voluminous works would make the ignorant believe, that they
had engrossed all learning unto themselves. But asmany times we may find in
little men that strength of body and vigor of mind which is wanting in those
of greater stature; so experience tells us that amongst books the greatest
are not always the best. Saepius in libro memoratur Persius vno,
Quam leuis in tota Marsus Amazonide.
And those that are acquainted with the writings of our Adversaries are not
ignorant, how for the most part their great volumes are stuffed. If a man will
take the pains to read them, like those that dig in mines for gold, he must
expect to find paruum in magno, but a little gold in a great deal of
unprofitable earth. Of this work I think I might safely say thus much, that
it compriseth much in a little: but I intend not a Panegyrique in the praise
thereof. If I give it not that praise which it deserves, my near relation unto
the Author may be my excuse; seeing whatsoever I should say would seem rather
to proceed from affection then judgment. What my opinion of it is, I think I
have sufficiently expressed in that I have thought it not unworthy your Graces
patronage. And thus praying for the continuance of your Graces prosperous and
happy estate I remain

Your Graces most humbly obliged servant NATHANIEL FIELD.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MY VERY GOOD LORD, THE LORD Archbishop of
CANTERBVRY his Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all England.
MOst Reverend in Christ, the consideration of the unhappy divisions of the
Christian world, and the infinite distractions of men's minds, not knowing in
so great variety of opinions, what to think, or to whom to join themselves,
(every faction boasting of the pure and sincere profession of heavenly truth,
challenging to it self alone the name of the Church; and fastening upon all
that dissent, or are otherwise minded, the hateful note of Schism and
Heresy) has made me ever think, that there is no part of heavenly knowledge
more necessary, than that which concerns the Church. For, seeing the
controversies of Religion in our time, are grown in number so many, and in
nature so intricate, that, few have time and leisure, fewer strength of
understanding to examine them; what remains for men desirous of satisfaction
in things of such consequence, but diligently to search out, which amongst all
the societies of men in the world, is that blessed company of holy ones, that
household of faith, that Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which
is the Pillar and ground of truth; that so they may embrace her communion,
follow her directions, and rest in her judgment. Hence it comes, that all
wise and judicious men; do more esteem books of doctrinall principles, than
those that are written of any other argument; and that there was never any
treasure holden more rich and precious by all them that knew how to prize and
value things aright, than books of prescription against the profane novelties
of Heretics: for that thereby men that are not willing, or not able to
examine the infinite differences that arise amongst men concerning the faith,
have general directions what to follow, and what to avoid. We admit no man,
says Tertullian in his book of prescriptions, to any disputation concerning
sacred and divine things; or to the scanning and examining of particular
questions of Religion, unless he first show us, of whom he received the
faith, by whose means he became a Christian, and whether he admit and hold
the general principles, wherein all Christians do, and ever did agree;
otherwise, prescribing against him, as a stranger from the commonwealth of the
Israel of God, and having no part, nor fellowship in this business. But as in
the days of the Fathers, the Donatists, and other Heretics, including the
Church within the compass of Africa, and such other parts of the world, where
they and their consorts found best entertainment, rejected all other from the
unity of the Church, excluded them from hope of salvation, and appropriated all
the glorious things that are spoken of it, to themselves alone: so in our
time, there are some found so much in love with the pomp and glory of the
Church of Rome, that they fear not to condemn all the inhabitants of the
world and to pronounce them to be Anathema from the Lord Jesus, if they dissent
from that Church, and the doctrine, profession, and observations of it; So
casting into hell, all the Christians of Graecia, Russia, Armenia, Syria, and
Aethiopia, because they refuse to be subject to the tyranny of the Pope, and
the Court of Rome: besides the heavy sentence which they have passed, against
all the famous States and Kingdoms of Europe, which have freed themselves from
the Aegyptiacall bondage, they were formerly holden in. These men abuse many
with the glorious pretenses of antiquity, Unity, Universality, Succession, and
the like; making the simple believe that all is ancient which they profess,
that the consent of all ages is for them, and that the Bishops succeeding one
another, in all the famous Churches of the world, never taught, nor believed
any other thing, than they now do: whereas it is easy to prove, that all the
things wherein they dissent from us, are nothing else but novelties, and
vncertaineties; that the greatest part of the Christian world has been
divided from them for certain hundreds of years; that none of the most
famous, and greatest Churches, ever knew, or admitted, any of their heresies;
and that the things they now publish, as Articles of faith to be believed by
all that will be saved, are so far from being Catholic, that they were not
the doctrines of that Church, wherein they and we sometimes lived together in
one communion, but the opinions only of some men in that Church, adulterating
the doctrine of heavenly truth, bringing in, and defending superstitious
abuses disliked by others, and serving as vile instruments to advance the
tyranny of the Bishop of Rome. Wherefore for the discovery of the vanity of
their insolent boastings, for the co^firming of the weak, the satisfying of
them that are doubtful, and that all men may know, that we have not departed
from the ancient faith, or forsaken the fellowship of the Catholic Church,
but that we have forsaken a part to hold communion with the whole, (led so to
do, by the most prevailing reasons that ever persuaded men, and the greatest
authority on earth) I resolved to communicate to others, what I had long since
in private for mine own satisfactien observed, touching the nature of the
Church, the notes whereby it may be known, and the privileges that pertain
to it. These my simple labors, most Reverend in Christ, I thought it my duty
to offer to your Graces censure, before they should present themselves to the
view of the world; that so, either finding approbation, they might the more
confidently make themselves public, or otherwise be suppressed like the
untimely fruit, that never saw the Sun. The condition of the times wherein
we live is such, that many are discouraged from meddling with the
controversies of Religion, because they are sure (besides the vile slanders,
wicked calumniations, and bitter reproaches, of the common adversaries) to pass
the censures of those men, who, though they will do nothing themselves, yet in
the height of a proud and disdainefull spirit, with many a scornful look,
smile at the follies of other men's writings, as they esteem them. The sinister
judgments of either of these sorts of men, I shall the less regard, for that
it pleased your Grace so lovingly to accept, and so favorably to approve
these my poor pains, bestowed for the clearing of sundry questions concerning
t^ ^rch, which by your direction and appointment I first entered into. It has
bi^ (...) ^he vaunt of the adversaries of the Religion established amongst us,
that (...) written many books against us, and none have been found to oppose
any ^g against them; and that they desire nothing more, then by writing, or
disputing, to ^ic the goodness of their cause. But, I doubt not, but this
National Church, the government whereof under our most gracious Sovereign, is
principally committed to your fatherly care, shall yield men more than
matchable, with the proudest of the adverse faction: who being animated and
hartned by your favor, and guided by your directions, shall no longer suffer
these proud Philistims, to defy the armies of the Lord of Hosts. For though
they proclaim their own praises with loud sounding trumpets, that might have
been piped with an oaten straw; and though they magnify themselves, as if
they were the only Paragons of the world, and as if all wit, and learning, had
bin borne with them, and should die with them: yet whosoever knows them, will
little regard the froath of their swelling words of pride and scorn: seeing
when they have done vaunting, they have done their best, and that which
remains is little worth; their allegations being for the most part nothing
but falsifications: their testimonies of antiquity, the marks and notes of
their ancient forgeries; their reasons, sophismes: their reports, slanders, and
wicked calumniations: their threats, the venting of their malice, and pouring
out of their impotent desires; their predictions, only manifesting what they
wish might be, but no way showing what shall be. In the later days of our late
dread Sovereign Elizabeth of famous and blessed memory, all their books were
nothing but fearful threatenings of bloody confusions, and horrible
dissipations, of Church and commonwealth, which they hoped for, and looked
after, so soon as it should please God to cut off the thread of her blessed
life. But, he that sits in heaven has laughed them to scorn, and branded
them with the mark of false Prophets. For, Elizabeth is gathered to her
fathers in peace, full of days, and full of honor, and yet they have not
bathed their swords in blood as they desired; but God has disappointed all
their purposes, frustrated their hopes, and continued our happiness. Joshua
has succeeded Moses: and Solomon, David: and he that disposes the kingdoms
of men, and gives them to whom he will, has set upon the Throne of Majesty
amongst us, a King of a Religious, Virtuous, and peaceable disposition, to whom
he has given a wise and understanding heart, large as the sands of the sea
shore, whose delight is in the Law of the Lord, who has chosen his testimonies
to be his Counselors; whose constant resolution in matters of faith and
Religion, daunteth the enemies of it; whose admirable understanding in things
Divine, more then for many ages, the world has found in any of his rank,
gives us good assurance, that no frauds of any deceivers shall ever be able to
seduce or misse-lead him: whose blessed Progeny, and Royal issue, makes us
hope, that the felicity of these united kingdoms, shall continue as long as
the Sun and Moon endure: which whosoever desires, and seeks to procure,
Peace be upon him, and upon the Israel of God. Thus craving pardon for this my
boldness, and humbly beseeching Almighty God, long to continue your Graces
happy and prosperous estate, and to make you a glorious instrument of much
good to his Church, I rest.

Your Graces, in all duty, RICHARD FIELD.

WHAT THINGS ARE HANDLED IN THE BOOKS FOLLOWING.
The first Book is concerning the Name, Nature and Definition of the Church;
and the different sorts of them that do pertain unto it.
CHAP. 1. OF the Church consisting of men and Angels, in the day of their
creation. page 1. Chap. 2. Of the calling of grace, whereby God called out both
men and Angels from the rest of his creatures, to be unto him a holy Church
and of their Apostasy. 4. Chap. 3. Of the Church, consisting of those Angels
that continued in their first estate by force of grace upholding them, and men
redeemed. 5. Chap. 4. Of the Church of the redeemed. 7. Chap. 5. Of the
Christian Church. 9. Chap. 6. Of the definition of the Church. 11. Chap. 7. Of
the diverse sorts of them that pertain to the Church. ibid. Chap. 8. Of their
meaning, who say, that the Elect only are of the Church. 13. Chap. 9. Of the
difference of them that are in and of the Church. 14. Chap. 10. Of the visible
and invisible Church. ibid. Chap. 11. Of the diverse titles of the Church, and
how they are verified of it. 17. Chap. 12. Of the diverse sorts of them that
have not yet entered into the Church. 18. Chap. 13. Of the first s^rt of them,
that, after their admission into the Church of God, do voluntarily depart and
go from the same. 19. Chap. 14. Of the second sort of them that voluntarily
go out from the people of God. 20. Chap. 15. Of them whom the Church casts
out by excommunication. 22. Chap. 16. Of the errors, that are, and have been,
touching the use of the discipline of the Church, in punishing offenders. 24.
Chap. 17. Of the considerations moving the Church, to use indulgence toward
offenders. 25. Chap. 18. Of their damnable pride, who condemn all those
Churches wherein want of due execution of discipline, and imperfections of men
are found. 26.
The second Book is of the notes of the Ch^h.
CHAP. 1. OF the nature of notes of difference, and their several kinds. 29.
Chap. 2. Of the diverse kinds of notes whereby the true Church is discerned
from other societies of men in the world. 30. Chap. 3. Of Bellarmines reasons
against the notes of the Church assigned by us. 32. Chap. 4. Of Stapletons
reasons against our notes of the Church. 34. Chap. 5. Of their notes of the
Church, and first of Antiquity. 37. Chap. 6. Of succession. 39. Chap. 7. Of the
third note assigned by them, which is Unity. 40. Chap. 8. Of Universality. 41.
Chap. 9. Of the name and title of Catholic. 42.
The third Book shows which is the true Church demonstrated by those notes.
CHAP. 1. OF the division of the Christian World into the Western or Latin
Church, and the Oriental or East Church. 47. Chap. 2. Of the harsh and
unadvised censure of the Romanists, condemning all the Oriental Churches as
Schismatic all, and heretical. 75. Chap. 3. Of the nature of heresy, of the
diverse kinds of things wherein men err, and what pertinacie it is that
makes an heretic. 76. Chap. 4. Of those things which every one is bound
expressly to know and believe; and wherein no man can err, without note of
heresy. 77. Chap. 5. Of the nature of Schism, and the kinds of it, and that
it no way appears that the Churches of Greece, etc. are heretical, or in
damnable Schism. 80. Chap. 6. Of the Latin Church, that it continued the true
Church of God even till our time, and that the errors, we condemn, were not
the doctrines of that Church. 81. Chap. 7. Of the several points of difference
between us and our adversaries, wherein some in the Church erred, but not the
whole Church. 83. Chap. 8. Of the true Church, which, and where it was bef^
Luthers time. 84. Chap. 9. Of an Apostasy of some in the Church. 86. Chap. 10.
Of their error, who say, nothing can be amiss in the Church, either in
respect of doctrine or discipline. 89. Chap. 11. Of the causes of the manifold
confusions and evils, formerly found in the Church. ibid. Chap. 12. Of the
desire and expectation of a reformation of the corrupt state of the Church, and
that the alteration which has been, is a reformation. 91. Chap. 13. Of the
first reason brought to prove that the Church of Rome holds the faith first
delivered; because the precise time wherein errors began in it, cannot be
noted. 93. Chap. 14. Of diverse particular errors which have been in the
Church; whose first author cannot be named. 94. Chap. 15. Of the second reason
brought to prove that they hold the ancient faith; because our men,
dissenting from them, confess they dissent from the Fathers, where sundry
instances are examined. 96. Chap. 16. Of Limbus Patrum, concupiscence, and
satisfaction, touching which, Calvin is falsely charged to confess, that he
dissenteth from the Fathers. 99. Chap. 17. Of Prayer for the dead, and Merit.
101. Chap. 18. Of the Fathers strictness in admitting men into the Ministry:
of single life, and of their severity in the discipline of repentance. 103.
Chap. 19. Of the Lent Fast, of Laymens Baptism, and of the sacrifice of the
Mass. 106. Chap. 20. Of the invocation and adoration of Saints: touching which
the Century writers are wrongfully charged to dissent from the Fathers. 109.
Chap. 21. Of Martyrdom, and the excessive praises thereof found in the
Fathers. 114. Chap. 22. Wherein is examined their proof of the antiquity of
their Doctrine, taken from a false supposall, that our doctrine is nothing else
but heresy long since condemned. 115. Chap. 23. Of the heresy of Florinus,
making God the author of sin, falsely imputed to Calvin and others. 117.
Chap. 24. Of the heresies of Origin, touching the Image of God, and touching
hell, falsely imputed to Calvin. 133. Chap. 25. Of the heresy of the
Peputians, making women Priests. 134. Chap. 26. Of the supposed heresy of
Proclus and the Messalians, touching concupiscence in the regenerate. 135.
Chap. 27. Of the heresies of Nouatus, Sabellius and the Manichees. 139. Chap.
28. Of the heresies of the Donatists. 141. Chap. 29. Of the heresies of Arrius,
and Aerius. 142. Chap. 30. Of the heresies of Iouinian. 143. Chap. 31. Of the
heresies of Vigilantius. 146. Chap. 32. Of the heresy of Pelagius touching
original sin, and the difference of venial and mortal sins. 147. Chap.
33. Of the heresy of Nestorius, falsely imputed to Beza, and others. 149.
Chap. 34. Of the heresies of certain touching the Sacrament, and how our men
deny that to be the body of Christ that is carried about to be gazed on. 150.
Chap. 35. Of the heresy of Eutiches, falsely imputed to the Divines of
Germany. 151. Chap. 36. Of the supposed heresy of Zenaias Persa, impugning the
adoration of Images. 152. Chap. 37. Of the error of the Lampetians; touching
vows 153. Chap. 38. Of the heresy of certain, touching the verity of the
body and blood of Christ, communicated to us in the Sacrament. ibid. Chap. 39.
Of succession, and the exceptions of the adversaries against us, in respect of
the supposed want of it. 154. Chap. 40. Of succession, and the proof of the
truth of their doctrine by it. 159. Chap. 41. Of unity, the kinds of it, and
that communion with the Roman Bishop, is not always a note of true and
Catholic profession. 160. Chap. 42. That nothing can be concluded for them, or
against us from the note of Unity, or division opposite unto it. 164. Chap. 43.
Of Universality. 169. Chap. 44. Of the Sanctity of doctrine: and the supposed
absurdities of our profession. 170. Chap. 45. Of the Paradoxes and gross
absurdities of Romish religion. 172. Chap. 46. Of the efficacy of the Churches
doctrine. 174. Chap. 47. Of the Protestants pretended confession, that the
Roman Church is the true Church of God. ibid. Chap. 48. Of Miracles confirming
the Roman faith. 175. Chap. 49. Of Prophetical prediction. 177. Chap. 50. Of
the felicity of them that profess the truth. 178. Chap. 51. Of the miserable
ends of the enemies of the truth. ibid. Chap. 52. Of the Sanctity of the lives
of them that are of the Church. 179.
An Appendix to the third book wherein it is proved that the Latin Church
was, and continued a true orthodoxe and protestant Church, and that the
maintainers of Romish errors were only a faction in the same, at the time of
Luthers appearing.
AN answer to M. Brerelyes objection concerning the mass publicly used in
all Churches at Luthers appearing page 185. Chap. 1. Of the canon of the
Scriptures. 224. Chap. 2. Of the sufficiency of the Scripture. 232. Chap. 3.
Of the original text of Scripture, of the certainty and truth of the
originals, and of the authority of the vulgar translation. 238. Chap. 4. Of the
translating of the Scripture into vulgar languages, and of the necessity of
having the public liturgy and prayers of the Church in a tongue understood.
ibid. Chap. 5. Of the three supposed different estates of mere nature, grace,
and sin: the difference between a man in the state of pure and mere nature,
and in the state of sin: and of original sin. 250. Chap. 6. Of the blessed
virgins conception. 264. Chap. 7. Of the punishment of original sin; and of
Limbus puerorum 270. Chap. 8. Of the remission of original sin, and of
concupiscence remaining in the regenerate. 272. Chap. 9. Of the distinction of
venial and mortal sin. 277. Chap. 10. Of free will. 279. Chap. 11. Of
justification. 290. Chap. 12. Of merit. 324. Chap. 13. Of works of
supererogation and Counsels of perfection. 331. Chap. 14. Of Election and
Reprobation depending on the foresight of something in the parties elected or
rejected. ibid. Chap. 15. Of the seven Sacraments. 332. Chap. 16. Of the being
of one body in many places at the same time. ibid. Chap. 17. Of
transubstantiation. 333. Chap. 18. Touching orall Manducation. 334. Chap. 19.
Of the real sacrificing of Christ's body on the Altar, as a propitiatory
sacrifice for the quick and dead. 335. Chap. 20. Of remission of sins after
this life. ibid. Chap. 21. Of Purgatory. 336. Chap. 22. Of the Saints hearing
of our prayers. 337. Chap. 23. Of the superstition and idolatry committed
formerly in the worshipping of Images. 338. Chap. 24. Of Absolution. ibid.
Chap. 25. Of Indulgences and Pardons. 339. Chap. 26. Of the infallibility of
the Popes judgment. 340. Chap. 27. Of the power of the Pope in disposing the
affairs of Princes and their states. ibid.
The fourth Book is of the Privileges of the Church.
CHAP. 1. OF the diverse kinds of the privileges of the Church, and of the
different acceptions of the name of the Church. 343. Chap. 2. Of the different
degrees of infallibility found in the Church. 344. Chap. 3. Of the meaning of
certain speeches of Calvin touching the erring of the Church. 345. Chap. 4.
Of their reasons who think the present Church free from all error in matters
of faith. 346. Chap. 5. Of the promises made unto the Church, how it is secured
from error, and of the different degrees of the obedience, we owe unto it.
348. Chap. 6. Of the Churches office of teaching and witnessing the truth; and
of their error, who think the authority of the Church is the rule of our
faith, and that she may make new articles of faith. 350. Chap. 7. Of the
manifold errors of Papists; touching the last resolution of our faith, and the
refutation of the same. 351. Chap. 8. Of the last resolution of true faith, and
whereupon it stays it self. 355. Chap. 9. Of the meaning of those words of
Augustine, that he would not believe the Gospel, if the authority of the
Church did not move him. 358. Chap. 10. Of the Papists preferring the Churches
authority before the Scripture. ibid. Chap. 11. Of the refutation of their
error, who prefer the authority of the Church before the Scripture. 359.
Chap. 12. Of their error who think the Church may make new articles of faith.
361. Chap. 13. Of the Churches authority to judge of the differences that
arise, touching matters of faith. 362. Chap. 14. Of the rule of the Churches
judgment. 364. Chap. 15. Of the Challenge of Papists against the rule of
Scripture, charging it with obscurity, and imperfection. 365. Chap. 16. Of the
interpretation of Scripture and to whom it pertains. 366. Chap. 17. Of the
interpretation of the Fathers, and how far we are bound to admit it. 368.
Chap. 18. Of the diverse senses of Scripture. 369. Chap. 19. Of the rules we
are to follow, and the helps we are to trust to in interpreting the
Scriptures. 372. Chap. 20. Of the supposed imperfection of Scriptures, and the
supply of Traditions. 373. Chap. 21. Of the rules, whereby true Traditions may
be known from counterfeit. 378. Chap. 22. Of the difference of books
Canonical and Apocryphal. ibid. Chap. 23. Of the Canonical and Apocryphal
books of Scripture. 379. Chap. 24. Of the uncertainty and contrariety found
amongst Papists, touching books Canonical and Apocryphal now controuersed.
382. Chap. 25. Of the diverse editions of the Scripture, and in what tongue it
was originally written. 385. Chap. 26. Of the Translations of the old Testament
out of Hebrew into Greek. 387. Chap. 27. Of the Latin translations, and of the
authority of the vulgar Latin. 388. Chap. 28. Of the truth of the Hebrew Text
of Scripture. 390. Chap. 29, Of the supposed corruptions of the Greek text of
Scripture. ibid. Chap. 30. Of the power of the Church in making Laws. 393.
Chap. 31. Of the bounds, within which, the the power of the Church in making
laws is contained, and whether she may make laws concerning the worship of
God. 394. Chap. 32. Of the nature of Laws, and how they bind, 397. Chap. 33.
Of the nature of Conscience, and how the conscience is bound. ibid. Chap. 34.
Of their reasons, who think that humane Laws do bind the Conscience. 399.
The fifth book is concerning the diverse degrees, orders and callings of those
men, to whom the government of the Church is committed.
CHAP. 1. OF the Primitive and first Church of God in the house of Adam, the
Father of all the living; and the government of same. 409. Chap. 2. Of the
dignity of the first borne amongst the sons of Adam, and their Kingly, and
Priestly direction of the rest. 410. Chap. 3. Of the division of the
preeminences of the first borne amongst the sons of Jacob, when they came out
of Egypt, and the Church of God became National. 411. Chap. 4. Of the
separation of Aaron and his sons, from the rest of the sons of Leui, to
serve in the Priests office, and of the head or chief of that company. 412.
Chap. 5. Of the Priests of the second rank or order. 413. Chap. 6. Of the
Levites. 414. Chap. 7. Of the sects and factions in religion, found amongst the
Jews in latter times. ibid. Chap. 8. Of Prophets, and Nazarites. 416. Chap. 9.
Of Assemblies upon extraordinary occasions. 417. Chap. 10. Of the set Courts
amongst the Jews; their authority and continuance. 418. Chap. 11. Of the
manifestation of God in the flesh, the causes thereof; and the reason why the
second Person in the Trinity rather took flesh, then either of the other. 423.
Chap. 12. Of the manner of the union that is between the Person of the Son of
God, and our nature in Christ, and the similitudes brought to express the
same. 429. Chap. 13. Of the communication of the properties of either nature in
Christ, consequent upon the union of them in his Person, and the two first
kinds thereof. 432. Chap. 14. Of the third kind of communication of
properties, and the first degree thereof. 434. Chap. 15. Of the third kind of
communication of properties, and the second degree thereof. 438. Chap. 16. Of
the work of Mediation; performed by Christ in our nature. 441. Chap. 17. Of
the things which Christ suffered for us, to procure our reconciliation with
God. 445. Chap, 18. Of the nature and quality of the passion and suffering of
Christ. 450. Chap. 19. Of the descending of Christ into hell. 453. Chap. 20. Of
the merit of Christ: of his not meriting for himself, and his meriting for us.
464. Chap. 21. Of the benefits which we receive from Christ. 469. Chap. 22. Of
the Ministry of them to whom Christ committed the publishing of the
reconciliation between God and men, procured by him. 471. Chap. 23. Of the
Primacie of power imagined by our Adversaries to have been in Peter, and their
defense of the same. 479. Chap. 24. Of the preeminence that Peter had amongst
the Apostles, and the reason why Christ directed his speeches specially to him.
486. Chap. 25. Of the distinction of them to whom the Apostles dying left the
managing of Church-affaires, and particularly of them that are to perform the
meaner services in the Church. 488. Chap. 26. Of the orders and degrees of them
that are trusted with the Ministry of the word, and Sacraments, and the
gogouernment of Gods people: and particularly of Lay Elders falsely by some
supposed to be Governors of the Church. 493. Chap. 27. Of the distinction of
the power of Order and Jurisdiction, and the preeminence of one amongst the
Presbyters of each Church, who is named a Bishop. 497. Chap. 28. Of the
division of the lesser titles, and smaller Congregations or Churches, out of
those Churches of so large extent, founded and constituted by the Apostles.
501. Chap. 29. Of Chorepiscopi, or Rural Bishops, forbidden by old Canons to
encroach upon the Episcopal office, and of the institution, and necessary use
of Archpresbyters or Deanes. 504. Chap. 30. Of the form of the government of
the Church, and the institution and authority of Metropolitanes, and
Patriarchs. 510. Chap. 31. Of Patriarchs, who they were: and the reason why
they were preferred before other Bishops. 515. Chap. 32. How the Pope
succeeds Peter, what of right belongs to him, and what it is that he
unjustly claims. 518. Chap. 33. Of the proofs brought by the Romanists for
confirmation of the universality of the Popes jurisdiction and power. 521.
Chap. 34. Of the pretended proofs of the Popes universal jurisdiction, taken
out of the decretall Epistles of Popes. 524. Chap. 35. Of the pretended proofs
of the Popes Supremacy, produced and brought out of the writings of the
Greek Fathers. 533. Chap. 36. Of the pretended proofs of the Popes
Supremacy, taken out of the writings of the Latin Fathers. 539. Chap. 37. Of
the pretended proofs of the Popes universal power, taken from his
intermedling in ancient times, in confirming, deposing, or restoring Bishops
deposed. 550. Chap. 38. Of the weakness of such proofs of the supreme power
of Popes as are taken from their laws, Censures, dispensations, and the
Vicegerents they had in places far remote from them. 556. Chap. 39. Of
Appeals to Rome. 561. Chap. 40. Of the Popes supposed exemption from all
humane judgment, as being reserved to the judgment of Christ only. 571.
Chap. 41. Of the titles given to the Pope, and the insufficiency of the
proofs of his illimited power and jurisdiction taken from them. 582. Chap. 42.
Of the second supposed privilege of the Roman Bishops, which is infallibility
of judgment. 585. Chap. 43. Of such Popes as are charged with heresy, and how
the Romanists seek to clear them from that imputation. 593. Chap. 44. Of the
Popes unjust claim of temporal dominion over the whole world. 602. Chap. 45.
Of the Popes unjust claim to intermedle with the affairs of Princes, and
their States, if not as Soueraign Lord over all, yet at least, in ordine ad
Spiritualia, and in case of Princes failing to do their duties. 609. Chap. 46.
Of the examples of Churchmen deposing Princes, brought by the Romanists. 618.
Chap. 47. Of the civil dominion which the Popes have by the gift of Princes.
632. Chap. 48. Of general Councels and of the end, use, and necessity of them.
642. Chap. 49. Of the persons that may be present in general Councels, and who
they are of whom general Councels do consist. 645. Chap. 50. Of the President
of general Councels. 649. Chap. 51. Of the assurance of finding out the truth,
which the Bishops assembled in general Councels have. 660. Chap. 52. Of the
calling of Councels, and to whom that right pertains. 667. Chap. 53. Of the
power and authority exercised by the ancient Emperors in general Councels,
and of the Supremacy of Christian Princes in causes, and over persons
Ecclesiastical. 677. Chap. 54. Of the calling of Ministers, and the persons to
whom it pertains to elect and ordain them. 686. Chap. 55. Of the Popes
disordered intermedling with elections of Bishops and other Ministers of the
Church, their usurpation, intrusion, and preiudicing the right, and liberty of
others. 696. Chap. 56. Of the ordinations of Bishops and Ministers. 702. Chap.
57. Of the things required in such as are to be ordained Ministers, and of the
lawfulness of their Marriage. 704. Chap. 58. Of Digamie, and what kind of it
it is that debarreth men from entering into the Ministry. 727. Chap. 59. Of
the maintenance of Ministers. 733.
What things are Occasionally handled in the Appendix to the fifth Book.
THat Protestants admit trial by the Fathers. 749. Of Purgatory and Prayer for
the dead. 750. 764. 776. 783. 787. 792. Whether general Councels may err.
761. The opinion of the Greeks concerning Purgatory. 764. Of
Transubstantiation. 770. The opinion of some of the Schoolmen, thinking that
final Grace purges out all sinfulness out of the soul, in the moment of
dissolution. 772. Of the heresy of Aerius. 789. Nothing constantly resolved on
concerning Purgatory in the Roman Church at Luthers appearing. 790. Abuses in
the Roman Church disliked by Gerson. 795. Grosthead opposing the Pope. 809.
The agreement of diverse before Luther with that which Protestants now teach.
813. Of the difference between the German Divines and us, concerning the
Vbiquitary presence and the Sacrament. 819. The differences, of former times
amongst the Fathers, and of the Papists at this day, compared with the
differences that are found amongst Protestants. 823. Of the Rule whereby all
controversies are to be ended. 827. That the Elect never fall totally from
grace once received. 833. What manner of faith is found in infants that are
baptized. 837. Of the saying of Augustine that he would not believe the
Gospel if the authority of the Church did not move him. 841. Of the last
resolution of our faith. 844. 856. Of the sufficiency of the Scripture. 847. Of
Traditions. 849. 892. Of the merit of works and justification. 861. Of the
things required for the attaining of the right understanding of the Scripture.
863. Of the means whereby we may know that the Scriptures are of God. 868. Of
the differences that have bin amongst protestants. 869. That there remained a
true Church under the papacy when Luther began. 880. The Roman Church is not
the same now that it was when Luther began. 881. That we have not departed from
the Church wherein our Fathers lived and dyed, but only from the faction that
was in it. 883.
Errata.
Page Line. 10. 8. Negleing for neglecting. 27. 50. either sort for either God.
marg. respicio te for respicio. 36. 1. which is that society for which is the
true Church, we ask which is that society. 81. marg. ep. 161. for ep. 162. 92.
41. vndoubtfully for undoubtedly. 102. 30. lacis for lacus. leonus for leonis.
107. marg. Alcu^io for Alcuino. 189. marg. immediately it for immediately after
it. 191. 2. nothing of for nothing for 201. 55. which for with 244. 22.
Crocouia for Cr^couia 289. 4. and effect for an effect 292. 2. nor to be for
nor be 39. not only in a twofold for not only a two fold. 322. 45. fortitudinem
for formidinem 338. marg. Rational. diuinorum l. 2. for Rational. diuinorum l.
1. 36. obtains for obtains grace 340. 24. vt for us 345. 47. Church for the
Church. 50. to err for or err 348. 46. Thus he for This he 349. 14. euious
for envious 353. marg. C^nus lib. 1. for C^us l. 2. 357. 24. dubium for dubiam
358. 31. of deltatur 359. 5. definition for definitions 360. marg. lect. for
lect. 2. 362. marg. Canonum for Canonem 363. marg. certa and veridica for certa
and veridica 364. 24. generalily for generality 372. 27. For for Fifthly 375.
55. is was for it was 377. 11. in the matter for in matter 380. 27. Helenists
for Hellenists 479. 38. for for forth 495. 4. as deleatur 496. 23. writing for
writes 520. 12. An^tolius for Anatolius 532. (...). Byz^zenus for Byz^zenus
541. 32. ar for or 551. 52. as deleatur 554. 12. fearing for fearing not 593.
20. toherwise for otherwise 729. 34. non deleatur. 752. marg. fide for fine
779. 54. say for shall say 55. sits for sits 792. 24. take for takes
81^. 52. the for him and the 820. 55. Bc. for (...).

THE FIRST BOOK CONCERNING THE NAME, NATVRE, AND DEFINITION OF THE CHURCH.
CHAP. 1
Of the Church consisting of men and Angels, in the day of their Creation.

Whatsoever comes within the compass of man's conceit and apprehension, is
either the universal perfection of being it self, wherein there is nothing
intermingled of not being, nothing of possibility to be that which already it
is not, which is the nature of God, whose name is Exodus 3. 14. and 6. 3.
Iehoua, Reve. 1. 8.
Which is, which was, and is to come: or else it is finite limited and
restrained to a certain degree, measure; and kind of being, which is the
condition of all things under God. So that as we cannot think aright of God,
but with resolved and undoubted assurance that he is, (For what can be, if
being it self be not?) that he is infinite, and has noe limitation of his
perfections, (for within what bounds or limits shall we compass that, wherein
the fulnesseof being is found?) that he is from everlasting to everlasting,
and knows neither beginning nor end of his continuance: (For how should that
have either beginning or end, wherein there is nothing intermingled of not
being, and so no time nor moment can be imagined wherein it was not, or shall
cease to be?) so we cannot think of any thing else but as finite and
limited, having certain bounds set unto it, within the compass whereof, all
the perfection it possesses and enjoys is contained, as having being after
not being, and so receiving it from another, as limited in continuance as well
as in measure and kind of perfections, having set and certain terms before
which it was not, and a necessity of ceasing to be, if the hand that vpholdeth
it withdraw it self but for a moment. Hence it follows that such is the
nature and condition of all things under God, that they are mixed and
compounded of being and not being, perfection and imperfection, fulness and
want. For howsoever they want nothing, which to the perfecting of their own
kind is required, yet they fail, and come infinitely short of that
perfection, which is found in God the fountain of all being; yea, much is
denied to every of them, which is bestowed on others, and even in respect of
themselves, they are oftentimes that in possibility, which actually they have
not attained unto. Seeing therefore the imperfection of each thing,
presupposes perfection before it, out of which it is taken, whereunto it
tends and endeavors to attain, and whereof it fails; all things under
God having imperfection found in them, and having some part of his Divine
perfections committed unto them, but not in sort answerable to that whence they
are taken, and wherein they are origanally found, look back and hasten to
return to that beginning, whence they came forth, and with fixed eyes, bowed
knees, and hands lifted up, present themselves before him that lives for ever,
which is, which was; and which is to come, with great joy and exultation
pouring forth and returning thankful praises to him, Revel. 5. 1^. and 4. 11.
for whose sake they were created; desiring continuance of that they are,
supply of that they want, and thinking it their greatest happiness, to have
but the least resemblance of his Divine perfections.

Gasper Contarenus lib. 7. primae Philosophiae.
The proceeding of each thing from the first, is like to a straight line drawn
out in length which of all other is the weakest; neither can it be
strengthened, but by being redoubled and bowed back again, whereby it draws
nigh to the nature of a circular line, which of all other is the stro^gest, as
wherein each part yields stay and support to other. All things therefore
after they are come forth from the presence of God, taking view of themselves,
and finding their own imperfect and defective nature, fearing to remove too
far, fly back unto him that made them, for support, comfort and stay, and
like a reflected line return toward the presence of him, for whose sake they
are, and have been created: yet is there nothing found in degree of nature
inferior unto man, that returns so far, and approaches so near, as to
know, see and delight in God, as he is in himself, but all rest contented and
seek to discern, know and enjoy no more of his Divine perfections, than in
themselves they possess and partake of him. So that they express not the
nature of a perfect circle, in which the lines, drawn forth in length, are in
such sort reflected and bowed back again that in their return they stay not,
till they come to the very same point whence they began. This is peculier to
men and Angels, which are carried back with restless motions of unsatisfied
desires, and stay not till they come to the open view, clear vision and happy
fruition of GOD their Creator. Quis fecisti nos ^d te, and inquietum est cor
nostrum donec requiescat in te. Aug. lib. 1. Confess. in ^tio.
O Lord, says Augustine, thou made us for thy self, and our hearts are
restless and unquiet, till they rest in thee.

The reason of this so different condition of men and Angels, from other
things, who so takes a view of the diverse degrees and sorts of things in the
world, cannot but with exceeding great sweetness of delight observe and
discern.

There is nothing which, in sense of want and imperfection, does not endeavor
to return toward God, from whom all good and happy supply of defect and
want proceeds: neither is there any thing found in the world, (all things
being full of defect,) which is not carried with some inclination of desire,
either seeking that it has not, or desiring the continuance of that it has
already received from him, in whom the fulness of all happy good is found.
From hence it comes, that all things incline, tend, and move to that place,
condition and estate, wherein they may enjoy the vtermost of that perfection
they are capable of. This inclination of desire arises and grows in each
thing out of the form thereof, which gives it that degree, measure and kind
of being it has, neither is there any form whence some inclination does not
flow. Those things therefore which have no form, but that which gives them
their natural being, different and distinct from other things, have no
inclination of desire, but natural, to enjoy and possess themselves and
continue that they are, to grow and increase till they come to the full period
of their natural perfection, and to continue the same by turning into their
own substance and nature such things, by addition whereof they may be
nourished, increased and continued. But those things, wherein besides their
natural forms giving them being, by reason of their more spiritual and
immateriall nature, the forms and formal resemblances of other things do ^ine
and appear, have far more large desires, growing out of the forms thus
shining into the, and apprehended by them. And as they are of more or
less^rgenesse of apprehension so are their desires larger and more free, or
shut up within the narrower compass.

The Contarenus lib. de libero Arbitrio.
most perfect and excellent creatures in the world, below the condition of man
have not a general apprehension of all things, but only of some outward
sensible things, in the getting or declining whereof their good does stand and
consist; and therefore have their desires likewise contained within the same
straites, and are like prisoners subject to the will of him that restrains
them, which cannot go at large whither they will. But man is by condition of
his creation free, having no bounds of any one kind of good things within the
compass whereof he is enclosed; but as his understanding is so large, that it
reaches to all things that are, though in kind never so different, and number
never so numberless; so his desires have no limitatio^ to things of any one
kind alone, but are freely carried to the desiring of whatsoever in any kind
or degree of goodness appears to be good. And because in this multiplicitie
of good things nothing is good, but as partaking of the chief good; nothing
better than other, but as coming nearer unto it: therefore for the direction
of all his desires, that he may rightly value and prize each thing, either
preferring or less esteeming it according to the worth thereof, it is
necessary that he know and desire as the chief good, that which indeed is the
chief and principal good, the measure of all the rest, before he can rightly
discern the different degrees of goodness found in things, and so rightly
prefer one before another.

And this doubtless is the reason why no other creatures but only men and
Angels are capable of felicity and bliss; because the greatest good they
know or desire is but some particular thing, and that not better than
themselves; but men and Angels, in whom so great perfection of knowledge is
found, that they apprehend the whole variety and multiplicity of things, and
all the different degrees of goodness in them, never have their desires
satisfied till they possess and enjoy that sovereign; infinite and
everlasting good; by participation whereofall things else in their several
kinds and degrees are judged good. This glorious society of men and Angels,
whom the most high God; (passing by all his other creatures) made capable of
felicity and bliss, calling them to the view, sight, and enjoying of himself,
is rightly named Ecclesia, coetus evocatus, the Church of the living God, the
joyful company of them among whom his greatness is known and his name called
upon, the multitude which by the sweet motions of his Divine grace he has
called out to the participation of eternal happiness.

CHAP. 2
Of the calling of grace, whereby God called out both men and Angels from the
rest of his creatures, to be unto him a holy Church: and of their Apostasy.

ALl Virtus naturae ordinat act^ ^um in bonum per naturam, quia non est supra
naturam, and ideo potest in illum ordinem and sine dispositione nova far
ad^ocum. Actus rationali^ creaturae meritorius oportet quod o^dmetur ad bonum,
quod est supr^ ipsam, quod est summum bonum and infinitum. Quia ergo non (...)
possibilis, extensio rationals creaturae supra seipsam, ideo non est ei
possibile per naturam vt ordinet suum actum, sieve perveniat in suum finem: and
ideo necesse est vt invetur gratia. Et post. Duplex est cognitio de Deo. Vna
per effectus su^, and haec est fine gratia, alia per praesentiam sui apud
animam, and haec est pe^ g^atiam. Praesen^ autem est in quantum p^sentat, seu
p^sentemfacit beatitudinem, quae est in ipso; in habitu tantum, vt in par^ulis;
in affectu tantum, vt in adultis; in habitu, affectu and intellectu, vt in
beatis. Alex. de H^es part. 3. ^61. (...). (...). 1.
other things seeking no higher perfection nor greater good, than is found
within the compass of their own nature, by natures guiding without the help
of any other thing attain thereunto: but men and Angels which seek an
infinite and Divine good, even the everlasting and endless happiness, which
consists in the vision of God, at whose right hand are pleasures for
evermore, cannot attain their wished good, which is so high and excellent, and
far removed from them, unless by supernatural force, which we call grace,
they be lifted up unto it. For though by nature they know God, so far forth
as by his effects and glorious works he may be known; yet as he is in
himself they know him not, farther than in the light of grace and glory he is
pleased to manifest himself unto them, thereby addmitting them to the joyful
sight, and blessed view of his glorious Majesty, Which dwells in light that
no creature, by it self, can approach unto. Oftendam tibi o^e bon^. Exo. 33.
19.
This is true and perfect happiness, to see the face of God: which to behold
is the height of all that good which any creature can desire. Joan Picus
Heptapli l. 7. in pro^mio
To this the Angels may be lifted up, to this they cannot ascend by
themselves; to this man cannot go, to this he may be drawn, according to
that our Savior delivers of himself, John 6. 44.
No man comes unto me, unless my Father draw him. Those things which are
inferior unto man, can neither attain by themselves, nor be drawn, nor
lifted up to the partaking of this so happy and joyful an estate. The vapor
of water goes up on high, but not unless it be drawn with the beams and
sweet influence of the Sun: but more gross and earthly things, can neither
ascend of themselves, nor admit into them these heavenly beams, to raise and
draw them up. Among bodily substances, some are carried only with a straight
and direct motion, either to the highest or lowest places of the world: which
motion expresses the condition of those things to the which God has denied
the knowledge and immediate enjoying of himself, which are established in the
perfection of their own nature, and therein rest without seeking any further
thing. Some with circular motion, by which they return to the same point
whence they began to move. The motion of these expresses the nature and
condition of men and Angels, who only are capable of true happiness, whose
desires are never satisfied, till they come back to the same beginning whence
they came forth, till they come to see God face to face, and to dwell in his
presence. None but immortal and incorruptible bodies are rolled with circular
motions: none but Angels that are heavenly spirits, and men whose souls are
immortal, return back to the sight, presence, and happy enjoying of God
their Creator. Each thing is carried in direct motion, by natures force, in
circular, by heavenly movers. Every thing attaineth natures perfection, by
natures force and guidance; but that other which is Divine and supernatural,
consisting in the vision and fruition of God, they that attain unto it, must
impute it to the sweet motions and happy directions of Divine grace.

This grace God vouchsafed both men and Angels in the day of their creation,
thereby calling them to the participation of eternal happiness, and giving
them power that they might attain to the perfection of all happy and desired
good if they would, and everlastingly continue in the joyful possession of the
same. But such was the infelicitie of these most excellent creatures, that
knowing all the different degrees of goodness found in things, and having
power to make choice of what they would, joined with that mutability of nature
which they were subject unto in that they were made of nothing, August. de
Civitate Dei. lib. 12. c. 8.
they fell from the love of that which is the chief and greatest good to those
of meaner quality, and thereby deprived themselves of that sweet and happy
contentment they should have found in God; and denying to be subject to their
great sovereign, and to perform that duty they owed unto him, were justly
dispossessed of all that good, which from him they received, and under him
should have enjoyed; yea all other things which were made to do them service,
lost their native beauty and original perfection, and became feeble, weak,
unpleasant and intractable, that in them they might find as little contentment
as in themselves. August. de libero Arbitrio. lib. 3. cap. 15.
For seeing nothing can prevail or resist against the laws of the omnipotent
Creator: no creature is suffered to deny the yielding of that, which from it
is due to God. For either it shall be forced to yield it by right using of that
which from him it received, or by loosing that which it would not use well; and
so consequently, if it yield not that by duty it should, by doing and working
righteousness, it shall by feeling smart and misery. This then was the fall
of men and Angels from their first estate, in that by turning from the greater
to the lesser good, they deprived themselves of that blessedness which though
they had not of themselves, yet they were capable of, and might have attained
unto, by adhering to the chief and immutable good, and so by their fault fell
into those greevous evils they are now subject unto; yet in very different sort
and manner.

CHAP. 3.
Of the Church, consisting of those Angels that continued in their first estate
by force of grace upholding them, and men redeemed.

THe Fall of Angels was irrecouerable; For without all hope of any better
estate, or future deliverance out of those evils, (into the bottomless gulf
whereof, by their rebellious sin they plunged themselves,) they are reserved
in chains of darkness, to the judgment of the great day. But concerning the
sons of men, the Lord knew whereof they were made, and remembered that they
were but dust. He looked upon them with the eye of pity and in the multitude
of his compassionate mercies, said of them as it is in the Prophet Ierem. 8. 4.
Jeremy, Shall they fall, and shall they not arise? shall they turn away, and
shall they not return? as high as the heavens is above the earth, so great was
his mercy toward the^: As far as the East is from the West, so far
removed he their sins from them, he redeemed their life from hell, and
crowned them with mercy and compassion.

Alex. de Hales part. 3. q. 1. memb. 2.
The reason of this so great difference, as the Schoolmen think, is: First,
for that the Angels are not by propagation one from another, but were created
all at once, so that of Angels some might fall and others stand: But men
descend by generation from one stock or root, and therefore the first man
falling and corrupting his nature, derived to all his posterity a corrupted
and sinful nature: if therefore God had not appointed a redemption for man,
he had been wholly deprived of one of the most excellent creatures that ever
he made; whereas among the Angels, notwithstanding the Appostasie of some, he
held still innumerable in their first estate. Secondly, the Angels fell of
themselves, but man by the suggestion of another. Thirdly, the Angels in the
height of their pride, sought to be like unto God in omnipotency, which is an
incommunicable property of divine being, and cannot be imparted to any
creature. But men desired only to be like unto God in omniscience and the
general knowledge of all things, which may be communicated to a creature, as
in Christ it is to his humane soul: which notwithstanding the union with God,
yet still remains and continues a created nature, and therefore the degree
of sinful transgression was not so greevous in the one, as in the other.
Fourthly, the Angels were immateriall and intellectual spirits, dwelling in
heavenly palaces, in the presence of God and the light of his countenance, and
therefore could not sin by error or misperswasion, but of purposed malice
which is the sin against the holy Ghost, and is irremissible: But man fell by
misperswasion, and being deceived by the lying suggestion of the spirit of
error. Fifthly, the Angels have the fullness of intellectual light; when they
take view of any thing, they see all that any way pertains to it; and so do
all things with so full resolution, that they never alter nor repent: But man
who finds out one thing after another, and one thing out of another, does
dislike upon farther consideration, that which formerly he liked. Whereupon the
Schoolmen note that there are three kinds of wills; The first of God, which
never turns nor alters; the second of Angels, that turns and returns
not; the third of men, that turns and returns. Sixthly, there is a time
prefixed both to men and Angels, after which there is no possibility of
altering their estate, bettering themselves, or attayning any good; Now as
death is that time prefixed unto men, so was the first good or badde deliberate
action to the Angels; that who would, might be perpetually good; who would not,
no grace should ever after restore them again. Damasc. lib. 2. Orthodoxae
fidei. cap. 4.
Hoc est Angelis casus, quod hominibus mors. says Damascene. The reason why
God limited so short a time to them, and assigned so long a time to men, was,
because they were spiritual substances, all created at once, and that in the
empyreall heavens; and so both in respect of nature, condition, and place, were
most readily prepared, disposed, and fitted for their immediate everlasting
glorification; so that it was fit there should be set unto them a short time to
make choice of their future state, never after to be altered again, to wit,
till their first deliberate conversion unto him, or auersion from him.

But man being created in a natural body, to fill the world with inhabitants
by procreation, being set in a place far removed, even in an earthly
paradise, had a longer time set him before he should be in final stay, or have
his last judgment pass upon him, to wit, till death for particular, and till
the end of the world for general judgment, when the number of mankind shall
be full. These are the reasons that moved Almighty God that spared not the
Angels, to show mercy unto the sons of men.

So that as god, in the day of the creation, called forth all both men and
Angels from among the rest of his creatures, to whom he denied the knowledge
and enjoying of himself, that these only might know, fear, and worship him
in his glorious Temple of the world, and be unto him a selected multitude and
holy Church; so when there was found amongst these a dangerous Apostasy, and
departure from him, 1. Tim. (...). 21. et Jude verse 6.
he held of the Angels so many as he was pleased, and suffered them not to
decline or go aside with the rest; and raised up and severed out of the mass
of perdition, whom he would among the sons of men. The Angels now confirmed
in grace, and those men whom in the multitude of his mercies he delivers out
of the state of condemnation, and reconcileth to himself, do make that happy
society of blessed ones, whom God has loved with an everlasting love. This
society is more properly named the Church of God, than the former, consisting
of men and Angels, in the state of that integrity wherein they were Mayor
libertas est necessaria adversus tot and tantas tentationes quae in Paradiso
non fuerunt dono perseverantiae munita et firmata, vt cu^ omnibus amoribus,
terroribus, erroribus suis vincatur hic mundus. Hoc Sanctorum martyria
docuerunt: denique ille Adam, and terrente nullo and insuper contra Dei
terrentis imperium libero vsus arbitrio non stetit in tanta felicitate, in
tanta non peccandi facilitate. Isti autem non dico terrente mundo sed saeuiente
ne starent, steterunt in fide: cum videret ille bona praesentia quae erat
relicturus, isti futu^a quae acceptuti fuerunt non viderent. vnde illud, Nisi
donante illo, etc. Aug. de Correp. and gratia. Cap. 12.
created, in that they which pertain to this happy company, are called to the
participation of eternal happiness, with the calling of a more mighty, potent
and prevailing grace then the other. For whereas they were partakers only of
that grace, which gave them power to attain unto, and continue in the
perfection of all happy good, if they would, and then In tanta felicitate, and
non peccandi facilitate, in so great felicity and facility of not offending,
left to themselves to do what they would and to make their choice at their
own peril; These are partakers of that grace, which wins infallibly,
holds inseparably, and leads indeclinably, in the ways of eternal
blessedness.

CHAP. 4.
Of the Church of the Redeemed

ALl these, as well Angels that stood by force of grace upholding them, as men
restored by renewing mercy, have a most happy fellowship among themselves, and
therefore make one Church of God: yet for that the sons of men have a more
full communion and perfect fellowship, being all delivered out of the same
miseries, by the same benefit of gracious mercy; Therefore they make that more
special society, which may rightly be named the Church of the redeemed of God.
This Church began in him in whom sin began, even in Wisd. 10. 1.
Adam the father of all the living, repenting after his fall and returning to
God. For we must not think, that God was without a Church among men at any
time; but so soon as Adam had offended, and was called to give an account of
that he had done, (hearing that voice of his displeased Lord and Creator, Genesis
3. 9.
Adam, where art thou? that so he might know in what estate he was by reason of
his offense) the promise was made unto him, Genesis 3. 1 5.
that the seed of the woman should break the serpents head. Yet for that Genesis
4. 4.
Abel was the first that the Scripture reports to have worshipped God with
sacrifice, and to have been divided from the wicked in whom GOD had no
pleasure, even Genesis 4. 8.
cursed Cain, that afterward shed his innocent blood, therefore we usually say
the Church or chose^ company of the redeemed of the Lord began in Abel: who
being slain by Cain, God restored his Church again in Genesis 4. 25.
Seth, in whose race and posterity he continued his true worship Genesis 6.
till Noe. Genesis 7.
In whose time the wickedness of men being full, he brought in the flood and
destroyed the whole world, Noe only and his family excepted, whom he made a
preacher of righteousness to the world, before and after the flood, and chose
(from among his children) Genesis 10. 21.
Sem his eldest son, in whose race he would continue the pure and sincere
knowledge of himself, and the expectation of that promised seed that should
break the serpents head.

This Sem was the father of all the sons of Heber (of whom the people of god
were afterward named Hebrews) who was also Hieron. in Epist. ad Evagrium. 1.
Genesis 9. 26.
as some think Melchisedech, in whose posterity the true Church continued; so
that God vouchsafed to be called the God of Sem, till the days of Abraham, in
whose time there being a great declining to Idolatry after the flood, as there
was in the days of Noe before the flood, so that the defection was found not
only amongst those that descended of Cham and Iaphet, but even among the
children of Sem and the sons of Heber also, of whom Abraham was; Gen 12. 1.
God called him out from his fathers house, Gen 15. 5.
and gave him the promise that he would make his seed as the stars of heaven
in number, and that Genesis 12. 3.
in his seed all the nations of the world should be blessed, and Genesis 17. 9.
gave him the seal of circumcision, so that all posterities have ever honored
him with the name and title of the father of the faithful. This man obtained a
son by Genesis 15. 4. and 17. and 21. 2. 3.
promise in his old age, when Sara his wife was likewise old, and it ceased to
be with her after the manner of women, and named his name Isaac, of whom came
Esau and Jacob, concerning whom GOD pronounced ere they were yet borne, or had
done good or evil, Genesis 25. 23.
The Elder shall serve the younger, Malac. 1. 2. 3.
I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau. Genesis 32. 28.
Jacob therefore prevailed with God, and was named Israel, the father of the
twelve Patriarchs, of whom came the twelve Tribes of Israel, and that chosen
Nation of holy Hebrews, who were also named Jews of Judah the Patriarch, to
whom the Scepter and kingly dignity pertained, (...) Genesis 49. 8. 10
to whom his fathers sons bowed according to the tenor of Jacobs blessing,
concerning whom the Lord did promise, that the Scepter should not depart from
Judah, nor a law giver from between his feet, till the Shilo were come. Great
was the honor of this people above all the Nations of the World, for Romans 3. 2.
unto them were committed the Oracles of GOD, Romans 9. 4. 5.
to them pertained the adoption and glory, and the covenants, and the giving of
the Law, and the service of GOD, and the promises, of whom were the fathers,
and of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all blessed for
ever, the propitiation for sins, the merit of reconciliation, Luke 2. 32.
the glory of Israel, and the light of the Gen^iles, Philip. 2. 9. 10
to whom God gave a name above all names, that at the naming thereof all knees
do bow, both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth, Nazianz. Orat. 4. de filio (...).
in whom all things appear full of mercy, and full of marvel. God, before
all eternities, yet made man in time; begotten before all times, yet borne in
time; borne of a woman, yet a Virgin, enclosed in the womb of Mary his
Mother, yet even then known of John his forerunner, yet in the womb of
Elizabeth his Mother likewise, who sprang for joy at the presence of the
Eternal Word. He was borne in Bethlehem the meanest of the cities of Judah,
wrapped in swaddling bands, and laid in a manger, yet glorified by the Angels,
pointed to by a star, and adored by the Sages that came from far. He was no
sooner borne into the World, but Herod sought his life, so that he was forced
to fly into Egypt whilst he did yet hang on his mothers breasts, but he
ouer-threw and brake in pieces all the Idols of Egypt. The Jews saw no beauty
in his face, nor glory in his countenance, yet David in spirit long before
pronounced, that he was fairer than the sons of men; and being transfigured
in the mount, his face did shine like the Sun, and gave a taste of that
glory, wherein he will return to judge the quick and dead: he was baptized
as a man, but forgave sins as God, not washed by those waters, but purifying
them rather, and filling them with sanctifying force and power; he was tempted
as a man, but ouer-comming as GOD, makes us confident, because he has
overcome the world; he was hungry, but fed many thousands, and was the true
Bread that came down from Heaven; he thirsted but cried aloude, If any man
thirst let him come unto me, and promises, to every one that believes in him,
that rivers of waters shall flow out of his belly. He was weary, but promised
rest to all them that are weary and come unto him; he slept, but waking stilled
the tempest, and commanded the wind and the sea; he paid tribute, but out of
the mouth of a fish taken in the sea; he prayed, but hears our prayers; he
wept, but wipeth all tears from our eyes; he was sold for thirty pence, but
redeemed the World with a great and inestimable price; he was led as a
sheep to the slaughter, but he is the great shepherd that feeds the Israel
of God; he was beaten and wounded, but cures all our weakness, and heals
all our sickness; he died, was buried, and descended into hell, but he rose
again, and ascended into heaven, where he sits on the right hand of the
highest Majesty, till all his enemies be made his foot stool. This was he
whom all the Fathers looked for, all the Prophets prophesied of, whom all the
Ceremonies, Sacrifices, and Jewish observations led unto, in whom that which
was foretold was fulfilled, that which was imperfect supplied, and all things
changed into a better estate, so that by his coming all things are become new,
a new Priesthood, a new Law, a new Covenant, new Sacraments, and a new people,
John 4. 23.
that worship not at Jerusalem, or in the Temple alone, but (without respect of
place) worship God in spirit and truth.

CHAP. 5.
Of the Christian Church.

THE society of this new and blessed people began in the Apostles, whom Christ
the anointed Savior of the World did chose to be his followers, and to be
witnesses of all the things he did and suffered among sinful men. To these our
Savior Christ after his resurrection, gave most ample Commission Mat. 28. 19.
20.
to teach the Nations and people of the world, Luke 24. 45. 46. 47. 48.
and to preach repentance and remission of sins in his Name, opening their
understandings that they might understand the Scripture, that so it be^oued him
to suffer, and to rise again the third day, whereof they were witnesses, Acts
1. 4.
Yet commanded he them to tarry in Jerusalem, till they were endued with power
from above, Acts 2. 1.
which was performed unto them in the feast of Pentecost, when all they that
looked for the redemption of Israel by this anointed Savior, and had been his
followers, after his departure from them and returning to the heavens, were
assembled into one place, and suddenly heard as it were the noise of a mighty
and rushing wind, and there appeared unto them cloven tongues like fire; and
sat upon every of them, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and
began to speak with other tongues, as the spirit gave them utterance; so that
though there were dwelling at Jerusalem, men that feared God of every nation
under heaven, yet they all heard them speak in their own tongues the
wonderful works of God. Here was the beginning of that blessed company,
which for distinctions sake we call the Christian Church, as consisting of
them that believe in Christ now already come in the flesh.

And though the Church of the Old and New Testament be in essence the same,
yet for that the state of the Church of the New Testament is in many respects
far more glorious and excellent, the Fathers and Ecclesiastical Writers
forth mostpart appropriate the name of the Church, to the multitude of
believers sincethe coming of Christ, and call the faithful people that were
before by the name of the Synagogue. If this difference of names be retained
only for distinction sake, (that men may know when we speak of that moity of
the people of God that was before, and when of that other that is and has
been since the coming of Christ) we dislike it not.

The Greek words which we turn Church and Synagogue, the one originally and
properly signifies a multitude called out, or called together, which is proper
to men; the other a multitude congregated and gathered together, which is
common to men with brute beasts. If any man having an eye to the different
original significations of these words, do thereupon infer, that the people
of GOD, before the coming of Christ, did seek nothing but earthly, outward,
and transitory things, and so were gathered together like brute beasts, and
like oxen fatted to the day of slaughter, we detest and accurse so wicked and
damnable a construction. Catech. Trident. in explicatione Symboli.
And herein surely the Catechism of Trent cannot well be excused, which
abusing the authority of Augustine upon the Quimv^ proprie dicatur syn^ga
Iud^corum, Ecclesia vero Christianorum, quia Congregatio magis pec^um.
Convocatio magis hominum intelligi solet, ta^en and illam dictam invenimus
Ecclesiam, and nobis fortassis magis convenit dicere, Salva no^ Domine noster,
and congrega no^ de Gentibus, ut consite^mur nomini sancto tuo^neque dedignari
no^ oportet, imo gratias incffabiles agere, quia famous oves (...) eius, quas
praevidebat cum dicere^, Habeo alias over. Aug. in Psalm. 77.
Psalm 77, and Synagoga dicitur populus Israel, cum vtique quamvis vero Deo
mancip^us vider^tur, pro magnis tamen and sum^is bonis ab illo car^lia (...)
and temporalia requir^bat. Aug. in Psalm. 8^. Sed in Psalm. 72. ostendit, vt^que
multi animadertentes quae promiserit Deus populo sito, ^empe (...) ^sum
terren^, patriam, p^, and (...) ^errenam, and non considerantes in his omnibus
figur^ esse, (...) intelligentes quid ibi laterer, pa^rent non habere Deum
melius quod daret diligentibus se^suisse tamen Prophetas and alios quosdam
intellectores reg^i coele^is and ae^i, qui non pro temporalibus sed
spiritualibus bonis Domino servirent.
81. affirms that the name of Synagogue is therefore applied to the pe^ that
were under the Law, because like brute beasts (which most properly are said to
be congregated or gathered together) they respected, intended, and sought
nothing, but only outward, sensible, earthly, and transitory things. Which
unadvised speech, howmuch it advantageth the Anabaptists, H who think the
faithful people Calvin. institut. lib. 2. cap. 10. 1.
before Christ did only taste of the sweetness of Gods temporal blessings,
without any hope of eternal happiness, any man of mean understanding may
easily discer^e. It is therefore not to be doubted, but that the (...), before
the manifestion of Christ in the flesh, Hebr. 11. 13. 14. 15. 16.
were so instructed of the L^d, that they assured themselves (...) was a better
life for them else where and that, neglecting this earthly, ^any and w^ched
life they principally sought the other, which is Divine and Heavenly.
Notwithstanding, some (...) there was between their estate and ours, in that
though the Lord raised their minds from base and earthly things, to know,
seek, and desire the heau^ly inheritance, and life of the world to come, yet
that they might the better^ strengthened, in the hope and expectation thereof,
he made them take a ^ew of it, and taste the sweetness of it in those
temporal and earthly blessings and benefits, which most abundantly he bestowed
upon them: whereas now, the grace of the life that is to come being more
clearly revealed by the (...) (omitting all that inferior kind of
manuduction or leading by the hand, through the consideration, sight and
enjoying of these meaner things) he does more directly, and immediately fasten
our thoughts on things divine.

For the expressing of this difference, and the more easy distinction of the
two moities of the people of God, the one before, the other after the work of
redemption was performed by Christ, though both be rightly, and most aptly
named the Church of God; yet it has been and is religiously observed, that by
a kind of appropriation the one is named the Synagogue, the (...) the Church.
Neither do any of our Divines (for ought I know) call this society of
Christians a Synagogue, though (following the rule of Aliud est Etymologia
nominis, and aliud significatio nominis. Etymologia attenditur secundum id a
quo imponitur nomen ad significandum: Nominis vero significatio secundum id ad
quo significandum imponitur. 2. 2. q. 92. art. 1.
Thomas, that (...) we must not so much respect their original, exact, and
precise signification, or d^rivation, as whereunto they are by use of speech
applied) we use the word congregation, which is the Latin of (...), and fear
not to say that the people of God, in the state of the new Testament, are the
Congregation of Christ, and are congregated in his faith and name: even as,
though (...), Ecclesia, (...) catio, caetus evocatus, a multitude called out,
or called together, both Greek Latin, and English words, do originally
signify one and the same thing; yet there are many meetings, societies, and
assemblies of men, which may rightly be called convocations, multitudes called
together, or multitudes of men called out from others, which if we should
endeavor to express by the Greek word (...), or by the English word Church,
it would seem absurd, and no man would understand us. It follows not
therefore, that we call the company and society of Christians a Synagogue,
though we name it the Congregation of Christ, warranted thereunto by the
authority, example, and Practice of the Apostles of Christ, and other holy and
Catholic men that have been before us. Let us consider one another to
provoke unto love, and good works, says the Apostle in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. 10, verse. 25.
chapter, not forsaking our assembling or congregating, and gathering together,
or the fellowship we have among our selves, as the manner of some is; where the
Greek word is (...). And the same Apostle to the 1. Cor: 5. 4.
Corinthians, when you are congregated, and ^y spirit in the midst of you, I
will deliver, this man, that has done this thing unto Satan. And who knows
not that Ignatius Epist. ad Tralli^nos says, that without the Bishop and
Pr^yters there can be no congregation of (...), where the word is (...).
all writers, since the Apostles times, have freely used the word Congregation,
applying it to signify the multitudes and assemblies of Christians. In the
Council of Constance nothing more often repeated, than Synodus in spiritu
sancto congregata etc. Yet I hope that Gregory Martin, and other such verbal
companions, will not say that the fathers assembled in that Council, which
ended the Schism of three Popes, and settled the succession of the Bishops of
Rome again, were congregated, and gathered like brute beasts. It is not
therefore with so great scorn, and imputation of dangerous and heretical
meaning to be rejected, that our translatours of the Scriptures did, and do
sometimes translate the word Ecclesia, used to express the Christian people of
the new Testament, by the name of the Congregation.

The reason why our translatours, in the beginning, did choose rather to use
the word Congregation then Church, was not as the adversary maliciously
imagines, for that they feared the very name of the Church; but because, as by
the name of religion and religious men, ordinarily in former times, men
understood nothing but factitias religiones, as Religio Christiana quamvis
extendat se ad omnem Christianum, attamen appropriato quodam vsu loquentium
restringitur ad religiones quas Anselmus appellat Factitias Gerson. de Relig.
perfectione and moderatione, Consid. 3. et ibid. addit ecclesiae nomen ad
Clerum solere restringi, sicut religionis ad Religatos circa consilia Christi.
Gerson out of Anselme calls them, that is the professions of Monks and
Friars: So all the ordinary sort, when they heard the name of the Church,
understood nothing else thereby, but either the material place where men met
to serve and worship God, or the Clergy, Jurisdictions, and Temporalities
belonging to them; as the same Gerson shows, Sermo in die Circumcisionis Dom.
Consid. 1.
affirming that the state of the Church in his time was mere brutish, so that
men judged him a De origin iuris et legum consid. 13.
good Bishop and governor of the Church, that looked well to the Edifices,
Mansions, Lands, Rents, and Revenewes pertaining to the Clergy, not much
respecting, what care he took of the spiritual welfare of them that were
committed to his charge. When this error in the conceit and apprehension of
men was removed, the former name of Church was more ordinarily used again.
Wherefore leaving this contention about words, wherein our adversaries most
delight, let us come to the thing it self.

CHAP. 6.
Of the definition of the Church.

COncerning the Church, five things are to be observed. First, what is the
definition of it, and who pertain unto it. Secondly, the notes whereby it may
be known. Thirdly, which is the true Church demonstrated by these notes.
Fourthly, the privileges that do pertain unto it. Fifthly, the diverse
degrees, orders, and callings of those men, to whom the government of this
Church is committed.

Touching the first; the Church is the multitude and number of those, whom
Almighty God severeth from the rest of the world by the work of his grace, and
calls to the participation of eternal happiness, by the knowledge of such
supernatural verities as concerning their everlasting good he has revealed
in Christ his son, and such other precious, and happy means, as he has
appointed to further and set forward the work of their salvation. So that it
is the work of grace, and the heavenly calling, that give being to the Church,
and make it a different society from all other companies of men in the world,
that have no other light of knowledge, nor motion of desire, but that which is
natural; whence, for distinction from them; it is named Ecclesia, a multitude
called out.

CHAP. 7.
Of the diverse sorts of them that pertain to the Church.

THey that are partakers of the heavenly calling, and sanctified by the
profession of divine truth, and the use of the means of salvation, are of very
diverse sorts. For there are some that profess the truth delivered by Christ
the Son of God, but not wholly, and entirely, as Heretics, some that
profess the whole saving truth, but not in unity, as Schismatickes; some that
profess the whole saving truth in unity, but not in sincerity, and singleness
of a good and sanctified mind, as Hypocrites and wicked men, not outwardly
divided from the people of GOD; and some that profess the whole saving truth
in unity, and sincerity of a good and sanctified heart.

All these are partakers of the heavenly calling, and sanctified by the
profession of the truth, and consequently are all in some degree and fort of
that society of men, whom GOD calls out unto himself, and separateth from
Infidels, which is rightly named the Church. These being the different ranks
of men, made partakers of the heavenly calling, and sanctified by the
profession of saving truth, there are diverse names by which they are expressed,
and distinguished one from another.

For as the name of the Church does distinguish men that have received the
revelation of supernatural truth, from Infidels; and the name of the Christian
Church, Christians from Jews; so the name of the Orthodoxe Church, is applied
to distinguish right believing Christians from Heretics; the name of the
Catholic Church, men holding the Faith in unity, from Schismatiques; the name
of the invisible Church, Heb. 12. 23,
the Church of the first borne, whose names are written in heaven, the
mystical body of Christ, and the like, to distinguish the elect from all the
rest: so that many were of the Church which were not of the Christian Church,
as the Jews before the coming of Christ; many of the Christian Church that
are not of the Orthodoxe; many of the Orthodoxe, that are not of the
Catholic; and many of the Catholic, that are not of the invisible, and
Church of the first borne, whose names are written in heaven.

Thus then the Church having her being and name, from the calling of grace, all
they must needs be of the Church, whom the grace of God in any sort calls
out from the profane, and wicked of the world, to the participation of eternal
happiness, by the excellent knowledge of divine, supernatural, and revealed
verity, and use of the good, happy, and precious means of salvation: but they
only perfectly, and fully in respect of outward being, which profess the
whole truth in unity; and they only principally, fully, and absolutely are of
the Church, whom divine grace leads infallibly, and indeclinably by these
means, to the certain and undoubted possession of wished blessedness;
because in them only grace manifests her greatest and most prevailing force,
without which efficacy of grace, winning infallibly, holding inseparably, and
leading indeclinably, no man ever attained to salvation; and of which whosoever is
partaker shall undoubtedly be saved.

In the benefits of this grace, none but the elect and chosen of God, whom he
has loved with an everlasting love, have any part of fellowship, though others
concur with them in the use of the same means of salvation, and be
partakers with them of sundry inward motions inclining them to good. When we
say therefore that none but the elect of God are of the Church; we mean not
that others are not at all, nor in any sort of the Church, but that they are
not Ecclesia praecipue and ex intention sideles tantum colligit, qui veram
fidem in cord habent. Cum autem admiscentur aliqui ficti qui vere non credunt,
id accidit praeter intentionem Ecclesiae. Si enim eos nosse posset, nunquam
admitteret, aut casu admissos continuo exclude et. Bellarm. de Ecclesia lib. 3.
cap. 10.
principally, fully, and absolutely; and that they are not of that especial
number of them, who partake and communicate in the most perfect work, force,
and effect of saving grace.

CHAP, 8.
Of their meaning, who say, that the Elect only are of the Church.

THis was the meaning of Wickliffe, Husse and others, who therefore define the
Church to be the multitude of the Elect, not for that they think them only to
pertain to the Church, and no others, but because they only pertain unto it
principally, fully, effectually, and finally, and in them only is found that
which the calling of grace (whence the Church has all her being) intends, to
wit, such a conversion to God, as is joined with final perseverance, whereof
others failing and coming short, they are only in an inferior and more
imperfect sort, said to be of the Church.

The elect and chosen of God are of two sorts; some elect only and not yet
called; some both elect and called. Of the latter there is no question but they
are the most principal parts of the Church of God. Touching the former, they
are not actually of the Church, but only secundum praescientiam and
praedestinationem, in Gods prescience, and predestination, who has purposed
what they shall be, and knows what they will be.

It is frivolous therefore, that Lib. 3. de Eccles. milit. cap. 2
Bellarmine, Cont. 1. q. 2. art. 2.
Stapleton and others of that faction allege against us, that the elect before
they are called are not of the Church. For it is true, if they speak of
actual admission into the fellowship of Gods people; but false, if they speak
of the intent and purpose of Almighty God, whereby they were chosen to be made
his in this present world, before the world it self was made. Secundum
praescientiam says Augustine, Lib. 4. de Baptismo cont. Donatistas.
multi etiam qui aperte foris sunt, and haeretici appellantnr, multis and bonis
Catholicis meliores sunt: In the prescience of God, many that are apparently
without, and named Heretics, are better then many, and those good and right
believing Catholic Christians. And in his tract upon John, Secundum
praescientiam, and praedestinationem, quam multae ovesforis, quam multi lupi
intus? Quidest, inquit, quod dixi? Quam multae oves foris? quam multi
luxuriantur casti futuri? quam multi Cap. 45.
blasphemant Christum credituri in Christum? and hi oves sunt, veruntamen modo
alienam vocem audiunt, alienos sequuntur. Item quam multi intus laudant
blasphematuri? Casti sunt fornicaturi? stant casuri? and non sunt oves; de
praedestinatis enim loquimur: According unto Gods prescience and
predestination, how Electorum quidam adhue in haeresibus aut Gentilium
superstitionibus sunt: and tamen etiam illic novit Dominus qui sunt ejus. Aug.
lib. 1. de Baptismo contra Donatist.
many sheep are there without, and wolves within? what is it, says Augustine,
that I said? How many sheep are there without? how many are there that now
wallow in all impurity and filthiness, that hereafter shall be chaste and
undefiled? How many now do blaspheme Christ, which hereafter shall believe in
Christ? and these are sheep, yet for the present they hear the voice of a
stranger, and follow strangers: On the other side, how many are there now
within, which presently praise God, that hereafter will blaspheme him? which
now are chaste, that hereafter will become impure adulterers? now stand, that
hereafter will fall? and these are not sheep for we speak of the
predestinate. It is true therefore that Wickliffe, Husse, Calvine, and others
do teach, that none but the elect do pertain to the Church in such sort as
has been before expressed, and that all the electare of the Church either
actually, as they that are already called, or potentially and according to the
purpose of Gods will, as they that are elect and not yet called.

CHAP. 9.
Of the difference of them that are in, and of the Church.

BY that which has been said, that none but the elect are of the Church in
that principal and high degree before mentioned, we may easily understand
their true meaning, and the truth of their meaning, who say that Hypocrities,
wicked men, and castawaies, are in, but not of the Church. Puto (says De
Baptismo. lib. 7. c. 51. and de Ciuitate Dei l. 20. cap. 9. Regnant cum illo
qui eo modo sunt in regno ejus, vt sint etiam ipsi regnum eius.
Augustine) me non temere dicere alios sic esse in domo Dei, vt ipsi etiam sint
domus Dei; alios sic esse in domo Dei, vt non pertineant ad compagem domus, nec
ad societatem frugiferae pacificaeque iustitiae. I think I may very advisedly
and considerately say, some are in such sort in the house of God, that they
also are the house of GOD; and that some are so in the house of God, that they
pertain not to the frame and fabric of it, nor to the society and
fellowship of fruitful and peaceable righteousness.

Stapleton Relect. Contr. 1. de Ecclesia in se. q. 2. art. 1. in explicat.
articuli notabili tertio.
Of them that are in the Church there are three sorts. For there are some only
numero, some numero and merito, some numero, merito, and electione: that is,
there are some, that only in external profession; some that in profession and
affection; and some that, in profession and affection with never altering
resolution, ioy^ themselves to the company of the believers, and have their
hearts knit unto God for ever. As, the elect of God called according to his
purpose: these are intrinsecus and in occulto intus, as Aug. lib. 5. de
Baptismo, contra Donatistas. cap. 27. and ib. Est certus numerus sanctorum
praedestinatus ante mundi constitutionem qui est tanquam lilium inter spinas:
multitudo vero spinarum sieve occultis, sieve apertis separationibus extrinsecus
adiacet sup (...) numerum.
Augustine speaks; and whosoever are thus in the Church, are most fully of
the Church, and are of the special number of them, that communicate in the
most precious effects, and most happy benefits of effectual and saving grace.
In the two former sorts many are in the Church, which though they be also of
the Church, in Munera concessa divinitus partim sunt propria electorum sicut in
hoc tempore infatigabilis charitas, and in suturo vita aeterna, partim vero cum
malis and perversis communia, sicut omnia caetera in quibus sunt and
sacrolancta mysteria. Aug. ibid.
that they have fellowshippe in some outward things with the elect and chosen
servants of God, yet principally, fully and absolutely are not of it, nor of
that special number of those, that have part in the benefits of effectual and
saving grace.

CHAP. 10.
Of the visible, and invible Church.

HEnce it comes, that we say there is a visible and invisible Church; not
meaning to make two distinct Churches, as our adversaries falsely and
maliciously charge us, though the form of words may seem to insinuate some
such thing, but to distinguish the diverse considerations of the same Church:
which though it be visible in respect of the profession of supernatural
verities revealed in Christ, use of holy Sacraments, order of Ministry, and
due obedience yielded thereunto, and they discernable that do communicate
therein; yet in respect of those most precious effects, and happy benefits of
saving grace, wherein only the elect do communicate, it is invisible; and
they that in so happy, gracious, and desirable things have communion among
themselves, are not discernable from others to whom this fellowship is denied,
but are known only unto God. That Nathaniell was an Ioh. 2. 47.
Israelite, all men knew; that he was atrue Israelite, in whom was no guile,
Christ only knew.

The persons then of them of whom the Church consists are visible; their
profession known even to the profane and wicked of the world, and in this sort
the Church cannot be invisible, neither did any of our men teach that it is or
may be. For seeing the Church is the multitude of them that shall be saved, and
no man can be saved unless he make confession unto salvation, (for faith hid
in the heart and concealed does not suffice) it cannot be but they that are of
the true Church, must by the profession of the truth make themselves known in
such sort, that by their profession and practice they may be discerned from
other men.

Notwithstanding, because the truth and excellency of the faith and profession
of Christians, is not discerned by the light of nature, but of faith alone; the
excellency of this society of Christians above other profane companies in the
world, and their happiness that are of it, is invisible, hidden, and unknown
to natural men, and is known only to them that are spiritual: and who they
are that have fellowshippe among themselves, not only in the profession of
heavenly verities and outward means of salvation, but also in the benefits of
effectual and saving grace, is known neither to the natural nor spiritual
man, but to God alone.

If any man shall further urge, that Luther, and some other that were in the
beginning of the reformation of the Church, did think the Church to be
sometimes invisible, not only in those respects above specified, but even in
the truth of profession, and practice of those things that to salvation are
necessary, we deny that any such thing can be collected, out of any of
their writings which they have left unto posterity. For how should there be a
Church in the world, the perpetuity whereof they all most constantly defend,
and none found to profess the saving truth of God which all are bound to do
that look for salvation? But this surely both they and we do teach, that
though always the open, known, and constant profession of saving truth, be
preserved and found amongst men, and the ministry of salvation continued and
known in the world, (For how should there be a Church gathered without a
ministry?) that yet sometimes errors and heresies so much prevail, that the
most part not only of them that apparently are without, but even of them also
that hold and possess great places of office and dignity in the Church of
God, either for fear, flattery, hope of gain, or honor, or else misseled
through simplicity, or directly falling into error and heresy, depart from
the soundness of Christian faith, so that the sincerity of religion is
vpholden, and the truth of the profession of Christians defended and
maintained, but only by some few, and they molested, persecuted, and traduced,
as turbulent and seditious men enemies to the common peace of the Christian
world. In this sense then the Church is said to be sometimes invisible, not
because there are none seen, known, or found that profess the truth of God;
but because even in that company which is the true church of God, many and
those the greatest are carried into error, so that but some few, and they
such, as (if we should judge by outward appearance) are most unlike to uphold
and maintain the truth, are left to defend the same; multitude, authority,
reputation and opinion of greatness in others, obscuring them in such sort, that
they which measure things by outward appearance, can possibly take no notice of
them. This was the state of the Christian world in the time of Athanasius, when
in the Tunc Ousiae nomen abolitum est, tum Nicenae fidei damnatio conclamata
est, ingemuit totus orbis and Arrianum se esse miratus est. Igitur alij (...)
suam communionem remanere, alij ad eos co^fessores, (...) sub Athanasij nomine
exulabant; coeperunt literas mittere etc. Hieron contra Luciferianos.
Council of Seleucia and Ariminium; the Nicene faith was condemned, and all
the Bishops of the whole world carried away with the sway of time fell from the
soundness of the faith, only Athanasius excepted, and some few confessors
that sub Athanasii nomine ex^labant, as Hierome notes writing against the
Luciferians; Ingemuit totus orbis, and miratus est se factum esse Arrianum: The
world powered forth sighs, maruailing how it was become an Arrian. At that
time it was, when Hilarious contra Auxentium.
Hilarious writing against Auxentius Bishop of Millaine, complained that the
Arrian faction had confounded all, and therefore admonished all men to take
heed, how they suffered themselves to be led with outward appearances: Male
vos parietum amor cepit; male ecclesiam Dei in tectis aedificiisque veneramini;
male sub his pacis nomen ingeritis; anne ambigu^m est inijs Antichristum esse
sessurum? montes mihi, and syluae, and lacus, and carceres, and voragines sunt
tutiores, in his enim Prophetae manentes aut demersi prophet abant. It is not
well, says he, that you are in love with walls, that you esteem the Church in
respect of houses and buildings, and in and under those shows and outward
appearances, pretend and urge the name of peace: Is there any doubt of
Antichrists sitting in these places? The Mountains, the Woods, the Lakes, the
prisons, the deep pittes and devouring gulfes, seem to me more safe. For in
these the Prophets either remaining, abiding, and making them their dwelling
places, or as it were drowned and overwhelmed in them, prophesied in old time.
And to this purpose it is that Aug. ep. 48. Chrisu temp ore, deficientibus in
fide Apostolis, integra and omnino perfectissima fides in sola virgin Domini
matre remansit: and Arrianae haereseos fervente persecutione Athanasius fere
solus pro Catholica fide agens inventus est. Francise. Picus Mirand* Theorem.
13.
Augustine writes, most aptly distinguishing between the stars of heaven,
and the sands of the sea, according to the number whereof God promised Abraham
that his seed should be. Ecclesia aliquando obscuratur, and tanquam obnubilatur
multitudine scandalorum, sed etiam tunc insuis firmissimis eminet, qui sunt
quasi stellae coeli in semine Abrahae, at multitudo illa carnalium and
infirmorum fidelium, quae quasi arena maris est: aliquando tranquillitate
temporis, libera and quieta apparet, aliquando autem tribulationum and
tentationum fluctibus operitur, atque turbatur. The Church of God, says he,
sometimes is obscured, darkened, and as it were ouer-shadowed with the
multitude of offenses and scandals that are found in it, yet even then does it
appear and show it self in those worthies of most strong and constant
resolution, which are as the stars of heaven among those of Abraham's seed
and posterity; but for the multitude of weak and carnal Christians, which is
like to the sand on the sea shore, in peaceable times they are free, and quiet,
but in dangerous times troubled, covered, and hidden with the waters, and
raging waves of tribulation and temptation.

This and no other thing our Divines meant, that affirmed the Church to be
sometimes invisible, and therefore it is most true that Tom. 1. contr. 4. lib.
3. cap. 13.
Bellarmine notes, that many of his companions have taken much needless pain
in proouing against us the perpetuity of the Church, which (as he confesses)
none of us ever denied; but it is as true that he also labors in vain, in
proouing that there is, and always has been a visible Church, and that not
consisting of some few scattered Christians without order of Ministry, or use
of Sacraments; for, all this we do most willingly yield unto, howsoever
perhaps some few have been of opinion, that though all others failing from the
Faith, the truth of GOD should remain only in some few of the Laity, yet
the promise of Christ concerning the perpetuity of his Church, might still be
verified.

This question was disputed by Dialog. l. 5. 1. part. c. 32.
Occham, and Quaest. Vesperiatum de Re^umpta.
Cameracensis, long before our times, and who knows not that Canus lib. 4 c.
5. ostendit Turrecremat. and alios putas^e in sola virgin fidem permansisse,
idque significare dixisse candelam, quae (...) little dierum sola non
extinguitur, vnde discipuli lumen quod amiserant receperunt. Idem Turrecremat.
(...). (...). Summ^ cap. 16. (...), Apostolos omnes fuisse infideles tempore
mortis Christi. vid. C^ ibidem.
Cardinal Turrecremata, and other great Divines have been of opinion, that
during the time that Christ was touching his body in the grave, all the
Apostles being fallen from the Faith, the same continued in the blessed Virgin
alone; but these disputes we leave to them that are delighted in them, resting
in the assured and undoubted persuasion of the truth of these things which we
have delivered touching the visibility, and invisibility of the Church; by
which it may easily appear, in what sense the Church may be said to be
sometimes invisible, and how the same Church is at the same time, both visible
and invisible in diverse respects.

CHAP. 11.
Of the diverse titles of the Church, and how they are verified of it.

Having thus declared the diverse considerations of the Church of God, and the
different conditions of them that are of it; for our better directions, left we
mistake and misapply those things that are spoken of it, we must further
observe that the names and titles given unto it are of two sorts: for there are
some that are verified of it in respect of the whole considered generally, and
as it comrehendeth all those that; concur in the same entire profession of
heavenly verities, and outward means of salvation, though they be of very
diverse, different, and contrary condition; so it is named, 2 Timothy 2. 20.
a great house, wherein there are vessels of honor and dishonor, in Phil. 3.
16. 17.
which there are that walk according to the rule of Christianity and 1 These.
2. 12.
worthy of God; and 2 These. 3. 11.
others that walk inordinately. It is named Mat. 13. 25.
a field, in which is wheat mingled with tares: It is a Mat. 3. 12.
floor, in which there is wheat and chafe: It is a Mat. 25. 2.
company of Virgins attending the coming of the bridegroom, whereof some are
wise, having oil in their lamps, others foolish, having none: It is a Mat.
13. 47.
net cast into the sea, that gathers into it good fishes and bad. Non omnibus
^aeque convenient praeconia filiorum, sed vocabula summae laudis and
excellentiae tituli, quamvis indistincte per Scripturas de tota legantur
Ecclesia, tamen de sola gloriosa part ejus debent intelligi vt quod sit sponsa
agni, quod sit civitas sancta Jerusalem, nova descendens decoelo, a Deo
parata, etc. VValdens. lib. 2, art. 2. c. 11,
Other names and titles there are, which are not verified of the Church
considered generally in all her parts, but only in respect of some parts, and
those the best and principal; so it is named the Revel. 19. 7.
spouse of Christ, and the wife of the Lamb, a 1 Pet. 2. 9.
royal Priesthood, an holy nation, and a peculiar people, the Love of Christ,
all fair, undefiled, and without spot, the only Do^, an orchard enclosed, a
Well sealed up, a fountain of living water, a Paradise with all precious,
delectable, and desirable fruit, and that nothing may be added to the honor
of it: It is the mystical body of Christ, which he does animate, formalize,
and quicken with his own spirit: Distinguenda est Ecclesia Christi in sua
latitudine a corpore Christi mystico proprie dicto. Inprimis enim etsi malus
non sit membrum corporis Christi, in quo perpetuus est influxus, and
participatio gratiae, vivum, operativum, adeoque reipsa vnivoce dictum, tamen
ipsius Ecclesiae Christi, quae ut est corpus Christi in vno sensu propter
internam gratiam, ita est domus magna Christi, est area and ager Dominicus in
alio sensu propter externam collectionem, professionem, and societatem per
Sacramenta: hujus inquam Ecclesiae in hoe sensu, qui-etiam verus and proprius
est, vere and proprie membrum est. Stapleton Contro. 1. q. 2. art. 1: notab. 5.
Ad vnionem corporis mystici sieve Ecclesiae nunquam proprie pertinent existentes
in peccato mortali, tamen refert dicere vnitatem Ecclesiae, et corporis
Ecclesiae. In vnitate Ecclesiae sunt boni and mali, vnitas vero corporis
Ecclesiae non est nisi per fidem Charitate formatam. Alexan. de Hales part. 3.
q. 12. memb. 3. artic. 3. Hieron. Non audeo (...) peccatores and gehennae reos
negare m^bra magni corporis Christi, and grandis Ecclesiae speciosae, and
fuscae, quos Apostolus dicit: Cum to o^es in vno spiritu baptizatos, vt vnum
corpus efficerentur in Christo and membra de membro, nec tamen ^io introducere
eos in Ecclesiam Electorum quam dicit Apostolus gloriosam vt membra cjus,
quamvis inter eos corporaliter habitent: sed vt mali humores, non vt membra in
corpore minus sano, and August. Tom. 9. Quidam sic sunt in corpore Domini vt
membra in non sano, quidam vt humores mali: Corpus non plene curatur nisi istos
evomuerit, exierunt ex me humores isti, sed non erant ex me. Non sunt ergo
membra in Christi corpore glorioso, qui forsan in Christi corpore magno illo
regno coelorum sunt membra. VValdens^ lib. 2. artic. 2. cap. 11. haec verba.
Hieron. and Aug. citat. Augustinus de doctrina Christian lib. 3. cap. 32. negat
esse de corpore Christi qui cum illo non erunt in aeternum: fatetur tamen esse
in Ecclesia, ideo^e Ecclesiam vocari posse permixtam, non autem corpus Christi
permixtum (...) bip^titum. Stapleton Relect. Cont. 1. q. 2. art. 1. notab. 5.
of this body the wicked are not members, though they be members of the body
of the Church generally considered. It is therefore (...) vain dispute
between them that say, they are members of the mystical body of Christ,
though not living members, and them that say, they are parts, but not members:
For they are neither parts, nor members, of the mystical body of Christ,
Cantic. 1. 2, etc.
though they be both in respect of the body of the Church considered generally.
And it is false that De Ecclesia militante lib. 3. cap. 2.
Bellarmine affirms, that we require inward qualities to make a man to be of
the Church, thereby making it unknown, who are that Church, to whose
authority and direction the Lord commands us to submit our selves. For we
do not require inward qualities in a man, before he can be at all of the
Church; but before he can be fully, and of the mystical body of Christ. We
say therefore that all they are of the Church that outwardly hold the faith of
Christ; and that that society wherein the sincere outward professi^ of the
truth of God is preserved, is that true Church of God, whose comm^on we must
embrace; that happy mother, in whose womb we are conceiu^, with whose milk we
are nourished, and to whose censures we must submit our selves. And so it is
untrue that the same Bellarmine imputes unto us, charging us that we affirm
that none of the privileges, which Christ has bestowed on his Church, do
pertain to the Church generally considered, but only to that more special
number of the elect of God, who communicate in the benefits of effectual and
saving grace; which who they are is known to none, but God only. For though we
know they were all granted for their sakes, and do benefit them only, yet we
say not that they pertain only unto them. For whereas there are 4 sorts of
things pertaining and belonging to the Church, to wit; First, the promises of
everlasting love and mercy; secondly, the knowledge of God, and means of
salvation; thirdly, the ministry and dispensation of the word and sacraments;
and fourthly, the performance of such duties as God requires; The first sort
of things pertain only to the more special number of the elect of God; the
second to the whole multitude of Christians in general; the third, to such as
are lawfully called thereunto; the fourth, if they be general duties, pertain
to all; if special, to special degrees and sorts of men in the Church,
according to their several differences. Thus then we see the diverse
considerations of the Church, and the different condition of them that do
pertain to it, and of whom it does consist; notwithstanding all which
differences, for that they all concur in the same holy profession, and use of
the same happy means of salvation, they make one holy Catholic Church, in
which only the light of heavenly truth is to be sought, where only grace,
mercy, remission of sins, and hope of eternal happiness are found.
Lactantius l. 4. cap. vltimo divinarum institut.
Sola Catholica Ecclesia est quae verum Dei cultum retinet; hic autem est fons
veritatis, hoc est domicilium fidei, hoc templum Dei, quod si quis non
intrauerit, vel a quo si quis exierit, a spe vitae ac salutis aeternae alienus
est. It is only the Catholic Church that has the true worship and service of
God; this is the welspring of truth, the dwelling place of faith, the temple
of God, into which whosoever enters not, and from which whosoever departs, is
without all hope of life and eternal salvation.

CHAP. 12.
Of the diverse sorts of them that have not yet entered into the Church.

THey that have not entered into this society are of two sorts; Infidels and
Catechumens; that is, infidels, and such as, though they be believers, are not
yet baptized. The former are without, of whom the Apostle speaks when he
pronounces, that he has nothing to do to judge them that are without. The
latter, for that they make profession of the truth of God, and with longing
desires thirst after the full enjoying of the blessed communion of the Saints
of God, wishing for nothing more then by baptism to be admitted into the
family of Christ, and household of faith, are in vestibulo pietatis as Nazanzen.
Orat. (...) in sanctum Bapt^ma.
Nazianzen notes, and are like children formed and fashioned in the womb and
come to the birth, though not yet brought forth.

Ioh. de Turrecremata in summa de ecsia. l. 1. cap. 8. ad arg. 8. and post cum
Bannes in secundam secundae q. 1. art. 10 docent Catechumenos non numero sed
merito ^e de ecclesia, quod verum esse posse vt Ecclesia est corpus Christi
mysticum, agnoscit Stapleton. Contro. 1. q. 2. art. 2.
And therefore the constant resolution almost of all Divines is, and has
been, that if without contempt and neglect, by any unavoidable impediment,
they be hindered from enjoying the benefit of this sacramental assurance of
their adoption, they do, notwithstanding the want thereof, live and die in the
state of salvation. These therefore are within, as the Apostle speaks, though
not by that solemn, outward, and sacrament^ admission which they do desire,
yet in desire, purpose and preparation fitting them unto it, which is so far
forth necessary to, salvation, that no man ever was, or shall be saved, that
either wilfully neglected or contemned the same.

And therefore it is not without great cause, that Nazianzen in the place above
mentioned taxes the folly of some in his time, who for that they knew the
greatness of the benefit of grace which is received in baptism, which, by no
other means in so full and ample sort is bestowed on the sc^nes of men, lest,
by the evils they might through humane frailty easily run into, they should
fall from it, which could not in the same degree and measure be recovered
again, deferred and put off their baptism as long as they could, so that
Nazienzenus Orat. in sanctum baptisma, and Nicetas in Commentarijs negant eos,
qui vel per ignorantiam vel per tyranni them a Baptismo exciderunt, coelesti
gloria aut supplicijs a iusto indice afficiendos esse, nec ad vim Baptismi
obtinendam ipsius cupid^ate teneri satis esse censent.
some were lifted up to Bishops chaires, before by baptism they had set one
foot within the doors of the house of God: not considering, as he wisely
observes, that while they sought so providently to avoid the danger of
loosing the benefits once received in Baptism, they did run into as great or
greater danger, never to receive the same: And that, if the fear of loosing
the benefit of the grace of Baptism once received may cause us justly to
defer the seeking and obtaining of it, we may with as good reason defer and
put off to be Christians at all, lest happily in time of persecution and trial
we might fall away. This was the fault of sundry in the Primitive Church; and
which was yet more to be condemned, many did therefore differ and put off
their Baptism, that so whatsoever evil things they did in the mean time,
might in that Lauer of new birth be washed away, thereby taking greater liberty
to offend, for that they had so present means of full remission, and perfect
reconciliation; so making that which was ordained against sin, and for the
weakening and overthrow of it, to be an encouragement thereunto, and to give
life and strength unto it.

Seeing therefore we are but in vestibulo pietatis, while we remain
unbaptized, and our feet stand but in the outward courts of the Lord of
hosts, we must not rest till we enter into his holy habitation, till we may
look into the holiest, of all, and behold his glorious presence in the midst
of his Saints. d In vita Ambrosij a Paulino Presbytero ad beatu^ Aug.
conscripta.


CHAP 13.
Of the first sort of them, that, after their admission into the Church of God,
do voluntarily depart and go out from the same.

THey which, after their entrance and admission into the house of God, depart
and go out again, are of two sorts; For either they depart of themselves,
leaving the fellowship and forsaking the faith, as Schismatikes, and Heretics;
or else they are cast out by the censures of the guides of the Church, for
their wicked, ungodly, and scandalous conversation, as excommunicate persons,
and such as are enjoined public penance.

Concerning the first sort, Inter haeresim and schisma hoc intere s^e
arbitrantur quoth heresis peruersum dogma habeat, schis^ propter episcopalem
dissensionem ab Ecclesia separetur. Quod quidem in principio aliqua ex part
intelligi potest. Caeterum nullum schisma non sibi aliquam confingit haeresim
vt recte ab Ecclesia recessisse videatur. Hiero in 3. ad Ti^.
Schismatikes are they that break the unity of the Church, and refuse to
submit themselves, and yield obedience to their lawful Pastors and guides,
though they retain an entire profession of the truth of God; as did the
Luciferians and some others in the beginning of their Schism, though for the
most part the better to justify their Schismatic departure from the rest of
Gods people, Schismatikes do fall into some error in matters of faith. This
is the first sort of them that depart and go out from the Church of God, and
company of his people, whose departure yet is not such, but that
notwithstanding their Schism, they are and remain parts of the Church of God.
For whereas in the Church of God is found an entire profession of the saving
truth of God, order of holy Ministry, Sacraments by virtue thereof
administered, and a blessed unity and fellowship of the people of God, knit
together in the bond of peace, under the command of lawful Pastors and
guides, set over them to direct them in the ways of eternal happiness;
Schismatikes, notwithstanding their separation, remain still conjoined with
the rest of Gods people in respect of the profession of the whole saving truth
of God, all outward acts of Religion and Divine worship, power of order, and
holy Sacraments which they by virtue thereof administer, and so still are and
remain parts of the Church of God: but, as their communion and conjunction
with the rest of Gods people, is in some things only, and not absolutely in
all, wherein they have and ought to have fellowship; so are they not fully and
absolutely of the Church, nor of that more special number of them, that
communicate entirely and absolutely in all things necessary, in which sense
they are rightly denied to be of the Church; which I take to be their meaning
that say they are not of the Church.

CHAP. 14.
Of the second sort of them that voluntarily go out from the people of God.

Heretics are they that obstinately persist in error contrary to the Churches
faith; so that these do not only forsake the fellowship but the faith also;
and therefore of these there may be more question, whether, notwithstanding
their heretical division, they still continue in any sort parts of the Church
of God. But this doubt in my opinion is easily resolved. Propter characterem
Baptismalem haereticus quadatenus ad militantem Ecclesiam pert^et: vnde
recedens a fide non dimittitur vt pa ganus, sed punitur vt transfuga:
Reconciliatus non de nouo initiatur vt pro^sus alienus, sed reparatione aliqua
fact^ ad militiam sine novo sacramento recipitur. Stapleton Contr. 1. de
Ecclesia in se, q,2. art. 3. notabil. 3.
For in respect of the profession of sundry divine verities, which still they
retain in common with right believers, in respect of the power of order, and
degree of ministry, which receiving in the Church they carry out with them,
and sacraments which by virtue thereof they do administer, they still pertain
to the Church. But for that they hold not an entire and full profession of all
such saving trueths, as to know and believe is necessary unto salvation, Potest
dici quod potestas 4 ex reperitur in ministris Ecclesiae. Q^aedam namque est
funda^ super ordinem principaliter, vt potestas conficiendi* quaedam supra
iurisdictionem Canonicam p^ncipaliter, vt potestas Excomunicandi: quaedam supra
ordinem and eminentiam, vt potestas ordinandi: quaedam supra ordinem and
iurisdictionem, vt potestas absolvendi and ligandi in foro paenitentiae: and
quoniam character auferri non potest ideo potestas, quae consequitur
characterem de facto, auferri non potest. sed quoniam iurisdictio descendit
ordinate a superiore, potest auferri: vnde potest auferri potestas absolvendi
and excommunicandi sed non ordinandi. Bonavent. lib. 4. distinct. 25. q. 2.
for that their Pastors and Priests, though they have power of order, yet have
no power of jurisdiction, neither can perform any act thereof, for that they
retain not the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, they are rightly
denied to be of the Church: not for that they are not in any sort of it, but
for that they are not fully and absolutely of it, nor of that more special
number of them, which communicate in all things wherein Christians should. This
more special number of right believing Christians, is, for distinction sake,
rightly named the Catholic Church, because it consists of them only, that
without addition, diminution, alteration, or innovation, in matter of doctrine,
hold the common faith once delivered to the Saints, and without all particular
or private division or faction, retain the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace.

Aug. de Baptismo contra Donatistas l. 5. c. 27. 28. ostendit ab Ecclesia in
suis perfectissis membris confiderata, and secundum vnitatem cum Christo
coniunctissim^, non secus separari and extra ^lam esse impio^: quam aperte per
haerisim praeciso^. Stapl. Contro. 1. q. 2. art. 1. ad 4.
To this purpose is it that Saint Augustine against the Donatists, (who
therefore denied the baptism of Heretics to be true Baptism, and did urge
the necessity of rebaptizing them that were baptized by them, for that they are
out of the Church) does show that all wicked ones, feined Christians, and false
hearted hypocrites, are secluded from the Church of God, considered in her best
and principal parts, and in the highest degree of unity with Christ her
mystical head, as well as ^retikes and Schismatikes. As therefore all they that
outwardly profess the truth, and hold the faith of Christ, without schism or
heresy, are of the Church, and are within as the Scripture speaks, Ex illis
omnibus qui (^t ita dicam) intrinsecus and in occulto intus sunt, constat ille
(...) conclusus, fons signatus, puteus aquae vi^ae, paradisus cum fructu
pomorum. Aug. lib. 6. de Baptismo contra Donatist. cap. 27.
yet are not all ofthat more special number of them that are intrinsecus and
in occulto intus, but in more general sort: So likewise Heretics and
Schismatikes, though they be not of that special number of them that in unity
hold the entire profession of divine truth, are of the Church generally
considered, and of the number of them that profess the truth of God revealed
in Christ. And this surely Augustine most clearly delivers.

For when the Donatists did object that Heresy is an harlot, and that, if the
baptism of Heretics be good, sons are borne to God of heresy, and so of
an harlot, than which, what can be more absurd, and impious; De Baptis. cont.
Donatist. lib. 1. cap. 10. Vna est Ecclesia quae sola Catholica nominatur, and
quicquid suum habet in communionibus diuersorum, a sua vnitate separatis, per
hoc quod suum in ijs habet ipsa vtique generat, non ille. Et lib. 1. cap. 1.
Isti in quibusdam rebus nobiscum sunt, in quibusdam a nobis exierunt. Et l. 1.
c. (...). Quiseipsos a societate caeterorum separantes charitate violata,
vnitatis vinculum (...), si non^ulla eadem (...) non se in ijs separave^t, and
ex ea part in texturae compage detin^ur in caetera (...). Proinde si quem
sociaverint sibi, ex ea part (...) Ecclesiae, in qua nec illi seperati sunt.
his answer was, that the conuenticles of Heretics do bear children unto
God, not in that they are divided, but in that they still remain conjoined
with the true and Catholic Church; not in that they are Heretics, but in that
they profess and practice that, which Christians should, and do profess and
practice.

It is not therefore to be so scornefully rejected by Bellarmine, Stapleton,
and others of that faction, that we affirm that both Heretics and
Schismatikes are in some sort, though not fully, perfectly, and with hope of
salvation, of the Church; seeing Augustine, in the just and honorable defense
of the Churches cause against Heretics, did long since affirm the same, not
doubting to say, that Heretics remain in such sort conjoined to the Church,
notwithstanding their Heresy that the true Church in the midst ofthem, and in
their assemblies by Baptism ministered by them, does bear and bring forth
children unto God. The not conceiving whereof gave occasion to Cyprian and the
African Bishops, of error, and afterward to the Donatists of their heresy,
touching the rebaptization of them that were baptized by Heretics. For seeing
there is but ^e Lord, one faith, one Baptism, seeing God gave the power of the
keys, and the dispensation of his word and sacraments only to his Church, if
Heretics be not of the Church, they do not baptize.

This their allegation they amplified and enlarged from the nature and
condition of heresy and Heretics, and the high precious and divine quality,
force, and working of the sacraments; thereby endeavoring to show, that so
excellent means, pledges, and assurances of our salvation cannot be given by
the hands of men so far estranged from God. Concilium Carthaginense hebetur
inter opera Cypriani.
There is, say they, one faith, one hope, one Baptism, not among heretics,
where there is no hope, and a false faith where all things are done in lying,
false, and deceivable manner, where he adiureth Satan, that is the vassal of
Satan, and possessed of the devil. He proposes the sacramental demands
and words of holy stipulation, whose mouth and words send forth a canker; He
gives the faith, that is himself an infidel; He gives remission of sins,
that is himself most wicked and sinful; Antichrist baptizeth in the name of
Christ; he blesses, that is himself accursed of God; he promises life, that
is, himself dead; he gives peace, that is himself an enemy to peace, he
calls on the name of God, that is a blasphemer of God; he administreth and
executes the holy office of Priesthood, that is profane; he prepares,
furnishes, and attends the Altar of God, that is a sacrilegious person. All
which objections, howsoever carrying a fair show at the first sight and view,
yet are most easily answered, if we consider, that heretics, notwithstanding
their heresies, do in some sort still pertain to the Church, and so
consequently have that degree, order, office, ministry, and calling which is
holy, by virtue whereof they do administer the holy Sacraments; even as in the
true and Catholic Church, many wicked ones are found, that are no less the
vassals of Satan, and possessed of the devil, dead in sin, accursed of God,
profane, sacrilegious, and enemies of peace, than heretics and ^hismatikes,
who yet for that they have that order, office, and degree of ministry, which
is holy, do no less, nor with less effect, administer the holy Sacraments,
than they that are the samplers of all sanctity, piety and virtue.

Bonaventur. lib. 4. distinct. 13. qu. 1.
Whereupon the schoolmen rightly note, that there are four sorts of
Ministers, to wit, good; secretly bad, openly and apparently wicked, but not
put from their office and place, nor cast out of the Church; and lastly such as
are deprived of their office, and dignity, and removed from the happy
fellowship of right believers. The first administer the Sacraments with
benefit, profit, and good to themselves and others. The second with benefit to
others but not to themselves. The third with hurt to themselves and scandal to
others, but yet to the euelasting good of them that receive them, if the fault
be not in themselves. The fourth administer those Sacraments that are holy, and
in their own nature the means, pledges, and assurances of salvation, but
without any benefit to themselves, or others, because they are in division and
schism: Si quis ad Haereticos aut Schismaticos reiectus ab Ecclesia transeat,
and si occilus propter nomen Domini postmodum fuerit extra Ecclesiam
constitutus, and ab vnitate atque charitate diui^ corona^ in morte non potest.
Cyprian. lib. 4. epist. 2.
Whereas nothing, though never so good and excellent, is aualeable to their
good, that are out of the unity, the people of God should have among
themselves. 1. Cor. 13. 3.
If I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits me
nothing, says the Apostle.

CHAP. 15.
Of them whom the Church casts out by excommunication.

HItherto we have treated of such, as, being once of the Church, of themselves
go out from the company of right believers, by schism, or heresy. Now it
remains to speak of them whom the Church casts out by excommunication.
Excommunication is that sentence of the Church, whereby she ejecteth and
casts out wicked sinners out of her communion. Which communion what it is,
and wherein it consists, that we may the better understand, we must observe,
that communion is sometimes taken for having the same things in common, and
sometimes for mutual doing and receiving good to and from each other. In the
former sense the communion of the Church is of two sorts; outward and inward.
The outward consists in those things, which all they that are of the Church
have in common, as the profession of the truth revealed in Christ, and the
Character of Baptism, which as a note distinctiue separateth Christians from
Infidels and unbelievers. The inward consists in those things, which only the
best parts of the Church have in common, as faith, hope, love and the like.

The Communion of the Church in the later sense consists in a mutual and
enterchangeable course of action, whereby the parts thereof do and receive
good to and from one another, one supplying the want and defect of another.
This is of two sorts: Public and private. The public consists, first in the
prayers which the Church powers forth for every the least and most
contemptible member thereof; thereby obtaining of God, the giving, supply, and
continuance of all necessary good, joined with a most happy protection keeping
them from falling into those evils they are subject unto; Secondly in the
dispensation of Sacraments by the hands of her Ministers: Private, in mutual
conversation of one man with another.

Non ita eijcitur fidelis ab Ecclesia per excommunicationem, quin illi maneat
subiectus ratione characteris and vnitus per fidem si alioqui illi non amittit;
sed solum privatur dicto iure morali ad vtendum ecclesiastica communicatione
and participatione. Suarez tom. 5. disp. 8. sectione 1. Quomodo excommunicatus
privatur suffragijs ecclesiae, idem ostendit in eodem tomo, disp. 9. secti. 3.
4. 5.
Excommunication does not deprive the Excommunicate, of the former kind of
communion. For, every sentence of excommunication is either just, or unjust.
If it be unjust, they may still retain all those things which the best parts
of the Church have inward or outward, as sometimes it falls out through the
prevailing of factious, seditious, and turbulent men, that the best men are
unjustly and undeservedly cast out of the true Church, as Aug. de vera
religione. c. 6.
Austine notes; who though they never be permitted to return again and
reenter, yet if they continue without gathering any conuenticles, or broaching
of heresies, and still love, profess, and seek to promote what in them lies,
the truth of God which is holden and professed in the Church of God, from the
assemblies whereof they are unjustly excluded and banished, who dare deny them
to be of the Church? And therefore Bell. 1. Tom. 4. contro, lib. 3. cap. 6.
Bellarmine himself, though he make show as if he meant to prove that
excommunicate persons are not of the Church, as he endeavors to do that
Heretics and Schismatikes are not, yet he alters the matter clean, and
says only they are not in the Church, corpore and externa communicatione, as
if he would only prove that they are excluded from the meetings and assemblies
of the Church, and conuersing with the people of God. There is therefore no
doubt but that they are of the Church, and that, if they patiently endure these
indignities, injuries and wrongs, they shall be highly rewarded of Almighty
GOD: but, says Bellarmine, they are not of the Church corporally, and in
outward Communion; then which, what could be more friuolously spoken? For who
makes any doubt, but that they are thrust out of the assemblies, so that they
may not be bodily present when the people of God do meet together, to
perform the acts of divine worship; but that therefore they are not properly
of the visible Church, who that advisedly considers what he says, would ever
say? Seeing they have still the communion, which only is essential and makes
a man to be of the Church, in that they have all those things, both inward and
outward, which the best among them that remain not eiected have, as faith,
hope, love, and profession of the whole truth of God, the character of
baptism, obedient and humble submission to their lawful superiors; which
things and no other are required to make a man to be of the Church. For, the
performance of holy duties is an action of them that are already of the Church,
and does not make a man to be of the Church. Yea the performance of these
duties is a thing of that nature, that by violence and the unjust courses
holden by wicked men, we may be hindered from it without any fault of ours.

If the sentence of excommunication be just, yet it does not cut the
excommunicate off from the mystical body of Christ, but does presuppose that
they have already cut off themselves, or that, if this sentence being duly and
advisedly pronounced make the not relent, but that still they hold out against
it, they will cut off themselves* and deprive themselves of all inward grace
and virtue. From the visible Church of Christ it does not wholly cut them off*
for they may and often do retain the entire profession of saving truth,
together with the Character of Baptism, which is the mark of Christianity,
and so far forth notwithstanding their disobedience still acknowledge them to
be their lawful pastors and guides, by whose sentence they are excommunicate,
that they would rather endure and suffer any thing, the^ schismatically join
themselves to any other communion. It does therefore only cut them off, from
communicating with the Church in the performance of holy duties, and deprive
them of those comforts which by communicating in the sacraments, etc. they
might have enjoyed.

This exco^municatio^ is of two sorts; the greater and the lesser. The greater
puts the excommunicate from the sacrament of the Lords body and blood, and
depriueth them of all that comfort and strength of grace, which from it they
might receive, it denies to the^ the benefit of the Churches public prayers,
and so leaves the^ to themselves as forelorn and miserable wretches, without
that assistance, presence, and protection which from God she obtains for her
obedient children. Whence it is, that they are said to be delivered unto
Satan, because they are left (naked, and void of all means to make
resistance) unto his will and pleasure: and as if this were not enough, they
are denied that solace which they might find in the company and conversation
of the people of God; who now do no less fly from them, than in old time
they did from the Lepers, who cried, I am unclean, I am unclean. The lesser
excommunication excludes only from the Sacramental pledges, and assurances
of Gods love, which, when it is pronounced against them that stubbornely stand
out, and will not yield themselves to the Churches direction and disposition,
is properly named excommunication; but when it is pronounced against them that
yield when they have offended, and seek the blessed remedies of the evils they
have committed, it is not so properly named excommunication, but it is an act
of the discipline of repentance, and of that power and authority which Christ
left unto his Church, whereby she imposes and prescribes to her obedient
children, when they have offended, such courses of penitency, whereby they may
obtain remission of their sins, and recover the former estate from which
they are fallen.

CHAP. 16.
Of the errors that are and have been, touching the use of the discipline of
the Church, in punishing offenders.

TOuching this discipline of repentance and power of the Church in ordering
offenders, and the use thereof, there are, and have been sundry both errors
and heresies. The first of the Pelagians in former times, and the Anabaptists
in our times, who for every the least imperfection cast men out of their
societies, denying that any are or can be in, or of the Church, in whom the
least imperfection is found. Which if it were true, there should be no Church
in the world; all men being subject to sin and sinful imperfection, that
either are or have been. For it is a vain dispute of the Pelagians, whether a
man may be without sin or not; whereof see that which Aug. de perfect. just.
cont. Coelestinum.
Augustine and Hier. cont. Pelagianos.
Hierom have written against the madness and folly of those men. e Aug lib. de
perfect. justit.


For confirmation of their error touching absolute perfection, they allege
that of the Chap. 4 7.
Canticles, Thou art all fair my Love, and there is no spot in thee: And that
of the Apostle to the Chap. 5, 25. 26. 27.
Ephesians; that Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might make it to
himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, but that it should be
holy, and without blame. For answer whereunto, first we must remember that
which formerly was observed, to wit, that sundry glorious titles are given to
the Church, which agree not to the whole totally considered, but to some parts
only; so it is said to be fair, glorious, and without spot or wrinkle, not
for that all or the most part of them that are of the Church are so, but
because the best and principal parts are so; and for that the end, intent, and
purpose of the gift of grace given to the Church is to make all to be so, if
the fault be not in themselves. Secondly, we must observe that there is a
double perfection, purity, and beauty of the Church without spot or wrinkle, to
wit, absolute; and according to the state of this life. The first is not found
in any among the sons of men, while they are clothed with the body of death.
And therefore if we speak of that absolute purity, and perfection, the Church
is said to be pure, all fair, and to have no spot or wrinkle, Hoc ag^tur
vtique in hoc seculo, vtad istam quam omnes sancti cupiunt immaculatissimam
puritatem Ecclesia sancta perveniat, quae in fururo seculo neque aliquo malorum
hominum permixto, neque aliqua in se leg^ peccati resistente^egimentis, ducat
mundis^imam vitam in (...) divina. Aug. cont. Pelag de natura and gratia c. 63.
not for that actually, and presently it is so, but for that it is prepared to
be so hereafter, as Augustine fitly ^teth. The second kind of purity, which is
not absolute, but according to the state of this life, consists herein, that
all sins are avoided, or repented of, and in Christ forgiven, and his
righteousness imputed. In this sense the Church is now presently pure, and
undefiled, and yet not free from all sinful imperfection, as the Pelagians and
Anabaptists vainly and fondly imagine, contrary to all experience, and the
words of the Apostle, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
there is no truth in us.

The second error, touching the power of the Church in the ordering of
sinners, and the use thereof, was that of the Miror quo^dam sie obstinatos esse
vt dandam non pu^ent lapsis poenitentiam Cypr. l. 4. epist. 2. in e^dem episto.
oftendit Novatianos moechis, and fraudatoribus communicare qui libellaticis and
sacrificatis deteriores sunt. Novatus refused only to communicate with
idolators: the Novatians exclude men from the communion for other sins,
referring unto God alone the power of remitting them Socrates. lib. 7. cap. 25.
Novatians, who refused to reconcile, and restore to the Churches peace, such
as grievously offended, but left them to the judgment of God, without all that
comfort which the sacraments of grace might yield unto them; and if any fell in
time of persecution, and denied the faith, how great and unfeigned soever their
repentance seemed to be, they suffered them not to have any place in the
Church of God. The third of certain of whom Apud antecessores nostros quidam
de episcopis istic in provincia nostra dandam pace^ m^chis non putaverunt, and
in totum poenitentiae locu^ contra adulteria clauserunt: non tamen a
Coepiscoporum collegio recesserunt Cypr. in eadem epist.
Cyprian speaks, that would not reconcile nor restore to the Churches peace,
such as foradultery were cast out.

The fourth, of the Plusquam quadraginta anni sunt inter Cypriani passionem and
divinorum codicum exustionem: vnde isti calumniarum suarum fumos iactantes
occasionem faciendi schismatis invenerunt. Aug. lib. 5. de Bapt contra
Donatistas. cap. 1.
Donatistes, who would not receive, into the lap and bosom of the Church, such
as having in time of persecution, to save their own lives, delivered the
books and other holy things into the hands of the persecutors, did afterward
repent of that they had done, and with tears of repentant grief seek to
recover their former standing in the Church of God again; yea they proceeded
so far in this their violent and passionate zeal, that they abandoned the
society of them that did, held them not Christians, and rebaptised them which
came from them, to their pretended purer societies.

The fifth of the Hiero. contra Luciferianos.
Luciferians, who received men returning from heresy to the Catholic faith,
without rebaptization, and enjoined them penitence, and gave them imposition of
hands. But Bishops that had been drawn into heresy, they would not admit,
unless they forsook their office and ministry: against these, Hierom
writes his book against the Luciferians. All these did err, urging overmuch
the Church discipline in casting off the wicked, and not admitting the
unworthy, to her happy fellowshippe.

CHAP. 17.
Of the considerations moving the Church, to use indulgence toward offenders.

But the true Church admits and receives all, that with sorrowful
repentance return and seek reconciliation, how great soever their offenses
have been: not forgetting to use due severitie, which yet she sometime
remitteth, either upon due consideration, or of negligence. The due and just
consideration moving the Church to remitte something of her wonted severitie,
is either private, or public peril. Private, as when the party being of a
tender, timorous, and relenting disposition, if he be proceeded with
rigorously, is in danger to fall into despair, or to be swallowed up with
overmuch sorrow. In this case the Cor. 2. 8. 9. 10.
Apostle, having excommunicated the incestuous Corinthian, writes to the
Church of Corinth, speedily to receive him again, least he should be
swallowed up with overmuch grief: and in this sort the ancient Bishops
were wont to cut off great parts of enjoined penance; which remission and
relaxation, was called an indulgence. Caietan (...) puscu. tom. 1. tractat. 15.
c. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Quid^ distinguences forum Dei, and forum Ecclesiae, dixerunt
relaxationes non fieri nec intelligi quantum ad forum Dei, sed quantum ad forum
Ecclesiae: hoc au tem sic intelligunt: sacri canones promortalibus peccatis
graves, and diuturnas poenitentias quas pa^ci facere volunt, taxant, and
ideirco constituerunt relaxationes aliquando fieri. Bonaventura lib. 4. did.
20. quest. 2. aliam ipse sequitur opinionem.
Out of the not understanding whereof, grew the popish pardons, and
indulgences. Public peril is then, when the multitude, authority, and
prevailing of the offenders is so great, as that if they be cut off, and
separated from the rest, a schism may justly be feared, without hope of any
good to be effected thereby; in this case there is just cause why the Church
forbeareth to proceed to excommunication. Si contagio peccandi multitudinem
inuaserit, consilia sepe rationis and inania sunt and pernitiola, atque
sacrilega, quia et impia and superba sunt, and plus perturbant infirmos bonos
quam corrigunt animosos malos. Aug. con. Epist. Patmeniani. l. 3. cap. 2.
For whereas the end of excommunication is, that evil doers being put from the
company of right believing Christians, and forsaken of all, may be made ashamed
of their evil doing, and so brought to repentance, this cannot be looked for,
when the multitude of offenders has taken away all shame.

These are the due and just motives, which cause the Church sometimes to
forbear to punish with that extremity, which the quality and condition of
the offenders fault may seem to require. But sometimes of negligence, not led
by any of these considerations, she omitteth the due correction of such as
have offended God and scandalized his people. So the 1. Cor. 5. 1. 2.
Corinthians before the Apostles Letter written unto them, suffered an
incestuous person, and seemed not much to be moved with so vile a scandal.
And the like negligence is often found in the Churches of God, which
notwithstanding their fault in this behalf continue the true Churches of God
still; Auferte, inquit, maulm ex vobis; vt si forte non possent auferre malos a
congregatione sua auferendo malum ex seipsis, id est, non cum ipsis peccando,
nec ijs ad peccandum consentiendo, aut fauendo, integerrimi inter eos and
incorruptissimi versarentur. Aug. lib. 3. cont. epist. Parmeniani cap. 1.
and private men may communicate with them that through the Churches negligence
are thus tolerated and suffered, and that both in public acts of religion,
and private conversation, without being partakers of their sins, if they
neither do the same things, nor approve, like, and applaud them that do, and
if they neglect not by all good means, to seek their correction and amendment.

CHAP. 18.
Of their damnable pride, who condemn all those Churches wherein want of due
execution of discipline, and imperfections of men are found.

THere are and have been always some, who possessed with a false opinion of
absolute sanctity, and spotless righteousness, reject the societies and
companies of them in whom any imperfection may be found; which was the furious
zeal of the Pelagians in old time, and the Anabaptists in our time. Others
there are, which, though they proceed not so far, yet deny those societies
of Christians to be the true Churches of God, wherein the severity of
discipline is so far neglected, that wicked men are suffered, and tolerated
without due and condign punishment. These, while they seem to hate the
wicked, and fly from their company for fear of contagion, do schismatically
rent, and inconsiderately divide themselves from the body of Gods Church, and
forsake the fellowship of the good, through immoderate hate of the wicked. Both
these do dangerously and damnably err; the first in that they dream of
heavenly perfection to be found amongst men on earth, when as contrariwise the
Prophet Esaias, 64. 6. Nostra si qua est, humilis iustitia, recta for sitan, sed
non pura, nisi forte meliores nos esse credimus quam patres nostros, qui non
minus veraciter quam humiliter aiebant, omnes iustitiae nostrae tanquam pannus
menstruatae mulieris. Bernard de verbis Esaiae sermo 5. hinc afflictus Job.
verebar omnia opera mea, ait Deo: and iterum, si volueris contendere mecum, non
potero respondete vnum pro mill: cui conformis est oration prophetica, non
intres in iudicium cum servo tuo: and rursus, si ini quitates observaueris etc.
Porro quod Esaias se cum caeteris inuoluens, fibique vilescens humili
confessione protulerit, legimus, omnes iustitiae nostrae tanquam pannus
menstiuatae; quis igitur iustitias suas velut gloriabundus ostentavetit Deo
plusquam pannum confusionis suae mulier viro Gers. de consol. theolog. l. 4.
pros. 1.
Esaias pronounces, that all our righteousness is like the polluted and filthy
rags of a menstruous woman. And b David desires of (...) Aug. in Psalm. 142.
in illa verba non iustificabitur omnis viuens, sic habet: forte iustificare
potest se cosam se, non coram te: quomodo coram se? sibi placens, tibi
displicens: noli ergo intrate mecum in iudicium Domine, quantumlibet rectus
mihi videar: producis tu de the sauro tuo regulam coaptas me ad eam, and prauus
inuenior: ad te cum respitio te nihil aliud meum quam peccatum inue nio: nolo
tecum habere causam, vt Ego propo. nam just tiammeam, tu con vincas iniquitatem
meam: commemorate iustitias vestras, ego novi facinora vestra, inquit Dominus.
Aug. conf ^li 9. c. 13.
Almighty God, that he will not enter into judgment with him, for that in his
sight no flesh shall be justified: And Augustine denounces a woe against our
greatest perfections, if God do straightly look upon them. The later, though
they do not require absolute and spotless perfection in them that are in and
of the Church, yet think it not possible that any wicked ones should be,
found in so happy and blessed a society: not remembering that the Church of
God is compared to Math. 13. 47.
a Net, that gathers into it all sorts of fishes great and small, good and
badde, which are not separated one from another, till they be cast out upon the
shore; that it is like a Math. 13. 24 25.
field sown with good seed, wherein the envious man sows tares; like a
Math. 3. 12.
floor wherein wheat and chafe are mingled together; like the Genesis 7. 13.
Arc of Noah, wherein cursed CHAM was as well preserved from drowning as
blessed SEM.

But they will say, there may be Hypocrites, who, for that their wickedness is
not known, cannot be separated from them who in sincerity serve and worship
God; but if their wickedness break forth, that men may take notice of it,
either they are presently reformed, or by the censures of the Church cut off
from the rest: which course if it be not so holden, but that wicked ones
without due punishment be suffered in the midst of Gods people, those
societies wherein so great negligence is found, cease to be the true Churches
of God, and we may and must divide our selves from them. This was the error
of the Canus lib. 4. c. 3.
Donatistes in former times, and is the error of certain proud and arrogant
Sectaries in our time. But if the Church of God remained in Corinth, 1. Corinthians. 33.
where there were divisions, sects, emulations, contentions, and quarrels, 1,
Corinth. 6. 1.
and going to law one with another for every trifle, end that under the
infidels; where that 1. Cor. 5. 1.
wickedness was tolerated, and winked at, which is execrable to the very
heathens; where 2. Corin. 10. 10.
Paul's name and credit was despitefully called in question, whom they should
have honored as a father; 1. Cor. 15. 12.
where the resurrection of the dead, which is the life of Christianity was with
great scorn denied; who dare deny those societies to be the Churches of God,
wherein the tenth part of these horrible evils and abuses is not to be found?
We see then the difference between the turbulent disposition of these men, and
the mild affection of the Apostle of Christ, who writing to the Corinthians,
and well knowing to how many evils and faults they were subject, yet does not
thunder out against them the dreadful sentence of Anathema, exclude them from
the kingdom of Christ, or make a division and separation from them, but
calls them the Church of Christ, and society of Saints. What would these men
have done, if they had lived amongst the Galathians, who so far adulterated the
Gospel of Christ, that the Apostle pronounces that they were Galat. 3. 1.
bewitched, and if they still persisted to join circumcision and the works of
the law with Christ, they Gal. 5. 4.
were fallen from grace, and Christ could profit them nothing; whom yet the
Apostle acknowledges to be the Church of God, writing to the Church which is
at Galathia?

Excellent to this purpose is the counsel of Augustine in his third book
against Parmenian and second chapter, which he gives to all that are of a
godly and peaceable disposition, vt misericorditer corripiant, quod possunt,
quod non possunt patienter ferant, and cum dilectione gemant and lugeant, donec
aut emendet Deus ac corrigat, aut in mess eradicet zizania, and paleas
ventilet. That with merciful affection they should dislike, reprove, and
correct, as much as in them lies, what they find to be amiss; what they
cannot amend, that they should patiently endure and suffer, and in loving sort
bewail and lament, till either God do here in this world correct and amend
it, or otherwise in that great harvest in the end of the world, pluck up all
tares, and coming with his fan in his hand purge the wheat from the chafe.
Thus then we have hitherto showed, who are of the Church, the definition of it,
and the meaning of such sayings of our Divines, as have bin by our adversaries
mistaken or perverted, together with all such errors, and heresies, as are or
have bin concerning the nature and being of the Church.

THE SECOND BOOK, CONCERNING THE NOTES OF THE CHVRCH.
CHAP. 1.
Of the nature of notes of difference, and their several kinds.

NOw it remains that we come to the second part of our principal and
general division, to find out the notes whereby the true Church may be known
and discerned from all other companies and societies of men in the world. A
note, mark, or character, is that, whereby one thing may be known and
differenced from another. The Philosophers observe that of things not the same,
there are two sorts; some wholly diverse, which have no common condition of
nature wherein they agree (...) are the same. These cannot be apprehend^ (...)
us, but the diversity of nature and condition, found in them, must of
necessity be conceived and known likewise; so that no man, having any
apprehension of the nature of a voice or sound, enquireth wherein it differs
from a circle or line, not finding any thing wherein they are the same. These
need not any notes, or marks of difference whereby to be known one from
another.

Other things there are which have many things in common wherein they agree and
are the same, and some other which are so found in one of them that not in
another. These are not properly said to be wholly diverse, as the former, having
many things in common wherein they agree and are the same; but to differ one
from another, in that some thing is so found in one of them that it is not in
another. The distinction of these things thus differing, cannot be known by any
other means, but by observing what is peculiarly found in each of them:
neither is there any thing proper or peculiar to any ofthem which may not serve
for a note or mark of distinction, to discern one of them from another.

That which is proper to a thing, and peculiarly found in it alone, is of two
sorts: For either it is said to be proper and peculiar respectively, and at
some one time only; or absolutely, and ever. Respectively that is proper to a
thing, which, though it be not found in it alone, but in sundry other, yet if
we take view of it, and only some certain and definite things besides, is so
in it that in none of them, and serves for a sufficient note of distinction to
know it from any of them. So if we seek to difference and discern the nature
of man, only from those things that are void of life; sense and motion serve
for notes of difference, and distinction, and are proper to man for that they
are not found in any thing void of life. But if we seek to difference the
nature of man from all other things whatsoever; we must find out that which is
in man and in (...) thing else; in which sort also a thing may be proper and
peculiar at some o^ time, that is not perpetually and ever so, as wee^ng,
laughing, and the like; which though not always found in a man, (for sometimes
he neither weepeth nor laugheth) yet when they are, they be notes of
difference, distinguing man from all other things, for that nothing else is at
any time capable of any of these.

Perpetually and absolutely that is proper to a thing, which is inseparable and
incommunicable, as never being not found in that to which it is proper, nor
ever being found in any thing else. Those things which are thus and in this
sort proper to a thing, either are of the effence of that to which they are
proper, or that is of the essence of them: by both these, a thing may be known
from all other whatsoever, but more specially by them that are of the essence
of that which we desire to know. These things thus generally observed touching
the nature of the notes of difference, whereby one thing may be discerned and
known from another, if we apply particularly to the Church, we shall easily
know which are the true, certain, and infallible notes thereof, about which
our adversaries so tediously contend and iangle, delivering them confusedly
without order, and doubtfully without all certainty.

Wherefore, seeing by that we have already observed it is evident, that there
is nothing not proper that may, nor proper that may not serve as a note of
difference to distinguish one thing from another; Seeing likewise of things
proper and peculiar, there are two sorts, some respectively; and some
absolutely; and of these again, some not perpetually, but at some one time
only; and some perpetually and ever; and these either essential to that to
which they are pecul^ar, or essentially depending of it and flowing from it.
Let us first see, what things are proper to the Church respectively considered;
and secondly, what (without such respective consideration) absolutely,
generally, and perpetually; which only are perfect notes of difference,
whereby the true Church may be perpetually and infallibly kn^en from all other
societies of men, professions of religion, and diversities o^ine worship that
are in the world and thirdly, suchas are generally and absolutely but not
perpetually proper.

CHAP. 2.
Of the diverse kinds of notes, whereby the true Church is discerned from other
societies of men in the world.

THere are presently, and were formerly, but three maine differences of
religion in the world, Paganism, Iudaisme, and Christianity. Paganism is, and
was, that state of religion and divine worship, wherein men having no other
light than that of nature, and the uncertain traditions of their erring
fathers to guide them, Romans 1. 25.
did and do change the truth of God into a lie, and worship and serve the
creature rather than the Creator; who is blessed for ever. Iudaisme is that
state of religion, wherein men embrace the Law which God gave to the children
of Abraham, and sons of Jacob, reforming heathenish impiety, teaching
salvation to be looked for through one, whom God would send in the last days,
and exalt to be Lord over all. Christianity is the religion of them that
believe Jesus Christ to be that Savior promised to the Jews, and Math. 16. 16.
acknowledge him to be the son of the living God. They which hold this
profession, are called the Church of Christ: neither is there any other society
or company of men in the world, that profess so to believe but they only.

If we take a view of this Church respectively considered, seeking only to
difference and distinguish it from the society of Pagan Infidels, the
profession of Divine, supernatural, and revealed verities is so found in the
Church, that not amongst any of these; and so, (...), respectively, it is
proper to the Church, and may serve as a note of difference, distinguishing it
from these profane and heathenish companies; but from the Jews it does not
sever it; for it is common to it with them; both holding the sacred profession
of many heavenly and revealed verities. So that, if we will distinguish
Christians from Jews, we must find out that which is so proper and peculiar
to the companies and societies of Christians, that it is not communicated to
the Jews. Such is the profession of divine verities revealed in Christ, whom
only these societies acknowledge to be the son of God and Savior of the
world. But for that, when neither heathenish superstition, nor the Jews
perfidious impiety, could any longer prevail, or resist against the knowledge
and glory of Christ, Christi adventis detectus and prostratus inimicus, sed
videns ille idola derelicta, and per nimium credentium populum seeds suas ac
templa deserta, excogitavit nova fraudem, vt sub ipso Christiani nominis titulo
fallat incautos. haereses inuenit, and schismata, quibus subverteret fidem.
veritatem corrumperet, scirideretvnitatem. Cypr de vnitate Ecclesiae.
but that all the whole world went after him, Satan the enemy of mankind
stirred up certain turbulent, wicked, and godless men, who professing
themselves to be Christians, under the name of Christ brought in damnable
doctrines of error, no less dangerously erring, than did the Pagans and
Jews. This profession of the faith of Christ, though it distinguish the
Christian Church from the Jews and Pagans, and is so far proper unto it,
that it is not found in any of them, yet does it not separate the multitude of
right believing Christians (which is the sound part of the Christian Church,
and is named the Orthodoxe Church) from seduced miscreants, being common to
both.

We must therefore further seek out that which is so peculiarly found in the
more special number of right believing Christians; that not in any other,
though shadowed under the general name of Christianity. Such is the entire
profession of divine verities, according to the rule of faith, left by Christ,
and his first disciples, and scholars, the holy Apostles.

This entire profession of the truth revealed in Christ; though it distinguish
right believers from Heretics, yet it is not proper to the happy number, and
blessed company of Catholic Christians, because Schismatikes may, and
sometimes do, hold an entire profession of the truth of God revealed in
Christ. It remains therefore, that we seek out those things that are so
peculiarly found in the companies of right believing and Catholic Christians,
that they may serve as notes of difference, to distinguish them from all, both
Pagans, Jews, Heretics, and Schismatikes. These are of two sorts; for either
they are such as only at sometemes, and not perpetually; or such as do
perpetually, and ever sever the true Church from all conuenticles of erring and
seduced misereants. Of the former sort was multitude, largeness of extent, and
the name of Catholic, esteemed a note of the Church, in the time of the
Fathers. The notes of the later sort, that are inseparable, perpetual, and
absolutely proper and peculiar, which perpetually distinguish the true
Catholic Church, from all other societies of men, and professions of religions
in the world, are three: First, the entire profession of those supernatural
verities which God has revealed in Christ his son; secondly, the use of such
holy ceremonies, and sacraments as he has instituted and appointed, to serve
as prouocations to godliness, preseruations from sin, memorialls of the
benefits of Christ, warrants for the greater security of our belief, and
marks of distinction to separate his own from strangers; thirdly, an union,
or connection of men in this profession, and use of these sacraments; under
lawful pastors and guides, appointed, authorized, and sanctified, to direct,
and lead them in the happy ways of eternal salvation. That these are notes
of the Church, it will easily appear, by consideration of all those conditions
that are required in the nature of notes. They are inseparable, they are
proper, and they are essential, and such things as give being to the Church,
and therefore are in nature more clear and evident, and such as that from them
the perfect knowledge of the Church may and must be derived. Notwithstanding,
for that our adversaries take exception to them, I will first examine their
objections, and secondly prove, that neither they, nor any other that know what
they write or speak, can or do assign any other. And because Bellarmine and
Stapleton have taken most pains in this Argument, I will therefore propose the
objections I find in them, assuring my self that there are not any other of
moment, to be found in the writings of any other of that side.

CHAP. 3.
Of Bellarmines reasons against the notes of the Church assigned by us.

BEllarmine his first objection is; Bell. 1. tom. 4. contra. de. con^ilijs and
ecclesia militante, lib. 4. cap. 2
By these notes we know not who are elect; therefore by these we do not
certainly know which is the true Church. The consequence of this reason we
deny, as being most fond and false. He proves it in this sort. The Church,
according to the doctrine of the Protestants, is only the number of the elect;
and therefore if the elect be not known and discerned by these from the
reprobate and castawayes, the Church cannot be known by them. But the
Antecedent of this argument is likewise false, as appears by that which I
have formerly delivered, touching the nature and being of the Church: for we
do not say that the Church consists only of the elect, but principally,
intentionally, and finally. For otherwise it consists of all that partake in
the outward calling of grace, and enjoying of the means of salvation, and so
may be known by these notes. For that society doubtless has and enjoys the
means of salvation, to which the notes above specified do agree.

Secondly, he reasons thus; The true and certain notes whereby the Church is
known, are inseparable; but there may be true Churches that hold not the
entire and sincere profession of supernatural trueths revealed in Christ;
therefore this profession is no note of the Church. That there may be true
Churches without the entire and sincere profession of the truth of God,
appears by the examples of the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, and other, to
whom Paul wrote, and gave them the titles and names of the Churches of God, and
yet they erred in the matter of the resurrection, and the necessity of the law
of Moses to be joined with the Gospel. To the minor proposition of this
argument, we answer by a double distinction: the first taken out of Relect.
con. 1. q 4. art. 5. expoposit. articuli.
Stapleton; that a multitude or company of Christians may be said to be a true
Church, either only because it has the true nature and essence of a Church,
or because, besides that, it has all those things that pertain to the
integrity, and plenitude thereof. The second, that there is a double
sincerity, and purity of the profession of the truth of God revealed in
Christ; the first free from all damnable, fundamental, and pertinacious
error; the other from all error whatsoever. The former is an inseparable note
of the true Church: For there is no being of a Church to be found where that
sincerity, and purity of profession is not. The later is a note of a pure and
perfect Church, and is inseparably proper unto it. So that proportionably,
sincerity, and purity of profession is always inseparably proper to the
Church: Absolute to the Church, that is absolutely perfect; and in an inferior
degree and sort, to that which is in any sort a Church. For seeing, as
Stapleton rightly affirms, the true faith is the life of the Church, it
cannot be the true Church, that pertinaciously erreth in the substance and
maine grounds of the faith. What is a fundamental error, and what that
pertinacie, that cannot be found in the true Church of God, I will then make
manifest when I come to speak of the nature of Schism and Heresy.

His third reason he proposes in this sort: Notes of the Church must be
proper to the Church, and such things as are not to be found in any society
or company of men besides; but this sincerity and soundness of profession may
be found in other societies and companies of men besides, namely amongst
Schismatikes, as appeared in the Luciferians, and some others in the beginning
of their schism, Hieron. in Epist. ad Titum cap. 3.
though for the most part the better to justify their schismatic
separation, they add heresy to schism. To the Mayor proposition of this
argument we answer, that the notes of the Church are of two sorts; either
absolute, full, and perfect, generally differencing and distinguishing it from
all other societies whatsoever; or only from some certain. Those notes, that
absolutely, and generally distinguish the Church from all other societies and
companies whatsoever, are so peculiar to the true Church, that they are not
found any where else; but they which do distinguish it but only from
certain, are proper only (...), and respectively, that is, so that they are
not found in any of those things, from which they do distinguish it. Notes of
the former sort are all those three things jointly concurring, whereof I spoke
in the beginning, to wit, entire profession of saving truth, and right use of
sacraments, and union under lawful Pastors. These jointly cannot be found
among Pagans, Jews, Heretics, Schismatikes, nor any other seduced or misseled
people whatsoever. But the entire profession of saving truth singly and by it
self, is a note distinguishing the Church from Infidels, and Heretics only,
and so is not absolutely, but respectively proper to the true Church, so far
forth that it is not found in any of these.

Fourthly he reasons, that purity of profession can be no note of the
Church, for that absolute purity is not necessarily required to the being of
the Church; for that the Church may be without it: and that other purity free
from essential and fundamental error, is no note, for that it does not
distinguish the Church from Heretics; For there have been, and may be
Heretics, which err not in any matter directly fundamental. But who sees
not that he reasons sophistically, from an imperfect division of the purity
of the Churches profession? For there are three sorts of it; the first
absolute, and that is not necessarily required in the being of the Church; the
second free from fundamental and essential error, and that is necessarily
required in the Church, and company of right believers, but it is not peculiar
to it; for it may be found among Heretics; and a third free from pertinacious
error, and that is ever found in the true Church; and never among Heretics.
It is this last kind of purity of profession, which we make a note of the
Church.

Lastly, he endeavors to improoue the notes assigned by us, for that notes
must not only be inseparable and peculiar, but they must be such as may not
be challenged or pretended by any other. As if he should thus say, I may not
direct my man to seek out one whom I desire to speak with, being in company
with two or three more, by this note that he is the tallest man of the
company, though evidently he be so; if any one of the rest foolishly imagine
himself as tall or taller: Or by wearing a garment of some certain color or
die, because some one or other not exactly distinguishing the diversities of
colors, may think himself to have the like. But, says he, they must be so
proper, that no other must pretend or challenge them with any probability.
This likewise is false even in the notes which himself brings: for who
knows not, that the Grecians and others pretend Antiquity, Succession,
Universality, and the like, as well as the Church of Rome, and that not without
all probability? Thus we see how weakly this great Champion has performed
that which he undertook.

CHAP. 4.
Of Stapletons reasons against our notes of the Church.

LEt Relect. con. 1. de Ecclesia in se q. 4. art. 5. refuta tio notarum in
quibus haeretici conuenire videntur.
us see if Stapleton quitte himself any better. His first reason is taken from
the uncertainty of our doctrine, in this sort: The doctrine of the
Protestants is most uncertain, doubtful, and full of contradiction; therefore
they do unadvisedly make truth of doctrine a note of the Church; for the
notes of the Church must be constant and perpetual. The Antecedent of this
Argument We reject as most false, and calumnious. For the whole course of our
doctrine is most constant and certain, as shall appear by that which
follows. That which he alleges that we agree not touching the nature,
quality, and members of the Church, is sufficiently refuted by that which I
have already delivered touching that matter in the former part.

Secondly, he reasons from our confession; for, says he, Non dico vbicunque
praedicatur verbum, illic fructum mox exoriri, sed nullibi recipi and statam
habere sedem, nisi vt suam efficaciam proserat: vtcunque vbi revetenter auditur
Evangelij praedicatio, neque lacramenta negliguntur, illic pro illo tempore
neque fa'lax, neque ambigua ecclesiae facies. Call. instit. li. 4, c. 1. sect.
10. idem sentit Melancthon.
Calvin and Melancthon acknowledge these notes to be uncertain. This, who so
takes a view of the places cited by him, shall find to be most false. Calvine
indeed says, that not the bare preaching of the truth, but the receiving,
embracing, and professing of it is necessary to the being of the Church; but
touching the uncertainty of these notes he says nothing. That which he
obiecteth, that we make the Church to be only the number of the elect, and
that therefore it cannot be known by these notes, is answered in the
refutation of Bellarmines first reason.

His third allegation is this: There are many that do truly pertain to the
Church, to whom these notes agree not; therefore they are no notes of the
Church. The Antecedent we deny. He proves it out of our own doctrine.
Many not yet called pertain to the Church; but these notes agree not to such;
therefore there are many to whom these notes agree not, which yet pertain to
the Church. To the mayor proposition we answer thus. Of them that pertain to
the Church, there are two sorts; For some pertain to it actually, some
potentially only, and according to the purpose of Gods will. To both these,
these notes agree, but in different sort and manner; To them that are actually
of the Church, they actually agree; For they do presently make profession of
the truth of God, and join with the people in the use of holy Sacraments
appointed by him: To them that potentially and according to the purpose of Gods
will pertain to the Church, as do all the elect not yet outwardly called,
these notes agree only potentially, and according to the purpose of Gods will,
for that in due time they shall come to the knowledge and profession of the
truth, and use of those happy means of salvation, which others actually enjoy.

His fourth objection, that the entire profession of the truth agrees to
schismatikes, is answered already, being likewise objected by Bellarmine.

Fifthly he reasons thus; The truth of heavenly doctrine and right use of
Sacraments are no notes of the Church, because they do not show us which is
the Church. We answer that they do: he proves they do not, because the
true Church is known of us before we can know any of these. This we deny;
For we say a man must know which is true doctrine, and what is the right use of
Sacraments, before he can know which is the true Church. This he thinks
impossible, because we seek to learn the truth, of the Church; and
therefore we must in the beginning of our inquiry know, which is the true
Church, and where assuredly truth is found, or else our whole search and
enquiry is doubtful, uncertain, and often without success. For the clearing
of this doubt, we must observe, that seeking is a motion of the mind, desiring
to know where a thing is, or what it is, He that desires to know where a
thing is, either knows the place, within compass whereof he is sure it is,
or else his search is doubtful, uncertain, and often in vain. What a thing
is, we desire to know, either by our own discourse, or by the instructions or
directions of another: He that seeks after a thing, desiring to know it by
the directions of another, either knows not particularly and certainly of
whom to enquire, with assurance that from him he shall receive satisfaction,
and this kind of search and inquiry is always doubtful, and often without
success; Or else he knows particularly of whom to enquire with assurance of
resolution and satisfaction. Now if we apply this which has been said, to
that which Stapleton alleges, we shall easily answer his objection. For
when Infidels, and men wholly ignorant of the truth of God, begin first to
seek it, they do not know certainly where they may find it; and being left
to themselves, would often seek in vain, as he says but being directed by
divine providence, and the help of others, to the true Church which they know
not, and being taught by her, they are established in the persuasion of the
truth taught by her, in such sort, as they make no doubt of it; and are farther
resolved that that must needs be the Church of God, and company of them whom
he loves, where these truths are in such sort known and taught, as they find
them to be there. It is therefore untrue that Stapleton says, that the Church
is better and sooner known then the doctrine of it. For the doctrine is in
some sort known, before we can know the Church that teaches us. For even as a
man wholly ignorant, and knowing none of the precepts and principles of
Geometry, cannot possibly know who is learned in that kind of knowledge, but
eitheir casually, or by direction of others meeting with one excelling therein,
learneth of him, and then by that which he has learned of him, knows him to
be a skillful professor thereof, and ever after resorts unto him, if in any
thing he be doubtful, with assurance of satisfaction; whose perfections when
he began to learn, he knew not, but either casually met with him, or by the
directions of others, and not of his own choice: So we know not the Church,
what it is, which it is, nor how excellent it is, till we have learned some
part of the doctrine it teaches, and are directed to it without any certainty
of our own knowledge; but being once established in the certainty of the
truth of the things she teaches, we thereby know her to be the Church of
God, beloved of him, led into all truth by him, and appointed a faithful
witness, and skillful mistress of heavenly truth; and then in all our doubts
and uncertainties, we ever after resort unto her, with full assurance of
satisfaction and resolution. Thus then we see, how both the Church shows us
the truth of heavenly doctrine, and that again the Church; but in different
sort: the Church doctrinally proposing to us what we must embrace and believe;
and the doctrine of the truth believed and embraced by us, really
demonstrating to us that to be the Church, in which so precious and saving
truths are taught and professed: and that the first repair and resort of
Infidels, to the Church, proceeds from the direction of others, or some thing
which they see, that makes them enquire farther after her; but not from their
own knowledge of her infallibility, and the precious treasures ^f heavenly
truth which she possesses, as Stapleton vainly fancieth.

In his sixth objection first he says; Truth of doctrine and right use of
sacraments are things without which the Church is not entire and full:
contrary to Bellarmine, who therefore excludes them from being notes, because
they are separable and the Church may be without them. Secondly, in the same
place he says, that these things do depend of the Church, flow from it, and
are in order of nature after the being of it, not giving being to it, or
concurring in the constitution of it; and therefore cannot be notes; c but
elsewhere he says the things that give being to the a Eadem cont. q. 4. art.
5. notabili, 3.
Church, are the same with the Church; and so cannot be more evident, nor easy
to be known then the Church it self. Thirdly, in his seventh reason he
says; These are the notes whereby wise and spiritual men do know the
Church: and again in his ninth: That to demonstrate the Church by these notes,
is demonstrare idem per idem, to demonstrate the same by the same. For, says
he, when we ask which is that society that holds the true profession, etc;
and they that assign these notes, answer, it is that which holds the true
profession, etc. If this man beenot possessed with a spirit of giddiness,
saying, and unsaying; affirming, denying the same things in the very same page,
and so indeed saying he knows not what, let the Reader, how partial so
ever he be, judge.

To that which he adds, that faith is known from infidelity, religion from
superstition, a believer from an infidel, and a Catholic from an heretic,
by true doctrine and right use of sacraments, that they are essential to them
and give them their being, but that the whole collected multitude of right
believers, must be known by those things which are proper and essential to
such an united multitude, as universality and the like: We say, that there is
nothing, besides sincerity of profession and right use of Sacraments,
essential to the Church as a collected multitude, but only order and orderly
connection or union of men concurring in these, while some authorized there unto
do teach, direct, and command, others obey; which if we add to the former
two, we shall find all and only those notes which we assign. Neither are
sincere profession, and right use of Sacraments so essential to believing and
catholic men, that they do sufficiently distinguish them from schismatickes,
unless this be added, that they hold the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace: so that as they do not sufficiently distinguish the whole body of the
Church from the Conuenticles of schismatickes, unless an orderly connection of
men concurring in them be added; which orderly union or connection is
essential to the Church as a collected multitude; so do they not a catholic
from a schismaticke: but on the other side, who is so foolish as to deny, that
the profession of truth and right use of Sacraments are essential to the whole
body of the Church? seeing, as Stapleton himself says, Cont. 1. de ecclesia
in se. q. 3. art. 6. expo. art. notabili 3.
Recta fides est anima ecclesiae, Right faith is the very life and soul of the
Church; which is nothing else but an orderly multitude of right believers, and
is collected and gathered in the true faith of Christ, and hope of eternal
happiness: which as it cannot be known and discerned from the Conventicles of
Schismatickes, by right faith and due use of Sacraments only, without the
addition of orderly connection, so likewise on the contrary side, it cannot be
known without these, and therefore of necessity they must be notes, though not
sole and only notes.

In the seventh there is nothing but that which refuteth that himself else
where says, or is refuted by him. For when he says that wise men do know and
discern the Church by the notes assigned by us, he does acknowledge that they
do demonstrate the Church in the perfectest sort that may be; which in his
ninth he denies, saying that to demonstrate the Church by them, is to
demonstrate the same by the same: and in his eight makes it savor of heresy
at least, to think to find out the true Church by them. Whereas in the same
place he appropriateth these notes only to the wiser sort of men, as not being
within the compass of ignorant men's conceit. Surely those which he assigns
are less obvious to the knowledge of the vulgar sort than these, as shall
appear in that which follows.

His eight reason, that the notes of the Church must be such as may not be
challenged or pretended by the heretics, is answered already in the
refutation of the reasons brought by Bellarmine. That which he adds
concerning their notes, of Antiquity, Unity, Succession, and Universality,
that they are so clearly proper and peculiar to the Church of Rome, that we
do not deny them to agree to it, but deny them to be notes of the true
Church; is wholly false. For we peremptorily deny any of these notes to agree
to the Romish Church; and with such explication, as they (forced with our
arguments) now make of them, we most willingly admit them, and will prove,
that they differ not really from them assigned by us.

His ninth, that the notes assigned by us are no notes of the Church, because
to demonstrate the Church by them, is to demonstrate the same by the same, (for
that when we ask which is the true Church, we ask which is the Church that
holds the true profession and right use of the Sacraments;) is a mere
sophistical cavillation. For the better manifestation whereof, we must
observe, that he that seeks to find out the true Church, at the first is
wholly ignorant of whatsoever pertayneth to the nature and being of it, as
Insidels that know not what the very name of the Church imports; and then
surely the first thing, that he, who is thus wholly ignorant, enquireth after,
is not, which is that society that holds the profession of saving truth, as
STAPLETON says; (For, he knows not, that there is any such profession, or
society so professing;) But about the signification of the word, and meaning of
the name of the Church: whom we satisfy, if we say no more, but that it is a
society or company of men, called by the working of grace to the hope of
eternal happiness. But if, when he knows thus much, and is not ignorant
what the word imports, he do farther desire to know which among all the
societies of men in the world it is, that has this happy and precious hope;
We satisfy him by showing him, what things are so peculiar and proper to it,
that wheresoever he finds them, he may assure himself, that that company
and society of men has the assured hope of eternal happiness, and is the
true Church of God; as namely, the entire profession of revealed truth,
according to the rule of faith left by Christ, and the right and due use of
Sacraments, under lawful pastors and guides appointed to conduct the sons
of God, in the ways of their eternal bliss and happiness. Now when he
knows the entire profession of saving truth etc. to be proper and peculiar
to the true Church, if yet still he know not truth from error, and the right
use of Sacraments from the profanation of them, and therefore ask of us in the
third place which is the true profession, and which is the multitude that has
it, we will not tell him, as Stapleton vainly fancieth, that it is that which
holds and embraces the truth; but we will show him how to know truth from
falsehood; that so, wheresoever he finds it professed and taught, he may
know that society that so professes, as he now knows the truth in Christ to
be, is the true Church of God. Even as, if one ask of us, how he may know
such a noble man's servants in the Princes Court, we satisfy him, if we tell
him they are clothed with scarlet, if none other but they only be so clothed;
But if he know not scarlet, and so ask of us in the second place, which is
scarlet, and who they are that wear it, we will not tell him, they that wear
it, but show him how he may know it, that so, when he sees it, he may assure
himself he has found the men he enquired after.

CHAP. 5.
Of their notes of the Church, and first of antiquity.

THus having answered the reasons brought by our adversaries against the notes
of the Church assigned by us, let us proceed to take a view of such as are
allowed by them, and see if they be not the very same in substance with ours.
The Bellar. 1. tom. cont. 4. lib. 4. and alij.
notes that they propose unto us, are Antiquity, Succession, Unity,
Universality, and the very name and title of Catholic, expressing the
Universality. Antiquity is of two sorts; primary, and secondary. Primary is
proper unto God, who is eternal, whose being is from everlasting, who is
absolutely the first, before whom nothing was, and from whom all things receive
being, when as before they were not. This kind of antiquity is a most certain
proof, and demonstration of truth and goodness. Of this they speak not, who
make Antiquity a note of the Church. Wherefore letting this pass, let us come
to the other; which for distinction sake, we name secondary Antiquity. This is
of two sorts; The first we attribute to all those things, which began to be
long ago, and since whose first beginning there has been a long tract of
time. This is no note, or proof of truth or goodness: For the devil was
both a liar, and a murderer long ago, even immediately after the beginning.
And there are many errors, and superstitions which began long since, yea
before the name of Christians was once named in the world, and sundry heresies,
that were coaetaneall and as ancient as the Apostles times, and that began
before the most famous Churches in the world were planted. This kind of
Antiquity it is, that Cyprian speaks of; Epist. 63.
Non debemus attendere quid alius ante nos fecerit, aut faciendum putauerit;
sed quid, qui ante omnes est, Christus prior fecerit. Neque enim hominis
consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed dei veritatem. Et Ep. ad Quint. 7.
alibi; Non est de consuetudine praescribendum, sed ratione vincendum. Epist.
74.
Et ad Pompeium; Consuetudo sine veritate, vetustas erroris est. We must not
regard what any other did before us, or thought fit to be done, but what Christ
did, who was before all. Neither must we follow the customs of men, but the
truth of God. And in another place; We must not prescribe upon custom, but
persuade by reason. And writing to Pompeius; Custom without truth, is nothing
else but inueterate error. There is therefore another kind of Antiquity, which
is not long continuance, or the being before many other, but the prime, first,
and original being of each thing: this is a sure proof of goodness, and
perfection. For all defects, found in things, are swaruings, deelinings, and
departures from their original, and first estate. For truth is before
falsehood, and good before evil, and the habit before privation. Veritas, says
Tertullian, in omnibus imaginem antecedit, e In his book of prescript against
haretickes. Contra Praxean; id verum quodcunque primum: id adulterum quodeunque
posterius.
postremo similitudo succedit. The truth is before any counterfeite,
similitude, on representation; the truth is first, and then afterward there
are imitations. That therefore that is first in any kind, or sort of things, is
truest and best: and consequently, that Church that has prime and absolute
Antiquity, is undoubtedly the true Church.

This Antiquity, a Church may be said to have, three ways, either only
because the first constitution of it was most ancient, as taking beginning
from the first publishers of heavenly knowledge, the Apostles of Christ, the
immediate, indubitate, and prime witnesses of the truth of God, whatsoever her
declinings have been since; Or because as her first constitution was most
ancient, in that she received the faith from the Apostles, or such as she
knew undoubtedly to hold communion with them, so she is not since gone from it,
in whole, or in part, but still has the same being she first had: or thirdly,
because the profession it holds is the same that was delivered by the prime,
immediate, and indubitate witnesses, and publishers of the truth of God,
though it began to be a Church but yesterday. The Antiquity of the first
constitution of a Church is no sufficient proof, or note of the truth or
soundness of it: Neither do they that plead most for Antiquity, think it a
good proof for any company or society of Christians, to demonstrate themselves
to be the true Church of God, because they have had the profession of
Christianity ever since the Apostles times, by whose means they were first
converted to the faith, and established in the profession of the same. For then
the Church of Ephesus might at this day prove it self a true Church of God;
yea many Churches in Aethiopia are yet remaining, which have continued in the
profession of Christianity, ever since the Apostles times. But this is all they
say, that if any Church founded by the Apostles, or their coadiutors, and left
by them in the true profession, as were the Churches of Rome, Antioche,
Ephesus, and the like, can demonstrate that they have not since departed from
their first, and original estate, they thereby do prove themselves to be the
true Churches of God. And if any other that began since, as innumerable did,
can show that they have the faith first delivered to the Saints, they thereby
prove themselves no less to be the true Church of God, then the former, which
had their beginning from the Apostles themselves, and have continued in a state
of Christianity ever since. Do we not see the^, that it is truth of doctrine,
whereby the Church is to be found out, even in the judgment of them that seem
most to say the contrary? they admit no plea of Antiquity on the behalf of
any Churches whatsoever, though established by the Apostles, unless they can
prove that they have not left their first faith. So that this is still the
trial, if they may be found to have the truth of profession, etc. Whereupon
Stapleton says, Contr. 1. de Ecclesia q. 4. art. 1. exposit. art. notabili. 3.
Ad notam Antiquitatis sibi vendicandam, non satis est quod aliqua societas sub
titulo Ecclesiae diu perdurauerit, aut prior extiterit, sed praeterea necesse
est quod sanam doctrinam semper, and prius retinuerit. Hoc autem contra veteres
haereses, maxim ipsis Apostolis coetaneas, notandum est. It is not a
sufficient reason, for a society of Christians, to challenge to it self the
note of Antiquity, because it has long continued, and been before others in
the profession of Christianity; but besides it is required, that it have
aunciently, and ever holden the doctrine of truth: This is specially to be
noted against old heresies, whereof some began in the Apostles times. Ibidem in
solutione argumentotum.
And he says of the Churches of Greece, Aethiopia, and Armenia, that, though
their Antiquity did reach as high as the Apostles times, yet notwithstanding
propter doctrinae novitates postea inuentas, veram antiquitatem non habent;
because they have brought in new doctrine, they have no true Antiquity.

CHAP. 6
Of Succession.

HItherto we have spoken of Antiquity, which they make the first note of the
Church. It follows in the next place that we speak of Succession. The
ministry of pastors and teachers is absolutely, and essentially necessary to
the being of the Church. For how should there be a Church gathered, guided, and
governed without a ministry? Therefore the ministry of those whom God
sanctified to himself, to teach, instruct and govern his people, is an
essential mark and note of the Church, as we have already showed. Now
because the Church is not to last only for some short time, and so to cease,
but to continue to the end of the world, this ministry must continue likewise;
which because it cannot continue in the same persons (all being subject to
death) it is necessary, that when some fail, others possess the places they
formerly held, which is to Succeed, Neither is this Succeeding of one into the
place of another, necessary, only by reason of that failing which is by death,
but because the places of sacred ministry must not be unfurnished; if either
the wickedness of them that are in place, cast them out, or their weakness
cause a voluntary relinquishment of their office, and standing, others must
succeed. Lawful and holy ministry therefore is an inseparable, and
perpetual note of a true Church; for no Church can be without it; but
Succession not so; For the Churches in the first establishment in the Apostles
time had it not, and many Churches, which in sundry ages since have been
founded, had none, their Bishops being the first, and succeeding none, in those
episcopal chaires wherein they sat. If therefore we should cavil against
them as they do against us, we might deny Succession to be a note of the
Church, because there have been, and may be true Churches without it; as all
at the first in the beginning of Christianity, and all others since newly
founded, in their first beginnings. But because we know they make not
Succession of pastors and Bishops a note of the Church absolutely
considered, but of that which being formerly established, is still to be
continued, by multitudes of men and people continually succeeding, and coming
into the places of others that went before them, in the same profession of
Christianity; Let us see whether Succession of Bishops, and pastors may truly
be said to be a note of the Church.

Absolutely and without limitation, doubtless it is not: For there may be a
continued Succession of Bishops, where there is no true Church, as at this
day amongst the Grecians, Armenians, and Aethiopians, which yet are not the
true Churches of GOD, in the opinion of them that plead for succession. Bellar.
1. tom. cont. 4. l. 4. c. 8. Ecclesia Constantinopolitana habet sucessionem a
tempore Constantini, sed argumentum a successione aftertur ad probandum non
esse ecclesiam vbi non est etc.
Bellarmine therefore says, that Succession is inseparable, so that there can
be no Church without it; but that it is not proper, so that wheresoever it is
found, we may assure our selves that there is the Church; so forgetting
himself, who requires in the notes that they be proper, and rejects our
note of purity of doctrine free from pertinacious error, because it may be
found among schismatickes, though it be inseparable, and the true Church cannot
be without it.

Contr. de Ecclesia in se. q. 4. art. 2. expos. art. notabili. 5.
But Stapleton, handles this point of Succession much better. For he says,
that Succession is an inseparable, and proper note of the true Church: but not
every Succession, but that which is true, and lawful. Let us therefore see
what he requires to make a true and lawful Succession. First, there must be
a place void, by resignation, deprivation, or death; Neque qui per vim irrupit
successor haben dus est, sed qui vim perpes. sus: nec qui contratiam sententiam
tuetur, sed qui eadem fide praeditus est, nisi quis fortassis ita successorem
dicat, quemadmodum morbum sanitati, tenebras luci, tempestatem tranquillati,
dementiam prudentiae succedere dicimus. Nazianz. in laudem Athanasij.
Secondly, they that succeed must have election, and ordination from them to
whom it appertains to elect, and ordain, Thirdly, they must not depart from
the faith that was formerly holden, by them that went before, unless any of
them did first decline, and go aside from the way of the first, and most
ancient, that held those places before: and therefore in the catalogue of
Bishops succeeding one another in each several See, wheresoever any first
began to teach any new and strange doctrine, different from that which was
formerly delivered, the thread and line of succession was by him either wholly
broken, or somewhat endaungered, according to the quality of the error and
the manner of defending, and maintaining the same. So that this is all which
Stapleton says, that wheresoever we find a Church once established, under a
lawful ministry, in the undoubted profession of the truth, if afterward
there be a Succession of Pastors and Bishops in the same place, and that
none of them depart from the faith of the former, that so it may be evident,
that what faith was first holden, is still holden by them that presently are in
place, there we may assure our selves to find the true Church.

Thus still we see, that truth of doctrine, is a necessary note whereby the
Church must be known and discerned, and not ministry, or Succession, or any
thing else without it.

But, says he, the people must not judge, which is true doctrine and which is
false, by the particular consideration of the things themselves, but only by
the newness, strangeness, contrariety it has with that which they have
learned of their pastors, guides, and forefathers. He allows then a kind of
judgment to the vulgar sort, who must discern which is the true doctrine and
which is the false, though not by particular consideration of the things
themselves that are taught, yet by the newness and strangeness of them.
Touching the judgment the people of God ought to have of the doctrine of
Christianity, I will speak when I come to the fourth part of my first and
general division. In the mean while it suffices, that not bare and naked
Succession, but true, and lawful, wherein no new, or strange doctrine is
brought into the Church, but the ancient religiously preserved, is a mark,
note, or character of the true Church.

CHAP. 7.
Of the third note assigned by them, which is Unity.

THe third note of the Church assigned by them is Unity. There are many sorts
and degrees of Unity found in the Church: The first, in respect of the same
beginning, and original cause, which is GOD that has called us to the
fellowshippe of his Son, and to the hope of eternal life. verse. 44.
10. 6. No man comes unto me, unless my father draw him. The 2d, in respect
of the same last end, whereunto all they that are of the Church do tend,
signified by that penny given to every one of the laborers. Math. 20. 8. 9.
10.
Matthew. 20. The third is in respect of the same means of salvation, as are
faith, sacraments, holy laws, and precepts, according to that Ephesians. 4. 5.
Ephesians 4. One faith, one Baptism, etc. The fourth, in respect of the same
spirit, which does animate the whole body of the Church: There are diversities
of graces, but the same spirit. 1. Cor. 12. 4.
1. Cor. 12. The fifth, in respect of the same head Christ, and guides appointed
by him; who, though they are many, yet are all holden in a sweet coherence and
connection amongst themselves, as if there were but one episcopal chair and
office in the world. Which Unity of Pastors and Bishops, though they be many,
and joined in equal commission, without dependence one of another, Christ
signified by directing his words specially to Peter, Feed my sheep, feed my
lambs, as Cypr. de vnitate Ecclesiae.
Cyprian most aptly notes. The sixth is in respect of the connection, which all
they of the Church have amongst themselves, and with Christ, and those whom he
has appointed in his stead to take care of their souls. Romans 12. 5.
Romans 12. We are one body, and members one of another. These being the diverse
kinds, and sorts of Unity in the Church, let us see what Unity it is, which
they make a note of the Church. The Unity which they make a note of the Church
is, first, in respect of the rule of faith, and use of the sacraments of
salvation; secondly, in respect of the coherence and connection of the Pastors
and Bishops amongst themselves; thirdly, in the due and submissiue obedience of
the people to their Pastors.

This is it then which they say, that wheresoever any company, and society of
Christians is found in orderly subjection to their lawful Pastors not erring
from the rule of faith, nor schismatically rent from the other parts of the
Christian world, by factious, causeless and impious division, that society of
men is (undoubtedly) the true, and not offending Church of God. This note thus
delivered, is the very same with those assigned by us. But if any of them shall
imagine that any Unity, and agreement whatsoever of Christian people amongst
themselves, does prove them to be the Church of God, we utterly deny it.
For the Armenians, Aethiopians, and Christians of Muscovia, and Russia, have
every of them an agreement amongst themselves, though divided each from other,
more perfect than they of the Church of Rome have; which yet in the judgment
of the Romanists, are not the true Churches of God.

CHAP. 8.
Of Universality.

THe next note assigned by them is Universality. Concerning Universality, 1.
Tom. cont. 4. lib. 4. c. 7.
Bellarmine observes three things: First, that to the Universality of the
Church is required, that it exclude no times, places, nor sorts of men; in
which consideration the Christian Church differs from the Synagogue, which
was a particular Church tied to one time, being to continue but to the coming
of Christ; to a certain place, to wit, the Temple at Jerusalem, out of which
they could not sacrifice; and to one family, the sons of Jacob. Secondly, he
notes out of Augustine, that to the Universality of the Christian Church it
is not required, that all the men of the world should be of the Church, but
that at the least there should be some, in all provinces of the world, that
should give their names to Christ. For till this be performed, the day of the
Lord shall not come, Math. 24. 14.
Mat. 24. Thirdly, he notes out of Dried^, in his fourth book, chap. 2. part.
2. de Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus, that it is not required, that this should be
all at once, so that at one time necessarily there must be some Christians in
all places of the world; For it is enough, if it be successively. Whence,
says he, it follows, that though but only one Province of the world,
should retain the true faith, it might truly and properly be named the
Catholic Church, if it could clearly demonstrate it self, to be one with
the Church and company of believers; which if not at one time, yet at diverse
times has filled the whole world. This it cannot demonstrate, but by making it
appear, that it has neither brought in any new, and strange doctrine in
matter of faith, nor schismatically rent it self from the rest of the
christian world.

This note of Universality, thus understood, we willingly admit: For it is
the same with those we assign. For we say, what Church soever can prove it
self to hold the faith once delivered to the saints, and generally published
to the world, without heretical innovation, or schismatic violation, and
breach of the peace, and unity of the Christian world, is undoubtedly the true
Church of God. But out of this which Bellarmine has thus truly, wisely, and
fitly observed touching Universality, we may deduce many corrolaries of great
consequence in this controversy touching the Church.

The first, that it may be the true and Catholic Church, which neither
presently is, nor ever hereafter shall be, in all or the most parts of the
world, if it can continuate it self, and prove it self one, with that Church
which formerly at some time or times, has been in the most parts thereof.
From whence it is easy to discern the vanity of that their silly objection
against us, who say our Church began not at Jerusalem, in the feast of
Pentecost, but at Wittenberg, or Geneva, in this last age of the world; and
that it is not likely, beginning so late, that ever it will so far enlarge it
self, as to fill all the whole world, and so become Catholic, or Universal.
For we do not imagine, that the Church began at Wittenberg, or Geneua, but
that in these and sundry other places of the Christian world, it pleased God to
use the ministry of his worthy servants, for the necessary reformation of
abuses in some parts of that Catholic Church, which beginning at Jerusalem,
spread it self into all the world, though not at all times, nor all places, in
like degree of purity, and sincerity. So that, though the reformed Churches
neither presently be, nor perhaps hereafter shall be, in all, or the most parts
of the world, yet are they catholic, for that they do continuate themselves
with that Church, which has been, is, or shall be, in all places of the
world, before the coming of Christ, and undoubtedly already has been in the
most parts thereof. The second, that the true Church is not necessarily always
of greater extent, nor the multitude of them that are of it greater, than of
any one company of Heretics, or mis-beleeuers. The third, that the true
Church cannot be at all times infallibly known from the factions of
heretics, by multitude, and largeness of extent. The fourth, that this
contrarieth not the sayings of Aug. psalm. 101. conc. 2. reprehendit Donatistas
dicentes ecclesiam in sola Africa remansisse. hunc locum Augustini explicat
Bellarminus loco superius notato.
Augustine, and others of the Fathers, who urge the ample extent of the Church
as a proof of the truth thereof; For that they lived and wrote in those
times, when the Church was in her growth, and we are fallen into the last and
worst times, wherein she is in her declining.

CHAP. 9.
Of the name and title of Catholic.

THe Bell. 1. Tom. cont. 4. lib. 4. cap. 4.
fifth note assigned by them is the name and title of Catholic; which they
say, is an undoubted proof of the true Catholic Church wheresoever it is
found. And because our adversaries do not more insolently boast, and glory of
any thing, than of the bare and empty name, and title of Catholic; I will
therefore make it evident to all them, that know their right hand from their
left, that howsoever it was in the days of the fathers, it is not now proper
to the true Church, but common to Schismatickes, and Heretics; and therefore,
that it cannot now serve as a mark or note distinctiue, whereby the true
Church may be known from mis-beleeuers. This therefore is to be reckoned
amongst those things that are proper and peculiar to the true Church, but not
perpetually proper; and so amongst those notes that may difference the true
Church from the false, at some times and not at others.

The title of Catholic does most fitly express those, both Christian men and
societies of Christians, which hold the common faith, without particular
divisions from the maine body of Christianity. While therefore there was but
the maine body of Christianity at unity in it self, and such portions of
seduced and misseled people, as apparently divided themselves from it, the name
of a Catholic was a note and distinctiue mark, or character to know and
discern a Catholic from an Heretic, or Schismaticke by, and the naming
after the name of any man, a note of particularity, and heretical or
Schismatic faction. Whereupon Paclanus in epist. ad sempronianum citatur a
Bellar. loco superius notato.
one of the ancient said fitly to this purpose, Christian is my name, and
Catholic is my surname: by the one I am known from Infidels, by the other
from Heretics and Schismatickes. But when the maine body of the Christian
Church divided it self, partly by reason of different ceremonies, uses,
customs, and observations; partly through the ambitious striuings of the
Bishops, and Prelates of the greatest, richest, and most respected places;
partly by occasion of some different opinions; the name of Catholic remained
common to either of the parts thus divided, sundred, and rent one from another,
though on the one side rested not only error, but heresy also in the opinion
of the other. For who knows not, that the Christians of the Greek, and
Oriental Church, are and have been as generally named Catholics, as the
friends and followers of the Western or Latin Church? Neither have they any
name, or note of faction, as all ancient Heretics had, but as in former
times before this schism began, for distinction sake the whole Christian
Church was divided into two moities, the one called the Occidentall, or Latin:
and the other the Oriental, or Greek Church: so are they by the same notes of
difference and no other known at this day. Yet are the Grecians, Armenians,
Aethiopians, and other in the East parts of the world, in the judgment of the
Romanists, not only Schismatickes, but Heretics also.

It 1. Tom. cont. 4. lib. 4. cap. 4.
was therefore more than ordinary impudency in Bellarmine to affirm, that the
name of a Catholic is a note of true Catholic profession, when he knew it
to be common to such as himself pronounces Heretics. And it is yet more
intolerable that he says, there is no heresy which receives not her name
from some particular man the author and beginner of it: and that whosoever are
named after the names of men are undoubtedly Heretics. For of what man had
the Apostolici their name, whose author and first beginner was never known,
(as Ceterae huiusmodi pestes singulae singulos magistros, homines habuisae
noscuntur, a quibus originem duxere, and nomen: quo nomine isto^ tituloque
censebis? nullo; quoniam non ab homine illorum haereles etc. Bernard^ cantica
ser. 66.
Bernard says) that we might assure our selves the Devil was author of that
damnable Sect? and who dare pronounce all the Thomists, Scotists, Benedictines,
and the like, to be Heretics? That we may therefore make his folly to
appear in that he says concerning Heretics, and the naming after the names
of men, as we did in the former part, touching the name and title of
Catholic, we must observe, that Heretics sometimes have their names from
the matter wherein they err, as the Monothelites in old time, and the
Anabptists in ours; the first affirming, that there is but one will in Christ,
whence they were named Monothelites; the other urging rebaptization of such as
are baptized by Heretics, whence they are named Anabaptists, that is,
rebaptizers: sometimes of that they arrogantly challenge to themselves and make
pretense of, Nempe iactant se esse Apostolorum, successores, and Apostolicos
nominant, ^lum tamen Aposto^ (...) valentes, ostendere. Ber. in Cant. sermon. 66.
as the Apostolici, for that they challenged to themselves more than ordinary
perfection, as equalling the Apostles, or coming nearer to their examples, and
presidents, than other men: sometimes of the place where they began and most
prevailed, as the Cataphriges: sometimes of the first author of their heresy,
as Maronites, Donatistes, and the like. Thus then we see all Heretics have
not their names from men.

But they will say, they were all Heretics that were named after the names of
men. Surely it is not to be denied but that the naming after the names of men
was in the time of the Primitive Church, peculiar and proper to Heretics and
Schismatickes only.

Neither were there any Christians in the first ages of the Church called after
the names of men, but such as followed wicked seducers in Schism, or Heresy:
whereupon it was a sure rule in ancient times, that whosoever professing
themselves Christians, were named after the names of men (as Nouatians of
Nouatus, Pelagians of Pelagius) they were to be holden for Heretics. This
rule is delivered by Hierom, against the Contra Luciferianos prope finem.
Luciferians. sicubi etc. If any where thou find men professing Christianity,
called after the particular names of men, know them to be the Synagogue of
Antichrist, and not the Church of Christ. But as the honorable title of
Catholic, sometimes a note of the true and Orthodoxe Church, is now ceased to
be so; in like sort the naming after the names of men, sometimes a note of
Heresy, is now ceased to be so: which to be most true the sundry, manifold
and diverse names of Dominicans, Franciscans, Benedictins, Augustinians,
Thomists, Scotists, and the like, do make it most apparent. And besides this,
there are at this day innumerable Christians in the East parts of the world,
that are Onuphrius in supplemento Platinae in vita Iulij. 3.
called Nestorians, that hold not the Heresy of Nestorius, nor any other
special Heresy, whence they might have any such name of division, faction, or
particularity.

For the better clearing of whatsoever may seem doubtful in this matter of
names, titles, and appellations, we must observe, that they, which profess
the faith of Christ, have been sometimes in these later ages of the Church,
called after the special names of such men, as were the Authors, deuisers,
and beginners of such courses of monastical profession, as they made choice of
to follow, as Benedictins, and the like; sometimes of such principal men,
whose judgment and opinion they embraced, and followed, in sundry matters of
great moment in the controversies of religion, not yet determined by consent of
the whole universal Church; and so in our times amongst the school Divines,
some following Thomas, and others Scotus, in many and sundry maine
contradictory opinions, some were named Thomists, others Scotists; sometimes of
such men, whose new, strange, and private opinions contrary to the Churches
faith, they pertinaciously embraced and followed, as Arrians, of Arrius,
Eutichians, of Eutiches: yea, sometimes of some arch-hereticke, whose opinions
and heresies they hold not, as at this day the greater part of Christians that
are in Assyria, Persia, and the rest of the Eastern provinces, are called
Onuphrius in vita iulij. 3.
Nestorians, by all other Christians in those parts, as the Iacobites,
Maronites, Cophti, and the like; yet do they hold nothing that sauoureth of
Nestorius heresy, as Onuphrius reports in the life of Julius the third, in
whose time sundry of them came to Rome.

These in likelihood are called Nestorians, for that in former times the
heresy of Nestorius prevailed much in those parts of the world: which now
being clearly banished, the right believing Christians of those parts are
still notwithstanding called by that odious and hateful name: or else it is by
wrong and unjust imputation; as the Armenians are judged by many to be
Eutichians, for that they receive not the council of Chalcedon In Concilio
Florentino in decreto Eugenij 4.
which they refused to subscribe unto, upon a false suggestion and
apprehension, that in it the heresy of Nestorius condemned in the Council of
Ephesus, was reviued again: sometimes of such as collected, gathered, and
brought into a certain Order, for the better direction of Gods people in his
service, the prayers of the Church, and forms of administering the sacraments,
and other holy things, or else augmented, altered, or reformed those that were
before; So when there grew a division among the Churches of this part of the
world, some following the form of Divine administration left by Ambrose,
others embracing that prescribed by Gregory, some were called In Ecclesia
Gregoriana est haec forma, per istam sanctam vnctionem etc. in Ambrosiana est
haec, vngo te etc. Bonavent. lib. 4. did 23. q. 4. de sacramento vnctionis,
Cassandet in praefat. in l. or d. Romans Petrus Voraginisis in legenda Gregorij.
1.
Ambrosian, and some Gregorian Churches: as likewise in our times when Luther,
Calvin, and other worthy servants of God had persuaded some states of
Christendom to reform, correct, and alter some things that were amiss, and
to remove and take away sundry barbarismes, errors, and superstitions crept
into the prayers of the Church, with many gross abuses, and grievous
abominations formerly tolerated in the midst of the Church of God; those
States, people, and Churches, which reformed themselves, abandoning
superstition, and error, were by some called reformed Churches; by other,
Lutherane Churches. Neither was it possible, that so great an alteration, as
the corrupt state of the Church required, should be effected, and not carry
some remembrance of them by whom it was procured. We see the sincerity of our
Christian profession concerning the Son of God, (whom we acknowledge
coessentiall, coequall, and coeternall with the Father,) cleared, and published
in the Nicen Council, was ever after, for distinction from the manifold
turnings and windings of Heretics, endeavoring to obscure, corrupt, alter,
and adulterate the same; called the Nicene faith.

That the Church needed reformation when Luther began, and that it was not
necessary, nor behoouefull to expect the consent of the whole Christian world
in a general Council, I will make it evident when I come to the third part of
my first general division. In the mean while, it is most clear and evident,
that the naming after the names of men is now no certain note of Heresy, or
Schism. For if the naming after the names of men were a certain note of
Heresy, or Schism, then should all orders of Monks and Friars, that are
named after the names of their first authors, be proved Heretics: yea, the
followers of Thomas, and Scotus, should be convinced of Heresy: and all the
Christians that are named Nestorians, should be found Heretics; which they
which know them best, do deny; yea then, all the Ambrosian and Gregorian
Churches, must be charged with Heresy, and Schism.

THE THIRD BOOK, OF THE TRVE CHVRCH DEMONSTRATED BY THE NOTES BEFORE AGREED
UPON.
CHAP. 1.
Of the division of the Christian world into the Western, or Latin Church,
and the Oriental, or East Church.

THus then having sufficiently examined those things which concern the notes
of the Church, so that it is evide^t to all not wilfully contentious, which are
the true notes whereby the Church may be known: it remains, that by
application of them we seek out, which among so many diversities, and
contrarieties in matters of religion, as are at this day found in the World, is
the true, and Orthodox Church of God. And because our controversies are not
with Jews, nor Pagan Infidels, as in the times of the fathers, but with such
as together with us profess themselves Christians, letting pass all those
notes which serve to prove the truth of Christian profession in general,
against heathenish and Jewish errors, let us come to take view of the
diversities that are found among Christians, and, by the direction of the notes
agreed upon, see which is the true Church of God.

The Christian Church is divided at this day into the Western, or Latin
Church, and the Oriental or East Church. The Oriental or East Church is
divided, into the Greek Church, the Nestorian or Assyrian Churches, and the
Churches of the supposed Monophysits, as the Iacobites, Armenians, Cophti or
Christians of Egypt; the Aethiopians or Abissens, and the Maronites who are
thought to be Monothelites. The Christians that are of the Greek religion are
of two sorts. First such as presently are, or lately were, subject to the
jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople. Secondly such as never were
under that jurisdiction and yet are of the same Communion: as the Melchites of
Syria, and the Georgians. Of the first sort are all the Christians of Natolia
except Armenia the lesser, and Cilicia; the Christians of Circassia and
Mengrellia, and Russia, in Europe the Christians of Greece, Macedon, Epirus,
Thrace, Bulgaria, Rascia, Servia, Bosina, Walachia, Moldavia, Podolia, and
Moscovia, together with all the Islands of the Aegean sea as far as Corfu,
besides a great part of the king of Polonia his dominions and those parts of
Dalmatia, and Croatia that are under the Turk. The reason of this large extent
of the jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople was. First the decree of
the Council of Chalcedon, subjecting unto him all Thracia and Anatolia except
Isauria and Cilicia belonging to Antioch, 28 Roman Provinces. Secondly the
voluntary submission of the Grecians upon the separation of the Churches. For
thereby not only Greece, Macedon, Epirus, Candie, and the Isles about Greece, in
all about 7 Provinces came under him, but Sicily also, and Calabria fell from
Rome, and for a long time were subject to the jurisdiction of Constantinople.
Whereupon in prope finem.
Curopalates the Metropolitans of Syracusa and Catana in Sicilia, of Rhegium,
Severiana, Rosia and Hydruntum in Calabria are registered amongst the
Metropolitans of that jurisdiction. Thirdly the conversion of sundry nations
and people to the Christian faith by his suffragans and ministers wrought a
great enlargement of his jurisdiction. The first of the Slavons, says Lib. 3.
pa. 31.
Cromerus, that were converted to the faith, were those of Bulgaria, who became
Christian the year 860 in the time of Nicholas the first. About these there
was much contention a long time between Rome and Constantinople, either of
them clayming jurisdiction over them as having won them to the true knowledge
and worship of God. But in the end the Grecians prevayled, and they were
wholly put under the jurisdiction of Constantinople. Some thirty years after
these, they of Rascia, Servia, Bosina, Croatia, Dalmatia and Illiricum received
the Christian faith from their neighbors the Grecians, and Italians, in the
time of the reign of Suatoplugus amongst the Moravians, who gave his name to
Christ, and was the means of the conversion of Borivoius Duke of the Bohemians
about the year 900. Not long after the conversion of the Bohemians about 980
years after Christ in the time of the reign of Basilius and Constantine
Emperors of Constantinople, the Russees began publickely to profess the
Christian faith, Volodomirus their prince having married the Emperors sister
and received teachers from the Patriarch of Constantinople. This prince after
he became a Christian, placed a Metropolitan at Kiovia, an Archbishop at
Novograd, and in other cities Bishops consecrated by the Patriarch of
Constantinople. Since which time the Russians adhere most constantly to the
Greek religion, and rites. After this the Polomans possessed themselves of
sundry parts of Russia, but the Russians not long enduring that subjection,
cast off the yoke and became free again; yet continued not long so: for
within short time after Russia in a great part became subject to the Lituanians
partly by conquest, and partly by marriages, and from them was passed over
again to the Polonians. For Ludovicus King of Hungary, and Poland, had two
daughters, of which the younger named Heduigis succeeded him in the kingdom of
Polonia, who was married to Iagello prince of Lituania; and thereby all
Lituania, and that part of Russia also that was subject to Lituania was joined
to the kingdom of Polonia for ever. But the histories report that while the
Russees were divided into many principalities, which fell out immediately after
the death of Volodomirus, one John the son of Daniel, a prince amongst them,
taking a good liking of the river, and tower of Mosqua repaired the tower
before mean, and base; and made it the seat of his principality. So that the
Russees subject to him were named Moscovites from the river and tower of Mosco.
And when long after they of the posterity of John, having joined unto them
partly by marriages, partly by fraud, partly by force such people of that
nation and language as lay near unto them formerly weakened by the incursions
of the Tartars and others, and so enlarged their principality. All such Russees
as were joined to that empire, though much more noble and mighty then the
Moscovites, were content to be named Moscovites, and yet still retained the
name of Russees also, as the Podolians are Russees and yet have a peculiar
name. These Moscovites by conquest obtained Novograde, and after that, those
Russees that were called Severianenses fell from the subjection of the
Lituanians to the Moscovites, either moved so to do by the injuries they had
received from them as they pretended, or rather by reason of the difference in
religion between them; and the good correspondence they held with the
Muscovites in this respect, so that the principality of Mosco grew to be
exceeding great. The Duke of Mosco growing thus great obtained of the Patriarch
of Constantinople to have a metropolitan of Mosco, who was named Metropolitan
of Russia, both by the Patriarch and others: as well as the Bishop of Kiovia,
who was long before so named and continues yet still so to be. In that part
of Russia that is subject to the King of Polonia there are seven Bishoprics,
whereof the Bishop of Kiovia is the Metropolitan. In the other which is
subject to the great Duke of Mosco there are eleven Bishoprics, whereof the
Bishop of Mosco is Metropolitan, the Bishop of Novograde and Rascavium are
Archbishops, the rest ordinary Bishops. All these as being at the first
consecrated and placed by the Patriarch of Constantinople were under his
jurisdiction. 4o The Turks conquests have been an occasion of the enlargment
of the Constantinopolitan jurisdiction; for when sundry parts of the Christian
world formerly subject to Rome were brought under the bondage of the Turks,
the Bishops and Pastors like hirelings forsook their flocks, over which, the
Patriarch of Constantinople pitying their case, placed Bishops and Pastors of
the greek religion, who by little and little won them to the liking of the
same. Thus we see how far the Constantinopolitan jurisdiction spreades it
self, so that I think it will be found that the number of Christians under
that Bishop with the Melchites and Georgians that are joined in communion with
him, though never under his jurisdiction, does far exceed them of the Roman
communion, unless they draw in their new converts in the Indies to fill up the
number. Annotatio Onuphrij in vita^ Bonifacij, apud Platinam.
The division and separation between the Greek and Latin Churches grew out
of the ambitious co^tentio^s of the Bishop of Rome, and the Patriarch of
Constantinople in this sort. In the time of the Nicen Council and before, as
appears by the Nicen. council. can. 6.
acts of the Council limiting their bounds, there were three principal
Bishops or Patriarchs of the Christian Church; namely, the Bishop of Rome,
Alexandria, and Antioch. After which time, Constantinople before named
Bizantium made great by Constantine, and being the seat of the Emperors, the
Bishop of this See, not only obtained to have the dignity of a Patriarch among
the rest, Sub Theodosio seniore can. 3. and Socrates l. 5. cap. 8.
but in the second general Council holden at Constantinople was preferred
before both the other of Alexandria and Antioch, and set in degree of honor
next unto the Bishop of Rome. Acts. 16. can. 28. in Graecis Codicibus.
In the great Council of Chalcedon, he was made equal with him, and to have
all equal rights, privileges, and prerogatives, because he was Bishop of new
Rome: as the other of old. But not long contenting himself with this equality;
the magnificencie, and glory of his City daily increasing, making him proud,
and insolent, he challenged to be superior, and would be named universal B.
not challenging to himself to be B. alone but incroaching upon the right of
all other, Caeterarum sedium privilegia, and earunde episcoporum co^secrationem
ad se vnum revocare, eosque in ordinem cogere, and sibi subdere conatus, est.
Leo epist. ad Anatolium; post consecrationem Antiocheni episcopi quam tibimet
contra canonicam regnlam vindicasti etc. epist. 53.
and thereby declaring himself greater, and more honorable then any of the
rest, and the chief Bishop of the whole world, because his city was the
chief city of the world. Gregor. lib. 4. epist. 76. 78. 82. lib. 6. epist.
168. 169.
About this, was the contention between Gregory the first, and John of
Constantinople; which not being ended in the days of Gregory, because the
Emperor Mauritius was averse from him, favoring the claim of his adversary,
Beda in lib. de temporum ratione. Platina in vita Bonifacij, 3.
Bonifacius obtained of Phocas to have the mattter in such sort concluded
between them, that the B. of Rome should have the first and chief place in
the Church of God, and the Patriarch of Constantinople the second: which
conclusion was not of such force, but that the succeeding Bishops of
Constantinople continued the same challeng their predecessors made, and as any
opportunity was offered, sought to advance their pretended title, till at length
there growing some difference between the^ in the matter of the proceeding of
the holy G, whom the Latins affirmed to proceed from the Father and the
Son, the GREEKS from the Father only, either pronounced the other to be
heretics and schismatickes.

Wherefore let us see what the religion of the Greek Church is, and whether
these Christians be so far forth orthodoxe, that we may account them members
of the true Catholic Church of God, or so in error, that we may reject them
as schismatics and heretics, though in number never so many. De consid. ad
Eugenium, l 3. cap. 2.
Bernard speaking of them, says, nobiscum sunt and non sunt, iuncti fide, pace
diuisi, quanquam and fide ipsa claudicaverint a rectis semitis. That is, they
are with us and they are not with us, they are of the same profession with us
touching matters of faith, but they hold not the unity of the spirit in the
band of peace; although they have halted also, and in some sort declined from
the straight paths in matters pertaining to the Christian faith. Touching the
state of these Christians, the Romanists lay down these propositions. First,
that there is a double separation from the Church of God, the one by heresy
overthrowing the faith, the other by schism breaking the unity. The second,
that schismatics, though they fall not into heresy, are out of the Church,
cut off from being members of the same, and consequently in state of damnation.
Believe certainly, and no way doubt, says St De fide ad Petrum, c. 38.
Augustine, that not only all Pagans, but all Jews, heretics, and
schismatics also, dying out of the communion of the Catholic Church, shall
go into everlasting fire. The third, that the Graecians are Schismatically
divided from the Roman Church, that they have long continued so, that they are
excommunicate with the greater excommunication thundered out against all
Schismatics in bulla coenae Domini, and consequently are in state of
damnation. Tho: a Jesus l. 6. c. 8. p. 281.
But whether they be not only Schismatics but haereticks also as some fear
not to pronounce, they are not yet agreed. Institut. moral. l. 8, c. 20. q. ^0.
Azorius thinks they are not to be censured as heretics, and yields a
reason of his so thinking: because in those articles of the faith where they
are thought to err, they differ verbally only, and not really from those that
are undoubtedly right believers; and gives instance first in the question
touching the proceeding of the holy Ghost, wherein he thinks they differ but
in form of words from them that seem to be their opposites: and secondly, in
the questions touching the Pope, his power, privileges, and authority,
concerning all which he affirms, they have no other opinion then Gerson and
the Parisians, who were never yet pronounced heretics, for they yield a
primacie to the Bishop of Rome, but no supremacy. They acknowledge him to be
Patriarch of the West amongst all the Patriarchs in order and honor the first
as long as he continues orthodoxe, and seeks not to encroach upon the
jurisdiction of others. But they deny as also the Parisians do, that his
judgment is infallible, or his power and authority supreme and absolute, they
teach that he must do nothing of himself in things pertaining to the state
of the universal Church, but with the concurrence of others his colleagues,
and that he is subject to a general Council. All which things were defined
in the Counsels of Constance and Basil, and the contrary positions condemned
as haereticall. Neither want there at this day many worthy Divines living in
the Communion of the Roman Church, who most strongly adhere to the decrees of
those Counsels, and peremptorily reject those of Florence and Trent, wherein
the contrary faction prevayled. For the whole kingdom and state of France
admit those and reject the other, and would no less withdraw themselves from
all communion with the Roman Bishop then the Grecians do if they should once
be pressed to acknowledge that his power and authority is supreme and
absolute, that he cannot err, and that he may dispose the kingdoms and
depose the kings and sovereign princes of the world as the Jesuits and other
the Popes flatterers affirm, and defend. Whence it will follow that they are
not only free from heresy, as Azorius resolves but from schism also. So
that after so great clamours, and so long contendings they must of necessity
be forced in the end to confess, they have done them infinite wrong and
sinned grievously against God in condemning to hell for no cause so many
millions of Christian souls redeemed with the most precious blood of his
dearest Son. There are, says De eccl. lib. 4 cap. 2.
Andreas Fricius, who think that the Russians, Armenians, and other Christians
of the East part pertain not to the Christian Church; but seeing they use the
same sacraments which we do, seeing they profess to fight under the banner
of Christ crucified, and rejoice in their sufferings for his sake, far be it
from us ever to think that they should be cast off and rejected from being
fellow citizens with the Saints and of the household of God, having borne the
burden, and endured the heat of the day, so many ages in the vineyard of the
Lord. Nay rather I think there can be no perfect co^sociation and union of the
whole Church without them. For the Latin Church alone cannot be taken for the
universal Church, that which is but a part cannot be the whole. But some man
happily will say, whatsoever we think of these differences touching the power
and authority of the B. of Rome, yet in the article of the proceeding of the
holy ghost they err damnably, and so are heretics, and that Azorius was
deceived when he thought otherwise. Wherefore for the clearing of this point;
first I will make it evident that not only Azorius but sundry other great and
worthy Divines think the difference about the proceeding of the holy Ghost to
be merely verbal. Secondly, I will show how the seeming differences touching
this point may be reconciled. Thirdly, I will note the beginnings and
proceedings in this controversy. The Grecians, says Lib. 1. d. 11.
Peter Lombard, affirm, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father only,
and not from the Son, yet we must know that the Greeks do acknowledge the
holy Ghost to be the spirit of the Son, as well as of the Father; because the
Apostle says, the spirit of the Son: And truth it self in the Gospel, the
spirit Galat. 4.
of truth. Now seeing it is no other thing to be the spirit of the Father and
the Son, then to be from the Father and the Son; they seem to agree with us
in judgment touching this article of faith, though they differ in words. In
notula quadam super finem epistolae de trisagio apud Scotum l. 1. d. 11. q. 1.
Grosthed the famous and renowned Bishop of Lincoln, writing upon a part of
Damascen, delivers his opinion touching this controversy in these words. The
Grecians are of opinion that the holy Ghost is the spirit of the Son, but
that he proceeds not from the Son but from the Father only, yet by the Son;
and this opinion seems to be contrary to ours. For we say the holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father and the Son. But happily if two wise and
understanding men, the one of the Greek Church, the other of the Latin, both
true lovers of the truth, and not of their own sayings, because they are
their own, might meet to consider of this seeming contrariety, it would in
the end appear that this difference indeed, and in truth is not real, but
verbal only. For otherwise either the Grecians, or we that are of the Latin
Church are truly Heretics. But who dares charge this Author John Damascen,
or those blessed ones Basil, Gregory the Divine, or Gregory Nazianzen, Cyril,
and other Greek Fathers of like esteem with heresy. And again on the other
side, who dares brand blessed Hierome, Augustine, Ambrose, Hilarie, and other
like Latin Fathers with the note of heresy. Therefore it is likely that
though there be contrariety in the words of these fathers, so that they seem to
be contrary one to another; yet in judgment and meaning they agree. De
Ecclesia l. 4. cap. 2.
Stanislaus, Orichovius, as Andreas Fricius reports, a man renowned for wit,
eloquence, and profound science in diverse kinds, has written of the opinions
of the Russians, and in an epistle to Peter Gamrat an Archbishop in Polonia,
he shows how the differences touching the proceeding of the holy Ghost, where
they seem especially to be contrary unto us, may be agreed and composed.
Lib. 6. p. 24^
Thomas a Jesus resolves clearly that this question touching the proceeding of
the holy Ghost is only de modo loquendi, and that the difference is not real,
which he shows to be true in this sort. The Greeks, who deny the holy Ghost
to proceed from the Son, acknowledge that he is the spirit of the Son,
and that he is given unto us by the Son. We do not say, says Damascen,
that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Son, but we name him the spirit of
the Son. If any man, says the Apostle, have not the spirit of Christ, he is
none of his. And we affirm, that he appeared by the Son, and was given
unto us by him, for he breathed upon his disciples, and said unto them,
receive the holy Ghost, but we never say that the Son is the son of the holy
Ghost, or proceeds from him. They teach therefore, that the spirit is, and
proceeds from the Father by the Son: as the brightness is from the Sun, by
the beam. And that, as we may say, the brightness is the brightness of the
Sun-beame, as well as of the Sun, but not that the beam is the beam of that
brightness: so the spirit is the spirit of the Son, but the Son is not the son
of the spirit, So then they say, the holy Ghost proceeds or receives essence
and being from the Father only, as from the original and fountain, but by
the Son as a middle person in order of subsistence between them, receiving
being immediately from the Father, and so mediately deriving and communicating
it to him. Neither Greeks nor Latins therefore deny the holy Ghost to receive
being and essence from the Son, and consequently to proceed from him as from
a middle person in order of subsistence between the Father and him in such
sort, as the brightness that flows from the sun is from the sun-beame
between the sun and it. Neither of them deny the Father to be the fountain,
and the original: as the sun is the fountain whence flows both the beam,
and brightness of light. And both agree that the Father from whom, and the
Son by whom the spirit receives being, are one cause, or one beginning: and
that by one eternal breathing the spirit receives essence or subsistence from
them both, in such sort as the son and beam are one cause, and do by one
action send forth that shining brightness that flows from them. By that
which has been spoken says Thomas a Jesus, it is easy to understand that
those Greeks which seem to differ from the Latins, differ but in words only,
and that the Churches may easily be brought to a reconciliation and agreement,
if they will but endeavor to understand each the other: But the Latins and
those Greeks that agree with them speak more fitly, and express the thing
whereof they speak better then the other. Howsoever it is certain that some
of the Fathers expressed that they conceived of this mystery in one sort, and
some in another. Contr. Praxeam.
Tertullian says, the holy spirit is from the Father by the Son; his words
are, Spiritum non aliunde puto quam a Patre per Filium. Lib. 2. de trinitate.
Hilarie says, he is from the Father and the Son. His words are de patre and
filio authoribus confitendus est, etc. When the holy spirit is x In epist. ad
Hedibiam.
sent, says Hierom, he is sent of the Father, and the Son; and in Scripture
he is called sometimes the spirit of the Father, sometimes of the Son. And
Esai. (...). 7.
again Spiritus a Patre egreditur, and propter naturae societatem a filio
mittitur. That is, the spirit proceeds from the Father, and in that he is of
the same nature and essence with the Son he is sent of him. Why should we not
believe, says Tract. in Ioann. 99.
Augustine, that the holy spirit, proceeds from the Son also, seeing he is
the spirit of the Son. The Greeks say not expressly, that he proceeds
from the Father and the Son; for in the creed of Athanasius as it is found
in the Greek, the words are, the spirit is of the Father not made, nor
created, nor begotten, but proceeding; without the addition of the Son.
Nyssen in vita Greg. Thaumaturg.
But some of them say he is, or received being from the Father, that he
appeared by the Son, and is a perfect image of the Son. Chrysostom. hom. 76. in Joan.
Others, that not only the Father but the Son also sends the holy spirit.
Epiphan. haere. 69.
Some that he proceeds from the Father, and receives of the Son. And
Maxim. in Zach. c. 4. citat. a Bessario. Tha^. in epist. ad patriarchas orient.
habetur in 7. Sy nodo actio. 3.
others that he is from the Father by the Son. In all which diversity of
words and forms of speaking there was one and the same meaning, and therefore
no exception was taken by one against another. But the controversy that now is
touching this point began in this sort. The first publishers of the Gospel of
Christ delivered a rule of faith to the Christian Churches which they founded,
comprehending all those articles that are found in that epitome of Christian
religion, which we call the Apostles creed. But in process of time, when
Arrius and his accomplices questioned the deity of Christ, and denied him so to
be the son of God as to be coequall, coeternall, and coessentiall with the
father, Constantine called a Council and assembled the Bishops of the
Christian world at Nice a city in Bithinia; these Bishops cleared the point in
controversy, and with unanimous consent, composed a Symbol, containing a full
explication of whatsoever might be questioned touching the deity of Christ.
This form of Christian profession was called the Nicen creed, and was received
as a most excellent rule of faith by all right believers throughout the world.
In this creed there was nothing expressly put down touching the holy Ghost
more then was found in the Apostles creed, that we believe in the holy Ghost.
But when Macedonius and Eunomius denied the deity of the holy spirit, the
Fathers assembled in the first Council of Constantinople, added to the Nicen
creed these words. I believe in the holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who
proceeds from the Father, who together with the Father and the Son is
worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the Prophets. So expressing his
proceeding from the Father, without any mention of the Son. This creed, or
form of Christian profession was confirmed in the council of Ephesus, and all
they accursed that should add any thing unto it: meaning as it may well be
thought to condemn such addition as might make any alteration, and not such as
might serve for more full and definite explication. But howsoever, this Nicen
creed thus enlarged in the Council of Constantinople without any farther
addition was confirmed, and proposed to the Christian world for a rule of faith
in all the general counsels that ever were holden, and was so publickely
received in sundry Christian Churches in their liturgies. But in time the
Bishops of Spain began to add the proceeding from the Son, saying; We
believe in the holy Ghost the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the
Father and the Son: And the French not long after admitted the same addition;
but the Romans admitted it not, Whereupon Charles the great in his time called
a Council at Aquisgrane, in which it was debated, whether the Spaniards, and
after them the French had done well in adding to the creed the proceeding of
the holy Ghost from the Son. And whether supposing the point of doctrine to
be true, it were fit to sing and recite the creed in the public service of
the Church with this addition, the Church of Rome, and some other Churches
refusing to admit it. Besides this, some were sent to Leo the third about
that matter, but he would by no means allow of this addition, but persuaded
them that had given way unto it, by little, and little to put it out, and to sing
the creed without it. The same Leo caused the symbol to be translated and
written out in a table of silver, in such sort as it had been delivered in the
Covncels, placed the same behind the altar of S Peter, and left it to
posterity, out of the careful desire of preserving the true faith as he
professed. And in this Symbol in the article touching the proceeding of the
holy Ghost, the Father only is named in this sort: and in the holy Ghost the
Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the Father. Neither was this the
private fancy of Leo only, for after his time John the 8th showed his dislike
of this addition likewise, for writing unto Photius patriarch of Constantinople
he has these words. Reverend vid. Pithaeum.
Sir, that we may give you satisfaction touching that addition in the creed
(and from the Son) we let you know, that not only we have no such
addition: but also we condemn them as transgressors of the direct word, that
were the first authors of this addition. And afterward he adds, we
carefully labor, and endeavor to bring it to pass that all our Bishops may
think as we do; but no man can suddenly alter a thing of such consequence,
and therefore it seems reasonable to us: that no man be violently
constrained by you to leave out this addition. But in the year 883 the Romans
also made the same addition to the creed in the time of Pope Nicholas the
first. Here by the way we may note the inconstancy, irresolution, and
uncertainty of the Roman Bishops, one of them admitting that as right and good
which another not long after condemned as a transgression of the direct law.
And farther that in matters of great importance other Bishops have gone before
them, and drawn them to do that in the end which at first they misliked, so
that all direction in former times was not sought from Rome. By that which has
been said it appears that the difference between the Churches touching this
point is not such as it should cause any division, or breach. Yet was this
addition no sooner made, but so great dislikes grew upon it, (many thinking
nothing might be added, at least without a general Council, to the creed
formerly published in so many general Councels as a rule of faith:) that
though the difference in truth and in deed were but verbal, yet either side
endeavored to show the other erred daungerously; and so this verbal difference
was an occasion amongst other things to cause a schism and separation between
them.

Thus having cleared this point, wherein, if in any thing, the Grecians may be
thought to have erred, let us see what other errors are imputed to them.
Citatus a Pratcolo.
Guido Carmelita, and after him Prateolus impute unto them sundry errors which
Apud Possev. bibl. l. 6. c. 1.
Lucinianus of Cyprus a learned Dominican and a worthy man, as he is accounted
by Possevine, shows to be falsely ascribed unto them. As first, that simple
fornication is no sin. 2dly, that they condemn second marriages which he
shows to be untrue likewise, though the Priest bless only in the first,
and not in the second. Thirdly, that they think the contract of marriage may
be broken, and the band dissolved at the pleasure of the parties. Whereas
contrariwise, he affirms, they allow no divorce so as to permit a second
marriage, while both the parties live. Fourthly, they are said to affirm that
the sacrament consecrated on maundy Thursday, is of more force, virtue, and
efficacy, then consecrated any other day. Wherein he shows, that they are no
less wronged then in the other imputations. Fifthly, they are charged to teach
that it is no sin to lend upon usury; and which is worse, that it is not
necessary to make restitution of things unjustly taken away. In both which
imputations he says, they are much wronged. For they think usury to be
sin, and urge the necessity of restitution. Sixthly, they are said to think,
if a Priests wife die, he cease to be a Priest any longer, which is as
mere a slander as the rest were. So that it is true that Tho: a Jesus has,
that one of the principal things that makes the Grecians so averse from the
Latins is that they are wronged by them by untrue reports and unjust
imputations. The things wherein they differ indeed from the Church of Rome are
these. First they deny the Pope to be head of the universal Church, or to have
any supreme commanding authority in the Church and over other Bishops: they
say that there are five Patriarchs or chief bishops of the Christian Church;
to wit, the Bishop of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and
Jerusalem, and amongst these they yield a primacy of order and dignity to the
Bishop of Rome. So that in all Councels and meetings he is to have the first
place in sitting, or giving voice, in subscribing, or defining and determining
things concerning the faith and state of the Church, but not any power or
commanding authority over them. We, says Marcus Ephesinus, think the Pope
to be one of the five Patriarchs if he be Orthodoxe. But they that met in
the Florentine Council and subscribed to the union there made, do teach, that
he is the Vicar of Christ, the father and teacher of all Christians. Secondly,
in the ministering of baptism they differ much from the Roman Church. For first
the words of form with them are; let the servant of the Lord be baptized, in
the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy Ghost: and not I
baptize thee as in the Latin Church. 2ly, they dippe the baptized thrice in
the water, whereas many among the Latins do only power water upon the top of
the head. 3ly, they use not salt, spittle, and the like as the Latinos do. 4l,
they Cyrill. catech, page 524.
anoint them with chrisom or holy oil in the forehead, so as in the Latin
Church they are anointed in confirmation. And in some other parts also; saying,
sigillum and obsignatio donispiritus sancti. that is, the seal and obsignation
of the gift of the holy Ghost, and use no other confirmation. Whereas the
Latins make it a sacrament to be ministered by none but a Bishop. 5ly,
According to the old custom used in the Primitive Church they minister the
Sacrament of the Eucharist to children when they baptize them. 3ly, They differ
much more from the Latins touching the sacrament of the eucharist. For first
they use leavened bread, and some of them proceed so far as that they think
it no sacrament if it be ministered in unleavened bread. 2ly, They consecrate
one loaf which they devide into many parts, and give to the communicants. 3ly,
They keep the bread and wine covered until they come to bless, and then
drawing aside the curtain they bring them into sight, and lift them up from
the mystical table, that the people may see what heavenly food is prepared
for them. And to this purpose with them serves the elevation. 4ly, They think
the consecration is made by the prayers and blessing, and that the reciting of
the words of Christ, this is my body, etc. serves only to put us in mind
what was then done when he first instituted this Sacrament, and to give a power
or aptness to the sacramental elements to be changed mystically into his
body and blood, whereas the Latins think the bare recital of the words of
Christ do work the consecration. 5ly, They pronounce the words of Christ
aloud, that all may hear and understand; the Latins so that they are not
heard. 6ly, They give the sacrament to the hands of the communicants, the
Latins put it in their mouths. 7ly, They condemn private masses, as
appears by Marcus Ephesinus, who says, the Priest in the Latin Church
eats all and drinks all himself, giving no part to any that are present,
no not to the Deacon that assisteth him, and yet cries aloud take and eat. So
do they many things, says he, in the celebration of this holy mystery,
contrary to the tradition received from the fathers, contrary to the words of
Christ, and contrary to themselves, and their own words. 8ly, They minister
the communion in both kinds to all communicants, and think it necessary so to
do, the Latins minister it only in one kind to the lay people, and such
Priests, and clergy men as consecrate not, but are present only to
communicate. 9ly, They teach that there is a co^version of the bread and wine
into the body and blood of Christ. But such as that is, whereby the iron is
turned into fire, or rather into a fiery nature, and being; whence it becomes
burning iron. In which there is no abolishing of the substance, but such a
change, that it is no longer merely iron, but the nature and properties of
fire appear in it, rather then of iron. So that as iron is turned into fire,
not by an absolute ceasing to be, or loosing of former properties, but by a
suspension of them for a time, so that they appear not, and by becoming one
in such sort with the fire, that it has all the properties and actions of it:
so the bread is turned into the body of Christ, not by an absolute ceasing to
be; but by becoming one in such sort with Christ's body thorough the presence
of the spirit descending and coming down upon it, as that the communicating
in the one, is the partaking in the other, and an imparting of all such graces
as may, or do flow from any union with the same. The bread and wine, says
Orthodoxae fid. lib. 4. c. 14.
Damascen, are so changed into the body and blood of Christ by the presence of
the spirit, descending and coming down upon them, as that they are no longer
two, but one and the same thing. And as the coal is no longer mere wood or
iron, but so united to the fire, that it is become one with it; so the bread
wherein we communicate is no longer mere bread but united unto the deity. He
does not say, the bread cease to be, or is abolished, but that it cease to
be that it was, mere bread. What kind of conversion this is, we may learn out
of Catech. 3. pa. 525.
Cyrill. Vosvncti estis, says he, vnguento, facti participes and consortes
Christi, caeterum vide ne illud putes vnguentum tantum. Quemadmodum enim panis
eucharistiae post sancti spiritus invocationem non amplius est (...), sed
corpus Christi; sic sanctum hoc vnguentum non amplius est vnguentum nudum post
invocationem, neque, siquis it a malit appellare, commune, sed donum Christi.
Here we see, he makes the consecrated and holy ointment to be the gift of
Christ, as the bread is the body of Christ; and so to cease to be mere oil or
ointment: as the bread which we break cease to be mere bread, whereas yet
no man imagines any such transubstantiation of the oil, or holy ointment, as
to abolish the nature and substance of it. But that the Greckes never dreamed
of any such conversion of the bread and wine as should utterly abolish the
former substance, it is evident by Dialog. in confus.
Theodoret in his dialogues. For whereas the Eutichian heretic objects, that
as the outward signs in the Sacrament of the eucharist are changed after they
are consecrated, so the body of Christ after it was assumed, was changed into
the divine substance: The Orthodoxe and right believer answers, that he is
taken in that snare which he laid for others. For the mystical signs do not
change their nature after consecration, but remain and continue in the same
substance, figure, and shape, and are visible, and may be handled as before,
but they are conceived and believed to be that which now they are made, and are
adored as being that which they are believed to be. Here we see is no such
change of the mystical signs, as to abolish their substance and former being,
for then the conversion in the Sacrament had been such as the Heretic
imagined it to be in the body of Christ assumed; and so Theodoret could not
truly have said, he was taken in the snare which he laid for others.
Wherefore to conclude this point, the Crecians teach that there is a conversion
of the sacrame^tall elements, but of that kind which I have before showed,
that abolisheth not the things which were, but makes them to be that they
were not. Which may farther appear in that they say likewise, there is a
change of the communicants into the being of Christ, and make the end of the
Sacrament to be nothing else but (...) a transubstantiation into Christ, (...),
the making of them that communicate partakers of the divine nature, according
to that of the Apostle, who says, We are made the body of Christ; and yet is
not our former being abolished, but we are made to be that which we were
not, in a divine, and supernatural sort, according to that of Orthodoxae
fider l. 4. c. 14.
Damascen. Let us come and receive the body of him that was crucified, let us
partake of that divine burning coal that the fire of desire being kindled in
us by that coal, may burn up our sins, and lighten our hearts, and that
being changed into that devine fire, we may become fire, and be in a sort
deified, and made partakers of the divine nature. All which changes neither
abolish nor confound substances. For as De caen^ Do. mind.
Cyprian says well, nostra and ipsius contunctio, nec miscet personas, nec
unit substantias, sed affectus consociat and confaederat voluntates. That is,
the union and conjunction that is betwixt Christ and us, neither causes any
mixture of the persons, nor makes them to be substantially the same, but
joyneth affections and confederateth the wills. Lastly, touching the sacrament
of the Lords boby and blood, they teach that it is a sacrifice, and that we
may the better conceive what they mean, they lay down these propositions.
First, that under, the Law, two sorts of things were presented unto God, gifts,
and sacrifices. Gifts, as vessels of gold, or silver, and things of like
nature: which were dedicated unto God, and set apart from profane, and
ordinary uses. Sacrifices, as sheep, oxen, and the like things, when they were
slain and their blood powered out; and generally all such things as were
consumed in the fire. The second proposition is, that the body of Christ was
both a gift and a sacrifice: for he was dedicated to God from his first
entrance into the world, as the first fruits of our nature, and as the first
borne of Mary his mother; and afterward he became a sacrifice when he was
crucified. The third, that bread and wine are presented unto God in the holy
sacrament in the nature of gifts before they are consecrated. The fourth, that
the bread and wine are consecrated, and so changed as to become the sacrificed
body and blood of Christ. The fifth, that it may be truly said, that there is
not only an oblation in the holy eucharist, but a sacrifice also, in that the
body of Christ which was once sacrificed is there. The sixth, that the bread
cannot be said to be sacrificed, for then the sacrifices of the new Testament
should not excel those of the old. The seventh, that in the sacrificing of a
living thing, the killing of it is implied. The eight, that the body of Christ
cannot be said to be sacrificed in the eucharist, because he can die no
more, but is immortal and impassible. The ninth, that Christ may be said to be
newly sacrificed and slain commemoratiuely, in that the sacrificing of him on
the altar of the cross is there commemorated and lively expressed, and the
benefits of it communicated to them that are made partakers of those holy
mysteries, according to that of In Hebr. 10.
Lyra: Si dicas, sacrificium altaris quotidie offertur in ecclesia; dicendum,
quod non est ibi sacrificij reiteratio, sed vnius sacrificij in cruce oblati
quotidiana commemoratio. Secundum illud Lucae 22. hoc facite in meam
commemorationem. That is, If thou say, the sacrifice of the altar is daily
offered; the answer is clear and easy, that the body of Christ is not newly
sacrificed on the altar, but whereas Christ once offered himself as a
sacrifice on the cross, the same is daily commemorated; according to that,
Luke 22, Do this in remembrance of me. And therefore Chrysostom writing upon
the Cap. 10.
epistle to the Hebrews having named it a sacrifice, adds by way of
explication, or correction, that it is a sacrifice, or rather the commemoration
of a sacrifice. So that herein they differ from the Romanists, who teach, that
there is a new real sacrificing of Christ. In the doctrine of freewill they
do not so clearly express themselves as S. Augustine, and others that follow
him. For they teach, that we must first will the things that are right and
good, and that God then helps, confirms, and sets us forward, so that
they suppose he follows our wills and goes not before them, least the
liberty thereof might be prejudiced. Their meaning I think is, that no good
can be wrought in us without our consent, which S. Augustine also confesses to
be true, but it is Gods grace that wins, inclines, and boweth us to
consent to that good which it self suggesteth, in which respect it may be
truly said to go before our will, and yet not to prejudice our liberty. If
they speak not so distinctly touching this point as some others do, it is not
to be marvailed at; seeing the Greek fathers are not so clear in this point
as the Latins are. Whereupon Aloisius Lippomannus in catena aurea in his
preface to the reader has these words. I have thought good to admonish thee,
that if in this whole work thou shall any where find any such sayings of
Chrysostom; as that when man endeavors, and does that which pertayneth to
him, God will abundantly give grace: thou wisely and warily read that holy
Doctor, least thou fall into any such error, as to believe that Gods grace is
given for our merits. For if out of merit, it is not grace. But far be it
from us so to think, seeing we cannot so much as endeavor, or do any thing
that pertayneth to us without Gods grace preventing us. According to that in
the Psalm, His mercy shall prevent me, and again, his mercy shall follow
me all the days of my life. And that of holy Church, Let thy grace O Lord we
beseech thee prevent and follow us. Sixthly touching Justification they lay
down these propositions. The first, that we must have faith to believe the
things revealed unto us of God. The second, that this faith makes us see what
the estate of man's nature should be what it was at first, and how much we are
fallen from that we were. The third, that out of this faith must flow a
dislike of those sinful evils, into which we are fallen, and a fear of
woeful consequents, if we be not freed from them. The fourth, that hence must
grow a desire of remission of that which is past, of grace that we may cease to
do evil and learn to do well, and of assistance of the same grace that we
may go on, continue, and not be turned out of the good way when we are
entered into it. The fifth, that no man obtayneth remission of sins without
dislike of sin, and desire, and purpose to leave off to do evil. The sixth,
that being thus converted unto God, in longing desires of reconciliation, we
must not doubt but assure ourselves of the obtaining of it. The seventh, that
being justified, no man can be saved without the study and care of well
doing, and that works are necessary unto salvation. The eight, that when we
have done all, we must confess we are unprofitable servants, that in many
things we sin all. That if God do mark and observe our defects, we cannot
abide it. That we must not trust in our works, but in Gods mercy. That even
those things which seem small to us, deserve great punishment if God enter
into judgment with us. And that it is not our well doing, but his mercy that
makes us escape condemnation. So that they differ from the Romanists touching
the perfection of inherent righteousness, the merit of congruence, and
condignity, and works of supererogation. 7ly, The Romanists teach, that sins
committed after baptism, are not so remitted for Christ's sake, but that we
must suffer that extremity of punishment which they deserve, and therefore
either we must afflict our selves in such sort and degree of extremity as may
answer the desert of our sin, or be punished by God here, or in the world
to come in such degree and sort that his justice may be satisfied. But they
that are Orthodox, teach; First, that it is injustice to require the payment of
one debt twice. Secondly, that Christ suffered the punishment due to all sins
committed before and after baptism, and therefore so satisfied the justice of
God, that they that are partakers of the benefit of his satisfaction, so far
forth as they are made partakers of it, are freed from the guilt of punishment.
Thirdly, that the satisfaction of Christ is applied and communicated unto us
upon the condition of our faith and repentance without suffering the punishment
that sin deserves. 4ly, That it is no less absurd to say, as the Papists
do, that our satisfaction is required as a condition, without which Christ's
satisfaction is not appliable to us; then to say, Peter has paid the debt of
John, and he to whom it was due accepts of the same payment conditionally if
he pay it himself also. Fifthly, that as one man pays another man's debt, and
the payment of it is accepted upon condition of his dislike of former evil
courses, and promise of amendment, and not otherwise: so it may be truly said,
that neither Christ has paid our debt, or God the Father accepted the payment
of it for us, but upon condition of our sorrowful conversion and repentance.
Sixthly, That the penal and afflictiue courses which the sinner puts
himself into, may be named satisfactions dispositiue, in that they put us into
an estate wherein we are capable of the benefit of Christ's satisfaction
freeing us from the punishment of sin. In this sort, the Greeks urge the
necessity of satisfactions, and not as the Romanists do, which appears by
the reasons and causes which they deliver. Whereof the first is, that
correcting our selves, and amending that which otherwise God by his
chastisements must drive us to do, we may escape punishment. The second, that
we may pull up the root of sinful evils, that is, the inordinate desire and
pleasure we had in things which either we should not desire or not so as we
do. The third, that this correction may serve us as a bridle to restrain us
from running into the like or worse evils hereafter. The fourth, that we may
frame ourselves to labor and a strait course of life, virtue being a laborious
thing and requiring painful endeavors. The fifth, that we may make it
appear to our selves and others that we hate sin truly and from the heart.
These are true reasons why men should put themselves into penitential courses,
and these only are assigned by the Grecians; but they never give any such
reason thereof as the Romanists fancy. And as they receive not the Romish
doctrine of satisfactions: so they never admitted any use of such indulgences
as are granted in the Roman Church, nor ever dreamed of any power in the Church
of communicating the overplus of one man's satisfactions and sufferings, to
supply the want of another. Eighthly, touching the estate of the departed; First
they think that neither the Saints are already entered into the kingdom
prepared for them, nor that the sinners are already cast into hell: but that
both are in an expectation of that lot that remains for them, and shall so
continue till the resurrection and judgment. This opinion prevails generally
amongst all the Eastern Christians, and it was the opinion of many of the
ancient Fathers. Secondly, they beeleeue that the souls of such men as excel
in virtue, are worthy of eternal life, and such as merely embrace this
present world, of eternal punishment. But that they who were in a course of
virtue, yet not without sundry defects, and die in the same, are not to be
punished eternally, nor yet to be made partakers of Gods glory till they have
obtained remission of those sinful defects in which they die without
particular repentance. So that they believe there is remission of some sins,
not remitted here, obtained after this life. But whether they, whose sins are
so remitted, be subject to any punishment after their departing hence, or God
do freely, without inflicting any punishment, remit them out of his merciful
disposition, and at the entreaty of the Church they do not so clearly
resolve. A pologia Graecorum de Purgato rio.
Though they incline to think that this remission is free, and amongst many
other reasons for proof of the same allege, that as some few good things in
them that are generally and principally evil, shall have no reward in the
world to come; so some few evil things in them that principally embrace
virtue, shall not be punished. But if they be subject to any punishment, they
all agree, that it is only the wanting of the clear light of Gods countenance
that shines upon others; or the being in a strait or restraint, or the
sorrowful dislike of former evils, and not any punishment inflicted from
without, to give satisfaction to the justice of God, or to drive them to
dislike that they formerly liked well; and so to purge them from the impurity
of sin, as they of the Church of Rome imagine. Thirdly, they pray for the
dead, not as the Papists, to deliver the^ out of purgatory, but for their
resurrection, and the remission of their sins, and public acquitall in the
day of judgment, the perfecting of whatsoever is yet wanting unto them, the
possessing of them of heavenly happiness, and in the mean while the placing of
them where in best sort they may expect till they be perfected. Lastly
touching the Saints departed they lay down these propositions. First that
truly and properly God only is to be invocated. Secondly, that Saints are
invocated improperly and by accident only. Thirdly, that Peter and Paul hear
none of those that invocate them, but the grace and gift that they have,
according to the promise, I am with thee till the end of the world. Meaning; as
it may be conceived, that the Saints hear not them that invocate them, but
Christ the Son of God who was given unto them, and promised to be with them:
and the holy Ghost which is likewise given unto them, and abides and dwells
in them for ever. So that whatsoever their words seem to import when they
speak to the Saints, their meaning is to direct their petitions to that God
that promised to be with them, and to hear the petitions, and grant the
requests of all such, as by them should be converted, and should seek to him,
in hope to obtain such things as by them he made them promise of. The
question is proposed, says Hugo de Sancto Victore, whether the Saints when we
entreat them to intercede for us, do pray for us and how? The answer hereunto
is, that the Saints are no otherwise said to pray for us; but in that the
favor, and acceptance they have with God, induces him to do good to such as
he finds well affected toward them for his sake. So that it is nothing
whether they hear us or not; for it suffices that God hears us to whom we
principally direct our selves. Ninthly touching Images. First they differ from
the Church of Rome, in that they allow no Image of God. Who can make an Image,
says Damascen l. 4. c. 17.
Damascen, of God, who is invisible, incorporeall, incircumscriptible? it is
great folly and impiety to seek to have any representation of him that is an
infinite and incomprehensible Spirit. Secondly, they admit no graven, carved,
or molten Images, of gold, silver, wood, or stone, but think they savor of
Heathenish superstition. Thirdly, they have the Pictures of the Saints, not
only for history and ornament, which might be allowed but so as in reference to
Christ and his Saints, to bow and incline themselves before them, this they do
following the 2d Nicene Council, which though it condemn all religious
adoration of the Saints, and their pictures, and seems to permit no other
acts of outward reverence and respect to be done to pictures of Saints, then
they yield to all sacred and holy things, as books, vessels, vestiments, and
places dedicated to the service of God; nor the expressing of any other
affections toward them, or remembrances of them, then holy men here in this
World bear one toward another, and so come far short of the conceit of
the Romanists; yet the Western Church in the time of Charles the Great, and a
long time after, condemned that Council, and the Image Worship, which they
that met in that Council, sought to bring in; neither can the Greeks be
excused from superstition in this point. Tenthly, they permit such as are to be
Priests, if they like not to live single, to marry wives before they be
ordained, and made Priests, and to live with them after they are entered into
that degree, and order: knowing that God has ordained marriage, that it is
honorable amongst all men, and that they that condemn Priests marriage, are
the occasion of much sinful impurity. The Romanists, says Photius, do so
press the law of single life, that many grievous scandals follow the same. For
with them many Virgins become mothers that never were wives, and many mothers
are found to nurse the Children of such Fathers as may not be known. And yet
these endeavor to make the true Priests of God, that live in lawful marriage,
to be odious, and hateful. So then the Graecians leave it free to them that
are to be ordained Priests to take unto them wives before their ordination, and
to live with them afterward: but if they then refuse so to do, they permit
them not to marry afterward. Yet if any do, they dissolve not the marriage,
but put them from the execution of their office and ministry. Lastly,
touching abstinence they differ not a little from the Church of Rome: for they
fast Wednesday because on that day Judas agreed with the Jews to betray
Christ, and Friday, because on that day Christ was crucified. But they fast no
Saturday in the whole year, but only Easter Eve. In the Lent they abstain on
Saturday from flesh, but all the year besides they freely eat flesh that day.
They keep four Lents in the year. The first, that which the Western
Christians observe. The 2o from the Octaues of Whitsuntide, until the
holidays of Peter and Paul, which they call the fast of S. Peter. The 3d from
the first of August until the assumption of the blessed Virgin. The 4th 6
weeks in the Advent, beginning presently upon the feast of S. Philip according
to the Calendar of the Russions, and therefore call it the Fast of S. Philip.
Their Monks and Bishops, as having been Monks, do never eat flesh. Lastly,
they all abstain from things strangled, and blood, observing as they suppose
the Canon of the Apostles. Thus we see the extent of the jurisdiction of the
Patriarch of Constantinople, and the Religion of them that are under the same.
This jurisdiction has been greatly straightned within these few years, for
both the Russiaes; both that under the Moscovites, and the other subject to the
King of Polonia are fallen from the same. But the number of them that profess
the Greek Religion is not diminished. For all those Christians still retain
their former religion, rites, and ceremonies. The metropolitan of Mosco, says
Possevine, was wont to be confirmed by the Patriarch of Constantinople, but now
he is chosen by the Prince and consecrated by two or three of his own Bish.
without seeking any confirmation from the Patriarch of Constantinople, to whom
yet the Emperor of Russia sends yearly a certain sum of money by way of
alms. The occasion of this breach and falling off, Possevine says, was the
coming of a certain Priest from Constantinople unto Russia, in the time of
Basilius. For this Priest finding the Muscovites to differ in some things
pertaining to religion, not only from the Latins, but the Greeks also, freely
reprehended them, and showed his mislike, this his reproof so enraged the
Emperor, that though he had sent for him before he came, yet he cast him
into prison, and would never release him, though the Great Turk wrote unto him
on his behalf. Since this time the Moscovites seek no confirmation of their
metropolitan from the patriarch of Constantinople. The Russians that are under
the King of Polonia in the year 1595 finding they could not have recourse to
the Patriarch of Constantinople living under the tyranny of the Turk, in such
sort as was fit, fell from that jurisdiction, and submitted themselves to the
Roman Bishop, yet not without reservation of the Greek religion, and sundry
limitations in subjecting them selves to that government, as we may see at
large in l. 6. page 328.
Thomas a Jesus.

With these Christians, that presently are, or lately were subject to the
Patriarch of Constantinople, the Melchits of Syria, and the Georgians hold
communion, and are of the same religion with them. Touching the Melchites, were
must observe, that after the ending of the Counsel of Chalcedon, there grew a
very great distraction in the East part of the world, for many disliked and
questioned the proceedings in that Council, and would not consent to the
decrees of it. Amongst those that thus refused to admit the Council, some
ran into dangerous errors and heresies, the Emperor Leo therefore for the
remedying and preventing of evils of this kind, required the Bishs. of those
parts by their subscription, to confirm the faith established in that
Council; and they that so did at the Emperors command, were by the rest in
scorn and contempt, called Melchites, as if you would say, men of the Kings
religion, of Melchi, which in the Syrian tongue signifies a King, but they
were indeed, and were reputed right beleivers, by all the sounder parts of the
Church throughout the world. These fell from the Communion of the Roman Church
when the Greeks did, and are wholly of the same religion; yet were they never
subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople but of Antioch, Boter. relat. p. 3.
l. 2. cap. de Melch.
These for their number are reputed the greatest sort of Christians in the
Orient. Their Patriarch resideth at Damascus whither the patriarchall seat
was traslated; Antioch it self, (where they that believed in Christ were
first called Christians, and which was therefore named Theopolis the City of
God;) lying in a manner wast, or broken and dissevered into small villages, of
which only one, of about threescore houses, with a small temple, belongs to
Christians; but in Damascus there are above a thousand houses of Christians.
The Maronites which inhabit mount Libanus have a Patriarch of their own, whom
they honor as Patriarch of Antioch; as likewise the Iacobites of Syria have a
Patriarch of their own residing in Mesopotamia, whom they account patriarch of
Antioch. But the Melchites, who retain the ancient religion of Syria,
acknowledge none for Patriarch but their own chief Bishop residing at
Damascus, and reject the other as having departed from the faith, obedience,
and Communion of the true Patriarch. The Georgians inhabit Iberia, they are,
says Volateran, great warriers, and cruel to their bordering neighbors. They
are named Georgians, as some think, from S. George, whose banner they carry
when go to war against Infidels. But he rather inclines to think they were
the same that were named Georgians by Pliny, before Saint George was borne; and
that it is not a name of sect, but of their Country named Georgia and Iberia.
Thom. a Jesus l. 7. c. 21
They follow the opinions of the Grecians touching matters of Religion, and in
their divine service and writings, they partly use the Greek tongue, and
partly the Chaldee. They have an Archbishop residing in mount Sina, in a
Monastery of S. Katherin, whom they obey without any further relation, or
dependence. Between these and the river Tanais along the coast of Meotis and
the Euxine sea, lie the Mengrellians, and the Circassians, who are not only of
the Greek Religion, but subject also to the Patriarch of Constantinople.

Thus having spoken of the Christians of the Greek Religion, it remains,
that we come to the rest. Amongst whom the first that offer themselves to our
consideration are the Assyrians, commonly named Nestorians. What the Heresy of
Nestorius was, is known to all. For he professed to believe, that the Son
of Mary is a divine Man, and that GOD is with him, but would not acknowledge
that he is GOD, and therefore would not yield, that it may be truly said,
that Mary is the Mother of GOD. But they that are now named Nestorians
acknowledge, that Christ was perfect GOD, and perfect Man, from the first
moment of his conception, and that Mary may rightly be said to be the Mother
of the Son of GOD, or of the Eternal Word; but think it not fit to call her
the Mother of GOD, left they might be thought to imagine that she conceived
and bare the Divine Nature of the three Persons, the Name of GOD containing
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. This scruple might be tolerated in them; but
they have another leaven that sowreth the whole lump. For they are said to
affirm, that the nature of man is imperfect without personalitie, and
therefore that the Son of God who assumed not an imperfect humane nature,
assumed the nature of man, together with the personalitie of the same. Whence
it seems to follow, that there are two persons in Christ. For the clearing of
this point it is to be noted, that personalitie is nothing but the existence
of nature in it self; which is in two sorts, potentally, or actually. The
humane nature which the Son of GOD assumed, potentially existeth in it self,
and would have existed actually, if it had been left unto it self. And in
this sense they say the Son of GOD assumed the nature of man, together with
the personalitie of the same, that is, with a potentiall aptness to exist in
it self. But it was not left, but prevented before it might actually exist in
it self, and assumed into the Divine Person, and so suspended from actual
existing in it self. In which sense we rightly say the Son of God assumed
the nature of man without the personalitie of the same, and that it must not be
granted, that there are two persons in Christ, as there are two natures.
Neither do these Christians so say there are two persons in Christ, as if the
humane nature did actually exist in it self, but only to imply, that there is
a potentiall aptness in it so to exist, if it were left unto it self. Yet the
form of words which they use is not to be allowed: for it savoureth of
Heresy, and took beginning from Heresy. But that they have no heretical
meaning it is more then probable, because otherwise they should contrary and
overthrow their former true Confession: that Christ was perfect GOD and perfect
Man from the first moment of his conception. And that Mary that conceived and
bare him, may truly be said to be the Mother of the Son of GOD. And also
because the Archbishop of the Indians was permitted to retain his ancient
Religion, when first he submitted himself to the Church of Rome. Which he
might not have been suffered to do, if he had erred in the article of the
incarnation. These Nestorians inhabit, though mixed with Mahumetanes and
Infidels, a great part of the Orient. For* besides the countries of Babylon,
Assyria, Mesopotamia, Parthia, and Media, where very many of them are found,
they are scattered in the East Northerly to Cataia, and Southerly to India. So
that in the histories we find mention of them, and no other sort of
Christians in sundry regions of Tartary. These have a Patriarch residing in
Muzall on the river Tigris in Mesopotamia. This Muzall either is the city of
Seleucia, so honored in times past, that the government of those parts was
committed to the Bishop thereof with the name of a Catholic, and place of
Session in Counsels next the Patriarch of Jerusalem; or, if that were
destroyed, the Patriarchall seat was thence translated to Muzal. In this city,
though subject to Mahumetans, the Iacobites have three temples, the Nestorians
fifteen, being esteemed to be about forty thousand souls. Onuphr. in Iul.
3. Thomas a Jesus l. 7. part. 1 c: 3. and 4.
In the time of Julius the third, certain of these Nestorians fell from the
Bishop of Muzal, and took for their head Simon Sulaca of the order of Saint
Basil. Who submitted himself to the Bishop of Rome, exhibited an orthodoxe
confession of his faith, and was by him confirmed bishop of Muzal in title and
name: but the other held the place still. So that when he returned, he was
forced to abide in Caramit. This Simon Sulaca made certain Archbishops and
Bishops, and caused the memory of Nestorius to be put out of their liturgies,
and in the end he was slain by the Turks ministers. But Abdesu of the same
order succeeded him, and after him Aatalla, after him the Archbishop of Gelu,
and Salamas, renouncing the obedience of the Bishop of Muzal, was elected
Patriarch, and confirmed by the Bishop of Rome. So that there were four
Patriarchs successively following one another, that held communion with the
Church of Rome, but no one of them ever possessed that city, but resided
either in Caramit, Serit, or Zeinalbach in the confines of Persia. All these
were undoubtedly orthodoxe touching the article of the incarnation of the Son
of God. And Leonard. Episcop. Sidon. citat: a Thom. a Jesus. ibidem.
Elias one amongst the Bishops that held the seat at Muzal, desired to be
joined in communion with the Church of Rome, and sent his confession which was
found to be orthodoxe and right: so that they of that faction also, seem not
to have differed much in judgment touching any article of faith. The
Nestorians are subject to these two Patriarchs to this day. The Patriarch of
Muzal has under him 22 Bishops, more then 600 territories, in which there are
at the least 22 rich and flourishing cities, and in every of them 500 families;
in Muzal 1000, whereof every one contains about forty persons. And
other-lesser territories containing about 200, or 300 families a piece, and
thirty monasteries. In India also there are many families subject to this
Patriarch, by the name of Patriarch of Babylon, to whom he was wont to assign
Bishops. There were in India before the Portugals coming, about some 15, or 16
thousand families. About some thirty years since, their Archbishop fell from
the Patriarch of Muzal, or Babylon to the Bishop of Rome, by the persuasion of
the Portugals, yet retayning the ancient religion which was permitted. But his
successor in another Synod holden at Diamper, not far from Maliapur by the
Archbishop of Goa in the year 1599, received the religion of Rome also, and
suffered their liturgy so to be altered as we find it in Bibliotheca
patrum. z Auctarij tom. 2 in fine.


But let us proceed to take a view of the particular points of their religion.
First all clergy men amongst the Chaldeans, and also all lay men that excel
in devotion, receive the Sacrament of the Lords body and blood in their own
hands under both kinds. The rest receive into their mouths the body of the
Lord dipped into the blood. They contract marriages within the degrees
prohibited, marrying in the second degree without dispensation. Their Priests
are married, and after the death of the first wife, have liberty to marry the
second or third time, or oftener. They minister the communion in leavened bread.
They use not auricular confession, nor confirmation. They deny the supremacy
of the Pope. The specialties of the religion of the Indians or Christians of S.
Thomas before they admitted any alteration were these. First they distributed
the sacraments in both kinds. Secondly they used bread seasoned with salt, and
in stead of wine (India affording none) the juice of raisons softened one night
in water, and so pressed forth. Thirdly they baptized not their children till
they were forty days old except in danger of death. Fourthly their priests
were married, but excluded from the second marriage. Fifthly they had no images
in their Churches but the cross only: Sixthly they denied the supremacy of
the Pope.

From the Assyrians and Indians unjustly named Nestorians, let us pass to
those Christians that are supposed to be Monophysits, as the Iacobites,
Armenians, Cophti or Christians of Egypt, the Aethiopians or Abissens. These
believe that the nature of God and man were so united in the person of Christ,
that he is truly God and truly man, and that after the union they remain
distinct in their being of essence and property, so that the divinity is not of
the same essence, substance and nature with the humanity: for the divinity is
infinite incomprehensible and increated, and the humanity is finite and a
created essence, yet because they are united and conjoined in the unity of the
same person, they say they are but one nature, and will not acknowledge as we
do, that there are two natures in Christ. That we may the better know what we
are to think of these Christians differing thus from us. I will first
historically show how this difference grew. Secondly more largely refute their
opinion. And thirdly make it appear that in respect of this difference they
are not to be rejected as heritickes.

There lived at Constantinople a certain man whose name was Eutiches, a priest
and an abbat. This Eutiches in opposition to Nestorius, who divided the person
of Christ, proceeded so far that he confounded the natures, imagining a
conversion of the divinity into the humanity, or of the humanity into the
divinity, or a kind of mixtion of them. This Eutiches was well acquainted with
Eusebius Bish. of Dorilaeum, who understanding by conference with him that he
was fallen into such a damnable haerisie, made the matter known to Flauianus
the B. of Constantinople, wishing him to call Eutiches unto him and sharply to
rebuke him, least the faith might be endangered. Flavianus as soon as he
understood thus much, called together 30 of his Bish. and in their presence
asked of Eutiches, whether he did believe that Christ's body is of the same
substance with ours. He answered he had never said so hitherto but would seeing
they would have it so: to whom Flavianus replied, that not they, but the
fathers required him so to profess, and therefore if he did so believe, he
should anathamatize all that thought otherwise. To whom Eutiches answered he
had never hitherto professed so to believe, yet would now for their sakes; but
would never be induced to anathematize them that think otherwise, for that if
he should, he must as he supposed, accurse the holy Fathers and Scriptures,
which do so speak, that they deny Christ's body to be of the same substance
with ours. When Flavianus heard him thus speak, he put him out of the order
of Presbyters, and removed him from his office and dignity of an Abbot.
Eutiches thus degraded and deprived, resorted often to the Emperor, complaining
that he was wronged by Flauianus; whereupon Theodosius then Emperor called a
Council at Ephesus, that it might be there examined whether Eutyches were
duly proceeded against or not; and made Dioscorus Bish. of Alexandria
president of the Council: who caused the proceedings of Flauianus to be read,
but suffered him not to say any thing in his own defense, neither would he
give him leave to ask any question if any doubt arose; and for Eusebius who
was to accuse Eutiches he would not so much as suffer him to speak. The
conclusion was he deposed Flavianus, and restored Eutiches. Things being thus
violently carried, they that supplied the place of the B. of Rome, returned,
home and made all known to Leo the Bish. He presently went to Valentinian, who
wrote to Theo^osius to call another Council, but he refused so to do, thinking
Dioscorus had duly proceeded. But after his death Martianus called a Council
at Chalcedon. In the first Session of this Council, Dioscorus appeared, where
he clearly anathematized those that bring in either a confusion, conversion,
or commixtion of the Natures of God and man united in Christ. So condemning
Eutyches, whom out of partiality and sinister respect he had formerly
acquitted. But yet professed, that after the union we must not say there are
two Natures, but one Nature of the Son of God incarnate, and told them he had
to this purpose sundry testimonies of the holy Fathers, Athanasius, Gregory,
and Cyrill. For confirmation of this his saying, Eustathius Bishop of Beretum
produced an Epistle of Cyrill to Acacius Bishop of Melitinum, Valerianus of
Iconium, and Successus Bishop of the Province of Diocaesarea, wherein more
fully explaining certain things contained in his former Epistles, he says
expressly, we must not say, there are two natures in Christ, but one nature
of the Son of God incarnate. Which when they of the East disliked, he brought
forth the book, and read the very same words unto them, and after the reading
of them, brake forth into these words. Whosoever says, there is one nature,
to deny the flesh of Christ which we believe to be consubstantiall with ours,
let him be anathema: and whosoever says there are two natures to make a
division in Christ, let him be accursed also; adding that Flavianus admitted
this doctrine of Cyrill, and therefore that he was unjustly condemned by
Dioscorus. But Dioscorus answered, that he condemned him, because he affirmed
that there are two natures in Christ after the union, whereas the Fathers tell
us, we must not say there are two natures after the union, but one of the
Word, incarnate. And after this time he refused to appear any more in the
Council. Whereupon for his former violent, and sinister proceedings, and for
his present contumacie he was condemned, and deposed; and not for heresy, as
is expressly delivered by Anatolius in the Council. For whereas there was a
form of Confession composed, which Asclepiades recited in the Council;
wherein was contained, that Christ consisted of two natures: there arose
presently a great doubt amongst the Bishops; the Nobles and great men therefore
that moderated, spoke unto them in this sort. Dioscorus says, that Christ
consists of two natures; Leo that he consists in two natures, without
mutation, confusion, or division, whom follow ye? to whom the Bishops rising
up, answered with one voice, as Leo so we all believe: accursed be Dioscorus.
At the hearing hereof Anatolius said, Dioscorus was not deposed for erring in
faith, but because he excommunicated Leo Bishop of Rome, and refused to come
into the Council when as he was required so to do. Neither was the form of
Confession recited by Asclepiades rejected as ill, but as imperfect. That which
some allege, that Dioscorus had been condemned as an Heretic, if he had
appeared, is childish. For if the Fathers there assembled had judged his
sayings heretical, they might, and no doubt would have condemned him as an
heretic though absent: as well as the Council of Ephesus condemned Nestorius
though absenting himself, and as much as in him lay declining their judgment.
So the Council of Chalcedon condemned Eutyches as an Heretic, and deposed
Dioscorus for his contumacie, and other sinister, violent, and disordered
proceedings in that second Council, wherein he was President, and so ended.
But after the ending thereof there arose woeful distractions and divisions in
the Christian world. For besides those that followed Eutyches in his Heresy,
there were many found; who though they were far from adhering to cursed
Eutyches, yet disliked the proceedings against Dioscorus, and stiffly maintained
that form of Confession that was published by Asclepiades, not only as good,
but as perfect and sufficient. Affirming that 2 natures were united in Christ
without mutatio^, conversio^, co^mixtion, or confusion: but that being united
they are no longer two, but one. So that we may say Christ co^sisted of 2
natures, but we must not say he consists in 2 natures as Leo and the
council. Urging to this purpose that authority of Cyrill. That we must not
say there are 2 natures in Christ, but one of the Word incarnat. His words are,
Post vnionem, sublata in duo diuisione, vnam esse credimus filij (...):
Nestorianus agnoscit Verbum incarnatum, sed dum duas nominat naturas, diuidit
and seiungit ab invicem.

This opinion prevailed mightily in those times, and continues in many
Christian Churches till this day. For the Christians of Egypt, Aethiopia,
Armenia, and the Iacobites of Syria defend the same, accursing Eutiches as an
Heretic; and acquitting Dioscorus, yea honoring him as a good, and holy man.
Wherefore seeing it is against the law of charity to condemn so many millions
of souls to hell, unless they be clearly convinced of heresy, let us more
exactly consider what it is they say. First therefore they teach, that Christ
is truly God and truly man, that he received his divine nature of his Father
before all eternity, his humane nature from his mother in the fullness of time.
Secondly, they accurse all them that spoil him of either of these natures.
Thirdly, they say that these natures were so united, that there was no
confusion, mixtion, or conversion of one of them into another; nor such
composition as that a third nature might arise out of them. Fourthly, that the
deity, and humanity of Christ, are not all one. Fifthly, they confess, that it
may truly be said, the Divinity of Christ is aliud natura; that is, a thing
of different condition and nature from his humanity. Sixthly, that they are not
of the same nature and substance. Seaventhly, that their properties are not the
same, the one being finite, and the other infinite. So that this is it which
they say; that the 2 natures which were united in Christ remain after the
union, without mixtion, confusion, or conversion in their distinct being of
essence, and properties: but are become one, first in the being of subsistence;
2 in respect of mutual inexistence; and 3 in communion of mutual operation,
in that the one does nothing without the communion, and concurrence of the
other. And in this sort is that saying of Cyrill to be understood, when he
says, there are not 2 natures in Christ, but one nature of the Word incarnate,
that is, the 2 natures united, are not 2 and distinct, but one in subsistence.
For the nature of man has no subsistence, but that of the Word communicated
unto it, in which they are one. And so it is expounded in the 8 Canon of the
fifth general Council. Apud Thom. a Jesus, l. 7 par: (...). c. 14.
Leonardus Bishop of Sidonia reports, that when he conferred with the
Patriarch of the Iacobites to this purpose, he clearly accursed Eutyches
confounding the natures of God and man in Christ; but yet affirmed that they
are so united, that there is one personated nature, arising out of 2 natures
not personated. Professing that they think as the Latins do touching the
thing it self, but differ from them in form of words, more aptly expressing
the thing, as they suppose. Apud Thom: a Jesus, l. 7. p. 1. c. 13.
Tecla Abissen, says the Aethiopians think there is but one nature in Christ.
Being asked whether they think there is one nature resulting out of the two
natures that were united. He answers, that they say no such thing: but that
they profess simply that there is one nature, and that is the divine nature,
meaning, as it seems, that the divine nature only subsisteth in its own
subsistence, and that the humanity is drawn into the unity of the same. Thom.
a Jesus, l 7. c. 6.
Thomas a Jesus reports, that in the time of Gregory the 13th, there were
certain learned men sent into Egypt to win the Christians of those parts,
to join in communion with the Roman Church. And that in the year 1582, a
Synod was holden at Cair, where at the third meeting after six hours
disputation touching the 2 natures of Christ, all with one consent by Gods
happy direction decreed, as the truth is, touching the thing it self:
anathematizing all them that should spoil him of either nature; who being God
and man received his deity from the Father, and his humanity from his mother.
And though the Christians of Egypt refuse to say there are 2 natures in
Christ, yet they confess him to be God, and man. Lib. 17 Orthodoxiae citatus
a Genebrardo Chron. ad annum, 1153.
Nicetas says, the Armenians are Monophysits, and that Immanuell the Emperor,
in the year 1170 sent Theorianus to confer with their Catholic, or chief
Bishop, and to reclaim them if it might be from that heresy. The disputation
between them he sets down at large. But Genebrard fears not to censure
him, pronouncing that both he, and Theorianus were deceived, if that be
indeed the answer of the Armenian Bishop to the objections of Theorianus, as
is there put down. For nature being sometimes taken for a part, sometimes for
the whole consisting of the several parts; as in Aristotle sometimes it
imports the whole, sometimes the parts of which the whole consists; the
Armenian Bishop said truly, the things whereof Christ consists are of
different nature, or difference in nature, and that they are but one nature in
that they are so joined and put together, that they are one in the being of
subsistence, that one of them inexisteth in the other, and either of them has
a communion of operation with the other. But he in no sort imagines that they
are so one as if a compounded nature did arise out of the putting of them
together, in such sort as the nature of man is a compound nature, arising out
of the putting together of the soul and body. So that these Christians are
unjustly charged with the heresy of the Monophysits aunciently condemned. For
they imagined that the two natures united in Christ are become one in the being
of essence, and property, but these confess them to remain distinct in both
these respects, and to become one only in respect of the being of subsistence,
mutual inexistence, and the communion the one has with the other in action,
and operation: comparing this union to that of the iron and fire. Neither is it
to be marvailed at, that they are thus wronged. For as Genebrard notes, the
Greeks often thus wrong the oriental Christians, laying an imputation of
heresy upon them out of sinister respects. So that they are to be suspected
as often as writing of the Syrians, Maronits, Aetbiopians, Persians, Indians.
Georgians, Egyptians; they call them Iacobits, or Nestorians. For they that
travel into these parts find them to be orthodoxe and right believers,
differing from other parts of the true Church rather in certain ceremonies
then in substance. Having thus cleared these Christians from the imputation of
heresy vndeservedly laid upon them: let us proceed more particularly to
consider of the specialties of religion professed by them, and first of the
religion of the Iacobits.

The Iacobits have their name from one Iacobus of Syria surnamed Zanzalus,
living about the year of our Lord 530. Who, amongst others that rejected the
Council of Chalcedon, labored greatly to persuade the people of Syria to
refuse the same; and taught them to believe, that the two natures which were
united in Christ, after the union are become one, not in such sort as Eutiches
imagined, who confounded them into one, but as Dioscorus taught who made them
to be one by adunation without mixtion, or confusion. That this was his
opinion it is evident by his followers. Who honor Dioscorus as a Saint, and
condemn Eutyches as an heretic. These, as Leonardus Bishop of Sidonia
reports are dispersed thoroughout the c^ties, regions, and towns of Syria,
Mesopotamia, and Babylon, mixed with other sects, and their number is so great,
that there are fifty thousand families of them. They chiefly inhabit in
Aleppo of Syria, and in Caramit. They have, and long have had, a Patriarch of
their own; to whom they yield obedience. For we read of the Patriarch of the
Iacobits in the time of Heraclius the Emperor. This Patriarth resideth in
Caramit, but the Patriarchicall Church is in the monastery of Zafra, without
the city Moradin in Mesopotamia. They were before the breach subject to the
Patriarch of Antioch, but when they fell off from other Christians in opinion,
they departed from the Patriarch that then was, and entitled one of their own
making to that honor: supposing the other to be in error, and themselves
right. And even to this day they account their chief Bishop Patriarch of
Antioch, calling him always Ignatius. And to him the Metropolitan of
Jerusalem, whom the Iacobites call the fifth Patriarch, is subject. As
aunciently the Bishops of Jerusalem were before the Council of Chalcedon.
Which took from Antioch the 3 Provinces of Palestina, and assigned them to the
Bishop of Jerusalem, for his Patriarchicall jurisdiction. Besides the Bishop
of Jerusalem who acknowledges him for his Superior, he has under him 7
Archbishops, with many Bishops. Let us therefore take a view of their Religion.
Touching the 2 natures in Christ, they believe as I have already delivered. The
other particulars of their Religion are these. First, they confess their
sins to God only, and not to the Priest, or but very seldom; so that many
communicate without confession. Secondly, they admit not Purgatory nor prayers
for the dead. Thirdly, their Priests are married. Fourthly, they consecrate the
Eucharist in unleavened bread. Fifthly, they minister the Eucharist in both
kinds. Sixthly, they use circumcision even of both sexes. Seventhly, they
sign their children before Baptism, with the sign of the Cross, imprinted
with a burning iron, some in the arm, some in the forehead, that they may be
known to be Christians, and that if ever they fall away, they may by this
mark be known to be Apostataes. Hence grew the false report, that they
baptized with fire. Eighthly, they add to the trisagium this Appendix, qui
crucifixus est pro nobis. And hereupon are charged to attribute the passion of
death to the Divinity, and consequently to the whole Trinity: which is made
more probable, because they acknowledge but one nature in Christ. Touching this
Hymn it is to be noted, that in the time of Theodosius the Emperor there was
a most fearful Earthquake, which specially appeared in Constantinople, where
the wall with 57 towers fell down, so that the people were forced to go out of
the City, and to abide in the fields to avoid the danger of the ruins. While
they were crying Curie eleeson, a child was suddenly taken up into the air,
and upon the prayers of the godly, let down again to the ground without any
hurt, who when he was come down, told them he had heard a Quire of Angels
singing, (...). Willing them so to sing, that the Earthquake might (...). When
Proclus the Bishop heard this, he commanded the whole Congregation so to sing,
and the Earthquake ceased, and immediately the child died. H^vpon Theodosius
the Emperor commanded this Hymn to be sung in all Christian Churches
throughout the world. So that it grew to be in great request. C^nt. (...) page
14^6
Petrus Gnapheus Bishop of Antioch, added to this Hymn, qui crucifixus est pro
nobis, and was bitterly reproved by many Bishops for so doing. (...). Bibl p.
(...)
Ephraim, Bishop of Antioch, finding that certain were divided from the
communion of other Christians in respect of this addition, tells them, that
they of the East understand this Hymn of Christ, and so sin not in adding,
qui crucifixus est pro nobis. But they that inhabit Constantinople, and the
Nestorian parts understand it of the Trinity, and therefore endure not this
addition, because it is impious to attribute the passion of death to the
blessed Trinity. The Vicar of the Patriarch of the Iacobites being conferred
with by some Western Christians about this addition; told the^, that they
understand this Hymn of Christ, and so apply the passion of death on the
cross to Christ only, and not to the holy Trinity. 9 They deny the supremacy
of the Pope. Next to these in order are the Armenians, these inhabit Asia in
that part which lies between the mountains Taurus and Ca^casus: their country
Armenia reaches from Cappadocia to the Caspian sea. They are subject to 2
Patriarchs: for the greater Armenia is subject to one, and the lesser to
another. The Patriarch of the greater Armenia resideth in the monastery and
Church of E^meazin near the city Eruan in Persia. The families that are
subject to this Patriarch, are more then 150000, besides exceeding many
monasteries, Bishops, Priests, religious men, and Deaco^s. There are also
certain primats, or rather Patriarchs, of this Armenian nation in the remotest
parts of Persia, and in Constantinople: who though of right they should be
subject to this Patriarch, yet sometimes acknowledge no such thing. The
Patriarch of the lesser Armenia resideth in the city Sis in Cilicia named at
this day Caramania. This Patriarch has under him 24 Prelates, Archbishops, and
Bishops, besides three hundred Priests, and exceeding many Deacons and Clerks
living of alms and their own labor, and about twenty thousand families of
Christians which live in Cities villages and Castles of Syria, and Cilicia:
and twenty monasteries, in every of which there are an hundred religious
persons. These Armeniaes, both the greater and the lesser, are lately taken by
the Persians from the Turk and added to the Persian Empire. Touching their
religion, Nicephorus attributes unto them sundry damnable haerisies concerning
the Trinity, and the incarnacion of Christ, but most untruly according to
Genebrards observation, before mentioned, as may appear by their own
confession extant, sent by the mandate of the Catholic of Armenia to the
Patriarch of Constantinople not 50 years ago: by which it is evident that
they are Orthodox in these points. The specialties of their religion are these.
First touching the two natures in Christ they are of the same opinion with the
Iacobites formerly expressed. Secondly they admit only three general
Counsels; they reject that of Chalcedon: they condemn Leo Bishop of Rome:
they accurse Eutiches, and honor Dioscorus. Thirdly theyadde to the Trisagium
as the Iacobites also do, qui crufixus est pro nobis: but in the same sense as
they do, and without any haereticall meaning. Fourthly they affirm with the
Graecians, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father only. Fifthly they
think the souls of the just shall not enjoy heaven happiness till after the
resurrection. Sixthly they deny purgatory, and pray not for the dead.
Seaventhly they deny marriage to be a Sacrament. Eighthly they deny the local
presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament. Ninthly they deny that the
Sacraments give grace. Tenthly they think that the Eucharist is to be given to
all that are baptized together with their baptism. Eleauenthly they mingle not
water with wine in the holy Eucharist. Twelfthly they condemn the adoration of
images. Thirteenthly they admit married priests, and as some say admit none
to be saecular priests except they be married, and yet exclude the second
marriage. Fourteenthly they fast Wednesday and Friday, and on those days eat
neither oil nor fish, neither do they drink wine, and they abstain in like
sort the whole lent; save that on Saturday and Sunday they eat butter, cheese,
and eggs. Fifteenthly in the Lent they never consecrate but on Saturday, and
Sunday, what days they fast not. 16 Out of Lent they eat flesh on all
Saturdaies throughout the year. 17 From Easter till Whitsontide they fast not
any Friday but freely eat flesh. 18 They know not the ember fasts. 19 They
solemnize not Christmas day on the 25th of December but fast that day, and in
steed of it keep the day of the Epiphany, as Christ birth day, according to
an ancient See Casaub.
Custom, as we may read in Epiphanius, and Chrysostom. 20 On Saturday before
Easter they eat eggs and cheese in the evening, saying that Christ rose in
the evening. 21 They eat not of such beasts as are judged unclean in the Law.
22 Thom. a Jesus l. 7. c. 23.
They admit not the Sacrament of auricular confession as it is in the Roman
Church, neither of confirmation or extreme unction. 23 They deny the supremacy
of the Pope. Lastly they are charged to deny original sin, but unjustly as
it seems seeing they teach Thom. a Jesus l. 7. c. 17.
that the children of infidells not baptized go to hell with their unbelieving
parents.

Having spoken of the Iacobites and Armenians, it remains that we come to
take a view of the religion and rites of the Cophti, and Abyssens or
Aethiopians. The word Cophti is not a name of sect, but of country, importing
no more then an Egyptian Christian. The particulars of the religion of the
Cophti are these. First they reject the Council of Chalcedon, they condemn
Leo Bishop of Rome, they accurse Eutyches, and honor Dioscorus, and Iacobus
Syrus as holy men, and touching the incarnation, teach as the Iacobites and
Armenians do: refusing to acknowledge two natures in Christ, and yet
confessing him to be truly God, and truly man: and accursing them that spoil
him of either nature, or deny that they remain in him distinct, and
unconfounded, in being and property, in sort before expressed. Secondly, they
add to the Trisagium as the former, but in the same sense, and without all
touch of heresy. Thirdly, they permit none to baptize but a Priest in what
necessity soever, nor any where else but in the Church, nor before the fortieth
day. Fourthly, they dip the baptized into the water after the manner of the
Greeks, but pronouncing the words as the Latins do. Fifthly, they presently
anoint the baptized and minister the Eucharist to them in both kinds. They
sometimes used Circumcision, but now have abrogated that custom at least in
Alexandria and Cair: happily since the Synod there holden, whereof I spoke
before. Sixthly, they minister the Sacrament of the Eucharist in both kinds;
the Priests never celebrate without the assistance of the deacons, and the
subdeacons: and these always communicate with the Priest, but the saypeople
seldom, but only at Easter. Seaventhly, they consecrate in leavened bread.
Eighthly, they neither minister extreme unction, nor the Eucharist to the
sick. Ninthly, they give the inferior holy orders even to children so soon
as they are baptized. 10 They acknowledge that the holy Ghost proceeds from
the Son, yet leave out those words, and from the Son in the creed. 11, They
contract marriage in the presence of the Priest, and in the face of the Church,
after the manner of the Roman Church, but with more ceremonies. 12 They
sometimes dissolve marriage, and permit a second marriage. 13, They admit
married Priests. 14, They admit not purgatory nor prayer for the dead. 15, They
read in the Churches certain fabulous things, as the book called secreta
Petri and the gospel of Nicodemus. 16, They deny the supremacy of the Pope,
and think him no less subject to error than other Bishops. They condemn the
Latin Church, as erring in sundry points of religion, and thereupon refuse to
communicate with the Christians of these parts. And though Baronius have a
large narration of an embassage, sent from the Church of Alexandria to Clement
the eight; wherein is reported that Mark the Patriarch, and with him all the
Bishops and people subject to that jurisdiction, submitted themselves to the
Bishop of Rome, as to the head of the Church: yet afterward it was found to be
a mere imposture, and cousenage, as Thomas a Jesus reports. But Casaubone
tells us, that the Patriarch of Alexandria wrote a most pious letter to the
now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, desiring to join in communion with the
Churches of England, etc. Which letter under his Patriarchicall seal is to be
seen: besides another letter to the same purpose from a Bishop of Asia. To
this Patriarch are subject all the Christians of Egypt, the Christians of
Habassia, that small remainder of Christians that are found about the Bay of
Arabia, and in mount Sina Eastward, or in Afrique as far as the greater
Syrtes Westward. And under this jurisdiction, the Nubians also were, as some
think, before their defection from Christianity. Nubia being a part of
Habassia, which was put under the Bishop of Alexandria by the Concilij Nicen:
l. 3 c. 36.
Nicen Council. The number of Christians in Egypt is greatly diminished. For
whereas Descrip. terrae sanctae, part. 2. c. (...).
Burchardus reports, that in his time, about 320 years since there were
found in Cair alone above forty Christian temples, Bar. tom. 6. ^n fine.
now there are but three in Cair, and no more in Alexandria. And the number of
Christians is esteemed to be about fifty thousand in that great, and populous
Country. But in Habassia almost innumerable. For the kingdom of Habassia
subject to that great Monarch, whom we by error call Praester John, they John
Encoe or Belul, is as large in circuit, and compass of ground, as Italy,
Germany, France, and Spain: but nothing so populous, nor without mixture of
Mahumetans and Pagans in some parts of it.

The Habassines have a Patriarch of their own, whom in their Language they
call Abuna, that is, our father. This Patriarch was to have the seventh place
in sitting in general Councels next after the Bishop of Seleucia, Council.
Nicen. l. 3. Can. 36
as appears by the Arabique Book of the Nicene Council, translated by
Pisanus, but he is subject to the Patriarch of Alexandria, and being elected
by the Habassine Monks of S. Antonies order residing at Jerusalem, he is
consecrated and confirmed by him, and so sent to Habassia. And answereably
hereunto in their Liturg AEthiop* tom 6. ^iblioth. Patrum.
Liturgy they pray for the Patriarch of Alexandria before their own
Patriarch, terming him the Prince of their Archbishops. Wherefore let us
descend to take a view of their Religion. First, touching the Holy Trinity they
are orthodoxe professing as we do. Concerning the Incarnation of the Son of
God, they think as the Iacobites, Armenians, and Egyptians beforementioned;
teaching, that two natures were united in Christ: but that after the union they
are become one; not by mixtion, conversion, confusion, or such a composition,
as that a third should arise, and result out of them, but by coadvnation only
in sort before expressed. So that they may be said to be one nature not in the
being of essence, or property, which cannot be conceived without confusion:
but in respect of the being of subsistence, the mutual inexistence of one of
them in another, and the Communion of action, or operation, one of them doing
nothing without the other Tecla Abis^. apud Thom a Jesus l. 7. c. 13
Thirdly, they reject the Council of Chalcedon, they condemn Leo Bishop of
Rome, they accurse Eutyches, and honor Dioscorus, and Iacobus his Disciple.
Fourthly; they are baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
in such sort as other Christians are, but they are also circumcised both Male
and Female, which may seem to cut them off from the fellowship of true
Christians, and the hope of salvation: according to that of the Apostle, if ye
be circumcised ye are fallen from grace, and Christ can profit you nothing.

For the clearing of this point, Lib. 7 c. 12
Thomas a Jesus delivers these propositions. First, that Circumcision and
other legal observations were so abrogated after the promulgation of the
Gospel, that the continuing of them became not only a dead thing, and of no
force, but deadly also. So that Cerinthus and Ebion thining otherwise, were
condemned as Heretics. 2 That some legal observations, though not as legal,
may be, nay are retained and continued amongst Catholic Christians. For the
better understanding of this proposition he notes, that legal and ceremonial
things may be observed four ways. First, as they are legal, that is, with an
intention to keep the Law, and to do as the Law prescribes, and in this sort
Christ submitted himself to be circumcised. Secondly, that things prescribed
or forbidden in the Ceremonial Law may be done or omitted, not only in
respect of obedience to the Law, but as figuring the coming of Christ, or as
figures of Christ to come, as ^a 2 ae qu. 104. art. 3
Thomas Aquinas shows. So the holy Fathers that lived before Christ kept this
observation. Thirdly, we may do or omit such things as are commanded or
forbidden in the Ceremonial Law, neither as figures of Christ to come, nor as
being bound by the Law so to do, or not to do; but only to make it known
that such Laws were not evil* but of God, howsoever they are now no longer to
have any binding force. Thus the Christians after the resurrection and
ascension of Christ, before the full promulgation of the Gospel, retained
circumcision for a time, that they might bury the Synagogue with honor.
Fourthly, such things may be done or omitted as the Law forbids or
prescribes, materialiter sine vlla formalitate vel respectu ad legem veterem;
that is, though the same thing be done that is there prescribed, yet it is not
done as there prescribed, but for other ends; as we keep the feast of
Pentecost which the Jews observed, but not because it was prescribed in the
law, nor for the same reasons for which they kept it; for it was therefore a
solemn day with them, because as on that day the law was given unto them upon
mount Sina, but with us because on that day the law of the spirit and life was
given: so in like sort some Christians consecrate in unleavened bread, yet are
they not to be condemned as Jewish, seeing the reasons of their observation are
very different from those motives the Jews had. So that to omit or do such
things as are forbidden or Commanded in the ceremonial law, materialiter
tantum, that is, without any of the former respects, is undoubtedly lawful:
as if a man should be circumcised, or should abstain from swines flesh, for
physical considerations, or keep Saturday holy as many Christians do: but to
omit or do such things as are forbiden or prescribed in the ceremonial law,
because they are there forbidden or prescribed, or as figures of Christ, is
heretical: wherefore let us see in what sort the Abissens use circumcision.
Apud Damian: a Goes.
Zagazabo professes that they use it only as an ancient observation of their
Country, which they had received before they became Christians, even from the
time that the Queen of Sheba went to see Solomon, and that they retain it
only for the honor of their nation, that they may thereby show that they are
of the stock of David: and indeed Herodotus speaking of certain nations that
were circumcised, before the coming of Christ, amongst the rest he numbreth
the Aethiopians: which being so, I see not why we should censure them as
heretics for this observation. William Reinolds speaking of the Abyssens has
these words. The Abyssens Christianly, and as we that believe as Christians
should, do Baptize their infants, and that they may show from how noble a
stock they are come, circumcise them also, but not as if circumcision were of
any force, or a man might put any trust in it as the Jews do: which being
so, I would no more condemn them in respect of Circumcision, then a man that
should abstain from swines flesh which was forbidden by the Law, upon the advice of his physician only. Caietan and Bartholomeus de Medina think they
sin not in retaining this observation; but supposing it to be lawful,
whether it be fit they should be tolerated still so to do, many taking
offense at it; I had rather (says Caietan) hear the Church speak, then other
particular authors. Some impute to them that they are not Circumcised, only,
or principally for the causes before expressed, but in imitation of Christ, and
consequently to fulfill the law, which was the end of circumcision, and
thereupon condemn them as observers of the Ceremonial Law. But first it will
hardly be proved, as I think, that they use circumcision in imitation of
Christ's circumcision. And secondly it will not follow if it be so, that they
are circumcised to the same end he was: but only that they desire to be like
unto him, in the outward act, and to have that done unto them in the honor of
him. So that I rather incline to the opinion of Caietan, and Bartholomeus de
Medina, who acquit them; then to that of Soto and others that condemn them
upon this supposall. The particular points of their religion are these. First
they think that the soul is ex traduce. Secondly they use the same form of
words in baptizing that the Latins do: saying, I baptize thee in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 3 None baptizeth with the^
but the Priest or in his absence the Deacon. 4 Their males are not Baptized
till the 40th day, their females till the 80th: till which time the mother is
not purified, nor enters into the Church, but if there be danger of death
they are baptized sooner: but they must not suck the breasts of the mother
until she be purified. They are unjustly charged, that they Baptize with
fire: for there is none amongst them that do so; but in some Provinces they
(...).
sign themselves in the forehead; either that they may differ from the
Mahumetans, or for the cure of diseases incident to the eyes. 5 On twelfe day
in memory of the baptism of Christ they go forth in great multitudes to the
river, and after many prayers said by the priests they put them selves into the
water, but no man is newly baptized. 6 They think that the infants of
believing parents are sanctified in the womb: as Hieremie, and John the
Baptist were: and therefore if they die without Baptism dare not pronounce of
them as the Romanists do. 7 They deny confirmation and extreme unction to be
sacraments. 8 Touching the Eucharist they consecrate ordinarily in leauened
bread, but on Maundy Thursday in unleavened bread and in wine; or the juice of
raisons moistened in water and so pressed out. They minister the Communion in
both kinds to all, both Clergy men, and Laymen. The priest ministereth the
bread, and the Deacon the wine in a spoone. They give this Sacrment to infants,
when they are baptized, in this sort. The priest dippeth his finger into the
consecrated wine and puts it into the mouth of the child. They have neither
elevation, nor reservation, nor circumgestation, as the Roman Church has. They
all Communicate twice every week, but the Sacrament is never ministered in
private houses no not to the Patriarch, or Emperor him self. 9 Touching
purgatory they believe that souls after death are detained in a certain
place named in their tongue Mecan aaraft (id est) locus alleviationis, that is,
a place of refreshing: in which the souls of such as die, not having repented
of their former sins in such full and perfect sort as was sitting, are
detained, and so whether the souls of good men do enjoy the vision of God
before the resurrection they resolve not. 10 They say no masses for the dead;
they bury them with crosses, and prayers, but specially they use the beginning
of St John's Gospel. The day following they give alms and so a certain number
of days and make feasts also. 11 They grant no indulgences. 12 They have no
cases reserved. 13 They believe that the Saints do intercede for us; they pray
unto them; they have painted images but none molten or carved: they much
esteem them in respect of those holy ones they represent, and make sweet
perfumes before them. 14 Their Priests receive no tithes, but they have lands
on which they live. 15 Their Bishops and Priests are married but may not marry
a second wife and continue in those degrees and orders, unless the Patriarch
dispense with them. 16 They think it unlawful to fast on Saturdaie, or
Sundaie: and urge to that purpose the Canon of the Apostles. 17 They keep
Saturday holy as well as Sunday; following the Ancient Custom of the East
Church, they eat flesh on that day throughout the whole year; except only in
Lent: and in some Provinces they eat flesh on that day even in the Lent also.
18 They fast Wednesdaies and Saturdaies till the Sun setting, and celebrate
not on those days till the evening. 19 Between Easter and Whitsontide they
eat flesh freely on those days. 20 They abstain from things strangled, and
blood, observing the Canon of the Apostles in so doing, as they suppose. and
besides forbear to eat of such kinds of meat as were forbidden by Moses Law.
21 The Emperor has a supreme authority in all causes, as well
Ecclesiastical, as Civil, though the Patriarch also exercise a spiritual
jurisdiction. 22 They deny the supremacy of the Roman Bish. But they yield a
primacie unto him acknowledging him to be the first amongst Bishops.

Having spoken of the Grecians, Assyrians, and supposed Monophysites, it
remains that we come in the last place to treat of the Maronites. Touching
the name ^ Baronius shows that it was not from any heretic named Maron, but
that there was a holy man so named: and that in honor of him a certain (...)
Tom. 7. ann, 518. number: 49. Synod. sub Menna act. 5.
monastery was founded: which was named the monastery of St Maron: and that all
the monks of that monastery were named Maronites. These in time as it may be
thought joined them selves to the Monophysites formerly described, though
happily not without some little difference. And hence all the Christians that
professed to believe so as these did, were named Maronites. They have a
Patriarch of their own who claims to be Patriarch of Antioch. He resideth in
a monastery some 25 miles from Tripolis in Syria. He has under him some 8 or
9 suffragan Bishops. These Maronites inhabit mount Libanus, and some of them in
Damascus, Aleppo, and some parts of Cyprus. Mount Libanus is of such extent
that it is in compass 7 hundred miles. It has no cities but villages which
are neither few nor small. Within this compass none inhabit but Christians,
though under the Turk. For they redeem it at a high rate, and pay an
intolerable tribute to live without mixture of Mahumetans. The particulars of
their Religion are these. First, they believe that the Holy Ghost proceeds
from the Father only. 2 They bless and consecrate the water so often as any
are to be baptized; And not as in the Roman Church, on the Saturday before
Easter only for the whole year. The reason of which observation is, for that
at Easter and at Whitsontide only in the Primitive Church they ministered
Baptism, which they did because in baptism men are mortified to sin, and
quickened in the life of grace by virtue of Christ's death, resurrection, and
giving of the spirit. All which things were co^memorated in these solemnities.
3 They never baptize males and females together, lest they should contract a
kind of affinity. 4 None baptizeth with them in what necessity soever but a
Priest or Deacon. 5 They require not the intention of the Minister, but think
the faith of the Church suffices. 6 They baptize not a male till the 40th day,
nor a female till the 80th, in respect of the impurity of the mother which they
think continues so long. 7 They seek no confirmation from the Bishop, nor
have any other anointing then that which is used in baptism. 8 They consecrat
the Eucharist in unleavened bread in a massy loaf, out of which they give a
piece to every co^municant. 9 They give the Sacraments to Lay men in both
kinds. 10 They celebrat but once in one day, upon one and the same altar. 11
They think the Person of the Holy Ghost to be in the holy oil, in such sort as
the Person of Christ is in the Eucharist. 12 They think that the Eucharist
received into the mouth, goes not into the stomach, but presently diffuseth it
self through all the members of the body. 13 On fasting-dayes they celebrate
not till the evening, which custom Tho* a Jesus says, is not to be altered,
affirming that it was most ancient in the Church of God; the Council of
Cabilon related in the De ^ons did. 1 Can. (...).
decrees, prescribing that they should celebrate the Sacrament in the Ember
fasts, in the evening, and on the saturday before Easter in the beginning of
the night. And although, says he, the Church yielding to our infirmity, permit
the Latins to do otherwise, yet where the old custom may be kept, it is not
only not to be taken away, but much to be commended; that men when they fast
may put it off as long as may be before they eat any thing. In former times
they did not eat in Lent till the evening, as appears by the Council
formerly mentioned. Which custom continued till the time of Tho: Aquinas, for
he says, they did eat nothing in his time on their fasting days till the 9th
hour, in which hour Christ gave up the ghost. 14 they (...) 2a 2ae q. 147.
art. 7.
think it not lawful to carry the Eucharist to them that are sick. 15
Touching marriage they have these opinions. 1 they think the state of marriage
is not inferior to virginity. 2 they think if the son contract without
consent of the father, the father may void the marriage, and so likewise the
father of the wife. 3 they think the bond of marriage is dissolved by
adultery, and that the parties separated may marry again. 4 they permit not
the father and the son to marry with the mother and the daughter: nor 2
brethren with 2 sisters. 5 they dislike the marriage of widows of 60 years
of age. 6 they allow not the 4th marriage, whereas Hierom says, non damno
bigamos imo nec trigamos, ac si dici potest octogamos, that is, I dare not
condemn the^ that marry the 2d, 3d, or 8th time. 16 touching orders. 1 they
ordain children of 5 or 6 years of age deacons. 2 no man is ordained a Priest
or deacon amongst the^ except he have first contracted matrimony, and that with
a virgin, not with a widow or woman dishonored; but neither of these is
permitted to marry a 2d wife. 17 they think it unlawful to eat of things
strangled, or blood. 18 they judge it unlawful to fast Saturday or Sunday.
Lastly they teach that no man enters into the kingdom of heaven until the
general judgment. These Maronites are now said to be joined in Communion
with the Church of Rome since the time of Clemens the eight; but how far forth
they have changed either their opinions or their rites and ceremonies, it does
not appear. These only and the Indians of all the Christians of the Orient
hold Communion with the Church of Rome.

Out of all that which has been said, two things are obseruable. First, that
by the merciful goodness of God all these different sorts of Christians,
though distracted and dissevered, by reason of diversity of ceremonies and
outward observations, different manner of delivering certain points of faith,
mistaking one another, or variety in opinion touching things not fundamental,
do yet agree in one substance of faith, and are so far forth orthodox, that
they retain a saving profession of all divine verities absolutely necessary to
salvation, and are all members of the true Catholic Church of Christ. The
second, that in all the principal controversies touching matters of religion
between the Papists and those of the reformed Churches, they give testimony of
the truth of that we profess. For first they all deny and impugn that
supreme universality of ecclesiastical jurisdiction which the Bishop of Rome
claims. Secondly, they think him subject to error as all other Bishops are.
Thirdly, they deny that he has any power to dispose the principalities and
kingdoms of the world, or depose kings. Fourthly, they acknowledge all our
righteousness to be imperfect, and that it is not safe to trust thereunto, but
to the mere mercy and goodness of God. Fifthly, they admit not the merit of
congruence, condignitie, nor works of supererogation. Sixthly, they teach not
the doctrine of satisfactions, as the Romanists do. 7 They believe not
Purgatory, neither pray to deliver men out of temporal punishments after this
life. 8 They reject the doctrine of the Romanists touching indulgences and
pardons. 9 They believe not there are seven Sacraments. 10 They omit many
ceremonies in baptism which the Roman Church uses, as spittle, etc. 11. They
have no private masses. 12 They minister the communion in both kinds to all
communicants. 13 They believe not transubstantiation, nor the new real
sacrificing of Christ. 14 They have the divine service in the vulgar tongue. 15
Their priests are married, and though they permit them not to marry a second
wife without special dispensation, yet if any do, they do not void nor
dissolve the marriage. 16 They make no image of God. 17 They have no massy
images but pictures only. 18 They think that properly God only is to be
invocated, and howsoever they have a kind of invocation of Saints, yet they
think that God only hears them and not the Saints.

CHAP. 2.
Of the harsh and unadvised censure of the Romanistes, condemning all these
Churches as Schismatic, and heretical.

ALL these Churches and societies of Christians, in number many, in extent
large, in multitudes of men and people huge and great, in continuance most
ancient, in defense of the Christian faith constant, and undaunted (though
enduring the malice, and force, of cruel, bloody, and potent enemies) the
Bishop of Rome with his adherents judges to be heretics, or at least
Schismatics, and consequently, to have no hope of eternal salvation; for that
it is, on the peril of everlasting damnation, imposed upon every soul, to
bow, and do reverence, at the sight of his triple crown, to kiss his sacred
feet, and to believe nothing, more, nor longer, then his holiness shall
decree, and define. And therefore the most part of the Christian world is
plunged into hell, abandoned into utter darkness, and reserved in chains unto
the judgment of the last day, In concilio 2. Episcopus Constantinopolitanus
suit antepositus Alexand^no and Antiocheno in concilio chalcedonensi act: 6. ad
istum canonem addiderunt oportere eum p^a habere priuilegia cum Romano
Pontifi^e: sed c^m a legatis reclamatum esset, non ausi^t pa^um priuilegio^um
mentionem facere Bellar. 1. Tom. contro. generali de pontifice. l. 2. c. 18.
ever since that schismatic act, of the base, ignoble, and contemptible
Council of 600 Bishops assembled at Chalcedon; who, forgetting themselves,
presumed to equal another B. to the peerless and incomparable Vicar of
Christ, his Vicegerent general on earth; in comparison of whose greatness,
all other Episcopal, and Patriarchicall dignity, regal or Imperial majesty,
is no more then the light of a candle at midday, when the sun shines in
strength. But because we have not received the mark of this Antichrist and
child of perdition in our foreheades, nor sworn to take the foame of his
impure mouth, and froath of his words of blasphemy, wherein he extolleth
himself above all that is named God, for oracles and infallible certainty and
the rule of our faith. Let us therefore see what that heresy and schism is,
that cutteth of from the company of right believers, in such sort, that
whosoever is convinced of it, is thereby clearly without all hope of eternal
life.

CHAP. 3.
Of the nature of heresy, of the diverse kinds of things, wherein men err,
and what pertinacie it is that makes an heritique.

Heresy is not every error, but error in matter of faith; nor every e^ror in
matter of faith; (For neither Jews, nor Pagans, are said to be heritickes,
though they err most damnably in those things, which every one that will be
saved must believe, and with all the malice, fury, and rage that can be
imagined, impugn the Christian faith, and verity) but it is the error of such
as by some kind of profession have a Occam di^l. l. 3 partis 1. cap. 2. 3.
been Christians; so that only such, as by profession being Christians, depart
from the truth of Christian religion are named heritickes.

Occam dial. l. 4. partis 1. cap. 3. tract. 1. 2. partis. cap. 10.
These are of two sorts: For there are haeretici scientes, and there are
haeretici nescientes; that is, there are some that are wittingly heretics,
some unwittingly. For though no man do, or can wittingly err, or be deceived;
yet a man may wittingly be an heriticke, and though no man think that to be
true which he knows to be false, or that to be false which he knows to be
true, which were wittingly to err; yet a man may forsake that which he knows
to be the profession of Christians, judge it erroneous, false and impious, and
choose some other kind of religion: which is wittingly to be an heriticke. Such
are Apostates, which depart from that which they know to be the Christian faith.

Heretics unwittingly are such as think, that they do most firmly cleave to
the doctrine of Christ, his blessed Apostles, and holy Church, and will not be
induced to think the whole profession of Christians to be false, and
erroneous, as do Apostates; yet do err in many particulars that pertain to
the faith, and think that to be the only true Christian profession which
indeed is not, as did the Marcionites, Manichees, and the rest of that sort.

The things that pertain to the Christian faith and religion, are of two
sorts: for there are some things explicit, some things implicit credenda;
that is (...) Occam dial. Tract. 1. 2. part. cap. 10.
there are some things that must be particularly and expressly known and
believed, as that the father is God, the son is God, and the holy Ghost God,
and that yet they are not three Gods, but one God; And some other, which though
all men, at all times, be not bound upon the peril of damnation to know and
believe expressly, yet whosoever will be saved must believe them at least
implicit, and in generality, as that JOSEPH, MARIE, and JESUS ^edde into Egypt.

Men are bound to know and believe things particularly, and expressly; either
in respect of their office, and standing in the Church of God; in which
consideration, the pastors, and guides of the Church, (who are to teach others)
are bound to know many things, which others of more private condition are not:
or else for that they are particularly offered to their consideration; and so a
Layman, finding it written in the Scripture, that Onesimus was a fugitive
servant, and recommended to Philemon his master by Paul, is bound particularly
to believe it, which a great Bishop not observing, or not remembering, is not:
or lastly, because they do essentially and directly concern the matter of our
salvation. Dubious in fide est Hereticus and infidelis, quod vtique veritatem
habet, cum quis deiis dubitat quae per eruditionem sacrae scripturae certa
tenetur and explicita fide tenere: neque enim generalis sufficeret credulitas
in multis. Gers. p. 3. l. (...). de co so^at, prosa 1.
He that erreth in those things which every one is bound particularly to
believe, because they do essentially, and directly concern the matter of our
salvation, is without any farther inquiry to be pronounced an Heretic.

Neither need we to ask, whether he join obstinacy to his error: for the
very error it self is damnable; as if a man shall deny Christ to be the Son
of GOD, coessentiall, coequall, and coeternall with his Father, or that we have
remission of sins by the effusion of his blood. But other things, that do
not so nearly and directly touch the substance of Christian faith, and which a
man is not bound upon the peril of damnation expressly to know and believe,
but it suffices if he believe them implicit, and in praeparatione animi, that
is, if he carry a mind prepared, and ready to yield assent unto them, if once
it shall appear that they are included in, and by necessary consequence to be
deduced from those things which expressly he does and must believe; Deuteronomy 34. 4.
as that Moses saw the promised land, but entered not into it: 1 Kings 1^
or, that the Queen of the South came from the uttermost ends of the world to
hear the wisdom of Solomon. A man may be ignorant of, and be deceived in
them, and yet without all touch of heresy, or peril of damnation, unless he
add pertinacie unto error. Neither does every pertinacie joined with errors
in this kind, make them Heresies: For, all they are in some degree to be
judged pertinacious, that neglect the censure, and judgment of them, whom they
should reverence, and regard; and stand in defense of those errors, which if
they had used that careful diligence which they should, in searching out the
truth, they had not fallen into; but that only, when men erring in things of
this kind, they are so strongly carried with the streams of misperswasion,
that rather than they will alter their opinion, or disclaim their error, they
will deny some part of that which every one that will be saved, must know and
believe.

Socrat. l. 7. c. 32.
So in the beginning, Nestorius did not err, touching the unity of Christ's
person in the diversity of the natures of GOD and man: but only disliked, that
Mary should be called the Mother of GOD: which form of speaking, when some
demonstrated to be very fitting, and unavoidable, if Christ were GOD and Man in
the unity of the same person, he chose rather to deny the unity of Christ's
person, then to acknowledge his temeritie, and rashness; in reproving that
form of speech, which the use of the Church had anciently received and allowed.

CHAP. 4.
Of those things which every one is bound expressly to know and believe; and
wherein no man can err, without note of heresy.

SEeing then the things which Christian men are bound to believe, are of so
different sort and kind, let us see which are those that do so nearly touch
the very life, and being of the Christian faith, and religion, that every one
is bound particularly and expressly to know and believe them, upon peril of
eternal damnation. They may most aptly be reduced to these principal ^heads.

First, concerning God, whom to know is eternal life, we must believe and
acknowledge the unity of an infinite, incomprehensible, and eternal essence
full of righteousness, goodness, mercy and truth; The trinity of persons
subsisting in the same essence; the Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
coessentiall, coeternall, and coequall; the Father not created, nor begotten;
the Son not created, but begotten; the holy Ghost not created, nor begotten,
but proceeding.

Secondly, we must know, and believe, that God made all things of nothing,
that in them he might manifest his wisdom, power, and goodness; that he
made men and Angels capable of supernatural blessedness, consisting in the
vision and enjoying of himself; that he gave them abilities to attain
thereunto, and laws to guide them in the ways that lead unto it; that
nothing was made evil in the beginning; that all evil entered into the world
by the voluntary aversion of men and Angels from God their Creator; that the
sin of Angels was not general, but that some fell, and others continued in
their first estate; that the sin of those Angels that fell, is irremissible,
and their fall irrecouerable; that these are become devils and spirits of
error, seeking the destruction of the sons of men; that by the misperswasion
of these lying spirits, the first man that ever was in the world, fell from God
by sinful disobedience and apostasy; that the sin of the first man is
derived to all his posterity, not by imitation only, but by propagation and
descent, subjecting all to curse and malediction; yet not without possibility,
and hope of merciful deliverance.

Thirdly, we must believe, that for the working of this deliverance, the Son
of God assumed the nature of man into the unity of his divine person; so that
he subsisteth in the nature of God, and man, without all corruption,
confusion, or conversion of one of them into another: that in the nature of man
thus assumed he suffered death, but being God could not be holden of it, but
rose again, and triumphantly ascended into Heaven: that he satisfied the
wrath of his father, obtained for us remission of sins past, the grace of
repentant conversion, and a new conversation, joined with assured hope, desire,
and expectation of eternal happiness,

Fourthly, we must constantly believe, that God does call, and gather to
himself out of the manifold confusions of erring, ignorant, and wretched men,
whom he pleases, to be partakers of these precious benefits of eternal
salvation: the happy number and joyful society of whom we name the Church of
God; whether they were before, or since the manifestation of Christ the son
of God in our flesh. For both had the same faith, hope, and spirit of adoption,
whereby they were sealed unto eternal life; though there be a great
difference in the degree, and measure of knowledge, and the excellency of the
means, which God has vouchsafed the one, more then the other.

Fifthly, we must know, and believe, that for the publishing of this joyful
deliverance, and the communicating of the benefits of the same, the Son of
God committed to those his followers, whom he chose to be witnesses of all
the things he did and suffered, not only the word of reconciliation, but also
the dispensation of sacred and sacramental assurances of his love, set means
of his gracious working: that those first messengers, whom he sent with
immediate commission, were infallibly led into all truth, and left unto
posterities that sum of Christian doctrine that must for ever be the rule of
our faith: that these blessed messengers of so good and happy tidings,
departing hence, left the ministry of reconciliation to those, whom they
appointed to succeed them, in the work so happily begun by them.

Lastly, we must know, and be assuredly persuaded, that seeing the renouation
of our spirits and minds is not perfect, and the redemption of our bodies
still remaining corruptible is not yet; therefore God has appointed a time
when Christ his son shall return again, raise up the dead, and give
eternal life to all, that with repentant sorrow, turn from their evil and
wicked ways, while it is yet the accepted time and day of salvation; and
contrary ways, cast out into utter darkness, and into the fire that never
shall be quenched, all those that neglect, and despise so great salvation.

That all these things, and these only, do directly concern the matter of
eternal salvation, is evidently proved by unanswerable demonstration. For how
should they attain everlasting happiness, that know not God the original
cause and end of all things, the object, matter, and cause of all happiness?
that know not of whom they were created, of what sort, to what, whereof
capable, and how enabled to it, how far they are fallen from that they
originally were, and the hope of that which they were made to be, whence are
those evils that make them miserable, and whence the deliverance from them is
to be looked for, by whom it is wrought, what the benefits of it are, the
means whereby they are communicated, to whom, and what shall be the end both
of them that partake, and partake not in them? We see then that all these
things, and these only essentially and directly touch the matter of eternal
salvation.

Other things there are that attend on them, as consequents deduced from them,
or some way appertayning to them: whereof some are of that sort, that a man
cannot rightly be persuaded of these, but he must needs see the necessary
consequence, and deduction of them from these, if they be propounded unto him:
as that there are two wills in Christ; that there is no salvation, remission of
sins, or hope of eternal life out of the Church; Theodoret. in ep.
decretorum diuinorum. Aug. de moribus Manicheorum, lib. 2. cap. 15: Tertul.
contra Marcio, l. 1.
that the matrimonial society of man and wife is not impure, as the
Marcionites, Tatianus, and other supposed; nor any kind of meats to be
rejected as unclean by nature, as the Manichees and some other Heretics
fondly and impiously dreamed: other things there are that are not so clearly
deduced from those indubitate principles of our Christian faith; as namely,
concerning the place of the Fathers rest before the coming of our Savior
Christ; concerning the local descending of Christ into the hell of the damned.

In the first sort of things which are the principles that make the rule of
faith, a man cannot be ignorant and be saved. In the second, which are so
clearly deduced from those principles, that who so advisedly considers them,
cannot but see their consequence from them, and dependence of them, a man
cannot err and be saved; because if he believe those things which every one
that will be saved must particularly know, and believe, he cannot err in
these. The third a man may be ignorant of, and err in them without danger of
damnation, if error be not joined with pertinacie.

The principal grounds of Christian doctrine, above mentioned, are the whole
platform of all Christian Religion; The rule of faith so often mentioned by
the Ancient, by the measure of which all the holy Fathers, Bishops, and
Pastors of the Church, made their Sermons, Commentaries, and Interpretations
of Scripture. This rule (every part whereof is proved so nearly to concern
all them that look for salvation) we make the rule to try all doctrines by;
and not such platformes of doctrine, as every Sect-master by himself can
deduce out of the Scriptures understood according to his own private fancy,
Annot. in Romans 12.
as the Rhemists falsely charge us. This rule is delivered by De
praescriptionibus aduersus hereticos and aduersus Praxean.
Tertullian. Irenaeus, lib. 1. cap. 3.
Irenaeus, and other of the Fathers: and with addition of conclusions most
easily, clearly, and vnavoydably deduced hence, by Theodoret in his Epitome
Dogmatum.

CHAP. 5.
Of the nature of Schism, and the kinds of it, and that it no way appears
that the Churches of Greece, etc. are heretical, or in damnable schism.

OVt of this which has been delivered, it is easy to discern what is
Heresy, and what errors they are, that exclude from possibility of salvation.
It remains to speak of Schism and the kinds and degrees of it. Schism is
a breach of the unity of the Church. The unity of the Church consists in
three things: First, the subjection of people to their lawful Pastors;
Secondly, the connection, and communion which many particular Churches, and the
Pastors of them have among themselves: Thirdly, in holding the same rule of
faith. The unity of each particular Church depends of the unity of the Pastor,
who is one, to Ecclesiae salus in su^itacerdotis dignitate pe^et, ^ui si non
exors quaedam and ab on (...) eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesia eff^entur
s^hismata quot sacerdotes. Hier. contra Luciferianos.
whom an eminent and peculiar power is given, and whom all must obey: In
respect of this first kind of unity, consisting in the subjection of each
people, or portion of the flock of Christ to their lawful Pastors, if they
who should obey this one Pastor, as being in the stead and place of Christ,
do either wholly withdraw themselves, refusing to be subject to any
Ministry, like Numb. 16, 1. 23.
Core and his accomplices, pretending that all the people of God are holy, and
that the guides of the Church take too much upon them; or when one is elected,
do set up an other against him, and forsaking the right, cleave to him that
has no right: This is the first kind of Schism.

Secondly, because there must be Cyprian. de v^tate Ecclesiae.
an unity, not only among the parts of each particular Church, but also of
many particular Churches, and the Pastors, and guides of them among
themselves: the Churches which forsake the communion of other Churches without
just cause, do fall into Schism. And if they not only refuse to communicate
with them, in the performance of the acts of religion, upon causeless dislike,
but swerve from the rule of faith, the other do constantly hold; they become
not only schismatic, but heretical also.

These are the several kinds of Schism, of which one is much more dangerous
then another. The forsaking the rule of faith, or absolute refusal to be
subject to the holy Ministry, saying as they did, Are not all the people
holy? you take too much upon you, etc. is damnable Schism. In each Church,
wherein there must be one Pastor, having eminent, and peerless power, when
one is lawfully called, they who presume to set up an other, if they know the
former to be lawfully possessed of the place, or their ignorance thereof be
affected, or they be so violently carried with the streams of contention and
faction, that they would not yield, though the right should appear unto them,
this Schism is likewise damnable. In sch^mate prae^ tam du^o, temerarium,
ini^osum and scandalosum est, a^ere omnes tenentes istam partem vel al^eram,
vel omnes neutral^ ^sse vniversa^ter extra statum (...), vel
But if it be doubtful, and men carry minds ready to yield, when they shall
see the right, it is not so.

When whole Churches with their Pastors, and guides, divide themselves from
other, refusing to communicate with them, if this separation grow out of pride,
and Pharisaicall conceit of fancied perfection, and absolute holiness, as did
the Schism of Novatus, Donatus, Lucifer, and others of that sort, it is
damnable Schism; but if out of ignorance, or error, not overthrowing the rule
of faith; or over earnest urging of ceremonies, rites, and observations, as the
c^mmunicatos, vel (...) de schis^e (...), (...) ^de mo^ h^endi tempore schis^.
(...). Ecc^es. (...). c. ^3.
separation of Victor Bishop of Rome, and the Churches of Asia, had been, if
Irenaeus had not interposed himself, or striving for precedence; it is
dangerous, but not damnable, unless it be joined with such pertinacie, that
though it should appear they were in error, or did amiss, and contrary to
the rule of charity, they would not yield.

This being the nature of Schism and Heresy, and these the kinds and degrees
of them more or less dangerous, let us in the next place see, what is to be
thought of all those Churches of Graecia, Armenia, Aethiopia, Russia before
mentioned; Every of which is in some sort rent, and divided from other. We
dare not with the proud Romanists, condemn so famous Churches, as culpable of
damnable Heresy and Schism, and cast so many millians of souls into hell,
for every difference in matter of opinion, or rent from the other parts of the
body of the Church.

All Diligenter consider ^dum esset, quid dicere vellent; vel inuenie^dum esset
medium expediens, vt omnia ponerentur ad concordiam, non persistendo in
omnimoda probatione huius articuli contra eos; vix enim convincerentur homines
qui velint repugnare. Nota hic, quomodo aliquae determinationes Parisijs factae
duntaxat ligant diocessanos, and si sic dici posset de Latinorum Ecclesia,
Notate si de vno articulo fieri posset non articulus, ponendo res in talem
statum in quali erant ante determinationem, exemplum; determinatio Bonifacij
annihilata fuit per quendam successorem eius. si Graeci habeant consuetudinem
conferendi beneficia etc. and ad hoc facit, quod dicunt aliqui, eos alias
scripsisse Papae, potentiam tuam recognoscimus, avaritiam tuam implere non
possumus, viuite per vos. Gers. part. 4. sermon. de pace and vnitate Graecorum.
these therefore holding the rule of faith, and believing all those things,
that are on the peril of eternal damnation to be particularly and expressly
known and believed, and their separation not growing (for ought we know) out
of Pharisaicall and damnable pride, as did that of Nouatus, Donatus, and the
like, but out of error, not directly contrary to the rule of faith, or some
other humane infirmity, and defect; and it no way appearing that their
obstinacy is such, that, though they knew they did amiss, they would still
continue so to do; we account them in the number of the Churches of God, and
doubt not but that innumerable living, and dying in them, notwithstanding their
sundry defects, imperfections, and wants, are, and have been saved. We
conclude therefore, that their Schisms, and seperations are sinful, wicked,
and dangerous, and their errors inexcusable, insnaring the consciences of many
to endless perdition, and greatly endangering all that are, or have been
misse-led with them; but not damnable, excluding from all possibility of
salvation. Qui sententiam suam quamvis falsam atque perversam nulla pertinaci
(...) defendunt, praesertim quam non audacia suae praesumptionis pepererunt,
sed a seductis and in errorem lapsis parentibus acceperunt, quaerunt autem
cauta solicitudine veritatem, corrigi parati, cum iuvener^t, ne quaquam sunt
inter haereticos deputandi. Aug. epist. 162. Glorio Eleusio etc.
We make a great difference between them, that were the first Authors and
beginners of these divisions, and such as walk in the ways, and insist in the
steps of their misse-led, and seduced fathers: between such as are more, and
such as are less deeply plunged into error.

CHAP. 6.
Of the Latin Church, that it continued the true Church of God even till our
time, and that the errors we condemn, were not the doctrines of that Church.

TOuching the Latin Church likewise we are of the same opinion, that it
continued still a part of the Catholic Church, notwithstanding the manifold
abuses and superstitions that in time crept into it, and the dangerous and
damnable false doctrine that some taught, and defended in the midst of it. It
is therefore most fond and frivolous, that some demand of us where our Church
was before Luther began? For we say it was, where now it is: if they ask us,
which? we answer, it was the known and apparent Church in the world, wherein
all our Fathers lived and died; wherein Luther and the rest were baptized,
received their Christianity, ordination, and power of ministry. If they reply,
that that Church was theirs, and not ours, for that the doctrines they now
teach, and we inpugne, the ceremonies, customs, and observations, which they
retain and defend, and we have abolished as fond, vain, and superstitious,
were taught, used, and practiced in that Church wherein our fathers lived, and
dyed; we answer, that none of those points of false doctrine and error which
they now maintain, and we condemn, where the doctrines of that Church
constantly delivered, or generally received by all them that were of it, but
doubtfully broached, and devised without all certain resolution, or factiously
defended by some certain only, who as a dangerous faction adulterated the
sincerity of the Christian verity, and brought the Church into miserable
bondage.

Touching the abuses and manifold superstitions which we have removed; it is
true they were in that Church wherein our fathers lived, but not without
signification of their dislike of them, and earnest desire of reformation, as
shall appear by that which follows. Epist. ad Corint. 1. Epist. ad ga^atas.
revel. 2 12. 18.
As therefore the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Pergamus, and Thyatira, had in
them emulations, divisions, neglect of discipline, contempt of the Apostles of
Christ, some that denied the resurrection of the dead, that joined circumcision
and the works of the law with Christ in the work of salvation, the^ that
maintained the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, and suffered the woman Iesabel,
which called her self a Prophetess to deceive the people of God, and make
the^ commit fornication, and eat things sacrificed unto Idols, etc. yet it is
not to be thought, that all that were of these Churches, with one consent
denied the resurrection, and fell into all the errors, and evils above
mentioned; For then doubtless these societies had ceased to be the true, and
Catholic Churches of God: so though sundry dangerous, and damnable errors
were broached in the midst of the Church and house of God, in the days of our
Fathers, which did fret Gers. part. 1. de potestate ec^es. consid. 12.
as a canker, as Gerson confesses, yet were they not with full approbation
generally received, but doubted of, contradicted, refuted, and rejected, as
uncertain, dangerous, damnable, and heretical. And as in the reformation of
those Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Pergamus, and Thyatira, if some had still
persisted in the maintenance of those errors and abuses reproved by the Spirit
of God, and the blessed Apostles of our Savior Christ, whiles other moved by
the admonition of the Spirit of God, and the words of the holy Apostles,
reformed themselves; and so a division or separation had grown, it had been a
vain challenge for the stiff maintainers of errors and abuses, to challenge
the reformed part for novelty, to ask of them where their Church was before
this reformation began, seeing it was even the same, wherein in one communion
they formerly lived together, with toleration of all those evils which the one
part still retained, and the other justly rejected: So when many Princes,
Prelates, and great States of the Christian world, have in our days shaken off
that yoke of miserable bondage, whereof our fathers complained, removed those
superstitious abuses they disliked, condemned those errors in matters of
doctrine, which they acknowledged to be dangerous, and damnable, fretting as
a canker, and insnaring the consciences of many: It is no less vain and
frivolous for the Patrons of error, to ask us which, and where our Church
was, before the reformation began; for it was that wherein all our Fathers
lived, longing to see things brought back to their first beginnings again, in
which their predecessors as a dangerous and wicked faction tyrannized over
men's consciences, and perverted all things, to the endless destruction of
themselves and many others with whom they prevayled.

If they shall further reply, that that Church wherein our fathers, lived was
not ours, because there were many things found in it, which we have not; who
sees not, that this reason stands as strong against them, as against us? For
there are many errors and superstitions, which they have rejected, and do not
retain at this day, which were in being in the days of our Fathers. And
besides, this objection would have served the Patrons of error in the Church
of Corinth, Galatia, and the rest: For they might have said, after those
Churches were reformed, that they were new, and not the same that were before;
For that in the former, the resurrection of the dead was denied, circumcision
urged and practiced, discipline neglected, and the Apostles of Christ
contemned, which things afterward were not found in them. As therefore this
had been a shameless objection of those erring miscreants against the godly
and well-affected in those times, so it is in ours. And as those errors were
not general in those Churches, so were not they which we have condemned, in
the Churches wherein our Fathers lived. As those errors and heresies were not
the doctrines of the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, and the rest; but the lewd
assertions of some, perverting, and adulterating the doctrine of the Churches:
so likewise the errors, which we condemn at this day, whereupon the
difference grows between the Romish faction, and us, were never generally
received, nor constantly delivered, as the doctrines of the Church: but
uncertainly, and doubtfully disputed, and proposed as the opinions of some men
in the Church, not as the resolved determinations of the whole Church.

CHAP. 7.
Of the several points of difference between us and our adversaries, wherein
some in the Church erred, but not the whole Church.

FOr neither did that Church, wherein our Fathers lived, and died, hold that
Canon of Scripture, which the Romanists now urge; nor that insufficiency they
now charge it with; nor corruption of the originals; nor necessity of
following the vulgar translation; nor the heresies touching man's creation
brought into the Church by certain barbarous Schoolmen, as that there are
three different estates of men; the first of pure nature, without addition of
grace, or sin; and two other, the one of grace, the other of sin: That all
those evils, that are found in the nature of man, since his fall, as ignorance,
concupiscence, contrariety between the better and meaner faculties of the
soul, difficulty to do well, and pronenesse to do evil, were all natural,
the conditions of pure nature, that is, of nature, as considered in it self, it
would come forth from God: That these evils are not sinful, nor had their
beginnings from sin, that they were the consequents of Nature in the state of
creation, but restrained by addition of supernatural grace, without which the
integrity of nature was full and perfect: That men in the state of pure nature,
that is, as they might have been created of GOD in the integrity of Nature,
without addition of grace, and in the estate of original sin, differ no
otherwise, but as they that never had, and they that have lost rich and
precious clothing; so that original sin is but the loss of that, without
which natures integrity may stand: that no evils are brought in by the fall,
but Nature left to her self to feel that which was before, but not felt, nor
discerned while the addition of grace bettered Nature. None of these errors
touching the estate of man's creation were the doctrines of the Church, but the
private fancies and conceits of men.

So likewise touching original sin, there were that taught, that it is not
inherent in each particular man borne of Adam, but that Adams personal sin
is imputed only: that the propagation of sin is not general, Mary being
conceived without original sin: That the punishment of it is not any
sensible smart, or positive evil, but privatiue only; and that therefore
there is a third place, neither hell nor heaven, named Limbus puerorum; which
is a place, where, as some think, they who are condemned thither, though they
be excluded from the kingdom of Heaven, and all possibility of ever coming
thither, yet are in a state of natural happiness, and do enjoy the sweet
content of eternal life. These Pelagian heresies were taught in the Church of
God, but they were not the doctrines of the Church; being condemned, rejected,
and refuted, as contrary to the Christian verity, by many worthy members and
guides of the Church: who as they never received these parts of false doctrine:
so likewise the Church wherein they lived, neither knew, nor approved that
distinction and difference of venial and mortal sins, which the Romanists
now teach, nor power of nature to do the works of the Law according to the
substance of the things commanded, though not according to the intention of the
Lawgiver, to love God above all and to do actions morally good, or not
sinful, without concurrence of special grace, nor election and reprobation
depending on the foresight of some thing in us positive or privative; nor merit
of congruence and condignity; nor works of supererogation; nor counsels of
perfection, as they now teach; nor justification by perfection of inherent
qualities; nor uncertainty of grace: nor seven Sacraments properly so named:
nor local presence: nor Transubstantiation: nor orall manducation of the body
of Christ, nor real sacrificing of it for the quick and the dead: nor
remission of sins after this life: nor tormenting of the souls of men dying
in the state of salvation in a part of hell, hundred of years, by devils in
corporal fire (out of which, prayer should deliver them) nor that the Saints
hear our prayers, know or are acquainted with our particular wants: nor the
gross Idolatry in those times committed, and intolerable abuses found in the
number, fashion, and worship of their images: nor their absolution, as now they
define it: nor treasure of the Church growing out of the superfluity of Saints
merits not rewardable in themselves, to be disposed by the Pope for supply of
other men's, wants to release them out of Purgatory by way of indulgence: nor
the infallibility of the Popes judgment, and plenitude of his power such and so
great that he may depose Princes, and dispose of their crowns, and dignities,
and that whatsoever he does he may not be brought into order, or deposed by
authority of the whole Christian world in a general Council. These are the
errors which we condemn and our adversaries maintain and defend: these, we
are well assured, were not the doctrines of that Church wherein our Fathers
lived and dyed, though, we do not deny, but they were taught by some in that
Church. All these we offer to prove to be error in matter of our Christian
faith, and that seeing we could no longer have peace with our adversaries, but
by approving these impieties, we had just cause to divide our selves from
them, or (to speak more properly) to suffer our selves to be accursed,
anathematized, and rejected by them, rather than to subscribe to so many
errors, and heresies, contrary to the Christian, and Catholic verity.

CHAP. 8.
Of the true Church, which, and where it was before Luthers time.

THus then it appears, which we think to have been the true Church of God
before Luther or others of that sort were heard of in the world: namely that,
wherein all our Fathers lived and died, wherein none of the errors, reproved
by Luther, ever found general, uniform, and full approbation, in which all
the abuses removed by him were long before by all good men complained off, and
a reformation desired. And therefore though we accknowledge Wickliffe, Husse,
Hierome of Prague, and the like; who with great magnanimity opposed them selves
against the Tyranny of the Sea of Rome, and the impiety of those who withheld
the truth of God in unrighteousness, who being named Christians served
Antichrist ( Sermon. 33. omnes amici and omnes inimici, omnes necessarij and
omnes adversarij, omnes domestici and nulli pacifici, serui Christi serviunt
Antichristo.
as Bernard complained of some in his time) to have been the worthy servants
of God, and holy martyrs, and confessors, suffering in the cause of Christ
against Antichrist: yet do we not think that the Church of God was found
only in them, or that there was no other appearance, of succession of Church
and ministry, as Stapleton and other of that faction falsely impute unto us.
For we most firmly believe, all the Churches in the world, wherein our
Fathers lived and died, to have been the true Churches of God, in which
undoubtedly salvation was to be found: and that they which taught, embraced,
and believed those damnable errors which the Romanists now defend against us,
were a faction only in the Churches, as were they that denied the resurrection,
urged circumcision, and despised the Apostles of Christ, in the Churches of
Corinth and Galatia.

If any of our men deny these Churches to have been the true Churches of of
God, their meaning is limited in respect of the prevailing faction, that was
in the Church, and including them and all the wicked impieties by any of them
defended, in which sense their negative is to be understood. For howsoever the
Church (which is not to be charged with the errors and faults of all, that in
the midst of her did amiss) held a saving profession of the truth of God: yet
there were many, and they carrying the greatest show of the Church, that erred
damnably, and held not a saving profession of divine truth: whereupon De
potestate ecclesiastica consid. 12.
Gerson says, that before the council of Constance, the false opinions
touching the power of the Pope did fret like a Canker, and prevailed so far,
that he would hardly have escaped the note of heresy, that had said but half
so much, as was defined in the Council of Constance, by the universal consent
of the whole Christian world.

Lib. 2. distinct. 26. q. 1. art. 1. did. 30. q. 3.
Gregorius Ariminensis shows, that touching the power of nature to do things
morrally good; and to fulfill the law without concurrence of special grace,
touching the works of infidels, predestination, reprobation, and punishments
of original sin, the heresies of Pelagius were taught in the Church; and
that not by a few, or contemptible men, but so many and of so great place,
that he almost feared to follow the doctrine of the Fathers, and oppose
himself against them therein. The same does Dial. Apolog. iudicium de concilio
Constantien^.
Gerson report concerning sundry lewd assertions prejudicial to the states of
Kings and Princes, which the Council of Constance could not be induced to
condemn, by reason of a mighty faction that prevailed in it, though many great
ones much urged it, and though they made no stay to condemn the positions of
Wicklife and Hus, seeming to derogate from the state of the Clergy, though
many of them might carry a good and Catholic sense, if they might have found a
favorable construction. Whereupon he breaks into a bitter complaint of the
partialities, and unequal courses holden in the Church, and protests, that
he has no hope of a reformation by a council, things standing as they then
did.

The like complaint did In libro de praedestinatione.
Contarenus make in our time, that if any man did debase the nature of man,
deiect the pride of sinful flesh, magnify the riches of the grace of God,
and urge the necessity of it, he was judged a Lutheran, and pronounced an
Heretic; though they that gloried in the name of Catholics, were themselves
Pelagian heretics, if not worse then Pelagians. Alas, says Occam prol: comp.
err. Iohannis 22.
Occam, the time is come the blessed Apostle Saint Paul, 2. Timoth. 4*
prophesied of, When men will not suffer wholesome doctrine, but having their
ears itching, after their own lusts, get them a heap of Teachers, turning
their ears from the truth, and being given, unto fables. This Prophecy is
altogether fullfilled in our days. For behold, there are many that pervert the
holy Scriptures, and deny the sayings of the holy Fathers, reiecte the Canons
of the Church and civil constitutions of the Emperors, which molest,
persecute, bring into bondage, and without mercy torment and afflict even unto
death, them that defend the truth; And, that I may conclude many things in
few words, with harl^ttes foreheades, and execrable boldness, do endeavor
to subvert imperial and regal power, and to overthrow all laws both of GOD
and man. Neither are these young men, or unlearned, but they are the elders of
the people, High Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and Doctors of the Law, as they
were that crucified Christ: so that we may rightly say of our times, that
which Daniel long* since pronounced in his 13 Chapter, Iniquity is gone out
from Babylon, from the elders and judges which seemed to govern and rule the
people: For many that should be pillars in the Church of God, and defend the
truth even unto blood, do cast themselves headlong into the pit of heresies.
Thus spoke he in his time of the corrupt (...) of the Church, wherein so
damnable a faction prevailed, daungerously perv^ting all things, that in the
end he submits all his writings to the judgment and correction of the true
and Catholic Church; but not of the Church of malignant miscreants,
heretics, schismatickes, and their favorers.

CHAP. 9.
Of an Apostasy of some in the Church.

THus then we think with In 2 Thessalonians. 2 nisi venerit disces^io primum,
exponunt aliqui de discessione a Romano imperio: alii de recessu a Rom:
Ecclesia, a qua ^am diu est quod recessit Graecia: sed saluo melio^i iudicio,
mihi videtur melius intelligendum de recessu a fide Catholica: non tamen in
telligendo, quod omnes sint a fide catholica (sicut exponunt aliqui) recessu^,
quia durabit in aliquibus usque ad finem mundi; sed quia mayor pats credentium
discedet ab ca.
Lira, that as there was an Apostasy or revolt of many kingdoms from the
Roman Empire, and of many Churches from the communion of the Roman Church; so
there has been an Apostasy from the Catholic faith in the midst of the
Church not for that all at any time did forsake the true faith, but for that
many fell from the sincerity of the faith, according to the saying of our
Savior, a when the time of Antichrist draws on, iniquity shall abound, and
the charity of many shall wax cold: and that 1 Timoth. 4, In the last times
some shall depart from the faith, attending to spirits of error: and 2 Timoth.
3. In the last days there shall be perilous times, men shall be lovers of
themselves, men of corrupt minds, reprob^e concerning the faith. This he
speaks, of an Apostasy in the midst of the Church it self; answerably to
that of ^ Nazianzen, who says, that as when one takes water into his hand,
not only that which he takes not up, but that also which runs forth and
finds passage between his fingers, is divided b Orat* in laudem Athanasii.
and separated from that which he holds enclosed in his hand: so not only
the open and professed enemies of the Catholic verity, but they also that
seem to be her best and greatest friends, are sometimes divided one from
another.

There is no cause then, why it should seem so strange to our Adversaries,
that our Divines affirm, there has been an Apostasy from the Faith, not of
the whole Church, but of many in the Church, dangerously erring and
adulterating the Doctrine of Faith delivered by Christ and his blessed
Apostles. And that some say, this Apostasy began sooner, some later: For if
we speak of those grossest illusions, wherewith men were abused in these
latter ages, surely that degree of Apostasy did not enter into the Church in
former times. For there was no thought in any Christian man living six hundred
years ago, No mention of Indulgences in Peter Lumbard, nor others of that
time, and the Schoolmen speak very doubtfully of them.
that the Pope could dispense the merits of the Saints, and give pardons;
Nimi^um, ut pace omnium bonorum dixerim, haec novitas non dicam haeresis,
necdum in mundo emerserat, ut sacerdotes illius qui regna^e facit hypocritam
propter peccata populi, docerent populum: quod malis regibus nullam debeat
subiectionem, et licet iis sacramentum fidelitatis fecerit, nullam tamen debeat
fidelitatem. Sigebertus in Chron. an. 1088.
that he might depose Princes for supposed heresy: Diu haec consue^udo
obtinuit, ut praesentibus omnibus Eucharistia distribuere^ur. Et certe ^ota
sacrae precis quam canonem vocant compositio, publicae tantum missae
acco^modata videtur: quo fit, (...) nonnulli ^eteris Rom: ordinis expositores,
qui apud nos sunt, canonem in publica tantum, non autem quotidi^a et privata
action legend^ contendunt* Cassander Praef. in li. ord: Romans a se editi.
that the Sacrament not received, but elevated, gazed on, and adored, is a
sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead; ^onavent. l. 3. did. 3.
q. 2.
that Mary was conceived without original sin; that the people are to be
partakers of the Sacrament but only in one kind: and sundry other things of
like nature. But if we speak of a declination from the sincerity of the
Christian Faith, it is certain it began long ago, even in the first ages of
the Church.

Of this sort was the error, that the souls of the just are in some part of
hell till the last day, as De anima, cap. 32. habes etiam de paradiso a nobis
libellu^ quo constituimus omnem ^nimam apud inferos sequestrari in diem Domini.
Tertullian, Irenaeus contra haereses prope finem.
Irenaeus, and sundry other of the ancient did imagine: Sixtus Senens.
Biblioth. li. 6. annot. 345
and that they see not God, nor enjoy not heavens happiness till the general
resurrection, which was the opinion of many of the Fathers.

That all Catholic Christians, how wickedly soever they live, yet holding the
foundation of true Christian profession, shall in the end, after great torments
endured in the world to come, be saved as it were by fire. This was the error
of sundry of the ancient, who durst not say, as Origin, that the Angels, that
fell, shall in the end be restored; nor as some other, mollifying the hardness
of Origens opinion, that all men, whether Christians or Infidells; nor as a
third sort, that all Christians, how damnably soever erring in matter of
faith, shall in the end be saved; Sicut diaboli and omnium negatorum and
impiorum qui dixerunt in cord suo non est Deus, credimus aeterna tormenta, sic
peccatorum atque impiorum, quorum opera in igne probanda sunt, moderatam
arbitramur and mixtam clementiae sententiam iudicis. Hiero. in comment in
Esaiae 66. prope finem. Et contra Pelagianos, l. 1 Christianos in peceato
praeventos saluandos post poenas scribit.
but thought it most reasonable, that all right believing Christians should
find mercy, whatsoever their wickedness were. This opinion was so general in
Aug: de civitate Dei li. 21. cap. 24. 25. 26. 27. proponit opinionem Origeni^
and aliorum, and enchiridio ad Laurentium, c. 67. ait eos, qui credunt
Christianos impios and peccatores post poenas saluandos, and tamen Catholici
sunt, humana quadam benevolentia sibi falli videri.
Augustines time, that very fearfully he opposed himself against it, and not
daring wholly to impugn that which he found to have so great and reverend
authors, he qualified it, what he could, and so doubtingly broached that
opinion, which gave occasion to the Papists of their heresy touching
Purgatory. For, says he, if they would only have us think, that the souls
of men living wickedly here in this World, may through the goodness of God,
and the prayers of the living find some mitigation of their pains in hell, or
have their punishments suspended, and differred for a time, yet so, that they
be confessed to be eternal; I would not strive with them: yea, says he, it
may be, that men for some lighter sins and imperfections cleaving to them
while they are here, may find pardon and remission in the world to come, and
be saved as by fire: which whether it be so, or whether there be no other
purging but in this life by the fire of tribulation, he professes he knows
not, nor dares not pronounce.

Sixtus Senensis bibliothecae sancta li: annotatione, 233. vbi ostendit Hiero:
and August: summa cum reverentia dissenti^e, quia multi Ecclesiasticorum
virorum and multi martyrs Chiliastarum opinionem amplectebantur.
Of this sort was the opinion of a double resurrection; the first of the good,
who should live in all happiness on the earth, a thousand years before the
wicked should be awaked out of the sleep of death; and another after the
thousand years expired, when the wicked also should rise and go into
everlasting fire, and the good into everlasting life, which they supposed to
be the second resurrection. How generally this error spread it self in the
true Church, they that have but looked into the writings of the fathers, and
monuments of antiquity, cannot be ignorant.

Cyprianus de lapsis Aug: contra 2. Epistolas Pelag: ad Bonifacium li. 1. cap.
22. H^pogno: l. 5. epist. 107. Vitali. Rhenanus in lib. Tertull. de corona
militis ostendit baptizatos statim sa^ctae communionis participes effecto^.
Maldonatus in 6. Ioh. Missam inquit facio Aug. and Innocentij 1. sententiam,
quae sexcentos circiter annos viguit in ecclesia, Eucharistiam etia^ infantibus
necessari^.
The opinion of the necessity of infants receiving the sacrament of the Lords
body and blood, as well as Baptism, did possess the minds of many in the
Church, for certain hundreds of years, as appears by that Augustine writes
of it in his time, and Hugo de S. Victo. eruditionis theolog. de sacramentis,
l. 1. c. 20. Pueris recens natis idem sacramentu^ in specie sanguinis est
ministrandu^ digito sacerdotis, etc.
Hugo de sancto victore, so many hundred years after him; Censura orientalis
ecclesiae. c. 9.
yea, the Greek and Damianus a Goes.
Ethiopian Churches continue that error and the practice of communicating
infants as soon as they are baptized even unto this day.

Touching predestination, how many obscurities uncertainties, and contrarieties
shall we find? Sixtus Senensis bibliothecae sanctae, l. 6. annotatione, 251.
Surely before Augustines time, many great and worthy prelates, and doctors of
the Church, not having occasion to enter into the exact handling of that part
of Christian doctrine, did teach, that men are predestinate for the foresight
of some thing in themselves. And Aug, himself, in the beginning of his
conflicts with the Pelagians, was of opinion, that at the least, for the
foresight of faith, men are elected to eternal life: which 1 Retractatio, c.
23. and de praedest. sanctorum cap. 3.
afterward he disclaimed as false and erroneous, and taught that man's
salvation depends on the efficacy of that grace which God gives: and not
his purpose of saving, upon the uncertainty of man's will. This doctrine of
Augustine was received and confirmed in the Church against the Pelagians and
Semi-Pelagians. And Bellar. li. 2. c. 11. de gratia and libero arbitrio.
Bellarmine professes that Augustines doctrine, in this case, is the doctrine
of the Church; yet so, that many followed the former conceit, as we Refutat
Grego. Arim. lib. 1. did. 40. q. 1. art 2.
may easily see by the writings of the School men, many of which do teach that
men are elected for the foresight of some thing positive or privative in
themselves.

How, far some did Montanise in the matter of second marriage, so far
disliking it, that they would not have it blessed in the Church, but imposed
penance on them that married a second wife after the death of the first;
Hierome against Iouinian and Presbyter in conviu^o secundarum nuptiarum
interesse non debet, maxim cum praecipiatur secundis nuptijs poenitentiam
tribuere: quis ergo erit presbyter, qui propter conuiuium illis consentiat
nuptijs? concilium Neocesariense can. 7. Amb. in cap. 7. 1 Cor: Primae, inquit,
nuptiae sub benedictione dei celebrantur solenniter: secundae etiam in
praesenti carent-gloria, id est, benedictione. Rhenanus in arg: in e^hort.
Tertull ad castitatem: omnes (inquit) veteres, atque adeo Hiero: ipse
matrimonio parum aequi suerunt: certe constat Hiero: hac de causa Romae male
audisse.
certain ancient provincial Counsels, are proofs more then sufficient.

Touching the state of Saints departed, their generality of presence in all
places, their universal knowledge of all things, and admirable working every
where, where their memories are solemnized: are not more confidently affirmed
by Hier: contra Vigilantium.
Hierome, and Greg. dial. 4. cap. 33.
Gregory, than they are modestly denied, and doubted of by Aug. de cura pro
mortuis. Si tanti Patriarchae quid erga populum a bijs procreatum ignorauerunt
etc.
Augustine, Hugo eruditionis theologicae de Sacramentis fidei. l. 2. part. 16.
cap. 11.
Hugo de sancto victore, Glossa in Esaiae 63.
the Author of the gloss and others.

That there were superstitions and abuses in the primitive Churches, we have
such witnesses, as the Romanists dare not except against. Does not Hier. Contra
Vigilantium.
Hierome confess, that the burning of lights at noone day, used in some
Churches, was an act of zeal, but not according to knowledge? Did not a
Concilium Elibertinum can: 34. 35.
Council forbid those pernoctations in the cemeteries and places of the
martyrs burial: which when Vigilantius reproved, Hier. contra Vigilantium.
Hierome with such fierceness and rage, as cannot well be excused, traduced
him as the vilest monster the earth did bear. Bellar: l. 3 de cultu sanctorum.
cap. 17. quoniam paulatim occasion nocturnarum vigiliarum ab^ quidam i^repere
coeperant, vel potius flagitia committi, placuit ecclesiae nocturnos conventus,
and vigilias proprie dictas intermittere, ac solum in ijsdem diebus ieiunia
celebrare.
Are not these vigils long since abolished?

Does not Aug. de moribus ecclesiae cath. l. 1. c. 34. in ipsavera religione
quidam superstitiosi sunt etc.
Augustine confess there were certain adoratores sepulchrorum, et picturarum,
worshippers of Tumbes and Pictures in the Church in his time. It is therefore
much to be maruailed at, that our adversaries charge us with I know not what
impiety, for that we say, there has been a defection not only of heretics
from the Church, and faith, but also in the Church, of her own children, from
the sincerity of the heavenly truth, sometimes more, and sometimes less; in
some things by some, and in some other by others: That this defection began
long ago, but found greater and stronger opposition in the first six hundred
years then after; there being in later times a great decay of the ancient
piety: whence it came, that many more and worse errors then ever before were
broached: and they which were in some beginnings before, were augmented, and
more dangerously defended. In which sense some of our men have said, that Greg.
ita vixit vt vsque ad nostra tempora neminem ex successoribus parem habuerit.
Platina in vita Greg. idem in vita Stephani 3. seueros and graves viros
reformidat hic noster clerus: quid ita? quia in tanta licentia malunt viuere,
quam been monenti aut cogenti obtemperare: ob eam rem Christiana religio
quotidie in peius labitur.
Gregory was the last of the Good Bishops, and the first of the bad. For that
all things since his time, have greatly decayed: and the state of the Church
been much corrupted.

CHAP. 10.
Of their error who say, nothing can be amiss in the Church, either in
respect of doctrine or discipline.

IT is vain, says Gers. declarat defectuum virorum Ecclesiasticorum.
Gerson, that some object, the Church is founded on a Rock, and therefore
nothing can be amiss either in the doctrine or discipline of it, nothing that
should need any reformation. If it be so, says he, then where is the
observation of that Canon, that Clarks go not into Innes or Tavernes? that
Monks in their own places attend only prayer, and fasting, without
intermedling with Ecclesiastical or secular business? whence is the superfluous
pomp and Princely state of Cardinals and Bishops, making them forget that they
are men? what say they to that abomination, that one man holds two hundred
or three hundred Ecclesiastical benefices? That the sword of excommunication
is so easily drawn out against the poor for every trifle, as for debts? and
that the Lords of the Clergy, use it for the maintenance of their own
temporal states? That strangers are appointed by the Pope to have cure of
souls, not understanding the language of them, over whom they are set, nor
living amongst them?

Open your eyes, says he, and see if the houses of Nuns be not stews of
filthy harlots: if the consecrated Monasteries be not Faires, Markets, and
Innes; Cathedral Churches, dens of thieves, and robbers; Priests, under
pretense of maids, keep harlots: consider, whether so great variety of
pictures and images be fit, and whether it occasion not Idolatry in the
simple. Look upon the number and variety of religious orders, the canonising
of new Saints, though there be too many already, as Briget of Suetia, Charles
of Britain, the feasts of new Saints being more religiously kept than of the
blessed Apostles. Enquire, if there be not Apocryphal Scriptures, hymns, and
prayers in process of time, either of purpose, or of ignorance brought into
the Church, to the great hurt of the Christian faith. Consider the diversities
of opinions, as of the conception of Mary, and sundry other things. Gers. de
directione cordis consideratione 16. et sequentibus.
See, if there be not intolerable superstition in the worshipping of Saints,
innumerable observations without all ground of reason; vain credulity in
believing things concerning the Saints, reported in the uncertain Legends of
their lives: superstitious opinions of obtaining pardon and remission of sins,
by saying so many Pater nosters in such a Church before such an Image: as if in
the Scriptures and authentical writings of holy men, there were not sufficient
direction for all acts of piety and devotion without these fabulous and
frivolous additaments: nay, which is yet worse, see if these observations, in
many Countries and Kingdoms of the World, be not more urged than the Laws of
God; even as we shall find in the decrees and decretals, a Monk more
severely punished for going without his coule, then for committing adultery or
sacrilege.

CHAP. 11.
Of the causes of the manifold confusions and evils, formerly found in the
Church.

THese are the evils, deformities, and sores of the Church, which this worthy
man in his time complained of: The causes where of he thought to be principally
two. First, the neglecting of the Laws of GOD, and direction of the
Scriptures, and following humane inventions: Secondly, the ambition, pride, and
covetousness of the Bishop of Rome. Touching the first, which is the neglect
of divine laws, and infinite multiplying of humane inventions, he pronounces
confidently, there can be no general reformation of the Church, without the
abolishing of sundry canons and statutes, which neither are, nor reasonably can
be observed in these times, which do nothing else but ensnare the consciences
of men to their endless perdition. Gers. part. 1. sermo. in die circumcisi.
consid. 1.
That no tongue is able sufficiently to express, what evil, what danger, what
confusion, the contempt of holy Scripture (which doubtless is sufficient for
the government of the Church, for otherwise Christ had been an imperfect
lawgiuer) and the following of humane inventions has brought into the Church.
For proof hereof, says he, let us consider the state of the clergy, to which
heavenly wisdom should have been espoused: but they have committed whoredom
with that filthy harlot, earthly, carnal, and devilish wisdom: so that the
state of the Church is become merely brutish and monstrous; heaven is below,
and the earth above: the spirit obeys, and the flesh commands; the
principal is esteemed, but as accessory; and the accessory, as principal: yet
some shame not to say that the Church is better governed by humane inventions,
than by the divine law, and the law of the Gospel of Christ; which assertion
is most blasphemous. For the Evangelical doctrine, by the professors of it,
did enlarge the bounds of the Church, and lifted her up to heaven; which these
sons of Hagar, seeking out that wisdom which is from the earth, have cast
down to the dunghill. And that it is not wholly fallen, and utterly
overthrown, and extinct, it is the great mercy of our God and Savior.

Touching the second cause of the Churches ruin, which is the ambition, pride
and covetousness of the Bishop and Court of Rome, he boldly affirms that
whereas the Bishops of Rome challenging the greatest place in the Church,
should have sought the good of Gods people, they contrarily sought only to
advance themselves: Gers. post tractatulum de vnitate ecclesiae addit 4.
considerationes ad sulcimentum praemis^orum in 4 habentur haec verba.
ad imitationem Luciferi adorari volunt vt dij, neque reputant se subditos esse
cuiquam, sicut filij Belial sine iugo; nec sibi posse dici, cur ita facis, nec
Deum timent, nec homines reuerentur. In imitation of Lucifer, they will be
adored and worshipped as Gods. Neither do they think themselves subject to
any, but are as the sons of Beliall that have cast off the yoke, not enduring
whatsoever they do, that any one should ask them why they do so. They
neither fear God, nor reverence men. Gers. de concilio generali vnius
obedientiae.
Whereupon he fears not to deliver the opinion of many good and worthy men
in his time: That there being a Schism in the Church, by reason of the
contention of the three Popes, which continued for a long time in that age
wherein he lived, it were good to take the advantage of the time, and never to
restore to any Pope again that universal administration of the temporalities
of the Church, and swaying the jurisdiction of the same; but that it were best,
that all things were brought back to that state they were in the times of the
Apostles, or at least in the times of Syluester and Gregory; when each prelate
in his own jurisdiction was permitted to govern them committed to his charge,
and dispose of the temporalities belonging to the Church, without so many
reseruations, and exactions, as have been since brought in; Gers: part. 3. de
potestate ecclesiae, papa ita praesideat bonis Ecclesiasticis, vt de ijs statum
habeat sufficientem and decentem, sed non ita vt caput grauidum m^ra reliqua
ob^uat mole sua. De concilio generali vnius obedientiae.
The Popes in time getting all into their own hands, with so many abuses,
frauds, and Simonies, all serving to maintain the state of the Romish Court,
and of that head thereof, which long since grew too heavy for the body to
bear.

Neither was this the private opinion and conceit of Gerson only, but Petrus
de Aliaco, Cardinalis Cusanus, Picus Mirandula, and innumerable more of the
best, wisest, and holiest men the Church had, saw those abuses, errors,
uncertainties, and barbarismes, wherewith the glory of the Church was greatly
blemished, and almost quite defaced, and wished and expected a reformation.
Gers. de signis ruinae ecclesiae. Moderno tempore v^squisq. interpretariet
trahere n^ veretur sacram Scripture, iura sanctoru^que patru^ instituta, ad
libitu^ suae volu^tatis, etc.
Yea, nothing was more certainly looked for, a long time before Luther was
borne, than the ruin of that pompous state of the Church, the staying of the
furious, covetous, and tyranous proceedings of the Court, and Bishop of Rome,
and the freeing of the Church from that Aegypticall bondage, wherein it was
holden.

CHAP. 12.
Of the desire and expectation of a reformation of the corrupt state of the
Church; and that the alteration which has been, is a reformation.

WHen Innocentius 4 in Matheo Parisi. in Henrico 3. 844. nonne Rex Anglorum
noster est (...) and mancipium etc. Pagin: 847. papam Antichristum pronunciat.
Pagin. 848. eius avaritiae totus non sufficit orbis: eius luxuriae meretrix non
sufficit omnis.
the Pope resolved to accurse, Anathematise and excommunicate Grostead the
renowned Bishop of Lincoln, because he contemned his papal Bulls and Letters
(who was therefore in his time named Romanorum malleus and contemptor) The
Cardinals opposed themselves, saying, he was a right good man, and holier
then any of them: the things he charged the Pope with, most true, and that
therefore it was not safe thus to proceed, least some tumult should follow;
especially, say they, seeing it is known there must be a departure from us,
and a forsaking of the Roman See. The same Grosteade, a little before his
death, complaining of the wicked courses holden by the Romanists, whose scourge
he was; said, the Church should never find any ease from the oppressiue
burdens laid upon her, nor be delivered from the Aegyptiacall bondage, she was
holden in, till her deliverance were wrought in ore gladij cruentandi, in the
mouth of the sword all bathed in blood.

Philip de Comines, l. 8. c. 2. He preached that the state of the Church
should be reformed by the sword, etc.
Sauanorola, holden by many for a Prophet, surely a renowned man for piety and
learning, told the French King Charles the eight, he should have great
prosperity in his voyage into Italy, and that God would give the sword into his
hand: and all this, to the end he should reform the corrupt state of the
Church, which if he did not perform, he should return home again with
dishonor, and God would reserve the honor of this work for some other; and
so it fell out. Guicciardin.
At that time, when Luther began to reprove the abuses of the Church of Rome,
things were in so bad state, that not only the blood of Christ was profaned,
the power of the keys by abuse made contemptible, and the redemption of souls
out of purgatory, set as a stake at dice by the pardon-sellers to be played
for: but so many grieuances there were besides, that all the world sighed under
the burden of them, and wished that some man of heroical magnanimity would
oppose himself. When God had stirred up so worthy an Instrument, what did the
Pope and his adherents: Surely, as Guicciardin reports, there were that year
many meetings in Rome, to consult what was best to be done. The more wise and
moderate sort Hist. lib. 13.
wished the Pope to reform things apparently amiss, and not to persecute
Luther, least continuing those intolerable disorders, abuses, and villainies
whereof all good men complained, and persecuting him, that reproved them with
so great applause of the whole Christian world, men should think innocence,
virtue, and piety in him to be persecuted and oppressed, and so be incensed
against so pertinacious and stiff maintainers of the Churches confusions. This
counsel would not be followed; whence ensued this alteration of things we
now see, resisted by the Pope and Papists, set forward by many Christian
Countries: kingdoms, and States, and long before wished for, and foretold,
before it came to pass. For what is now done in this reformation, which
Cameracensis, Picus, Sauanorola, Gerson and innumerable other worthy guides of
Gods Church long before thought not necessary to be done, as appears by that
we have already delivered touching that matter. Reformatio ecclesiae fieri non
potest sine abolitione statutorum multorum super excommunicationibus and
caeteris traditionibus nimis multiplicatis etc. Gers. de Concilio vnius
obedientiae.
Thus then it being evident, that the number of laws, canons, and customs
formerly in use, and by us taken away, was a burden to the Church, and an
insnaring of men's consciences: That in the feasts, fasts, holy days, worship
of God, and honor of his Saints, there were abuses in that very kind, which
we have reprehended, and that a reformation was wished for, and the Popes were
so far from setting it forward, that when they saw the States of the world
ready to accomplish it, even with division of themselves from them, they would
in no sort consent unto it (though the wisest about them persuaded them to it
as the likeliest way to keep all in quietness:) seeing it was necessary for
the good of the Church, to free it self from that bondage it was formerly
holden in under the Pope, taking all into his own hands by innumerable
sleights, and treading down under his feet the Crowns of Kings, and
jurisdictions of Bishops, as has been showed, and proved out of Authors not
to be excepted against: seeing in matters of doctrine, wherein we dissent from
them, we found uncertainty, contradiction, and contrariety, some saying that
we now say, and others that which they defend, and the things they defend, not
hauiug the consenting testimony of other Churches in the world, as of Armenia,
Grecia, Aethiopia etc. nor the certain approbation of antiquity; and the
places of Scripture, on which they were grounded, being most apparently
mistaken, as now in this light of the world themselves are forced to confess:
Picus Theor. (...). loquens de erratis glos^atoris, non mirum est, inquit,
aetatis vitium fuit: perierunt enim tum and in desuetudinem abierunt bonae
literae and excultiores disciplinae pessundabantur. Haec non referrem, nisi
conduceret in commune notari scriptorum huiusmodi, non dicam, imperitiam, sed
arrogant^m impudentiam, perinde, quasi pec^dibus aut truncis scribant, non
hominibus. Erasm. in scholiis in praefat. Hier. in Pentateuchum Mosis.
seeing it is certain, there was great ignorance of tongues, and all parts of
good learning, Bonaventura recedit a curiositate quantum potest, non immiscens
positiones extraneas, vel doctrinas seculares, Dialecticas aut Philosophicas
terminis Theologic^s obumbratas, more multorum: vnde factum est, vt ab indevo^
scholasticis, quorum (proh dolor) mayor est numerus, ipse minus extiterit
frequentatus. Gers de exam. doctr.
neglect of the study of Scripture, and mixture without all judgment of things
profane with divine, Multa quae in decretis nominantur Apocrypha. and ita apud
Hier. habentur, nihilominus in officiis divinis leguntur: multa item quae apud
nonnullos vera non creduntur. Picus theo. 6. Propter barbariem nescio quam
latinitati and compositio^ additam abhorrent viri docti a lectione officii.
Platina in vita Gregor. 1. Sunt meo iudicio iila de Constantino Apocrypha,
sicut fortasse quaedam alia longa and magna scripta Sanctis Clementi and
Anacleto Papis attributat in quibus volentes Romanum sedem plusquam Ecclesiae
expedit, exaltare, se penitus fundan^. Cusan. concord. cath. lib. 3. cap. 2.
See the censure of Erasmus and other. upon the books falsely attributed to
Ambr. Ier. August. and the rest.
seeing innumerable errors, superstitions, barbarismes, and tautologies were
crept into the prayers of the Church: Gers. part. 3. dial. apolog. iudicium de
Concilio Constantiensis.
seeing there was great corruption, ignorant mistaking, and shameless
forgeries, of the monuments of antiquity, and writings of Ecclesiastical
Authors, in favor of errors then maintained, which have been detected in
this age wherein learning is revived, and with, and out of learning, the purity
of Religion: seeing it was long before resolved, the Church must be reformed:
Remotiones statutorum and canonum antiquorum aut additione novorum fieri
nequeunt rationabiliter pro tota Ecclesia, sine communi consens^, alias possit
esse statim nimi^ diversitas: no^o tamen dicere quin in multis partibus possit
Ecclesia per suas parts reformari: immo hoc necesse esset, and ad hoc
sufficerent Concilia Provincialia. Gers. de Concilio vnius obedientiae.
that this reformation was never likely to be obtained in a general Council,
and that therefore several kingdoms were to reform themselves: seeing it was
then feared the proceeding in this reformation thus severally without general
consent, would breed too great difference in the courses that would be taken,
as we see it has now fallen out, to the great grief of all well affected,
who mourn for the breaches of Sion: seeing notwithstanding this disadvantage,
in that one part of Christendom, knew not what another did in this work of
reformation, nor consulted with other, that so they might proceed in the same,
in one and the same sort; yet it so fell out by the happy providence of God,
that there is no essential, fundamental, or material difference among those
of the reformed Religion, whose confessions of faith are published to the view
of the world: (howsoever the heat, ignorant mistaking, and inconsiderate
writings of some particular men, and the diversity of ceremonies, rites, and
observations, make show of a greater division, than indeed there is) it is most
vndoubtfully clear, and evident, if we be not wilfully blinded, that this
alteration of things in our times, was a reformation, and not as our
adversaries blasphemously traduce it, an heretical innovation.

CHAP. 13.
Of the first reason brought to prove that the Church of Rome holds the
faith first delivered; because the precise time, wherein errors began in it,
cannot be noted.

NOtwithstanding, to stop the mouths of our adversaries, whom a spirit of
contradiction has possessed, and to satisfy all such as be any way
doubtful, I will by application of the notes of the Church formerly agreed
upon, examine the matter of doubt, and answer all such reasons as from thence
are taken, and by them urged against us, either for proof of their profession
and faith, and the soundness of their own Church, or reproof of ours. The
first note assigned by them is Antiquity; by which they understand not simply
and absolutely long continuance in the profession of Christianity, but the
retaining and having that faith which was first delivered to the Saints by the
Apostles, the immediate and prime witnesses of the truth which is in Christ.
Let us therefore see, how they endeavor to make proof that they now hold that
ancient profession. This they endeavor to demonstrate three ways. First it
being confessed the Church of Rome was the true Church, established in the
faith by the blessed Apostles, and the faith thereof commended and renowned
throughout the world; they think they can prove there has been no change,
alteration, or departure from that sincerity which some times was found in it.
Secondly, they offer to show the consent and agreement of that form of
doctrine they now teach, and that the Fathers of the Primitive Church did teach
in their times, and commended to posterity in their writings. Thirdly, they
presume they can show, that our doctrine, who dissent from them, is nothing
else but the renewing of old heresies long since condemned, in the best times
of the Church, by consent of the whole Christian world: If they could as easily
prove these things, as they confidently undertake it, there were no resisting
against them. But seeing they fail therein so much, that very children may
discern their weakness, therefore I will propose whatsoever I find alleged
by any of them in this kind, that carries any show of probability; that all
men may see, how weakly their persuasion is grounded in these things which are
of greatest consequence. First therefore let us see, how they prove there has
been no change in the doctrine, discipline, profession, and state of the Roman
Church since the Apostles times.

Bellar. Tom. 1. contro. 4. lib. 4. cap. 5. de nota Antiquitatis.
In every great and notable mutation, say they, may be observed the author,
the time, place, beginnings, increasings, and resistance made against it. But
the protestants are not able to note these circumstances in that mutation in
matters of religion, which they suppose has been in the Church of Rome.
Therefore it is evidently convinced, there has been no such mutation. For the
more full answering of this objection we must observe, that there are 4 kinds
of mutation, or change in matters of religion: The first when the whole essence
of religion is changed; such is the change from Paganism to Christianity, or
from Christianity to Paganism. The second when the essence remaining the same,
the state is changed; such was the change of Iudaisme into Christianity, there
being in the later, new sacraments, ceremonies, and a new ministry, that was
not in the former, and the performance of that which was but in expectation
only before. The third is, when not the whole essence and state of religion,
but some parts of it only are so changed, that some impugning, and denying
those things, which others always did and do hold most certain, the
opposition is so great, that there grows an apparent separation between
them, the one sort refusing to communicate with the other. As when the Arrians
denied the Son of God to be coessentiall, coequall, and coeternall with his
Father. The fourth, when men so bring in new opinions, and observations into
the Church, that yet both they and other, not led away in the same error, hold
communion still. In the three first kinds of mutation, all those circumstances
they speak of may be noted, but not always in the fourth. Now the mutation in
matters of faith and religion which has been in the Roman Church, is of the
fourth and last sort. For the errors thereof were so brought in, that both
they that were the authors of them, and others that never fell into them, were
both of one communion, as I will make it most clear and evident in that which
follows. And therefore it is most absurd to require us to show these
circumstances they speak of.

Secondly, for the better clearing of this matter, we must note, that the
aberration which has been in the Church of Rome from her ancient purity and
simplicity, consists in four things: First, in certain canons, laws, and
traditions, evil and hurtful from the beginning. Secondly, in the multitude
of laws and canons, in respect of the number growing to be a burden. Thirdly,
in that the state of things, and conditions of men altering, the same
constitutions and ordinances become hurtful, that were formerly good; or in
that, things instituted to one end, are in process of time applied to another;
or evil and dangerous opinions, corrupting the use of that which was not
wholly to be misliked in the beginning, are newly added. Fourthly, in errors
in matter of faith. Touching that aberration of the Church of Rome, which
consists in the bringing in of laws, canons, and constitutions hurtful from
the beginning, we can note the beginning of it, and assign who were the
authors of such laws. But when the laws themselves are not evil, but the
number of laws, Canons, and constitutions is a burden to the Church, and the
evil complained of, it is most foolish to urge us to show the first author
thereof. As likewise, when laws not evil in the beginning, by alteration of
times grow hurtful, or when things from one use grow to another. Eruditionis
theologicae de sacramentis. li. 1. cap. 20.
Hugo de sancto Victore, notes that the custom was to communicate little
children in the Sacrament of the Lords body and blood: which being in time
ceased, yet still they continued in his time to give wine, though not
consecrated, to children new baptized, which he confesses to be a
superstitious and foolish custom; yet it is not possible to show the beginning
of it. The aberration in the Church of Rome, in matters of doctrine, was in
such things, and so carried in the beginnings, that the Authors of those new
and false opinions, were not disclaimed and noted as damnable heretics, as
were those that erred in things most clearly resolved before: or that erred
with such pertinacy, that they divided themselves from all that thought
otherwise; But the Authors of these errors, and they that were free from
them, were, notwithstanding these differences, both of one communion. And
therefore the circumstances by them required in these mutations, cannot be
showed, as it will easily appear by these instances following.

CHAP. 14.
Of diverse particular errors which have been in the Church; whose first
Author cannot be named.

THe opinion of two resurrections of men's bodies, the first of the Sea the
ninth cha. of this book, where they are named that defend these erroneous
opinions, whose Authors and first deuisers are not know^.
good, the second of the wicked, (there being between the one and the other a
thousand years) was an error; but the Author of it is not known. For I hope
the Romanists will not say, the Fathers learned it of any heretic the first
author of it. The opinion that the souls of the just are in hell, and see not
God till the general resurrection, was an error; but they cannot tell who was
the first author of it. The opinion that all Catholic Christians how wicked
soever, shall in the end be saved as by fire, was an error, but the Author is
not known. The opinion that men are elelected for the foresight of some thing
in themselves, is an error, or else the doctrine of Augustine, who was of that
opinion sometimes, but afterward condemned it in himself and others. The
opinion that infants could not be saved, unless they were not only baptized,
but did receive the Sacrament of the Lords body, was anerrour; but the Author
of it is not known. The opinions, that the books of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus,
the Machabees, and the like, are Apocryphal, and that they are Canonical, are
contradictory, and the one of them an error in matter of Faith; yet is not the
Author of that error known. The innumerable contradictory opinions holden in
the Church of Rome, touching matters of Faith, Bellar lib 5. de potestate
temporali Pontificis cap. 1. Waldensis doctrinalis fidei. l. 2. art. 3. q. 78,
negat potestatem Papae quoad regna Principum, and Sigebertus in Chro nico an.
1088. Stapleton controv. 3. q,4. proponit contratias opiniones de infallibili
Papae iudicio, and ait, non esse de fide quod non possit errate.
as that the Pope is Sovereign temporal Lord of all the World, and all Kings
and Princes hold of him in fee, and that he is not: that he may depose Kings
erring in Faith, and persecuting the faithful, and that he may not: that
papally he cannot err, and that he may, and sometimes does; and many other
like; must needs be errors on the one side or other; yet is not the author
of those errors to be nominated.

Liquet ex lectione antiquorum, Eucharistiam laicis in manus datam olim, nunc
in os: olim dominicumsanguinem ^stulis hauriebant, and etiam Romans Pontifex
quoties public sacrificat, aureo calamo sugit sanguinem dominicum e calice cum
diacono and subdiacono. Rhenanus in annot. in lib. Tertul. de corona militis.
It was doubtless, in the confession of the adversaries, the custom of the
Western or Latin Church as well as of the rest, to communicate in both kinds:
when and where that custom of communicating the Lay People only in one kind
began, cannot be precisely noted. Apud veteres absolutio nisi satisfactione
purgatis fere non impertiebatur. Lindan. panopliae l. 4. c. 70.
It was the custom to impose penance first, and after the performance of it,
to give absolution: now, absolution is first given, and then penance imposed to
be performed afterward: when this alteration began, it cannot be noted.
Bonavent. l. 3. did. 3. q. 2.
It was the general opinion, that Mary was conceived in sin: it grew
afterward to be generally thought, she was not. The first Author of this
latter opinion cannot be known, nor of the former neither, as I suppose.
Caiet. opusculorum tom. 1. tract. 15. c. 7. seruauit Ecclesia multo tempore
hunc stilum, ut exprimeret in literis relaxationem ab iniunctis poenitentiis,
etc. in tantum ut dubitet an Papa dederit aliquando indulgentiam, non ^olum ab
iniunctis. sed a quom odosibet debitis poenis pro peccatis: and tamen fatetur
Petrum Paludanum, and Iohannem Monachum in extravaganti Bonifacii de Iubilei
expositione, tale aliquid refer, and formam plenariae indulgentiae tale
aliquid probare agnoscit: sed ait ed^tam illam formam secundum illam opinionem
valdeut videtur communem, scilicet quod indulgentia liberet ab iniunctis et non
iniunctis poenis
The custom was to grant Indulgences or Relaxations only from enjoined
penance: the form of these was afterward altered: I think it can hardly be
noted by whom, etc. Lindan. Panopl. l. 3. c. 11.
The custom was on the days which they kept as Fasting-dayes, not to eat
till three a clock in the afternoon, or till the even; so that to dine and
not to fast were Synonymies in the Primitive Church; but in the Romish Church
they did dine on their Fasting-dayes, and therefore said their Euensong
between ten and eleven a clock in the morning: I think it hard to note
precisely the time when this alteration began. Thus then we see there may be,
and have been many alterations in the state of Religion, and matters of Faith
in the Church of Rome, though all those circumstances they urge us to show,
cannot be noted in them. And therefore the first reason brought to prove, that
the Romish Church is not departed from the first and original purity, is found
too weak.

CHAP. 15.
Of the second reason brought to prove that they hold the ancient faith;
because our men, dissenting from them, confess they dissent from the Fathers;
where sundry instances are examined.

LEt us see the other. The other way, whereby they endeavor to prove the
antiquity of their faith and religion, is by showing the agreement and consent
between it, and the doctrine of the Primitive Fathers. This, they say, they
cannot do, but either by proposing the several parts of Christian doctrine
delivered by the Fathers, and comparing the doctrine of their Church with it,
or out of our own confession. The first course they think would be too
tedious, and therefore they endeavor to prove by o^ own confession that the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, and of the ancient Fathers, is all one.

The greatest Divines, say they, of the reformed Chuches, when they impugn the
assertions of the Romanists, confess they go against the stream of all
Antiquity. Therefore they are forced to confess the doctrine of the Fathers,
and of the Church of Rome to be all one. This is a vile and wicked
calumniation: neither are they able to justify it. Bellar. lib. 4. cap. 9. de
concilijs, and Ecclesia Calvin. institut. l. 2. c. 2. 4.
But let us see what they say: Calvin (they say) in the article of free will
condemning the Roman Church of error, is forced to reject, and refuse the
judgment of all Antiquity. For the clearing of this, we must observe, that the
will of man may be said to be free in diverse sorts. First from necessity of
seeking and having divine support, help, and assistance: secondly, from divine
direction and ordering: thirdly, from sin: fourthly, from misery: fifthly,
limitation of desire, natural necessity, and constraint. These being the
diverse kinds that may be conceived of the freedom of man's will, Calvin
denies the will of man to be, or ever to have been free from the necessity
of seeking, and having divine support, help, and general assistance, without
which it has no force or faculty at all. Secondly he denies it to be free
from divine direction, ordering, and guidance: for in this sort, neither the
wills of men nor Angels, were so free in the day of their creation, as to
exempt themselves from the ordering of the divine providence, which most
sweetly disposes all things. Thirdly, from misery there is no freedom in
this world, nor from the bondage of sin, without the benefit of grace making
free. Habemus (says De gratia and libero arbitrio.
Bernard) liberum arbitrium, sed nec cautum a peccato, nec tutum a miseria. We
have says Bernard, free will, but neither so wary as to avoid sin, nor so
safe, as to be free from danger. From limitation of desire, natural necessity,
and constraint, he confesses the will to be free, though it be subject to a
condicionall or moral necessity, which by Bernard is most aptly named male
libera necessitas. The will of man being thus over ruled by divine providence,
and in so diverse sorts inthralled to sin and misery, Calvin thinks the
titles of (...) and liberum arbitrium, taken from the Philosophers, and used by
the Fathers, to be too glorious to express a thing so weak and miserable;
and that in his opinion it is not safe to use these words, unless we add,
for the clearing of our meaning, the limitations with which the Fathers do
restrain them; which yet many will not so carefully observe, as they will
unadvisedly suck the poison of error out of the words themselves. Thus then
we see Calvin confesses, the Fathers used these words in a good and godly
sort.

But, says Bellarmine, he fears not to pronounce, that all the Fathers
(Augustine excepted) are so uncertain, perplexed, and doubtful in the
delivering of this point, that a man can gather no certainty out of them:
Surely it is most true that he says of them, they are doubtful and uncertain
in this point; yet so that it appears, that in this ambiguitie ascribing
little or nothing to the power of man's will, they give all the praise of well
doing to the holy Spirit of God. Calvin. instit. lib. 2. c. 2. 9.
To this purpose he alleges sundry excellent sentencesout of Cyprian,
Eucherius, and Chrysostom, and concludes, that it was the drift of these
Fathers, howsoever they seem sometimes too much to amplify the power of man's
will, yet wholly to drive men from the confidence in their own strength, to
seek their strength in God. This then is all that Calvin says, that before
Augustine was stirred by the Pelagians, exactly to examine these things that
concern the grace of God, and power of nature, the Fathers delivered not this
point so distinctly, as afterward it was, nor so fully, but that some things
were found in their writings not so fit, as was to be wished. Prosper. in
epist. ad Aug. de reliquijs Pelagianae haereseos. obstinationem suam vetustate
defendunt: vt ea, quae de epist. ad Romanos, ad manifestationem Dei gratiae
praeuenientis electorum merita proferuntur a nullo vnquam ecclesiasticorum ita
esse intellecta, vt nunc sentiuntur, affimant.
That this is most true, the writings of the Fathers themselves will witness,
and the Testimonies alleged out of them by the Pelagians against Augustine,
will sufficiently prove it; which are no otherwise answered by him, than they
are by Calvin, Aug. de praedestinatione sanctorum cap. 14. quid opu^ est vt
eorum scrutemur opuscula qui priusquam ista haeresis oriretur non habuerunt
necessitatem in hac difficili ad soluendum quest. one versari etc. eodem modo
respondet. Bellar. lib. 2. de gratia and libero arbitrio. c. 14.
that their drift was to deiect the pride of sinful flesh, and extol the
greatness of Gods mercy and goodness; That if they spoke some things not so
distinctly and fully as men did afterward, it is not to be marvelled at,
seeing they did not purposely enter into the examination of these things,
before the Pelagian heretics (whose heresy was in these things) were known
in the world.

For the farther justifying of Caluines censure, let the Reader consulte
Bibliothecae sanctae lib. 6. annot. 251. epist. Prosper. and Hi'arij inter
opera Aug.
Sixtus Senensis, alleging many testimonies out of the Fathers, affirming,
that men are elected to eternal life, for the foresight of some thing in
themselves. And surely this should not seem incredible, that many of the
Fathers were in this error; seeing Augustine himself was of this opinion,
before he entered into conflict with the Pelagians: which error when he
corrected, most men disliked his doctrine touching election, the grace of God,
and power of nature, as it appears by the Epistles of Prosper and Hilarious,
for that he seemed unto them to ascribe so much unto the grace of God, and
detract so much from the power of man's will, that they greatly feared his
doctrine would weaken that carefullnesse that should be in men to arise from
sin, discourage them from all good endeavors, and give an occasion of
negligence, and careless slouthfullnesse. That which Bellarmine adds, that
Calvin disliketh that saying of Augustine that man's will concurreth with grace,
not as precedent unto it, but as following after it, and as a handmaide
attending on it, is most false. For Calvin. instit. lib. 2. cap. 3. 7.
he approoueth the saying of Augustine, but reproves the Master of sentences
for misseunderstanding and misseapplying it.

Ibidem. Calvin. l. 3. cap. 11. sect. 15.
That which follows, that Calvin dissenteth from Augustine in the matter of
justification, is of the same nature. For he says only, that, though nothing
be to be disliked in the matter it self delivered by Augustine, for In Psalm.
142. and in libro de perfectione iustitiae, cum rex iustus sederit in throno
quis gloriabitur se castum habere cor? aut quis gloriabitur se mundum esse a
peccato? nisi forte qui volunt in sua justitia non in ipsius iudicis
misericordia gloriari, and Hieron, contra Pelagianos, lib. 1. tunc iusti sumus
cu^m nos peccatores fatemur, and iustitia nostra non ex proprio merito sed ex
Dei consistit misericordia.
that it is plain, that acknowledging the imperfection of inherent justice,
and thinking it our greatest perfection to know our own imperfections, and
seek remission of our sinful defects, he cannot but acknowledge the imputation
of Christ's righteousness to be that, in confidence whereof we stand in the
sight of God: yet his manner of delivering this article is not so full,
perfect, and exact, as we are forced to require in these times, against the
errors of the Romanists: For that, when he speaks of grace, he seems for
the most part to understand nothing else thereby, but that sanctification
whereby the holy spirit of God changes us to become new creatures: seldom
mentioning the imputation of the righteousness of Christ.

Ibidem. Lib. 2. 14. 3.
That which Bellarmine charge Calvin with, in the next place, argues his
intolerable impudency. Calvin (says he) does think, that the son of God
is subject to the father in respect of his Deity: which because all the
Fathers deny, he pronounces they all erred, and that their error cannot be
excused. Let the Reader peruse the place, and he shall find that Calvin says
no such thing, but the clean contrary.

Indeed Hugo de S. Victore in his questions on the 1 Epist. to the Corinth. 15.
says, that CHRIST is subject to his Father according to his divine nature, and
shows that many have been of that opinion. But Calvin says no such thing;
neither does he charge the Fathers with any error touching the distinction of
the Natures of God and Man in Christ, or the unity of his Person: but says
only, that some of them applying those things distinctly to one of the natures
of Christ, which are applyable to the whole Person of the Mediator, entangle
themselves in some doubts, which otherwise might easily be cleared; which will
easily appear by that place of Hugo before mentioned. The kingdom (says
Hugo) which Christ shall deliver to his Father, and so become subject unto him,
either was given unto him in that he was God, and then he cannot resign it,
nor become subject to his Father, because in that respect he is equal unto him,
whence we say, equalis Patri secundum diuinitatem, minor Patre secundum
humanitatem: Or in that he was man; and that seems not conceiuable; For the
nature of man is not capable of that infinite power, that is employed in the
Kingdom which God gave his Son. He answers, that he may be said to be
subject to his Father, in that he is God, because though he have the same
essence with him, yet he has received it from him. How aptly this may be said,
I will not now examine: but how in this sense he may be said to give up his
kingdom to his Father, is yet more hard to conceive.

In 1 Corint. 15. Filius ostendet non se esse ex quo ^mnia, sed per quem sunt
omnia: and hoc erit tradere regnum Deo and patri.
Ambrose says, he may be said to give it up, not by real resigning of that he
had, but by bringing us to his Father, and showing us that Fountain whence he
received it, and all that fullness whereof we are partakers: These are doubts,
which Calvin says, that the Fathers do not clear, attributing the Kingdom
of Christ unto him distinctly, in respect of this or that nature. But he
affirming, that the Kingdom of Christ does not agree unto him distinctly or
severally in respect of this or that nature, but to the whole person considered
in both natures, easily expresses himself. For, says he, God gave to his
Son by eternal generation, the same essence he had in himself, and with it
the same power and kingdom, and this he shall never resign. Hereunto agrees
Hugo in the place abouementioned, saying, Secundum humanam naturam ad
aequalitatem patris sublimatus est dum verbo consubstan tiali patri in un am
person^ humana natura unita est.
Secondly, he gave to the nature of man not by formal transfusion, but in the
Person of his Son, (which in the admirable work of the Incarnation he
bestowed on it, to support and sustain it) all that power he had originally in
himself, and eternally gave his Son: so that the Son of God, after the
taking of our nature into the unity of his person, administreth not his
Kingdom without the union, knowledge, assent, and cooperation of the nature of
man, which he shall continue to do, while we need mediation, and till he
have brought us to his Fathers presence, and to the clear view, and sight of
his Majesty. Then shall he cease to rule in this sort any more; his humane
nature shall not need to be interposed any longer, but he shall appear in
the glory of his Godhead; then shall he be subject to his Father in the nature
of man, in more special sort then now he is; because though now he be
inferior unto God in that he is man, and so subject to him, yet that nature of
man intermeddleth with the administration of the Kingdom in such sort, as then
it shall cease to do, though it shall never lose that power and kingdom which
in the Person of the Son of God it is honored with.

CHAP. 16.
Of Limbus patrum, concupiscence, and satisfaction, touching which, Calvin is
falsely charged to confess, that he dissenteth from the Fathers.

THe Ibid. l. 2. 16. 9.
next imputation is touching Limbus patrum, supposed to be a place below in the
earth near hell, if not a part of hell, which Calvin pronounces to be but a
fable, though it have great authors and patrons; as if this were so strange a
thing, that a fable and mere fancy should find approbation among some of the
Fathers. The opinion of the Millenaries, I suppose, Bellarmine thinks but a
mere fancy; yet had it great and reverend patrons. If he say, that all the
Fathers did hold the opinion of Limbus, and that Calvin opposes himself
against them all, he is clearly refuted by In Epist. 99. ad Euodium. vnde
illis justice qui in sinu Abrahae erant cum ille ad inferna descenderet nondum
quid contulisse^ inueni, a quibus secundum beatificam praesentiam divinitatis
nunquam video recessisse, and ibid. Quia ne ipsos quidem inferos vspiam
scripturatum locis in bono appellatos potui reperire. Quod si nusquam in
diuinis authoritatibus legitur, non vtique sinus ille Abrahae, id est secretae
cuiusdam quietis habitatio aliqua pars inferorum credenda est.
Augustine, who doubted of it. Besides that their popish Limbus supposed to
have been a receptacle for the souls of the Patriarchs, but only till the
death and resurrection of Christ, as being then emptied by him, is a mere
private conceit of their own, wanting the testimonies of the most ancient
Fathers. Supra. cap. 9.
For Tertullian, Irenaeus, and others did think the souls of all men to be
holden in hell till the last day. And if it were resolved that there was such a
Ibid. l. 3. 3. 10.
Limbus, as they fancy, yet their Schoolmen are not agreed of the place;
neither dare they affirm, that it was below in the earth, though they seem
most inclineable to that opinion.

The next false report that Bellarmine makes of Calvin, is, that he opposes
himself against all Antiquity, in the question whether concupiscence in the
regenerate be sin or not. This he endeavors to make good in this sort.
Calvin (says he) professes, that Augustine has truly and faithfully
gathered the opinions of all the Fathers, and that his judgment is their
judgment; but he opposes himself against Augustine; therefore against all the
Fathers.

This assumption we deny. For Calvin no way dissenteth from Augustine, but
says only, it may seem, that there should be some little difference between
Augustine and us; For that we affirm concupiscence in the regenerate to be
sin, but he is fearful to call it sin, unless it be consented unto;
naming it rather an evil, sickness, infirmity, or the like. But elsewhere
taking away this doubt, he says, that Augustine fears not sometimes to call
it sin: whereby the consent and agreement between Augustine and Calvin
appears. It were easy to show, that not only Augustine, but the Fathers
generally were of the same opinion, that we are of, and that the popish opinion
is a most dangerous and damnable error, if this were a fit place to enter into
the exact handling of that question.

But let us see the rest of his objections. Calvin (says he) in the matter of
Ibid. l. 3. 4. 38.
satisfaction, charge all the Fathers with error. This is as true, as the
rest. For Calvin does not say, they erred in this matter of satisfaction; for
he shows plainly, they were far from the absurdity of the Popish conceit:
but he says disiunctiuely only, that either they erred, or at least used some
phrases and forms of speech that may seem hard, and need a good, and
favorable construction; rather than to be wrested to a worse sense then they
were uttered in, as the manner of the Popish Sophisters is to deal with the
writings of the Fathers.

For the clearing of this matter we must observe, that, in sin, there are two
things; the sinfulness, and the punishment which for it the justice of God
inflicteth. Both these are taken away by Christ, but in a different sort. The
sinfulnes, by the operation, working, and infusion of grace; and the punishment
by the imputatio^ of Christ's sufferings, who suffering that he deserved not,
freeth us from that we were deservedly to have suffered. From one of these we
cannot be freede, unless also we be freede from the other; and in what
degree we are delivered from the one, we are discharged from the other: if
we be freed only from the dominion of sin, we are only discharged from the
condemnation of eternal death; if from all sinnefullnesse, we are discharged
from all touch of any puuishment. Poena aeterna in temporalem in remissione
culpae: temporalis magna and supra vires, in temporalem quae viribus competit,
in sacerdotis absolutione commutatur. Alex, de Hales part, 4. q. 2 1. memb. 2*
a^t. 1. 2. God upon our repentance pardoning the sin and the eternal puishment
due unto it, through Christ does exact of every man a temporal satisfaction
answerable to the fault committed. Reformat. of a de formed Cathol. by D. B. P.
cap. 6. of satisfaction.
But the Romanists do teach touching sins committed after Baptism, that God
contenteth not himself, with the most perfect abolishing and extinguishment of
all sinnefullnesse, by working of Divine grace, and the satisfaction of Christ's
sufferings, but that he does require that we suffer the extremity of that we
have deserved, only some little mitigation procured by the bloudshead of
Christ, and the eternity excepted, from which our ceasing from sin does free
us: the punishment of sin being eternal, because sin is eternal.

Hence it comes, that they teach, that if we will not suffer and endure the
extremity of punishment we have deserved, we must make some other recompense
to Gods justice for it. This is a blasphemous assertion, and contrary to the
doctrine of all the Fathers, who know and teach as we do, that the justice of
God, and his wrath against sin is satisfied in Christ; that this satisfaction
is imputed to us, not continuing in, but ceasing from sin; that according to
the degree of our ceasing from sin, this satisfaction is diversely imputed;
Sane vbi prorsus de medio factum fuerit omne peccatum, causa quidem ^mnino
sublat^, nec ipse quidem de* inceps manebit effectus. Ber. in Psalm. Qui
habitat. Sermon. 10.
So that if we cease from sin only so, that it has no more dominion over
us, it is imputed in such sort as it discharges us only from condemnation: but
if we wholly cease from sin, it is so imputed unto us, as that it freeth us
from all punishment whatsoever. So that if there were found in any of us a
perfect leaving and forsaking of sin, GODS justice would lay no punishment
upon us. But the Romanistes think it might and would for precedent sin,
though now wholly forsaken and quite abolished.

It is true indeed, that the Fathers sometimes used the name of satisfaction
in their writings, but to another purpose than the Romanists do. They knew,
that evils are cured by contraries, and therefore in the curing of sinful
souls they prescribe that, which Calvin also does, that men having offended
in yielding too much to their own desires, pleasures, delights, and profits,
should, for the freeing of themselves from the evil of sin, deny something
to them selves which otherwise they might lawfully enjoy: which if they do not,
they shall in the punishments which God will bring upon them, taste the
bitterness of that that seemed sweet unto them in sin. This exercise of
repentant mortification, the Fathers called satisfaction; not as if the justice
of God were not satisfied in Christ, or we were tied, yea though we should
wholly forsake sin, yet to satisfy for that is past, by suffering so much as
our sins have deserved; or else to do some painful thing equivalent to
such sufferings, which is the popish error: But because we must do that in
this kind of repentant mortification, which may be sufficient, for the finding
out of the depth of that wound which sin has made in the soul, for removing
the causes of it, the extinguishment of that remains of it, the taking away
the occasions, and the preventing of the reentrance of it again. This if we
do, we shall prevent the hand of GOD, which otherwise would smite us, not to
be satisfied in the course of his Justice, (which at our hands cannot be
looked for, and which is abundantly satisfied in Christ, and would not touch
us for any thing past, if by perfect forsaking of sin we were fully joined
unto him) but to drive us by bitter sorrow to purge out that sinfullnesse, and
those remainders which our precedent sins left behind them, in respect
whereof we are not yet fully joined to Christ. These remainders of sin, if
we dislike, cast off, and forsake, and judge and condemn our selves, as the
Apostle speaks, we shall not be judged of the Lord for them. This happy
course of preventing the hand of God, and turning away his punishments by
bitter and afflictiue recounting of our sins, the Fathers call Satisfaction.
Some sayings of the Fathers it may be there are which are hard, and must with
a favorable constructio^ be reduced to the sense we have expressed: and that
is all that Calvin says; for which how justly he is blamed, let the Reader
judge.

CHAP. 17.
Of Prayer for the dead, and Merit.

THe Ibid. l. 3. c. 10.
next calumniation is concerning prayer for the dead. Let the Reader observe,
what it is that Bellarmine is to prove, and he shall find that he does nothing
but trifle. For, he is to prove that Calvin confesses, that more then a
thousand and three hundred years since, the Popish doctrine, and custom of
prayer for the dead did prevail, and was generally received in the whole
Church of God throughout the world. This if he will prove, he must reason
thus. The custom of praying to deliver the souls of men out of the pains of
Purgatory, is the custom and practice which the Roman Church defends, and
Calvin impugneth: but this custom Calvine confesses to have been in use more
then a thousand and three hundred of years since: therefore he acknowledges
the doctrine and practice of the Roman Church to be most ancient, and to have
been received a thousand and three hundred years ago. The Minor proposition
of this reason is false: and Calvin in the place cited by Bellarmine,
protests against it, most constantly affirming, that the Fathers knew nothing
of Purgatory, and therefore much less of prayer to deliver men from thence.
But Bellarmine will reply, that the custom of praying for the dead, was most
ancient. We answer, The custom of remembering the departed, naming their
names at the holy Table in the time of the holy mysteries and offering the
Eucharist (that is the sacrifice of praise) for them, was a most ancient and
godly custom, neither is it any way disliked by us. Epiph. haeres. 75.
And surely it appears, this was the cause that Aerius was condemned of
heretical rashness, in that he durst condemn this laudable and ancient
custom of the commemoration of the dead. Liturgia Chrysostomi. We offer this
reasonable service, that is, the Eucharist of praise and thanksgiving, to thee
O Lord, for all that are at rest in the says of Christ, even for the
Patriarckes, Prophets, etc.
In this sort they did most religiously observe and keep, at the Lords Table,
the commemoration of all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists,
Martyrs, and confessors, yea of Mary the Mother of our Lord, to whom it cannot
be conceived, that by prayer they did wish deliverance out of Purgatory, since
no man ever thought them to be there: but if they wished any thing, it was the
deliverance from the power of death, which as yet tyranniseth over one part of
them; the speedy destroying of the last enemy, which is death, the hastening of
their resurrection, and joyful public acquitall of them in that great day,
wherein they shall stand to be judged before the Judge of the quick and dead.
This was the practice of the whole church, and this the meaning of their
commemorations and prayers, which was good, and no way to be disliked.
Notwithstanding, it is most certain that many particular men extended the
meaning of these prayers farther, and out of their own private errors and
fancies used such prayers for the dead, as the Romanists themselves (I think)
dare not justify: and so it is true, that Calvin says, that many of the
Fathers were led into error in this matter of prayer for the dead, and not
that all, as if the whole Church had fallen from the truth, as Bellarmine
falsely imputes unto Calvin, who says no such thing.

First therefore, it was an opinion of many of the Fathers, that there is no
judgment to pass upon men till the last day; that all men are holden either in
some place under the earth, or else in some other place appointed for that
purpose, so that they come not into heaven, nor receive the reward of their
labors, till the general judgment. Out of this conceit grew that prayer in
Liturgia Iacobi 2.
James his Liturgy, that God would remember all the faithful that are fallen
asleep in the sloepe of death, since Abell the just, till this present day,
that he would place them in the land of the living, etc. And the like are found
in the mass book. Sixtus Senensis bibliothec. sanct. lib. 6. annot. 345.
Of this opinion was Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens Romanus, Lactantius,
Victorinus Martyr, Ambrose, Gerts. sermon. in festo Paschae. Hodie, in quit
Christus, mecum eris in Paradiso. Lucae, 23. Propter quod insuper apparet
falsitas doctrinae Papae, Johan, 22, quae damnata fuit cum sono buccinarum vel
tubarum coram Philippo avu nculo tuo per theologos Parisienses de virgin
beata, and credidit potius theologis Parisiensibus quam Curiae.
Johannes Romanus Pontifex, and sundry other.

The second opinion was, that men may be delivered from the punishments of
sin after this life, if they die in the profession of the true faith, how
wickedly soever they lived, or at least, if the punishment of such be
eternal and cannot be ended, yet it may be deferred, or mitigated. Supra page
87
How many of the Fathers were in this error, and made prayers for the dead
upon this false persuasion, that all Christians, how wickedly soever they
lived, may find mercy at Gods hands in the world to come, at the entreatie of
the living, they that have read any thing can soon report.

Thirdly, whereas there are three estates of the souls of men, the first, in
the body; the second, when they are severed from the body, and stand before God
immediately and instantly upon the dissolution; and the third, after they have
received their particular judgment; the Preces pro commendatione ani^ae apud
Cassandrum in lib. Precum Ecclesiast.
godly do not only recommend them unto God while they are yet in their
bodies; but when departing thence, they go to stand before the judgment seat
of God, they accompany them with their prayers and best good wishes, even to
the presence of the Lord. Hence were all those prayers, that were used on the
days of the obites of the Saints, conceived respectively to their passage out
of this world, and the dangers they do by the goodness of God escape in that
fearful hour of their dissolution, which prayers were again repeated in the
anniuersarie remembrances of their obites. Officium pro defunctis in
Anniuersarijs.
Of this sort was that prayer in the Mass book. Libera Domine animas omnium
fidelium defunctorum de poenis inferni, and de profundo lacis: libera eas de
ore leonus, ne absorbeat eas tartarus, ne cadant in obscurum: etc. Deliver, O
Lord, the souls of all faithful ones departed, from the pains of hell, and
the deep Lake; deliver them from the month of the Lion, that hell swallow them
not up, and that they fall not into the dungeons of utter darkness. How hard
this was, to use these prayers in a set course, in the days wherein they did
only commemorate, and represent the days of men's departure hence, and so to
pray for them long after their death, as if they were but even then in the
passage, and so in danger of falling into the hands of their ghostly enemies,
and not yet secure and assured of their eternal future state; ( Bellar. lib.
2. cap. 5. de Purgatorio.
which yet Bellarmine confesses, is the best construction can be made of them)
I leave to the consideration of the wise. These are the several kinds of
praying for the dead, all which I hope Bellarmine dares not justify: but for
the Romish manner of praying for the dead, it has no certain testimony of
Antiquity, no man ever thinking of Purgatory, till Augustine, to avoid a
worse error, did doubtingly run into it; after whom many in the Latin Church
embraced the same opinion, but the Greek Church never received it to this day.
Thus then we see how unjustly Calvin is traduced by Bellarmine, in this matter
of prayer for the dead, and how weakly he proves, that it is confessed, that
their opinion and the doctrine of Antiquity is the same. His Ibid. l. 3 15. 2.
next challenge is scarce worth the mentioning, much less the refuting. Calvin
says, the Fathers were far from the popish error touching merits, and that
yet they used the word, whence men have since taken occasion of error.
Therefore he dissenteth from all Antiquity, and acknowledges the Roman faith
to be the ancient faith and religion. Truly, I am weary in following of him
in these senseless fooleries.

CHAP. 18.
Of the Fathers strictnes in admitting men into the ministry: of single life,
and of their severity in the discipline of repentance.

THat Ibid. 4. 4. 10.
which follows is altogether of the same kind: Calvin says, the Fathers
were too severe, in that they required more in them, that were to be ordained
to serve in the holy ministry of the Church, than the blessed Apostle Saint
Paul does require; Therefore says Bellarmine he dissenteth from all
Antiquity, and confesses the Romish doctrine and practice to be most
ancient. This consequence is very weak. For the Romanists retain nothing of
that ancient severity, but break all the Canons of discipline that the
Fathers observed, by their ordinary dispensations, or rather dissipations of
all order, and neglect of all rules of orderly government. Synodus. sex. can.
14. and Neocaesariensis can. 11.
For where is that Canon observed, that no man attain to the order and degree
of a Presbiter, till he be thirty years of age: Synodus Chalcedonensis can. 6.
that no man be ordained loosely, or at random, but to be employed in some
certain charge of ministry; that Gerson. declarat. defectuum virorum
Ecclesiasticorum.
one man have no title, interest, and living in two Churches; whereas, in the
Church of Rome, one man has two hundred, or three hundred ecclesiastical
livings; Synodus Sardicensis. can. 1.
that men ambitiously and couetously go not from one Church, because it is
meaner, to another because it is greater? Calvin therefore was not so ignorant
as to think the Romanists to be too severe in the observation of discipline,
and therein to be like the primitive Fathers; he says therefore the clean
contrary to that which Bellarmine imputes unto him; that in the choice of such
as were to be admitted into the holy Ministry, the Fathers of the Primitive
Church followed the prescription of Saint Paul, and the examples of the
blessed Apostles, that they proceeded therein with very great and religious
reverence, and invocation of the name of God, that they had a set form of
trial and examination, according to which they made inquiry both into the
life and doctrine of them that were to be chosen; but that contrariwise in the
Church of Rome there have been very few found to be chosen for the space of
an hundred years last past, that the old Canons reject not as wholly unworthy
of ecclesiastical honor and employment, as Drunkardes, Adulterers, Sodomites,
and the like Monsters, to pass by less matters, as that boys of ten years
of age, by the Popes dispensations have been admitted to Bishoprics. The
Church of Rome then, by her pactise, condemns the whole course of proceeding
in former times, which Calvin reuerenceth as most religious, and wishes that
things were brought back to that ancient order again. Only he says, that
the Fathers of those times may seem a little to have exceeded, in too much
severity, in that they required more things in them that were to be elected,
then the blessed Apostle Saint Paul does. This censure need not seem so
strange unto us, if we remember Concilium Neocaesari. Cano. 12. Eusebius. lib.
6. c. 42. Cornelius speaking of Novatus his ordination says many withstood the
fact, affirming that none baptized in bed, as he was, should be admitted into
Ecclesiastical order.
that such as had been baptized by heretics, or when they were in fear and
danger of death, which were named Clinici in those times, might not (unless
their conversation, learning and deserts afterward were very highly approved)
be admitted into the ministry; Concilium ^elense canon. 5. Leo in Epist.
episcopis per Campaniam, etc. ne vidua^um mariti.
that he which had married a widow, though he were now free, she being dead,
might not enter into the degree and order of Ministry; that he which had one
wife, yea, though it were before he became a Christian, or were baptized, and
after his being a Christian, his first wife being dead, married another, was
judged incapable of Ministerial order; against which Jerome declaimeth in his
Epistle to Oceanus: Behold, says he, Men suppose Adulteries, whoredoms,
Incests, Sodomitries, Paricides, impieties against God, and whatsoever things
are so wicked, that they are not to be named, are washed away in Baptism, and
that after all these horrible crimes a man may be admitted to the Ministry,
as being washed from them in the lauer of new birth: but if a man had a wife
before, which was no crime, and after his Baptism she being dead, marry
another, he may not. Thus, says he, these hypocrites (for so in the heat of
his passion he calls them) do strain at a gnat, and swallow a Camel. For
this, Ruffinus challenges him, as a contemner of the constitutions and decrees
of the Fathers, though he show that innumerable not only Presbyters, but
Bishops, were in all the parts of the world admitted, contrary to the prescript
of these pretended Canons. That which Calvine adds, that in process of time
they forbade marriage, and forced all them that would enter into the holy
Ministry to live single, was never general, nor in one sort.

Socrates l. 1. c. 8.
In the Council of Nice, Paphnutius dissuaded the Bishops from putting those
of the Clergy from the matrimonial society of their wives, affirming that
marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled, and that the
forcing of single life would bring many evils into the Church. This Counsel
and persuasion of Paphnutius was not only yielded unto by the Fathers of that
Council, but Can 13.
in the sixth general Council, the Fathers there assembled, condemned the
practice of the Roman Church in forbidding marriage, not only as hard,
injurious, and being an occasion of many evils, but as contrary to the Canons
of the Apostles of Christ; from whence it is, that all the Churches of the
world (the Church of Rome only excepted) admit married men, continuing in the
state of marriage, into the holy ministry: as, the Churches of Armenia,
Graecia, Syria, Aethiopia, Russia, and whatsoever Christians there are in any
part of the world.

Sigebertus in Chronico 1074. Greg. Papa celebrata Synodo uxoratos sacerdotes a
divino officio removit, and laicis missam little audire interdixit: ex qua re
tam grave oritur scandalum, ut nullius haeresis tempore, Sancta Ecclesia
graviori schismate s^ssa sit: paucis continentiam tenentibus, aliquibus eam
causa quaest^s and iactantiae simulantibus, multis incontinentiam periurio aut
multipliciori adulterio cumulantib^, etc. Laici sacra mysteria temerant,
baptisant infantes, sordido aurium humore pro sacro chrismate ut^. Lambertus
Schafnaburgensis, Fol. 201. si^ scribir, Hildebrandus Papa cum Episcopis
Italiae decreuerat, ut sacerdotes non habeant u^ores, habentes aut dimittant,
aut deponantur. Adversus hoc decretum vehementer infre^ to^a factio Clericorum,
hominem plane haereticum and vesani dogmatis esse, etc. Hildebrandus moriens
confes^ est Deo, Sancto Petro, and to^i Ecclesiae, se valde peccasse in cura
pastorali, and suadente Diabolo contra (...) genus odiu^ and iram concitasse.
Sigebertus in Chronic. An. 1088.
How long it was before this decree of forced single life prevailed in the
Latin Church, and what resistance there was made against Pope Hildebrand for
the same, by the whole Clergy of Christendom, calling him heretic, monster,
and enemy of mankind, author of all mischief, impurity, and confusion; the
histories of those times report; affirming that upon the publishing of that his
decree, there followed such disturbance of the peace of the Church, such
confusions, indignities, contempts, and profanations of all holy things, as
that the Church was never so grievously and daungerously afflicted in any of
her most bloody persecutions under the Heathen Emperors, nor in her greatest
conflicts with heretics. What good success this decree had after it
prevailed, and what a pure and holy Clergy it represented to the world, let
Gers. de vita spirituali ani^ (...). 4. corrolar. 14. et part. 4. de
exterminatione schismatis.
Gerson report, who acknowledges that the places of holy Ministry were
possessed by adulterers, wantons, Sodomites, and such like monsters: that the
number of the offenders in this kind was so great, as that there was no
proceeding against them; that the canons against Concubinaries notorioussie so
known, requiring all men to refrain from communicating with them, could not
now be continued; that it were best to permit them to keep harlots, fot the
avoiding of greater evils, and to tolerate their wickedness in that kind, as
the stews are permitted.

Thus then I hope it does appear to be true that Calvin says, that they did
ill deserve of the Church, that forced her Ministers to single life; Platina in
vita Pii 2.
and that, the speech of Pope Pius the second, was most true, that what reason
soever they had that forbade marriage in former times, there were more reason
in our times to leave it free again. Now Ibid. l. 4. 12. (...).
let us proceed to consider his next exception against Calvin; in proposing
whereof he reasons thus. Calvin thinks that all the Fathers were of
opinion, that after the remission of sin men must suffer the punishment their
sins deserve, to satisfy Gods Justice; and that therefore they were so
severe in imposing penance on them that had offended: but this is the opinion
of the Romanists, which Calvin so much disliketh; therefore he confesses the
doctrine of the Romanists to have been the doctrine of all the Fathers. The
Mayor or first proposition of this reason is a most vile calumniation: for
Calvin denies that the Fathers were of that opinion the Romanists are of,
touching the punishments of sin after remission of them, as has been
sufficiently cleared already. Neither does he dislike the Fathers severity
upon that ground; for then he should condemn their imposing of penance,
absolutely, as a thing wholly unlawful; which he does not, but most highly
commends it: only whereas the end of these penitential corrections was, and
is, to remove and take away ill examples, to provide that neither Gods name be
blasphemed, nor others provoked and encouraged to do evil, by seeing them that
offend to escape without condign punishment, and that the sinner may be
brought to a right sense, knowledge, dislike, and forsaking of his sin: when
it appears that the sinner is truly penitent, and carefully indeavoureth to
satisfy the Church which was scandalized by him, there must be great
consideration had, least he be swallowed up with overmuch heaviness, and so
fall into desperation. In this respect, Calvin thinks those courses of
ancient discipline, in putting men from the communion of the Church, for the
space of three, four, or seven years, and sometimes for the whole time of
their life, to have been very dangerous, unless they were wisely moderated
by the discretion of the Pastors, as he confesses they were: without which
moderation, who does not see they were carnificina conscientiarum; a cruel,
bloody, and merciless tormenting, and murdering of the souls of men? Now as
the severity of the Primitive Fathers was very great in the prescription of
these Canons, yet mixed, tempered, and sweetened with good moderation in the
execution of them, and therefore not to be disliked; Aug. epist. ad Macedonium
54. Conc. Tolletan. 6. Can. 8. l. Erasmus in^epitaphio Fabiolae ait August.
semel lapso aperire Ecclesiae fores, relapso claudere: nec tamen huic claudere
fores caeli cui claudit fores templi. Ambros. de poenitentia li. 2. c. 10. S^
vere agerent poenitentiam, iterandam postea non putarent: quia sicut vnum
baptisma, ita vna penitentia: quae tamen public agitur. nam quotidiani nos
debet poenitere delicti: sed haec delictorum leuiorum, illa grauiorum.
so their extreme severity toward those that fell after penitencie, whom they
eiected, and cast out of the Church, without hope of a second reconciliation,
cannot well be excused. This denying of reconciliation to such as fell after
they had once before done open and public penance, the Bellar. l. r. de
paenitentia c. 21. Lindan. Panop. l. 4. c. 62. vbi reprehendit Rhenanum, qui
dicit nonnullos veteres in h^cfuisse opinione, and inter eos August.
Papists restrain to solemn penitencie; which they distinguish from public
and open, as being imposed for sins of the highest nature; otherwise
confessing, that the Fathers severity connot be excused. But this distinction
of public and solemn penitency, is a mere devise of their own, without any
ground of authority or show of proof. For how does Bellarmine prove the
difference of these two kinds of penitencie? Surely he says, solemn
penitencie is imposed only for the most grievous crimes; public, for those
that are not so grievous; but proves it not. Further he adds, that solemn
penitencie could not be twice imposed, public might, and they that had done it
be admitted into the Clergy; that solemn penitencie could not be imposed
upon married folks without consent, nor upon young folks, public might; that
none but Bishops might reconcile those that were enjoined solemn penitencie,
but those that had been enjoined public penitencie, others of meaner
condition might absolve. August. Seleucia epist. 109. distinguit 3 em
poenitentiam: quarum prima agitur ante baptismum: secundam agunt homines, si
post baptismum ita peccauerint vt excommunicari and postea reconciliari
mereantur: est etiam poenitentia, bonorum and humilium pene quotidiana, in qua
pectora tundimus, dicente^ dimitte etc. illa vtique quae humanae fragilitati
quamvi^ parua tamen crebra subrepunt.
These fained distinctions of theirs between solemn and public penitencie
have no testimony of Antiquity, but it is clear and evident they were all
one: and therefore seeing they mislike the denying of reconciliation generally
to such as fell after public penitencie, they cannot justify the Fathers who
did so deny it.

CHAP. 19.
Of the Lent fast, of Laymens Baptism, and of the sacrifice of the Mass.

THe Ibid. Lib. 4 12. 20.
next allegation is touching the Lent fast: wherein, as in the former, Calvin
is charged to condemn the judgment and practice of all antiquity. That the
falsehood of this allegation may the better appear, we will lay down what
Calvin likes or disliketh in the matter offasting in general, and
particularly in the set Fast of forty days, aunciently observed in the
Church before the joyful solemnities of the resurrection of Christ. First
therefore he acknowledges the use and necessity of fasting, to be continued
amongst Christians to the end of the world, as well as formerly it was amongst
the Jews. Secondly, he shows that fasting is not a thing that God requires
in respect of it self, but respectively to certain ends, and as serving to
express, and set forward the inward affections of the heart. Thirdly, he
shows what those ends are; namely, to tame the flesh, to give a greater edge
unto our prayers, to testify, express, and set forward what may be our
dislike of sin, and of our selves for sin, to testify our humiliation and
dolor proceeding from the fearful apprehension of Gods displeasure, to make
it appear we take no pleasure in any thing till God be reconciled to us, to
amerce and punish our selves for our manifold abuses of Gods good creatures,
and lastly to show that in holy meditations and contemplations we foretaste the
sweetness of that heavenly Manna, which makes us for a time to forebeare to
taste of any sweetness of corporal meats; thereby showing the excellency
of that spiritual life, which we shall live in heaven, without any of these
outward nourishments, being filled with the happy fruition, vision, and
enjoying of him that is the fountain of life.

The faults, he finds, are, when men sever this outward exercise from the
inward affection, when they think it a thing for it self respected, and
coommanded by almighty God, and a matter of rare and special virtue, and merit
in it own nature. The Fathers, he confesses, did rightly and truly deliver
the nature of religious fasting; yet so, that, by their exceeding great
admiration and commendation of it, they may seem to have given some occasion
of that erroneous persuasion, that it is in it self highly pleasing to God.
This, says Calvine, I do the rather think, for that there was, and appeared
superstition even in their times, in the observing of that principal fast of
forty days, in that both the common people thought the keeping thereof in it
own nature a thing highly pleasing God, (whereas no fast is accepted, but
respectively to the ends above mentioned;) and the Fathers commended it under
the name of an Imitation of Christ; Iansenius comment. in concord^m eyang^am,
c. 15. in (...) ^ba cum (...) quadraginta dies.
whereas it is plain, that Christ did not fast principally for that end, that
we should follow his example, but to begin the new law, as Moses did the
old: and therefore to take it as imposed upon us, by Christ's example, in the
nature of a precept, and to be done in imitation of Christ, and as being in it
self a thing pleasing unto GOD, for that it is an imitation of his Sons
action, is (...), as Calvin rightly notes, and not void of superstition, and
error.

Now that the Fathers either erred themselves in this sort, or sought to abuse
others, neither Calvine, nor we ever thought. For they never imagined, that
the principal reason that moved the authors and beginners of this fast to
prescribe it, was the only imitation of Christ's fast, or because they thought
it it in it own nature a thing respected by God, merely as an imitation of
his Sons action; but that, whereas it is very fit, there be a solemn time
at least once in the year, wherein men may call themselves to an account for
all their negligences, repent them of all their evil doings, and with prayers,
fastings, and mournings turn unto the Lord; this Bellar. lib. 2. cap. 16. de
bonis operibus in particulari ostendit istas fuisse rations instituendae
quadragesimae.
time was chosen as fittest, both because that herein we remember the
sufferings of Christ for our sins, which is the strongest and most prevailing
motive that may be to make us hate sin, and with tears of repentant sorrow
bewail it, (which could no otherwise be taken away but by the blood shed of
the Son of GOD) as also for that after this meditation of the sufferings of
Christ, and conforming our selves to them, his joyful resurrection for our
justification, does immediately present it self unto us in the days following;
in the solemnities whereof, men were wont with great devotion to approach to
the Lords Table, and they which were not yet baptized, were by Baptism
admitted into the Church. Thus then it was not without great consideration,
that men made choice of this time, wherein to recount all their negligences,
sins, and transgressions, and to prepare themselves by this solemn act of
Fasting, both for the better performance of their own duties in those ensuing
days of joyful solemnity, as also to obtain at Gods hands, the gracious
acceptance of such as they offered unto him to be entered into his covenant.
For Synod. Antisiodorensis Can. 18. Leo ep. 4. ad vniversos episcopos per
Siciliam constitutos, prohibet baptisare nisi tantum in Festis Paschatis and
Pentecostes, nec permittit in Festo Epiphaniae, licet eo die Christus putetur
baptisarus a Iohanne. Rhenanus in lib. de corona militis per tempora Caroli
Magni and Lu. dovici Augusti, neminem, excepto mortis articulo, praeterquam in
Pascha and Pentecoste, baptisant, ut indicant leges ab illis sancitae
prohibentes aliis temporibus baptismum celebrari.
the manner was in the Primitive Church, never to present any unto Baptism,
unless it were in the case of necessity and danger, but only in the Feasts of
Easter and Pentecost. Thus then these being the reasons moving to institute a
set and solemn Fast, and to appoint it at this time and season of the year,
rather than any other; for the limitation of the number of days, men had an
eye as to a convenient direction, to Christ's Fast of forty days in Mat. 4. 2.
Exodus, 34. 28. 1 Kings 19. 8.
the dedication of the new Covenant, which number also Moses, as being the
giver, and Elias as being the restorer of the old Law, kept and observed
before him: not as if they had been precisely and absolutely tied by force of
these examples; for then they would precisely have kept that number, which yet
they did not: for the Saturdayes and Sundays deducted, which Ambrosius in lib.
de Elia and ieiunio. c. 10 Quadragesima, totis, praeter Sabbatum and dominicum
ielunatur diebus.
were not aunciently fasted, neither in the Greek Church, nor in some of the
Latin Churches, there remain not forty days; and if only the Sondayes be
deducted as in the Latin Church, there will want of the number: for those in
capite Ieiunii, which being added to the rest, make up the number of 40. were
not observed from the beginning, Hanc additionem esse valde antiquam in Latina
ecclesia, patet ex Alcnuio, inquir Bellar. l 2. c. 15. de bonis operibus in
particulari. Greg. homil. 16. dicit ieiunium quadragesimae constare 36. diebus:
tametsi enim non ignoraret addi solere 4 dies ad numerum 40. perficiendum,
tamen sciebat etiam quadragesimam proprie dictam non ultra 36 dies extendi.
Bellar. l. 2. c. 16. de bonis operibus in particulari.
but added afterward.

Our Divines therefore do teach, that Fasting is commanded by Almighty GOD,
not as a thing in it self regarded, but respectively to those ends before
mentioned; that GOD has set no certain times of Fasting, but that the Church
may appoint upon set and ordinary, or special and extraordinary occasions and
causes, times of fasting, and that men are bound to obey.

The Fast of Lent they do not dislike, but think it may be kept as a
convenient tradition of Antiquity, (dispensable by authority of the Church,
upon due consideration of times and persons,) so that no false nor
superstitious opinions be added; but the practice of the Romanists they
condemn: for that whereas they pretend to follow the ancient custom of
fasting, and to be tied unto it, they retain no Ieiunia no stra quae and vini
copia natant, and piscium varietate carnis superant delicias, adeoque cum Deo
ludere videntur dum pro intercepto qui ex ouis oritur calore, olei flammas,
vini aestum, omnisque generis aromatum ignes infare^nt stomacho, veteribus
Christianis omnibus fuisse non modo incognita, sed and intolerabilia, adeoque
a^ominanda constat: vmbra tantum very ieiunij cernitur in catholica ecclesia,
ieiunium, quod ante non nisi ad horam tertiam pomeridianam soluebatur. ante
meridiem (...), atque in eam rem non modo mysteria, sed vesperae suum
mentientes tempus anticipantur. Lindan. Panopliae. lib. 3. cap. 11.
show of the ancient fast, but make a mere mock of God and man, as their own
best friends are forced to confess, besides their erroneous opinions of merit
and satisfaction, and gross superstition in the difference of meats. Thus
then we did not put down the true and right use and exercise of fasting, but
the mockery of it, and do wish that in the full establishment of the Churches,
the ancient discipline of fasting, due consideration had of times and
conditions of men, may be restored again. If any of our Divines seem to
dislike that there should be any set fasts, as being Jewish, it is not the
general resolution of the reformed Churchs, but the private opinion only of
some particular m^, who were carried with the hate of Romish errors and
superstition in the set fasts, to dislike them wholly; which advisedly I see
not how they could do, and I am well assured many of very great esteem, do
allow and approve the use of them.

The next objection is most frivolous. Calvin says, Ibid. Lib 4, 15. 12.
Lay men long since presumed in times of necessity to baptize; werein, whether
they did well or not, the Fathers in those times, wherein they were suffered
thus to do, could not, nor did not resolve: what can be inferred of this?
Whether they did well, or not, Calvin says, the Fathers were not resolute, and
he think eth their doing can hardly be excused from usurpation of that which
no way pertained to them; therefore, says Bellarmine, he dissenteth from all
antiquity, and confesses the doctrine of the Romish Church to be most ancient.
Let Bellarmine give us leave to reason from his speeches in the same sort, and
he will soon perceive he has wronged Calvin. Lib. 1 de sacramento baptismi.
cap. 7.
Bellarmine says, the Fathers were doubtful whether, if men not yet baptized,
should attempt to baptize, it were baptism or not; he pronounces peremtorily
it is; therefore he dissenteth from all antiquity. As likewise they August. l
7. de bapt. cap. 53. non audet definire, sed ait expectandam Detreuelationem:
at Bellar. de sacramentis in genere lib. 1. cap. 28. ait definitum in
concilijs, scilicet Florentino and Tridentino.
doubted, whether baptism administered sportingly, were true baptism or not:
he and his consorts make no question of it: therefore they dissent from all
antiquity.

But Ibid. Lib. 4. 18. 21.
let us proceed to the next allegation. Calvin says it is most certain, that
all antiquity is clearly against the Romish doctrine of the real sacrificing
of Christ in the blessed Sacrament, and that the Fathers did most rightly
conceive of this sacred mystery, without derogating any way from the
sufficiency and plenitude of Christ's sacrifice. A man would hardly think any
man would allcage this place, to prove that Calvin confesses the doctrine of
the Fathers, and the opinion of the Romanists are all one: and yet this does
the Jesuit: so forcible and powerful he is in reasoning, that what a man most
constantly denies, he can prove he affirms. But he will say, that Calvin in
the same place does except against the Fathers. Surely he says, he thinks
they cannot be altogether excused, in that they so much urged the mystical
sacrificing of Christ's body in the Sacrament, and thereby made it carry a kind
of show of a new, and newly repeated sacrifice: for that by misconstruction of
that they meant well, others turned the Sacrament into a new offering of the
Son of God for the quick and dead. The reason doubtless, that moved the
Fathers so much to urge that mystical sacrificing of CHRIST in the blessed
Sacrament, was, for that they lived in the midst of Jews and Gentiles: both
whose religion consisted principally in sacrifice: the Fathers therefore to
show that Christian Religion is not without sacrifice, and that of a more
excellent nature than theirs were, did much urge that Christ once offered for
the sins of the World upon the altar of his Cross, is daily in mystery
offered, slain, and his blood powered out, on the holy Table: and that this
sacrifice of Christ, slain for the sins of the world, thus continually
represented, and living in our memories, is the sacrifice of Christians. If any
man shall allege, that these were reasons sufficient to move the Fathers to
speak as they did, notwithstanding any occasions of error that might by
ignorant men be taken, Calvin does not pertinaciously resist, for he said
only what he thought, not peremptorily judging, or condemning those, whom so
just and good causes have made honorable in the Church for ever.

CHAP. 20
Of the invocation and adoration of Saints: touching which the Century-writers
are wrongfully charged to dissent from the Fathers.

THus then I hope it appears, that Calvin does not confess that the
doctrine of the Romanists has any testimony, or approbation of Antiquity.
Ibid.
Bellarmine therefore passes from him to the writers of the Centuries, in whom
he hops to find something for his purpose; but they stead him as little as
Calvin did. Let us therefore take a view of that he says. Touching
free will, justification, merits and the like, there is nothing in them, but
that which has bin sufficiently, I hope, cleared in Calvin; the things they
say, being the same. Centur. 3. c. 4 col. 83.
Only two things I find imputed to them by Bellarmine, and not to Calvin. For
first they are supposed to acknowledge the Popish invocation of Saints, to have
been in the time of the Fathers, and allowed, by them. Centur. 3. 4. col. 85.
Secondly, they are charged to blame the Fathers, for magnifying too much the
excellency of Martyrdom, the praises whereof Bellarmin says they dislike,
because they will not admit that Martyrdom is a kind of baptism, serving for
the expiation, and washing away of sin.

Touching the invocation of Saints, it is evident it was not known in the first
ages of the Church, nor approved by the Primitive Fathers: but because it has
mightily prevailed in these later times, and the superstition and idolatry
there in committed, has been such as cannot be excused; therefore for the
better answering of Bellarmines cauils, and the satisfying of our selves and
others, let us consider from what grounds, and by what degrees it entered into
the Church.

First there was in the Church from the beginning, a true and certain
resolution, that the Saints departed do in general tender, respect, and wish
well unto their brethren, and fellow servants, whom they have left behind them,
in the warfare of Christ in this world. Secondly, men grew afterward to
think, that men departing out of this world, carry with them the remembrance
of the state of things, wherein, departing hence, they leave them: and that out
of their love which never falls away, they do most carefully recommend unto
God the particular necessities of their brethren made known unto them while
they lived there. Si quis istu^ nostrum prior diuinae dignationis celeritate
praecesserie, perseveret apud Dominum nostra dilectio pro fratribus and
sororibus nostris, apud misericordiam patris non cesset oration. Cypr. epistola
^7.
Thirdly, from hence it came, that men entreated their friends yet living, that
if they prevented them, and came before them into Christ their masters joyful
and happy presence, being freed from the dangers, miseries, and evils of this
present life, they would not forget to recommend them unto God, that are in
them still. Fourthly, whereas by an ancient custom, they did remember the
names of the departed, at the LORDS table, giving thanks unto GOD that had
made them so glorious in their life and death through his goodness, and
praying him by their examples to frame them to the like, and besides kept the
anniuersarie remembrances of the days of their death, as if they had been
their birth days, with all tokens of joy: in the orations they Nos autem
Martyribus nostris non templa sicut dijs etc. nec sacrificamus Martyribus, sed
vni Deo and Martyrum and nostr^ sacrificium immolamus: ad quod sacrificium,
sicut homines Dei qui mundum in confessione eius vicerunt suo loco and ordine
nominantur: non tamen a sacerdote qui sacrificat inuocantur. Aug. de ciuitate
Dei lib. 22, cap. 10. Sacrificia pro ijs semper vt meministis offerimus quoties
Martyrum passiones and dies anniversaria commemoratione celebramus. Cypr.
epist. 34.
made to set forth the goodness of GOD toward them, and to propose their
example for imitation, they did sometimes by way of Apostrophe speak unto
them, as if they had been present, and had sense and apprehension of that they
spoke (whereof yet they were doubtful, as appears by Oratione in laudem
Gorgoniae: Si hoc praemium sanctis animabus a Deo confertur, ut ista
persentiscant etc. and in Iulianum, alloquitur pias animas Imperatorum, dicens,
si quis mortuis sensus, etc.
Gregory Nazianzen, In Epitaphio Nepotiani stupet animus, manus tremit,
caligant oculi, balbutit lingua, quicquid dixere, quia ille non audit, mutum
videtur.
Hierome, and others; and not contented thus to commune with them, they
entreated them, if they had any sense or knowledge of things in this world, to
be remembrancers for them, and the Church here below. This was a kind of
doubtful compellation and soliciting of them, If their state were such, as
that they could take notice of these things, that they would not forget to
procure the good of their brethren; but was no invocation, which is a retyring
of our selves in all our needs, necessities, and distresses, with assured hope
of help, to him that we know can stead us in what distress soever we be.

Thus then, though the Fathers did sometimes, when they had particular
occasions to remember the Saints, and to speak of them, by way of Apostrophe
turn themselves unto them, and use words of doubtful compellation, praying
them, if they have any sense of these inferior things to be remembrancers to
God for them, yet shall our adversaries never prove, that they did prostrate
their bodies, bow their knees, or make prayers to them, in a set course of
devotion, but this both adoration and invocation of Saints and Angels, was
directly condemned by them. We honor the Saints, says Adversus Vigilantium ad
Ripatium Presbyterum 110.
Jerome, but do not worship or adore any creature, neither Angels, Archangels,
nor any name that is named in this world, or that which is to come. Theodoret:
in Epist. ad Colos. qui legem defendebant, cos etiam ad angelos colendos
inducebant, dicentes fuisse legem per illos datam. Mansit autem diu hoc vitium
in Phrygia and Pysidia: quo circa Synodus quoque quae conuenit Laodiceae, quae
est Phrygiae metropolis, lege prohibuit ne precatentur Angelos: and in
hodiernum usque diem licet videre apud illos and eorum finitimos oratoria
Sancti Michaelis, Illi ergo hoc consulebant, utique humilitate utentes
dicentes, universorum deum nec cerni, nec comprehendi, nec ad eum (...) posse.
and oportere per Angelos diuinam conciliare benevolentiam: hoc autem dixit in
humilitate et cultu Angelorum.
The Council of Laodicea, reported by Theodoret, directly condemns this
kind of adoration and invocation, not of Saints only, but of Angels also.

The Popish distinction of Latria and Doulia, does not answer these
authorities and testimonies of Antiquity: for those erring miscreants mentioned
by Paul, the Council of Laodicea, Theodoret, Epiphanius, and others, did not
think the Angels to be God, or equal to the Most High, neither did they
worship them in such sort, as to ascribe infinite greatness unto them, which
the Papists mean by their Latria: but they gave spiritual worship and
adoration unto them, in an inferior and lower degree, such as the Papists call
Doulia: because they thought them to mediate between God and mortal men in
very high and excellent sort. Either then the Fathers condemned these without
cause for worshipping creatures, or they meant to restrain more than that
adoration, which ascribes infinite greatness to him that is adored; which
undoubtedly they did, even the least and lowest degree of spiritual worship,
or worship in spirit and truth. This most clearly appears to be so, by that
of the seventh Con^um Nicenum 2.
general Council, which though it did not only confirm the placing of
pictures in the Church, but prescribed that they should be worshipped, yet the
Fathers of that Council expounded themselves, that they meant nothing else
thereby, but a reverent usage of them, approaching to them, embracing and
kissing of them, in such sort as men use to do to the books of holy
Scriptures, and all sacred vessels, and things consecrated to the use of Gods
service; but permit not any the least part of spiritual worship, or
worship in spirit and truth the Scripture speaks of, to be given unto
them; for if it be, they judge it Idolatry. But the Romanists at this day give
spiritual worship to creatures, and think they sin not, if it be not in
so high a degree, as to ascribe unto them infinite greatness. Epiphanius
contra Collyridianos haeresi 79 omnem adorationem creaturarum damnat.


Dicunt Walsingam and Henricus: reuereri, est animo reputare magna bona quae
quis videt aut existimat esse in alio, parui pend^ndo in comparatione eorum
bona quae considerat in seipso: honorare, est reuerentiam existentem intus in
anima, opere exterius indicare: hinc est, quod honor ^icitur exhibitio
reverentiae in testimonium virtutis eius quem reueremur: laudare est honoratum
p^o bonis quae in ipso sunt alijs commendare: glorificare autem, est lauds
honorati large, lateque praeconizare. propter quod dicitur esse gloria frequens
fama cum laud: adoratio est, in id, quod reuerendum, laudandum, ^onorandum
glorificandum est propter eminentiam sanctitatis and virtutis, totam spem ac
fiduciam subijciendo se illi proij^ere, propter quod ado^atio dicitur cultus
propter diligentem intentionem erga id quod adoratur: illud enim coli dicitur,
cui quis studiose intendit operam suam illi exhibendo. Waldensis tom, 3. titulo
12. de sanctis adorandis, cap. 118.
Adoration implies in it three acts. First, an apprehension of the
excellency of that which is adored. Secondly, an act of the will, desiring to
do some thing to testify our acknowledgement of this greatness, and our
subjection and inferioritie. Thirdly, an outward act expressing the same. We
say therefore that Adoration proceeding out of the apprehension of the
excellency of that is worshipped, and the desire to testify our
acknowledgement of it, is of two sorts or kinds: For either it is limited to
certain times, places and things, when, where, and wherein, the excellency of
that we worship, presents it self unto us, and requires our acknowledgement
of it; as is the worship of Kings, Princes, Prelates, and Prophets, in their
kingdoms, Courts, Churches, and Schools, ruling, guiding, teaching, and
instructing: or else it is spiritual, which in all places, at all times, and
in all things causes him that worshippeth to bow himself before that he
worshippeth, and thereby to testify his acknowledgement of the excellency of
it, which he finds in every time, place, and thing to present it self unto
him. This kind of Adoration, subiecteth not only the body, but the spirit and
mind also, to him whose greatness it thus acknowledges. This worship, we
say, is proper to God. For he only at all times, and in all places and things,
sees, beholds, guides, and takes care of us, and ruling, disposing, and
commanding us, inwardly and outwardly, works our good.

But the Romanists say, the Saints do so likewise, though not in so excellent
sort as God does: for they suppose, that they know all things that concern us,
that they watch over us with a careful and vigilant eye, that they carry us in
their hands, and by their mediation procure our good from God, the fountain of
all good; and therefore they worship them with spiritual worship. The miracles
that God wrought in times past by them made many to attribute more to them,
than was fit, as if they had a generality of presence, knowledge, and
working; but the wisest, and best advised never durst attribute any such thing
unto them.

August. de cura pro mortuis.
Whether, says Augustine, the Saints be present every where, or at least
wheresoever their memorialls are kept, or whether they remain in one place
only, and praying only in general for the Militant Church, God do work by
himself, or his Angels, that which is fit for the confirmation of the faith
they professed, and the good of such as remember them, I dare not pronounce.
And who knows not, that he inclines to that opinion, that they do not
particularly see, know, and entermeddle with humane things, and confirms this
his judgment with sundry excellent reasons and authorities? This opinion did
the Interlinearis glossa in Isaiae 63.
Author of the gloss follow, and Hugo de sancto victore erudit. Theolog. de
sacramentis fidei, lib. 2. part. 16. cap. 11. quaerunt nonnulli de animabus
carne solutis, vtrum cognitionem habeant eorum quae in hac vita gerunt^r, and
an preces supplicantium audiant, difficile est de huiusmodi dijudicare: quidam
ex patribus quaedam dixerunt, quasi nihil sit quod non videant, qui vident
omnia videntem: sed ego non praesumo ita iudicare, etc.
Hugo de sancto victore, and the Church of God never defined otherwise:
howsoever Jerome in his passion against Vigilantius seem to say the contrary,
and Greg. dial. 4. cap. 33.
Gregory endeavor to confirm it, saying, he that sees God, who sees all
things, cannot but see all things in him. But Occam tract. 1. part. 2. cap. 3.
vbi confutat Iohannem 22. haeresem esse pronunciat dicere videntes Deum nulla
ignorare, etc. Magister lib. 2. distinct. 11. accipiendum dicit dictum, Greg.
de his quorum cognitio beatum sacit cognitorem, vt sunt ea quae pertinent ad
mysteria trinitatis etc. sed haec explicatio verbis Greg. non conue^t moral.
12. c. 13. nullo modo credendum est quia foris sit aliquid quoth ignorent.
Occam, and sundry other excellent Schoolmen, reject this saying of Gregory;
and Gregorius Ariminensis resolves peremptorily, that neither Saints, nor
Angels know the secrets of our hearts, but that this s Greg. Arimi. l. 2.
distinct. 9. 10. q. 1. ex 2. Paralip. ex dicto Salomonis. Tu solus nosticorda
filiorum hominum. and ex libro de ecclesiasticis dogmatibus, secrctacordis ille
solus novit, probat nullam creaturam cognoscere cogitationes cordium nostrorum.
is reserved as peculiar to God alone.

If then the Saints (for ought we know) do not see, know, and intermeddle with
our particular affairs, but pray only in general, there remains nothing
else safely to be done by us, but to seek unto GOD; and then all these both
Saints and Angels shall love us in him, and what in them lies procure our
good. August. de vera religione c. 55.
Behold, says Augustine, I worship one God, one beginning of all things, that
fountain of wisdom and happiness whence all things that are wise and happy
have their wisdom and happiness; whichsoeuer of the Angels loves the GOD, I
am sure he loves me, whosoever abides in him, and can hear the prayers,
and take notice of the wants of mortal men, I am well assured, he does hear
me, when I pray to God, and endeavors to give me the best furtherance he
can. Let therefore those Adoratores partium mundi, worshippers of parts and
portions of the world, tell me, what good Saint or Angel he does not assure
unto himself, which worshipeth that one God, whom every one that is good does
love and desire to please. Hence it came, that though some particular men did
aunciently, at sometimes, when they had occasion to speak of them, doubtfully
solicit the Saints, and desire them, if they had any apprehension of these
inferior things, to be remembrancers for them unto God: yet no man prayed
unto them with bowed knees, in set courses of devotion and prayer. Neither was
there any form of invocation of Saints brought into the service of the Church
for a long time, as appears by that of De ciuitate Dei li. 22. c. 10.
Augustine, who says, they are named by the Minister in the time of the holy
mysteries, but not innocated.

For how could there be any invocation of them generally received and allowed,
or constantly resolved on and used, in the set courses of the prayers of those
primitive Christians; when they knew not, nor were not certainly resolved,
whether the Saints do know, or intermeddle with the particular affairs of men
in this world: seeing the Romanists themselves confess, it were not fit nor
safe to pray to Saints, if they did not hear us? Now it is no way likely, that
any general opinion was holden in those times, of the universal presence,
knowledge, and ability of Saints to stead them that seek unto them, seeing
it was a long time doubtful in the Church, whether the faithful departing out
of this world, be immediately received into heaven, and enjoy the happy
presence of God, or whether they remain, or stay in Abraham's bosom, or some
place of rest, till the day of the resurrection. Yea it is known to all them
that have perused the monuments of Antiquity, that See cap. 9.
Iraeneus, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and sundry others were of opinion, that
none of the just are in Heaven till the end and consummation of all things, but
that they are below in some part of hell, or in some hidden and invisible place
sequestered from the presence of God, till the second coming of the son of
man. Now seeing the invocation of Saints presupposes that they pray for us in
particular, and particular prayer for us knowledge of our wants, which the
presence and sight of God is supposed to afford them; if they do not yet enjoy
the presence of God, as many of the Ancient (though falsely) did think, we
see not how in their judgment there should be any safe and fruitful inuocating
of them. Bell. l. 1. de sanctorum beatitudine cap. 20.
For the absence from GOD, and the not enjoying of his sight and presence, is
the reason alleged by our adversaries, why the Fathers in the time before
Christ, neither prayed in particular for the Church on earth, nor were prayed
unto, as being in Lymbus, and not in heaven.

Howsoever, it is most certain, if we look into the ancient practice of the
Church, that the Saints in their anniuersarie solemnities and holy days, were
not prayed unto, but remembered only, proposed for imitation, and rather prayed
for, then prayed unto, as it appears by that Bicl. lect. 85. in canonem
missae.
Innocentius reports, that in the Feast of blessed Leo, the ancient custom
was, to pray that the solemnity of that day, and the oblations then offered
might be available to his soul, for the increase and consummation of his
glory: which since has been altered, and the prayer is now, that by his
mediation this Festival solemnity may avail, and be to the good of them that
observe and keep it. So that it cannot be showed by our adversaries, See how
the ancient missals were abandoned, in praefat. Cassandri in libr^ Romani
ordinis a se editi and in vita Greg. 1. apud Voraginensem.
that, before the ancient Liturgies were abandoned, and those brought in by
Gregory had gotten into their place, there was any invocation of the Saints
found in the public prayers of the Church; but when their names were
remembered, men prayed only to God, that he would give them grace to follow
their examples, and make them partakers of that happiness, which those blessed
ones already enjoy. And at that time, when this alteration began, the
invocation was not brought into the Liturgy and public prayers of the
Church, in direct form, but men prayed still unto God only, though desiring
him the rather to respect them, for that not only their brethren on earth, but
they also that are in heaven, cease not (prostrate before his sacred Majesty)
to pray for them. Neither is there any other form of prayer found in the
Missall, Ab bas Nocherius de sancto Gallo sequentias pro pneumis composuise
dicitur, quas Nicholaus Papa ad missam cantari concessit. Hugo de sancto
Victore erudi^. theol. de officiis eccles. l. 2. c. 11. Durand. rational.
divin. offic. l. 4. ait Nocherium sequentias pro pne umis alleluia composuisse,
sed alios post plerasque addidisse.
but in the sequences and Litanies only.

Wherefore to conclude this matter concerning the invocation and adoration of
Saints and Angels, seeing the Fathers did not in their set courses of
devotion make prayers to the Saints; but when they had particular occasions to
speak or think of them, used doubtful compellations, desiring them, if they
had sense of these things, to be remembrancers for them unto God, seeing for
ought we know, the Saints are not particularly acquainted with the state of
things here below, seeing no degree of spiritual worship is to be given to
any creature: we invocate them not, but pray unto God only, assuring our
selves, that if they can hear us, or any way further our suites, they will do
it, when we pray unto God, as Augustine rightly observes.

Aug. de vera reli gione 55.
We adore them not, but rest in the judgment of the same Augustine, that the
Saints are to be honored for imitation, but not to be adored for Religion:
that they do not seek, desire, or accept any such honor, but will have us to
worship God only, being glad, that we are their fellow servants in well-doing.
The Romanists evasion, that God is only to be adored with that highest kind
of religious worship which is named Latria, which yields to him that is
worshipped infinite greatness: but the Saints may be adored with an inferior
kind of religious worship, named Doulia, is directly contrary to De vera
religionc c. 55
Augustine, who speaking of Saints and Angels, says, Honoramus eos charitate,
non servitute: We honor them with the honor of love, but not of Doulia, or
service. If they say, they have this distinction from Austine, it is true: but
he does not use it to this purpose, (to make difference of two sorts of
religious or spiritual worship, the highest degree whereof should be Latria,
the lowest Doulia: neither does he anywhere call the honor given to Saints
Doulia, but names it the honor of love and fellowship, but he vseh to
distinguish religious worship (every degree whereof he calls Latria) from
that external and civil worship, duty, and service, that men yield to their
Princes, Masters, and Rulers, which is fitly named Doulia, a service: but it is
De vera religione c. 55.
servitus corporis, non animae, a service of the body, and not of the mind.
For men, notwithstanding this servitude, have their minds and their thoughts
free, as being known to none, nor ouerruled by none but GOD only. But the
service of the spirit and mind, in the lowest degree that can be imagined, is
due unto GOD only, and not to be given to any creature: for no creature
knows the secrets of our hearts; no creatute can prescribe laws touching the
inward actions and thoughts of the mind, not having knowledge of them, nor
power to punish them that should offend.

It is therefore an impious conceit of the Papists, that the Saints both can
and do know all our inward actions and secret thoughts, approving, or
reproving, excusing or accusing them: and that as presidents of our whole life
and conversation; and that therefore they are to be honored and worshipped,
with spiritual service, or service of the spirit and mind. Thus then it is
true the Centurie writers report, that in the third and fourth age after
Christ, there were some beginnings of that superstition, which afterward grew
to be intolerable in the adoration and invocation of Saints and Angels; but
neither they, nor we are so ignorant, as to think, that the invocation of
Saints, or the adoration of them prevailed in the Church within the compass of
the first six hundred years; neither do they (as Bellarmine is pleased to
slander them) tax that, as idolatry in the Roman Church, which they find to
have been the practice of all the Fathers; for they find nothing of the
Romish Idolatry in these glorious lights of the Christian world.

CHAP. 21.
Of Martyrdom, and the excessive praises there^f found in the Fathers.

THe next allegation, against them, is touching Martyrdom; which, Bellarmine
says, they suppose the Fathers did too immoderately and excessiuely magnify
and extol. The reason of this their censure, he thinks, is, because they
will not admit it to be a kind of Baptism, and to wash away sin, as both
the Romanists and the Fathers teach. For the better clearing of this point, and
the answering of this objection, we must remember, that whereas the ordinary
and set means of salvation is Baptism, so that no man carelessely neglecting,
or wilfully contemning it, can be saved; The Fathers notwithstanding do
constantly teach, that if men be excluded by inevitable impossibility, they
may be saved without it; and that faith and the inward conversion of the heart,
flying unto GOD in Christ, through the gracious instinct and sweet motion of
the sanctifying spirit, may be reckoned a kind of Baptism: because thereby
they obtain all that which should have been sought in the Baptism of water:
And because if an ordinary degree of faith do sometimes obtain salvation
without the Baptism of water, much more that which makes men willing to
suffer death for CHRIST; therefore they affirm, that Martyrdom, and the
constant suffering for Christ, is also fitly named Baptism.

So that there are three kinds of Baptism: Flaminis, Fluminis, Sanguinis; Of
water, of the spirit, and blood.

It appears by Epist. 77.
Bernards Epistle to Hugo de sancto victore, of this Argument, that there were
some in his time, who, though they thought that Martyrdom does supply the
defecte of Baptism, yet would not grant, that faith, and the inward conversion
of the heart, without such suffering, does so; and therefore though they
confessed that Martyrs, not baptized with the Baptism of water, may be saved,
yet they denied, that others, though repenting, believing, and converting unto
God, can possibly obtain remission of their sins without the sacramental
washing. Against these, Barnarde reasons in this sort. If Martyrdom do
supply the defect of Baptism, it is not poena, but fides; not the suffering,
but the faith of the sufferer that makes it be of so great force. Nam absque
fide, quid est Martyrium, nisi poena? For were it not for faith, what were the
passions of Martyrs, but bitter and uncomfortable torments only? Shall then
that which makes Martyrdom be esteemed in stead of Baptism, be so infirm
and weak, that what it gives to another thing, it shall be denied to have it
self? The sheading of our blood for Christ, is an undoubted proof and
demonstration of a very great, constant, and immovable faith; but it is not
God, but men that take notice of faith by these proofs. For God does often see
and pronounce the faith of a man dying in peace, to be as great, as the faith
of a Martyr: for that though it be not proved by Martyrdom, it is ready for
Martyrdom, and animates him that has it, to suffer any thing if need should
require.

This which Barnarde has thus delivered touching this point, is the constant
doctrine of the Fathers; neither do we, or the Authors of the Centuries
dislike any thing in it, but we condemn the vain and idle disputes of the
Romish Schools, touching these three kinds b Bellar. li 1. de sacr: Bapt. cap.
6. N^ des^t Theolog. vt Dom^us a Soto, Martinus Ledes. in 4. d. 3. q. vnic.
art. 11. qui docent martyrium non dare gratiam ex opere operato, nec dare vllum
gradum gratiae, praeter eum qui respondet merito charitatis ipsius martyris.
Probabilior sententia est, martyrium ex opere operato confer primam gratiam,
ita vt si quis ad martyrium accedat adhuc in peccatis existens, tamen sine
affectu ad aliquod peccatum et cum fide et dilectione in^hoata, and poenitentia
t^li qualis requiritur ad baptismum aquae, in virtute mar^yrij justificab^tur.
of Baptism, especially in that they teach concerning Martyrdom, that it
gives grace ex opere operato; so that if a man not justified, nor yet in the
state of grace come unto it, and do not ponere obicem, he shall by virtue
thereof obtain grace, and have the effects of it wrought in him, in such sort
as in the Baptism of water. This not only we condemn, but many amongst
themselves, affirming that Martyrdom has no force to work or procure our
good, farther then the greatness of our faith and love, which is therein
tried, approved, and made manifest, does work it.

The Centurie writers reprove not the Fathers for any such error, as the
Papists do maintain, touching the force of Martyrdom, but they dislike that
the Fathers did use so many Hyperboles, and Rhetorical amplifications, in the
praising of Martyrdom, (though in a good sense:) that the Romish Sophisters
have from thence taken occasion of their error, touching the merit,
satisfaction, and expiation of sins, which they fancy to be in the blood of
Martyrs, of which impiety the Fathers never thought. Thus then it does not
appear by any thing which Bellarmine has, or can allege, that we confess
the faith of the Romanists to be the ancient profession of the primitive
Christians, but rather the contrary is constantly defended by all our Divines
in the places produced by him.

CHAP. 22.
Wherein is examined their proof of the Antiquity of their doctrine taken
from a false supposall, that our doctrine is nothing else but heresy long
since condemned.

LEt Ibid.
us therefore come to his third part, wherein he undertakes to prove that the
doctrine of the reformed Churches, opposite to the faith and profession of
Rome, is the same with the old heresies long since condemned by the universal
consent of the whole Christian world. In this part he is so shameless, that I
blush at the very thought of that he so doctorally and gravely delivers, as
if it were truer than truth it self; whereas in his conscience he knows it
to be an untruth, so gross and apparent, that the devil himself will be
ashamed of it. He reckons twenty several heresies of damned
Arch-heretickes, every of which he pronounces, that we silly men defend and
embrace as the sacred truth of God.

Let us for our better satisfaction, and refutation of so vile a slander, take
a view of the particulars. He places in the front the heresy of Simon Magus,
and his disciples, Irenaeus, l. 1. contra haereses, cap. 20.
which was, that the Angels made the world, that the Prophets were inspired
from them, and delivered their pleasure, not the will and pleasure of the high
God, and that therefore the things commanded by them, were not in themselves
good, or to be respected; that God was displeased with their government, and
would exempt his own from it, and have them free to do what they list, for
that men are saved by his favor, and not in doing those things, which though
they were commanded and imposed as good, by Moses and the Prophets mis-ledde
by the Angels, yet were not naturally so, but by accident only. This, he
says, is the error of the Protestants; for they think God made the world,
and not the Angels, that Moses and the Prophets spoke as they were inspired of
him, that the things they commanded are just and holy, that there is no way of
salvation, but by having that righteousness the Law of Moses prescribes,
which all they that are saved, have; First, by imputation of that perfect
righteousness and obedience to Moses Law which was found in Christ, to merit
our good; and secondly, by the operation and infusion of sanctifying grace from
him, making them to hate sin, to love righteousness, and walk in the ways
of Gods commandments; so that sin has no more dominion over them. Surely,
I think, if the devil himself fate as Judge in this case, he could not but
condemn the impudency of this his shameless disciple.

Ibid.
But he adds; Eunomius taught, that if a man would embrace his profession, he
should be saved, though he continued without repentance and remorse in all
manner of most damnable wickedness; and that others, whom Augustine refuteth in
his book, De fide and operibus, were of opinion, that all Christians, how
damnably soever they live, holding the truth of Christian profession, may, and
shall be saved, This, he says, is the doctrine of the Protestants. If any of
us ever wrote, spoke, or thought any such thing, let GOD forget ever to do
good unto us, and let our prayers be rejected from his presence: but if this
be as vile a slander, as ever Satanist devised, the Lord reward them that
have been the Authors and devisers of it, according to their works. But let
us see, does he make no show of proof? doubtless he does.

De captivitate Babylonica cap. de Eucharistia.
Luther, says he, pronounces, that there is no way to have access unto God,
to treat with him touching reconciliation, and acceptance into his favor,
but by faith; that God regards not works; that a true Christian is so rich
in faith, that he cannot perish though he would, nor how wickedly soever he
live, unless he refuse and cease to believe.

For the clearing of these places of Luther, we must remember that which In
Claue Scripturae, de varia ope^um praedicatione. tract. 6. titulo. duplex
iustitia et iustificatio.
Illyricus has fitly noted to this purpose: that there are two Courts of Gods
Judgments and most righteous proceeding toward the sons of men: the one, he
calls forum iustificationis, the other novae obedientiae: In the first he
says, God requires perfect righteousness, fully answering that his Law
prescribes; which being no where to be found but in Christ, no way
apprehended but by faith: in this respect, and sitting in this Court of exact
trial, he regards no works, virtues, or qualities, finding nothing of
worth, or worthy to be respected, but looks to our faith only, and for
Christ's sake only, at the sole and only suite of Faith, forgiueth sin, and
imputes righteousness. Notwithstanding because he never says to any sinner,
Thy sins are remitted, but that he adds, go and sin no more, and that
upon peril of forfeiting the benefit received, and that some worse thing
should betide unto him: therefore there is another Court, wherein he sits
and gives commandment for new obedience and works of righteousness, though
not requiring so strictly that perfection which formerly he did, but accepting
our weak indevours, and study of well doing: and in this sort it is, that he
will judge us in the last Day according to our works.

Thus then we see, how that, though Faith be never alone, yet in procuring us
acceptance with God, it is alone: and that though God regard none of our
virtues, actions, and qualities, as being of any worth in the strictnes of his
Judgment, but reject them as vnpure, and unclean, and respect nothing but the
humble suit and petition of Faith, for the purpose of justification: yet when
we are justified, he requires of us a new obedience, judges us according to
it, and crowns us for it. That which Luther adds, that a man cannot perish
though he would, and how wickedly soever he live, unless he cease to
believe; may seem hard at the first sight, but not to them that do know,
that Luther is far from thinking that men may be saved, how wickedly soever
they live; for he constantly teaches, that Justifying faith cannot remain in
that man, that sins with full consent, nor be found in that soul wherein
are peccata vastantia conscientiam, (as Melancthon speaks, following
Augustine) that is raging, ruling, prevailing, laying wast and destroying the
integrity of the conscience, which should resist against evil and condemn it.

This is all then that Luther says, that no wickedness with which faith may
stand, can hurt us, so long as faith continues: but if sin once become
regnant, and so exclude faith, we are in the state of damnation. Against this
doctrine of Luther, or any part thereof, neither Bellarmine, nor the gates of
hell shall ever be able to prevail. We see then how justly we are charged
with the heresies of the Simonians, Eunomians, and the like monsters; surely as
justly, as Bellarmine may be charged with true and honest dealing, in this
imputation and other that follow.

CHAP. 23.
Of the heresy of Florinus, making God the author of sin, falsely imputed to
Calvin and others.

THe Ibid.
next heresy which they say we are fallen into, is the heresy of Florinus;
who taught that God is the cause and author of sin. This he says, Calvin,
Luther, Martyr, and sundry other of the greatest Divines of the reformed
churches have defended in their writings. Of this sinful, wicked, and lying
report, we are sure GOD is not the Author, but the devil; and therefore we
do not fully accord with Florinus. But that it may appear, how truly these
men write, and speak of things of so great moment, I will only positiuely
lay down what we think of this matter, and the adversaries slanders will
be sufficiently refuted. For the clearing of our opinion touching this point,
I will first set down the different kinds of sin. Secondly what God may be
said to will or decree touching the first entrance thereof. And thirdly what
when it is entered.

Sin as we know is nothing else but (...) a transgression of the law. The
law is partly affirmative requiring, partly negative forbidding the doing of a
thing. Hence it follows that all sin is either of omission or commission,
Sin of omission is the not doing of that the Creature is bound to do. Sin
of Commission is the doing of that the creature is bound not to do.

The not doing of that the creature is bound to do, God may be said to will
and decree four ways. First by effectual opposing against the doing of it;
and in this sort it is impious to think, that God decreed the omission or not
doing, of that the creature stands bound to do. Secondly by discouraging and
dissuading from the doing of it: which is no less absurd and impious then the
former. Thirdly, by denial of that grace, concurrence, and assistance, without
which it cannot be done; this cannot be imagined in respect of the state of
man's first creation, but we must make God the Author of sin: and therefore
there is none of us that does attribute any such thing unto God. But
contrariwise Instit. l. 1. 15. 8. lib. 2. 3. 1^. citat. Aug. de correptione and
gratia.
Calvin whom Bellarmine seems most to challenge, notes fitly to this purpose
out of Augustine: that God gave Adam posse si vellet, sed non velle quod
potuit, power to stand and continue in his uprightness if he would, though he
did not inseparably hold him to it, but left him to his own choice: whence
followed that evil we now complain of. Fourthly, by denial of that grace,
assistance, and concurrence, without which he sees the creature will not be
moved nor won to do it; though it have other more then sufficient graces,
motives, and encouragements, to induce it thereunto. In this fourth sense many
fear not to say, that God negatiuely, or privatiuely, decreed the sin of
omission, or the not doing of that the creature was bound to do, in that he
decreed the denial of that, without which he knew it would not be done. But
some there be that fear thus to speak, choosing rather to say, that God only
permitted, then that in any sense he decreed the sin of omission, in the
first entrance of it. Yet these, if they rightly understand that permission
which they speak of, agree with the other in sense and meaning. For God may
be said to permit the not doing of a thing three ways. First, when he
requires not the doing of it, neither will dislike the omission of it: and in
this sense it is impious to say, that God permits the sin of omission: For
he requires the doing, and will punish the not doing of that, the omission
whereof is sin. Secondly, God may be said to permit a man's not doing of a
thing, in that he leaves him to himself, to do, or not to do the same,
without any particular providence or care, in ordering, or disposing, the
motions, and resolutions of his will: which to think is no less impious then
the former. Thirdly, he may be said to permit the not doing of a thing, when
he does not work upon a man in such sort, as only he knows he will be
wrought to the doing of the same. Deum permittere, says Cumel. dis* varia in
primam and primam secundae pa. 162.
Cumel, nihil aliud videtur esse, quam subtrahere illam maiorem gratiam, quam
si tribueret, Petrus non peccaret, and hoc quoad primum peccatum: vt servet
suavem modum providendi in omnibus; vel vt servet multipliciter dispositionem
concurrendi cum libero arbitrio; vel vt ostendat se dare gratis illam gratiam
cuicunque dat. When God is said to permit sin, says Cumel, no other thing
seems to be meant, but that he de^eth that more potent and prevailing
grace, which if he should give, he that now sins, would not sin; and
this he does in respect of the first sin, that he may hold a sweet course
in guiding all things, so as to suffer them to work according to the condition
of their nature, that in diverse and different sorts, he may dispose of his
concurrence with the liberty of man's will; and that he may make it appear,
that to whomsoever he gives that more potent and prevailing grace, he gives
it freely. In this sense, God may truly be said to permit the sin of
omission. And because he knows infallibly such omission will be, whenever
he does not so work upon a man, as he knows he must be wrought upon, if
ever he be brought to the doing of that good which is required of him, he
may be said priuatiuely to decree it: seeing he may rightly be said in a
sort, to decree the not doing of a thing, when he decrees the denial of
that, without which he knows it will not be done. Praefinitio duplex est,
says Li. (...). q. 1. con^. 1.
Rispolis, positiua, negatiua: positiua, qua Deus apud se quasi deliberat,
velle in tempore determinare physice per aliquod auxilium voluntatem hominis
alicuius: negatiua qua deliberat non confe^re alicuisuum auxilium efficax; and
quia voluntas infallibiliter deficiet circa quamcunque materiam virtutis, nisi
efficaciter moveatur a diuina voluntate ad been operandum; in materia verbi
gratia temperantiae, cognoscit evidenter voluntatem creatam peccaturam. Sic
bona cognoscuntur praefinitione positiua; mala negatiua, quam potius
permissionem appellabimus. Et post; Nos, quando dicimus Deum praefinijsse
peccatum, hoc non intelligimus quantum ad decretum impositionis malitiae, sed
quantum ad subtractionem gratiae. There is a two fold decree of God, the one
positive, the other negative; the positive is that whereby God determines with
himself, in such time as he thinks good, to incline the will of man to the
doing of a thing, by his effectual working and powerful help: the negative
is when he determines not so to work a man to the doing of a thing; and
because man will not do the same, unless he be so effectually wrought unto
it, he sees it will not be done, and that man will sin in omitting it. So
that God knows future good things, because he has positiuely decreed them;
and future evil things, because he has privatiuely decreed them; the which
we rather ^all permission. And again; When we say God has decreed sin, we
speak not of any positive decree of making a man evil; but of a privatiue
decree of not working him to do good. So that if there be any difference
amongst Divines touching this point, it is only in form of words.

The sin of commission, which is the doing of that the creature is bound not
to do, is merely positive. For as the affirmative part of Gods Law is broken,
by the not putting that in being which it requires, or not so as it requires:
so the negative is violated precisely, by putting that in being which it would
not have to be, or by putting it in being in such sort as it would not have it
to be; and yet every sin is an evil, and the nature of evil is privatiue.
For the clearing therefore hereof, the Ariminens. l. 2. d. 34. 35. 36. 37. q.
1. art. 1.
Divines do note, that we speak of evil formally, and denominatiuely.
Formally, evil is nothing but the not being of some good, in that thing
wherein it should be. Denominatiuely a thing may be said to be evil, either by
active denomination, because it depriueth some thing of that good it should
have, in which sort poison is said to be evil; or by passive denomination, as
those things are said to be evil, that want, and are deprived of that good
they should have. The sin of omission is formally evil, because it is negatio
boni debiti inesse, the not doing of that good act which should be done, and
from it the sinner is denominated evil by passive denomination, as wanting
that good which he should have. Sin of commission is an evil act. Evil acts
are of 2 sorts; for either they are evil only ex fine and circumstantiis, in
that they are not done to a right end and rightly: or ex genere and obiecto:
the former are denominated evil by passive denomination, as wanting some
circumstances that should make them good: the latter are such as no
circumstances can make good, neither are they denominated evil from the want of
circumstances, which they should or might have, but by active denomination,
because by way of contrariety, they deprive the sinner of that orderly
disposition, that should be found in him; and some other of that good which
pertains to him. As it appears in the acts of injustice, spoiling men of
that which is their own; and in the acts of blasphemy against God, or the
hate of God, in which the sinner as much as in him lies, by attributing unto
God that which is contrary to his nature, or denying that which agrees unto
the same, makes him not to be that which he is, and hating him, wishes he
were not, and endeavors to hinder what he would have done. From this kind of
sin; the sinner is denominated evil, partly by denomination passive, in that
he wants that orderly disposition that should be in himself: and partly by
active, in that he depriueth as much as in him is, some other of that good
which pertaines to him. Some not rightly observing these things, and finding
that some sins are positive acts, whereas the nature of evil is privatiue,
distinguish that which is material in the sins of commission, and that which
is formal; the substance of the act, and the difformity of it: making the one
positive, and the other privatiue, consisting in the want of that rectitude
which should be in it. But these men seem not rightly to conceive the things
whereof they speak. For the sin of omission is formally evil, and a want of
rectitude, in that the good act that should be done, is omitted. But the sin of
commission if it be an evil act, ex genere and obiecto, is denominatiuely
evil, not by passive denomination, as wanting that rectitude that should be in
it: but by active, in that by way of contrariety, it depriueth the sinner of
that orderly disposition that should be found in him: and others of that good
that pertains to them. That that sin of commission, that is, an evil act ex
genere and obiecto, is not denominated evil passiuely, from the want of
rectitude due unto it, it is evident, in that no rectitude is due to such an
act. For what rectitude is due to the specifical act of hating God? or what
rectitude is it capable of? Greg. de Valentia, finding this to be true, and yet
willing to defend the distinction, of that which is formal, and that which is
material, of some thing positive, and some thing privatiue in the sin of
commission, says; that evil acts, as particularly the act of injustice, may
be considered 2 ways. First in the proper and specificall nature of injustice;
and so it is no subject capable of the perfection of virtue, neque huius
perfectionis negatio est in illo priuatio, sed pura negatio; neither is the
denial of this perfection in respect of such an act so considered a privation,
but a mere and pure negation. 2l, Secundum communem quandam ratione^ illi and
actui iustitiae; vt versantur circa materiam communem ipsi, and iusticiae,
scilicet rem alienam; and sic subiectum aptum est ad perfectionem iustitiae, et
hui^ perfectionis negatio est in illo priuatio. In a generalitatie, in respect
of that which is common to it and the contrary act of justice, as they are both
conversant in things pertaining to other men; and in this sort it is a subject
capable of rectitude, and the perfection of virtue: his meaning is, that a
moral act, conversant in things pertaining to other men, considered in a
generality, is indifferent either to be an act of justice giving to every one
his own: or of injustice depriving others of that which pertains to them: and
that the omission of the act of justice, is a privation of such rectitude, as
might be found in this kind. So that whensoever any act of injustice is don:
first there is a want of rectitude, that is, an omissio^ of the good act of
justice, which might and ought to have bin done, and 2ly the producing of an
evil act, contrary to that good act that is omitted: and 2 kinds of sin do
allwaies concur, the one of omission, the other of commission, the one is a
mere privation of rectitude, and the difformity of it is privative, in the
other which is a sin of co^missio^ specifically considered, there is no
privative want of rectitude, for it is capable of none: and in it there is
nothing but merely positive: and the difformity that is found in it, is
precisely a positive repugnance to the Law of God. Lib. 6. de auxilijs diuinae
gratiae. disp. 44.
Aluarez says, the sin of commission is a breach of a negative law which is
not broken but by a positive act contrary to the prescript of right reason: as
Tho: Aquinas teaches 2a 2ae. q. 79. ar. 2. 3. 4. And the same is further
confirmed, because the same Thomas Quest. 2. de malo ar. 1. ad. 4.
elsewhere says, that in the sin of omission there is nothing but privation, if
we consider it as it is in it self: but the sin of commission is some positive
thing. Because says In primam secundae q: 79. ar. 1. and 2.
Caietan sin consists as well of a co^version to an object contrary to the
object of virtue, as of an aversion from the Law; there is in sin a double
nature of evil, the one arising from the object, the other from the not
observing of the law; the first is positive, the 2d privative; the first
infers the 2l. For it cannot be that a man should hate God, but that in so
doing, he must break the Law. For there are some acts simply and intrinsecally
evil, so that to do them is to sin: of which sort is the act of hating God.
Besides one contrary depriueth the subject wherein it is found, and makes it
incapable of the other, so long as it is in it: as the hate of God makes a man
incapable of the love of God, and of the hate of such things as are contrary to
God, and should be hated. So that there is a double nature of evil; the one
positive, the other privative: and the one of these is the cause of the other.
Tom. 2. d 2. q. 13. punc. 3. ar^. 5.
Greg. de Valentia says, it is consequent upon the opinion of Caietan: that
sin formally as sin is a positive thing: which thing he also expressly
affirms in 1am 2ae q. 71. ar. 6. There are that hold (says Disp. vatia ad
primam and primam secundae. pa. 104.
Cvmel) that the formal nature of sin (he means the sin of commission)
consists in some positive thing, to wit in the manner of working freely,
with positive repugnance, to the rule of reason, and the Law of God.
Difformitas in actu co^missionis (says Lib 3. Sent. q. 12.
Ockam,) non est nisi ipsemet actus elicitus contra praeceptum diuinum, and
nihil penitus aliud dicit: Q^ando elicit quis actum quem non debet; si non
teneatur ad oppositum actum, difformitas non est care^tia alicuius rectitudinis
debitae inesse, nec illi actui, nec voluntati; sed si teneatur, tunc est duplex
peceatu^, co^missionis and omissionis, et hoc est carentia alterius actus
debiti inesse, et it a rectitudinis debitae inesse voluntati. that is, The
difformity in an act of commission, is nothing but the very act which is done
contrary to the Law of God neither does it imply any thing else. So that when a
man produces an action which he should not do; if he be not bound to do the
contrary, the difformity that accompanies such an actio^, is not the want of
any rectitude, that should be either in that action, or in the will; but if he
be bound to do the contrary, then there are 2 sins found in him, the one of
co^missio^, the other of omissio^, and this latter is the want of another act
that should be done, and consequently of a rectitude that should be in the
will but is not, when it fails to bring forth that action, that in duty it is
bound to do. But some man will say, this must not be granted; for if we
admit not the distinction of that which is formal, and that which is
material in the sin of commission; the difformity, and the substance of the
act; and that the one is positive, and the other privative; God having a true
efficiency in respect of the substance of the act, and that which is positive
in it, we must acknowledge that he has a true efficiency in respect of the
whole, even the difformity as well as the substance, and consequently make him
the author of sin. They who make this objection, seem to say some thing, but
indeed they say nothing: for this distinction will not clear the doubt they
move, touching Gods efficiency and working in the sinful actions of men.
Whenever, says l. 2. d. 37. q. (...).
Durandus, two things are inseperably joined together, whosoever knowing them
both and that they are so inseperably joined together, chooses the one,
chooses the other also: because though happily he would not choose it
absolutely as being evil, yet in that it is joined to that which he does will,
neither can be separated from it, it is of necessity that he must will both. As
it appears in those voluntary actions that are mixed: as when a man casts
into the sea those rich commodities, which he has dearly bought, and brought
from a far, to save his own life, which he would not do but in such a case.
Hence it follows that the act of hating God and sinful difformity, being so
inseperably joined together, that the one cannot be divided from the other,
(for a man cannot hate God but he must sin damnably,) if God does will the one
he does will the other also. This of Durand is confirmed by Metaphystom. 1. d.
2^. Sec. 4. p. 522,
Suarez, who says, he shall never satisfy any man that doubts, how God may
be cleared from being author of sin, if he have an efficiency in the sinful
actions of men: that shall answer, that all that is said touching Gods
efficiency and concurrence, is true in respect of the evil motions and actions
of men's wills materially considered, and not formally in that they are evil
and sinful. For the one of these is consequent upon another. For a free and
deliberate act of a created will, about such an object, and with such
circumstances, cannot be produced but it must have difformity annexed to it.
There are some operations or actions, says Disp. vari ad primam and primam
secundae page 104.
Cumel, that are intrinsecally evil, so that in them we cannot separate that
which is material, from that which is formal, and wherein the sinfulnes of
sin consists: as it appears in the hate of God, and in this act when a man
shall say and resolve, I will do evil. So that it implies a contradiction,
that God should effectually work our will to bring forth such actions, in
respect of that which is material in them, and not in respect of that which is
formal. And this seems yet more impossible if we admit their opinion who
think, that the formal nature and being of the sin of commission, consists
in some thing that is positive, as in the manner of working freely, so as to
repugne to the rule of reason and law of God. So that it is clear in the
judgment of these great divines, that if God have a true real efficiency, in
respect of the substance of these sinful actions, he must in a sort produce the
difformity, or that which is formal in the^.

Wherefore for the clearing of this point, we must observe, that there are 3
opinions touching Gods co^currence with 2d causes in producing their effects.
The 1st, that God has no immediate influence, but mediate only, in respect of
volu^tary age^ts. And according to this opinion it is casie to clear God from
the imputatio^ of being author of sin, and yet to acknowledge his co^currence
with 2d causes in producing their defective effects. If the will of the
creature, says Lib. 2. did. 37. q. 1.
Scotus were the total and immediate cause of her action, and that God had no
immediate efficiency but mediate only in respect thereof as some think: it were
easy according to that opinion, to show how God may be freed from the
imputation of being author of sin, and yet to acknowledge his concurrence with
second causes, for the producing of their effects. For whether we speak of
that which is material or formal in sin, the will only should be the
total cause of it, and God should no way be a cause of it but mediatly, in
that he caused and produced such a will, that might at her pleasure do what
she would. Durandus seems to incline to this opinion, supposing that 2d
causes do bring forth their actions and operations, by and of themselves, and
that God no otherwise concurreth actiuely to the production of the same, but in
that he preserves the 2d causes, in that being and power of working, which at
first he gave them. But they that are of sounder judgment resolve, that as the
light enlightneth the air, and with the air all other inferior things: so god
not only gives being and power of working to the 2d causes, and preserves
them in the same, but together with them has an immediate influence, into the
things that are to be effected by the* God, says Caietan, being the first
cause, works and produces the effects of all 2d causes immediately, tum
immediatione virtutis, tum immediatione suppositi, that is, not only so, as
that the virtue and power of God the first agent, immediately shows it self in
the production of the effect, but so also that he is an immediate agent,
between whom and the effect produced, no secondary agent intercedeth. Yet are
we not to conceive that he is an immediate agent, immediatione suppositi, as he
is immediatione virtutis, for he produces immediately every effect of every 2^
cause, in respect of all that is found in any such effect, immediately
immediatione virtutis, that is, so as that his virtue and power, more
immediately and effectually shows it self in the production of every such
effect, then the power and virtue of the 2d cause; but he produces every
effect of every 2d cause, immediately immediatione suppositi, that is, as an
immediate agent between whom and the effect, no secondary agent intercedeth,
not in respect of all that is found in such an effect, but of some things only,
as existence, and the last perfection of actual being. For to give being, is
proper to God, as to make fire is proper to fire. So that between God the
supreme agent, and being, communicated to the effects of 2d causes, there is
nothing that comes between, that by force and power of it own, can produce
any such effect. So that God as an immediate agent brings forth such effects,
and all 2 causes in respect thereof are but instruments only. But in respect of
those things found in the same effects, into which the 2d causes have an
influence by virtue of their own proper for me, Caietan confesses that God
does not so produce them as an immediate agent, but that the 2d causes do
mediate between him and them, and as secondary principal agents bring forth
their effects. Yet are not these, that is, the first and the 2d causes
partial, but total causes of all those effects which they produce. For the
clearing whereof we must observe, that a cause may be said to be total,
either totalitate effectus, that is, because it brings forth the whole
effect, though some other cause have such efficiencie also in respect of the
same, that without the help of it, it cannot bring forth any such effect; as
when 2 men draw a ship, either of them produces the whole effect, and moves
the whole ship, but yet not so wholly, but that either has need of the others
help and concurrence. Or secondly a cause may be said to be total,
totalitate causoe, and that in 2 sorts: either so, as to produce the whole
effect without any concurrence of any other cause: in which sense neither God,
nor the creature, neither the first, nor the 2d cause, must be said to be a
total cause; or so, as that though some other do concur, yet the being,
power of working, and actual cooperation of it, is wholly from the agent with
which it does concur, and so God is a total cause of all those effects, that
he produces by, and together with the 2d causes. So that the opinion of them
who think, that God has no immediate influence into the effects of 2d causes,
nor immediate concurrence with such causes in producing their effects, is to be
exploded out of all Christian schools and Churches as profane and heathnish.
Wherefore there are, who finding that this first opinion is not to be admitted,
fly to a 2d, little better then the former. For they acknowledge that God has
an immediate influence into the effects of all 2d causes, but they think it to
be general, indefinit, and to be ^ted and determined, by the different concurse
of 2d causes. It is true indeed; that God works all things as an universal
cause: but this may be understood; ways. For first a cause may be said to be
universal, in the universality of predication, as opposite to special or
particular; as an artificer in respect of this and that special kind of
artificers, is general, and is an universal cause of all works of art, and
they of such special works, as are incident to their several kinds.
Secondly, a cause may be said to be universal, in that it extends it self
to effects of all sorts, in respect of something common to them all, and not in
respect of that which is proper to each of them; unless the working of it be
limited and directed by something else. The fire warmeth the water with which
poison is mingled, in the same sort that it does any other water, and without
any difference of it own action. And the actions of the sun and fire are such,
as that men make use of the^ to what purposes they please, and accordingly as
their vvorking is differently applied, bring forth different effects. Thirdly,
a cause may be said to be universal, because the efficiencie and vvorking of
it, extends it self to many things, according to the several differences of
them, without being limited and determined by any other thing. These men
suppose that God is an universal cause in the second sense, and that his
concurrence and influence, is indefinit and general, and such as may be taken
and applied by second causes, in what sort they will. So that the actions of
free will, and the actions of every other second cause, have from the freedom
of the will, and the particular quality of the second causes, that they are of
this or that sort, good or bad: and not from the concurse or influence of the
first cause, which is finde^init, as is the concurse and influence of the sun
with other inferior causes, and as one man may make offer of his help and
concurrence, to whatsoever another will make use of it. So they suppose that
God offers his concurse to second causes, to be used by them, to what purpose
and in what sort they will. According to this conceit, they suppose they can
easily clear the doubt, and free God from all imputation of being author of
sin, though he concur immediately with second causes, in, and to the producing
of those actions that are sinful. For, say they, his concurse and influence is
indefinit, and is by them applied in ill sort, to ill purposes. But first,
this conceit cleereth not God, from being author of sin. And secondly, it
cannot stand with the grounds of Philosophy or divinity. That it cleereth not
God from being author of sin, but rather lays this imputation on him, it is
evident. For if the concurse of God be general, indefinit, and indifferent,
and to be determined by the creature, to the producing of good or evil, it
follows; that when the will of the creature determines it self to the
specificall act of sin, God also determinately concurreth with it in
particular, to the producing of such an act in kind. That this consequence is
good it is evident, because whosoever shall offer his help, concurrence, and
cooperation, to another indifferently, for the producing of good, or evil, the
acts of sin, or virtue, as it shall please him, he concurreth in truth and
indeed, to the producing of the act of sin in particular, as it is such an
act, if by the will of the other, his concurrence and cooperation be
determined to such an act in particular. Wherefore if God for his part, offer
only a general concurse, and such as is indifferent to the producing of acts
of virtue or sin, accordingly as the will of the second cause shall determine
it: it will follow that God concurreth determinately or in particular, to the
producing of the act of sin; as being determined to the producing of such an
act in particular, by the will of the creature, before he come to actual
cooperation or concurrence. Secondly, this conceit cannot stand with the
grounds of true Philosophy or divinity. For if Gods concurse were only
general and indefinit, to be determined by the will of the creature, the will
of the creature should be before the will of God, in respect of the
particularity of things: yea in respect of some real act, as an act, it
should be simply the first agent. For according to this fancy, because the
creature inclines to such an act, and to put a thing in being, therefore God
cooperateth. Whence it will follow, that there are 2 beings of things, and that
God is not simply the first cause of all those things that have being. 2ly It
pertains to divine providence, determinately to will, and aforehand to
appoint, what afterward shall be: to move second causes to certain and
determinate effects, and so to dispose all things, that they may attain the
ends for which they were created. But this could not be, if his concurse were
indefinite, and general only. 3ly If it were as these men imagine, the
determination of the will of the creature, should not be within the compass
of things ordered by divine providence, and so God should not have particular
providence of every particular thing. That this is consequent upon the fancy
of indefinite concurse, it is evident. For if Gods concurse be indefinite and
in general only, then does he not truly and efficiently work, that the will
of the creature shall in particular incline to, and bring forth such an
individual actio^. And if he be not the cause that it so enclineth and
works; his providence exte^deth not to such working, seeing his providence
exte^deth to those things only, wherein he has a working. So that if these
things were so as these men imagine, Gods providence should extend it self to
contingent things, in a generality only, in that he has given to intellectual
creatures a freedom, to what, when, and how it pleases the^, and in
particular in respect ofthings, of this nature, he should have a presidence
only and no providence. Neither does that which is alleged by these men,
touching the indifferent co^curse of the Sun, or that of a man offering his
concurrence in a generality only, prove that Gods concurse is such. For the
Sun is a finite and limited thing, having something in act, and something in
possibility, and so is man likewise; and therefore they may be determined, to
produce such and such individual acts, by the concurse of some other cause.
But God is a cause of infinite perfection, and a pure act, having nothing
admixt of possibility: so that his action and will, cannot be determined and
limited by any other. Wherefore the resolution of the best divines is; that
Gods concurse and influence, is not into the effects of 2d causes only, but
into the 2d causes themselves. So that he does not only by an immediate
concurse and influence, concur with the 2d causes, for the bringing forth of
such effects as they determine themselves unto, but he has an influence into
the 2d causes themselves, moving and working the^ to bring forth effects; and
such effects, as he thinks good to work the^ unto. This is proved by sundry
reasons. First (as we see) 2d causes do not only produce some certain effects
and operations, as within some certain kind, but they give unto the^ their
last actual perfection, and to be. But this they cannot give, unless they be
made co^pleate in virtue active, by the first agent: because an agent must be
no less actual, then the effect or operation it brings forth. But every
created agent is mixed and compounded, of actual being and possibility, and is
not so actual, as an execution, that is a 2d act; therefore before it can
bring forth any execution or effect, it must be made co^pleate in virtue
operative, by the actual motion of the first agent. 2ly, To be is a most
universal act, and the proper effect of God only; therefore if we will speak
formally, and properly, 2d causes, in that they give being to their own
effects, are but instruments of God: whence it will follow, that they must be
moved by him in nature, before they give being to any of their effects. For an
instrument does nothing, toward the producing of the effect of the principal
agent, unless it be actually moved by the principal agent. 3ly Every such
thing as is sometimes an agent in act, sometimes but potentially only, must be
moved by some mouer that is a pure act, and has nothing mingled with it of
possibility, before it ea^ bring forth any actio^. But the will of the creature
is sometimes actually in actio^, sometimes but pote^tially only: therefore it
must be moved by the first act, before it can bring forth any action. Which
must be granted; for that otherwise the will of the creature, in respect of
some actions, should be the first mouer of it self, and the first determiner.
That which is wrought by God, in and upon the second causes, to make them
actually to be in action, is a thing that has a kind of incompleate being,
in such sort as colors have a being in the air, and the power of the act in
the instrument of the artificer; and so often as 2^ causes, whether of natural
or supernatural order, have in respect of the form inherent in them, a
sufficient active power in the nature of the first act, to bring forth their
effects; the help or precedent motion of God, whereby he moves and applies
the same active powers to operate, is not a quality, but is more properly
named a powerful motion, whereby the first, and most universal agent so
works upon them, that the 2d causes are actually in action, every one in sort
fitting to the nature and condition of it. And to this purpose it is that Tho:
Aquinas has, that habitual grace is a quality, but the actual help whereby
God moves us to will a thing, is not a quality, but a certain motion of the
mind. And surely it will easily appear, that there is a great difference
between these. For the habit does perfect the power of the soul, as a form or
first act, implying possibility in respect of actual operation; because the
habit does not determine the power actually to work, but fitteth it only for
action, and inclines it thereunto. But this actual help and moving, putting
forth the 2d causes into their actions, does not perfect the power of working,
but makes the^ actually to be in action. Lastly, the habit in respect of the
nature of it, may be the cause of diverse actions, but that actual help and
moving whereof we speak, determines the will to one individual action, and
yet takes not from it a power of dissenting, and doing otherwise. Disp. 24.
part. 238.
Alvarez a great and learned Archbishop, that has lately written with good
allowance of the Church of Rome, lays down these propositions. First, that
God by an effectual will, predetermined all such acts of men and Angels, as
are good; and all such as are not evil ex obiecto, though in individuo they be
evil, and sins ex mala circumstantia, Which he proves out of the 10th of
Esaias, where Almighty God says, Assure is the rod of my wroth, he is my staff,
I will send him to a deceiptfull nation, and against the people of my fury will
I give him a command. and a little after. Shall the axe boast against him that
cutteth with it? or shall the saw be lifted up against him that draws it? as
if a rod should be lifted up against him that lifts it, and the staff which
is but wood. Here it is evident that Assure sinned ex mala circumstantia, in
subduing the nations; and yet it is clear that God predetermined, that he
should waste and destroy the nations, and that he sent him to that purpose, and
moved him so to do. His 2d proposition is this, that whatsoever is positive,
and of being, in an act of sin, though intrinsecally, and ex obiecto evil, it
has God for the first moving cause, and he does primarily and originally
predetermine the will of the creature by an actual motion, to such an act, in
that it is an act, and in that it has being, and yet not to the difformity of
it. But Cumel disputes strongly against this proposition in this sort. There
are certain acts, says he, intrinsecally evil, so that in them that which is
material, cannot be separated a formali malitia peccati, that is, from the
difformity or sinfulness of such an act. So that it implies a contradiction,
that God should determine our wills freely to bring forth such an action, in
respect of that which is material in it, and not to determine it to bring
forth the same action, in respect of that which is formal. And this reason
has greater force against them, that hold that the formality of sin,
consists in some thing that is positive, as in the manner of working freely,
with positive repugnance to the Law of reason, and of God. For if God
predetermine, and effectually move, to the producing of evil actions, in
respect of that which is material in them, and the substance of the act; he
must necessarily also predetermine the same actions, in respect of all their
positive conditions and circumstances: as the freedom of working, and the
positive repugnance to the Law of God. And if he determine the will to work
repugnantly to the Law, he must needs move and determine it to sin; seeing to
sin is nothing else, but to repugne unto the law. So that it must not be
said, that God is the original cause, that man has any such action of will,
as is evil ex obiecto. For if he should originally and out of himself will
any such act, he must be the author of sin: seeing such an act is
intrinsecally evil, so that it cannot be separated from difformity: but
whosoever wills the substance of such an act, must also will the difformity
annexed thereunto, in the same sort as he wills the substance of it, as is
already proved.

Wherefore that we may rightly conceive, how God may be said to will actions
of this kind: I will lay down these propositions. First, that of the sin of
omission no higher cause needs to be sought, then the deficient will of the
creature; and that God no otherwise decreed the entrance of it, but in that he
decreed the denial of that grace, without which he knew such omission would
be. The second, that the sin of omission is in order before the sin of
commission. The sin of omission was first in the Angels, says Wickliffe, as
it is also in every man that sins. Omission, says Alexander of Hales, in
the order of sins, so far forth as we may conceive, that there is any
order amongst them, is before commission. The third, that the sinner falling
into the sin of omission, puts himself, not only into an estate of
aversion from God, but of opposition also, and being adverse unto God: and so
into a necessity of committing sin, so long as he continues in that state.
For he that is opposite to God, if he have any action at all, must of
necessity have such as are repugnant to the will and law of God. The fourth,
that God the universal mouer, who moves and works all things, to bring
forth such actions, as are fitting to their condition, cease not, to work
and move upon men, and Angels, after they are become averse: but he still
moves, and impelleth them to do things, fitting to that condition wherein he
finds them, as he does all other things, and as he works in and together
with all second causes, such effects as are fitting to their condition. So he
brings forth in and with these thus auerse, actions fitting to such an estate
of aversion, and adverse opposition, that is, such as are beside and contrary
to the rule of righteousness. So that to conclude this point, God neither
works the creature to be evil, for it becomes evil of it self, by
falling into the sin of omission; nor simply and absolutely moves and
determines it to do evil: but he moves it to do things fitting to the
condition wherein it is, even after by it own fault it is become evil, and
produces in and together with it, such actions as are fitting to that estate:
that is, such as are evil. And his will being that nothing shall be without
action, nor without action fitting to the condition thereof, he has settled it
by an effectual and positive decree, that he that will be averse and evil,
shall not but do evil, so long as he is and will be, in such an estate and
condition. If we speak, says Gregorius Ariminensis de prima mala voluntate,
non habuit causam efficientem, quia nulla res fuit quae aliquid faciendo
faceret illam malam, sed ipsa desistendo a bona volitione facta est mala: sed
malae volitionis aliqua est causa. That is, If we seek out how the will of
the creature at first became ill, there is no efficient cause thereof to be
found, for there was nothing that did any thing to make it evil, but of it
self by desisting to will that it should, it became evil: but of the act of
willing what it should not, there is a positive cause. It is excellent to this
purpose that Luther has, in his book de servo arbitrio against Erasmus.
Reason yields, says he, that God works all in all, and that nothing can
be done without him; for he is omnipotent, and this pertayneth to his
omnipotency, as Paul says to the Ephesians. Now Satan and man fallen from
God, and forsaken of him, cannot will that which is good, that is, such things
as please God, or such as he would have to be done; but being turned away to
desire such other things as shall please themselves, they cannot but seek
those things that are their own. This nature of men and Angels thus turned
from God, is not nothing, neither is Satan and a wicked man nothing; neither
can we say they have no nature, nor will; though they have a corrupt and
auerse nature. Therefore that which remains of nature in a wicked man, and in
Satan, as a creature and the work of God, is no less subject to omnipotency,
and the action of God, then all other creatures and works of God are. Whereas
therefore God moves, and works all in all, he moves and works also in
Satan, and the wicked man, and he works in them in such sort, as is fitting
to that they are, and as he finds them, that is, so, that being evil and
averse, and yet carried on with the motion of divine omnipotency, they cannot
but do such things as are averse, and evil. As if a horseman shall drive a
horse that goes but on two, or three feet; he makes him go so as he must
needs go, if he go at all, so long as he is thus lame, that is, haltingly.
But what should the horseman do? he drives on the lame horse, with the other
that are sound: they go well, this ill. It cannot be otherwise, unless the
horse be freed from his lamenesse. Here we see by this comparison, how that
when God works, in and by them that are evil, such things are done as are
evil, but that God cannot do evil, though he produce in and by them that
are evil, such things as are evil, because he being good cannot do evil.
Yet does he use ill instruments, which cannot but be moved with the motion of
his power, nor cannot but do evil if they be moved. So that the fault is in
the instruments which God moves, and will not suffer to be idle, that evil
things are done, when he moves them; no otherwise than if a Carpenter using an
ill axe, should cut, or rather tear the timber ill favouredly. And hence it
comes, that the wicked cannot but always do amiss, and sin. Because
being carried on by the motion of divine power, they are not suffered to do
nothing, but are forced to will, desire, and do that which it fitting to the
state wherein they are: till they be altered by Gods holy grace, and spirit.
And hereunto agree all the best learned in the Roman Schools. If the name of
sin, says Gregorius Ariminensis, be taken improperly for an evil act, as
for such an act as whosoever does sins, for example, for the act of v Li.
2. d. 34 3^. 36. 37. q. 1. art, 3.
willing something, that should not be willed, or for some other inward or
outward act which the sinner does; there is some doubt whether God be an
immediate efficient cause of such a sinful act, or not: and there are solemn
opinions one contrary to another touching that point. But without peremptory
defense of the one or the other, which might argue rashness, for the present I
hold the affirmative as more probable, and as it seems to me, more consonant
to the sayings of the Saints. And he adds, whereas some speak of the
difformity of such a sinful act, denying God to be any efficient cause
thereof; Si per difformitatem intelligatur aliqua entitas, quaecunque and
vbicunque sit, illam coagit Deus, nec scio oppositum dici a Sanctis. Doctores
aliqui moderni dicunt, quod licet actus difformis sit a Deo, difformitas tamen
ipsa non est a Deo. Quod dictum potest habere bonum intellectum, non quidem
concipiendo quod difformitas sit aliqua entitas ab actu distincta, quae non
causetur a Deo: sed intelligendo quod licet actus difformis sit a Deo, non
tamen est difformis, in quantum est a Deo. Nam non est difformis nisi in
quantum contra rectam rationem fit ab homine, non autem a Deo qui nihil agit
contra id quod ab eo agendum esse recta ratio indicat. Deus non est eiusdem rei
secundum idem actor and vltor; sed est eius actor, in quantum entitas quaedam,
eius vero vltor in quantum est malum. Est autem malum in quantum male fit, and
ideo punit eum a quo male fit pro ea. If by the difformity they understand any
being, or any thing that is positive, whatsoever and wheresoever it is, God is
a cause thereof, neither do I know, says he, that the contrary is delivered
by the Saints. Indeed there are certain modern Doctors that say, that
though the act wherein difformity is, be from God, yet the difformity is not;
which their saying may have a good sense, not conceiving that the difformity is
any positive thing distinct from the act, whereof God should not be an actor:
but so understanding it, that though the act which is done otherwise then it
should be done, be of God, yet it is not done otherwise then it should be
done, as it is done by God: for God does nothing in producing such an act that
he should not do but the creature only. So that, as the Divines do tell us,
God is not an actor and a punisher of the same thing in respect of the same:
but he is an actor of the thing in that it is a thing done, but a punisher in
that it is ill done. And therefore he punishes him that has done ill in doing
ill, himself, having done the same thing well. Quid mirum, says De casu
Diaboli c. 20.
Anselm, si dicamus Deum facere singulas actiones, qu^ fiunt mala voluntate,
cum fateamur eum facere singulas substantias, quae fiunt iniusta voluntate, and
inhonesta action: that is, What strange thing is it, if we say, that God
produces all those actions which sinful men do wickedly, seeing we confess
he produces all those substances, which are brought forth by a sinful desire
of the will, and an dishonest action? God produces and forms the same child
in the womb, which a man begets in adultery, and yet man only sins, and
not God. Hug. eruditi Theolog. de Sacram. lib. 1. part. 4. c. 12. 13.
Si vero dicitur, says Hugo de S. Victore, Deus vult malum, grave est auditu,
and non facile recipit hoc pia men's; de bono quod malumvult, Videtur enim hoc
solum dici cum dicitur Deus vult malum, quia bonus malum diligit, and approbat
quod pravum est, and amicam sibi reputat iniquitatem, and gaudet quasi de
consimili, and bonum put at quod malum est: and ideo refutat hoc menspia, non
quia quod dicitur non been dicitur, sed quia quod been dicitur, non been
intelligitur. Non enim hoc solum dicitur, sed ex eo quod dicitur, aliquid
intelligitur quod non dicitur. Quoniam malum esse vult, and malum non vult:
that is, If it be said, that God wills the thing that is evil, men hardly
endure to hear it, and a pious and good mind does not easily admit, that he
that is good, wills the thing that is evil: for we conceive nothing else
when we say, God wills that which is evil, but that he that is good, loves
that which is evil, and approves that which is wicked. And therefore a good
mind rejects such a speech, not because it is not right and good, but
because that which is rightly said, is not rightly understood, For this speech
is not so to be taken, as if God loved, or approved that which is evil, but
something is to be understood which is not expressed. And the meaning of this
speech is, that God wills the being of evil, or that evil shall be, and yet
wills not evil, that is, approves it not. Now when it is said, that God
wills the being of evil, or that evil shall be, the meaning of this saying of
Hugo is; concerning the sin of omission, that he wills it no otherwise, but
only in that he denies that grace, which only he knows, would work the
doing of the contrary good; and concerning the sin of commission, that he
produces in and together with them, that by falling into the sin of omission
are become evil, such actions as are evil. There are, says Li. 1. q. 13.
art. 1.
Cameracensis, who hold, that God has an efficiencie, and is a cause producing
the action that is sinful, and that he may and does cause and will that which
is sin; as Ockam, Bradwardine, and sundry other renowned Doctors. Lib. 1. q. 14.
And elsewhere he says, that according to the opinion of the master of the
sentences, God only permits those evils which are sin, and that he neither
wills their being, or not being. For if he did will their being, he should
be the cause of them; which he thinks must not be granted; and if he did
will their not being, they should not be. But Bradwardine, and others hold,
that God wills those evils that are sins, and that in respect of every
thing, he has an act of will, either that it shall be, or not be, and not a
mere negation of such act. If we speak says In sen. l 3. q. 12
Ockam of the sin of commission, we must not think that the will of the
creature has an efficiencie, and is so the cause of that act, but that God
also who as immediately produces every act of the creature, as the creature
does it self, has his efficiencie, and is a cause also even of the difformity
that is found in such an act, as well as of the substance of the act. Seeing as
we have already showed, the difformity in an act of commission, is nothing else
but the very act it self that is done contrary to the precept. Yet does not
God originally move the creature to do any such evil act; but contrariwise so
made it, and would have so continued it, if the fault had not been in it
self, that it should never have done any evil act. But finding it by it own
fault averse and turned from him, notwithstanding all the gracious means he
used to retain it, he goes on moving and carrying it forward with restles
motions, and produces in and with it thus averse, actions fitting to such an
estate, and such as it must needs bring forth, if it bring forth any at all;
that is, such as are evil. Thus he does without all fault of his, who must not
cease to do his work of moving and carrying forward all things with restless
motions, though by their own fault being put out of due course, they do not
attain their wished good, but run themselves into endless evils. Thus then
God did only by substraction and denial of that grace, without which he saw
the creature would not be won to continue in that state of good wherein it
was to be created, decree and purpose, the entrance of the sin of omission
and auersion; but presupposing this purpose, and foreseeing that which would
follow upon it, by his consequent and conditiouall will, he positiuely decreed
the other which is of commission. For seeing man must needs seek an infinite
good, and love it infinitely, and if he seek it not in God, must seek it
elsewhere; God did decree that man not continuing to adhere to him, should
seek his chief good in him self, and so consequently fall into selfeloue,
pride, and all other evils of that kind. This is the opinion of many worthy
divines in the Roman Church, and this is that Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, and the
rest meant, if any where they affirmed that God does effectually move, impell,
and incline sinful creatures, to do such things as are evil: namely that God
has settled such a course in things, that they that will not do what they
should, shall do that they should not; and that he will not suffer them that
fall from him to do nothing, but will effectually move them to will, desire,
and do that, which is fitting to the estate into which they put themselves, so
long as they continue in the same, and will not be reclaimed and won to
return to him again. And this is agreeable to that of S. Augustine that God
enclineth or moves no man to evil, but that he enclineth such as are evil,
to this or that evil. With whom Cap. (...).
Anselm writing upon the epistle to the Romans agrees, where he says, that
God may be said to deliver men up to their own hearts desires, when being prone
to evil; he stays them not: and adds, that it is also manifest, that God
does work in the hearts of men, to incline their wills whither soever he
pleases, either to choose things that are good out of his mercy, or to choose
things that are evil according to their deserts, the reasons of his judgment
being sometimes manifest, sometimes hid, but always just. For because men have
run into some sins, they afterward fall into many: and God, that long
expects the sinner, looking that he should return, when he finds that he
returns not, but co^temneth both his justice and mercy, he casts some thing
in his way, at which he may stumble and fall yet worse then before. Inter
primum peccatu^ apostasiae, and vltimam poena^ ignis, media quae sunt, and
peccata sunt, and poenae peccati. Whatsoever sins do come between the first sin
of apostasy, and the last punishment which is that of eternal fire, they are
both sins and punnishme^nts, and therefore God may justly deliver up such as
fall from him by the first sin of apostasy, and depart from him, unto their
own hearts desires, for the committing of such things as are not seemly.

Thus then we may resolve touching the entrance of sin. First, God purposed
eternally to make man a rational and intellectual creature, endued with
knowledge of all things, and faculty and power to make choice of what he
would. Secondly, Man could not be thus made, and be naturally free from
possibility and danger of making an evil choice, disposing amiss of himself,
and offending against the laws of his righteous Creator. Thirdly, God wanted
not gracious means whereby to hold him inseperably to himself, and to
preserve him infallibly from falling away, though he were not, nor could not
be, naturally free from possibility of falling. Fourthly, God foresaw, that, if
man were so created and left to himself as afterward he was, he would
sinfully depart from him. Fifthly, he saw that it was best to create and leave
him so, and that if sin should enter, he could take an occasion thereby of
the manifestation of greater good, then the world otherwise could ever know.
Sixthly, seeing the determination of man's will, that if he should be thus
created and left, he would auert from him and sin would enter, he
determined so to create him and leave him, and to give way that sin might
enter. Thus then we do not say that God did absolutely, without all
prescience of the determination of man's will, determine and decree that sin
should enter; but that, foreseing what would be the determination of his will,
if he were so created and left to himself, as in his divine wisdom he saw it
to be fittest, he determined so to create and leave him, and purposed by
subtraction of grace to give way unto the sin of auersion, or omission, and
permissiuely to suffer it for to enter; and by a positive decree resolved, that
auerting himself from the fountain of all goodness, and the rule of all
righteousness, he should run into innumerable dangerous evils, and grievous
sins of commission.

But Bellarmine will say, Calvine denies that Gods determination, decreeing
what shall be, depends on this prescience, and that his prescience
presupposes his purpose and decree. Scotus, li. 1. did. 41. quest. vnica sola
permissio alicuius actus, and certitudo de permissione non facit ce^titudinem
de illo actu, quia oportet habere aliquam causam effectiuam: igitur ex hoc quod
Deus prae^t se velle permitter Luum^ peccare, ex hoc, in^ quam, solo non
uidetur quod sc^t Luciferum peccaturum. Soluitur haec objectio, quia Deus non
solum scit se permissurum, sed etiam scit se non coop^ aturum c^ ad actum
necessarium, et per consequens omittet: and scit se cooperatu^ ad substantiem
actus prohibiti sine debitis circumstantijs, and per consequens committet. This
expl^catio. of Scotus ^leateth the meam^ g^f ^luine and Beza, when they say.
God cannot foreknow fu^ t^thinas, unless he co^cur otherwise than by bare
pe^issie. See the places objected by Bell^mine l. 2. c. 4. de a^one gratiae and
statu p^cati.
For answer hereunto we must remember, that there is a double prescience;
simplicis intelligentiae, and visionis. The first is of all those things that
are possible, and which upon any supposed condition may be; as was that
prescience of God, whereby he foreknew, that if in Tyrus and Sidon those
things should be done, which afterward were done among the Jews, they would
repent. This does not presuppose the decree of God, but extends to many
things God does not decree, nor purpose to be, as it appears in the example
proposed, The other is of those things only which hereafter shall be; and
this presupposes some act of Gods will. For seeing nothing can be unless
some act of Gods will do pass upon it, at least not to hinder the being of
it, nothing can be thus foreseen, as being hereafter for to be, unless
some decree of God do pass upon it. Of this kind of prescience, Calvin
speaks, and not of the other. For that first kind of prescience what the
creature would do, if it were so created, and left to it self, as afterward
it was, was before any decree of God, or determination what he would do. But
that other, to wit, what hereafter shall be, not so; and therefore Calvin
rightly affirms, that Gods foresight of the entrance of sin, presupposed
his decree that it should enter.

Thus I see not what can be disliked by our adversaries in our doctrine thus
delivered, nor what difference can be imagined between them and us, touching
the entrance of sin. But, Lib. 2 cap. 17. de ^one g^ae and statu p^ati.
says Bellarmine, Calvin affirms, that the end, for which God purposed to
make man, was the manifestation of the severity of his justice, and the riches
of his mercy; and that the consideration of this end, was the first thing that
was found in God, when he thought of creating man: so that this purpose was
before and without respect unto the prescience of any thing that afterward
might or would be in man; And that because there was not any thing wherein he
could show either mercy or Justice, unless sin did enter, therefore
secondly he purposed, that sin should enter. So that first he purposed to
punish before he saw any cause, and then purposed the entrance of sin, that
there might be cause; which is no less inexcusable from injustice, cruelty,
and tyranny, than if he should purpose to punish, and so do, without any cause
at all. Thus, says he, it should seem, that the first original and spring
of sin, is from the will of God, according to Calvines opinion.

For answer hereunto we must note, that Calvin does no where say, that God
did purpose the manifestation of his mercy and Justice before all prescience,
but only before that, which is named praescientia visionis. Secondly, that
Calvin does no where pronounce, that simply and absolutely the end wherefore
God purposed to make man, was the manifestatio^ of the severity of his justice,
and the riches of his mercy, or that he might save some, and condemn others;
But as I conceive according to Caluines opinion, four things are implied in
Gods purpose of creating man. First, what he meant to bestow upon him.
Secondly, what he meant to deny unto him. Thirdly, the foreknowledge what would
fall out, upon the bestowing of such benefits only, and the denying of others,
namely, Sin, and Apostasy. Fourthly, his purpose, notwithstanding his
foreknowledge, to bestow upon him only such benefits of his rich and abundant
goodness, and no other. So then the end of those benefits, which God purposed
in such sort, and in such degree and measure, to bestow upon man in his
creation, was not the manifestation of his mercy and Justice, neither did he
purpose the entrance of sin originally out of his own liking, that he might
have matter of punishment, as Bellarmine injuriously charge Calvine to
affirm; But the end of his purpose of bestowing such benefits only, and no
other, notwithstanding his foreknowledge what would fall out, if so he did,
was, that he might show his mercy and Justice in saving and condemning whom he
would. And against this, Bellarmine neither does, nor can except.

Thus having cleared those doubts that occur in the doctrine of the Divines
of the reformed Churches, touching the entrance of sin; Let us come to the
second part, and see what it is, that they attribute unto God, when sin is
entered. The actions they attribute to God, when sin is entered, are three:
Limitation, direction, and condign punishing of one sin with another. For
the first, that God sets bounds to wicked men in their wickedness, not
only in respect of the effect and event, but also of the very inward purpose,
affections, and designs, and at his pleasure stops them when he will; I
think none of our adversaries will make any question. For the devil himself
was limited how far he should proceed in afflicting Job c 1. ^z. Math. 8. 31.
Job: and could not enter into an herd of swine, without leave obtained. For
though the will to do evil be not of God, yet the power is; for there is no
power that is not of God.

Touching the second; which is direction, though God be not the Author and
causer of evil, nor may be thought without impiety to put it into men, yet
when he finds it in them, he directs it, not only in respect of the kind
wherein; the persons against whom, and the time when it shall break forth; But
also in respect of the end and effect: in which sense it is that Lib. 2. c. 13.
de amis^ione gratiae and statu peccati.
Bellarmine and Stapleton both say, that though GOD incline not simply and
absolutely unto evil, yet he inclines and bends the wills of them that
be wicked, that they shall be wicked in this sort, rather than that, at this
time, than at some other, against such men, rather than against those they more
malign and desire to despite, if they were left to themselves. Hugo de S.
Victore lib. 1. de sacramentis part. 5. cap. 29.
This God does in that he opens the passage, and makes way for wickedness
to come forth and show it self in what sort he pleases, and stops all
other. Even as a man being in a high Tower, and desiring to cast himself
down, there being many passages thorough which he might cast himself out, if
a man should stop all but one, though he might not justly be said to be
the cause of the fall of him that should thus cast away himself, Ibid. Hugo.
Qui praecipiti qua vult ad rumam viam aperit, quodammodo ipsum inclinat, non
impellendo, sed permittendo, and non tenendo: nec author illiest ruendi, sed
incedendi ordinator.
yet might he rightly be said to be the cause, why he fell rather this way,
and out of this window or passage, then any other. So does God order, dispose,
and direct the wickedness of men, to break out in what sort, at what time,
and against what persons he pleases, and no otherwise; and is author ordinis
in malo, though not mali. k Thomas in comment. c. 9. ad Romans citatut a Bella^.
l. 2. c. 13. de amissione gratiae and statu peccati.


When we say he opens the way and passage for wickedness to break forth, we
must understand that he does this in two sorts; either by not hindering it from
breaking forth in some one kind, which he suffers no otherwise to show it
self, or in that he positiuely inclines it hither rather then thither, not by
way of cause but of occasion offered. In which sense it is, that David says,
God Sam. 16. 10.
commanded Shemei to curse him, not as if God had either inwardly or outwardly
persuaded him so to do; But because, finding him full of malice against David,
he so prospered David before, that he durst not revile him, not had no cause to
insult upon him: But now he presented him to his eyes in such a miserable
estate, forsaken of many, and pursued by his own son, as he knew would
occasion these words of insultation, and bitter malediction. Thus then God
commanded Shemei to curse David, not by precept, outwardly requiring him so to
do, nor by persuasion, inwardly inclining him to so vile an actio^; but by,
direction, inclining him, by words of malediction to express his bitter
affection (which long before desired to vent it self) now at this time, and
for the punishment of David's sins, rather then at an other time and in
another sort.

So when wicked men had spoiled Job. 1. 21.
Job he said, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, imputing it to
God; not as if he had made them to become Robbers, but for that being such, he
directed their wickedness, and used it to the trial of his servant, opening a
passage for their wickedness, and presenting to them such things as he knew
would occasion this outrage. Acts 2. 23.
As lakewise the Jews, in crucifying Christ, are said to have done nothing but
that which God had before resolutely determined, not as if God had purposed
their wickedness, but only because knowing what was in them, he was pleased to
direct, guide, and turn their wickedness and furious malice, to the effecting
of his own purposes.

The third action that we attribute unto God, is, that he punishes one sin
by an other. In punishments, In annotationibus clucidatorijs quaestionum in
epistolam Pauli ad Roman. 1. cap. illa verba, Tradidit illos Deus.
Hugo de sancto victore notes three things: The matter, with which a man is
punished; the contrariety between it, and the party punished; and the order of
consequence, that where such an offense went before, such an evil shall follow,
to make the party offending feel the smart of it. In those punishments which
be punishments only, and not sins, God is the author and cause of all these
three things employed in the nature of punishments: in those which be
punishments, and sins, God is author only of the order of consequence, and
the contrariety between them, and the nature of the parties punished; not of
the matter wherewith they are afflicted and punished. As for example: Pride is
punished by envy; Envy is not of God, but the contrariety between it, and
the soul of man, which makes it bitter and afflictiue, is: And the order of
consequence, that where pride went before, envy must follow. Neither does God
only punish one sin with another, when there is such a dependence of one upon
the other, that where one goes before, the other must follow: But oftentimes,
when there is no such necessary dependence, yet he withdraws his grace, and
for the punishment of one sin, lets men run into another. In this sense,
there are three things attributed to God, in the punishment of wicked and
godless men: The blinding of their vrderstanding: The hardening of their
hearts, and the giving of them up unto a reprobate sense.

These things God is said to do three ways: First, by subtraction and denial
of that grace which should lighten the understandings, and soften and mollify
the hearts of men: Secondly by giving leave to Satan to work upon them, and no
way either strengthening them against him, or weakening his force: Thirdly,
occasionally and by accident, when God does that which is good, which yet he
knows, through the evil disposition that is in men, will increase their
wickedness, and make it greater then it was before.

CHAP. 24.
Of the heresies of Origin, touching the Image of God; and touching hell,
falsely imputed to Calvin.

IN the third place, the Jesuit, fearing that men should think he were near
driven and wanted store, he charge Calvin at once with two heresies of
Origin. The first concerning the Image of God; the second touching Hell and the
punishments of it.

Heresi. 64. and in Epistola ad Iohannem Episcopum Hierosolymitanum.
Touching the first, it is true that Epiphanius charge Origin with heresy,
For saying that Adam lost the Image of God by his disobedience and sin: but
how justly, it is very doubtful; Seeing neither Hierome, nor Theophilus
Alexandrinus, most diligently noting his errors, make any mention of it. And
therefore it may be probably thought, as Contra Hereses: lib: z. Adam and Eua.
Alphonsius a Castro notes, that if any such thing was found in the works of
Origin, it was so delivered by him, as that it might carry a good
construction, and free from heresy. But leaving it uncertain what it was that
Origin meant by the loss of Gods Image. For the clearing of Calvin, we must
note that which 1. Part summae quaest. 93. art. 4. vbi ait glossam distinguere
triplicem imaginem: creationis, recreationis, and similitudinis, prima
inuenitur in omnibus; 2. in justice tantum: tertia vero solum in beatis.
Thomas Aquinas (no heretic I hope in Bellarmines judgment,) being a
Canonized Saint of the Romish Church, has fittely observed to this purpose.

He notes, first, that the Image of God consists in the eminent perfection
which is found in men, expressing the nature of God in an higher degree, then
any excellency of other creatures does. Secondly, that this perfection is
found principally in the soul. Thirdly, that it is threefold. First, natural,
which is the largeness of the natural faculties of understanding and will,
not limited to the apprehension or desire of some certain things only, but
extending to all the conditions of being and goodness, whose principal
object is God; So that they never rest satisfied with any other thing, but the
seeing and enjoying of him.

The second kind of this perfection is supernatural; when the soul actually,
or at the least habitually knows and loves God aright, though not so
perfectly as he may, and shall be loved hereafter. The third is when the
soul knows and loves God in fullness of happiness. The first is of nature,
the second of grace, and the third of glory. The first of these is never lost,
no not by the damned in hell. The second, Adam had, but lost it, and it is
renewed in us by grace. The third we expect in heaven. To think the Image of
God, considered in the first sort, to be lost, is heresy; but Calvin is free
from it. To think it lost in the second sort, is the Catholic doctrine of
the Church: for, who knows not that man has lost all right knowledge and
love of God, by Adams fall?

Some restrain the name of the Image of God, to the excellency of the souls
nature, framed to know all things, and never to rest satisfied in any thing,
under God: And so generally and absolutely deny, that the Image of God can be
lost or blotted out. These make a difference between the Image of God, thus
restrained to the largnesse and and admirable perfection of the natural
faculties of the soul, and the similitude or likeness of God, which appears
in the qualities and virtues of it, making him that possesses them, partaker
of the divine nature, which they confess to be lost.

Now this similitude is all one, with the Image of God in the second
consideration set down by Aquinas; and therefore in this matter Calvin erreth
not, but writes that which is consonant unto the truth.

Touching the second part of this imputation, it is true that Hier. in Epist.
ad Avitum.
Origin erred, thinking hell to be nothing else but horror of conscience; But
he that looks in the place in Calvin cited by the Jesuit, shall see, that he
says no such thing, but the clean contrary. So that the Reader shall find
Bellarnne to be constant, and still like himself, adding one calumniation to
another.

CHAP. 25.
Of the heresy of the Peputians, making women Priests.

THe fourth Heresy, imputed unto us by our adversaries, is that of the
Peputians, who gave women authority to intermeddle with the sacred ministry
of the Church. That we do so likewise, they endeavor to prove, by
misreporting the words of Luther. There are two things therefore which Luther
says, in the place alleged by them. First, that in absolution and remission
of sins in the supposed Sacrament of Penance, a Bishop or ordinary Presbyter
may do as much, as the Pope himself; which Lib. 2. verb. absolutio.
Alphonsus a Castro, writing against Heresies, confesses to be true. The
second, that when, and where, no Presbyter can be found to perform this
office, a Lay man, yea or a woman in this case of necessity, may absolve;
which our adversaries need not to think so strange, seeing themselves give
power to women, to baptize in case of necessity: which (I think) is as much a
ministerial act, as to absolve the penitent, in such sort as absolution is
given in the Church of Rome. And yet they would think themselves wronged, if
from hence it should be inferred, that they make women Priests and Bishops.
But Bellarmine reports the words of Luther, as if he should say absolutely,
that a woman, or child, has as much power and authority from God in these
things, as any Presbyter or Bishop: wherein he is like himself.

Absolution, in the Primitive Church, was the reconciling and restoring of
penitents to the peace of the Church, and to the Communion of the Sacraments,
from which during the time of their penitencie, they were excluded. This in
reason none could do, but they to whom the dispensation of the Sacraments was
committed, and who had power to deny the Sacraments. The Popish absolution is
supposed to be a Sacramental act, Sacramentally taking away sin, and
making the party absolved partaker of the remission of it. This is a false and
erroneous conceit. LVTHER thinks it to be a comfortable pronouncing, and
assuring of good to the humble, penitent, and sorrowful sinner: which though
ordinarily, and ex officio, the Minister be to do, yet may any man do it
with like effect, when none of that rank is, or can be present. Thus when the
matter is well examined, it is merely nothing, that Bellarmine can prove
against Luther.

But that which he adds, touching our late dread Sovereign ELIZABETH of
famous memory, that she was reported and taken as chief Bishop within her
dominions of England etc. is more then a Cardinal lie, and might beseem the
father of lies, better then any meaner professor of that faculty.

For the Kings, and Queens of England, neither do, nor have power to do, any
ministerial act, or act of sacred order, as to preach, administer Sacraments,
and the like: But that power and authority, which we ascribe unto them, is,
that they may by their princely right, take notice of matters of Religion, and
the exercise of it in their kingdoms; That they may, and in duty stand bound,
to see, that the true Religion be professed, and God rightly worshipped: That
God has given them the sword to punish all offenders against the first or
second Table, yea though they be Priests or Bishops. That neither the persons,
nor the goods of Churchmen are exempted from their power: That they hold their
Crowns immediately from God, and not from the Romish Antichrist; That it was
the Lucifer-like pride of Antichrist, which appeared in times past in the
Popes, Matheus Paris in Hentico 3. de Innocentio 4. p. 844.
whee^ they shamed not to say that the Kings of England were their villanes,
vassalls, and slaves. Thus then the fourth supposed heresy we are charged
with, proves to be nothing but a devilish slander of this shameless Jesuit.

We say therefore, to silence this slanderer, that we all most constantly hold
the contrary of that he imputes unto us; And that we think, there is no more
dangerous or presumptuous wicked boldness, then for any man not called, set a
part, and sanctified thereunto, to intermeddle with any part of the sacred
ministry of the Church.

CHAP 26.
Of the supposed heresy of Proclus and the Messalians, touching concupiscence
in the regenerate.

THe fifth heresy, which he endeavors to fasten upon us, is, he says, the
heresy of Proclus, of whom Here Is. 64.
Epiphanius makes mention. But what was the heresy of Proclus? Let Bellarmine
tell us, for our learning. It was (says he) that sin does always continue and
live in the Regenerate: for that concupiscence is truly and properly sin,
which is not taken away by Baptism, but only allaied, stilled, and brought, as
it were, into a kind of rest and sleep by force thereof, and the working of
faith. In this, Bellarmine shows his intolerable either ignorance, or
impudence, or both. For Epiphanius, in the place cited by him, refuteth the
heresy of Origin, who denied the resurrection of the bodies of men, as
thinking such bodily substances, which we see are continually subject to
alteration here in this world; not capable of immortality; And that God did put
these bodies upon Adam and Eve, after their sin, at that time when he is said
to have made them coats of skins. This Epiphanius refuteth, showing that
God, who only has immortality, made man though out of the earth, yet by the
immediate touch of his own hands; that he breathed into him the breath of
life, for that he meant he should be immortal; that man had flesh and blood,
and a true bodily substance before his fall, as is proved by that of Adam
concerning Eve, This is now flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone; that there
was no evil found in the World, such as death is, in the beginning; that man
voluntarily sinned against God, and thereupon God brought in death; that even
as the Schoolmaster uses correction, not for any delight he has in it, but
for that thereby he intends to bring his Scholars to forsake their negligent
and disordered courses, and to do those things he prescribes to them; in like
sort, God seeing that sin was entered, brought in punishments to repress it:
and seeing that it would be eternal, if man did continue immortal, he brought
in death to make an end of it. For (says Epiphanius) sin is so deeply rooted
in us, that it cannot be quite killed nor pulled up by the roots, while the
body and soul remain together, Even as (says he) when some wild fig tree
grows in the walls of a Goodly and stately building, and defaceth and hides
the beauty and glory of it, the boughs and branches may be cut or broken off,
but the root which is wrapped into the stones of the building, cannot be
taken away, unless the walls be thrown down, and the stones cast one from
another: So the sin which dwells in us, has the roots of it so
invvrapped into our nature and the parts of it, that howsoever the boughs and
branches may be cut and broken off, the root remains while we carry about
us this body of death, and will cause more branches to grow forth till by
death, the parts of our nature, to wit, the soul and the body, be sundred
and divided. And as the wall may be raised again, and the stones thereof in
due sort laid together, when the roots of the trees, which formermerly grew
into it, be taken forth: So when the root of sin is removed by death out of
man's nature, God will bring these parts of his nature together again, and give
him that immortality both of body and soul, which he intended to him in his
creation, and would have given him, had not death been necessary for the
rooting out of that sin he voluntarily fell into.

That sin is so deeply rooted in the nature of man, that it cannot be
plucked up but by death, Epiphanius says it is evident, by that of the
Apostle, who pronounces of himself, that to will was present with him, but he
found no ability to perform: That the good he would do, he did not, and the
evil that be would not do, that he did; And, that yet it was not he that
did it, but sin that dwells in him; By this (says he) it is proved, that
sin is not pulled up by the roots, that it is not dead but living, that
there is no man but has evil thoughts and desires, which grow from this
bitter root of sin, which neither Baptism, nor faith do wholly remove or
kill, that sin is only repressed, resisted, and stilled from raging and
prevailing in such sort as it did before, but not wholly taken away.

Thus then we see, that Epiphanius most excellently delivers that, in the
defense of the truth against Origin; and such like heretics, which
Bellarmine imputes unto us, as heresy condemned by Epiphanius. Wherein surely
he was either grossly abused by others, making him beleeu Epiphanius says that,
which most peremptorily he denies; or else he was vvilling to deceive and
abuse others.

Howsoever, this advantage we have gotten thereby, that our assertion, that
sin remains after Baptism, and that the root of it is not taken away, nor
killed, till by death the soul and body be divided, is proved to be the
ancient doctrine of the Primitive Fathers.

But if Epiphanius fail him, Bellarmine has another author, whereon to rely.
For he says, Hereticarum fabularum: li. 4. These heretics thought, that
baptism does not take away original sin, which is the root of all other, nor
deliver us from the power of Satan, nor give spirit and grace to resist sin.
These errors we condemn, and therefore we are ^ly charged with the heresy
of the Messali^ns.
Theodoret reports, that the Messalians were condemned for heretics,
because they thought that Baptism as a Razar shaueth away sins past, but
does not take away the root of sin, and that therefore for that purpose we
must fly to the force of prayer.

This opinion of the Messalians, touching the not taking away the root of
sin, in such sort as they understood it, and Theodoret disliked it, we also
condemn. For we think, that Baptism does not only take away sins past,
but the very root of all sins, which is Original sin, though not wholly;
(for then we should dissent from Epiphanius before alleged) yet in such sort,
as I will deliver in that which follows.

The error of the Messalians, Bellarmine attributes unto us, because we
teach that concupiscence in the Regenerate is sin. For the better clearing of
this point, we must observe, that the Romanists do err most daungerously in
the matter of original sin, and natural concupiscence. For first they
teach, that the contrariety between the spirit and the flesh, the pronenesse
inordinately to desire things transitory, sensible and outward, and the
difficulty to that which is best, are the primitive conditions of the nature of
man: And consequently, that concupiscence, neither after, nor before Baptism,
in the Regenerate nor unregenerate is sin or punishment of sin, but a
condition of pure and sole nature. For if man had been created in a state of
pure nature (that is, having all that pertains to the integrity of nature,
and nothing else) it would have been found in him. Neither do they make any
doubt, but that GOD might have created man in the beginning, with all those
defects he is now subject unto, and yet without all sin.

For, the being subject to them argues not sin: but whereas they were
restrained, bridled, and suppressed by addition of supernatural qualities, the
having of them at liberty, by voluntary loss of those qualities, is not
without sin.

Thus then, howsoever they talk of concupiscence in the Regenerate, and would
seem to deny it to be sin in them only, yet they do as well deny it to be
sin in men not Regenerate, as in the Regenerate, and make it only a punishment
of sin, if yet they yield so much unto the truth. For indeed according to
their erroneous conceit, concupiscence is a sequel of nature, and not a
punishment of sin: so that all that they do or can say, is nothing but this,
that concupiscence was natural, and such a thing as might be found in the
integrity of nature, that it was restrained by supernatural grace, added above
that nature requires for the perfecting of her integrity; that the having it
now free and at liberty, to provoke, move, and incline us to sin, is the
punishment of that sin, whereby we deprived our selves of supernatural grace.

But we say, contrary to this absurd conceit of theirs: First, that all these
defects and evils, to wit, contrariety between the better and meaner faculties
of the soul, pronenesse to do evil, and difficulty to do good, do arise
and grow out of the want of that original righteousness, the property whereof
is, to subject all unto God, and to leave nothing void of him.

Secondly, that this righteousness was essentially required to the integrity
of nature. So that there is no state of sole and pure nature, without addition
of sin or grace, as the Papists fondly imagine; for that the nature of man is
such, as must either be lifted above it self by grace, or fall below it self,
and be in a state of sin.

Thirdly, that all declinings and swaruings from that perfect subjection unto
God, and entire conjunction with God, which grace works, are sins and
decays of natures integrity: and consequently, that concupiscence, being a
declining from that entire subjection to, and conjunction with God, is truly
and properly sin, whatsoever our adversaries teach to the contrary.

Fourthly, that original righteousness is said to be a supernatural
quality, because it grows not out of nature, and because it raises nature
above it self; But that it is natural, that is, required to the integrity of
nature.

Neither should it seem strange to any man, that a quality not growing out of
nature, should be required necessarily for the perfecting of natures integrity;
seeing the end and object of man's desires, knowledge, and action, is an
infinite thing, and without the compass and bounds of nature. And therefore
the nature of man cannot, as all other things do, by natural force, and
things bred within her self, attain to her wished end; but must either by
supernatural grace be guided and directed to it, or being left to her self,
fail of that perfection she is capable of, and fill her self with infinite
evils, defects, and miseries.

This may suffice for refutation of the vain and idle conceits of the Papists,
concerning three estates of man, the one of grace, the other of nature, and the
third of sin. Out of which we may observe, that howsoever they endeavor to
make show of the contrary, yet indeed they think that concupiscence is not
sin, neither in the regenerate, nor unregenerate. Whereupon it is that Lib.
5. c. 13. de amissione gratiae and statu peccati. Hugo de sancto Victore dicit
concupiscentiam spiritus inordinatam esse culpam: concupiscentiam carnis poenam
and culpam, etc. Alex. de Ales p. 2. q. 105. memb. 2. art. (...).
Bellarmine, speaking of the guilt of concupiscence, which the Divines say is
taken away in Baptism, though the infirmity remain, says, it must be
understood of that guilt, which causes concupiscence, not which is caused of
it. For (says he) original sin makes guilty, and subjecteth men to
concupiscence, but concupiscence does not make them guilty that have it, and
therefore it is not sin, neither before, nor after Baptism.

But we say with, Contra Iulianum lib. 5.
Augustine, Sicut caecitas cordis, quam removet alluminator deus, and peccatu^
est, quo in deum non creditur; and poena peccati, qua cor superbu^ digna
animadversione punitur; and causa peccati, cum mali aliquid caeci cordis errore
co^mittitur: ita concupiscentia carnis, aduersus quam bonus concupiscit
spiritus, and peccatum est, quia inest ei inobedientia contra dominatum mentis;
and poena peccati est, quia reddita est meritis inobedientis; and causa peccati
est, defectione consentientis, vel contagione nascentis. As the blindness of
heart, which God remooueth, when he lightneth those that were formerly in
darkness, is a sin, in that by reason of it, men believe not in GOD; and a
punishment of sin, wherewith the proud hearts of wicked men are justly
punished; and a cause of sin, when, erring by reason of this blindness of
heart, they do those things that are evil: so the concupiscence of the flesh,
against which the good spirit does strive and covet, is a sin, because there
is in it disobedience against the dominion of the mind; and a punishment of
sin, in that it falls out by the just judgment of God, that they who are
disobedient unto God, shall find rebellious desires in themselves; and it is a
cause of sin, in that men either by wicked defection consent unto it, or by
reason of the general infection of humane nature, are borne in it.

We think therefore there should be no question made of concupiscence, and
other like defects and evils found in the nature of man, but that they are in
their own nature sinful defects. And hereof, I am well assured, none of the
Fathers ever doubted: but how far they are washed away and remitted in
Baptism, which is the matter about which Bellarmine wrangleth and takes
exception against us, let us now consider.

part. 4. qu. 8. de sacramento baptismi. membro. 8. art. 2.
Alexander of Hales, the first and greatest of all the Schoolmen, notes
diverse things most fitly to this purpose, out of which we may easily resolve,
what is to be thought of this matter. First therefore he observes, that
there are two sorts of sins: some natural, which are in the person from the
general condition of nature; some personal, that are acted by the person, and
so defile the nature, as all actual sins. Secondly, that concupiscence is of
the first kind, being an evil contracted and cleaving to nature, not
personally acted, or wrought by us. Thirdly, that concupiscence may be
considered, either as it has full dominion, and is a prevailing thing in them
that have it: or as it is weakened, and has lost that strength, dominion, and
command which formerly it had. Dicitur concupiscentia culpa ante baptismum quia
tum dominatur and habet carentiam dibitae iustitiae sibi conjunctam Alex. de
Hales part. 2. q. 105. membro. 7. art. 1.
Fourthly, that concupiscence, while it has dominion, is a sin defiling, and
making guilty, both the nature and person in which it commands all: But if
it lose this dominion, it cleaves to the nature only, and is not imputed to
the person for sin, unless he some way yield unto it, be drawn by it, or
suffer himself to be weakened in well doing, by the force of it. Fifthly, that
the benefits of grace are not general, but special, and of privilege, not
freeing the whole nature of man from sin and punishment, as sin corrupted and
defiled all, but that they extend only personally to some certain. Sixthly,
that when men are borne anew in baptism, they are freed from all that sin
which makes their persons guilty before God, and consequently from all
punishments due to them, for any thing their persons were chargeable with.
Peccatum originis transit reatu, manet actu. in actuali peccato praecedit
actus, sequitur reatus, nec dicitur in originali peccato actus peccati quo fit,
vel quo est, sed quo ^emanet ad exercitium. Alex. de Hales part. 2. q. 105.
membro. 6
But because they still remain in that nature, which is of the mass of
malediction, therefore sin cleaves to their nature still, and they are subject
to the common punishment of hunger, thirst, death, and the like. Seauenthly,
that the dominion of that sin, which is of nature, is taken away by the benefit
of regeneration in Baptism. Whence it comes, that the persons of men
baptized are not chargeable with it, though they remain still in that nature
wherein it is. And consequently that the punishments, which they are subject
unto (because they remain in the communion of that nature which is not
generally free, from sin,) cease to be unto them in the nature of destroying
evils, serve to diverse good purposes, and turn to their great benefit.

So then we say with the Fathers, and best learned of the Schoolmen, that
concupiscence in men not regenerate is a sin, corrupting and making guilty
both the nature and the person wherein it is; and that in the Regenerate it
cleaves to nature as a sin still, but having lost the dominion it had, so
that it cannot make the person guilty, not prevailing with it, nor commanding
over it. Regnum amittit in terra, perit in caelo: It is driven from the
kingdom it formerly had in the Saints of God, while they yet remain on earth,
but it is not utterly destroyed till they go from hence to heaven. Thus then,
I hope, it appears that we are far from the error of the Messalians, and
do fully accord with the Catholic Church of God, and that the Romanists are
not far from the heresy of Pelagius.

CHAP. 27
Of the heresies of Nouatus, Sabellius, and the Manichees.

THe sixth heresy, that we are charged with, is that of Nouatus, who would not
have those that fell in the time of persecution, reconciled and received again
to the communion of the Church upon their repentance. But we receive all
Penitents whatsoever, and therefore this lying slander may be added to the rest
to make up a number.

But they will say, the Nouatians were condemned for denying penance to be a
Sacrament, and that therein at least we agree with the Nouatians. This is as
false as the rest: for it is most certain, that the absolution which was given
in the Primitive Church, disliked by Nouatus, was not taken, as a sacramental
act, giving grace, and remitting sins, but as a judicial act receiving
them to the peace of the Church, and the use of the Sacraments, which had been
formerly put from them. See that whichwee have noted cap. 7. out of Alex. of
Hales and Bonauent affirming that the Minister is a mediator between God and
men, dealing with God by way of entreaty, with men by way of command: by prayer
and petition obtaining for sinners remission at Gods hands: and by authority
and power resting in him, restoring them to the Churches peace.
This, the best and most judicious of the Schoolmen confess, besides the
infinite testimonies that might be alleged out of the Fathers to prove the
same. It was then an admitting to the use of the Sacraments, not it self a
Sacrament.

But Calvin says, that the speech of Hierome that poenitentia is secunda
tabula post naufragium is impious, and cannot be excused, and therefore it
seems he inclines to the Nouatians heresy, in denying the benefit of
penitencie to distressed and miserable sinners, that seek it. Li. 1. de
mendacio, ad Consentium, cap. 4.
Augustine in his book De mendacio ad Consentium, makes it a disputable
question, whether a man, that usually lies, speaking truth at some one time,
with purpose to make men think it like the rest of his lying speeches,
wherewith they are well acquainted, may not be said to lie when he speaks
truth, because he intends to deceive, and does deceive. Surely, if this
man should speak any truth, I fear the Reader would think it a falsehood,
because his ordinary manner is seldom or never to speak any truth. Does
Calvin say the speech of Hierome is impious, and not to be excused, as he
reports he does? Surely no: but that if it be understood as the Papists
understand it, it cannot be excused. For they conceive thereby, that the
Sacrament of Penance is implied, which Hierome never thought of.

But he will say, the Nouatians refused to have those, that they baptized, to
receive imposition of hands, with which was joined in those times the anointing
of the parties with oil. Surely so they did, but so do not we: for we t^inke
of the use of imposition of hands, as Hierome does in his book against he
Luciferians. But touching the use of oil though at that time there was no
cause for the Nouatians to except much against it, yet now that it is made the
matter and element of a Sacrament, and that by a kind of consecration, the
ground whereof we know not, we think we do not offend in omitting it, See
Dionysius ecclesiastical ^ierarchie. cap. 2. part, 2. where a great number of
ceremonial observations arch mentioned, whic are long since grown out of use
in the Church of Rome.
no more than the Church of Rome, in omitting innumerable ceremonial
obseuations of like nature, that were in use in those times.

The seventh is the heresy of Sabellius, which he says was revived by
Servetus. So it was indeed, that Seruetus revived, in our time, the damnable
heresy of Sabellius, long since condemned in the first ages of the Church. But
what is that to us? How little approbation he found amongst us, the just and
honorable proceeding against him at Geneva, will witness to all posterity.

The eighth is the heresy of the Manichees, which taught, that evils which
are found in the World, were from an evil beginning, so making two original
causes, the one good, of things good; the other evil, of things evil. It is
true that this was the damnable opinion of the Manichees. But will the
shameless companion charge us with this impiety? I think he dares not: for
he knows that we teach, that all the evils that are in the World had their
beginning, and did proceed from the freedom of man's will, which while he
used ill, he ouerthrewe, and lost both himself and it, that while he turned
from the greater to the lesser good, and preferred the creature before the
Creator, he plunged himself into innumerable defects, miseries,
perplexities, and discomforts, and justly deserved, that GOD, from whom thus
wickedly he departed, should make all those things which formerly he
appointed to do him service, to become feeble, weak, unfit, and unwilling to
perform the same.

But, says he, Luther affirms, that all things fall out by a kind of
absolute necessity, whence the heresy of the Manichees may be inferred. The
answer to this objection is easy; for Luther takes necessity for
infallibility of event, thereby meaning that all things fall out infallibly,
so as God before disposed and determined: but does not imagine a necessity of
coaction enforcing, nor a natural and inevitable necessity, taking away all
freedom of choice, as our adversaries injuriously impute unto him.

If this of Luther fail, as in deed it does, Bellarmine has another proof
and demonstration that we are Manichees, for that Calvine denies man to have
freedom of choice in any thing whatsoever. This is a most false and injurious
imputation. For, though Calvine deny that man can do any thing in such sort,
as therein to be free from the direction and ordering of Almighty GOD; yet he
confesses that Adams will in the day of his creation was free, not only from
sin and misery, but also from limitation of desire and natural necessity,
and left to her own choice in the highest matter, and of most consequence of
all the rest; and that man, by making an evil choice, did run into those
evils, which he is now subject unto. Calvin then is not worse than the
Manichees, as making God the Author of those evils, which the Manichees
attribute to an evil beginning, as Bellarmine is pleased to pronounce of him:
but is farther from that hellish conceit, than Bellarmine is from hell it
self, if he repent him not of these his wicked and hellish slanders.

But, says he, the Manichees blamed and reprehended the Fathers of the Old
Testament, and so also does Calvine, therefore Calvin is a Manichee. This is
as if a man should thus reason with Bellarmine Porphyry blamed Paul, as an
arrogant man, for reprehending Peter, that was his ancient, and before him in
the faith of Christ, and Bellarmine dili^eth him for persecuting the Church of
GOD in the time of his infidility, therefore Bellarmine is as bad or worse than
Porphyry. For the Manichees thought that the Old Testament was from an evil
beginning and therefore exaggerated all the faults and sins of the Fathers
that then li^ed, for confirmation and strengthening of this their blasphemy.
But Calvin hates this impiety more than the Romanists, who imagine a greater
difference betwixt the state of the Jews and the Christians, that he does.
Ad illud de Jacob. Licet aliqui conentur multum saluare cum, and aliquos patres
veteris Testamenti non fuisse mentitos, cum tamen in alijs concedant eos
habuisse legem imperfectam, and gratiam modicam respectu nostri, qui and legem
habemus perfectam, and gratiam superabundantem, and de multis non negatur
aliquando mentiri, vel fuisse mentitos, non videtur multum rationabile negare
illos fuisse mentitos vel potuisse mentiri: quia si ita est, and si laudemus
bona facta eorum, and illa sumamus in exemplum, mala tamen nec recipimus in
exemplum, nec pertinaciter excusamus. Et Iudeth ipsa se ornauit ea intention,
vt Holofernes caperetur in aspectu suo, and hoc volendo eum velle peccare secum
mortaliter, and velle alium velle peccare mortaliter est peccatum mortale: vnde
non videtur omnino certum, quod excusata sit ab omni peccato mortali: and licet
factum eius natretur in Scriptura, and recitetur in Ecclesia tanquam laudabile,
quantum ad aliqua quae erant ibi religiositatis, aliqua tamen ibi annexa, nec
laudantur, nec licent. Scotus lib. 3. distinct. 58. quaest. vnica.
It is therefore an ill consequence, Calvin does not hide, nor excuse, but
condemn the murder, and adultery of David, the drunkenness of Noe, and the
incest of Lot, therefore he is like the Manichees that thought the old
Testament was from an evil beginning. Surely there is neither good beginning,
nor ending to be found in the writings of this slanderous Jesuit.

CHAP. 28
Of the heresies of the Donatists.

THe next heresy imputed unto us, is that of the Donatists, who denied those
societies of Christians to be the Churches of God, wherein wicked men are
tolerated, and the rules of discipline are not observed: and thought, that the
Church whose communion we must hold, does consist only of the good and elect
people of God.

Touching the first part of this imputation, we disclaim it as most unjust
and injurious. For, as I have showed in the first part, we confess, that
wicked and godles men are oftentimes tolerated in the true Church of God,
either through the negligence of the guides thereof, or upon due consideration
of the scandals and evils, that would follow if they should be eiected and
cast out, by reason of their greatness, power, or number.

Touching the second part, in what sense only the good and elect people of God
are of the Church, and how and in what degree hypocrites, wicked men, and
reprobates, while they hold the profession of the truth, may be said to be of
the Church, I have likewise cleared in the first part.

But, says Bellarmine, the Donatists thought the Church to be only in Africa,
and the Protestants think it to be only in the Northern parts of the world,
and therefore they are not far from Donatisme. Surely, as far as he is
from any honest and sincere meaning. For, none of the Protestants have any such
conceit as to think the Church of God so straightned, as that it should be no
where found, but in the Northern parts of the world, where themselves do live.
But the Romanists may muchmore justly be charged with Donatisme, who deny all
the societies of Christians in the world, wherein the Popes feet are not
kissed, and his words holden for infallible Oracles, to pertain to the true
Church of God: who acknowledge no true Churches of Christ, but their own
conuenticles, so casting into hell all the Christians of Aethiopia, Syria,
Armenia, Graecia, and Russia, for that they stand divided from the communion of
the Church of Rome. Which unchristian censure we are far from, thinking that
all those societies of Christians, notwithstanding their manifold defects and
imperfections, be, and continue parts and limbs of the true and Catholic
Church of God.

Lastly he says, the Donatists committed many outrages against true Catholic
Bishops, spoiled the Churches of God, and profaned the holy things they found
in them. But what can he conclude from hence against us? With which of these
impieties can he charge us? Our blood has bin spilt by them like water in the
streets, our bodies tormented and consumed with fire, and sword; and all this
by the procurement of the Antichristian Bishops, sworn enemies of Christ, and
vassals of Antichrist. Yet have we hurt none of them, but in patience
possessed our souls, knowing that our judgment is with God, and that when he
makes inquiry for blood, he will find out all their barbarous acts of
cruelty, which they have done against us. We have profaned nothing that is
holy, we have removed and abolished nothing, but the monuments of gross
idolatry, and therefore we are not to be compared to the Donatists. If in any
place in popular tumults, or confusions of war, whereof ever the Romanists
have been the causes, there have been any thing done in fury, that was not
fit, we cannot excuse it, nor could not remedy it.

CHAP. 29.
Of the heresies of Arrius, and Ae^rius.

THe tenth imputation is of Arrianisme, which heresy we accurse to the pit of
hell, with all the vile calumniations of damned slaunderers, that charge us
with it. Neither did ever any of our men incline unto it, or give any occasion
of so execrable an heresy. Hae voces, quae extra Scripturam sunt, nullo casu a
nobis suscip^ntur. Maximinus apud Aug. contra Man. lib. 1. in initio. vnde Aug
l^ 3. c. 14. contra eundem sic habet. Pater and filius vnius sunt eiusdemque
substantiae: hoc est illud homousion, quod in Concilio Niceno aduersus
haereti^os Arr^os a Catholicis patribus ve^s auc^tate and au^ritatis veritate
firmatum est, quod postea in Concilio Ariminensi propter novitatem in verbis
minus quam oportuit intellectum. quam tamen fides antiqua pepererat, multis
paucotum fraud deceptis, haeretica impietas sub haer^tico Imp^tore Constantio
labefactare tentauit: sed post non longum tempus liberate Catholicae fidei
praeualente, po^aquam vis verbi, sicut debuit intellecta est, homousion illud
Catholicae fidei sanitate long lateque defensum e^ quid est enim homousion,
nisi vnius eiusdemque substantiae? quid est homousion, nisi ego and pater vnum
sumus? Sed nec ego Nicenum, nec tu debes Ariminense, tanquam praeiudicaturus,
proferre Concilium, nec ego huius auctorit^, nec tu illius de^neris: ^turarum
aucto ritatious, non quorumcunque proprijs, sed; triusque communibus test^us,
^es cum ^e, ^ausa cum causa, ratio cum ratione concerter.
Touching traditions, which, Bella^mine says the Arrians did refuse, they were
not blamed, for denying unwritten verities. For, I hope the Romanists will not
disadvantage the Catholic cause so much, as to confess that the Godhead of
Christ, which was the thing the Arrians denied, cannot be proved by Scripture,
and that the Fathers were forced to fly to unwritten traditions for proof of
it. But they were blamed, for that, when the thing had proof enough by
Scripture, they refused the word Consubstantiall (most happily devised to
express the truth against the turnings and sleights of heretics) only
because they found it not in Scripture: as if no words nor forms of speech
might be allowed, but those only that are there expressly found.

The eleventh is the heresy of Ae^rius. Ae^rius condemned the custom of the
Church in naming the dead at the Altar, and offering the sacrifice of the
Eucharist, that is, of thanksgiving for them. He disliked set fasts, and would
not admit any difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter. For this his rash
and inconsiderate boldness and presumption in condemning the universal Church
of Christ, he was justly condemned. For, the practice of the Church, at that
time, was not evil in any of these things, neither do we concur with Aerius
in the reprehension of that Primitive and ancient Church. For howsoever we
dislike the Popish manner of praying for the dead, which is to deliver them out
of their fained Purgatory, yet do we not reprehend the Primitive Church, nor
the Pastors and guides of it, for naming them in their public prayers, thereby
to nourish their hope of the resurrection, and to express their longing
desires of the consummation of their own, and their happiness, that are gone
before them in the faith of Christ. If any of the Fathers did doubtfully extend
the prayers then used, further than they were originally or generally intended
or meant, it was not to be imputed to the whole Church.

Of our allowance of set fastes, I have spoken before: and of the difference
between a Bishop and a Presbyter, I shall have a fit occasion to speak in
examining the note of succession, and the exceptions of the Romanists against
us touching the same. If it be said, that sundry of our Divines seem to
acquit Aerius in these points, they are to be conceived, as understanding his
reprehension to have touched the errors and superstitions, which even then
perhaps began in some places, and among some men, to grow into practices and
doctrines of the Church, which were not evil nor erroneous. For otherwise his
reprehension, if it be understood to extend to the general practice and
judgment of the Church, is not, nor may not be justified.

CHAP. 30.
Of the heresies of Iovinian.

THe twelfth heresy imputed to us, is the heresy of Iovinian, concerning whom
we must observe, that Augustine ascribes unto him two opinions, which Hierome
mentions not, who yet was not likely to spare him, if he might truly have
been charged with them.

Aug. lib. de haeresibus c. 82
The first, that Mary ceased to be a virgin, when she had borne CHRIST; the
second, that all sins are equal. If these were the opinions of Iovinian, as
it may very well be doubted, we condemn them, and his error therein, as much
as the Romanists do. For, we think, that Mary continued a Virgin, in, and
after the birth of CHRIST. But they will say, many of the Protestant Divines
do teach, that the doors of Mary's womb were opened when CHRIST was borne,
and from thence it will follow, that she ceased to be a Virgin. This
consequence we deny: for otherwise Tertul. de carne Christi.
Tertullian, Lib 2. c. 7. in Lucae 2.
Ambrose, Lib. 2. contra Pelagianos. Tertul. dicit Mariam patefacti corporis
lege peperisse, and Tertul. divus Ambrosius quoque subscribit. Rhena. in arg.
in lib. Tertul. de carne Christi.
Hierome, and sundry other of the Fathers shall be proved to have denied the
virginity of Mary after the birth of CHRIST, which yet they all most constantly
believed. But they know well that no such thing can be concluded from thence.
For, as Lib de carne Christi.
Tertullian aptly notes, there is virgo a viro; and virgo a partu; that is, a
virgin may be so named, because she has not been a mother, nor the doors of
her womb opened by bearing a child; or because she has known no man, though
she have borne a child. In this sort a virgin may remain a virgin, and yet
be a mother and bear a child, with the opening of the doors of her womb, if
this child thus conceived in her, and borne of her, were not begotten by man,
nor the doors of her womb opened by the knowledge of a man. So that though it
be granted, that CHRIST, when he was borne, opened the womb of Mary his
mother, yet she remained a Virgin still, because that which was conceived in
her, was of the Holy Ghost. Neither should our adversaries in reason press
this argument so much, Durand. l. 4 d. 44. q. 6. Verissimum est beatam virginem
Mariam permansisse virginem in partu, and post partum, sicut ante: fuit enim
virgo non solum ex carentia experientiae delectationis venereae per quam
proprie amittitur virginitas, sed etiammembri corporalis integritate: nec tamen
propter hoc suerunt duo corpora simul, quia fieri potuit dilatatio membroru^
and meat^um naturalium sine interruptione vel aliqua fractione: sicut, secundum
Aug. 14. de civit. Dei, fuisset in omnibus mulieribus, in statu innocentiae.
Nolim equidem dicere, quod viros nonnullos doctos certe atque Catholicos sine
cuiuspiam reprehensione nostra aetate dixisse, video, Christum modo quodam
matris uterum aperuisse. Maldonatus in Lucae 2, 23.
seeing their own Schoolmen confess there may be an opening of the womb, in
such as still remain virgins. Thus then we say with the Fathers, that CHRIST
being Mary's firstborn, may be said more properly to have opened the womb of
Mary his mother, then any other firstborn do: because he found it shut when
he came to the birth, which they do not. But, that from hence a denial of
Mary's virginity will follow, we deny. And therefore we are wronged in this
challenge, as in the rest.

Touching the opinion of the parity of sins, which is in the second place
imputed to Iovinian, we hold it to be a Stoicall Paradoxe. Their argument to
prove that we think all sins to be equal, because as they suppose, we deny
the difference of Venial and Mortal sins, and think all sins to be
mortal, is very weak; first, because we do not deny the difference between
venial and mortal sins, as shall appear in that which follows; and
secondly, because if we did make all sins to be mortal, yet of mortal
sins one may be, and is greater, and more grievous then another.

The opinions, that Hier. l. 1. and 2. contra Iovinianum.
Hierome imputes to Iovinian, are four: the first, that there is an equality
of joys and rewards in heaven. This opinion we do not hold, neither can it
be deduced by necessary consequence from the words of Luther, where he says,
that all Christians are as holy and just as the mother of God. For he speaks
of imputed righteousness, which is equal in all men, from which no imparity
of joy can flow; but he never denies inherent righteousness to be more in
one than in another, and more in Mary the mother of Christ, then in any other.
Now from this imparity of inherent righteousness it is, that there are so
different degrees of joy and glory found among the Saints of God that are in
heaven.

The second opinion which Hierom condemns in Iovinian, is, that there is no
difference between abstinence from meats, and the sober and due taking of
them with thanksgiving. This we judge not to be so truly delivered by him, as
was to be wished. For, eating with thanksgiving is a matter of ordinary
sobriety and temperance, but abstinence is an extraordinary act of Christian
mortification, and humiliation, and being rightly used has those effects the
other has not; though neither meat, nor abstinence from meat, do simply
commend us unto God, fasting being a thing not absolutely, and for it self,
but only respectively to certain ends, to be judged good.

The third assertion of Iouinian was, that they which are baptized with water
and the holy Ghost, are not subject to temptation, nor sin. This is not only
an error, but a damnable heresy, if it were so delivered by him as it is
reported by Hierome. That which Calvin says, that true faith which is found in
them that are called according to purpose (as Augustine speaks, following
blessed Paul) cannot be wholly extinguished, nor finally lost, is most true,
but has no agreement with that of Iouinian, that the regenerate is neither
subject to temptation, nor sin. For Calvin denies not, but that the elect and
chosen servants of God may and do oftentimes fall very daungerously, but that
such is the love of God toward them whom he has called according to purpose,
that he is always with them, to raise them up again, if they fall: and that
this is the difference between them, and such as God has not ordained unto
life, that they fall into the hands of God, who suffers them not to be broken,
or utterly to perish; whereas the hand of God, even his heavy hand falls
upon the other, to crush and break them to pieces, as De sacramentis fidei.
lib. 2. p. 13. in tractatu, an charitas semel habita amitti possit.
Hugo de Sancto Victore has most excellently observed. This therefore is but a
calumniation like the rest, when Bellarmine does charge Calvin with the
heresy of Iouinian in this respect.

The fourth and last assertion of Iouinian is, that married persons, virgins,
and widows, if they differ not in other works of virtue, and therein excel
one another, are of equal merit. This assertion, howsoever it pleases
Hierome to tax, I am well assured the best learned both of the Fathers and
Schoolmen do approve. For, virginity in that it adds, over and above the
ordinary chastity and purity, which ought to be found in married folks,
though it be a kind of splendour and beauty of virtue, yet it is no virtue, nor
degree of virtue, as Gers. p 3. de consilijs Euangelicis and statu perfectionis
so, 67. Occam. li. 3. q. 11. in sentent^ ostend^t, quomodo connexae sunt omnes
virtutes, non obstante apparenti repugnantia, and quomodo matrimonio iuncti
virtutem virginitatis habere dici possunt: ad virginitatem, inquit, requiritur
abstincatia carnis co modo quo Deus vult talem ab stinentiam es se, and
similiter actus carnis co modo quo Deus vult esse.
Gerson proves. For that then married folks could not have all virtues: nay,
because all virtues are connexed, not having this of virginity they could have
none. Besides that, no virtue is lost but by sin, whereas virginity may be
lost by that which is no sin, as by the act of Matrimony. All virtues in
their times and places are commanded, and not left free and counseled only:
but virginity is never imposed by precept, and therefore it is noe virtue.
Lastly, there is no virtue, but being lost, by repentance may be recovered
again: but virginity being lost cannot be recovered again, therefore it is no
virtue. These reasons are laid down by Gerson, whereby in his judgment it is
most clearly proved, that virginity in that it adds, over and above
ordinary chastity and purity, is no virtue; and consequently that the bare and
sole having of it, makes not them that have it more acceptable unto God, then
others that have it not, unless they excel them in virtue. It is then a state
of life wherein if all things be answereable in the parties that embrace it,
there are fewer occasions of distractions from God, and more opportunities of
attaining to the height of excellent virtue, then in the opposite estate of
marriage; yet so, as that it is possible for some married men so to use that
estate, that they may be noe way inferior to any that are single. This does
Gregory Nazianzene most confidently and peremptorily defend, in his oration
made in the praise of Gorgonia his sister. Our whole life, says he, is
divided into two sorts or kinds, to wit, marriage and single life; whereof
the one, that is single life, as it is more excellent and divine, so it is of
more labor and peril. The other as it is more mean, and of less esteem, so
it is subject to less peril. Gorgonia avoiding the inconveniences of both
estates, whatsoever she found in either of them behoofefull, beneficial and
commodious she took, and made the height of the excellent perfection of the
one estate, and the safety and security of the other, to concur and meet
together. She was chaste and undefiled, without scornful disdain, mixing the
commodities of single life, with marriage, and showing by evident proof, that
neither of those estates is in it own nature such, as that it should wholly
join us to God, or the world, or wholly divide, and separate us from these, so
that the one of these should be a thing altogether to be avoided, and the other
to be desired; but that it is the mind which does rightly use both marriage
and single life, and that either of these is as fit a matter for a skillfull
workman to work upon, and to bring forth the excellent work of virtue. And
in his In laudem Basilij. pa. 496.
Oration in the praise of Basil, he says There have been some found that
living in the state of Marriage have so carried themselves, as that they made
it evident, that marriage is no impediment or hinderance, but that therein man
may attain to as great glory of virtue, as in virginity or single life. By
which it may appear, that marriage and virginity are rather diverse sorts and
kinds of life, then differences and degrees of living better or worse.

These sentences of Nazianzene are very different, from the inconsiderate
speeches of Hierome, that he is wont to use in comparing these two states of
life together. For, who knows not, that he was so far in love with the
one, and carried away with the admiration of it, in such sort, that he spoke
too basely of the other, and indeed otherwise then truth and reason would
permit. If this be not so, let them that think otherwise tell me what they
think of these sayings of his. Contra Iouinianum, his books against Iouinian
were excepted against by those of the Church of Rome. whereupon he writes an
apology. Certe co^stat Hiero. hac de causa Romae male audisse. Rhen. in arg. in
lib. Tertul. de exhortatione ad castitatem.
Melius est nubere quam vri: si per se nuptiae sint bonae noli illas incendio
comparare, sed dic simpliciter, Bonum est nubere. Suspecta est mihi omnis
bonitas eius rei, quam magnitudo alterius mali, malum esse cogit inferius. Ego
autem non leuius malum, sed simplex per se bonum volo. Si bonum est mulierem
non tangere, malum est ergo tangere; nihil enim bono contrarium est, nisi
malum. etc. So then as we do not approve any private opinion of Iouinian,
contrary to the judgment of Gods Church: So on the contrary side, we dare not
approve these and the like rash and inconsiderate speeches of Hierome, being
contrary to the truth of scripture, and the judgment of the rest of the
Fathers, who are wont so to compare marriage and virginity, that the
difference between them should be bonum and melius, both good, but the one
better then the other; not bonum and malum, the one good and the other evil.
For so to think is to fall into the heresy of Marcion, and Tatianus.

CHAP. 31.
Of the Heresies of Vigilantius.

THe next heresy that we are supposed to fall into, is that of Vigilantius.
The opinions imputed to him by Hierome, and disliked, are these. The first,
that the Saints departed pray not for the living. The second, that they abide
in some certain place, and are not euery-where. The third, that the vigils of
the Saints are not to be kept, nor their bodies, and the relics, and the
ashes that remain of them to be honored, but despitefully trampled under
feet. The fourth, that Bishops are bound to marry, and a Nulli autem animae
omnino inferos patere satis dominus in argumento illo paupe ris requiescentis
and divitis ingemiscentis ex persona Abrahae sanxit non posse inde religari
renunciatorem dispositionis infernae etc. Tertul. de anima. Luc. 16.
may not be admitted unless they do first marry. The fifth, that it is better
to give alms of our goods, according to that ability we have, and to retain a
sufficiency to our selves, then to sell away all, and give whatsoever we
have, at once to the poor. Two other assertions there are where with
Bellarmine charge Vigilantius, to wit, the impugning of the invocation of
Saints, and the condemning of the adoration of Saints, and their relics.
Thereby intending to make his Reader believe, that there was a controversy
between Hierome and Vigilantius about these things; That Hierome did defend
invocation of Saints, whereof yet he speaks not one word, and that he
justified the adoration of Saints, and their Relics, which yet in express
words he disclaimeth and condemns, saying, that the Church honors them,
but adoreth them not.

For the opinions wherewith Hierome charge him, this we briefly answer.
First, if he absolutely denied that the Saints departed do pray for us, as it
seems he did by Hieromes reprehension, we think he erred. For we hold they
do pray in genere. Touching the second, whether the Saints do abide in some
one place appointed for their rest, or be present euery-where, how peremptory
soever Hierome be, we wish the Reader to consider how doubtfully Augustine
has written of this matter in his book de cura agenda pro mortuis: And that
Tertullian, Athanasius aut quisquis auctor est quaestion: ad Antiochum quaest.
11. 13. Isid. l. 3. Ety molog. c. 9. The^philact. in 8, Mather prorsus negant
animas mortuor^ viventibus un quam apparere, and cur fieri non conueniat multas
rations a^erunt. Maldonatus in Lucae 16, and 27. 28.
Athanasius, and sundry other have resolutely delivered, that the souls of men
departed do never return nor intermeddle with the living, any more. Vide
supra c. 9
Touching the third, which is the keeping of the vigils of the Saints, we know
they were long since by the decree of a Council condemned and forbidden, and
that the Church of Rome does not continue nor retain any such use or custom
at this day. But whereas he is said to have denied any honor to be given to
the bodies of Gods Saints, and despitefully to have used them, if so he did,
we cannot but as much condemn his impiety therein, as Hierome did. Neither
do we suffer any with us to despise the blessed Saints of God, to trample
their bodies under feet, or cast them into the fire, as Bellarmine most
falsely and unjustly accuses us. But this indeed we confess we have done,
remembering In Romany ^el totius occidentis partibus intolerabile est et
sacrilegium si sanctorum corpora tangere qu squam fortas^s voluerit. et ib^d:
quis praesumat in^ere? l. 3. in. d^ctione. 12. (...). 30.
the saying of Gregory and other of the Fathers, affirming that neither the
bodies of the Saints, nor any parts of them ought to be brought into open view,
or handled with the hands of men; and that the burying of them, and hiding
them from the sight of men is a duty we owe unto them: we have caused
Relics which were wont superstitiously to be adored, and offered to be seen
and handled of men, to be honorably buried. If any thing have been
disorderly done in the confusions of war, and popular tumults, they know our
answer, we cannot excuse it, nor could not remedy it. Touching the fourth
we say, that Bishops neither are bound to marry, nor abstain from marriage.
Touching the last, we say, that Christian perfection stands in this, that
we set not our hearts upon riches, that we be not proud of them, nor trust
in them, that we be ready if it be for Gods glory or our own souls good, to
leave all: But, for giving away all at once, or retaining to our selves a
sufficiency, neither the one nor the other is absolutely a matter of more
perfection. For, sometimes and for some men it is better to keep and retain a
sufficiency, and to give according to the proportion of their ability, then
to give away all at once: and sometimes, for some men, upon some occasion, and
in some state of things, it argues more perfection, to give away, relinquish,
and forsake all at once. Perfection therefore essentially consists not in
riches or poverty, nor in the refusing to have any property in any thing, as
thereby expressing the state of things in the time of man's innocence: but in
the affection of the mind, always ready to forsake all for the glory of God,
the profession of the faith of Christ, and the attaining of eternal salvation.
See to this purpose Gerson in his book de consilijs evangelicis, wherein he
excellently handles, and clears this matter of Christian perfection.

CHAP. 32.
Of the heresies of Pelagius touching original sin, and the difference of
venial and mortal sins.

THe fourteenth heresy we are charged with, is Pelagianisme, which Bellarmine
endeavors to fasten upon us three ways. First, because Zuinglius did
sometimes seem to deny original sin, as did the Pelagians. Secondly,
because Calvine and others teach, that the children of the faithful are holy,
by the right of their birth. Thirdly, because we say that all sins are by
nature mortal.

To the first of these objections we say, there is no more reason to charge us
with the private opinion of Zuinglius which himself afterward corrected, and
none of his followers ever in the Heluetian Church defended, then for us to
charge them with the error of Bell. l. 5. c. 16. de amissione gratiae and
statu peccati, proponit and damnat errorem Pighij et Catharini
Pighius and Catharinus, who taught more peremptorily the same error that
Zuinglius did, if not a worse and more dangerous. For whereas he acknowledged
most grievous evils to be found in the nature of man since Adams fall, which no
way could have been in the integrity of nature, though he will not call them
by the name of sin; They hold, that original sin is not subiectiuely and
inherent in every of us, but that Adams sin is imputed to us, and we
punished for his offense, that all the evils the sons of Adam are subject to,
are the conditions of nature, and consequently not newly brought in by Adams
sin, with sundry other erroneous conceits of the like nature.

Touching the second objection, that Bucer, and Calvine deny original sin,
though not generally, as did Zuinglius, yet at least in the children of the
faithful: If he had said that these men, affirm the earth does move, and the
heavens stand still, he might have as soon justified it against them, as this
he now says.

For they most constantly defend, the contrary of that he imputes to them.
But, says he, they teach that the children of the faithful are borne holy,
or are holy by the right of their birth. O inconsiderate Jesuit! is this the
ground of that vile and unjust imputation? 1. Corinthians. 7. 14.
Does not Paul say so in express words, and will thou make him a Pelagian like
wise? But, says he, Calvin and Bucer teach that the children of Christians by
the right of their birth are comprehended in the covenants of grace, and so
understand the holiness attributed to them; whence it will follow that they
are borne without original sin. To this we answer, that the children of
believing parents may be understood to be comprehended in the covenants of
mercy and grace, by the right of their birth, either as being already in the
covenants by actual admission, in that they are borne of such parents, or for
that in the covenant between God and their parents, their parents offering
them unto God, and his admission of them, and taking them to be his children
upon such offer made, are couenanted and agreed upon. If Calvin and Bucer did
teach, that the children of believing parents are already in the covenant by
actual admission, in that they are borne of such parents, it would follow that
they were the children of grace by nature, and not of wrath, and consequently
not borne in sin. But they teach no such thing, but understand the
comprehension in the covenants in the other sense, namely that the offering of
them unto God by their parents, and his acceptance of them upon such offer
made, are couenanted and agreed upon in the covenants between God and their
parents. Now then as believing parents have good assurance that God will
receive their children as his own children by adoption, and forgive them the
sin they are borne in, if they present and offer them to Baptism, as they
are bound by covenant to do, as much as in them lies; So if by inevitable
impossibility they be hindered and cannot, they hope of Gods goodness in this
behalf, and are moved so to hope, by sundry Rules of equity, whereof Gers. 3.
part: sermon: de natiuitate Virginis Mariae cons. Caietanus in 3 Thomae quaest.
9. alias 68 art. 2.
Gerson and diverse others do speak, whom I hope Bellarmine will not pronounce
to be Pelagian heretics.

The second thing, wherein Bellarmine supposes we agree with the Pelagians, is
the denial of the difference or distinction of venial and mortal sins.
That the Pelagians did expressly and directly deny this distinction of sins,
there is no ancient writer that reports. Bellarmine therefore proves it to
be consequent upon that which they taught concerning the perfection of
righteousness, supposed by them to be so full and absolute, as not to admit any
imperfection, or any the lightest sins to be where it remains. How good this
consequence is, and how well he proves that he intends, I refer to the
judgment of the Reader, and will not now examine. But whether the Pelagians
were in an error touching the difference of sins, or no, I will make it clear
and evident that we are not. For we do not deny the distinction of venial
and mortal sins: but do think, that some sins are rightly said to be
mortal and some venial; not for that some are worthy of eternal punishment,
and therefore named mortal, others of temporal only, and therefore judged
venial, as the Papists imagine: Caietanus in primam secundae quaest. 87. art.
5.
but for that some exclude grace out of that man in which they are found, and
so leave him in a state wherein he has nothing in himself that can or will
procure him pardon: and other, which though in themselves considered, and never
remitted, they be worthy of eternal punishment, yet do not so far prevail,
as to banish grace, the fountain of remission of all misdoings.

All sins then in themselves considered are mortal, a as Gerson does
excellently demonstrate. First, because every offense against God may justly
be punished c De vita spirituali animae lect. 1.
by him in the strictness of his righteous judgments with eternal death, yea
with annihilation; which appears to be most true, for that there is no
punishment so evil, and so much to be avoided, as the least sin that may be
imagined: so that a man should rather choose eternal death, yea utter
annihilation, than commit the least offense in the world. Secondly, the least
offense that can be imagined, remaining eternally in respect of the stain and
guilt of it, though not in act, as do all sins vnremitted, must be punished
eternally: for else there might some sinful disorder and (...) remain not
ordered by divine justice. But wheresoever is eternity of punishment, men are
repelled from eternal life and happiness: and consequently every offense that
eternally remains not remitted, excludes from eternal glory and
happiness, and is rightly judged a mortal and deadly sin. All sins then
are mortal in them that are strangers from the life of God, because they have
dominion and full command in them, or are joined withsuch as have; and so leave
no place for grace which might cry unto God for the remission of them. But the
elect and chosen servants of God, called according to purpose, do carefully
endeavor, that no sins may have dominion over them, and therefore
notwithstanding any degree of sin they run into, they retain that grace
which can and will procure pardon for all their offenses.

Thus all sins in themselves considered, and never repented of, forsaken, nor
remitted, are mortal. All sins (that against the Holy Ghost excepted) are
venial, ex eventu, that is, such as may be, and oftentimes are forgiven
through the merciful goodness of God, though there be nothing in the parties
offending while they are in such state of sin, that either can or does cry
for remission. The sins of the just not done with full consent (and therefore
not excluding grace, the property whereof is to procure the remission of
sins) are said to be venial, because they are such, and of such nature, as
leave place in that soul wherein they are, for grace that may and will procure
pardon.

By that which has been said, I hope it does appear, that we teach nothing
touching the difference of venial and mortal sins, that Bellarmine himself
can except against, and that we differ very much from the Pelagians, who
thought that no sinful defect can stand with grace, or a state of acceptance
and favor with God. For we reject this their conceit, as impious and
heretical, and do confess that all sins not done with full consent, may
stand with grace, and so be rightly named venial.

CHAP. 33.
Of the heresy of Nestorius, falsely imputed to Beza and others.

THe next heresy, it pleases this heretical Romanist to charge us with, is
that of the Nestorians. Let us see how he indeauoureth to fasten this impiety
upon us. First, says he, the Nestorians contemned the Fathers, and so do the
Protestants, therefore they are Nestorians. The consequence of this argument we
will not now examine. But the Minor proposition is most false. For we reverence
and honor the Fathers much more then the Romanists do, who pervert, corrupt,
and adulterate their writings, but dare not abide the trial of their
doctrines, by the indubitate writings of antiquity.

Secondly, (says he) the Nestorians affirmed, that there were two persons in
Christ, and so divided the unity of his Person. But the Protestants think so
likewise. Therefore they are Nestorians. The assumption we deny, and he does
not so much as endeavor to prove it, but proceeds particularly to prove Beza
a Nestorian heretic: in which he has as ill success as he had in the rest
of his slanderous imputations.

Beza (says he) teaches, that there are two hypostaticall unions in Christ;
Ergo two hypostases or persons: which was the heresy of Nestorius. The
consequence of this argument is too weak to enforce the intended conclusion.
For when Beza says, There are two hypostaticall unions in Christ, the one of
the body and soul, the other of the nature of God and man, he does not
conceive that the union of the body and soul do in Christ make a distinct
humane person or subsistence, different from that of the Son of God: (for he
euery-where confesses, that the humane nature of Christ, has no subsistence,
but that of the Son of God, communicated to it) Deus dupliciter habet esse in
creaturis. 1 per illapsum in omni natura and creatura. 2 per circuminsessionem
in natura assumpts, and licet per illapsum Deus sit intimus omni creatura, and
interior quam ipsa sibi aut forma materiae, tamen per circuminsessio nem fit
intimior naturae assumptae, quia necesse est naturam assumptam amittere
proprium esse subsistentiae, si quod ante assumptionem in ea fuit: velsi
nunquam ipsum habuit, subintrare esse subsistentiae naturae ad quam assumitur,
vt sit idem suppositum subsistens in duplici natura. Picus Apolog. q. 4.
but he therefore calls it an hypostaticall union, because naturally it does
cause a finite and distinct humane person or subsistence, and so would have
done here, if the nature flowing out of this union, had not been assumed by
the son of God, and so prevented and stayed from subsisting in it self, and
personally sustained in the person of the son of God. This doctrine is so
far from heresy, that he may justly be suspected of more then ordinary
malice, that will traduce it as heretical. Yet has Beza, to stop the mouths
of such clamorous adversaries, long since corrected and altered this form of
speech, which he had sometimes used.

CHAP. 34.
Of the heresies of certain touching the Sacrament, and how our men deny that
to be the body of Christ that is carried about to be gazed on.

THe sixteenth heresy, imputed to us, is the heresy of certain, who, what
they were, the Jesuit knows not, nor what their heresy was, as it should
seem by his doubtful and uncertain manner of speaking of it. This unknown
heresy, defended by he knows not whom, he says Calvin, Bucer, Melancthon,
and other worthy and renowned Divines (with whom he is no way matchable either
in piety or learning, though he wear a Cardinals hatte) do teach. But what
monster of heresy is it, that these men have broached? Hugo de sancto victore
de sacram. fidei. li. 2. p. 9. c. 13. Bonauent. l. 4. did. 13. art. 2. q. 1. 2.
Surely, that Christ's body is not in the Sacrament, or sacramental elements,
but in reference to the use appointed by Almighty God; nor longer than the
Sacrament may serve for our instruction, and the working of our spiritual
union with Christ; and that therefore it is not the body of Christ, that dogs,
swine, and mice do eat, as the Romanists are wont to blaspheme: and that it
is not fit to dispute, as their impious Sophisters do, of the passage of it
into the stomach, belly, and draught, of vomiting it up again, and resuming
it when it is vomited, with infinite other like fooleries, which every modest
man loatheth and shameth to hear mentioned. Secondly, that it is not the body
of Christ, which the Popish Idolaters carry about in their pompous, solemn,
and pontifical Processions to be gazed on and adored, to drive away devils, to
still tempests; to stay the ouerflowing of waters, to quench and extinguish
consuming and wasting fires: But that the body of Christ is present in and,
with the sanctified elements, only in reference to the use appointed, that is,
that men should be made partakers of it.

This participation, according to the ancient use, was first and principally
in the public assembly; secondly, in the primitive Church the manner of many
was, to receive the Sacrament, and not to be partakers of it presently, but to
carry it home with them, and to receive it privately when they were disposed,
De corona milit^s. l. 2. ad vxotem. Hieron, aduersus louin. quare non
ingrediuntur ecclesias, etc. Rhenanus annotat. in lib. de corona militis.
as Tertullian and others do report. Justinius martyr apolo. 2. prope finem.
Thirdly, the manner was to send it by the Deacons, to them, that by sickness,
or other necessary impediment were forced to be absent; Eusebius. l. 5. c. 23.
and to strangers. Yea, for this purpose they did in such places where they
communicated not every day, reserve some part of the sanctified elements, to be
sent to the sick, and such as were in danger of death.

Non tamdiu leruabatur, vt ru^c: nam sequitur in can. de septimo in septimum
diem semper mutetur, and alia eodem die consecrata in: locum (...) subto^etur,
at vetustissimus can. Clementis apud But char dum vetat Eucharistiam asseruari:
hodie muc^das particulas comedere coguntur sacerdotes quas olim vetustas igne
consumpsit Rhena. in annot, in Tertul. de corona militis. page ^38.
This reservation was not generally observed, as may appear by the Canon of
Clemens, prescribing, that so much only should be provided for the outward
matter of the Sacraments, as might suffice the Communicants; and that if any
thing remained, it should presently be received by the Clergy. Neither could
there be any place for, or use of, reservation, where there was a daily
Communion, as in many places there was: nor in any place for such reservation
as is used in the Church of Rome, for weeks, and months, seeing there was
generally in ancient times in all places, twice a week, or at least once
every week, a Communion, from whence they might be supplied that were absent.

The Romanists consecrate every day, but make their reseruations from some
solemn time of communicating, as Easter, or the like; and this not only, or
principally, for the purpose of communicating any in the mysteries of the Lords
body and blood, but for circumgestation, ostentation, and adoration, to which
end the Fathers never used it. Neither is that, which is thus unto this purpose
reserved, the body of Christ, as our Divines do most truly pronounce. The
manner of the primitive Church was as Rhenanus testifies, if any parts of the
consecrated elements remained so long as to be musty and unfit for use, to
consume them with fire, which I think they would not have done to the body of
Christ. This shows they thought the sanctified elements to be Christ's body no
longer, than they might serve for the comfortable instruction of the faithful,
by partaking in them. But the Romanists at this day, as the same Rhenanus fitly
observes, would think it a great and horrible impiety, to do that which the
Fathers then prescribed and practiced.

So then Calvin does think that the Romish reservation does not carry about
with it the body of Christ, as the Papists foolishly fancy, and yet I hope is
in no heresy at all. Neither does he any where say, that the elements
consecrated and reserved for a time, in reference to an ensuing receiving of
them, are not the body of Christ; but says only, that there were long since
great abuses in reservation, and greater in that every one was permitted to
take the Sacrament at the hand of the public Minister in the Church, and carry
it home with him: which I think this Cardinal will not deny, if he
advisedly bethink himself.

CHAP. 35.
Of the heresy of Eutiches, falsely imputed to the Divines of Germany.

THe next heresy, imputed unto us, is Eutichianisme; which is directly
opposite and contrary to the former error of Nestorius. This he charge
first upon Zuinck feldius, whom we reject as a frantic and seduced
miscreant, and do in no wise acknowledge him to be a member of our Churches.
Secondly, upon Brentius, Iacobus Smidelinus, and other learned Divines of the
German Churches.

The heresy of Eutiches was, that as before, so after the incarnation there
was but one only nature in Christ, for that the nature of God was turned into
man, that there was a confusion of these natures. Do any of the Germane
Divines teach this blasphemous doctrine? No, says Bellarmine, not directly and
in precise terms, but indirectly, and by consequent they do. If we demand
of him what that is which they teach, whence this impiety may by necessary
consequence be inferred, he answers, the vbiquitary presence of the body and
humane nature of Christ. For, says he, vbiquity being an incommunicable
property of God, it cannot be communicated to the humane nature of Christ,
without confusion of the divine and humane natures. But he should remember that
they, whom he thus odiously traduceth, are not so ignorant, as to think, that
the body of Christ, which is a finite and limited nature, is every where, by
actual position or local extension, but personally only in respect of the
conjunction and union it has with God, by reason whereof it is no where
severed from God, who is every where.

This is it then, which they teach, That the body of Christ does remain in
nature and essence finite, limited, and bounded, and is locally in one place;
but that there is no place where it is not united personally unto that God that
is euery-where: in which sense they think it may truly be said to be
euery-where. For the better clearing of this point, we must remember that it is
agreed upon by all Catholic Divines, that the humane nature of Christ has two
kinds of being, the one natural, the other personal. The first, limited and
finite; the second, infinite and incomprehensible. For, seeing the nature of
man is a created nature and essence, it cannot be but finite: Unity Hypostatice
Deum and hominem, nihil est aliud quam naturam l^manam non habere propriam
subsistentiam, sed assumptam esse a verbo aeterno, ad ipsam verbi
subsistentiam. Bellarm. de incarn. l. 3. c. 8.
and seeing it has no personal subsistence of it own, but that of the Son
of God communicated to it, which is infinite, and without limitation, it cannot
be denied to have an infinite subsistence, and to subsist in an
incomprehensible and illimited sort, and consequently euery-where. Thus then
the body of Christ secundum esse natural, is contained in one place; but
secundum esse personale, may rightly be said to be euery-where.

It were easy to reconcile all those assertions of our Divines touching this
part of Christian faith, in show so opposite one to another, and to stop the
mouths of our prattling adversaries, who so greedily seek out our verbal and
seeming differences (whereas their whole doctrine is nothing else but an heap
of uncertainties and contrarieties) if this were a fit place. But let this
briefly suffice for the repelling of Bellarmines calumniation, and let us
proceed to examine the rest of his objections.

CHAP. 36.
Of the supposed heresy of Zenaias Persa, impugning the adoration of Images.

THe next heresy, he imputes unto us, is the impugning of the adoration and
worshipping of Images: the first author of which impiety, as this impious
Idolater is pleased to name it, was Zenaias Persa, as Nicephorus reports. But
whatsoever the Jesuit think, Nicephorus credit is not so good, that upon his
bare word we should believe so shameless a lie. For Augustine, which was
before this Persian, (in his book De moribus Ecclesiae, libro primo, capite
tricesimo quarto) has the same heresy, as it pleases these heretics to call
it. Nolite, inquit, consectari turbas imperitorum, qui in ipsa vera religione
superstitiosi sunt. Novi multos esse sepulchrorum and picturarum adoratores,
quos mores Ecclesia condemnat, and quotidie corrigere studet. And Greg. Sereno
Massiliensi lib. 9. c. 9. frangi non debuit quod non ad adorandum in Ecclesiis,
sed ad instruendum solummodo mentes fuit nescientium collocatum.
Gregory, after the time of this supposed Persian, does condemn the adoration
of Images. And Auctores antiqui omnes conueniunt in hoc quod in Concilio
Francofordiensi sit reprobata Synodus 7, quae decreuerat imagine^ adoranda^ ita
Hincmarus, Aimoinus Regino, Ado, et alii. Bellarmin. lib. 2. de sanctorum
imaginibus cap 14.
the Council of Frankford likewise after his time, as appears by Hincmarus,
and others.

Besides, if Nicephorus follow the judgment of the Fathers of the second
Nicene Council, he means nothing else, by that adoration of Images, which
he approoueth, but the embracing, kissing, and reverent using of them, like to
the honor we do the Books of holy Scripture, not that Religious worship
which consists in spirit and truth, which the Papists yield to their
Idols. And so there is as great difference of judgment between him and
Bellarmine, as between him and us.

Quis adorat vel orat intuens simulacrum, qui non sic afficitur ut ab eo se
exaudiri putet? itsque homines talibus superstitionibus obligati plerumque ad
ipsum solemn dorsum ponentes preces fundunt statuae, quam solemn vocant: and cum
sonitu maris a tergo feriantur, Neptuni statuam quam pro ipso mari colunt,
quasi sentientem gemitibus feriunt: hoc enim facit, and quodammodo extorquet
illa figur a membrorum. etc. Hoc venerantur quod ipsi ex auro and argento
fecerunt: sed dicent, and nos habere instrumenta and vasa ex huiusmodi materia
in vsu celebrandorum sacramentorum, etc. and sunt profecto ista instrumenta,
seu vasa, quid aliud quam opera manuum hominum? caeterum number quid os habent,
and non loquuntur, etc. numquid ijs supplicamus quia per ea supplicamus Deo?
illa causa maxima impietatis insanae, quod plus valet in affectibus miserorum
forma similis viuenti, quae sibi efficit supplicari, quam quod manifestum est,
non esse viuentem, vt debeat a viuente contemni. Aug. in Psalm. 113. vide
Walafridum Strabonem de rebus eccles. de imaginibus etc.
That which Bellarmine adds against Calvin and others, touching the time
that Images were first brought into the Church, if this place did require the
examination of it, we should find him as notable a trifler therein, as in all
the rest.

CHAP. 37
Of the error of the Lampetians, touching vows.

THe error of the Lampetians was, as Alphonsus a Castro supposes, that it is
not lawful for men to vow, and by vowing to lay a necessity upon themselves
of doing those things, which freely and without any such tie, might much better
be performed.

If they disliked simply all vowing, we do not approve their opinion, as may
appear by that which Kemnisius, Zanchius, and others have written to this
purpose, and therefore we are unjustly said to favor their error. That which
Bellarmine adds, for the strengthening of this his unjust imputation, is a
mere calumniation. For Luther does not say, that a man should vow to do a
thing as long as he shall be pleased, and then to be free again, when he
shall dislike that which before he resolved on: but that all vows should be
made with limitation, The Ronanists admit dispensations wholly discharging
from Vows and Commutations: whereby men are taught, it suffices to perform
some other thing insteade of that they vowed.
to be so far performed, as humane frailty will permit, and that it is
better after a vow made to break it, and to descend to the doing of that which
is lawful and good, though not carrying so great show of perfection as that
which by vow was promised, than, under the pretense of keeping it, to live in
all dissolute wickedness as the manner of the Popish votaries is: Si autem
perseuerare nolunt, vel non possunt, melius est vt nubant, quam in ignem
delictis suis cadant. Cypr: lib. 1 Epist. 11 Epiphanius heresi 61 ostendit
melius esse post votum iungi matrimonio and acta poenitentia recipi in
Ecclesiam, quam quotidie telis occultis vulnerari. August de bono viduitatis,
Though be do mislike them that vow, and perform not, yet he reprooueth them
also, that think marriages after vows to be void, and to be dissolved.
whereupon the Fathers are clear, that marriage, after a vow made of single
life, is lawful, and that it is better to marry than continuing single to live
lewdly and wantonly.

CHAP. 38.
Of the heresy of certain, touching the verity of the body and blood of
Christ, communicated to us in the Sacrament.

THe last heresy might well have been omitted. For those heretics condemned
by Impatibilis Dialog. 3. mirum est, Bellarm. hanc haerisin tam antiquam
putare, cum Alphonsus a Castro haeresi 4. de Eucharistia, dicat, omnes qui
huius perversi dogmatis mentionem fecerunt asserere fuisse Beringarij
inuentionem.
Theodoret, Ignatius and others, denied the verity of Christ's humane nature,
and thereupon condemned the Sacrament of his body and blood. So that it was not
the impugning of Popish Transubstantiation, as Bellarmine idly fancieth, that
was reproved in them, but the denying of the truth of that body and blood,
which all true Christians do know to be mystically communicated to them in
the Sacrament, to their unspeakable comfort. How then can we be charged with
the heresy of these men, seeing we neither deny the verity of Christ's humane
nature, nor make the Sacrament to be a naked figure or similitude only, but
acknowledge that it consists of two things, the one earthly, and the other
heavenly; and that the body of Christ is truly present in the Sacrament, and
communicated to us, though neither Capernaitically to be torn with the teeth,
nor popishly to be swallowed, and carried down into the stomach and belly.

Thus then we see, how fondly this Cardinal heretic has endeavored to
prove us heretics, and to hold the old condemned heresies of those cursed
Arch-heretikes, whose frensies we condemn much more than he, and his fellows
do. So that he is so far from demonstrating either our consent with
condemned heretics that were of old, or their consent with the ancient
Fathers, and consequently the antiquity of their profession, that contrarily
all that are not blinded with partiality, may easily see, that the whole course
of Popish doctrine is nothing but a confused mixture of errors; and all that
they write against us, nothing but mere calumniation and slander.

CHAP. 39.
Of Succession, and the exceptions of the adversaries against us, in respect of
the supposed want of it.

THus then, having taken a view of whatsoever they can or do allege, for
proof of the antiquity of their doctrine, which is the first note of the
Church assigned by them; Bellar. 4. de notis ecclesiae, c. 8. not. 5.
let us come unto the second, which is Succession, and see if they have any
better success in it, than in the former. In what sense Succession may be
granted to be a note of the true Church, I have showed already: let us
therefore see how, and what our adversaries conclude from thence against us, or
for themselves.

By this note, say they, it is easy to prove, that the reformed Churches are
not the true Churches of God. Contra Luciferianos.
Ecclesia non est, quae non habet sacerdotem, says Hierome against the
Luciferians. It can be no Church, that has no Ministry. And Cyprian to the
same purpose pronounces, that the Church is nothing else, but, Plebs episcopo
adunata. Thus therefore from these authorities 1 Lib. 4. Ep. 10.
they reason; Where there is no ministry, there is no Church. But, amongst the
Protestants there is no Ministry: therefore, no Church. The Minor proposition
or assumption of this argument we deny; which they endeavor to prove in this
sort; There is no lawful calling to the work of the Ministry, amongst the
Protestants; therefore no Ministry. The defects they suppose to be in the
calling of our Bishops and Ministers, are two fold: first, for that they that
ordained them, in the beginning of this alteration of things in the state of
the Church, had no power so to do. Secondly, for that no man may be ordained,
but into a void place, either wherein there never was any Pastor or Bishop
before, as in Churches in their first foundation: or, wherein there having
been, their place is now void, by the death, deprivation, or voluntary
relinquishment of them that possessed it before, that so they who are newly
elected and ordained, may succeed into the void rooms of such as went before
them, and not intrude upon their charge, whereunto they are still justly
entitled: Our Bishops and Pastors were ordained and placed in the beginning
of the reformation of religion, where there were Bishops already in actual
possession. These being the defects, which they suppose to be in the calling of
our Bishops and Ministers, let us see how they prove that they say.

That they, who ordained our Ministers in the beginning of the alteration of
Religion, had no power so to do, thus they prove. No Bishop may be esteemed
and taken as lawfully ordained, unless he be ordained of three Bishops at the
least; and they, such as have been ordained in like sort, and so ascending
till we come to the first, whom the Apostles did constitute by their Apostolic
authority, received immediately from Christ the Son of God, whom the Father
sent into the world. But the Pastors and Bishops of the reformed Churches had
no such ordination; therefore they wanted that calling which should make them
lawful Bishops and Pastors.

It is true, that the ancient Canons regularly admit no ordination, as
lawful, wherein three Bishops at the least do not concur. Bellarm. l. 4. de
notis Ecclesiae c. 8. nota 5
But Bellarmine and his fellows do not think this number of Bishops imposing
hands, to be absolutely and essentially necessary. For they confess, that by
dispensation, growing out of due and just consideration of the present
occasions and state of things, one Bishop alone may ordain, assisted with
Abbots, which are but Presbyters and no Bishops; nay which by the course of
their profession, and original of their order, are less interessed in the
government of the Church, than the meanest Presbyter having care of souls.
Hier. contra Vigilantium non procul a fine: er ad Heliodorum. Alia monachorum
est causa, alia clericorum: clerici pascunt oves, ego pascor illi de altari
viv^ mihi quasi infructuosae arbo^i securis ponitur ad radicem, si munus ad
altar non defero. Lindan. Panop. l. 4. c. 75. Monachi olim omnes erant laici,
et omnes templi choro excludebantur. Hugo erudit. theol. de Sacram. fid. lib.
2. part. 3. c. 4. ut intrinsecus quietius vivant ordines ministerii divini, per
indulgentiam Monachis conceduntur, non ad exercendam praelationem in populo
Dei, sed ad celebrandam intrinsecus communionem Sacramenti Dei, quod tamen in
principio non ita fuisse dicunt: Monachi quippe et Eremum habitantes olim
Presbyteros habuisse dicuntur.
Monachus plangentis non docentis officium habet. A Monk is a mourner, he is
no teacher in the Church of GOD. The Romanists thinking therefore, that in some
cases, the ordination which is made by one Bishop alone, assisted with
Presbyters, is lawful and good, cannot generally except against the ordination
of the Bishops and Pastors of all reformed Churches. For in England, Denmark,
and some other places, they which had been Bishops in the former corrupt
state of the Church, did ordain Bishops and Ministers, though perhaps
precisely three did not always concur, in every particular ordination.

But they will say, whatsoever may be thought of these places, wherein
Bishops did ordain, yet in many other, none but Presbyters did impose
hands; all which ordinations are clearly void: and so, by consequent, many
of the pretended reformed Churches, as namely those of France, and others, have
no ministry at all. The next thing therefore to be examined, is, whether the
power of ordination be so essentially annexed to the order of Bishops, that
none but Bishops may in any case ordain. For the clearing whereof we must
observe, that the whole Ecclesiastical power is aptly divided into the power
of order, and jurisdiction. Ordo est rerum parium dispariumque vnicuique sua
loca tribuens congrua dispositio: that is, Order is an apt disposing of things,
whereof some are greater, and some lesser, some better, and some meaner,
sorting them accordingly into their several ranckes and places. First
therefore, order does signify that mutual reference or relation, that things
sorted into their several ranckes and places, have between themselves.
Secondly, that standing, which each thing obtains, in that it is better or
worse, greater or lesser then another, and so accordingly sorted and placed,
above or below other, in the orderly disposition of things. The power of holy
or Ecclesiastical order, is nothing else, but that power which is specially
given to men sanctified and set apart from others, to perform certain sacred,
supernatural, and eminent actions, which others of another rank may not at
all, or not ordinarily meddle with: As to preach the word, administer the
Sacraments, and the like.

The next kind of Ecclesiastical power, is that of Jurisdiction. For the more
distinct and full understanding whereof we must note, that three things are
employed in the calling of Ecclesiastical Ministers. First, an election,
choice, or designement of persons fit for so high and excellent employment.
Secondly, the consecrating of them, and giving them power and authority to
intermeddle with things pertaining to the service of God, to perform eminent
acts of gracious efficacy, and admirable force, tending to the procuring of
the eternal good of the sons of men, and to yield unto them, whom Christ
has redeemed with his most precious blood, all the comfortable means,
assurances, and helps, that may set forward their eternal salvation. Thirdly,
the assigning and dividing out to each man, thus sanctified to so excellent a
work, that portion of Gods people which he is to take care of, who must be
directed by him in things that pertain to the hope of eternal salvation. This
particular assignation gives, to them that had only the power of order before,
the power of Jurisdiction also, over the persons of men.

Thus then it is necessary, that the people of God be sorted into several
portions, and the sheep of Christ divided into several flocks, for the more
orderly guiding of them, and yielding to them the means, assurances, and
helps that may set them forward in the way of eternal life; and that several
men be severally and specially assigned, to take the care and oversight of
several flocks and portions of Gods people. The Apostles of Christ and their
successors, (...) Presbyt^s ^y by ^y, and (...) by (...) allo^. (...). (...).
^stus, vt Damas^ air, titulos in vib^ Rot^. Presbyt^s d^it. (...) in ^ta (...).
when they planted the Churches, so divided the people of God converted by
their minsterie, into particular Churches, that each City and the places near
adjoining, did make but one Church. Now because the unity and peace of each
particular Chuch of God, and flock of his sheep, depends on the unity of the
Pastor, and yet the necessities of the many duties that are to be performed
in Churches of so large extent, require more Ecclesiastical Ministers then
one; therefore though there be many Presbyters, that is, many fatherly guides
of one Church, yet there is one amongst the rest, that is specially Pastor of
the place, who, for distinction sake, is named a Bishop; (...). contra ^anos.
to whom an eminent and peerless power is given, for the avoiding of Schisms
and factions: and the r^st are but his assistants and coadiutours, and named by
the generali name of Presbyters. So that in the performance of the acts of
Ecclesiastical Ministry, when he is present and will do them himself, they
must give place: As Christ does nothing wit^ut (...) Father, so do (...) with
(...). when be Pres^, Deacon or (...) man. (...) ad (...) ha^. ad (...). (...)
to (...) Pres^rs and D^. (...), (...) B. (...), (...) the (...) ^he Ch^ch.
Cen^. (...). 1. can^. Presbyteri. sine conscienti^ Episcopi nihil faciunt.
and in his absence, or when being present he needs assistance, they may do
nothing without his consent and liking. Yea so far for orders sake is he
preferred before the rest, that some things are specially reserved to him
only, as the ordaining of such as should assist him in the work of his
ministry, the reconciling of Penitents, Epiphanius haeresi. 75. Concilium
Anciranum can. 13. ^ero. ^pist. (...) ^um: quid facit Episcopus, except^
ordinatione, quod non facit Presbyter.
confirmation of such as were baptized, by imposition of hands; dedication of
Churches, and such like.

These being the diverse sorts and kinds of Ecclesiastical power, it will
easily appear to all them that enter into the due consideration thereof, that
the power of Ecclesiastical or sacred order, that is, the power and authority
to int^ddle with things pertaining to the service of God, and to perform emi^t
acts of gracious efficacy, tending to the procuring of the eternal good of
the sonn^s of men is equal and the same in all those whom we call Presbyters,
that is fatherly guides of Gods Church and people: and that, only for orders
sake, and the preservation of peace, there is a limitation of the use and
exercise of the same. Hereunto agree all the best learned amongst the
Romanists themselves, freely confessing that that, wherein a Bishop excels a
Presbyter, is ^t a distinct and higher order, or power of order, but a kind of
dignity and office (...) employment only. Which they prove, because a
Presbyter, ordained persaltum, k Council. Carth. (...) can. 4. ^arth. 3. ^an.
31. 32. 158.
l Hiero. contra Luciferianos: ob honorem sacerdotij fit, vt soli Episcopi
manus im^nt. (...) Thom^ (...) ^addit. quaest. 40. art. 5. Bonauen. l 4. did.
24. ar. 2 q. 3. Dominicus a Soto l. 10. de iustitia and (...) q. (...). a^ 2.
and in 4. did. 24. q. 2. art. 3. Armacanus l. (...). ostendit nullum praelatum
plus habere de potestate sacramen^ siu^or ^nis, quam sim^ces sacerdotes.
Cameracensis in 4. quaest. 4. Contarenus de Sacramentis. lib. 4.
that never was consecrated or ordained Deacon, may notwithstanding do all
those acts that pertain to the Deacons order, (because the higher order does
always imply in it the lower and inferior, in an eminent and excellent sort:)
But a Bishop ordained per saltum, that never had the ordination of a
Presbyter, can neither consecrate and administer the sacrament of the Lords
body, nor ordain a Presbyter, himself being none, nor do any act peculiarly
pertaining to Presbyters. Whereby it is most evident, that that wherein a
Bishop excels a Presbyter, is not a distinct power of order, but an
eminency and dignity only, specially yielded to one above all the rest of the
same rank, for order sake, and to preserve the unity and peace of the Church.
Hence it follows, that many things which in some cases Presbyters may
lawfully do, are peculiarly reserved unto Bishops, as Hierome notes; Contra
Luciferianos.
Potius ad honorem Sacerdotij, quam ad legis necessitatem; Rather for the
honor of their Ministry, then the necessity of any law. And Peruenit ad nos
quosdam scandalizatos fuisse quod Presbyteros Chrismate tangere in front eos
qui baptizati sunt prohibuimus etc. Greg Ianuario episcopo l. 3. in dict. 12.
Epist. 26.
therefore we read, that Presbyters in some places, and at some times, did
impose hands, and confirm such as were baptized: which when Gregory Bishop of
Rome would wholly have forbidden, there was so great exception taken to him
for it, that he left it free again. And who knows not, that Carth. 3. can:
32.
all Presbyters in cases of necessity may absolve and reconcile Penitents; a
thing in ordinary course appropriated unto Bishops? and why not by the same
reason ordain Presbyters and Deacons in cases of like necessity? For, seeing
the cause, why they are forbidden to do these acts, is, because to Bishops
ordinarily the care of all churches is committed, and to them in all reason the
ordination of such as must serve in the Church pertains, that have the chief
care of the Church, and have Churches wherein to employ them; which only
Bishops have as long as they retain their standing: and not Presbyters, being
but assistants to bishops in their Churches; If they become enmies to God and
true religion, in case of such necessity, as the care and government of the
Church is deuolued to the Presbyters remaining Catholic and being of a better
spirit: so the duty of ordaining such as are to assist or succeed them in the
work of the Ministry pertaines to them likewise. For if the power of order,
and authority to intermedle in things pertaining to Gods service, be the same
in all Presbyters and that they be limited in the execution of it, only for
order sake, so that in case of necessity, every of the^ may baptize and
confirm them whom they have baptized, absolve and reconcile Penitents, and do
all those other acts, which regularly are appropriated unto the Bishop alone;
there is no reason to be given, but that in case of necessity, wherein all
Bishops were extinguished by death, or being fallen into heresy, should refuse
to ordain any to serve God in his true worship; but that Presbyters as they
may do all other acts, whatsoever special challenge Bishops in ordinary
course make unto them, might do this also. Who then dare condemn all those
worthy Ministers of God, that were ordained by Presbyters in sundry Churches of
the world, at such times as Bishops in those parts, where they lived, opposed
themselves against the truth of God, and persecuted such as professed it?
Surely the best learned in the Church of Rome, in former times durst not
pronounce all ordinations of this nature to be void. For not only Videtur
quod si omnes Episcopi essent defuncti, sacerdotes minores possent episcopos
ordinare. Armachanus l. 11. in q. Armenorum cap. 7. Alex, de Hales. part. 4. q.
9. memb. 5. art. 1. dicunt quidam quod ex demandatione Papae ordinatus potest
confer ordinem quem habet.
Armachanus, a very learned and worthy Bishop, but, as it appears by
Alexander of Hales, many learned men, in his time and before, were of opinion,
that in some cases, and at some times, Presbyters may give orders, and that
their ordinations are of force, though to do so, not being urged by extreme
necessity; cannot be excused from over great boldness and presumption. Neither
should it seem so strange to our adversaries, that the power of ordination
should at some times be yielded unto Presbyters, seeing their Chorepiscopi,
Suffragans, or Titular Bishops that live in the Diocese and Churches of other
Bishops, and are no Bishops according to the old course of discipline, do daily
in the Romish Church, both confirm Children and give orders.

All that may be alleged out of the Fathers, for proof of the contrary, may
be reduced to two heads. For first, whereas they make all such ordinations
void, as are made by Presbyters, it is to be understood according to the
strictness of the Canons in use in their time, and not absolutely in the
nature of the thing; which appears in that they likewise make all ordinations
sine (...) Synodus Chalced. can. 6
titulo to be void: Episcopus praeter iudicium metropolitani and finitimorum
episcoporum non ordinandus. Council, Laodicen: can. 12. si episcopus ab omnibus
episcopis qui sunt in prouincia aliqua vrgente necessitate non ordinatur, certe
tres episcopi debent in vnum esse congregati, ita vt etiam caeterorum qui
absente^ sunt consensum literis teneant, Council. Nic. can. 4. ^
All ordinations of Bishops ordained by fewer then three Bishops with the
Metropolitan: Council. Antiochenum can. 13.
all ordinations of Presbyters by Bishops out of their own Churches without
special leave: whereas I am well assured, the Romanists will not pronounce any
of these to be void, though the parties so doing are not excusable from all
fault. Secondly, their sayings are to be understood regularly, not without
exception of some special cases that may fall out.

Thus then we see, that objection, which our adnersaries took to be
unanswerable, is abundantly answered out of the grounds of their own
Schoolmen, the opinion of many singularly learned amongst them, and their
own daily practice, in that Chorepiscopi or Suffragans, as they call them,
Council. Ancitanum can. 13. decrerum Iohannis 3. cp. ad Germaniae episcopos.
Antiochenum can. 10.
being not Bishops, but only Presbyters, whatsoever they pretend, and
forbidden by all old Canons to meddle in ordination, yet do daily with good
allowance of the Roman Church, ordain Presbyters, and Deacons, confirm (with
imposition of hands) those that are baptized, and do all other Episcopal
acts, whiles their great Bishops Lord it like princes, in all temporal ease,
and worldly bravery.

The next thing they object against us, is, that our first Ministers, what
authority soever they had that ordained them, yet had no lawful ordination,
because they were not ordained and placed in void places, but intruded into
Churches, that had lawful Bishops at the time of those pretended ordinations;
and consequently, did not succeed, but encroach upon other men's right. To this
we answer, that the Church is left void, either by the death, resignation,
deprivation, or the peoples desertion and forsaking of him that did precede. In
some places, our first Bishops and Pastors found the Churches voydby death,
in some by voluntary relinquishment, in some by deprivation, and in some by
desertion, in that the people, or at least that part of the people that adhered
to the Catholic verity, who have power to choose their Pastor, to admit
the worthy, and refuse the unworthy, did forsake the former that were wolves
and not Pastors, and submitted themselves to those of a better spirit. Of the
three first kinds of voidance, there can be no question; of this fourth,
there may: and therefore I will prove it by sufficient authority, and strength
of reason.

Cyprian, Cecilius, Polycarpus, and other Bishops, writing to the Clergy, 1
Li. 1. Ep. 4:
and people of the Churches in Spain, whereof Basilides and Martialis were
Bishops, who fell in time of persecution, denied the faith, and defiled
themselves with Idolatry, persuade them to separate themselves from those
Bishops, assuring them that the people being holy, religious, fearing God,
and obeying his laws, may and ought to separate themselves, from impious and
wicked Bishops, and not to communicate with them in the matters of Gods
service, Lib. 1: Ep. 4.
quando ipsa plebs maxim habeat potestatem, vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes vel
indignos recusandi; that is, seeing the people has authority to choose the
worthy, and to refuse the unworthy. And Occam to the same purpose says on this
sort: 1 Part. l. 5. 28
Si Papa and maxim celebres episcopi incidant in haeresin, ad Catholicos
deuoluta est potestas omnis iudicandi. If the Pope and the principal Bishops
of the Christian world do fall into heresy, the power of all Ecclesiastical
judgment is deuolued to the inferior Clergy and people remaining
Catholic. This opinion of Cyprian and the rest, if our adversaries shall
dislike or except against, may easily be confirmed by demonstration of reason.
For if it do fall out, that the Bishops and a great part of the people fall
into error, heresy, and superstition, I think our adversaries will not deny,
but that the rest are bound to maintain and uphold the ancient verity; who
being not so many, nor so mighty, as to be able to eiect those wicked ones by
a formal course of judicial proceeding, what other thing is there left unto
them, but either to consent to their impieties, which they may not do, or to
separate themselves, which is the thing our adversaries except against, in the
people of our time. Now having separated themselves from their former supposed
and pretended Pastors; what remains, but that they make choice of new to be
ordained and set over them; if not by the concurrence of such and so many, as
the strictness of the Canon does ordinarily require to concur in
ordinations, yet by such, as in cases of necessity, by all rules of equity are
warranted to perform the same.

CHAP. 40.
Of Succession, and the proof of the truth of their doctrine by it.

THus having examined the allegation of the Papists, endeavoring to prove
against us, that we have not the true Church amongst us, because, as they
falsely suppose, we lack the visible Succession of Pastors and Bishops, let
us see what they can conclude from this note of Succession, for themselves. In
this part Denotis Ecclesiae, cap. 8.
Bellarmine shows himself to be a notable trifler. For first he says, that
if there be no Church where there is no succession, then where there is
succession continued, the true Church does remain still. Secondly, being
pressed with the example of the Graecians, amongst whom a continual succession
of Bishops has ever been found, he answers, that succession does not prove
affirmatively, that to be the true Church where it is found, but negatiuely,
that not to be the true Church, where it is wanting: contrary to himself, who
requires in the notes of the Church (amongst which he reckons succession to
be one of the prinpall,) that they be not only inseparable, without which the
true Church cannot be, but proper also, and such as cannot be found in any
other society, but that which is the true Church of God. Thirdly, again
forgetting himself, he makes succession proper to the true Church, and such
a note as may prove c Irenaeus l. 4. c. 43. illis Presbyteris obediendum esse
dicit, qui cum Episcopatus successione Charisma acceperunt veritatis. Tertul.
de praescrip. praeter ter ordinem Episcoporum ab initio decurrentem requirit
consanguinitatem doctrinae. Aug. Epist. 165. enumeratis episcopis Romany: in
hoc (inquit) ordine nullus inuenitur Donatista.
all those societies of Christians true Churches which have it: and disliketh
Calvin, for saying that more is required to find out the true Church than
personal succession; and that the Fathers did not demonstrate the Church
barely by personal succession, but by showing, that they that succeeded, held
the faith of those that went before them. Thus he shows plainly that he
knows not what he writes.

This matter of succession Staplet. contro. de ecclesia in se quaestione 4.
art. 2. expositione articuli notabili, 5.
Stapleton has much more aptly delivered than Bellarmine, confessing, that not
bare and personal succession, but lawful succession is a note of the true
Church: And defines that to be lawful succession, when not only the latter
succeed into the void rooms of those that went before them, being lawfully
called thereunto, but also hold the faith, their predecessors did. In this
sort the Fathers were wont to reason from succession, in the controversies of
Religion. First, they reckoned up the successions of Bishops, from the Apostles
times; and then showed, that none of them taught any such thing, as was then
called in question, but the contrary; and consequently, that the Apostles
delivered no such thing, but the contrary.

To Bellarmines disjunction, that either the Fathers made it appear to
Catholics or to Heretics, that the succeeding Bishops held the same faith,
the former did; we answer, They made it appear to both. For so does Irenaeus,
l. 3. cap 3.
Irenaeus prove the tradition of the Apostles to be for him, and against the
Heretics he refuteth, because he can number all the Bishops in the principal
Churches from the Apostles times downward, none of which ever taught any such
thing, as those heretics dreamed, but the contrary. That which Bellarmine
adds, that if it had appeared to heretics, that the true faith had been
kept by succeeding Bishops they would have yielded to it, is as little to the
purpose as the rest. For, we do not say, it did apeare unto them, they held the
truth, but that they held the same faith their predecessors held. Now, though
the Fathers made this appear unto them; yet they feared not to oppose
themselves, as the same Lib. 3. cap. 2.
Irenaeus witnesses, affirming, that when it was proved against the
heretics of those times, that in the succession of Bishops those that
succeeded, held the same faith the former did, without any alteration, and
consequently, the Apostles doctrine was still continued in their Churches; they
thought themselves wiser then the Apostles themselves, affirming that they
mingled the Law and the Gospel together, taking exceptions of ignorance and
imperfection against them and their doctrine.

Thus then we see, the Fathers did not reason barely from personal sucession,
but by showing affirmatively, the faith they defended to have been received by
all those Bishops, whose succession they urged against their adversaries; and
negatiuely, by proouing that none of them ever believed any such things, as
their adversaries dreamed. If the Romanists will dispute against us in this
sort, and demonstrate that the Fathers successively held those opinions they
do, and that none of them were of that judgment in matter of faith that we are
of, we will most willingly listen unto them. But this they do not, and
therefore their talking of the Fathers reasoning from succession, when they
dare not reason as the fathers did, is most vain, and idle.

CHAP. 41.
Of Unity, the kinds of it, and that Communion with the Roman Bishop is not
always a note of true and Catholic profession.

THe Bellar. de notis Ecclesiae, li. 4 cap. 10. nota 7.
next note of the Church assigned by them, is Unity. The Unity of the Church
consists principally in three things. First, in observing and holding the
Rule of faith once delivered to the Saints. Secondly, in the subjection of the
people to their Pastors: and thirdly, in the due connection of many Pastors,
and the flocks depending on them, among themselves. All these kinds and sorts
of unity we think necessarily required, in some degree, in all those
societies of Christians, that will demonstrate themselves to be the true
Churches of God; and deny not, but that unity, in this sort expressed and
conceived, is a most apt note of the true Church.

The papists suppose, that besides these kinds and sorts of unity before
expressed, there is also required another kind of unity to the being of the
Church, namely subjection to, and union with that visible head, which, as they
think, Christ has left in his stead to govern the whole body of the Church,
and to rule both Pastors and people. This head, as they suppose, is the
Bishop of Rome, from whose communion since we are fallen, they infer, that
we are divided from the unity of the true Church.

Dicunt quidam articulum esse fidei quod Benedictus ex^ph gr^tia sit Papa. quod
absque co non stet salus, cum tamen salus Ecclesiae in solum Deum ordinetur
absolute and essentialiter, in hominem Christum de ordinatalege, sed
accidentaliter in papam mortalem: alio quin cum vacat seeds per mortem
naturalem vel ciuilem Papae, vtpote si sit haereticus depositus, quis hominum
saluus esse possit? Gers. part. 1. consid. 1. de pace, idem p^tte 4. ser. de
Angelis papam agnoscere de necessitate salutis esse ambigunt nonnulli,
sufficere dicentes vt verum Ecclesiae caput Christus agnoscatur.
This last kind of unity, devised by the Papists, we deny to be necessarily
required to the being of the true Church. First, therefore, let us see what
may be said for, or against the necessity of this kind of unity; and in the
next place consider, what our adversaries can conclude for themselves, or
against us, from that kind of unity, which we acknowledge to be necessarily
required to the being of the true Church.

If the union of all Christians with this supposed visible head, which is the
Bishop of Rome, were necessarily required as a perpetual duty, then was there
no true Church in the time of the Anti-Popes, Gers. de modo habendi se tempore
schismatis.
when the wisest knew not, who were the true Popes, and who were usurpers. If
they shall reply, that it is necessary to hold Communion with the true, if he
may be known; this has no more warrant of reason than the former, seeing the
best learned amongst themselves think, that not only the Pope, but also the
whole clergy and people of Rome may err, and fall into damnable heresies: in
which case it is the part of every true Christian, to disclaim all communion
with them, and to oppose himself against them, and all their heretical
impieties. See cap. 7.
That it is possible for the Pope to err, and become an heretic, so many
great Divines in the Church of Rome have at all times most constantly defended,
that the greatest patrons of the infallibility of the Popes judgment at this
day, are forced to confess, it is not necessary to believe, that the Pope
cannot err, but that it is only a matter of probable dispute.

Thus then it is evident to all, that will not wilfully oppose themselves
against the truth, that consent with the Roman Bishop cannot be made a
perpetual and sure note of the true Church. Nay, the Grecians most constantly
affirm, that the Popes taking all to himself, and challenging to be head of
the universal Church, has been the cause of the Churches division. But
because Bellarmine is so excellent a Sophister, that he is able to prove any
thing to be true, though never so false and absurd. Let us see how he
proves, that consent with the Bishop of Rome is a note of the true Church, in
such sort, that whosoever holds Communion with him, is a Catholic, and
contrarily whosoever forsakes his Communion, is an Heretic or Schismatique.

This he endeavors to make good by the testimonies of sundry of the
ancient Fathers, wrested against their known meanings, and undoubted
resolutions, in other parts of their works and writings. His first allegation
is out of Irenaeus, in his third book and third Chapter, against heresies. But
if we consider the circumstances of the place, and the occasion of the words
ci^d by Bellarmine, we shall easily see, they prove no such thing as he
labors to enforce. For Irenaeus in that place shows, how all heresies may
be refuted, by opposing against them the tradition of the Apostles; which he
says, we may easily find out and discern, how contrary it is to the
frantic conceits of heretics, by taking a view of them, which were
ordained Bishops by the Apostles in the Churches of Christ, and their
successors to this present time, which never taught nor knew any such thing as
these men dream. Now because it would be tedious to reckon all the
successions of Bishops succeeding one another in every Church, therefore he
produces the succession of the Bishops in the Roman Church, in steed of all;
because, that being the most famous and renowned Church of the world,
constituted and founded by the two most principal and glorious Apostles Peter
and Paul, whatsoever was successively taught and received in that Church, and
consequently delivered unto it by those blessed Apostles, must needs be the
doctrine and tradition of the rest of the Apostles, delivered to all other
Churches of the World. For what was there hidden from these Apostles, that was
revealed unto any of the rest? and what would they hide from this principal
Church, that was any way necessary to be known? Therefore, says Irenaeus,
the producing of the Roman succession, is in stead of all. For it must needs
be, that what this most principal Church received from these great Apostles,
that, and nothing else, the other did receive from their Apostles, and first
preachers: which he expresses in these words: Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter
potentiore^ principalitate^, necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesia^, hoc est,
cos, qui sunt vndique fideles. Bellarmines sense of these words, that all
Churches must frame themselves to believe what the Church of Rome believes,
and prescribes to others to be believed, no way stands with the drift of
Irenaeus in this place, as may appear by that which has been said: and
therefore this allegation might have been spared.

His next authorities are out of Cyprians Epistles: Lib. 1. Ep. 3.
in the first of which Epistles we shall find, that there were certain
Schismatikes, that fled from their own lawful Bishop and superiors, with
complaints to other Bishops and Churches, and amongst the rest to the Church
and Bishop of Rome; not knowing, (says Cyprian) or at least, not considering,
that the Romans are such as will not give entertainment to such perfidious
companions, nor listen to lying and false reports. For that is the meaning of
those words, Ad quos perfidia non possit habere accessum. But Bellarmine
wresteth the words to another sense, to wit, that infidelity and error in
faith can never find place among the Romans, as being secured from all
possibility and danger of erring. So that, that which Saint Cyprian speaks of
perfidious dealing, that he interprets of infidelity and error of faith. So
good construction the Jesuit is wont to make of the words of the Fathers. But
be will say, Cyprian calls the Rom Church the principal Church, whence
sace^dotall unity has her spring: hereunto we answer, that the R^m. Church
not in power of ouerrusing all, but in order is the first and principal: and
that therefore while she continues to hold the truth, and incrocheth not upon
the right of other Churches, she is to have the priority: but that in either
of these cases she may be forsaken, without breach of that unity, which is
essentially required in the parts of the Church.
But let this suffice for the clearing of the first place alleged out of
Cyprian, and let us proceed to the Cyprian, l. 4. Epist. 8.
second; the circumstances whereof are as follows. Cornelius was elected and
ordained Bishop of Rome: A Schism grew in that Church about this his election:
Cyprian, though he approved the election of Cornelius, yet did forbear to
write unto him as Bishop, till others also might be satisfied touching the
validity of the same; at which Cornelius seemed to be grieved: Cyprian shows
him the reasons that moved him to do as he did, and withal how carefully, to
avoid all scandals, he wished all that went to Rome, to hold the root of the
true Catholic Church, which was on Cornelius part, and not to be carried away
with the faction of Schismatikes, who opposed themselves against their lawful
Bishop, and brake the unity of the Church. How this will prove, that all
Christian men and Churches must perpetually hold communion with the Roman
Church, and that this is a note of the true Church, I see not. There was a
division in the Roman Church about the election of Cornelius: Cornelius in
Cyprians judgment, was rightly chosen^ and so the root and ground of the true
Church was with him and his partakers and not with his adversaries, that
factiously and Schismatically opposed themselves against him: Cyprian wishes
all men to adhere unto their lawful Bishop, and not to the faction of
Schismatikes, rent from the root of the true Churches unity. Therefore, say
our adversaries, all Churches must for ever hold communion, upon peril of
damnation, with the Church of Rome. How vveake this consequence is, he is very
vveake in understanding that does not see. But howsoever, surely Cyprian is
very unadvisedly alleged to this purpose, who peremptorily stands upon it,
that every Bishop ought to have his liberty of judgment, (as being accomptable
only unto God) and that no Bishop should make himself a judge of another:
Lib. 2. Ep. 1.
Who dissenteth from Stephen, Bishop of Rome, and fears not to challenge him
for pertinacy; yea, so hot was the contention between Cyprian and Stephen,
that Cyprians Fi^milianus Cypriano, Ep. 75.
consorts feared not to charge him with heresy, and favoring of heretics.
So far were the Bishops of those times, from prostrating themselves at the
Popes feet, and thinking it their duty to submit themselves upon pain of
damnation to all his determinations, as his vassals are every where now
taught to do.

The next allegation is out of Ambrose; who in his funeral oration, he made
upon the death of Satyrus his brother, reports of him, that being desirous to
be partaker of the holy mysteries, yet before he would proceed in an action
of that consequence, he called to him the Bishop of the place, and asked of
him, if he held communion with the Catholic Bishops; and because he should
not mistake him, whether he held communion with the Bishop of Rome, who at that
time both in the truth of the thing, and in the opinion of Satyrus was
Catholic, and best known both to him, and the Bishop, of whose faith he
inquired. This was done in the time of the Schism of the Luciferians, as
appears by the place of Ambrose. Now what consequence is this? Satyrus asked
of the Bishop, of whom he was to receive the holy mysteries, whether he held
communion with the Catholic Church; and to avoid all ambiguity, expressed
what he meant, by asking him, whether he agreed with the Roman Church, which
at that time, in his opinion, held the true profession; therefore the Roman
Church can never err. As if I being in France, or Germany, meeting with some
Christians, of whose faith I doubt, should demand of them, whether they hold
the true Catholic religion; and add, for explication of the meaning of my
question, whether they hold the profession of the reformed Churches in England
and Scotland, which at this time I think to be the true Churches of God: does
it follow, that I think these Churches can never err, or fall from the
sincerity of the Christian profession? or that for ever it must be a note of
the sincere professors of the Christian faith, to hold communion with these
Churches, howsoever they degenerate? The same answer serves for the places
alleged out of Hierome, Optatus, and Augustine; and particularly touching In
Catalogo scriptorum Ecclesiast.
Hierome, who knows not that he affirms directly, that Liberius, the Bishop
of Rome, fell into heresy? and Hiero. Euagrio.
disliketh the customs of the Roman Church? and will not have that See, and
the Bishops of it, to give laws to all Christendom; saying, Orbis mayor est
vrbe? and that though he say Epist. ad Damasum de nomine Hypostasis.
here, that Peter's chair is the rock the Church is builded upon, yet against
Lib. 1. contra Iouinianum.
Iovinian he professes, that super omnes ex aequo ecclesiae fortitudo
solidatur, The Church is equally founded upon all the Apostles. And in Hiero
Euagrio.
another place, A Bishop, whether of Rome, or of Eugubium, is eiusdem meriti,
eiusdem sacerdotij; equal in merit and office, howsoever riches and the honor
of places seem to make some difference. Hierome was a man of a violent spirit,
and wrote many things, that must have a favorable construction, to make them
accord with that, which elsewhere he has delivered. Touching Epist. 89. ad
Episcopos Viennensis prouinciae.
Leo, who says, that, that which Christ meant, should pertain to the office
of all the Apostles, was principally yielded to Peter, and from him, as from an
head, derived to the rest, must be understood only of a principality of order,
and that he first in time received the promise of that which was meant to all,
to express the unity that must be in all. For otherwise it neither stands
with the truth, nor the judgment of the Fathers, that the Apostles received
their office and authority by deriuation from Peter, or held it in a
subordination under him; seeing they were all called and constituted
immediately by Christ himself, without any dependence on Peter, or receiving
any thing from him, as is easy to demonstrate out of Cyprian, and the consent
of the most ancient Fathers. But because these authorities are too weak to
prove the thing intended, therefore from these Bellarmine flees to
experience, from whence he thinks he may fetch a better proof.

All Churches of the world, says he, that ever divided themselves from the
fellowship of the Roman Church, like boughs broken from a tree, and deprived
of the nourishment they formerly received from the root, did presently wither
away and decay. The falsehood of this saying of Bellarmine, is too apparent. For
the Churches of Greece, Armenia, Aethiopia, and Syria, continued a long time
after they had forsaken the communion of the Roman Church. Yea, many of them
continue to this day, holding a more sound and sincere profession of Christian
verity, than the Romanists do. It is true indeed, that many of the famous
Churches of the world have been swallowed up of Mahometisme, and Barbarism:
but to attribute that their fall to their separation from the Church of Rome,
is upon as good ground, as to attribute the cause of Goodwin-sands to
Tenterton-steeple. That which he adds, that none of the Churches divided from
Rome, had ever any learned men after their separation, shows plainly, that
his impudency is greater than his learning. For what will he say of
Oecumenius, Theophylactus, Damascenus, Zonaras, Cedrenus, Elias Cretensis,
Nilus Carbasilas, and innumerable more, living in the Greek Churches, after
their separation from the Church of Rome? Surely these were more than matchable
with the greatest Rabbines of the Romish Synagogue. But, says he, they could
never hold any Council since their separation. If he mean general, it is
not to be marvailed at, seeing they are but a part of the Christian Church: If
National or Provincial, it is most childish, and by sundry instances to be
reproved.

CHAP. 42.
That nothing can be concluded for them, or against us, from the note of
Unity, or division opposite unto it.

THus having cleared that which Bellarmine objecteth, to prove, that
subjection to, and union with the Bishop of Rome, is employed in that unity
which is required to the being of the Church. Let us come to the other part,
and see, whether any thing may be concluded from that unity, which we
confess to be required to the being of the true Church, either against us, or
for them. First therefore, the Jesuit reasons against us in this sort; All
they, that are of the true Church, must hold the unity of the faith once
delivered to the Saints: but there are sundry Heretics, erring damnably in
matters of faith, as Zuincheldians, Anabaptists, Trinitarians, and the like,
gone out of the reformed Churches: therefore they are not the true Churches of
God.

If this kind of reasoning were good, he might prove, that those Churches,
wherein the Apostles lived, were not the Churches of God; because out of them
proceeded sundry heretics, as (...) Tim c. 17.
Hymenaeus, Philetus, Revel 2. 6.
Nicolaus, Acts ^. 18.
Simon Magus, and the like. But, says he, there be two differences between
the Apostolic Churches, and the reformed Churches in this respect: the first,
that the doctrine of the reformed Churches it self, and of it own nature,
breeds dissension: the second, that when there is difference grown, they
have no rule by direction whereof to make an end of controversies. But the
divisions that grow from the Catholic Church, proceed merely from the malice
of Satan, and have no foundation in the doctrine of it; and if any difference
do arise, it has a m^anes to end all controversies by, which is, the
determination of a Council or the chief Pastor. Both these differences we
deny: for, neither does our doctrine of it self breed dissension and
diversity of opinions: neither are we without means of composing
controversies, if they arise. If Bellarmine will prove, that our doctrine of it
self breeds division, he must show that the grounds and principles of it
are uncertain, and such as may occasion error, contrariety, and uncertainty
of judgment; which he neither does, nor can do. For the ground of all our
doctrine is the written word of God, interpreted according to the rule of
faith, the practice of the Saints from the beginning, the conference of places,
and all light of direction, that either the knowledge of ^gues, or any part of
good learning may yield. This surely is the rule to end all controversies by,
and not the authority of a Council, or the chief Pastor, as Bellarmine
fondly imagines. Ne^ mouere quenquam debet quod con^dem professionem patrum
praeposus decreto generalo. Consilii, quam fide de toto (...) existentes
conuenitent e^copi: quin ^mo in tractatibu^ (...) ^uic ^ost ^ptaras (...)
Conciliorum (...) that (...), (...). (...). (...). art. (...) 1^.
For, they both must follow the direction of this rule in all their
determinations. (...)
Whereupon, the Book of God, and (...) de (...).
monuments of Antiquity, were always wont to be brought into the Councels,
whereby the Fathers might examine all matters controversed, or any way doubted
of. Now as we want not a most certain rule, whereby to judge of all matters
of controversy and difference, so in examining things by the direction of this
rule, we require that Christian moderation in all men, that ever was found in
the servants of God; that no man presume of his own wisdom, judgment, and
understanding, nor hastily pronounce, before conference with others: ^ For the
spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; and God is the (...) 1
Cor. 14 32, 33.
God of order, and not of confusion. It is therefore a vile calumniation of
Bellarmine, when he says, that with us every one prefers himself before
others, and every one takes on him peremptory judgment of another. For,
contrariwise, we teach all men to submit their private opinions to the
examination of others, the meaner to respect those of greater place, and
quality, the fewer the more; and those men which pertinaciously contradict the
doctrine agreed upon by consent of all that are in authority, or the greater
part, we reject from the communion of our Churches, and so, with us, an end is
made of all controversies.

The rule then with us, is most certain and infallible, known to all; to wit,
the scripture or the written word of God, expounded according to the rule of
faith, practice of the Saints, and the due comparing of one part of it with
another, in the public confessions of faith, published by the Churches of our
communion. In all which there is a full consent, whatsoever our malicious
adversaries clamourously pretend to the contrary: and all those, that
stubbornely resist against this rule, or any thing therein contained, and
refuse to be ordered by it, we reject as factious and seditious schimatickes.
Thus do we disclaim all Anabaptists, Familists, Zuinchfeldians,
Trinitarians, and all other Sectaries whatsoever. But, says Bellarmine, how is
it then, that there are so many divisions, not only from your Churches, but
also in your Churches, and amongst them that you take for your brethren, and
men of your own communion, as Lutherans, Caluinists, Flaccians,
Melancthonists, Hosiandrines, and the like? To this we answer, that this
diversity is to be imputed wholly to our adversaries. For, when there was a
reformation to be made of abuses and disorders in matters of practice, and
manifold corruptions in very many parts of Christian doctrine; and in a
Council by general consent it could not be hoped for, (as P. 3. dialog.
apolog. iudicium de Concilio Constanciensi.
Gerson long before out of his own experience saw and professed) by reason of
the prevailing faction of the Popes flatterers, but this was necessarily to be
assayd severally, in the particular kingdoms of the world; it was not possible
but that some diversity should grow, while one knew not, nor expected to know
what another did. Yet it so fell out by the happy providence of God, and force
of that maine truth they all sought to advance, that there was no material or
essential difference amongst them, but such as, upon equal scanning, will be
found rather to consist in the diverse manner of expressing one thing, and to
be but verbal upon mistaking, through the hasty and inconsiderate humors of
some men, than any thing else. Yea I dare confidently pronounce, that after due
and full examination of each others meaning, See Chap. 35.
there shall be no difference found touching the matter of the Sacrament, the
vbiquitary presence, or the like, between the Churches reformed by Luthers
ministry in Germany, and other places, and those whom some men's malice called
Sacramentaries: that none of the differences between That which Illyricus said
touching original sin, which he affirmed to be an essential corruption, was
not so meant, as if sin were a positive thing, or an essence and substance,
as many did conceive: for he acknowledged, that sin is formally nothing, but
a want of r^ctitude, and an aberration: but as we call that action sin,
wherein defect and want of rectitude is found, so likewise he feared not to
call the essential powers of the soul, auerse from God, and disordered in
their motions and inclinations, by the name of original sin, because they
are originally sinful, Smidelinus clears Hosiander, showing that his
opinion was that by the active and passive righteousness of Christ, performed
in his humane nature, as by causes meritorious, we find favor with God and
have communion with him, and are made partakers of his essential
righteousness: not transfusing it into us or confounding it withus as many
mistocke him, but by such a kind of participation as that, is wherein all
creatures partake of Gods divine perfections, and that so partaking of his
righteousness we may do that is right in his sight.
Melancthon and Illyricus except about certain ceremonies, were real: that
Hosiander held no private opinion of Justification, howsoever his strange
manner of speaking, gave occasion to many so to think and conceive. And this
shall be justified against the proudest Papist of them all.

But, says Bellarmine, your Churches are so torn and rent with dangerous
divisions, that not only one of you dissenteth from another, but the same man
often times from himself: and herein gives instance in Luther, whose
judgment varied in diverse things of great consequence. Touching Luther, we
answer, that he was a most worthy Divine, as the world had any in those times,
wherein he lived, or in many ages before; and that for the clearing of sundry
points of greatest moment in our Christian profession, much obscured and
entangled before, with the intricate disputes of the Schoolmen, and Romish
Sophisters, (as of the power of nature, of free will, grace, justification; the
difference of the Law and the Gospel, faith and works, Christian liberty,
and the like) all succeeding ages shall ever be bound to honor his happy
memory. In all these things he was ever constant: yea, all these things he
perfectly apprehended, and to the great joy of many men's hearts delivered both
by word and writing, before he departed from the Romish Synagogue; and out of
these, and more diligent search of the Scripture and Fathers, then was usual
in those times by degrees saw and descried those Popish errors, which at first
he discerned not.

That herein he proceeded by degrees, and in his later writings disliked that
which in his former he did approve, is not so strange a thing, as our
adversaries would make it seem to be. Did not Augustine, the greatest of all
the Fathers, and worthiest Divine the Church of God ever had since the Apostles
times) write a whole book of Retractations? Do we not carefully observe, what
things he wrote, when he was but a Presbyter, and what, when he was made a
Bishop, what, before he entered into conflict with the Pelagians, and what
afterward? Did he not formerly attribute the election of those that were
chosen to eternal life, to the foresight of faith, which afterward he
disclaimed, as a mere Pelagian conceit? So that his adversaries, as appears
by the Epistles of Prosper and Hilarious, did not only charge him to be
contrary to the Fathers, but to himself also. Did De t^ibuna. lib. atque
administrationis insulis ad sacerdotium raptus, do^ere vos copi, quod ipse non
did^ci, itaque factum est, vt prius docere inciperem, quam discerem: ^endum
ergo milu simul and docendum est, quoniam non vacauit ante discere; and qua^tum
libet quisque profecerit, nemo est, qui doceri non egeat, dum vivit, Ambr.
officiorum li. (...). 1. ^uther in his preface (...) wo^kes. (...). Bellar. l.
4. c. 10 de notis ecclesiae ait, Lutherum sic dicere in libro de ^ous Monasti
cis.
not Ambrose in his time complain, that he was forced to teach before he had
learned, and so to deliver many things, that should need and require a second
review? Does not their Angelical Doctor, in his Sum of Theology, correct,
and alter many things that he had written before? Let not our adversaries
therefore insult upon Luther, for that he saw not all the abominations of
Popery at the first, but let them rather consider of, and yield to the
reasonableness of the ^ request, which in the preface of his works he makes
to all Christian and well minded readers, to wit, that they would read his
books and writings with judgment, and with much commisseration, and remember
that he was sometimes a Friar. nourished in the errors of the Romish Church, so
that it was more painful to him to forget those things he had formerly ill
learned, than to learn anew that which is good.

But, say they, Luther himself witnesses, that contrariety and cotradiction
is a note of falsehood; and therefore his writings being contradictory, the
later to the former, his whole doctrine must needs be false, even in his own
judgment. Let them, that thus reason against Luther, know, that his meaning is
not, that whosoever retracteth and corrects that he formerly taught, is
thereby convinced of falsehood, and his whole doctrine proved to be erroneous;
but that those assertions, that do implie contradicton, and contrariety, that
stand wholly upon doubtful, uncertain and perplexed disputes, and so
overthrow themselves, do thereby appear to be false. Of which nature are all
the principal parts of the Romish doctrine. For example; Transubstantiation is
one of the greatest mysteries of Popish religion, and all Papists at this day
do firmly hold and believe it: yet it is demonstratiuely proved by their own
best Divines, that such a total conversion, or transubstantiation of the
Sacramental elements into the body and blood of Christ, is impossible, and
implies in it sundry contradictions, and consequences of horrible impieties.

The conversion or turning of one thing into another, is then, when upon the
ceasing of the former, the later begins to be in such sort as the conversion
is: if it be substantial, the former ceasing to be that substance it was, the
later begins to be that substance it was not before. Wherefore if bread be
substantially turned into Christ's body, the ceasing of the substance of bread
is the beginning of the substance of his body: this is called by Scotus,
transubstantiatio productiva: and is confessed to be impossible in respect of
the substance of bread, and the body of Christ. Wherefore they say that one
substance may be said to be turned into the other, when upon the ceasing of the
former, the later begins to have the same qualities, apparel, place and
employment the former had: and s^ suppose the body of Christ filling the same
place that the bread did, but now cease to do, (returning into that nothing
out of which it was taken) that the bread may be said to be turned into
Christ's body: and this is called by them transubstantiatio adductiua. Bielin
Canonem missae lect. 40. has a more foolish conceit than the former: See
Scotus in quartum distinct. 11. (...) Scotus in 4. distinct. 10. q. 1.
For is it not employed in the nature of the transubstantiation, or total
conversion of one substance into another, that the one must succeed the other
in being? and that the former must cease to be, and the later thereupon begin
to be? whence it will follow, that the later of the two substances, into which
the conversion is made, was not, nor had no being before. Now what greater
blasphemy can there be, than to think Christ's body had no being, till the
Massing Priests had wrought this miraculous Transubstantiation? It is true,
that one substance may be changed into another, as was Lots wife into a pillar
of salt: but that one substance should pass, and be totally transubstantiated
into another, having the same being, without all difference before the
supposed Transubstantiation, that after it has, and nothing being new in it,
in respect of substance, or being, implies a contradiction; and therefore the
sacramental elements cannot be transubstantiated into Christ's body and blood.

That which Bellarmine has out of Scotus, of Transubstantiatio productiua and
adductiua, is the most childish folly that ever was. For this is that he says;
The substance of the sacramental elements is annihilated, and they return
into that nothing out of which they were formerly taken, and then Christ's
body comes into the place, where they were before; Therefore the one
substance may be said to be changed into the other. If this reason be good,
when one man remooueth out of his place, into which another upon his remove
does enter, the former may be said to be transubstantiated into the later. For,
as the former of the two supposed men, goes out of his place into some other,
vvhereupon the other succeeds him, not in being, but in place: so the
sacramental elements go out of their place, and return to that nothing, out
of which they were created, and the body of Christ succeeds them, not in
being, which it had the very same while they were, but in place.

^ Neither can this supposed conversion of the elements into the body of
Christ, be the cause of Christ's being in the Sacrament, but rather of their own
ascension and going up into heaven. For, though when one substance is turned
into another not being before the conversion, but by the conversion beginning
to be, that, into which the conversion is made, occupies and possesses the
place the other held: as when Lots wife was converted into a pillar of salt,
the pillar stood in that place, where she was when she was converted: yet
if one substance should be changed into another preexistent, the converted
should get the place of that into which it were converted; so that the bread
and wine on the mystical table, being converted into the body and blood of
Christ sitting in heaven at the right hand of God, should go up into heaven,
and not bring him to the table. And yet this was the principal reason, that
moved the authors of Transubstantiation, to like better of that, than of any
other construction of Christ's words. For that they supposed thereby, the body
of Christ might be made present in the Sacrament, without any change of place
or local motion, in respect of it self. Which yet Scot. in 4. did. 10.
quest. 1.
Scotus In 4 quaest. 6.
Occam, and the latter Schoolmen do utterly reject. So sweetly do these men
agree, that talk so much of unity. Verily I am persuaded, there are more
material, and real differences amongst them, touching this one sacrament,
then there are appearing differences or controversies amongst those of our
religion, touching all points of Religion.

Cameracensis ^ut. (...). in^q 6.
For is it not so, that there are four opinions touching the presence of
Christ in the sacrament, and three of them different from Transubstantiation?
So that notwithstanding the decree of the Laterane Council, many of the wisest
and best learned were of opinion, that Transubstantiation cannot be deduced
from the scripture, or the Churches determination Did. not Thomas in
quo^libetalibus q^onibus quodlibeto 3 q. 1. art. 2 Dutandu^ lib. 4. distinct.
11. qu^st. 1.
Thomas Aquinas, and the rest of that time deny that one body may be locally in
more places than one, at one time, and reject it as a thing impossible, and
implying contradiction? and do not the Papists at this day judge us
haereticks for being of the same opinion? Did Cons^ Berengar^ est, panem and
vinum post consecrationem esse verum corpus and sanguinem Christi; and
sensualiter non solum in sacramento, sed etiam in veritate manibus sacerdotum
tractari, and frangi, and fidelium ^entibus atter^.
they not in Berengarius time think, that the very body of Christ is torn
with teeth, and yet without hurt, by a strange miracle? And was not Berengarius
in his recantation forced to say so much? yet at this day, this conceit is
holden most absurd and foolish. Do not some of them say, that the body of
Christ goes down into the stomach and belly, and is eaten of mice, and
dogs? and do not others detest this blasphemous impiety? Do not some of them
say, there are accidents in the Sacraments without substance? and do not others
affirm, that those accidents are inherent in the air? Do not some of them
say, that when the Priest breaks that which he holds in his hands after
consecration, it is no true breaking, but a deceiving of the sense? Others,
that he truly breaks, and yet nothing is broken? Others, that Christ's body
is broken? and others, that the accidents are broken? Such a broken religion
have these men devised, that neither the Fathers, nor any, before Barbarism
had possessed all, ever thought of. Corpus Christi est totum in tota ho^ia and
totum in qualibet part: hinc dubitatur an retineat distantiam partitium?
distinguit Scotus ordinem partium in toto, and in loco: primum retinere dicit,
non secundum. Occam probat secundum non posse esse sine primo, nec pri mum sine
secundo; vnde probat corpus Christi, in Eucharistia, non habete distantiam ^el
ordinem partium in toto (...), et per consequens nullam figuram, nec esse
organieum, and proinde nec animatum. Occam li. 4. q. 4 Cameracensis. in 4.
quaest 5.
Do not some of them say, that Christ in the Sacrament retains his own
proportion of parts, figure and fashion? and do not others say and
demonstratiuely prove, that if he be in the Sacrament, he has no distance of
parts, no figure, no fashion, nor organicall disposition of body, and
consequently no life? The rest of the infinite mazes, that these men turning
out of the direct way, have lost themselves in, I have no pleasure to tread
out. But those few examples may suffice to show that their whole doctrine is
full of uncertainty, contrariety, and contradiction, and does testify against
it self, that it is not of God.

It were easy to show, that all Popish doctrine is nothing else but a mass
of uncertainties and contradictions, showing that they are out of the way, that
pro^esse it, and know not how to find either it, or themselves. If any Papist
dare deny this, it shall be proved against him in particulars. But they will
say, notwithstanding all these differences, yet they submit their judgments
to the censure of the Pope and Council, and therefore their divisions are not
dangerous nor heretical.

How false and shameless this answer is, the Quod (...) errate in ^udicando
possit, asseverantissime a plerisque pronunciatur. Picus Theoremate 4. (...)
etiam concilia errare cosse ostendit.
infinite number of them that have ever judged, that the Pope may err and
become an Heretic, does apparently demonstrate.

If they shall say, that though they dare not rely upon the infallibility of
the popes judgment, yet they rest in the determination of general Councelles;
it will be found that they are as doubtful touching the authority of
Councelles, as they are concerning the Pope, Pighius hierarch. lib. 6. cap. 1.
2. 4. putavit vniuersalium conciliorum Constantinum ^ntorem fuisse: quem
diuinorum mysteriorum atque adeo Romani pontificis auctoritatis (...) fuisse
pronunciat: hunc reprehendit Andradius de generalium conciliorum auctoritate
lib 1. (...). (...). ^dem Andradius ait, si vniuersi patres in Synodo aliquid
definitent vnanimiter, cui definitioni sola pe^ona Papae contradiceter, Synodo
standum es^e, and non iudicio papae: and idem sen^sse ait Turrecremat: and
tamen (...) damnabant, vt patet ibidem. Gallia Synodum Florentinam pro
Oecumenica nunquam habuit, (...), nec perfectam admisit. Andrad. des^rip. and
tradit. auctoritate lib. 2 fol. 251. Constantiensem Synodum (...) Cai^anus,
affirmat Andradius in eodem lib. fol. 2^.
some saying, they are mere humane inventions; others, that they are nothing,
if the Pope confirm them not; others that they are, though he refuse to
confirm them; and others, that both may err: some rejecting one Council, and
some another, as appears by the contrary judgment of Papists, of the
Councelles of Constance, Basil, Pisa, and Florence.

But they will say, they all hold that, which the Catholic Roman Church does
hold, and in other things, not yet agreed upon, think every man at his
pleasure. This is as much, as if they should have said, that wherein soever
they all agree, they all agree, and wherein soever they differ, each faction
does differ from another, and carefully provides, that nothing shall pass
against it by public consent, as appears in the matter of Mary's conception,
and sundry other things, which no Council durst ever determine, for fear of
offendinge the contrary factions dissenting about these things. Thus then, I
hope, it appears out of that which has been spoken, that by the note of
unity and division, the Romanistes are found to be in error, and not we.
What degree of unity is necessarily required in the true Churches of God; and
what divisions may be found among the societies of Christians, and yet not
cause them to cease to be the true Churches of God, I have sufficiently cleared
in that part, wherein I showed, what is the nature of schism and heresy.

CHAP. 43
Of Universality.

THe next note of the Church, is universality: concerning which many things
have been spoken in the former part, touching the notes of the Church in
general. Wherefore passing by those things, let us in this place observe only
these few things following. First therefore to the Universality of the Church
it is required, that it extend to all times, places, and sorts of men.
Secondly, this Universality is not found in any one Church, limited either in
respect of time or place. Thirdly, from hence it follows, that it is no where
found, but in that blessed number of Christians, that have been, are and shall
be. Fourthly, it cannot be a note of the true Church, that is the multitude
of men now living in the world, as being found in it; For that multitude is not
universal, but limited in respect of time, being only the number of them,
that live at one time, Bellar. lib. 4. c. 7. de notis Ecclesiae nota. 4.
and may be limited also in respect of place: for it is not necessary, that the
Church be in all places at one time, but it suffices if it be successively.
Fifthly, universality may be a note of the true Church, in respect of particular
societies of Christians, limited in time, and place, though not by having it,
yet by demonstrating themselves, to pertain to the unity of that Church that
has it. This no particular Church can do, but by proving, that it holds the
common faith once delivered to the Saints, without heretical innovation, or
schismatic violation, of the unity and peace of the Christian world.

This being the way for particular Churches to demonstrate themselves to be
Catholic, by proving they hold the Catholic faith, it is easy from hence to
conclude, that the reformed Churches are the Catholic Churches of God. First,
for that, that being Catholic, as Contra profanas haereticorum nouitates.
Vincentius Lirinensis defines it, which is and has been holden at all
times, and in all places, by all Christians, that have not been noted for
novelty, singularity, and division; whatsoever has been so received, we
receive as the undoubted truth of God: neither is there any of the things which
we impugn, and the Papists defend, that is Catholic, but they all carry the
marks of nouelty and uncertainty. Secondly, touching the communion the people
of God should have among themselves, our adversaries shall never prove, that
we have at any time given occasion of those breaches that now appear; But we
will prove against them that they have, and so the note of Universality makes
nothing for them, or against us.

Touching the name of Catholic, devised to express those both men, and
societies of men, which hold the common faith without faction or division, I
have spoken sufficiently in the former part, touching the notes of the Church,
and so need not here to insist upon it. Thus have we run through the
examination of the principal notes of the Church, assigned by our adversaries:
but, because they add unto these certain other, I will briefly examine their
proofs taken from thence, for themselves, or against us.

CHAP. 44.
Of the Sanctity of Doctrine; and the supposed absurdities of our profession.

THese notes are, Sanctity and efficacy of doctrine, our own confession,
miracles, and predictions, the felicity and infelicity of such as defend or
impugn the truth; and lastly, the holy and religious conversation of the
Professors of the truth. Let us take a view of these in such sort and order,
as they are proposed by them. They place in the front the Sanctity and
efficacy of doctrine.

A liar (they say) should have a good memory; but surely our adversaries, of
all the liars that ever were, have the worst memories: by reason whereof every
second page of their writings, if not every second line, is a refutation of the
first. Bellarmine divides his tract of the notes of the Church, into two
parts. In the first he shows, what things are required in the notes of the
Church, and there he says, truth and Sanctity of doctrine is no note of the
Church. In the latter, he does particularly assign the notes, whereby he
supposes the Church may be known, and reckons truth, sanctity, and
efficacy of doctrine, amongst the rest. But let us pardon him this oversight,
and see how he proves by this note, that we are not, and that their faction
is, the true Church of God.

Our doctrine is false, absurd, and unreasonable; and theirs, full of truth,
reason, and equity: Therefore our Churches are not the true Churches of God,
and theirs are. Both parts of the Antecedent of this argument we deny. For, he
shall never be able to prove the absurdities he imputes unto us; but we are
able to demonstrate against him, that the whole course of Popish doctrine is
most absurd, false and impious.

But least he should seem to say nothing, he produces four instances,
wherein he supposes there is apparent and very gross absurdity. The first he
proposes in this sort: The Protestants teach, that a man is justified by
special faith, whereby he persuades himself that he is just. Now then he
reasons thus; When men begin to believe, either they are just, and then
their faith justifies not, being in nature after their justification, and
finding them already just, when it begins; or else they are not just, and
then special faith making a man believe he is just, is false, and so a man is
justified by a lie. To this horned argument we answer, that special faith
has sundry acts, but to this purpose specially two: the one, by way of
petition humbly entreating for acceptance and favor; the other, in the nature
of comfortable assurance, consisting in a persuasion that that is granted,
which was desired. Faith, by her first act, obtains and works our
justification, and does not find us just when we begin to believe: by her
second act, she does not actiuely justify, but finding the thing done,
certifieth and assures us of it, and so is no lying persuasion, as this lying
companion is pleased to pronounce it to be. So then, special faith in her
first act, which is a kind of petition, is before justification, and procures
or obtains it, but then she has not the persuasion of it; in her second
act, she presupposes the thing done, and already obtained, and so truly
persuades the believer of it, but procures not the doing of it.

The second palpable and gross absurdity of the Protestants doctrine is, that
it is not lawful to say the Lords prayer. This the Cardinal proves, because
no man of the Protestants Religion can, without dissimulation, ask
forgiveness of sins, which is one of the principal petitions of that
prayer. This petition they cannot make, because they hold, that all right
believing and justified men are without sin, and know themselves so to be;
and therefore cannot be excusable from vile dissimulation, and mocking of God,
in asking the remission of their sins. The impudency of this imputation is
such, as I think all moderate Papists are ashamed of it. For, does any of us
think, that the justified man is void of all sin? Or is it consequent, if a
man know himself to be justified, that then he may not ask remission of his
sins? Do not many right learned and wise amongst themselves teach, that a man
may a Alex. of Ales, Ioh. Bacon, Vega, Ambrosius Catharinus, and d^uers other,
of whom see cap. 7.
be sure he is in state of grace, and justification, by the ordinary working of
Gods spirit? and do not all Papists think, that by special revelation men
may be sure they are in state of grace, as Paul and sundry others were? Do all
these teach, that men thus assured of their justification, know themselves to
have no sin, and consequently, nothing whereof they should ask forgiveness?
Surely, herein I think both they and we agree, that in the justified, the
dominion of sin cease, sin has no longer dominion over them, and that
proportionably the guilt of condemnation is taken away; but that there are
still remainders of sin in them, not perfectly extinguished; and that, though
while they remain in the state of justification, they ^n not with full
consent, to the excluding of grace, and subiecting of themselves to the guilt
of condemnation, yet there are many sinful evils they run into, which
subject them to Gods displeasure, and for which he will not fail to judge
them, if they judge not themselves. For the weakening and abolishing of these
sinful evils, and the averting of that displeasure, wherewith God is
displeased with men for them, the justified do pray unto God, which is, to
ask forgiveness of sins, as in the Lords prayer is meant. Est poenitentia
bonorum and humilium fidelium pene quotidiana, in qua pectora tundimus,
dicentes, dimitte nobis debita nostra, illa vtique quae humanae fragilitati
parua, tamen crebra, subrepunt. Aug. Seleucianae Epist. 109. oration quotidiana,
quam docuit Dominus, delet quidem quotidiana peccata, cum quotidie dicitur,
dimitte nobis debita nostra. De ciuitate Dei, l 21 cap. 27.
For, the petition is understood of the sins of the servants of God, and such
as are in state of grace, as Augustine teaches. Thus then the justified man
knows, that the dominion of his sins is taken away, and that the guilt of
condemnation, whereunto they subject such as are under the dominion of them, is
already removed, and therefore he does not desire, nor ask forgiveness of
sins in this sort: but the inherence of sin he acknowledges in himself,
notwithstanding his justification, which still subiecteth him to Gods
displeasure, and punishments, accompanying the same. These things he desires
to be removed, and in this sense asks forgiveness of sins.

If it be replied, that the remission of the sins of the justified is full and
perfect, and that therefore they that know themselves to be justified, cannot
ask remission, which they know they have perfectly already; We answer, that
the remission of the sins of the justified, is full and perfect, not for that
they are already freed actually from the inherence of sin, and the
displeasure of God disliking it, but because they have full title unto, and
right in that mercy of God; which, as it has already delivered them from the
dominion and condemnation of sin, so it will in the end wholly free them, from
the inherence of it, and the displeasure of God disliking it.

His next allegation is more frivolous than the former. The Anabaptists, says
he, do most certainly and assuredly persuade themselves, that they are accepted
of God, and therefore they have true faith, according to the doctrine of the
Protestants, who define faith to be the assurance of the merciful goodness of
God; yet do the Protestants deny the^ to be justified, unless they forsake
their errors, and so by conseque^t do say, they have true faith, and yet are
not justified; which is to affirm that they are just, and not just. To this we
answer, that there is as great difference between true confidence and
assurance, (which only is to be named faith) and that which is found in
heretics, as between the joy and gladness that is fantastical, and is
found in men dreaming, and that which is true and in men waking.

That quietness of mind either proceeds from senseless stupidity in men
having cauterized consciences, though there be just cause of fearful
apprehensions; or from the not finding or having any matter of condemning
remorse: even as some men are touched with no grief, nor afflicted with any
smart or pain, though no part be sound or well in them, because they are in a
dead and senseles stupidity: and others feel not pain, because they are
perfectly well. It is not therefore every assured confidence that is faith, but
true confidence. Neither is it to be doubted, but that heretics do
oftentimes confidently persuade themselves they please God, and think they
embrace true piety, as men dreaming do persuade themseles they enjoy and
possess all things, though they possess nothing. But as men waking know the
things they apprehend, are so indeed as they apprehend them, and not in
fancy only, as men sleeping are deluded: so Johan: Baconus lib. 3. did. 30.
q. 1. art. 2. ait, habentem charitatem posse certitudinaliter scirese esse in
charitate.
true Christians know the persuasion they have of Gods goodness toward them,
grows from due and just consideration, and not from deceivable fancy and
imagination only, as in heritickes it does. This point is excellently cleared
by Part. 3. quaest. 61. membr. 7. art. 3.
Alexander of Hales, the first, and greatest of all the Schoolmen, whose
reasons and proofs, that true Christians may be assured, they are in state of
grace and acceptance with God, Bellarmine cannot answer.

Thus we have seen the supposed absurd positions, wherewith the Jesuit
charge all Protestants in general. In the next place, he produces such as
are proper to the Lutherans; and in the last place, such as are peculiar to the
Caluinistes. For thus it pleases him to term us, by these names of faction
and division; whereas it is Antichrists pride that has made all the breaches
in the Christian world, and would have laid all wast if God had not preserved a
remnant.

The error wherewith he charge the Lutherans, is, that children, when they
are baptized, have faith, hope, and love. Is this an error? are they
justified, sanctified, and made the temple of the holy Ghost, when they are
baptized; and have they neither faith, hope, nor love? does not justification
imply all these in it? But they have not the act of faith; noe more they have
of reason: have they not therefore the faculty of reason? This then is that
which these men ^each, whom it pleases these Antichristian sectaries odiously
to name Luthe^ans, namely, that children, when they are adopted, and made the
sons of God, when they are justified and sanctified, are filled with the
habites or po^ntiall habilities of these virtues, and that they have the
beginning, root, and seed of faith, hope, and love. For the farther clearing
of this objection, read Kemnisius in his Examen of the Tridentine Council.

The error of the Caluinists, touching absolute necessity, and that God is the
author of sin, is but the imagination of the Romanists, as I have already
sufficiently showed. For Calvin and we all detest both these absurdities.

CHAP. 45.
Of the Paradoxes and gross absurdities of Romish Religion.

THus then the Paradoxes and gross absurdities, which this Cardinal
adversary of Gods true religion imputes unto us, are but the fancies of his
own idle brain. But, if we should enter into the examination of the several
parts of their profession, it were not hard really to convince them, of the
most senseless follies, that ever the world was acquainted with. But because
it would be tedious and unseasonable, in this general controversy of the
Church, to enter into the particular handling of things more fitly reserved to
their own proper places; I will only touch some few things, that may seem to
concern the whole frame and fabric of their Religion,

They all hold at this day, that the infallibility of the Popes judgment, is
the rock on which the Church is builded; and that this is the difference
between a Catholic and an heretic, that, though both believe many divine
and supernatural truths, yet they build not themselves upon the same grounds
of persuasion. For the Catholic builds himself upon the sure ground of the
infallibility of the Churches chief Pastors judgment: but the Heretic upon
other things, yielding him satisfaction concerning the truth of that he
believes, whatsoever the judgment of the Pope be. Papam in decreto fidei
errare non posse, veritas certa and recepta est. etsi non de fide, propter
multos Catholicos qui contrarium tenuerunt: ut Gers: Occam, Almaynus, omnes
fere Parisienses, and omnes qui concilium supra Papam esse credunt. Alph.
Acastro Adrian: 6. and Durand. Stapleton contro: 3. q,4.
And yet the same men which thus teach, do say, it is no matter of faith, to
acknowledge, or not to acknowledge, the infallibility of the Popes judgment,
and that a man may be a true Catholic, that thinks the Pope may err.

These two assertions are directly contradictorie. The first they embrace,
because they find the authority Papal to be the surest stay of all their
false faith, and Antichristian profession: and the second they are forced unto,
because they dare not condemn so many famous, renowned, and great Divines as
have been of that opinion, as Durandus, Gerson, Cameracensis, Almaine,
Waldensis, and innumerable more. By this their contradicting of themselves, not
yet knowing whereon to ground their faith, it is evident they have no faith at
all.

Secondly, if we should grant them to have any faith, yet will it be found
to be Sophistical, or merely humane. For the reason, ground, and cause of
their persuasion, touching things Divine, is the testimony of the Church,
infallibly led into all truth; and that there is a Church thus led into all
truth, whose testimony is undoubtedly certain and true, they believe, because
the Church tells them so: as, if a man should believe the reports of such a
man, because he is wise, faithful, and honest, and believe him to be so, only
because he says so.

To avoid this Sophistical circulation, sundry of the Schoolmen do freely
confess, that the ground of their faith is nothing else, but the multitude and
consent of men, nations, and people agreeing in the profession of it; and
consequently, that it is merely an humane persuasion, and that they have no
faith at all; which always stays it self upon the certainty of the first
truth,

Thirdly they teach, that mortal men are never bound to give GOD thanks, for
the greatest benefit that is bestowed on them in this world. Nay, that to give
him thanks for it, were grievous sin. This is most evident; for the greatest
benefit of all other is justification: but for this no man may give God
thanks, because no man knows whether he has received it or not, nor can
assure himself of it without intolerable and inexcusable presumption. Nay,
some of these seducers are not ashamed to write, that every man is bound to
doubt of it, with so fearful doubting, as may cause trembling; applying that
place of the Apostle to that purpose; Work out your salvation with fear and
trembling. Now I think, he which should come to God, and give him thanks for
that, which, whether he has received or not, he is so doubtful, that he
trembles for fear, should but mock God, and mistake his own meaning.

Fourthly, they hold that Paul, and so many more, as knew certainly they were
in state of justification, did sin damnably in saying the Lords Prayer, and
that they did as foolishly, as if a man should come to God, and ask of him the
creation of the world, which was made long ago.

CHAP. 46.
Of the efficacy of the Churches doctrine.

THus were it most easy for us, to show in many other particulars, that the
course of their doctrine is full of palpable absurdities. But let these few
instances suffice, and let us pass from the sanctity of the Churches doctrine,
to that the Jesuit adds touching the efficacy of it: where he affirms two
things: the first, that heretics never convert any, from infidelity to the
faith: the second, that the Church of Rome has converted. This which the
Jesuit so confidently delivers, is partly false, and partly to no purpose at
all. For whereas he says, heretics never convert any from infidelity to
Christianity, the conversion of the Moscouites, by the Greek Church, at that
time, when it was in his judgment heretical and schismatic, abundantly
refuteth him, besides some other examples, that might be alleged.

Touching the other part of his speech, that the Church of Rome has converted
many nations to the faith, it makes nothing to the purpose. For we have
already showed, that we doubt not, but the Church, in which the Bishop of Rome
with more than Lucifer-like pride exalted himself, was notwithstanding the
true Church of God; that it held a saving profession of the truth in Christ,
and by force thereof did convert many from error to the way of truth; yet was
not the state of that Church such, but that a damnable faction of wicked ones
was found in the midst of it, who, being the vassals of that cursed Antichrist,
adulterated the truth of God, and brought his people into a miserable estate,
holding men in worse then Babylonical captivity. These men the Romanists
succeed at this day. For the clearing of this matter, see that which I have
noted before to this purpose.

CHAP. 47
Of the Protestants pretended confession, that the Roman Church is the true
Church of God.

THe Bellar. cap. 16 nota. 15.
next note, whereby Bellarmine endeavors to prove the Romish Synagogue to be
the true Church of God, is our own confession. Surely if he can prove, that we
confess it to be the true Church, he needs not use any other arguments. Let
us see therefore, how he proves, that we confess the Roman Church to be the
true Church of God. In lib. contra Anabaptista^.
Luther, says he, clearly yields it; and Calvin, and others in effect
acknowledge the same. This we deny: for, neither Luther, nor Calvin, nor any
of us do acknowledge, that the Popish religion, is true religion; or the
Romish faction, the Orthodoxe Church of God. It is true indeed, that Luther
writing against the Anabaptists does affirm, that the life of true
Christianity was preserved in the midst of those Churches, wherein the Pope
did formerly tyrannize; which thing we have more fully cleared before: But,
that any part of that doctrine, the reformed Churches have rejected, was to be
accounted the doctrine of the Church, or that those wicked ones, (in whose
steps the Romanists at this day do insist, perverting the strait ways of
God, and adulterating his heavenly truth) were lively members of the Church,
Luther did never so much as dream.

That which is alleged out of Caluinus, inquit. Bellar. eodem cap. vocat
Bernardum pium scriptorem: at certe papista suit Bernardus: and nemo est pius
sine vera fide, Idem probat ex Luthero and Philippo ib.
Calvin, touching Bernard, and other holy men, living and dying in the Roman
Church, is to no purpose. For we never doubted, but that the Churches, wherein
those holy men did live and die, were the true Churches of God, and held the
saving profession of heavenly truth, though there were innumerable in the
midst of them, that adulterated the same to their endless perdition; whose
successors the Romanists are at this day. There is therefore a great
difference to be made, between the Church wherein our Fathers formerly lived,
and that faction of the Popes adherents, which at this day resist against the
necessary reformation of the Churches of God, and make that their faith and
religion, which, in former times, was but the private and unresolved opinion of
some certain only. In former times, a man might hold the general doctrine of
those Churches, wherein our Fathers lived, and be saved, though the assertions
of some men were damnable; Now it is clean contrary touching the present state
of the Romish Church; For, the general and maine doctrine, agreed upon in the
Council of Trent, in sort as it is most commonly conceived, is damnable: but
there are (no doubt) some of a better spirit, and have in themselves
particularly a better conceit of things, than generally is holden. Formerly,
the Church of Rome was the true Church, but had in it an heretical faction:
now the Church it self is heretical, and some certain only are found in it,
in such degree of Orthodoxie, as that we may well hope of their salvation. Thus
then, this great objection taken, from our own confession, is easily answered.

CHAP. 48.
Of Miracles, confirming the Roman faith,

THe Cap. 14. not. 11.
next note of the Church, is, Gods own testimony, which he gives of the
truth, and sanctity, of the faith and profession it holds. This doubtless
is the most absolute and excellent note of all other. For that must needs be
the true Church, which holds the true faith and profession; and that the true
profession, which God, that neither himself can be deceived, nor deceive
others, does witness and testify to be so. For who dare make any doubt,
whether that be the true religion, or that the true Church, which the God of
truth witnesses to be so? Let us see, therefore, how God does testify
concerning the truth of religion, and the happy condition of them that
profess it.

Surely, this testification is of two sorts: the one by the inward operation of
his inlightening spirit, satisfying our understandings in those things, which
by natures light we could not discern, and filling our hearts with joy and
gladness, such and so great, as nothing within natures compass can yield. For
by this so great, happy, and heavenly an alteration, which we find in our
selves upon, and together with this receiving of this doctrine; which the
spirit of truth does teach us, he does most clearly witness unto us, that
it is heavenly indeed; and such as we could not have attained unto, but by
divine revelation. The other kind of testification, is, when being desired by
them, that teach and learn this doctrine, to give some outward testimony,
that it is true, he does some such thing for the good of them that receive it,
or hurt of such as refuse it, as none but God can do. But because, partly by
reason of the manifold illusions, wherewith Satan can, and often does abuse
men, making it seem unto them that those things are done which are not; and
partly, because we do not exactly know, what may be done by the force of
natural causes; Ante approbationem Ecclesiae non est evidens, aut certum
certitu dine fidei, de ullo miraculo, quod sit verum miraculum. Bellar. in
eodem cap.
we cannot infallibly know, concerning any outward thing performed before our
eyes, that it is in deed immediately and miraculously wrought by Gods own
most sacred hands. This kind of testification is not matchable with the other:
Nay, we cannot be infallibly assured of any thing done, that it is Gods own
work, and in deed a miracle, unless this assurance grow out of the former
testification. For we may justly fear some fraud, till finding, by the inward
testimony of Gods spirit, the truth of that for proof whereof this strange
thing is done, we are assured it is the immediate and peculiar work of God.
Aug. de utilitate credendi cap. 16. m^aculum, inquit, voco, quod arduum, aut
insolitum supra spem vel facultatem mirantis apparet: qu^dam solum faciunt
admitationem: quaed^m magnam gratiam benevolentiamque conciliant qualia suerunt
Christi miracula. Hunc locum producit Scotus prolog sentent. quaest. de ^tauo.
This assurance the quality of the things done, and the difference between the
works of Satan which only cause admiration and wonder, and the miraculous
works of God, that are full of gracious goodness, winning the hearts of such as
see them, will greatly strengthen.

To what purpose then (will some man say) served all the miracles that were
done by Christ and his blessed Apostles? This doubt is easily cleared: for
whereas the things then taught, were new, strange, and incredible to natural
men, they would not at all have listened unto them, made inquiry after them, or
search into them, had not the strange works that followed the publishers of
them, made them think the things credible, that were accompanied with so
strange attendants. Now while they gave heed to the things that were spoken,
the Word was mighty in operation, and entered into them in such sort, that they
discerned it was Gods own word, and that the way of salvation, which by it
they were directed unto.

Thus then we see, that miracles are no sure notes of the truth of Religion,
nor certain mark to know the Church by, unless they be strengthened by some
other means: not for that a miracle known to be so, is insufficient to
testify of the truth of God; but because it is not possible infallibly to
know, that the things which seem unto us to be miracles, be so in deed;
unless being assured of the truth of that, for confirmation whereof they are
wrought, we thereby be persuaded they are of God. All that has been
hitherto said, is confessed to be true, by the best learned Divines of the
Roman Church. Tom. 2. opuscul. tractat. 1. de conceptione virgin. (...) c. 1.
Yea, Cardinal Caietan proceeds so far, that he pronounces, it cannot be
certainly known, that those miracles are true miracles, which the Church
admits and approves, in the canonizing of Saints, seeing the truth of them
depends on men's report, that may deceive, and be deceived.

Thus having declared what the use of miracles is, and how far they give
testimony of the truth, let us see what our adversaries conclude from hence,
for themselves, or against us. They have miracles for confirmation of their
faith and Religion, and we have none: therefore they hold the true faith, and
we are in error. For answer hereunto; first, we say, that the truth of
Religion cannot infallibly and certainly be found out by miracles, especially
in these last times; because, as Gerson notes in his book De distinctione
verarum and falsarum visionum, in this old age of the world, in this last
hour, and time so near Antichrist his revelation, it is not to be marvailed
at, if the world like a doting old man, be abused by many illusions, and
fantasies most like to dreams.

Secondly we say, that howsoever it may be, some miracles were done, by such
good men as lived in the corrupt state of the Church, in the days of our
Fathers; yet that is no proof of those errors which the Romanists maintain
against us. For we peremptorily deny, that ever any miracle was done, by any
in times past, or in our times, to confirm any of the things controuersed,
between them and us. Fit aliquando in ecclesiamaxima deceptio populi in
miraculis fictis a sacerdotibus vel ijs adhaerentibus propter lucrum temporale:
talia extirpanda sunt, sicut ista extirpata sunt a Daniele. Lyra in 14 Danielis.
What credit is to be given to the reports of their miracles, they may easily
conceive, in that in all the differences they have had amongst themselves,
either in matters of opinion, or of faction, they have had contrary visions,
revelations, and miracles, to confirm the persuasion of either side: as
appeared in the differences touching Mary's conception, and in the times of the
Anti-Popes. Whereupon Caietane, writing to Pope Leo, about the controversy of
Mary's conception, wishes him not to suffer his judgment to be swayed, by
show of miracles, and gives many good reasons of the uncertainty, of finding
out the truth by that means.

Thirdly, whereas they say, we have no miracles, and therefore not the true
faith and Religion; we deny both the antecedent and the consequent. For first,
the restoring of the purity of religion in our age, has not been, without
wonderful demonstration of the power of God, to confirm the truth of our
doctrine, and the equity of our cause, as may appear by that which is
reported, f Tom. 2. opuscul. tractat 1. de conceptione virginis cap. 5. beata
Brigitta sibi revelatum dixit, virginem praeservatam fuisse ab originali
peccato: Catharina de senis. dixit sibi reuelatum oppositum.
by In Catalogo testium veritatis.
Illyricus, the English Martyrologue, and other histories of better credit,
than those out of which they report their miracles. And besides we say, though
we had no miracles, we are not thereby convinced of error. For the use of
miracles was specially, if not only, in respect of infidels, as Caietane
shows in the place above mentioned, out of 1 Corinthians 11. and the
authority of Gregory, in his tenth Homily, and served to make the mysteries of
God seem credible, to such as were wholly auerse from them. So that now the
faith being already generally planted and received in the world, and confirmed
by the miracles done by Christ and his Apostles, and nothing being taught by
us, but the same which was delivered by them in the beginning, nothing contrary
to the confirmed and received doctrine of the Church of God then in the world,
when those differences between us and our adversaries began, there is no
reason they should urge us, to confirm our doctrine by miracles. If they
require us to confirm our calling and Ministry, as being extraordinary, we
say, it is not extraordinary, as has been sufficiently cleared in the note of
succession. That which Bellarmine adds, that Luther and Calvine attempted to
do miracles, but could do none, is but the lying report of his own
companions, their sworn enemies, whose testimony in this case is not to be
regarded.

CHAP. 49.
Of Prophetical Prediction.

THe Bellar. cap. 15. nota 12, in eodem lib.
next note of the Church, urged by them, is Prophetical prediction. The
certain foreknowledge of future contingent things, is proper unto God, and
therefore none can foretell such things before they come to pass, but they to
whom God reuealeth them: but that this kind of revelation is made only to them
that are of the true Church, I think Bellarmine will not say. For then what
shall we think of Balaam, and the Sybils? so that prediction of future things
is no certain, nor proper note of the true Church. But if it were, it would
not help them, not hurt us. For, those men they speak of, that lived in the
days of our fathers, and prophesied of things to come, were of the true
Church, As Grosted, Gers. Sauanarola, and many other before mentioned.
and many of them did most certainly foresee, and foretell, the ruin of the
Pope his estate, and the alteration, and reformation of the Church in our time,
and gave most clear testimony unto that, which we have done. Neither is there
any better proof of the goodness of our cause, than that that, which we have
done in the reformation of the Church, was before wished for, expected, and
foretold, by the best men that lived in former times, in the corrupt state of
the Church.

That which Bellarmine scornefully reports of Luthers false and lying
prophecy, that if he continued but two years in preaching the Gospel, the
kingdom of the Pope should be overthrown; shall (we doubt not) be found
true, to the confusion of the enemies of Gods truth and Religion,
notwithstanding all the endeavors of the Jesuits to make up the breaches of
Babylon, which must be thrown down, till not a stone be left vpou a stone. In
Iabel demonstr. certitudinis sacrarum literarum and Christianae religionis.
But that Luther foretold many things before they came to pass, wherein his
predictions were found most true, we have the testimony of Melancthon,
Illyricus, and diverse others.

CHAP. 50.
Of the felicity of them that profess the truth.

THe next note of the true Church, assigned by Bellarmine, is the temporal
felicity of them that are of it. It was but his private fantasy, that moved
him to assign this note of the Church. For his fellows, the Divines of
Rhemes, in their annotations upon the fifth of Matthew, do utterly disclaim
it, saying in express and precise words, We see then that the temporal
prosperity of persons and countries, is no sign of better men, or truer
Religion.

But, let us suppose these petty Divines are deceived in this their judgment,
(though if they be, we must condemn all the Primitive Christians, that were
in the times of the ten bloody persecutions) and let us grant, that the
Cardinal says truly, that temporal felicity and prosperity is a note of the
true Church and Religion, what does he gain by it? surely nothing at all:
for he is most blind, that sees not the prosperity of all those Countries of
Germany, Denmark, England, Scotland, and the like, where the reformed Religion
is maintained; and the long life, and happy Reign of those Princes, that have
most favored and sought to advance the same, as of great ELIZABETH of famous
memory, late Empress of England, etc. who as she was the great and glorieus
protector of the Reformed Churches, so was she the wonder of the world, in
respect of the happy success she had in all things she took in hand, and the
perpetual course of felicity, and prosperity, that ever attended her,
notwithstanding the dangerous attempts of bloody miscreants, the hired slaves
of the son of perdition. How the professors of this Religion, though fewer
in number, forsaken and destitute of all worldly assurances, and being, by the
falsehood and treachery of their bloody enemies, oftentimes brought as it were
to nothing, in France and other places, have yet strangely, and indeed
miraculously lifted up their heads again, to the terror and confusion of
their proudest enemies; he that sees not, is a stranger in the world.
Wherefore I I will leave the consideration of this note to the indifferent
Reader, not fearing any great prejudice, that can grow from thence against our
cause.

CHAP. 51.
Of the miserable ends of the enemies of the truth,

THe next is the miserable end of such as are enemies of Gods true Religion. It
is true, that God has oftentimes showed his judgments most clearly, against
the wicked enemies of his truth and glory; so that in the end, the impiety of
their former courses was made to appear, as we see in Herod, Arrius,
Nestorius, and others: but that any such thing fell out to Luther, Calvin, or
any of those worthy men Bellarmine is pleased in this place to slander, we
utterly deny. And to the lewd and lying reports of Coclaeus, and Bolsecus, we
oppose the testimony of Iunius, Melancthon, and others. And surely it was the
worlds wonder, that Luther opposing himself against the bloody Romanists,
against whom no King nor Emperor in later times resisted, but he wrought his
own overthrow, should notwithstanding live so long, die so peaceably, and be
buried so honorably, as few of his rank have ever been.

Touching Calvin, there were many witnesses of the manner of his sickness;
but of his death, none but the worthy Iunius animadvers. in Bellarm. controv. 2
lib. 4 c. 8.
Scofferius, whose true report, we oppose against the wicked and vile
slanders of that base and branded runnagate Bolsecus. That Zuinglius died in
the field, with his Contrymen in defense of their lives, liberties, and
Religion, is no certain note (as I take it) that his Religion was false: but
rather an excellent proof, and demonstration, of the Christian magnanimity,
and resolution, that rested in him.

Charles the fifth, that famous Emperor, formerly so fortunate in all his
attempts, after he began to oppress the Duke of Saxony, the Lantgraue, and
others of the reformed Religion, prospered not, and was put to the w^rse by one
poor Duke, Maurice. Francis Spira, denying the truth of our Religion, which
he had formerly prosessed, died in horrible despair: the woeful end of
Saunders, that Antichristian Arch traitor, is well known to all men: the
overthrowe of the Invincible Navy in 88, and the miserable ends of so many
Traitors in the days of ELIZABETH, beside the late Sulphurian and hellish
miscreants, perishing in their sins, having blown up all good opinion any
man might have had of such companions.
How unfortunate they have been in their attempts, how unhappy in their ends,
that have most opposed themselves against the truth of that Religion, which
we profess, we are able to produce many examples.

CHAP. 52.
Of the Sanctity of the lives of them that are of the true Church.

THe last note of the Church, assigned by them, is the sanctity, holiness,
and good conversation, of such as are of it. In assigning of this note, as in
some of the former, they show how sweetly they conspire and agree together, For
Cardinal Allen, in his preface, before his book of Purgatory, confesses,
that by the guile and crafty conveyance of our common enemy the devil,
falsehood is often so cloaked in shadow and shape of truth, and the masters
thereof make such show of virtue and godly life, that you would think it had
no affinity with vice, nor origin of man's misbehauiour at all. So did he
cover the wicked heresies of Manicheus, Marcion, Tatianus, and the like, with a
fained flourish of continency and chastity. So did he ouer-cast the enemy of
Gods grace Pelagius Aug. Ep. 120.
with the appearance of all gravity, constancy, and humility. And so has he
always, where craft was requisite to his intent, made show of a simple sheep,
in the cruel carcass of a wily wolf, transfiguring himself into an Angel
of light, And that his scholars play the like parts, our Master Christ, of
his singular love, gave his flock this watchword, for a special provizo;
Math. 7. 15
Take heed of false Prophets, that come in sheep vesture, but within are
ravening Wolves. So that in all cloaked heresies, men must have an eye to the
fruit of the doctrines preached, and not only, or principally, to the lives of
such as teach them, by the outward appearance whereof, it is not always safe
to judge.

This the Rhemists do more fully express, in their annotations upon this
place, saying, the fruits that heretics are known by, are division from the
whole Church, division amongst themselves, inconstancy in doctrine, and such
like: and that these are lightly common to all heretics, but that there are
some other, more peculiar to certain, as wickedness of life, and doctrine,
directly tending to corruption of good life, in all states of men.

Thus then we see, that appearing sanctity, gravity and godliness, are no
sure, certain, infallible, and perpetual notes, to know the true professors
by, from such as err and are deceived. But passing by this their oversight, in
that they make such things to be notes of the Church, as are not proper unto
it, nor do not clearly distinguish it from heretics; let us see what they
endeavor to prove against us, or for themselves, by the force and evidence of
this note.

Thus therefore they reason; The chief guides of the reformed Churches, and
professors of the reformed religion, are apparently wicked, and godless men,
of vile and scandalous conversation, and the people wicked, yea much worse then
they were in the Papacy; but their Pristes, Prelates, Monks, Friars and
people, are holy and religious; therefore the truth of religion is theirs. This
imputation of wickedness, Bellarmine fastneth upon Wickliffe and Luther. and
from them descends to the people.

Touching Wickliffe, it is a most impudent and shameless challenge: Lib. 1.
doctrinae pra^ssiua 8. tom. 1.
for Waldensis shows, that his conversation was such, and his manner of life
so shadowed with shows of virtue, that he thereby prevailed much: and
thereupon shows at large, that it is not safe to discern the truth of
religion, by the appearance of sanctity, and good conversation of them that
profess it; and that heretics have and often do cloth themselves, with the
robes and garments of seeming virtue and piety. But has he no proof, that
Wickliffe was a wicked and godless man? Doubtless he has, and that very
pregnant. Lib. 2 doctrinallfidei. c. 6.
For Waldensis reports upon an uncertain rumor, that a Bishop of
Salisburie, in a very great and solemn assembly of the Clergy of the Prouence
of Canterbury, affirmed, that Wickliffe affected the Bishopric of Worcester;
which when he obtained not, he grew discontented, and so became an enemy to
the Catholic Church, impugned the different degrees of Ministry, and the
dignity of Bishops. If this kind of proof be good, innocence it self will
not be able to abide the trial.

Wherefore passing from Wickliffe, against whom it seems our adversaries, are
able to say little; let us see what are those grievous crimes, wherewith they
charge Luther. First, they say, he began to impugn the sale and merchandise
of indulgences, not led by any just reason, moving him to dislike them, but
because the publishing of them was not committed to the Friars of his order but
to the Friars predicant. This vile slander has no better ground then the
former against Wickliffe. For who will regard the malicious report of Coclaeus,
his sworn enemy, against the whole course of things that passed in those
times, and the clear evidence of the truth it self. Histor. lib. 13.
Guicciardine reports, that the abuses in the merchandise of those pardons
were so intolerable, that the pardon sellers set the price of redemption, and
deliverance of souls out of Purgatory, as a stake at dice, to be played for,
in every Inn and Ta^erne where they came: that all good men disliked much this
impious and irreligious abusing the people of God, and that thereupon Luther
began his opposition against them, not without the great applause of the
Christian world.

But to make it most clear to all not wilfully blinded, that noe such sinister
respect moved Luther to impugn the Kingdom of the Roman Antichrist; It is
certain, he had, before this occasion was offered unto him, cleared the
doctrine of Original sin, of Nature and Grace, of the difference between
the spirit and the letter, the Law and grace, of freewill and the like, which
are the maine grounds of all that doctrine, wherein he dissenteth from the
Romish Synagogue.

But (says Bellarmine,) Coclaeus reports, that Luther in the disputation at
Lipsia between him and Eckius said, his opposition against the Pope and
Popery, was never begun out of any desire of Gods glory, nor would ever have
any good end. This is is a devilish slander: for Luther said no such thing,
but that this disputation was not begun on his adversaries part, out of any
desire of the glory of God, or the good of his Church, and that therefore it
would never have any good end.

That which he writes to them of Strawesborough, that he would willingly be
of their opinion, and deny the real presence of the body of Christ in the
Sacrament, if the evidence of truth did not convince him, and force him to be
otherwise minded, for that he might thereby disadvantage his adversaries of
the Romish faction, no way proves that, which Bellarmine intends. For this
is all he says: Let no man think, that it is wilfulness, and a preiudicate
opinion, that makes me dissent from Zuinglius, and the rest; for in my
affection and desire, I should rather Wish to consent with them in this point,
then with the Romanists, (whose manifold damnable errors I detest,) if it
were affection, and not reason, and the clear evidence of truth, that must
prevail in things of this kind. An cum Apostoli vngebant infirmos and
cu^abant, illa vnctio fuerit sacramentalis, duae sunt opiniones: 1, negatiua:
2. affirmatiua: posterior interpretatio, inquit Bellar. eo nomine mihi gratior
est, quod videam Lutherum, Caluinum and Chemnicium, esse in priore opinione.
Bellar. 2. tom. 5. contr. l. 1. c. 2.
Indeed the Romanists are wont to temper their opinions, and sway their
judgments, accordingly as they find, they may most advantage their own cause,
and disadvantage their adversaries. As appears by Bellar. l. 1. de sacramento
ordinis. cap. 5.
Bellarmine, who in the question, whether the eminent degree of Bishops above
Presbyters, be a distinct order of Ministry, does incline to the opinion of
them that think it is, contrary to the judgment of the best learned of the
Schoolmen; for that thereby he may the more easily impugn the opinion of
them that think, Bishops and Presbyters to be all one, iure diuino.

That which follows, is as little to the purpose as the rest. It is true,
that in the assurance of the truth he professed, and the certain victory of
the same over all the enemies of it, of what kind, degree, or sort soever, he
esteemed all the greatenesse of the malicious adversaries thereof, as vile as
the dirt underneath his feet, though otherwise out of this comparison with the
truth, and opposition to it, he respected them as the greatness of their
place did require. That he says, he regards not a thousand Cyprians, a
thousand Augustines, if they should be produced, proves not, that he
thinks them to be against him in the cause of religion, or that he
contemns them, but that no authority of men or Angels, shall ever remove him
from that he knows to be the truth of God, as the Apostle requires the
Galathians, If an Angel come from heaven, and preach otherwise to them, then
they had been taught, to hold him accursed: not as if the holy Angels in
heaven, now confirmed in grace, Galat. 1. 3.
could either err themselves from the truth of the Gospel, or pervert others,
or that they should be vilely esteemed of, in the messages they bring unto us;
but that, if it were possible for them to err, and misleade others, we should
not listen unto them, but hold them accursed.

That out of his book of corner masses, is as devilish a slander as the rest.
For, Luther does not say, he learned of the devil, that the Mass is impious
and wicked, but that having learned that in the school of Christ, the devil
thereupon tempted him to despair, for that he had so often said such Masses,
and thereby dishonored God, and misled his people: what this can prove against
him, I see not.

That he was of a violent spirit, we deny not: nay himself gloried in it:
that he had an heroical spirit, made to contemn the fury and folly of the
Romanists; neither had he been fit to oppose against enemies of this kind,
if he had been of another spirit. That he was carried too much with the
violent stream of his passions, we impute it to the infirmity of flesh and
blood, and the perverseness of the manyfold adversaries he found in those
times. Neither was this the peculiar or proper fault of Luther: for who knows
not, that Hierome, and Chrysostom, and diverse other lights of the World were
not without their blemishes in this kind.

That the Tigurines, Gesnerus, and others, disliked the distempered passions of
Luther, is not to be maruailed at; or that there were some differences amongst
them; seeing the like were in former times, between How many unkindness
passed between Chrysostom and Epiphanius, who knows not? Did not the one
refuse to pray with the other? did not the one challenge the other for manifold
breaches of the Canons? did not the one, inv^ighing against the other, profess
that he hoped be should never d^e a bishop? and the other that he should never
come alive into his country? Socrat. l. 6. c. 13
Epiphanius, and Chrysostom; The invectiu^s of Hier. and Ruffinus one a against
another, are extant, and Aug. Epist. wherein he sorroweth for their bitter
dissentions
Hierome, Ruffinus, The Epistles of Aug. and Hier. which the one wrote unto the
other, show what differences were between them.
Augustine, and others.

From Luther, the Jesuit comes to the people of our profession, pronouncing
that there are many wicked amongst his consorts, but that there are none good,
amongst those that are of the Reformed Religion. Thus, with the breath of his
mouth, he thinks to blow up all that stands before him. But how proves he
that he says? Our own confession, says he, is proof enough. But against
this pretended and imagined confession, we protest, and profess before God,
men and Angels, that we never thought, much less spoke or wrote any such
thing. If Luther in his sermons complain, that the world is every day worse
than other, who was there ever found that used not words of the like
complaint? If he say, that the men of the world abuse the grace of God unto
want onnesse, and the more and better means they have, be the worse, what
strange thing, says he? Did not S. Paul find, that, when he magnified the
riches of the grace of God, and showed, that where sin has abounded, grace
more abounded, many took occasion to say; It is good to continue in sin,
that grace may abound. Does he not charge the Corinthians, that there 1 Cor. 5.
1.
was fornication amongst them, and such as was not once named among the
Gentiles? that they went to law one with another, and that under Infidels, to
the slander of the Gospel of Christ? that there was not a wise man amongst
them to interpose himself, and stay these their proceedings one against
another?

That which is alleged out of Smidelinus, tends to the same purpose, and
requires no other, nor farther answer. Touching the judgment of Erasmus, it
was so variable and uncertain, in things of this kind, that neither they, nor
we, can take any advantage by it. But for the extraordinary sanctity of the
Romish Priests, Friars, Monks, and other irreligious amongst them, whereof
they insolently boast, and brag, if we should stir the De Silvest (...) 2.
legitur, quod diabolo fecit homagium. qu^m etiam in papatu existens c^nsuluit.
Occam (...) part 1. cap. 2 sicut legitur in chronicis Johan. 3. erat venator
and totus lubricus, adeo quod foeminas public tenebat: propter quod quidam
Cardinalium and Romanorum scripserunt occulte, and cito imperatori Saxonum, ut
Scandalo compatiens Ecclesiae Rom, sine mo^ properaret. Hoc papa percipiens,
Johan, diacono Cardinali tanquam huius facti conciliatio. nasum, and alteri
Johan: subdiacono, qui literas scripsit, manum amputari fecit. Occam 1. part.
l. 5. c. 5. Stephanus corpus formosie sepulchro in concilium protractum, and
papali vest exutum, and laicali indutum, and abscissis duobus digitis dextrae
manus eius, in Tyberim praecipitari fecit. Sigeb in Chron. fol. 113. Anno 902.
Alii idem narrant de Sergio, erat quidem pontifex qui nullum Deum credens,
vniuersum infidelitatis culmen excessit: alius professus est se non credere
immortalitatem animae: qui mortuus, eidem, cui hoc aperuerat, apparuit,
manifestans se, quam mortalem crediderat, tum maximo cum damno et perpetuis cum
ignibus immortalem experiri. Picus Theor. de fide et ordine credendi.
dunghils of their own histories, wherein the lives of these Saints are
described unto us, the stench of them would infect the air: if we should make
report of that we read in Authors not partial, men would stop their ears,
and pronounce against us, that such things ought not once to be named amongst
men. This is so evident, that Bellarmine in his preface before his books of
the Pope, is not ashamed to make the wickedness, and prodigious villainies of
the Popes, a proof and demonstration of the Sanctity of that Chair in which
they sit, and of Gods provident care of it. Which argument, though it seem
strange at the first sight, yet it is in 1 Romans 3. 8.
his judgment very forcible, and unanswerable; For that such, and so great
has been the wickedness of the Roman Bishops, that, if God had not strangely
n 1 Cor. 6. 1. 5.
vpholden it, the Sea and Chair, in which they sit, had long since sunk down
into hell. Thus I hope, it appears to all, not wilfully blinded, that this
note of the sanctity of the lives of the Professors of Religion, makes very
little for them, or against us. And thus have we run through, and examined all
the notes of the Church, by which they desire to be tried.

AN APPENDIX, WHEREIN IT IS CLEARLY PROVED, THAT THE LATIN, OR WEST CHVRCH IN
WHICH THE POPE TYRANNIZED, VV AS, AND CONTINVED A TRVEORTHODOXE AND PROTESTANT
CHVRCH; AND THAT THE DEVISERS AND MAINTAINERS OF ROMISH ERROVRS and
superstitious abuses, were only a faction in the same, at the time when
Luther, not without the applause of all good men, published his propositions
against the profane abuse of Papal indulgences.

To the Reader.
THis Appendix, when first published by the Author, contained only some brief
quotations, upon several points of difference, between us and the Papists;
showing that the now Romish faith, was never generally received in the
Western or Latin Church, in the days of our Fathers; no not then, when the
dark mist of Popery seemed to have ouershadowed all things. The Author not
long before he died, intended an inlargment of it, in the several particulars;
but being prevented by death, lived not to finish what he had begun. So much
as was finished of it coming to my hands, I thought my self bound in duty not
to deprive the world of. I have therefore so far adventured to hazard the
credit of the Author, as to make it public, though something imperfect, and
wanting that luster, and beauty, which it might have received from the last
hand of the Author, if God had lent him longer life. As it is, it may serve, if
for no other use, yet for this, as a platform to show, what might be done in
this kind and what the Author intended. I make no question but a favorable
Reader will look on it, as we use to look on the foundations of stately
buildings, the finishing whereof has been hindered by some fatal accident;
the very ruins whereof breed in us astonishment and amazement, while we
consider, not what they are, but what they might have been. The twelve first
chapters of this Appendix are enlarged, the rest remain as they were formerly
set forth. The quotations contained in that part which has been added, I have
compared and amended if any where they differed, from the Originalls whence
they were taken: and the truth of them I am able to justify. If the world
shall reap any benifit by the work, or if I may be thought by my pains
bestowed on it, to have performed that duty, which I owe unto the memory of a
dear father, I have my desire, and so I rest.

Yours in all due respect. NATHANIEL FIELD.

AN ANSWER TO Mr Brerelyes objection concerning the Mass, publicly used in
all Churches at LVTHERS appearing.
WHereas to silence our adversaries, who never cease challenging us for
departing from the faith of our Fathers, and the doctrine of the Church,
wherein they lived and died; I affirmed in my 3^ Book, that none of those
erroneous positions, which at this day they of the Romish faction do defend,
and we impugn, were ever constantly received in the days of our Fathers, as
the doctrine of that Church wherein they lived and died: but only doubtfully
disputed of, as things not clearly resolved, or broached only as the private
fancies and conceits of particular men: and for proof hereof heretofore
added an Appendix, wherein I produced the testimonies of sundry worthy Pastors
and guides of the Church in every age; teaching as we do, touching the points
now controversed; It has pleased some of the adverse faction, to take
exceptions to the same my assertion. I will first therefore set down such
objections, as they have made, and answer the same, and then enlarge my former
proofs, that all that will not be wilfully blind, may see the truth of that
which I affirmed.

The principal man that showed himself in this kind is M^ Brerelie, the
Author of the book entitled the Protestant Apology. And after him the author
of the answer to Mr D Whites way to the Church. M Brerelie in the first tract
page 139, has these words. It is beyond belief and very wonderment, that D
Field, a man otherwise grave, and learned, should not be abashed by his
public writing, so confidently to aver, of our so many Christian Catholic
Churches, dispersed thorough the world at Luthers first appearing; that they
were all of them the true Protestant Churches of God. And that they which then
believed those damnable errors which the Romanists now defend, were a
particular faction only, contrary to the confession of so many learned
Protestants. And in his 2 tract, cap. 2. sect. 2, page 329. he has these
words. In this undue sort does Illyricus place in his catalogue of Protestant
witnesses, Gerson, Aquinas, and sundry of our Schoolmen, all of them
undoubtedly known Catholics; and we could give like farther example of S.
Bernard, Erasmus, Mirandula, and sundry other known Catholic Writers, whom
our adversaries in like manner do unjustly claim to be of their Church. D
Field a prime adversary (and for such, was together with the Bishops and
Deanes, summoned to the conference before his Majesty in January 1603, as
appears by the said conference) forbeareth not in these straits to enforce
the like undue and intolerable bold claim to the many Catholics (a
particular faction of them only excepted) dispersed thorough the world, at,
and next before Luthers first appearing. And in his third Book of the Church,
cap. 12. page 85, says, nothing is done in the Protestant reformation, which
Camaracensis, Picus, Savanarola, Gerson, and innumerable other worthy guides of
Gods Church, long before thought (...) fit to be done. And page 330, Mr
Brerelie adds these words. D. Field of the Church l. 3. c. 6. says, it is
most fond and frivolous that some demand, where our Church was before Luther
began. For we say it was where now it is, and that it was the known and
apparent Church in the world, where all our Fathers lived and died. And most
exceeding boldly he there farther says, none of the points of false doctrine
and error, which the Romanists now maintain, and we condemn, were the
doctrines of that Church, constantly delivered, or generally received, but
doubtfully broached, and factiously defended by some certain only. And book
the third, cap. 8. page 76, he proceeds yet farther with like incredible
boldness, saying, we must farther believe, that all the Churches in the world,
wherein our Fathers lived and died, were the true Churches of God, and that
they that taught the errors the Romanists now defend against us, were a
faction only, as they that denied the resurrection, urged circumcision, and
despised the Apostles of Christ, were in the Churches of Corinth and Galatia.
Who can without amazement and wonder, behold this incredible boldness? For was
not the Mass, wherein are comprehended so many chief points of our Religion,
the public liturgy solemnly celebrated in all Churches, at Luthers first
appearing? Was then the external face of religion, any other then our now
professed Catholic faith? Was Protestancie then so much as in being? No
marvel then, if our adversaries doubt not to make undue and pretended claim
to the ancient Fathers, seeing they blush not to affirm the same, exceeding
boldly and untruly, of the time in which Luther first began, which is yet
within the memory of this present age. Others affirm the Church to have been
then invisible, directly against that, which M. D. Field next before so boldly
affirmed; into which bold assertion he ventured, only thereby to avoid the
other absurd paradoxe of the supposed Churches being invisible, which so many
learned Protestants have also disclaymed heretofore; as on the other part, they
who so affirmed their Churches then being invisible, affirmed the same, as
enforced thereunto, in regard of the known pregnant untruth, of M. D. Feilds
other assertion, in affirming the Church to have been then known and visible.
Upon such dangerous rocks are our adversaries driven in their thus sailing
between Scylla and Charibdis

Here we see is much ado, as if some thing had been written by me, that were
beyond all belief, and a very wonderment. But what strange thing is it, that
is thus wondered at? Surely it is nothing else, but that I have affirmed; that
all those Christian Catholic Churches, in the West part of the world, where
the Pope formerly tyranized, and where our Fathers lived and dyed, were the
true Protestant Churches of God; and that the maintayners of those errors,
superstitious abuses, and Papal tyranny, which we dislike, were in that they
maintained, the same, and so far forth as they maintained any of them, but a
faction only in those Churches. If this be all, I doubt not but so to make good
what I have written, that Mr Brerelie shall in the end wonder at himself, why
he contradicted it. For if by a Protestant Church, we mean a Church believing
and teaching in all points as Protestants do, and believing and teaching
nothing but that they do, it shall be proved and demonstrated, that the
Latin or West Church, wherein the Pope tyrannized before Luthers time, was and
continued a true Protestant Church. For the Church that then was, believed and
taught all that we do, and nothing else; it condemned those profane and
superstitious abuses which we have removed; and groaned under that tyranny,
the yoke whereof we have now cast off; howsoever there were many in the midst
of her, that taught otherwise, that brought in and maintained, intolerable,
and superstitious abuses, and sought to advance the Popes ouerruling greatness
and supremacy. But if by a Protestant Church they understand, a Church that not
only complayneth of Papal tyranny, and usurpation, and shows her dislike of
the same, but that has cast off the yoke, and that not only disliketh
abuses, but removes them, and that not only teaches all necessary and saving
truth, but suffers none within the compass of her jurisdiction to teach
otherwise: we confess that no part of the Western Church, was in this sort a
Protestant Church, till a reformation was begun of evils formerly disliked.
But M Brerelie says, Protestancie was not in being before Luthers time, and
that therefore the Christian Catholic Churches, wherein our Fathers lived and
dyed, could not in any sort truly be said to be Protestant Churches.
Whereunto our answer is, that ifby Protestancie be meant, the believing of
all that, and that only, which they that are now named Protestants do
believe, and the professing of a dislike of such abuses, and Papal
usurpations, as they have now cast off: it was in being many ages, and long
before Luther was borne; and all those Christian Catholic Churches, wherein
our Fathers lived and died were Protestant Churches. But this Master Brerelie
thinks vnaunswerablie to confute, because the Mass, where so many points of
the Romish Religion are contained, was the public liturgy solemnly
celebrated in all Churches, at and before Luthers appearing, and the external
face of religion was no other, then the now professed Roman faith. For answer
whereunto, I will first show that the using of the Mass as the public
liturgy, is no good proof of that Master Brerely undertakes to prove.
Secondly I will make it to appear, that the external face of Religion before
Luthers time, was not as Master Brerelie would make us to believe, the Roman
faith now professed.

Touching the Mass four things are to be observed. The name, The canon it
self, The sinister consecrations and manifold abuses in practice besides and
contrary to the words of the canon, and the intendment of them that first
composed the same; and lastly sundry apocryphal vain superstitious and idle
things crept into the public service of the Church.

Touching the first it is known, that the celebration of the holy mystery,
and sacrament of the Lords body and blood, had the name of Mass, from the
dismissing of all non-communicants before the consecration began. So that none
stayed, but such as were to communicate. The ancient custom was, says
Cassander in his consultation, that none might be present at the consecration,
but such as were to communicate. For, as Chrysostom shows, as they Art. 24.
p. 213
that were not baptized might not stay, no more might they that were impure and
guilty of any grievous sin, so that they were not fit to communicate. Rhen.
annot. in Tertull. de corona militis.
And to this purpose was that most ancient observation of all Churches, that
by the voice of the deacon, missa seu missio denunciabatur, catechumenis and
non communicantibus ante consecrationem, that is, that the Catechumens and all
noncommunicants were dismissed before the consecration; the deacon crying out
with a loud voice, si quis non communicet exeat; si quis non communicet det
locum, if any communicate not, let him depart. So that hence it came, that the
name of Mass was given to sundry parts of the liturgy; for whereas all might
be present at some part of the divine service; that part was called missa
catechumenorum, for that the catechumens might be present at it; and it was
ended before their dismissing. But the other part, which consists in the
consecration, oblation, and participation, is called missa fidelium; for that
the faithful only who were fit to communicate, might be present at it, all
non-communicants being first dismissed and sent away. This makes against the
present abuse of the Roman Church wherein all stay, and yet none communicate
but the priest alone; and many are made believe, it is sufficient to be
present, though they do not prepare themselves, so as to be fit, to
communicate; nay oftentimes such as would communicate are repelled. This was
the fault of some, in the Church wherein our Fathers lived, but not without the
dislike of the better sort. And therefore, as Cassander tells us, Henricus
de Gorrichem in tractatu de effectu missae propos. 23, reprehendeth certain
pastors of his age, who could hardly endure, that some of their Parishioners,
desired every Sunday to receive the Sacrament, though they lived laudably. And
he adds, that seeing the same devotion that was in the Primitive Church,
when men communicated every day, is still to be found in some, the Pastor
should not dislike it, if any amongst the common people be so devout, as to
desire to communicate every Sunday, and some other days also. So that there
wanted not of the people in former times, that desired to communicate as well as
to be present, nor of the guides that encouraged them so to do; and therefore
hitherto nothing can be proved against my assertion. Wherefore let us come to
the Mass it self;

Amongst all the Sacraments of the Church, that is the principal, says
Rational div^. l 4. (...). 1.
Durandus, that is celebrated upon the table of the most holy Altar,
representing that Feast, and banquet of the Church, wherein the father upon the
return of his lost son, caused the fatlings to be slain, and sets out
the bread of life, and the wine which wisdom has mixed for her friends and
lovers. These mysteries, and this holy Sacrament, Christ then instituted, when
he made his new and last testament, disposing to his heirs a kingdom, as his
father had disposed to him, that upon his Table they might eat and drink in
his kingdom, that which the Church has consecrated, for as they were at
supper, Jesus took bread, and when he had given thanks, blessed it, brake it,
and gave it to his Disciples, saying, take, and eat, this is my body which
shall be given for you, do this in the remembrance of me. The Apostles following
this institution, began to celebrate these mysteries for the same end that
Christ had expressed, keeping the same form in words, and using the same
matter of bread and wine that he did, as the Apostle witnesses to the
Corinthians, where he says, what I have received of the Lord, I have delivered
unto you, who the same night that he was betrayed, took bread, etc. and added
to the form of words used by Christ, the Lords prayer. And S. Peter is said
in this sort to have celebrated first of all in the East parts. Wherefore in
the beginnings of the Church, these mysteries were celebrated in another sort
then since they have bin. Afterward, the reading of some parts of sacred
scripture, and particularly of the Epist. and Gospel was added. Pope
Celestinus instituted the introitus, and other things were added at other
times, and by others. Howsoever this is certain, there were, and are at this
day, diverse forms of celebrating this mystery. For the forms of the East
Churches are different from those of the West, and it appears that aunciently
in France, Spain, and sundry parts of Italy, they had other forms then now are
used, more like to those d Durand. rational (...).
of the East, which being in some things enlarged and perfitted by S. Ambrose,
were called the Ambrosian forms of divine service. These continued till the
time of Charles the great. For though Gregory, as Io. Diaconus tells us, taking
the forms of celebrating mass which Gelasius had composed, adding somethings,
detracting others, and changing others, brought in a new form which the Church
of Rome followed, yet the other churches of the west retained the old forms,
which they had received from their ancesters. And to this purpose it is, that
Berno Augiensis testifies, that amongst the monuments of his Abbey, there was
found an old ^all much different from those of Rome. But Charles the great,
sought to bring the Provinces subject to his Empire, to receive the Roman
form by threats and punishment. We read, says Durandus, in the life of
blessed Eugenius, that while (...). (...)
the form of divine service which was named the Ambrosian form, was more
followed and observed by the Church, then that of Gregory, Adrian the Pope
called a council, in which it was ordered, that the Gregorian form should
euerywhere be observed. To the observation whereof Charles the Emperor by
threats and punishments, forced the Clergy in sundry Provinces, burning the
old Ambrosian books. And further he adds, that Saint Eugenius coming to a
certain council called about this business, finding that the Bishops were
gone, and the council ended three days before his coming, induced the Pop^
to call the Bishops back again, which he did, and the council being
again renewed, it was agreed on by common consent, that both the missals, both
that of Saint Ambrose and the other of Saint Gregory, should be laid on the
altar of Saint Peter the Apostle, that the doors of the Church should be fast
locked, and sealed with the seal of sundry Bishops, and that then they should
spend the whole night in prayer, beseeching God that he would show by some
sign, which of these he would have to be observed in his Church; and in the
morning entering, they found that of Gregory torn in pieces, and scattered all
over the Church, the other opened, but yet still lying entire and whole on the
altar; of which accident they made this construction, that that of Gregory was
to be used every where thorough the world, the other only at Millain in S.
Ambroses own Church, and so says Durand, it is used unto this day. For by the
help of Charles the great, that of Ambrose was disused in many Churches, and
that other brought in place.

Only the Christians of Spain admitted not this alteration, notwithstanding
all these endeauours, till the time of Gregory the seventh, what time they
were constrained by Alphonsus the sixth to give way, which they did most
unwillingly, and not without tears. Archiep. Tolet. lib. 6. c. 25. and 26.
Rodericus reports, that when this alteration was urged by the Popes legate,
and the king, there being an assembly of all the states; the Clergy,
Nobility, and people resisted mainely against it; whereupon in the end it was
resolved, that that matter should be tried by cumbate, and one being chosen for
the new, and another for defense of the old, he that undertook the defense of
the old prevailed, which caused a great rejoicing among the people. But the
king not regarding this trial, nor thinking it to be any sufficient clearing
of the matter questioned, it was agreed that both the books should be cast
into the fire, that that which should be preserved in the fire might be
allowed as best, which accordingly being done, the book of the old form came
forth untouched, and the other was consumed: yet would not the king be
persuaded to desist, but threatening death, and utter confusion to all
gainesayers, made this innovation in his Church and kingdom, all his subjects
weeping and sorrowing, and then began the proverb Quo volunt reges vadunt
leges. So that we see, howsoever our adversaries would make the simple
believe, that things were ever as now they are, yet there have been great
alterations in the form of divine service, and it is not to be doubted, but
that the ancient forms as different from the latter, were more pure and
sincere then they that are now used.

They that have diligently looked into the monuments of antiquity, says
Rhenanus, upon Tertullians book de corona militis, do think, that aunciently
the mass began when the priest did say, The lord be with you, and immediately
after, Lift up your hearts, and Let us give thanks to our Lord God, and again,
It is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, that we should at all times and
in all places, give thanks unto thee holy Father almighty and everlasting God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. And that the^ immediately followed these words.
Who the night before he suffered took bread etc. For they think, that
howsoever the latter part of the Roman canon now used, ipsissimam prae se serat
antiquitatem, and admirabilem spiret sanctitatem, that is, appears to be
ancient and breathing forth nothing but admirable sanctity, yet the former
parts of it do not so; and that they were composed by Scholasticus, not long
before the time of Gregory the first, as himself tells us. What is to be
thought of this Scholasticus, whether he were a man so named, or whether
Gregory more to express unto us the quality of him that composed the canon,
that he was but a man though a professor of learning, and that therefore he
might add All that follows after the Lords prayer, and that immediately it is
named Embolismus, as added afterward.
the Lords prayer unto that form, that had but a man for the composer of it, I
leave uncertain, because some think it was composed by Gelasius, and that he
was styled Scholasticus before he was Bishop. But this is certain, that some
things have been added to the canon, since the time of Gregory, and that in
the celebration of the holy mysteries, so many tautologismes and barbarismes
are found, that ingenuous men abhor from the celebration thereof, as Platina
testifies, and so many and so gross corruptions are crept into the service of
the Church, that all good men long since and yet still complain of it. (...).
(...). (...)
Claudius Elpen^us affirms, that the public services are full of old
fables, and allea ^geth Petrus abbas Cluniacensis, l. 5. cap. 29. saying, that
the songs and himnes of the Church had very many toys, as namely a himne in
the praise of Saint (...); in the which though reading it over somewhat
hastily, and not staying to search all, yet he found at the least four and
twenty lies. He alleges likewise Petrus Pictaviensis, epist. 31. reproving a
false and fond himne in the pra^se of Maure running upon the waters; and
Cardinal Cameracensis de re^ ^lesie, consideration the third, advising the
council of Constance to take oder, that unsound writings might be no longer
read in the Church, and the oration of Picus Mirandula to the same purpose; and
Volateran complaining, that in the daily prayers there are read manifest lies;
to whom he adds Adrian the sixth afterward Pope, misliking superstitious
forgeries in holy matters, and concludes, that the Catholics may lament on
the behalf of the Church, as Hieremie lamented on the behalf of the
Synagogue. Thy Prophets have seen false and foolish things for thee, and
adds, that the grief which he does feel and express, for these toys and
dotages, is common to him with all good men for the most part. Bishop De optimo
^nere inter^. 3. (...) 2. (...)
Lindan to the same purpose has these words; Quod si nostra conspiceret
Agobertus episcopus Lugdu^rsis antiphonaria; Deum immortalem! quomodo ea
pingeret? vbi non Apochrypha modo exevangelio Nicodemi and alijs nugis sunt
inserta, sed ipsae adeo secretae pr^es su^ mendis turpissimis conspurcatae.
That is, If Agobertus sometimes Bishop of (...) that could not endure the
corruptions of his time, were now alive, and should see our antiphonaries; good
God! how would he paint them out? in which not only apochryphall things out of
the gospel of Nicodemus, and such other toys are ^ed, but even the very
prayers themselves named secretae, are defiled with ^st ^rosse and vile
absurdities and faults. Many things, says Picus Mirandula, which in the
decrees are accounted apocryphal, and are so censured by Hierome, are in the
service of the Church; and many things also that by many are not thought to be
true. I mean not, says (...). (...). (...).
Melchior Canus, to defend all the histories which are every where read in the
Church, I see there are so many of the vulgar sort and condition, not only
amongst those of the laity but of the clea^gie also, that most willingly
embrace those fables, which the Church long since exploded. In this kind it
behooves the Bishops to do something; but they must be wise, as well as
diligent, least while they go about to cure the looseness of the skin about
the fingers, they hurt the head. These happily go about, to put grave
histories into the place of such as are apochryphall, but they change the
divine service of the Church so much, that scarce any show of the old religion
seems to be left in the daily prayers: wherefore this must and firm, that
the histories of the Saints which are wont to be read in the Church, must not
be despised; though some of them be uncertain, apochryphall, light, and
false; for they are credible, and true for the most part, and some of them
certain.

Ferdinand caused it to be proposed to the council of Trent, amongst other
articles of reformation, that the breviaries and missals might be purged, that
all things that are found in them not taken out of the Scripture, might be
taken away, that the prolixity of prayers and Psalms might be abridged, good
choice being made of such as should be used. apud Goldast. imper. constable. tom.
2. page 3^. These it seems are those mysteries of Romish religion, found in
the liturgy of the Church, at and before Luthers time, whereof M Brerely
speaks, but they had no general approbation, but the dislike of all good
men, as it appears by that which has bin said. For otherwise the very form
and words of the liturgy, condemn the abuses of private masses, and half
co^munions, and make nothing of that propitiatory sacrifice, whereof the
Papists fable, which are those greatest mysteries of Romish religion, that they
insist upon in their Mass.

Touching the first of these parts of Romish religion, which is that of their
private masses, wherein the Priest receives alone without any communicants;
making the people believe that that which he does is a propitiatory sacrifice,
and that he can apply the benefit of it to whom he will, and that it is enough
for them to be present, or to give something for the procuring of it; their
error is clearly refuted, by the form of prayers that are used in the mass,
which show, that they only have the benefit that is here sought, that
communicate. For immediately after the consecration the Priest and people pray
in this sort. Supplices te rogamus, omnipotens deus, iube haec perferri per
manus sancti angeli tui in sublime altar tuum, in conspectu divinae maiestatis
tuae, ut quicunque ex hac altaris participatione sacrosancti filii tui corpus
and sanguinem sumpserimus, omni benedictione coelesti and gratia repleamur, per
eundem Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen. That is, We as humble suppliants,
beseech thee, O God Almighty, to command that these our sacrifices and
oblations, may be carried by the hands of thy holy Angel, to thy Altar on
high, and to the sight of thy divine Maiestic, that so many of us as shall
receive the sacred body and blood of thy Son, by partaking of this Altar, may
be filled with all benediction and grace, thorough the same Christ our Lord,
Amen. And after the communion they pray again in this sort grant Lord that we
may receive with a pure mind, what we have received with the mouth. And
again; Let this communion, O Lord, purge us from sin, and make us partakers
of the heavenly remedy. Whereupon Micrologus infers, that they must not
neglect to communicate, that think to have any benefit by these prayers. These
prayers remain as witnesses of the old observation. Rational. l. 4. 53.
Durandus says, that in the Primitive Church, all that were present at the
celebration of the Mass, were wont to communicate every day, and that to this
purpose they did offer a great loaf, that might suffice for the communicating
of them all: which custom, says he, the Grecians are said to keep still.
Afterward when the multitude of believers increased, and devotion decreased,
it was ordained, that at least every Sunday they should communicate. In
process of time, when this could not be kept, there was a Lombardus l. 4. d.
12. saltem ter in anno homines communicent.
third constitution, that at least thrice every year, each Christian man
should communicate, if not oftener. In the end it was ordered, that at the
least at Easter every one should come to the Sacrament; and instead of the
daily communicating, the Priest gave daily the kiss of peace to the
minister, saying in some places, take you the bond of peace, and love, that you
may be fit for these sacred mysteries, which were words that were wont to be
used, when they used to salute one another before the communion, and did import
an ensuing communion. 56.
The antheme which is named post co^munio, is so named, because it is sung
after the communicating, or in sign that the communion is past. For in the
Primitive Church, all the Faithful did daily communicate, and presently after
their communicating, this song was sung; that it might appear the people did
give thanks to God for the body and blood of Christ which they had received. In
canonem.
Odo Cameracensis says, that in old times there was no mass celebrated,
without some assembly of such, as might offer together with him that
celebrateth, and partake with him of the sacrament. l. 4. c. 1.
Generally we may say, says Durandus, that that is a lawful mass, at which
are present, the Priest, such as answer unto him, and such as offer and
communicate. And De rebus Eccles. cap. 22.
Walafridus Strabo agrees with him; saying, that the very form of the prayers
used in the mass show so much, where there is mention expressly made of such as
offer and communicate. And the book of Ecclesiastical observations, entitled
Micrologus, written 500 years since, says, it is to be known, that
according to the ancient Fathers, only the communicants were wont to be
present, at the celebration of the sacred mysteries, and that the catechumens
and penitents were all sent out, as not being fit to communicate. Which the
very form of celebrating imports, in which the priest prays not, for his
own oblation, and communion alone, but that of others also; and especially in
the prayer after the communion, he seems to pray only for the co^municants.
Neither can it properly be said to be a communion, unless diverse do partake
of the same sacrifice. Homil. 3.
Chrysostom writing upon the Ephesians, says, that he that stands by, and
communicates not, is impudent and shameless. And that not only they that sit
down at table, but they that are present at this feast, without their wedding
garment, are subject to a fearful judgment. For the master of the feast will
not ask, friend how durst thou sit down, but how durst thou come in not
having thy wedding garment? thou abidest, thou singest the himme with the rest,
thou professest thy self worthy, in that thou go not out with the unworthy;
how dare thou abide and not communicate? They that are in the state of
penitencie, are commanded out: if thou be in thy sins, how continuest thou?
if thou be unworthy of the sacramental participation, thou art so also of the
communion in the prayers. For the spirit descends, and comes by them as well
as by the mysteries there proposed. And surely how any can be present, that are
not fit at least in desire and in as much as in them is, to communicate, I know
not. In old time they communicated every day, or so often that they might seem
to communicate every day, and the holy canons debar all such as did not
communicate from hearing of the mass, as it apeareth De consecr. did. 2. can.
peract. Caietan in 3am Aquinat: q: 80. art. 12. Yet so did devotion decay, and
abuses grow, that in many places the whole people stayed and were present, yet
none but the Clergy alone communicated; and afterward, none but the Deacon
and subdeacon. Whence it came, that whereas the mystical bread, was wont to
be broken into 3 parts, whereof the first was for him that celebrated, the 2^
for the Clergy, and the 3^ for the people; Durand. rational. li. 4. 54.
in time it was so ordered, that a division being made into 3 parts he took the
one to himself, and gave the other two to the deacon and subdeacon, and in
some places did eat all himself. Whatsoever the neglect or abuses were,
Cassa. consult page 238. ar. 24.
it is evident by the composition of the canon, that the mystical action in
which the canon is used was public, and that there were always some present,
that offered the sacrifice of praise together with the priest, and participated
of the sacrament, as these words do clearly show. Quotquot ex hac altaris
participatione sacrosanctum corpus and sanguinem filii tui sumpserimus. Item,
prosint nobis domini sacramenta (...) Citat a Cassan. Ibidem page 220.
quae sumpsimus. And therefore John Hofmeister, a learned man, expounding the
prayers of the mass has these words. Res ipsa inquit clamat, tam in Graeca
quam in Latina Ecclesia, non solum sacerdote^ sacrificantem, sed and reliquos
presbyteros, diaconos, nec non and reliquam plebem, aut saltem plebis aliquam
partem, communicasse: quod quomodo cessauerit mirandum est, and vt bonus ille
vsus in Ecclesiam revocetur, laborandum. that is, The thing it self
proclaims it, that as well in the Greek, as Latin Church, not only the priest
which sacrifices, but the other priests, and deacons, also, yea and the people
or at least some part of them did communicate: which good custom how it grew
out of use I know not, but surely we should labor to bring it in again. That
it was not lawful for the priest to celebrate without the Deacon, who was to
receive the sacrament at his hand Epist. ad cle^um l^ratosque Bohem. (...) Cap
25.
Cusanus shows by that which is in the missal. Sumpsimus domini sacrame^ta,
we have received the Sacraments of the Lord etc. In the ^ Interim published by
the Emperor Charles the fifth, in the assembly at Augusta in the 15 of May 1548,
we find these words. Atque hic expedierit, cum verissimum illud and singular
sacrificium offertur, veterem Ecclesiae morem reuocare; quo non solum
sacrificans ipse, sed and diaconi, and reliqui Ecclesiae ministri, qui diebus
solennioribus velut testes ta^ti sacrificii, and necessar^ru^ ministeriorum
coadiutores adhibentur, vt perceptionis corporis and sanguinis domini nostri
Jesus Christi participes se preberent, seria canonum sanctione iubebautur; sed
and fideles omnes pro recolenda mortis domini and nostrae redemptionis memoria,
ad hoc mediatoris nostri sacrificium confluentes, sedulis exhortationibus
monendi and excitandi sunt, vt prius explorati, confessi, and absoluti,
sacrosanctae communionis gratiam sumant, and diuinissimae Eucharistiae
participationem vna cum sacerdote sedulo and deuote frequentent. that is, And
here truly it were expedient, that, when that most true and singular sacrifice
is offered, we should renew the old custom of the Church; by which not only
he that celebrateth, but the Deacons also, and the other ministers of the
Church, which on the more solemn days are used as witnesses of so solemn an
act, and as coadiutors in respect of sundry necessary ministeries, were
commanded by a serious sanction of the canons, to be partakers of the
sacrament of the Lords body and blood: but all such faithful and believing
men, as resort to this sacrifice of our mediator, to renew the memory of the
death of our Lord, and our redemption by the same, should be admonished and
stirred up, by effectual and often exhortations, having examined themselves,
confessed their sins, and obtained absolution to receive the grace of the
holy communion, and carefully and devoutly to frequent the participation of the
divine Eucharist together with the priest.

By this which has been said it appears that the priests receiving alone,
and neglecting or excluding the communicating of others as not much necessary,
(his act being availeable to apply the benefits of Christ's passion without
receiving the sacrament) is indeed a point of Romish religion, but not
contained in the mass; for it is contrary to the name of the mass, the words
of the canon, and intendme^t of the^ that composed it; contrary to the old
canons and the practice of the Church; it proceeded from the indeuotion of the
people, or rather the negligence or error of the guides of the Church, that
either failed to stir the^ up to the performance of such a duty, or made them
believe their act was sufficient, to communicate the benefits of Christ's
passion to them, not without the dislike of the better sort. So that hitherto
no proof is made, that the Church wherein our Fathers lived and died, was no
Protestant Church, but rather the contrary, for this Church did ever protest
against this abuse, professed her dislike of the same, and acknowledged that
this custom was much different from the ancient.

Honorius in gemma animae, says, it is reported that anciently the priests
were x Cap. 58.
wont to receive meal of every house or family, which custom the Greeks are
said to continue still, and that out of this they made the Lords bread which
they did offer for the people, and having consecrated it, distributed it to
the^. For every of the^ that offered this meal, were present at the mass, and
respectively to the^ it was said in the canon; and omniu^ circu^stantiu^, qui
tibi hoc sacrificiu^ laudis offeru^t, that is, consider the devotion of all
that stand round about, who offer to thee this sacrifice of praise. But after
that the Church increased in number, but decayed in devotion, it was decreed in
respect of carnal men, that they that could, should communicate every Sunday,
or on the chief feast days, or thrice in the year. And now because the people
ceasing to communicate, so great a quantity of bread was no longer necessary,
it was decreed that it should be formed in fashion of a penny, and instead of
offering meal, they offered every one a penny, by which they acknowledged
Christ's being sold for a certain number of pence. These pence were converted
either to the benefit of the poor, or for providing of something pertaining to
the sacrifice: and in stead of the consecrated bread they were wont to receive,
there was given them holy bread as they called it. Whatsoever men think of this
which Honorius has of offering meal, Durand. lib. 4. 53.
it is certain that in the Primitive Church, they did offer those things that
were to be consecrated in the sacrament; and that the bread that was there
consecrated, was usual and loafie bread, and in form (...)
round, as it appears by Page 492.
Epiphanius in Ancoratu, and Lib. 4. c. 55.
Gregory in his dialogues, who calls the bread of consecration coronas round
^aues; all which things show a Protestant Church.

Wherefore let us come to the next point of Romish religion, supposed to be
contained in the mass, which is the depriving of the people of the one part of
the Sacrament, and the giving them the same only in one kind. In the Primitive
Church, says ^ Lyra, the Sacrament was ministered in both kinds. b In Prove. c.
9.
Dionysius Carthusianus agrees with him, affirming the same; which thing may c
^n 1. Cor. cap. 11.
be proved by innumerable testimonies of antiquity. Ad Philadelph.
Ignatius says, there is one bread broken to all, and one cup distributed to
all. After the offering is made, let every one says Clement, in order take the
Lords body and his precious blood, with all reverent shamefastnes and fear.
The bread, says Dionysius, which e Const^. l. b. 2. c. 61.
was one, is broken in parts, and the cup that is but one, is divided amongst
al. Justin (...) Hieratch. cc^. cap 3 p. 3.
Martyr in his 2 Apology says, that after he that is the president has
finished his thanksgiving, and the people by a joyful acclamation have
approved and consented to the same, the deacons and ministers divide unto
every one of the^ that are present, that each one may partake of that bread,
wine, and water, over which the blessing and thanksgiving has bin powered out,
and they do bear the same to them that are absent. Of whose hand, says Ad
vvo^em l. (...) c. ^6.
Tertullian (speaking of a faithful woman married to an Infidel) shall she
receive, and of whose cup shall she partake? Epist. ^4.
Cyprian in his Epist. to Cornelius, How do we teach or provoke them, in and
for the confession of Christ's name to shed their blood, if we deny unto the^
when they are to enter into this warfare, the blood of Christ? or how shall we
make them fit for the cup of martyrdom, if we shall not first admit them to
drink the cup of the Lord, iure communicationis, by the right of
communicating? and in another place, Therefore they daily drink the cup of
Christ's blood, that they may shed their blood for Christ. And in a S^m. de laps.
3 place, speaking of a certain child, that had bin polluted in the idols
temple, he says, When as the solemnities were fulfilled, the deacon began to
offer the cup to them that were present, and when other had received, her
course came, but the little girl by the instinct of God, turned away her face,
and began to close her mouth with her lips, and to refuse the cup; but the
deacon desisted not, but though she resisted, powered into her mouth out of the
chalice. And disputing against them that were named Aquarii, he says, In
ministering the cup to the people, contrary to that which Christ did and taught,
they give water instead of wine; Let them tell us, says in Numer. homil. 16.
Origon, what people that is, that use to drink blood. Ambrose: If so often as
the blood of Christ is powered out, it be powered out for the remission of sins,
it behooves (...) Ambros. de Sacram. l. 4. c 6
me always to receive it, that my sins may be forgiven me. Amb^os. l. 1. off^.
c. 41.
Laurence the deacon says, Sixtus the B. committed unto him the dispensation
of the Lords blood, and made him his consort in consummating the Sacraments.
Cap. 3.
Hierom upon Sophonie; the Priests which do serve about the Eucharist, and
distribute the blood of the Lord unto his people, do wickedly against the Law
of Christ when they think that the words, not the life of him that prays,
make the Eucharist. Aug. in sent. Pr^. and de consecred. 2. c. cum frangitur.
Augustine, Cum frangitur hostia, dum sanguis de calice in or a fidelium
funditur, quid aliud quam dominici corporis in cruce immolatio, eiusque
sanguinis de latere effusio designatur? That is, When the host is broken, and
the blood powered out of the chalice into the mouths of the faithful, what
other thing is represented thereby, but the offering of Christ's body on the
cross, and the pouring of the blood out of his side? ^ Nazianzen, Reverere
mysticam mensam ad quam accessisti, panem quem participasti, poculum cui
communicasti, passionibus Christi initiatus. Reverence ^rat. 40. in sanct
baptisma.
the Lords Table to which thou have access, the bread whereof thou have been
partaker, the cup in which thou have communicated, being initiated in the
passions of Christ. ^ Cyrill of Jerusalem, Concava manu suseipe corpus Christi
dicens, Amen. tum vero post communionem corporis Christi accede, and (...)
Ca^hes. mystag^.
ad calicem illius etc. dicens, Amen. That is, Receive the body of Christ with
a hollow hand, saying, Amen. and after the partaking of the body of Christ,
come also to the cup of the Lord, etc, saying, Amen. And Hom^. 1 8. in 2 Co^.
Chrysostom most fully to this purpose, It is not now as in the time of the
Old testament, where the Priest did eat same things, and the people some
other; and where it was not lawful for the people to partake of those things
whereof the Priest did partake; but one body is proposed to all, and one cup.
Gregory, His body is there received, his flesh is there divided for the
salvation of the people, his blood is not now shed upon the hands (...) l.
(...). c.
of Infidels, but into the mouths of believers. ^ Ordo Romanus put forth by
Cassander; (...). 23.
The Archdeacon taking the challice, confirms all the^ with the Lords blood,
whom the Pope had ceased to communicate in the body of the Lord. And again; As
the Archdeacon does confirm those that the Pope communicates in the body of
the Lord, so do the other deacons confirm them that the other Bishops or
priests communicate. Citat. a Cassand. liturg. c. 31.
Liber sacramentoru^ put out by Gregory, prescribes thus; When the priest
gives the Lords body, let him say, the body of our Lord Jesus Christ keep
thee unto eternal life, amen. And let him that receives say, I will receive
the celestial bread, and will call on the name of the Lord. Also when the
priest gives the cup, let him say; the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ keep
thee unto eternal life, and let him that receives it say, I will receive the
cup of salvation. Inter homilias hiemales de sanctis tom. 7. p. ^20.
Beda; The body of Christ is not killed nor his blood shed by the hands of
Infidels to their own destruction, but it is received by the mouth of believers
to salvation. The 11t council of Toledo provideth, that such as through
weakness cannot receive the whole sacrament, but only drink of the mystical
cup, shall not for this be separated from the body of Christ. De imag. l. 4.
c. 14
Charles the great: The mystery of the Lords body and blood is daily x Apud
Binium.
received of the faithful in the sacrament. Rabanus Moguntinus: God would have
the sacraments of his body, and blood, received into the mouths of the
faithful, that by the visible work, the invisible effect might be showed.
Paschasius: z De institut. cler. l. 1. c 3.
It is he only that breaks this bread, and by the hands of his ministers
distributes it to the believers, saying, take ye and drink ye all of this,
as well a De corpore and sanguine Dom. c. 15.
ministers as other believers: for this is the cup of my blood of the new and
eternal testament. Haimo upon the 1. Cor. 10. The cup is called a
communication, as it were a participation: because all do communicate of it,
and do take part of the blood of the Lord which it contains in it. De
diuinis officijs, l. 2. c 9.
Rupertus Abbas; The priest distributeth the bread and wine, putting them into
the mouths of the faithful. 1 Cor. 10.
Anselm; All we which receive of one bread and one cup of the Lord, are made
one body. De eucharist.
Lanfrancus has the same words that before we cited out of Augustine. De
sacramento. l. 2. c. 3.
Algerus; Because we live so by bread and drink, that we cannot want either of
them, Christ would have them both in his sacrament, least if either were
wanting, the signification of life being imperfit, he might be thought to be
imperfit life. Petrus Cluniacensis abbas; The flesh of Christ was given to man
to be eaten under the form of bread, and the blood of Christ to be drunk
under the form of wine, that as men do principally use bread and wine, for
the maintaining of this present life: so for the life that is eternal, they
might be sed with the body and blood of Christ, here spiritually, and hereafter
both spiritually and corporally. In the primitive Church, says Caietan, f In
tertiam Aquin. 80. q. art 12.
the people did communicate in both kinds, as appears in the 1 Cor. 11. This
custom continued, not only in the time of persecution, and in the time of the
martyrs, whom Cyprian would have to be comforted and strengthened with
drinking the cup of the Lord, before they came to drink of the cup of
Martyrdom, but even in the time of peace also. And therefore we read not
only of the making and providing of dishes, but of ministerial chalices, much
different from those, wherein they now consecrate, and out of which the priest
receives; which were therefore named ministerial chalices, because they
served not to offer, but to minister the blood of Christ to the people. In the
Citat a Cassandro liturg. cap. 31.
pontifical of Damasus in the life of Syluester, we read, that Constantine
builded a Church in the city of Naples, where he offered two plates or
dishes, and 10 ministerial chalices weighing every one of them two pounds. Of
this sort was that of blessed Remigius as we find in Hincmarus, in which these
verses were,

Hauriat hinc populus vitam de sanguine sacro, etc. That is, let the people
draw life out of this sacred blood. Our Fathers, says Aphorism. de eucharist.
l. 6. p. 231.
Ioachimus Vadianus, did see, in the greater Church of Sangalli, a chalice
gilded with gold, that weighed threescore and ten marks of silver, provided
no doubt for the public communion of the people, formerly used. In Tertul. de
corona mil.
Beatus Rhenanus says, that Conradus Pellicanus, a man of wonderful sanctity
and learning, did find in the first constitution of the Carthusians, that they
are forbidden to possess any vessels of price, besides a silver chalice, and a
pipe, with which the lay people might suck out the blood of our Lord. Besides,
the book written more then four hundred years since, concerning the
treasures of the Church of Mentz, amongst chalices of gold of a great weight,
having handles and golden Crosses etc: reckons also silver pipes, six in
number, if I be not deceived, deputed to this use of sucking out the blood of
our Lord; which I suppose, says he, the Archbishop was wont to use. Ordo
Romanus shows, that when the Bishop of Rome does celebrate, the Archdeacon
gives him to drink of the holy chalice, and afterward powers a little out
of the same into a greater chalice or cup, which the acoluth does hold, that
the people may be confirmed or receive the sacrament of the Lords blood, out of
the sacred vessel. For the wine that was not consecrated, being mingled with
the blood of Christ is altogether sanctified. The Bishops therefore come in
order to receive of the hand of the Pope, and aftar them all the Priests come
up, that they may communicate at the alter; and while the Archdeacon
communicates, the chief Bishop that is present holds the challice: for as
Bishops attend the Pope in the Church of Rome, so priests should attend and
assist Bishops in other Churches. The Archdeacon after he has communicated,
receives the chalice back again from the Bishop, and confirms all those
with the Lords blood, to whom the Pope has given the communion of the body of
our Lord. This service being performed by the altar, having received by the
Subdeacon the pipe with which the people are to be confirmed; the Archdeacon
delivers the chalice to be carried to the acoluth, to be laid up by him in
the vestery. Then does the pope go down, to give the communion to the Princes
of the people, and their wives; and as the Archdeacon does confirm those to
whom the Pope gives the Communion of the Lords body: so do the other Deacons
confirm them, to whom (after the Pope has ministered to those of the better
sort) the other Bishops and Priests do give the Communion: and as soon as the
pope begins to minister the Communion to the Clergy, and people, the
school of singers begins to sing the antheme appointed for the Communion;
and after that, when the Pope thinks fit, Glory be to the Father etc.

Here we see a cloud of witnesses testifying for the Communion in both kinds:
whereupon, ^ Cassander fears not to pronounce, that he verily thinks,
(...) De communione sub vtraque specie.
it cannot be showed, that the sacrament of the Eucharist was any otherwise
ministered, in any part of the Catholic Church to the faithful people in the
holy assembly from the Lords table, for a thousand years and more, but under
both the sacramental signs of bread and wine. Neither can this saying of
Cassander be refuted, by that in the second of the Acts where the faithful are
said to have continued in the breaking of bread and prayer. Nor by that we
read in antiquity of the Lay communion, which Caietan childishly urges. For
sundry worthy divines in the Roman Church, have sufficiently showed the
weakness of these silly allegations.

Let us see therefore how the Communion in one kind came into the Church. It
appears by Sermon. de quad^ag. (...).
Leo the first, that the Manichees, as they denied Christ to have been borne
in the truth of our flesh, so they denied him to have truly dyed and risen
again, and therefore they used to fast upon that day, that is to us the day
of salvation and joy. And whereas to hide their infidelity and heresy, they
came sometimes to the Churches of Catholics, and were present at the
celebration of the sacred mysteries, they did so temper the matter, that with
unworthy mouths they received the Lords body, but declined to drink the blood
of our redemption. Leo carefully endeavored to make this thing known to all,
that by these signs they might be discried, that their sacrilegious
dissembling might be found out, and that being discovered, they might by
sacerdotall authority be cast out of the society of the Saints. By this of Leo
it appears, that the Manichees out of an heretical conceit, began to
communicate in one kind, and that all were wont to communicate in both kinds:
that hereby the Manichees might be discovered, and known from other right
believers, in that they would communicate but in one kind alone. Which thing
also Andradius does rightly note.

In the Cano. Comperimus de consec, did. 2.
time of Gelasius there were certain found, that out of some superstitious
conceit would not communicate in both kinds. We have found, says Gelasius,
that certain having received a portion of the sacred Body only, abstain from
the cup of the most holy blood. Which men because they are said to be holden
with I know not what superstition, either let them receive the whole Sacrament,
or let them be put and kept frrom the whole, seeing there can be no division of
one and the same mystery, without grievous sacrilege.

Thirdly, whereas in case of necessity, as when children, or such as were sick
and weak were to receive the communion, the ancient did sometimes dippe the
mystical bread into the consecrated wine, and so gave it unto them, as it
appears by the history of Serapion, by that which Sermon. de laps.
Cyprian, and De promiss. Dei dimid. temporis. c. 6
Prosper report: and by that which the Apud Ivonem decret. part. 2. cap, 19.
Council of Turon prescribes, that the Eucharist which is reserved for the
voyage provision of such as are ready to depart hence, shall be dipped into the
blood of the Lord, that so the Priest may truly say. The body and blood of our
Lord be beneficial unto thee unto eternal life. Ex institutis Cluniacensium
l. 2. c. 35. de sacerdote hebdomadario apud Cassand. liturgic. c. 31.
Some began to bring in this manner of dipping into the ordinary communion,
under pretense of careful avoiding the danger of shedding the blood of Christ,
and greater reverence toward the same. For certain Monks brought the same
custom into their Monasteries, ingenuously confessing that herein they did
contrary to the custom of other Churches. But that they were forced so to do,
by the rudeness of their novices, who they feared would run into some gross
neglect, if they should receive the blood of Christ apart; Neither did this
custom stay here, but it made an entrance into other Churches abroad also; for
Apud Cassand, ibid.
Ivo Carnotensis about the year 1100, has these words. Let them not
communicate in the bread dipped: but (according to the decree of the Council
of Toledo,) let them communicate in the body apart, and in the blood apart,
those only excepted, to whom it is not prescribed, but permitted to
communicate in the bread dipped, out of due consideration of the fear of
spilling and shedding the blood of Christ. But this attempt was disliked and
resisted: for the author of the book entitled Cap. 19.
Micrologus says, It is not authentical that certain do dippe the body of
the Lord, and having so dipped it, give it to the people, thinking thereby to
make up unto them the whole communion. But the Roman order is against this, and
does prescribe, that upon Good friday when they consecrate not, but use the
bread consecrated the day before, they shall take wine that is not consecrated,
and consecrate it with the Lords player, and dipping of the Lords body into it,
that so the people may receive the whole Sacrament; which prescription were
superfluous, if it were enough to dippe the body of Christ the day before, and
so to keep it, and to give it so dipped to the people to communicate in. Pope
Julius in order of Popes the 36th, writing to the Bishops of Egypt, does
altogether forbid any such dipping, and commands the bread and cup to be
received apart. What the credit of this Epistle is, which the author of this
book cites as the Epistle of Pope Julius, I know not, neither do I think that
any such custom of giving the Sacrament to the people in the Church in such
sort, was so ancient as to be reprehended by Pope Julius. But it appears that
such dipping when it began to be used in the Church, found great opposition;
and therefore this supposed constitution of Julius is renewed, and confirmed in
the 3d council of Can. 1.
Bracar. and Micrologus adds, that blessed Gelasius in order of Popes the 51th
writing to certain Bishops, commands them to excommunicate all those, that
receiving the Lords body, abstained from the participation of the cup:
pronouncing in the same decree, that such division of the Sacrament cannot be
without horrible sacrilege. By this of Micrologus it is evident, that they
thought in those times, that not only the communicating in one kind alone, out
of such erroneous conceits as those of the Manichees and other like; but all
communicating in one kind alone is sacrilegious. And that they could not endure
the dipping of the sacramental bread, whereby yet the people did in a sort
partake of both kinds. Neither does Micrologus alone show the dislike that
then was of such dipping, but the like we may find in the writings of sundry
worthy men. Epist. 64.
Hildebertus Cenomanensis. Hoec ideo tibi, frater, exaravi, vt excitatus
evigiles, vt videas quoniam traditioni sacramentorum altaris quae in vestro
celebris est monasterio, nec Evangelica traditio consonat, nec decreta
concordant. In eo enim consuetudinis est eucharistiam nulli nisi intinctam
dare, quod nec ex dominica institutione, nec ex sanctionibus authenticis
reperitur assumptum; si Mathaeum, si Marcum, si Lucam consulas, seorsim panem
traditum invenies, seorsim vinum, etc: nam intinctum panem aliis praebuisse
Christum non legimus, excepto tantummodo illo discipulo, quem intincta buccella
proditorem ostenderit; non quod huius sacramenti institutionem fignaret, and
sic Papa Julius ait, etc. That is, Brother I have therefore written these
things unto thee that being stirred by me, thou might be awakened, to see
that the manner of delivering of the sacrament of the altar which is grown
into use in your monastery, is neither consonant to the evangelicall
tradition, nor agreeing with the decrees. For in your monastery it is become a
custom, to give the mystical bread to none but dipped; which will never be
found to have taken beginning from the Lords institution or authentical
constitutions. For if thou consult Matthew, or Mark, or Luke, thou shall find
that the bread was delivered apart, and the wine apart, etc. for we read not
that Christ gave dipped bread to any other but only to that disciple, whom by
the dipped soppe he meant to show to be the traitor, and not that he would
have the sacrament so ministered, and so, Pope Julius says, etc.

From the custom of dipping the mystical bread into the blood, and giving it
so dipped unto the people, for fear of shedding the blood of Christ, if it
should have been ministered apart, some proceeded farther, and began to teach
the people, that seeing the body and blood of Christ cannot be separated, in
that they partake of the one, they partake of the other also, and that
therefore it is sufficient to receive in one kind alone. But herein they gave
no satisfaction, either to themselves, or others. For though it be true, says
Rational. div. l 4. c. 42.
Durandus, that they are not separated, and that he that receives the one
receives the other also; yet neither part of the sacrament is superfluous, but
both are to be received. For whereas wine breeds blood, wherein the soul
and life is seated, according to that in Leviticus, The soul of all flesh is
in the blood of it, and whereas in the offerings that were of old, the flesh of
those beasts that were sacrificed, was offered for the body, and the blood of
them for the soul; if we should receive Christ's body, and together with it
the blood under the form of bread signifying and exhibiting the flesh of
Christ, and not under the form of wine signifying and exhibiting unto us the
blood of Christ, we might be thought to neglect the salvation and good of our
souls. And els-where he says, that he that receives only the consecrated
bread, receives not the whole and entire Sacrament. For howsoever it be true,
that the blood of Christ is in the host or consecrated bread: yet is it not
there sacramentally, seeing bread does not signify the blood but the body of
Christ, neither the wine the body but the blood of Christ. And in the former
place he adds out of Innocentius tertius, that though the blood of Christ be
received with the body, under the form of bread, and the body with the blood
under the form of wine; yet neither can we drink the blood of Christ, under
the form of bread which we eat, nor eat the body of Christ, under the form
of wine which we drink. And sundry of the Schoolmen agree with him in this
point, resolving, that though Christ be whole, and entire in either part of
the sacrament, yet both parts are necessary. First because the exhibiting of
the body and blood of Christ distinctly, represents his passion, in which his
blood was separated from his body. And secondly, because in this sort Christ's
body is more fitly, and significantly exhibited unto us in the nature of food,
and his blood of drink. If this sacrament be worthily received under both
kinds, says Quarta part lum. q. 32. memb. 1. ar. 2.
Alexander of Hales, there is a greater efficacy and working of grace, causing
an unity between the mystical body and Christ the head; then when it is
received in one kind only. And therefore, he says, q. 53.
though the receiving under one kind be sufficient, yet that which is under
both, is of more merit, in that it augmenteth devotion, enlarges the
apprehension of faith, and is a more complete, and full receiving. And again,
q. 31.
The receiving under both kinds, which manner of receiving the Lord delivered,
is of more efficacy and complement. And he that receives the sacrament under
the form of bread only, does not perfectly receive the same in respect of
sacramental receiving. With him agree In 4 sent. d. 8. ar. 13.
Albertus magnus. In 4. d. 11. ar. 1.
Petrus de Palude. In 4. sent. d. 8. part. 2. art. 2. q. 2.
Bonaventura, and sundry other. By all which it is evident, that though they
gave way to the custom that grew in, and began to prevail in their time, yet
they signified, and sufficiently expressed that in their opinion, the
communicating in both kinds, as Christ at first did institute, and the Church
for a long time observed, is fit, convenient, complete, perfect, of more
efficacy, and more clear representation than the other under one kind alone.

And therefore many still retained the ancient manner of communicating, after
other had admitted and received the new. tertia part. q. 80. ar. 12.
Aquinas says of his time, that the communicating under one kind alone was
received in many Churches, not in all. P. 4. q. 31. memb. 1.
Alexander of Hales says, that lay men almost every where communicated in one
kind. Lib 4. d. 11. q. 1.
Petrus de Palude says, it was the custom in some Churches, to give the
communion to the people in both kinds. Durandus reports, that it was the
custom of some Churches in his time, that the priest should consecrate such a
quantity of wine, that after he had drunk of the same, there might still some
of the sacrament of Christ's blood remain in the chalice, into which more wine
not consecrated might be powered, that the other communicants might partake of
the blood of Christ. And then they began to dispute the question, whether the
wine that was put into the cup, by contact of Christ's blood, became consecrated
and sacramental or not. But whether it did or not they resolved, that all by
this means did partake, and drink of the blood of Christ, which was mingled
with every part of the wine, newly powered into it. After this some proceeded
farther, and left none of the sacramental, or consecrated wine, in the cup,
or chalice: but powered mere wine into it, that the communicants might wash
their mouths with it, after they had received the body of Christ; teaching
them that they had been sufficiently partakers of the blood of Christ, in that
they had received his body, from which his blood cannot be separated. But
Citat. a Cassand. Liturg. c. 31.
Willielmus de Lauduno says, that he that receives the body of Christ under
the form of bread, receives the whole verity,. but not the whole sacrament,
and that therefore in many places, they communicated in both kinds. And we
shall find, that where they admitted the communion under one kind, yet they
put a difference between the communicants, and permitted some to communicate
in both kinds. De summa trinitate and fide Catholica.
Linwood says, that in the lesser Churches, only they that consecrate receive
the blood of Christ, under the form of consecrated wine, insinuating thereby,
that in the greater it was otherwise: and that within the compass of the same
nation and people, the greater and more honorable Churches, had the communion
in both kinds; when the meaner had it but in one. Yea we shall find that in
the same particular Church, some communicated in both kinds, when other
communicated but in one. For Citat. a Cassan. in li. de communione sub utraque.
Richardus de media villa, and Petrus de Tarantasia, afterward named
Innocentius the 4t report, that in their time, not only the Ministers of the
Altar, but the more principal of the people communicated in both kinds. Lib.
de sacr. tom. 2. c. 88.
Thomas Waldensis provincial of the Carmelites here in England, says of his
time. We permit the Pastors of the Churches to give the Sacrament in both
kinds, to svch persons as are strong in faith, and discreet: as the Bishop of
Rome does use to give the communion to the deacon, and other Ministers of the
Altar, and other excelling in faith, or of high place and dignity; as Doctors
and Kings. Or as the Churches of religious men, and of great places, do still
continue to give the Sacrament to their brethren, and such persons as are
worthy of so great a thing. And in Cap. 94.
another place he has these words: Neither do we deny unto all Lay men
generally, to drink of the blood of Christ under the form of wine; neither
do we generally, and without distinction, or difference, grant and yield it
unto all, for we know that by the custom of the Church, it is left to the
discretion of the greater Prelates, to admit certain of the Ministers of the
Altar, or certain other illustrious persons amongst the people, that are
faithful, reverent, and devout, to the solemn communicating in both kinds.
Thus did he write, more then a thousand and four hundred years after Christ,
in the time of Pope Martin, who was elected in the Council of Constance, and
who as B. Lindan tells us, went home from the Council of Constance, and
ministered the communion to sundry, both of the Clergy, and Laity, under both
kinds. So that the communion under both kinds continued after the Council of
Constance: which, as the same Lindan says, did not simply forbid the
ministering of the Sacrament in both kinds, but the teaching of the people,
that of necessity it must be so ministered. To this purpose see the 13th
session of the Council. The Council of Basil permitted the Bohemians to
continue the use of the communion in both kinds, and Cassander tells us, that
good and credible authors do testify, that in n De comm. sub utraque fol. 33.
France the whole communion was ministered, though not euery-where, in ordinary
Churches, yet in Chapels, even a little before the memory of our fathers, as
also it is ministered to the French Kings to this day. in^. q. 80. art. (...).
Caietan says of his time, that the Church of Rome, and almost all the
Churches of the west, had the communion in one kind. He says not all, but
almost all; for as it appears by the same Caietan, the Cistercian monks in
some places did communicate under both kinds, even in his time: their order as
it may be thought, being instituted while the communion under both kinds
continued in general observation. For otherwise it is not to be thought, that
any Monastery would have presumed, to renew an abolished custom. So that we
see, that the Churches of this part of the world, were never wholly deprived of
the necessary, and comfortable use of the Sacrament under both kinds. And for
those that were, we see by what degrees, and in what sort, not without
complaining of the wrong done unto them, they were forced to give way to the
innovation, by a prevailing faction. Yet did they not cease to be members of
the true and orthodoxe Church, that were thus wronged. The Armenian in the
Dialogues of Armachanus, objecting the saying of Christ, except a man eat the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, he can have no life: to
prove the necessity of the Communion in both kinds; Armachanus answers,
that if the words of Christ be understood of the Sacramental drinking, they
must be understood with some qualification, to wit, that it is necessary to
salvation, and the attaining of eternal life, for each man to receive both at
some time, or to be willing and ready, as much as is in his power to receive
both. Which was no doubt the condition of many thousands, under the papacy,
that much desired to have enjoyed this comfort, so that in this point we see,
the Church wherein our Fathers lived and died, was a true Protestant Church, as
ever before, so at the appearing of Luther.

Which is yet more confirmed, in that after Luthers prcaching, many of the
greatest Princes of these parts of the world, that never joined wholly with
him, nor ever brake with the B. of Rome, urged this point of communicating in
both kinds most earnestly; as Ferdinand, Maximilian, the French king, the Duke
of Bauaria, and sundry other. Apud Goldast. imperial. constitut. tom. 2. 377.
There is extanta writing, exibited by the Ambassadors of the Emperor
Ferdinand, to the council of Trent in the year 1562 June 27. Wherein first it
is showed, that the custom of communicating in both kinds, which was in use in
Bohemia, when the council of Constance was called, has been retained there
ever since, and that the Bohemians could never yet be brought by any
persuasions, and entreaties, or by any force, and war, to relinquish this
custom, and to suffer the cup to be denied unto them. From which cup or
chalice, that part of the people that maintained this liberty, were called
Calixtini, and subutraque; which sort of men spread it self exceedingly in
that kingdom, and there are of that number many prime men, and certain great
officers and magistrates. To these the Church permitted the free use of the cup
upon due considerations. But Pius the second upon some dislike, revoked the
former concession; whose proceedings in that kind having no good success, but
rather causing a greater alienation, Paulus the third, and Julius the third
sent their legates, to reconcile them to the Church, and to permit them to use
their former custom. Neither is it to be marvailed at, that these Bohemians,
cannot be brought from this persuasion, of the necessity of communicating in
both kinds, seeing we find that there are many most learned, pious, and
Catholic men that do think, that they that communicate under both kinds,
obtain more grace, the^ they that communicate under one only. Besides these
Bohemians, there are in sundry other famous and noble kingdoms and provinces,
certain pious and Catholic men, as in Hungary, Austria, Morauia, Silesia,
Carinthia, Carniola, Styria, Bauaria, Sueuia, and many Provinces of Germany,
that with great earnestness desire the use of the cup to be left free unto
them. Hitherto we have heard the words of the Emperor; showing the desires,
of many states and provinces: and after the urging of the dangers that may
follow, if their desires be not satisfied, the Ambassadors earnestly desired
the Bishops assembled, to consider of this motion. The same desire of the
Emperor Ferdinand is excellently Apud Coldast. vbi supra page 399.
expressed, in an oration made by Andraeas Dudithius the Emperors Ambassador
in the council of Trent. Ibid. page 381.
Maximilian in his rescript to Pius the fourth touching the marriage of
priests, shows that in his opinion it is fit, not only to gratify the
people by the concession of the cup, as he says Pius had already yielded to
do, but the Clergy also by granting them the liberty of marriage. Trident.
council. quaedam membra avu^a edit ab Arnoldo Birkmanno Coloniae anno 1565.
There is extant also an oration made by the Ambassador of the Duke of Banaria
in the council of Trent in the year 1562: wherein we find these words. Not a
few are offended and fall away, and join themselves to the sectaries, by
reason of the prohibition of the communion under both kinds. For they think
there is an express word of God, for the communion under both kinds, and no
word for the other under one. To which they add, that the use of the communion
in both kinds was not only in the time of the Primitive Church, but is now also
in the Eastern Churches of the world: and that the Roman Church aunciently did
not abhor from the same, as it appears by many hystories. Neither does it
move men a little especially in Bauaria, that Paul the third by his bull
granted the communion under both kinds to certain Bishops in Germany. Apud
Gold. vbi sup. 399.
The same Duke in an Epistle written to Pius the fourth in the year 1564
concerning the same matter, has these words. We have conferred touching this
thing, which the most reverend and illustrious Arch-chauncelours and electours
spiritual of the Roman Empire, and they agree with me to beseech your
holiness help, for the confirming of them that stand, and the raising up of
them that are fallen, as being the supreme Monarch in respect of things
pertaining to Christianity; so that you need not to make any doubt of the
willingness of the electours, if your holiness shall be pleased to yield any
thing in this kind, to embrace the same, and to put it in execution. Wherefore
together with the Emperors majestic, I humbly and most earnestly beseech your
holiness, to grant the free use of the cup, at the least to them who being
persuaded as they are, will harken to no better advise at this time. lib. ^6.
anno. 15^5.
Thuanus reports, that Maximilian in the very beginning of his reign, when
he saw that men were exceedingly discontented, especially in Bohemia, and
Austria, that they had no satisfaction given them by the council of Trent, as
they expected, touching the concession of the cup, and the freedom of priests
marriages, that he might bring them to be better content, and that they might
be willing to do what he expected of them, for the good of the commonwealth,
he was earnest with the Pope, that the promises which he might well remember
he had made to Ferdinand, and to himself, by Cardinal Moronus, a little
before the council ended, might now be made good, in a time wherein it was so
needful: seeing the council determining nothing, had left power to him, to
take order in this kind. The Pope denied not to perform what the Emperor
desired, being persuaded so to do by Moronus, and not being much averse from
it of himself before. But Philip King of Spain, by the instigation of
Cardinal Pacecus, fearing this example in the Low Countries, sent Peter Avila
to Rome, at the same time that he understood, the Emperor would send his
ambassadors, to dissuade the Pope, from listening to any such motion, as
being very hurtful to the Christian Church, etc. The Pope at the instance of
the Cardinals, deferring and putting off the matter till a longer time, for
the present eluded the Emperors petition. Thus did this good Emperor insist
in the steps of Ferdinand his worthy father, ^ who when he was moved by the
Pope, to cause the (...). l. 3^. (...).
council of Trent to be promulgated in Germany showed himself willing to do
any thing that was fit, but earnestly urged the Pope to permit and leave free
the use of the cup to the lay people, being moved so to do by Charles the
Archduke his son, and the Duke of Bavaria his son in law, and the due
consideration of the necessity of his subjects. (...). (...). (...). (...). and
(...). (...).
There are extant certain articles concerning reformation of manners and
Church discipline, proposed in the council of Trent, by the ambassadors of
Charles the ninth the French King; amongst which the 18 article is, that the
ancient decree, of Leo and Gelasius, touching the communion under both kinds,
might be reviued, and brought to be in use again. But when the French
perceived, that there were scarce any footesteps, of the liberty of ancient
counsels to be discerned, in the council of Trent; that all things were
swayed, and disposed by the absolute command of Pius the fourth then Pope; the
ambassadors were commanded to make a protestation, in the name of the King
their master, the words of which protestation are these. We refuse to be
subject to the command, and disposition of Pius the fourth. We reject, we
refuse, and contemn all the judgments, censures, and decrees of the same Pius.
And although most holy Fathers, your religion, life, and learning, was ever,
and ever shall be of great esteem with us, yet seeing indeed you do nothing,
but all things are done at Rome, rather then at Trent, and the things that are
here published, are rather the deerees of Pius the fourth, then of the council
of Trent, we denounce, and protest here before you all, that whatsoever things
are decreed, and published in this assembly, by the mere will and pleasure of
Pius, neither the most Christian King will ever approve, nor the French Church
ever acknowledge, to be the decrees of a general council. Besides this, the
King our master commands all his Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots, to leave
this assembly, and presently to depart hence; then to return again, when
there shall be hope of better, and more orderly proceedings.

Wherefore from this point of Romish Religion touching the communion in one
kind, which finds no help in the public liturgy used in the days of our
Fathers, by which it is evident that the people were wont to communicate in
both kinds, when that form of divine service was first composed, nor no
liking or approbation of the best and worthiest guides of Gods Church then
living: let us come to the next, which is the propitiatory sacrifice for the
quick and the dead. This indeed is a grand point of Romish Religion, and if M
Brerelie can prove that it is contained in the public Liturgy, that was
used in the Church, at, and immediately before Luthers appearing, and
consequently, that all that used that Liturgy had such an opinion of a
sacrifice, he has said much to prove, that the Church under the Papacy, was
no Protestant Church; but this neither he, nor all the most learned Papists in
the world will ever be able to prove. First therefore, I will make it appear,
that the Canon of the Mass, imports no such sacrifice. And secondly, I will
show at large, that neither before nor after Luthers appearing, the Church
believed, or knew any such, new, real sacrificing of Christ, as is now
imagined.

Touching the canon of the Mass, it is true that therein there is often
mention of sacrifice and oblation: but Luther professes, that the words may be
understood in such a sense, as is not to be disliked, and he says, he could
so expound it, and that somewhere he has so expounded it; but seeing it is
obseure, and may bear diverse senses, and a better, and more clear form of
divine celebration may be brought in, he will not honor it so much, as to give
it that sense which it may well carry, and in which the first composers of it,
and others after did use it, but that wherein they of Rome will now needs have
it to be understood. That the form of words used in the canon, are obscure in
sundry parts of it, and hard to be understood, even by the learned, Consult.
page 242.
Cassander confesses, and therefore thinks it fit it were explained and
illustrated by some brief scholies put in the margent, or inserted into the
text by way of parenthesis. The obscurity that is in it, grows, as he
rightly observes, partly out of the disuse, and discontinuing of certain old
observations, to which the words of the canon composed long since have a
reference, and partly from the using of the word sacrifice, in diverse and
different senses, though all connexed: and the sudden passing from the using of
it in one sense, to the using of it in another. It is not unknown to them that
are learned, that in the Primitive Church the people were wont to offer bread
and wine, and that out of that which they offered, a part was consecrated to
become unto them the Sacrament of the Lords body and blood, and other parts
converted to other good and holy uses. Respectively to this ancient custom are
those prayers conceived, that are named secretae; and the first part of the
canon, wherein we desire that God will accept those gifts, presents,
offerings, and sacrifices which we bring unto him, and that he will make them
to become unto us, the body and blood of his Son Christ, which only are that
sacrifice, that procures the remission of our sins, and our reconciliation and
acceptance with God. So that to take away this obscurity, and that the words
may have a true sense, the ancient custom must be brought back again; or at
least it must be conceived that the elements of bread and wine that are set
upon the mystical table, and are to be consecrated, are brought thither, and
offered in the name of the people, and that as being their presents, they are
symboles of that inward sacrifice whereby they dedicate and give themselves and
all that they have unto God. Touching the second cause of the obscurity of the
words of the Canon, which is the using of the word sacrifice and ^ffering, in
so manifold and different senses, and the sudden passing from the one of them
to the other; we must observe; that by the name of sacrifice, gift, or
present, first the oblation of the people is meant, that consists in bread,
and wine, brought and set upon the Lords table. In which again 2 things are to
be considered: the outward action; and that which is signified thereby, to wit
the peoples dedicating of themselves, and all that they have, to God by faith,
and devotion, and offering to him the sacrifice of praise. In this sense is the
word sacrifice used, in the former part of the canon, as I have already showed.
In respect of this is that prayer powered out to God, that he will be mindful
of his servants that do offer unto him this sacrifice of praise, that is,
these outward things in acknowledgement, that all is of him, that they had
perished if he had not sent his son to redeem them, that unless they eat
the flesh, and drink the blood of Christ, they have no life; that he has
instituted holy Sacraments of his body and blood, under the forms of bread and
wine, in which he will not only represent, but exhibit the same unto all such
as hunger and thirst after righteousness; and therefore they desire him so to
accept and sanctify these their oblations, of bread and wine, which in this
sort they offer unto him, that they may become unto them the body, and blood of
Christ, that so partaking in them, they may be made partakers of Christ, and
all the benefits of redemption, and salvation, that he has wrought. Secondly,
by the name of sacrifice is understood, the sacrifice of Christ's body; wherein
we must first consider the thing offered, and secondly the manner of offering.
The thing that is offered is the body of Christ, which is an eternal, and
perpetual, propitiatory sacrifice, in that it was once offered by death upon
the cross, and has an everlasting, and never failing force, and efficacy.
Touching the manner of offering Christ's body and blood, we must consider, that
there is a double offering of a thing to God. First so as men are wont to do,
that give something to God out of that they possess, professing that they will
no longer be owners of it, but that it shall be his and serve for such uses,
and employments as he shall convert it too. Secondly, a man may be said to
offer a thing unto GOD, in that he brings it to his presence, sets it
before his eyes, and offers it to his view, to incline him to do something,
by the sight of it and respect had to it. In this sort Christ offers himself
and his body once crucified, daily in heaven, and so intercedeth for us; not
as giving it in the nature of a gift, or present, for he gave himself to God
once, to be holy unto him for ever; nor in the nature of a sacrifice, for he
dyed once for sin, and rose again never to die any more: but in that he
sets it before the eyes of GOD his Father, representing it unto him, and so
offering it to his view, to obtain grace, and mercy for us. And in this sort
we also offer him daily on the altar, in that commemorating his death, and
lively representing his bitter passions, endured in his body upon the cross,
we offer him that was once crucified, and sacrificed for us on the cross, and
all his sufferings, to the view and gracious consideration of the Almighty,
earnestly desiring, and assuredly hoping, that he will incline to pity us,
and show mercy unto us, for this his dearest sons sake, who in our nature
for us, to satisfy his displeasure, and to procure us acceptance, endured
such and so grievous things. This kind of offering, or sacrificing Christ,
commemoratiuely, is twofold, inward, and outward. Outward, as the taking,
breaking, and distributing the mystical bread, and powering out the cup of
blessing, which is the Communion of the blood of Christ. The inward consists,
in the faith, and devotion of the Church, and people of God, so commemorating
the death and passion of Christ, their crucified Savior, and representing and
setting it before the eyes of the Almighty, that they fly unto it as their
only stay and refuge, and beseech him to be merciful unto them for his sake,
that endured all these things, to satisfy his wrath, and work their peace and
good. And in this sense, and answerable hereunto that is, which we find in
the canon, where the Church desires Almighty God, to accept those oblations of
bread and wine, which she presents unto him, and to make them to become unto
the faithful communicants, the body and blood of Christ, who the night before
he was betrayed took bread into his sacred hands, lifted up his eyes to
heaven, gave thanks, blessed it, and gave it to his disciples; saying, take
and eat ye all of this, for this is my body. And in like manner after he had
supped, took the cup and gave thanks, blessed it and gave it to his
disciples: saying, drink ye all of this, for this is the new Testament in my
blood: do this as often as you shall drink it, in remembrance of me. And then
proceeds and speaks unto Almighty GOD in this sort. Wherefore o Lord we
thy servants, and thy holy people, mindful of that most blessed passion of the
same CHRIST thy son our Lord, as also of his resurrection from the dead, and
his glorious ascension into heaven, do offer to thy divine majesty, out of
thine own gifts consecrated, and by mystical blessing made unto us, the body
and blood of thy son Christ, a pure sacrifice, a holy sacrifice, and an
undefiled sacrifice: the holy bread of eternal life, and the cup of
everlasting salvation, that is, we offer to thy view, and set before thine
eyes, the crucified body of Christ thy son, which is here present in mystery,
and sacrament, and the blood which he once shed for our sakes, which we
know to be that pure, holy, undefiled, and eternal sacrifice, wherewith only
thou art pleased, desiring thee to be merciful unto us, for the merit and
worthiness thereof, and so to look upon the same sacrifice, which
representatiuely we offer to thy view, as to accept it for a full discharge
of us from our sins, and a perfect propitiation: that so thou may behold
us, with a pleased, cheerful, and gracious countinance. This is the meaning
of that prayer in the canon: supra quae propitio and sereno vultu respicere
digneris etc. as the best interpreters of the canon do tell us. Odo
Camaracen^: (...) can. exposit. in bibliotheca pat. tom. 6. p. 468. Stephan.
Eduensis Epis. de sacram. altaris ibid. page 491.
And when in the same prayer, we desire that this sacrifice may be accepted
for us, as the sacrifices of Abell, Abraham, and Melchisedec were, they observe
that this comparison, must not be understood in quantity, but in similitude
only. For the thing it self, is infinitely better then the figure; and the
sacrifice that CHRIST offered, and we here commemorate, is incomparably more
excellent, then those of Abell, Abraham, and Melchisedec. And that therefore
the meaning of those words is. That as God accepted those sacrifices which his
servants offered unto him, before the coming of CHRIST his son, as
prefigurations of that sacrifice which he was afterward to offer, and as a
profession of their hope, of remission of sins by the same; so it will
please him, to accept the sacrifice which CHRIST once offered, and we now
commemorate, for us; and us for it: That so our sins may be remitted, and
we received to favor. After this there follows another prayer in the canon,
wherein as humble suppliants, they that come to celebrate, and to communicate,
beseech Almighty God to command the oblations which they offer to be carried
by the hands of his holy Angel, unto his altar that is on high, and into the
view, and sight of his divine Majesty; that so many as shall by partaking of
the altar receive the sacred body and blood of his son, may be filled with
all heavenly benediction and grace thorough the same Lord JESUS CHRIST. This
form of prayer we find to have been very ancient, but what the meaning of
it is, it is not so easy to find out. For how may we be understood to
desire, that the body of CHRIST which we represent unto GOD, in this
commemoratiue sacrifice, should be carried into heaven, seeing it is always
there? Wherefore let us hear what the holy Fathers have said to this purpose.
Quis fidelium haberet dubium, says Saint Gregory, in ipsa immolationis hora,
ad vocem sacerdotis coelos aperiri, in illo Jesus Cristi mysterio Angelorum
choros adesse, summis in a sociari, terrena coelestibus iungi, vnum quid ex
visibilibus, and invisibilibus fieri? That is, What faithful man or believer
will ever make any doubt, but that in the hour of the oblation, the Heavens
are opened; that so soon as the voice of the Priest is heard, Quires of Angels
are present, the lowest and highest things enter into a society, earthly
things are joined with those that are celestial, and things visible, and
invisible become one. And in another place: At one and the same time and moment
that which is presented on the altar, is caught up into Heaven, by the
ministry of Angels, to be joined in a near sort unto the body of Christ,
and is at the same time before the eyes of the Priest upon the altar. So then
the oblations which we present unto God on the Altar, are then carried by the
hands of Angels, into Heaven, when those sacramental elements which we bring
thither, though they be still visible on the altar, as Gregory says, yet being
changed, and become unto us in mystery, and exhibitiue signification, the body
and blood of Christ, once sacrificed and shed for us: and now in heaven
continually represented unto God to intercede for us; may rightly be said to
be carried up into heaven. But seeing by the precedent words of mystical
blessing and prayer, the sacramental Elements are so changed before the
pronouncing of this prayer, that they are already become in sort before
expressed, the body and blood of Christ, which is in heaven, we do not in
these words desire any such thing to be done, but this is that we say, Lord
we here commemorate the death and sacrifice of thy Son Christ, that once
died for us, and now continually represents the same his death unto thee, to
procure us good, humbly beseeching thee, that for his sake thus dying for us,
and now continually in heaven representing himself unto thee, and setting the
same his passions and sufferings before the eyes of thy Divine Majesty, as if
even now he did hang on the Cross, all evil may be far removed from us,
and all good brought upon us. And that all we that by communicating in these
holy mysteries, receive the body and blood of the same thy Son Christ, may be
filled with all heavenly benediction and grace. So that to command the
sacrifice of Christ's body and blood once offered, and here by us commemorated,
to be carried into heaven, and to be represented unto God, is no more but to
make it appear, that that body of Christ which he once offered by the passion
of death, and which we now commemorate, is in Heaven, there so represented unto
God, that it procures for us all that we desire.

There is nothing therefore found in the Canon of the Mass rightly understood,
that makes any thing, for the new real offering of Christ to God his Father,
as a propitiatory sacrifice to take away sins, neither did the Church of
God, at, and before Luthers time, know or believe any such thing, though there
were some in the midst of her, that so conceived of this mystery, as the
Romanists now do. Wherefore for the clearing of this point I will first set down
what the conceit of the Romanists now is, and then make it appear, that all
the best learned, at, and before Luthers time, thought otherwise touching this
matter then these now do.

These that now are, express their conceit touching this point in this sort.
First they show what an oblation is. Secondly, what the nature of a sacrifice
is. And thirdly how and in what sort they imagine, Christ is now newly, and
really, not offered only, but sacrificed also to take away our sins. An
oblation they rightly define to be, the bringing of some thing that we have
into the place where the name of God is called on, and where his honor
dwells; a representing of it there unto God, a professing that we will own
it no longer, but that God shall be the owner of it, that it shall be holy
unto him, to be employed about his service, if it be an irrational thing; or
to serve him in some special sort, if it be rational, as when parents
presented and offered their children to God, to be holy unto him as were the
Nazarits, who were to serve him in some peculiar and special sort: and in this
sort Christ presented, and gave himself to God his father, from his first
entrance into this world, and was holy unto him, and an oblation. But in this
sort it is not for us to offer Christ to God his father, whatsoever any Papist
may imagine. For it were a woeful thing for us so to give up Christ to his
father, as to profess that we will own him no longer, nor have any interest
in him, nor claim to him, any more. And besides, if it were fit for us so to
do, yet who are we that we should present Christ unto God his father, to be
holy unto him? that so presented and gave himself unto him, from his first
entrance into the world, that he brings us also to God, to be holy unto
him. A sacrifice implies more than an oblation. For if we will sacrifice a
thing unto God, we must not only present it unto him, professing that it
shall be his, and that we will own it no more, nor make any claim unto it;
but we must destroy, and consume it also. As we see in the old law, when
living things were sacrificed, they were slain and consumed in fire; when
other that had no life were sacrificed, they were consumed in fire. And
answerably hereunto, Christ was sacrificed on the cross, when he was
crucified, and cruelly put to death by the Jews. But how he should now be
really sacrificed, sacrificing implying in it a destruction of the thing
sacrificed, it is very hard to conceive. First therefore they say, that Christ
may truly be said to be really sacrificed; because when the words of
consecration, are pronounced over the bread, they so cause the body of Christ
to be, where the bread was, that they cause not the presence of the blood; and
in like sort the words, pronounced over the wine, cause the presence of Christ's
blood, and not of his body, so that upon the pronouncing of the words of
consecration; there would be in the sacrament the body of Christ without the
blood, and the blood without the body, and so a slain, and a crucified
Christ, if that natural concomitance, by reason whereof the one of them will
not be absent, where the other becomes present, did not hinder their being
asunder. Thus then they say, there is a true real sacrificing of Christ, in
that, as much as is on the part of the words pronounced, and him that
pronounces them, Christ's blood is again powered out, and he consequently
slain. This is the conceit of Gregorius de Valentia: and in this sort he
imagines Christ is daily, newly sacrificed on the altar: But (besides that it
is an impious thing, for the priest to endeavor as much as in him lies to slay
Christ, and to power out his blood again) this proves not a real sacrificing
of Christ, but only an endeavor so to do. For his blood is not powered out,
neither is he slain indeed. So that as in the time of the old law, if the
priest reaching forth his hand, to slay the beast that was brought to be
sacrificed, had been so hindered by something interposing it self, that he
could not slay the same, he had offered no sacrifice, but endeavored only so
to do; so is it here. Bellarmine therefore rejects this conceit, and has
another of his own. For he says, that Christ has a two fold being: the one
natural, the other sacramental. The Jews had him present amongst them
visibly, in his natural being; this being they destroyed, and so killed, and
sacrificed him. The Romish Priests have him not so present, neither can they
destroy his natural being, and so kill him; but they have him present in a
sacramental presence, and in a sacramental being, this being they destroy.
For consuming the accidents of bread and wine, which are there left without
substance, and with which he is present, they make his presence there to
cease, and so cause him to loose that being, which formerly he there had.
Thus do they suppose that they newly sacrifice Christ, and destroy him in that
being, wherein he is present with them, And the Priests eating, is not for
refection, but for consumption, that he may destroy Christ in that being,
wherein he is present; as the fire on the altar, was wont to consume, and
destroy the bodies of those beasts, that were put into it. But first it is
impious to think of destroying CHRIST in any sort. For though it be true,
that in sacrificing of Christ on the altar of the cross, the destroying and
killing of him was employed, and this his death was the life of the world; yet
all that concurred to the killing of him: as the Jews, the Roman soldiers,
Pilate and Judas, sinned damnably, and so had done, though they had shed his
blood, with an intention, and desire, that by it the world might be redeemed.
So in like sort, let the Romish priests have what intention they will, it is
hellish and damnable, once to think of the destroying of Christ in any sort.
And besides, if it were lawful for them so to do, yet all that they do, or
can do, is not sufficient to make good a real sacrificing of CHRIST. Because
all they do, or can do, is noe destroying of his being, but only of his
being somewhere, that is, in the Sacrament. For as if the things which were
brought to be sacrificed in the time of the Law, had been only removed out of
some place, into which they were brought, or only caused to cease to be,
where they were, and not what they were; they could not truly have been said
to have been sacrificed: no more can it be truly said, that Christ is really
sacrificed, in that the priests consuming the accidents of bread and wine,
under which they supposed him to be, make him cease to be there any longer.

Having thus in their erring imaginations framed to themselves a real
sacrificing of Christ, they begin to dispute of the force and efficacy of it
affirming that this real offering, and sacrificing of CHRIST by the a Bellar
de mi^. l. 2. c. 4.
priest, is propitiatory in that it pacifieth God, and procures and obtains
grace, and the gift of repentance, that the sinner may come to the sacrament,
and so be justified: satisfactorie, in that it applies the satisfaction of
Christ, and procures remission of temporal punishments, to them that by faith
and repentance are already free, from the guilt of eternal condemnation;
meritorious, because it obtains that grace, whereby we may merit; and
impetratory, in that it obtains for us, and procures to us, all desired
good. This force and efficacy they say it has, ex opere operato, that is, the
very offering and sacrificing of Christ in sort before expressed, of it self
has force and power, to obtain and procure grace, remission of sins, and
the like, for all them for whom such offering is made; if there be no
hinderance or impediment in themselves. And that God has tied himself by
promise, to confer such gifts, and work such effects, so often as the body
and blood of his son shall be thus offered. And farther they add, that it
conferreth good and remoueth evil, not infinitely, but in a stinted and
limited sort. Nor in that limited sort equally in respect of all, but in
proportionable sort, as the intendment of the Church is to apply this sacrifice
more or less, to the procuring of more or less. And that therefore the
benefitte that this sacrifice procures, is in one degree communicated to all
faithful ones living and dead; in another to such, as by the Churches
appointment are specially named, as the Pope, King, and Bishop or the like;
in another to them that procure the offering of this sacrifice: in another to
them that are present and stand by: in another to them that minister and
attend; in another to the priest that sacrifices: and in another to whomsoever
it pleases the priest, to impart and communicate the benefitte and effect of
this sacrifice. For as Gregorius de Valentia alleges out of ^ Scotus, it is
to be thought, that the priest that is the minister of this sacrifice, may
apply to whom he will, not only that which by worth b Quodli. 2^.
of his personal merit, in the religious performing of this service he may
deserve, but some part also of that effect which this sacrifice has ex opere
operato: and that God has committed unto him the effect which it has in this
kind, in some degree and sort, to be dispensed by him to whom he thinks
good, in recompense of his service. And further they resolve, that those
effects which this sacrifice has ex opere operato, and are by the intendment
of the Church, communicated in different sort, and degree, to those diverse
sorts of men before specified, are equally communicated to each of those sorts,
according to their several differences, whether the sacrifice be offered for
more or fewer. As they that procure Mass to be said for them, whether they be
more or fewer, shall have like effects wrought in them. But that portion of
this efficacy, force, and power of working gracious effects, that is committed
to the disposition, and distribution of the Priest, is so limited, that
accordingly as he intends good, to more, or fewer, he procures more, or
less unto them. Here we see a goodly frame of building raised, but it has
an ill foundation, for it is most absurd to say, that the very offering of
Christ's body and blood, ex opere operato, and of it self, should have force to
obtain any thing at Gods hand, or to procu^e any good unto us. For there is no
offering that can have any acceptance unless it be offered by an accepted
offerer, according to that in the 4^ of Gen^sis, God had respect to Abel and to
his offering; first to Abel, and then to his offering; and that in the 21th of
Luke, where Christ says; this poor widow has cast in more into the
treasury then any of the rest; because she cast it in, out of a larger, more
free, better, and more accepted will. And hereupon Saint Gregory, in his
Homily on that of Matthew 4. Jesus walking, etc. says, non pensat Deus quantum
in eius sacrificio deferatur, sed ex quanto: that is, God does not so much
weigh and consider how much, or how good that is which is presented to him in
sacrifice, as out of how great and good affection it is presented. And
therefore if a Jew had offered Christ unto his father, willing so to be
offered, or not willing, this oblation had not been so acceptable, as when he
offered himself: nay it had not been accepted at all, according to that in
Cap. 34.
Ecclesiasticus, He that offers sacrifice out of the substance of the poor,
is as he that slays, and sacrifices the son in the sight of his father.
And Bellarmine says well to the same purpose, that though d De Miss. l. 2. c. 4
the thing offered be acceptable of it self, yet the oblation is not
acceptable, unless the offerer be accepted, which is especially true in
respect of God, whose all things are, and who needs nothing. So that in this
supposed sacrifice, the worthiness and acceptance of the offerer, is
principally to be considered, for it is not so much the worth of the thing
offered, as the esteem the offerer has of it, and his good affection in
offering it, that God respects. Who therefore is the offerer of this their
supposed sacrifice? They will say, Christ is the supreme, and the Priest the
inferior, and subordinate: and that therefore whatsoever the condition of the
Priest be, the sacrifice is accepted for the principal offerers sake. But
this is nothing, for though Christ be offered on the Altar, as they imagine,
yet he does not offer himself immediately. For then this offering would be
equivalent to that former on the Cross, which yet they will not acknowledge.
And besides, that of the Apostle should be found false and untrue, Heb. 9. that
he does not often offer himself. Neither can it be said, that Christ
offers himself mediatly by the Priest, and so gives price and worth to the
offering. For if it be said that Christ offers himself mediatly by the
Priest, either it is because he appoints, authoriseth, and encourages the
Priest to make this offering, and this will give no more value and worth to the
offering then the immediate offerer has, as we see it was in the offerings of
the Priest under the Law: or else in that the Priest does this in his name, as
a Legate presents a thing to a foreign Prince, in the name of the King; and
this cannot be; for whatsoever a legate may do, in the name and person of his
king, the king may do in his own person, if it please him; but Christ can no
more offer himself in his own person, therefore this is not to be admitted.
Wherefore passing by this idle phancie, we shall find, that the of^erer is
the priest, and so many as do procure, or desire the doing of the same; and
that therefore the whole Church in a sort, may be said to offer this sacrifice.
For though it be offered ministerio sacerdotis, by the ministry of the Priest,
yet it is offered voto ecclesiae, out of the devotion and desire of the Church,
in which there are ever some found, that are acceptable unto God; and therefore
the offerer of this sacrifice is ever acceptable: and according to the merit,
and worthiness of this offerer, the sacrifice here offered finds
acceptance. So then these men imagine, that there is a real, external
sacrifice in the Church, which they daily offer unto God; that it works great
effects of grace; that Christ is offered in it; but that the acceptance of it,
is not wholly, nor principally from the dignity of the thing offered, but from
the merit of the offerer.

This is the present doctrine of the Roman Church: but this was not the
doctrine of the Church at the time of Luthers appearing: for the best and
principal men that then lived, taught peremptorily, that Christ is not newly
offered any otherwise, then in that he is offered to the view of God; nor any
otherwise sacrificed, then in that his sacrifice on the cross, is commemorated
and represented. The things that are offered in the sacrament are two (says
the author of the Enchiridion of Christian religion, published in the
provincial council of Colen:) the true body of Christ with all his merits,
and his mystical body, with all the gifts which it has received of God. In
that therefore the Church does offer, the true body and blood of Christ to God
the father, it is merely a representative sacrifice, and all that is done, is
but the commemorating, and representing of that sacrifice, which was once
offered on the cross. But in that it dedicateth itself, which is the
mystical body of Christ unto God, it is a true, but a spiritual sacrifice,
that is, an eucharisticall sacrifice of praise, thanksgiving, and of obedience
due unto God. Christ therefore is offered and sacrificed on the altar, but
sacramentally and mystically: in that in the sacrament there is a commemoration
and remembrance of that which was once done. Christ is not often slain, which
once to think were abominable; but that which was once done is represented,
that we might not forget the benefit bestowed on us, but rather be so stirred
up and moved by this sacrament, as if we saw the Lord Jesus hanging upon the
cross. The passion of the Lord, says Epist. ad Cae^ilianum.
Cyprian, is the sacrifice that we offer to God, that is, that we offer to
the view of God, and represent unto him. page 68.
Neither is it to be marvailed at, that we offer the true body of Christ, to
reviue the memory of the former sacrifice, and to represent it unto God: seeing
the son of God was given unto us, that we might oppose him to the wrath of
God, as a reconciler, and that distrusting our own strength, we might
represent to the father, this most potent sacrifice. In cant. sermon. 22.
Cum defecerit, says Bernard, virtus mea, non conturbor, non diffido, scio
quid faciam: calicem salutaris accipiam. That is, When my strength shall fail,
I will not be troubled, neither will I despair. I know what I will do, I
will take the cup of salvation. And in another place. Sermon. 1. de Epi^h.
Totum quod dare possum miserum corpus istud est, id si minus est, addo and
corpus ipsius. Nam illud de meo est, and meum est: parvulus enim natus est
nobis, and filius datus est mihi, de te Domine suppleo, quod minus habeo in me.
O dulcissima reconciliatio! O suavissima satisfactio! That is, All that I can
give is this miserable body, if that be too little, I add his body, for that is
of mine, and it is mine: a little child is borne unto us, a son is given unto
me; from thee I take o Lord to supply what I find wanting in my self. O most
sweet reconciliation! O most sweet satisfactoin! Who does not see, that God
does by such a faith as that is, that is Paulo post.
exercised in the celebration of this representative sacrifice, and in the
eating of the body of Christ, the sufferings whereof are here represented,
apply the benefit of Christ his dearest son to his faithful ones. Neither
do we attribute this application to the priest, but to God, nor to our work,
but to Gods benefit. Which yet we receive no otherwise but by faith, with the
assent of our own will. Hitherto we have heard the words of the author of
the Enchiridion, and the same author page 66.
els-where says, that the orthodoxe divines, deny the external action which
we call the sacramental oblation, to confer grace, or to have any
spiritual effect, ex opere operato. It is true, says he, that a wicked man
may pronounce the words of Christ, and so make the elements of bread and wine,
to become the sacrament of the Lords body and blood, and this sacrament ex
opere operato, that is, out of the very nature of a sacrament, and of it self,
how ill soever the minister be, will confer grace instrumentally, to all
such as receive it, without such indisposition, as might hinder the working of
it. But if we speak of the offering of Christ representatiuely, it has no
force farther then the faith of the offerer extends. If the priest therefore
not only outwardly, but inwardly also, by the act of faith, present the
sufferings of Christ in the body of his flesh to God, in desire by the merit
thereof, to escape his wrath: he brings much good upon himself: and if he
devoutly beseech God for his Christ's sake, whose sufferings he represents
unto him, to be merciful to the people committed to his charge, or to any
other, there is no doubt but this his prayer, in the nature of a prayer, is
most powerful to obtain in this kind. But if he be wicked, and faithles,
his representative offering of Christ, of and merely in respect of it self,
works no good to himself, nor any other. For in the representative offering
of Christ's passion to God, must be included, a supplication made to God for
that passion sake, and a desire of those good things that we need. Now the
prayer of such a sinner God hears not, but the people spiritually
representing unto God by the act of their faith, that which the priest does
sacramentally, obtain all desired good, and the removing of all evil, not by
force of that the priest does, but by their own faith, which is stirred up by
that outward act done by him.

The most reverend Canons of the Metropoliticall Church of Colen, agree with
the author of the Enchiridion: their words are these. page 88. and 89.
Consecratione facta in missa, Christus Dominus qui seipsum aliquando in
corpore suo mortali Deo patri coelesti cruentum sacrificium pro peccatis mundi
obtulit, denuo totius ecclesiae nomine, modo incruento, spirituali
representatione, and commemoratione sacratissimae suae passionis, offertur:
quod ipsum fit, quando ecclesia Christum and eius verum corpus, verumque
sanguinem, Deo Patri cum gratiarum action, and oratione attenta, pro suis and
totius mundi peccatis proponit, seu repraesentat: quanquam enim sacrificium
illud, in ea forma qua in cruce offerebatur, semel tantum oblatum sit, and
semel tantum sanguis effusus; vt ita repeti, iterumque offerri non possit;
nihilominus tamen consistit, and manet tale sacrificium coram Deo, perpetuo in
sua virtute and efficacia acceptum; ita vt sacrificium illud in cruce oblatum,
non minus hodierno die in conspectu patris sit efficax, and vigens, quam eo die
quo de saucio latere sanguis exiuit and aqua. Quapropter cum vulnerati corporis
nostri plagae pretio redemptionis semper opus habeant, ecclesia proponit Deo
Patri pretium illud, in vera fide and devotione iterum, sed figurative, and
spiritualiter, ad consequendam remissionem peccatorum: non quod huic operi suo,
quo videlicet commem or at and repraesentat sacrificium illius, meritum
ascribat remissionis peceatorum, vt quam solus Christus cruenta sua oblatione
in cruce nobis promeruit; verum tali suo commemoratiuo, and mystico fidei
sacrificio, in quo repraesentat ecclesia, and sistit in conspectum patris verum
corpus and sanguinem eius vnigeniti, applicat sibi and accommodat magnum illud
donatiuum remissionis peccatorum, quod Christus impetravit, cum accipiat
remissionem peccatorum per nomen eius, qui credit in eum, Act. 10. That is; So
soon as the consecration is done in the Mass, Christ the Lord who sometime
offered himself in his mortal body a bloody sacrifice to God his heavenly
father, for the sins of the whole world, is now offered again after an unbloody
manner, by representation and commemoration of his most sacred passion; which
thing is then done, when the Church does propose and represent, Christ and his
true body' and blood to God the Father with thanksgiving, and with earnest
prayer for the remission of her sins, and the sins of the whole world: for
although that sacrifice in such sort as it was offered on the Cross, was
offered only once, and his blood only once powered forth, so that he can no
more be so offered: yet notwithstanding that sacrifice remains and abides
before God perpetually, in its virtue and efficacy; and is so acceptable unto
him, that being but once offered on the Cross, it is no less effectual, and
of force in the sight of God to day, then it was that day, when water and blood
streamed out of his wounded side. Wherefore seeing the soars and hurts of our
wounded bodies, have always need of the price of redemption, the Church
proposes to God in faith and devotion that price again, but figuratively and
spiritually, to obtain remission of sin, not as if she did ascribe to this
her work, whereby she commemorateth, and represents that his sacrifice, the
meriting of remission of sins, which Christ only merited for us, by his
bloody sacrifice on the Cross; but by such her commemoratiue and mystical
sacrifice of faith, in which she represents and sets before the eyes of
God the Father, the true body and blood of his only begotten Son, she
applies to her self that great donatiue of remission of sins, which Christ
obtained, it being so that every one that believes in him, receives remission
of sins by his Name, as it is in the 10th of the Acts.

(...). (...) Caesare proposit. ad rationem concordiae incundam in
controversiis religionis artic. 1 9. apud Goldast. imperialium constitutionum
tom. 2. page 1^7.
In the book proposed by Charles the 5th, written by certain learned and
godly men, much commended to him by men worthy to be credited, as opening a
way for the composing of the controversies in Religion, we shall find the same
explication of this point, touching the sacrifice, that I have already
delivered out of the former authors; the words are these. Omnis ecclesia
missam, in qu^ verum corpus and verus sanguis Christi conficitur, sacrificium
esse consentit; sed incruentum and spirituale; in ea enim (modo religiose, and
pie agatur,) Deo quatuor spiritualiter offeruntur. Initio enim Christus, qui
seipsum patri in mortali corpore, cruentam, sufficientem, and beneplacentem,
pro totius mundi peccatis hostiam, cruci affixus obtulit, idem ille in missa,
totius ecclesiae nomine, repraesentativo sacrificio, eidem deo patri immolatur;
quod certe fit, cum ecclesia illum, eiusque verum corpus and sanguinem, Deo
patri pro totius mundi peccatis pia prece sistit: nam etsi oblatio illa in
cruce semel facta, transiit non reiterabilis; victima tamen ipsa immolata
perpetua virtute consistit, vt non minus hodie in conspectu patris oblatio
illa, in iis qui eum Deo religiosa fide repraesentant, sit efficax, quam eo die
quo de sacro latere, sanguis and aqua exivit. In quam sententiam patres corpus
and sanguinem Christi in altari praesentia, nunc pretium pro peccatis totius
mundi, nunc pretium redemptionis nostrae, nunc victimam salutarem appellare
consueverunt. Et Chrysostomus testatur nos eandem hostiam, quae semel oblata
est, in sancta sanctorum semper offerre, at que unum esse utrobique
sacrificium, unum Christum, and hic plenum existentem, and illic plenum; sic
tamen ut quod nos agimus sacrificium exemplar sit illius, in commemorationem
eius, quod factum est semel. Nec ab re, Deus enim in hoc donavit nobis Christum
Iesum Filium suum, ut de nostris viribus diffisi ^deque nostris peccatis nobis
probe conscii, illum tanquam unicam and potissimam victimam pro nostris
peccatis satisfactoriam Deo patri repraesentemus: ipse enim natus est, ipse
datus est nobis, ut quicunque in eum credimus, non pereamus, sed pacem cum Deo
reconciliati per sanguinem eius habeamus. Secundo, Ecclesia in hoc missae
sacrificio seipsam quoque, quatenus Christi corpus mysticum est, per Christum
Deo offerre, non dubitat. Tertio, In missa sacrificium laudis offertur.
Postremo Ecclesia and dona quaedam, tam panis quam vini, ex quibus partim
corpus and san^uis Christi conficiebantur, offerebat, partim and eleemosynae
fiebant: and iustum est quod populus in hoc sacrificio se non tantum verbis deo
consecret, sed and symbolo aliquo externo testetur, quod se totum dedicet Deo.
Nam is mos in Ecclesiis pene abolitus est; cum olim omnibus diebus dominicis,
panis and vinum, and res aliae, ab omnibus tum viris tum mulieribus, ad altar
offerebantur, quemadmodum decreta quae Fabiano tribuuntur testantnr, that is,
The whole Church does consent, that the mass in which the bread and wine are
consecrated, to become the true body and blood of Christ, is a sacrifice, but
unbloody and spiritual, for in it (if it be Godly and religiously celebrated,)
four things are spiritually offered unto God. For first Christ himself, who
being fastened to the cross offered himself to his Father in his mortal
body, a bloody, sufficient, and well pleasing sacrifice for the sins of the
whole world, is in the mass offered to the same God his Father, in the name of
the whole Church, by a representative oblation: which thing truly is then done,
when the Church piously, to entreat mercy for the sins of the whole world,
presents him and his true body and blood to God the Father: for although that
oblation that was once made on the cross be past and cannot be reiterated, yet
the thing that was then sacrificed and offered abides, having a never failing
virtue and efficacy: so that that oblation, in them that by a religious faith
do represent it unto God, is no less effectual and prevailing, to procure
them favor in the sight of God, then it was that day, that water and blood
streamed out of his sacred side. And in this sense the fathers are wont
sometimes to call the body and blood of Christ present on the altar, the price
for the sins of the whole world, sometimes the price of our redemption,
sometimes the sacrifice that brings salvation. And Chrysostom witnesses,
that we continually and daily offer the same sacrifice, that was once offered
and presented into the holiest of all; and that both there and here there is one
sacrifice, one Christ, perfect here, and perfect there; yet so, that that which
we do is but a representation, and done in remembrance of that which was once
there done: and this not unfitly; for therefore did God give us Christ Jesus
his son, that distrusting our own strength and being guilty to our selves of
many sins, we might represent and set him in the sight of God the Father, as
the only and most excellent satisfactorie sacrifice for our sins. For he was
borne, and he was given unto us, that whosoever of us believe in him, might not
perish, but might have peace with God, being reconciled by his blood. Secondly
the Church in this sacrifice of the mass, doubts not to offer it self as
the mystical body of Christ, unto God by Christ. Thirdly, in it is offered the
sacrifice of praise. Lastly, the Church was wont to offer certain gifts, of
bread and wine, out of which some part was consecrated, to become the body and
blood of Christ to the faithful people, and the rest was given in alms to the
poor. And truly it is very just and right, that the people in this sacrifice,
should not consecrate themselves to God in words only, but so as to testify
by some outward symbol, that they wholly dedicate themselves to God; and
therefore it is not well, that this custom is almost utterly abolished;
whereas aunciently every Lords day, bread and wine and other things were
offered on the altar, both by men and women, as the decrees attributed to Pope
Fabian do testify. After this follow these words in the same place. I am si
canon ille missae in hunc quem diximus sensum intelligatur, nihil habet
incommodi, superstitiosa tantum absit opinio quia quidam de natura and energia
huius sanctissimi sacrificii male edocti, virtutem eius ex solo externo opere
quod facit Sacerdos, in se deriuari putabant, tametsi illi nullam viuam fidem
adferrent, nullam pietatem adhiberent, nulla communione vel precum seu
orationis, sacrificio assensum praeberent: quales erant qui nulla suae nefandae
impietatis and execrandorum flagitiorum habita ratione se huic sacratissimae
and diuinissimae actioni damnabiliter miscuerunt, missam solius externi operis
quod sacerdos facit virtute prodesse put antes, etsi ipsi nihil probae mentis
adferrent. That is, If the canon of the Mass be understood in this sense
which we have expressed, there is no evil in it; so that men have no
superstitious conceit of things: for there were some, who being ill instructed
touching the nature of this sacrament, supposed that virtue might be derived
unto them, by the sole externe action of the priest, although they brought no
lively faith, no piety, nor gave any consent to the sacrifice, by any communion
so much as of prayer: of which sort they were, who having no consideration of
their own horrible impieties, and evils committed by them, persevering in the
purpose of sinning damnably, presumed to be present at this most holy action,
and put themselves in a sort into it, persuading themselves that the mass, by
the virtue of the externe work of the priest alone would do them good, though
they brought no motions, affections, or desires of a good mind with them.

Hosius Tom: (...). cap. 41. page ^4.
Hosius was of the same opinion with these before recited: When the priest
(says he) lifts up the eucharist, let men remember that sacrifice wherein
Christ being lifted up to the cross, offered himself to God a sacrifice for
us. Let them think how bitter the torments were that he sustained, and let
them know that men's sins were the cause of such his sufferings; let them greiue
as it is fit they should for them, and let them show by all means that they
hate them. And because by his precious death he has so fully satisfied for
all sins, that there are none that are not abolished; let them with good
assurance and considence, go unto the throne of grace; and whereas we have no
merit of our own, let them plead that of Christ, let them present that his
body that did hang on the cross, and his blood which was shed for the
remission of our sins, to God the Father, and let them humbly beseech him to
turn away his face from their sins, and to look upon the face of his son
Christ, who bare our infirmities, to look upon his face, for his merit to
remit their sins, and to grant that they may derive unto themselves, all
that fruit which that sacrifice of the cross that is represented on the
altar, brought to the world, Thus he says the people were taught by our
forefathers, and this he says is enough for them to know. Notwithstanding he
shows, that Michael Bishop of Merspurg^nsis de mis^ae sa (...) sermon. (...).
Christum ^n (...). (...) ^dendo off^mus Deo sed (...) mysterio and spi^ali
ratione.
Merspurge, a man learned, godly, and truly catholic published certain
sermons touching the sacrifice of the mass^, which he wishes to be in the
hands of all men; in these sermons the same explication is made of the
sacrament so often mentioned, that I have already delivered. And with him
agrees another learned Bishop Thomas Watson sometimes Bishop of Lincoln in
his Sermon. 12.
sermons upon the seven sacraments; his words are these.

Christ in heaven and we his mystical body on earth do but one thing: for
Christ being a Priest for evermore, after his passion and resurrection entered
into heaven, and there appears now to the countenance of God for us; offering
himself for us, to pacify the anger of God against us, and representing his
passion and all that he suffered for us, that we might be reconciled to God by
him: even so the Church our mother being careful for us her children that
Greg. (...). ^7.
have offended our father in heaven, uses continually by her public minister
to pray and to offer unto God the body and blood of her husband Christ;
representing and renewing his passion and death before God, that we thereby
might be renewed in grace, and receive life, perfection, and salvation: and
after the same sort the holy Angels of God, in the time of this our sacrifice
do (...).
assist the priest and stand about the host, thinking that the meetest time to
show their charity toward us and therefore holding forth the body of Christ
pray for mankind, as saying thus, Lord we pray for them whom thou have so
loved that for their salvation thou have suffered death, and spent thy life
upon the cross; we make supplication for them, for whom thou have shed this
thy blood, we pray for them for whom thou have offered this same thy very body.
In that hour when Christ's death is renewed in mystery and his most Chrysostom. in
Act. hom. 3.
fearful and acceptable sacrifice is represented to the sight of God, then
sits the King on his Mercie-seat, inclined to give and forgive whatsoever is
demanded and asked of him in humble manner. In the presence of this Cyprian.
sermon. de Coena.
body and blood of our Savior Christ, the tears of a meek and humble man
never beg pardon in vain, nor the sacrifice of a contrite heart is never put
back, but has his lawful desires granted and given. By resorting to this
sacrifice of the mass, we evidently declare and protest before God and the
whole world, that we put our singular and only trust of grace and salvation in
Christ our Lord, for the merits of his death and his passion, and not for the
worthiness of any good work that we have done, or can do, and that we make
his passion our only refuge. For when wisdom fails, which only comes by
the doctrine of Bern. in Cant. sermon. 22.
Christ; when righteousness lacks, which only is gotten by the mercy of
Christ; when virtue cease, which only is received from him who is the Lord
of all virtue, then for supplying of these our lacks and needs, our refuge is
to Christ's passion, then we run, as the Prophet says, to the cup of our
Savior Psalm. 115.
and call upon the Name of our Lord: that is to say, we take his passion, and
offer to God the Father in mystery, the work of our redemption, that by this
Aug. in Psalm. 75
memory and commemoration of it, it would please his merciful goodness to
innovate his grace in us, and to replenish us with the fruit of his Sonns
passion. We are become debtors to Almighty God for our manifold sins and
iniquities done against him, we can never pay this debt, no scarce one farthing
of a 1000 pounds, what remedy then have we but to run to the rich man our
neighbor that has enough to pay for us all; I mean Christ our Lord, who has
paid his heart blood, for no debt of his own, but for our debt: and there
whiles we celebrate the memory of his passion, we acknowledge and confess our
sins, which be without number, and grant, that we are not able to satisfy
for the least of them, and therefore beseech our merciful Father to accept in
full payment and satisfaction of our debts, his passion, which after this sort
as he has ordained to be done in the sacrifice of the mass, we renew and
represent before him; and where our sinful life has altogether displeased
him, we offer unto him his well-beloved Son with whom we are sure he is well
pleased, most humbly making supplication to accept him for us, in whom only we
put all our trust, accounting him all our righteousness, and the author of our
salvation. Thus does the Church daily renew in mystery the passion of Christ,
and does represent it before God in the holy mass, for the attaining of all
the graces and benefits purchased by the same passion before, after the
measure of his goodness: and as our faith and devotion is known unto him. And
again, The Church offers Christ Gods Son, to God the Father, that is,
represents to the Father the body and blood of Christ, which by his
omnipotency he has there made present, and thereby renews his passion not
by suffering of death again, but after an unbloody manner, not for this end
that we should thereby deserve remission of sins, and deliverance from the
power of the devil, which is the proper effect of Christ's passion, but that we
should by faith, devotion, and this representation of his passion, obtain
remission and grace already deserved by his passion to be now applied to our
profit and salvation etc. not that we can apply the merits of Christ's death as
we list, and to who^ we list, but that we by the representation of his passion,
most humbly make petition and prayer to Almighty God to apply unto us the
remission and grace which was purchased and deserved by Christ's passion before,
after the measure of his goodness, and as our faith and devotion is known unto
him. The thing offered both in the sacrifice of Christ on the Cross, and in
the sacrifice of the Church on the Altar is all one in substance being the
natural body of Christ our high Priest, and the price and ransom of our
redemption, but the manner and effects of these two offerings are diverse, the
one is by the shedding of Christ's blood extending to the death of Christ the
offerer for the redemption of all mankind; the other is without shedding of his
blood, only representing his death whereby the faithful and devout people are
made partakers of the merits of Christ's passion.

Hitherto the Bishop of Lincoln, and to the same purpose the ^
Author of the Enchiridion of Christian religion has these words. Diligenter
ergo haec omnia nobis intuentibus, nihil vel absurdi, vel scrupulosi in toto
missae contextu occurret, sedomnia (praesertim quae canon complectitur)
pietatis plenissima ac plane reuerenda (vt sunt) videbuntur. Aut enim Ecclesia
respicit ad corpus and sanguinem Christi, pro se in cruce oblata, and vi
omnipotentis verbi in altari praesentia, and non veretur haec appellare hostiam
puram, hostiam sanctam, hostiam immaculatam, panem sanctum vitae aeternae, and
calicem salutis perpetuae; aut ad oblationem repraesentatiuam, and
commemoratiuam passionis seu corporis Christi very, (quae fide misericordiam
per Christum apprehendente and redemptionem quae est in Christo deo patri
opponente peragitur:) and non dubitat hoc sacrificium laudis offerre, pro se
suisque omnibus pro spe salutis and incolumitatis suae; nimirum spem salutis
and incolumitatis, ac redemptionem animarum, debitalaude ac gratiarum action
deo accepta referens; petitque vt hanc oblationem seruitutis suae Deus placatus
accipiat, diesque nostros in sua pace disponat, atque ab aeterna damnatione nos
eripi, et in electorum suorum grege iubeat numerari, non quidem ex meritis
nostris, aut ex dignitate nostrae seruitutis, sed per Christum dominum nostrum.
that is, If we rightly look into these things, nothing will occur unto us,
in the whole context of the mass, that may justly seem absurd, or cause any
scruple, but all things there found, especially such as are contained in the
canon, will appear unto us, as they are indeed, full of piety, and much to be
reverenced; for either the Church has respect, to the body and blood of Christ
offered for her on the cross, and by force of his Almighty word, present on
the altar, and so fears not to call these a pure host, an holy host, an
immaculate host, the holy bread of eternal life, and the cup of eternal
salvation; or else she has an eye to the representative and commemoratiue
oblation, of the passion or true body of Christ, which consists in faith,
apprehending mercy by Christ, and opposing unto God the redemption that is in
Christ, and so she doubts not to offer this sacrifice of praise, for her
self and all her members, for the hope of her salvation and safety; that is,
with all due praise and thanksgiving she acknowledges that she has
received from GOD, the hope of salvation, safety, and the redemption of the
souls of her sons and daughters, and desires that God will take in good
part this oblation of her service and bounden duty, that he will dispose our
days in peace, that he will deliver us from eternal condemnation, and that
he will make us to be numbered with his elect, not for our merits or the
worthiness of this service, but thorough Christ our Lord.

With these ^.
Georgius Wicelius, a man much honored by the Emperors Ferdinand and
Maximilian, fully agrees; defining the mass to be a sacrifice rememoratiue,
and of praise and thanksgiving; and in another place he says, the mass is a
commemoration of the passion of Christ celebrated in the public ^.
assembly of Christians, where many give thinks for the price of redemption.
With these agrees the Interim published by Charles the fifth in the the
assembly ^.
of the states of the Empire at Augusta March 15t 1548 and there accepted by
the same states.

But some man happily will say, here are many authorities alleged, to prove
that sundry worthy divines in the Roman Church, in Luthers time, denied the new
real offering, or sacrificing of Christ, and made the sacrifice of the altar
to be only representative, and commemoratiue, but before his time there were
none found so to teach. Wherefore I will show the consent of the Church to
have been clear for us to uching this point, before his time, and against the
Tridentine doctrine now prevailing.

Bonaventura in his exposition of the mass has these words. The body of
Christ is elevated and lifted up in the mass for diverse causes; but the first
and principal is, that we may obtain and regaine the favor of God the
Father which we have lost by our sins, for there is nothing that offends
God and provokes him to be dipleased but sin only, as the Psalmist says,
they provoked and displeased God with their inventions: the Priest therefore
lifts up the body of Christ on the altar, as if he should thus say. O
heavenly Father, we have sinned and provoked thee to anger, but now look on
the face of Christ thy son, whom we present unto thee to move thee to turn
from thy wrath and displeasure, to mercy and grace; turn not away thy face
therefore from this thy holy child Jesus, from this thy son, but remember
that thou have said of this same thy son; this is my well-beloved son in whom
I am well pleased: correct therefore mercifully in us, whatsoever thou find
in us fit to be corrected, and turn us unto thee and turn thy wrath from us.

The question is proposed, says Epistola 1. contra Petrobusianos.
Petrus Cluniacensis, why this sacrifice is so often repeated, seeing Christ
once offered on the cross, is sufficient to take away the sins of the whole
world, especially seeing here and there, not a diverse, but the same sacrifice,
that is, the same Christ, is offered. For if that on the cross sufficed, this
seems to be supefluous; but it is not superfluous etc. for after he had
said do this, he adds in remembrance of me. This then is the cause of this
Sacrament, even the commemoration of CHRIST. Our Savior knew what he had
done, and what he would do for man; he knew how great and singular that
work was which he had done, in putting on the nature of man; he knew how
wonderful that work would be that he was to do, when he should die for
man; he knew that by this work he should save man; but that noe man could be
saved without the love of this work; he knew that this work of his becoming
man, and dying for man, as it was renowned above all his works, so it was
especially to be recommended unto men, for whom it was done: it was specially
to be commended to them, seeing his flesh was tormented for them, his soul
grieved and death seized on him, that they might live; this was solemnly to be
commended unto them, that Christ might be beloved, that being beloved, he
might be possessed, that being once had, he might never be lost. But this
love of him could not have been retained by men, if they should-haue forgotten
him, neither could they have retained the memory of him, unless they should
have been put in mind of him, by some fitting outward sign. For this cause
was this sign proposed and appointed by CHRIST, which yet is so a sign, that
it is the same thing that it signifies, and herein it differs from the
sacrifices of the old Law, which were not that they signified. Sed istud nostri
sacrificij signum, non aliud sed ipsum est quod signat, ita vero est ci idem
quod signat, vt quantum ad corpus, id est, ad veritatem carnis and sanguinis
Christi pertinet, sit idem quod signat, non quoad mortem and passionem, neque
enim ibi Christus vt olim dolorem and mortem patitur, cum tamen immolari
dicatur, cum videlicet inviolabiter in altari frangitur, diuiditur, comeditur,
cum ijs, and quibusdam alijs signis in quantum fieri potest mors domini maxim
repraesentatur, vnde sicut dixi, quantum ad veritatem corporis and sanguinis
Christi pertinet, est idem quod signat non quoad mortem and passionem, quam
tamen maxim signat. that is, This sign of our sacrifice is noe other but the
same thing that it signifies, but we must so understand it to be the same
thing that it signifies, in respect of the truth of the flesh and blood of
Christ which it signifies, but not in respect of his passion and death, though
it very lively express and signify that also, for Christ does not there
suffer grief or death, as once he did, though he be said there to be offered
and immolated, when he is inviolably broken upon the altar, distributed and
eaten, and when by these and the like signs, Christ's death is represented
as much as possibly it may be, so that as I said, if we speak of the truth of
the body and blood of Christ, this sign is the thing it signifies, but if we
speak of the death and suffering of Christ it is not so, though it do very
clearly and expressly represent and signify that his death and passion. Thus
we see, he makes the sacrifice to be merely representative.

De Sacram. l. 1. c. 16.
Algerus excellently expresses the same thing in these words. Notandum quia
quotidianum nostrum sacrificium, idem ipsum dicit cum eo; quo Christus semel
oblatus est in cruce, quantum ad eandem veram hic and ibi corporis substantia^;
quod vero nostrum quotidianum illius semel oblati dicit esse exemplum, id est,
figuram, vel formam, non dicit ut hic vel ibi alium Christum constituat, sed ut
eundem in cruce semel, in altari quotidie, alio modo immolari and offerri
ostendat; ibi in veritate passionis qua pro nobis occisus est; hic in figura
and imitatione passionis ipsius, qua Christus non iterum vere patitur, sed
ipsius vere memoria passionis quotidie nobis iteratur: quod and ipse Ambrosius
notans subiicit. Quod nos facimus, in commemorationem fit eius quod factum est;
hoc enim facite, inquit, in meam commemoratione^, non aliud sacrificium sed
ipsum semper offerimus, magis autem sacrificii recordationem operamur. Non ergo
est in ipsius Christi veritate diversitas, sed in ipsius immolationis action,
quae dum veram Christi passionem and mortem quadam sua similitudine figurando
repraesentat, nos ad imitatione^ ipsius passionis invitat, and accendit, contra
hostem nos roborat, and munit, and a vitiis purgans, and virtutibus
condecorans, vitae aeternae idoneos and dignos exhibet. That is, It is to be
noted, that our daily sacrifice is the same thing with that sacrifice whereby
Christ was once offered upon the cross, in that the same true substance is
offered here, that was offered there, whereas therefore he says, that the
sacrifice which we daily offer, is a similitude, figure, or representation of
that sacrifice which Christ once offered, he is not to be conceived to imagine,
that there is one Christ essentially here, and another there, but his meaning
is to show that the same Christ once offered on the cross, is daily offered in
another sort on the altar, there in the truth of his passion being slain for
us, here in figure and imitation of his passion: not suffering again indeed,
but having the memory of his passion which once he endured, daily renewed:
which thing Ambrose himself also observing, has these words. That which we do
is done in remembrance of that which was then done, for he says, do this in
remembrance of me. We do not therefore offer another sacrifice, but we always
offer the same, or rather that we do, is a remembrance of that sacrifice,
which was once offered. There is therefore no diversity in the truth and
being of that Christ that offered himself, and that we offer, but in the
action of offering. For while that which we do, represents the true passion
and death of CHRIST, and by a certain similitude it has of the same, sets
it lively before our eyes, it inviteth and enflameth us to the imitation of his
passion, it strengthens and confirms us, against the enemy, it purges us
from sin, beautifieth us with virtues, and makes us meet and worthy to enter
into eternal life. And afterward he has these words. Semel passus in cruce,
qui non manifest sed invisibiliter est in sacramento, quotidie non passus, sed
quasi pa^ repraesentatus, hanc immolationem non vero sed imaginario actu
passionis and mortis fieri, and tamen veram salutem operari testatur, Gregorius
dialog. 4. c. 58. That is, Christ suffered once on the cross, who not visibly
but invisibly is in the sacrament; neither does he daily suffer, but his
suffering is daily represented, this immolation or offering Gregory says
consists not in the truth of passion or death, but in a mere representation
of the same, and that yet it works true salvation. And after he adds,
Licet non vera sed imaginaria passione in seipsa immoletur; vera tamen and non
imaginaria passione in membris suis immolatur, quando nos qui in memoriam
passionis suae, sacramentum tantae pietatis suae agimus sacrificando ipsum,
flendo, and cor nostrum vera compunctione atterendo, mortem tam pij and dilecti
Domini and patris annunciamus. That is, Though Christ be not offered by any
real passion in himself, but in a mere representation of his passion, yet
he is offered by a true and more than imaginary passion in his members, while
we who in memory of his passion celebrate this sacrament, of his so great
goodness and loving kindness toward us, and offer this sacrifice by weeping
and breaking our heart with true compunction, show forth the death of our so
gracious and dearly beloved Lord and father.

Paschasius makes the same construction of the sacrifice; and Lib. 4. did. 12.
Peter Lombard proposing the question, whether that the priest does, may
properly be named a sacrifice, or immolation, answers, that Christ was only
once truly and properly offered in sacrifice, and that he is not properly
immolated or sacrificed, but in sacrament and representation only.

Bellarmines shift to avoid this testimony is very silly, for he says that
Peter Lombard did not propose the question, whether and how Christ may be said
to be sacrificed, but how he may be said to be so sacrificed, as to be
slain, and that in this sense he says truly, that Christ was only once
properly sacrificed, for that he cannot be said any more to be killed or
slain, but in mystery and signification or representation only. Whereas it is
most clear and evident, that he proposes the question simply, and in
general, whether he may be said to be sacrificed or not; and seeing the
sacrificing of a living thing, does import the killing and destroying of it,
and the sacrificing of Christ the killing of Christ, he Li 4. d. 12.
pronounces that as Christ can die no more, so he can no more be properly
sacrificed, and that therefore when he is said to be sacrificed or offered in
the eucharist, we must understand that he is offered only in representation,
and not really. That this is his meaning, it appears by that which he has,
writing upon the epistle to the Cap. 10.
Hebrews, where he does not propose the question whether Christ may be said
to be so offered often, as to die often, but how it comes to pass, that the
Church daily offers sacrifice, seeing, as the Apostle says, where there is
one sacrifice having force to take away sin once offered, there is no need
that any more sacrifices should be offered; and answers hereunto, that the
thing now offered is the same that was offered on the cross; that the offering
of it now is commemoratiue, and that that which we do, is but recordatio
sacrificij, the calling to mind of Christ's sacrifice once offered, that it may
be applied unto us, for the remission of our sins; so absolutely excluding
all sacrifice for sin properly so called, of what kind soever it be. And
Hebrae. 10.
Thomas Aquinas on the same place, proposing the objection of the repetition,
and daily reiteration of sacrifice in the Church, which seems to import, that
that of Christ was not sufficient to take away sin, answers, that we offer
not any other, but the very same sacrifice that Christ did, that is, his body
and blood; and that it is no new or different oblation properly so named, but a
co^memoration only of that sacrifice which Christ once offered.

In 4 sent. d. 12
Henricus Gorrichem writing upon the sentences says, that in the eucharist
there is the offering of a sacrifice, not really or in the thing it self, but
in similitude; for that which is there daily done, is a sign bringing to our
remembrance, and figuring or representing that oblation, that was once made.
With whom In Hebrae. 10.
Lyra agrees, his words are. Si dicas sacrificium altaris quotidie offertur in
Ecclesia; dicendum quod non est ibi sacrificii iteratio, sed vnius sacrificii
in cruce oblati quotidiana commemoratio. that is If thou say the sacrifice of
the altar is daily offered in the Church, it must be answered, that there is
noe reiteration of the sacrifice, but a daily commemoration of that sacrifice,
that was once offered on the cross. This he says in answer to that
objection, that seeing now as in the time of the law, there is often offering
for sin, it seems no sufficient sacrifice has been offered, which objection
could not be cleared by his answer, unless he denied the often offering of
any kind of sacrifice for sin whether bloody or unbloody.

Wherefore that which De missa l. 1. cap. (...).
Bellarmine has, that Aquinas and the other Schooleme^ for the most part, do
no otherwise say that the sacrifice of the mass is an immolatio^ of Christ,
but in that it is a represe^tatio^ of Christ's immolatio^ on the cross, or
because it has like effects with that true and real sacrificing of Christ
that employed his death, is most true: his evasion is found too silly, and it is
made clear and evident, that the best and worthiest amongst the guides of Gods
Church before Luthers time, taught as we do, that the sacrifice of the altar is
only the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, and a mere representation and
commemoration of the sacrifice once offered on the cross, and consequently are
all put under the curse, and anathematized by the De missa canon. 3.
Tridentine council. So that the face of religion was not the same, before,
and at Luthers appearing, that now it is, as M Brerely would have us to believe.

Wherefore to conclude this point, it appears by that which has been said,
that neither the canon of the Mass rightly understood, includes in it any
such points of Romish Religion, as some imagine, but in sundry, yea in all the
capital differences, between us and them of the Roman faction, witnesses
for us, and against them; and that the Prelates and guides of the Church
formerly made no such construction of it, as now is made. That it may have a
good sense, our men confess. I could, says Luther, make such a construction
of the canon of the Mass, as might stand with the rule of faith, and I have
somwhere so done, but seeing it is obscure, and the rule of the Lawyers is,
that he that will speak obscurely, shall have his words construed against
him, and not for him, I will not says he take so much pains, as to seek out
and declare the best meaning, that may be conceived of it, but a better form
being found out will leave this and embrace that. That it is obscure I showed
out of Cassander, and that if it be to be retained it must have some scholies,
or explications, either added in the margent, or inserted into the text, that
it may be understood and rightly used, which thing if it be done, it will seem
a new one, and if it have such explications as he would have, it will differ
little or nothing from our liturgy.

There is extant a ceraine Apud Gold. imperialium constitutionum. Tom. 2. page
332. c. 12.
form of reformation exhibited by Charles the fifth to the ecclesiastical
states of the Empire, and accepted and received by them, wherein they profess,
that the canon of the mass, which the Church of God has used and retained so
many ages, contains nothing in it that is not consonant to the courses of
antiquity, so that it is not to be condemned or changed, by any private
authority, so insinuating that by public it may, but touching the other parts
of the mass, though for the most part they be nothing but praises of God,
prayers of the Church, and holy lessons, and readings, and so far forth not
to be despised, yet if there be any new collects, sequences, or prefaces,
either unlearned or depending upon Apocryphal histories, or not so fitting to
the sacrifice of the mass, which later ages have brought in, they prescribe
that they be removed, and that things may be brought back to their ancient
purity. Besides this we have extant certain apud Gold. ibid. page 376.
articles concerning the reformation of the Church proposed by the ambassadors
of Ferdinand the Emperor, in the council of Trent, amongst which these are
found. That the breuiaries and missalls should be purged; that all those
things which are not taken out of divine scripture, should be removed; that the
prolixity of Psalms and prayers should be contracted, good choice being made;
that a new agend or form of divine service should be composed, and that then
all that would not use it, should be severely punished.

So that M Brerelies maine objection which he thought unanswerable, falls to
the ground. For the Canon of the Mass rightly understood, is found to contain
nothing in it, contrary to the rule of faith, and the profession of the
protestant Churches; the abuses of private Masses and half co^munions, are
found to have bin beside, and against the words and meaning of them that
composed the canon, and not without the dislike of many good men, before and
since Luthers time; and the construction that they now make of the word
sacrifice, so often used in it, appears to be a mere perverting of the
meaning of the Canon; to a sinister sense, never intended by the authors of it,
nor ever allowed by the best men in the Church. This Canon notwithstanding, is
found to have some passages, that in the judgment of men right learned, can
not well have any true meaning, unless the old custom of offering bread and
wine on the Lords Table, out of which the Sacrament may be consecrated, be
restored; so that those parts, that custom being discontinued, may well be
omitted. Some other parts are obscure, and need explication, which being added,
ot inserted, it will differ little or nothing from those forms of consecration
of those holy mysteries that now are in use in the reformed Churches of
England, and some other places, therefore brought in, because in later ages many
things were added to the canon anciently in use, which the best and grauest in
the Church thought fit to be taken away, and a new form of divine service to
be composed. So that the Church that formerly was, having no different judgment
touching matters dogmaticall, no liking of those abuses in practice which some
had brought in; and wishing things to be brought to such a course as
Protestants now have brought them, it may well be said to have bin a Protestant
Church, in such sort as I have formerly showed.

Only two things may be objected against that which has been said; the one
touching prayer for the dead; the other touching the commemoration of the
Saints, and prayer that God through their intercession, and for their merit,
will give unto us such things as we desire; both which seem to make much
against the Religion of Protestants, and to be points of Roman Religion, and
contained in the very canon of the Mass, which the Church used in the days of
our Fathers; so that that Church wherein they lived and died could be no
Protestant Church. But the answer hereunto is easy. For touching the first of
these two, which is prayer for the dead, it is well known that Protestants do
not simply condemn all prayer in this kind, For they pray for the
resurrection, public acquitall in the day of judgment, and the perfect
consummation and bliss, of them that rest in the Lord, and the perfecting of
whatsoever is yet wanting unto them.

The Apology of the confession of Augusta, says expressly in the name of all
those worthy Princes People and States that subscribed the Augustane
confession, that they do not condemn nor forbid prayer for the dead. And Exam.
part. 3. page 92.
Chemnicius says, it is a bestiall apathie for men not to be affected with the
death of their friends, presently so soon as ever they are gone to put all
remembrance of them out of their minds, and not to wish good unto them, nor to
pray that it may be well with them; which desires and prayers yet must be
moderated according to the word of God.

That it is lawful to pray for the acquitall and public remission of sins in
the day of judgment, and the performing and perfecting of whatsoever is yet
behind, there is no question that I know made by any; and I am well assured
that in so doing, we exceeding christianly express our love toward the
departed, and give testimony of our persuasion, that the souls of them that
die do live; and that their bodies also shall be raised up at the last day;
which thing, as Cassander says truly, all the Christian Churches throughout
the world, as well those of the East, as of the West, do and ever did; though
they do not so certainly resolve what their state is that are departed hence,
what is yet wanting unto them, or wherein or how far forth they may be
benefitted by our prayers; but the Romish conceit of Purgatory, and their
praying to deliver thence, none of the Eastern Churches admit, neither do we.

This is that which our Adversaries must find in the Canon of the Mass, if
they will say any thing against us, for the proof of the Romish religion, out
of the canon. Let us hear therefore what the form of the prayer for the dead
is, which is found in the canon of the Mass. The words of it are; Remember
Lord thy servants and thine handmaides; N. or N. which are gone before us with
the badge of faith, and do sleep in the sleep of peace. O Lord we pray thee
to grant to them and to all that are at rest in Christ, a place of refreshing,
of light and peace. That this prayer has no respect to Purgatory, or to the
deliverance thence, it is evident. For how do they sleep in peace that are
tormented in Purgatory? and whose pains are no less than those of hell,
though they be not eternal? Or who is so void of sense as to think, that
all that are at rest in Christ are tormented in Purgatory, and that to all
these God is entreated in this prayer to grant a place of refreshing, of light
and peace.

So that first it is evident, that a place of refreshing, light, and peace is
wished, to such as are not in Purgatory. For it is wished to all that are at
rest in the Lord. But all that are at rest in the Lord, are not in Purgatory;
whence it will further follow, that the Church prays for them that she does
not think to be in Purgatory, and consequently that prayer for the dead
proves not Purgatory, as they would make the world believe that it does. And
secondly, that the Church at that time when this form of prayer was first
composed, did not believe or think that there is any Purgatory. For if she
had had any such persuasion, she would not have forgotten to recommend to God,
the woeful estate of men so afflicted as they are supposed to be that are
there.

That this prayer can have no reference to the state of men in Purgatory
pains, it is so clear, that Ock. compend* error. Papae Joan. 22. c. 7.
John the 22* (who supposed, (as many of the ancient also did long before him,
and the Eastern Christians still do;) that the souls of the just are so at
rest in Christ, that yet they remain under the altar, that is, under the
protection and comfort of the humanity of Christ, in a state and place of
happiness foretasted, but not fully enjoyed, and that they shall not be lifted
up above, to the view of the deity of Christ as it is in it self, and the
vision of God the Father Son and holy Ghost till the judgment,) produces
this prayer for confirmation of his opinion, supposing that seeing a place of
refreshing and peace is here wished to them that are at rest in Christ, (which
cannot in any sense be understood of such as are in purgatory,) therefore there
is some state of men free from pain and punishment, wherein they are and
expect the accomplishment of happiness. To which though Ockam in dialog. p. 2.
tract. 2. c. 3.
Ockam so answer, that he would have this prayer to have reference to the
estate of distressed souls in Purgatory; yet in the end he says, it may be
understood of the souls of holy men that are in heaven, and the meaning of it
is, that the souls of such men as sleep in the sleep of peace, having
resumed their bodies may enter into that place of refreshing light and peace,
that includes the highest essential and accidental degree of eternal peace,
which they cannot have till the resurrection. And Ribli^thecae tom. 6. p. 228.
Florus that lived in the time of Carolus Calvus, in his exposition of the
Mass, says, it is most clear that the souls of perfect just men, so soon
as they are loosed from the body are received into heaven; but this is to be
understood of the souls of Apostles, Martyrs, and confessors, and men of
great perfection of life. For the souls of certain just men are not presently
admitted into the heavenly kingdom; but though they be in blessed rest, yet
are stayed in certain mansions, by which their stay and not enjoying presently
what they most desire, it appears they come short of perfect righteousness.
Besides these, he thinks there is a third sort, of such as are in Purgatory.
Bernard, as it appears in the place of Cap. 5.
Ockams dialogues above cited, makes three estates of the soul; the first in
corpore corruptibili, the second in requie, the third in beatitudine
consummata; the first in the body subject to death and corruption, the second
in rest, the third in consummate happiness. The second excludes all
punishment and affliction, the third all desire of having any higher
perfection, or attayning any farther good. A man of great place and worth that
has written not long since, fears not to deliver his opinion, that the
souls of the just are so in rest and peace, and in heavenly mansions
immediately after their departure hence, that yet they come not into the highest
heaven and place of greatest felicity till the resurrection. Which of these
opinions the author of this form of prayer followed, it does not certainly
appear. But sure it is he thought those who are there commended to God, to
be in a state of rest, far from pain and torment; and so desired the
perfecting of whatsoever is yet wanting unto them, without any reference to
purgatory, or the delivering of any thence.

From this of prayer for the dead, let us come to the other objection touching
the commemoration of the blessed Apostles, and other Saints and holy Martyrs,
by and through whose intercession, and for whose merits, the priest and people
desires God to grant that they may in all things be kept safe and strongly
defended, by the help of divine protection.

That the Saints do pray for us in genere, desiring God to be merciful to
us, and to do unto us whatsoever in any kind he knows needful for our good,
there is no question made by us; and therefore this prayer wherein the Church
desires God to be gracious to her, and to grant the things she desires,
the rather for that the Saints in heaven also are suppliants for her, will not
be found to contain any point of Romish doctrine disliked by us.

But they will say, there is mention made in this prayer of the merits of those
holy Apostles and Martyrs, and the Church desires God to grant her petitions
for those merits, which is contrary to the doctrine of Protestants, that deny
all merit properly so named, and therefore cannot but condemn the opinion of
one man's meriting for another.

For answer hereunto we must observe, as Cassand. consult, articulo. 2^
Cassander rightly notes, that there is no merit properly so named, to be
attributed to mortal and miserable men; and that though the ecclesiastical
writers use the word merit, and when they speak of holy men's works call them
merits, yet they think them not to be properly so; but do so name the good
actions of holy men that proceed from faith, and the working of the holy Ghost,
because Almighty God, though they be his gifts, and joined in them, by whom
they are wrought, with defect and imperfection, yet is so pleased to accept of
them out of his goodness, that he not only rewards the doers of them with
ample and great rewards in their own persons, but so as to do good to others
for their sakes. So God said to Abraham, if there were but fifty righteous in
the city, he would spare the whole city for their sakes. Neither only does
he good for their sakes whose works he thus rewards, while they live, but
even after they are dead also. And therefore God promises that he will
protect Jerusalem for his own sake, and for David his servant, which he must
be understood to do, not only in respect of the promise made unto him, but
with respect had to his virtue, according to the which we read 1 Reg. 15. 3.
that God left a little light in Jerusalem, to Abiam the son of Roboam King
of Judah for David's sake; who did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord. This David, says In Ps. 50. hom. 2.
Chrysostom, did not only please God while he was in the body, but he is found
to have yielded great comfort after his death, to such as he left behind him
alive. The Prophet Esaias comes to Hezekiah and says unto him, I will defend
this city for mine own sake, and for David my servants sake. David is dead, but
his virtues that pleased God do still live. O strange thing! O ineffable
clemency! a man long since dead, patronizeth him that lives. In this sense
then it is that the Church desires God to be gracious unto her, in granting
her petitions for the merit of those his holiest Ones, that she remembers, no
way derogating from the merits of Christ, but putting a great difference
between them and those of the Saints, for Christ's merit is the only price of
our redemption, by which only we are redeemed from sin and eternal death,
and being reconciled to God, are adopted to be sons and heirs of eternal
life: but the merits of the Saints here mentioned, are nothing but those
imperfect good works which they did while they lived here; which God was
pleased so to accept, that he promised not only to reward them with great and
ample rewards in their own persons, but to do good for their sakes that did
them to others also.

Citat. a Cassandro Disp. Rati^bonae an. 1546.
Bucer speaking of the public prayers of the Church, which we call Collects,
in which the intercession and merits of Saints are commemorated, has these
words. Seeing in these prayers, whatsoever is attributed to the intercession
and merits of Saints, all that is asked, not of the Saints, but of our
merciful God through Jesus Christ, they that so pray, do thereby profess and
testify, that they acknowledge, that those things which they ask of God, by
the intercession, and for the merits of the Saints, are the free gifts of God,
etc: And a little after: We willingly acknowledge, and publicly profess,
that GOD does reward the works of his Saints, not only in their own persons,
but in those also that pertain unto them, and for whom they intercede, for he
has promised to do good to a thousand generations to them that love him, and
study to keep his Commandments; hence it was that he would not heal those
of the house of Abimelech, till Abraham interceded and entreated for them, and
hence it was that God granted and gave the deliverance and salvation of all
the people to Moses, when he entreated for the same. These are the words of
Bucer, which not being contradicted by any of our profession, it is evident
that no part of Romish Religion disliked by us, can be proved out of this
part of the Canon of the Mass.

Thus having cleared that great objection of Mr Brerelie touching the public
Liturgy, used in the Church in the days of our Fathers, and made it appear,
that the using thereof, is no proof that the Church that then was, was not a
Protestant Church, and having made it clear and evident that both the Liturgy
it self, and the profession of such as used it, show plainly that the Church
that then was, never allowed any Romish error, howsoever some did in the midst
of her: it remains that I now proceed to show in the particulars, that the
outward face of Religion, at, and before Luthers appearing, was not, as M^
Brerelie tells us, the now professed Roman Religion, and that whatsoever we
have done in the reformation of the Church, was long before wished for, and
desired by the best men amongst the guides of the Church.

CHAP. 1.
Of the Canon of the Scriptures.

THat the Church did not admit the Canon of Scripture which the Romanists now
do, nor ever accounted those books Canonical which we think to be
Apocryphal, it will easily appear, in that all the most famous Divines, from
the beginning of the Christian World, even till the time of Luther, did reject
those books as Apocryphal that we do. The Church of the Jews (to whom as
S. Paul says, the oracles of God were committed) admitted but only 22 Books,
as delivered to them from Romans (...). 1. 2.
God, to be the Canon of their faith, as Lib. 1. contra Appion.
Josephus witnesses. Neither did the Christian Church ever admit any more.

Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 25.
Melito Bishop of Sardis being desired by Onesimus to send him a catalogue of
the books of the old and new Testament, writes thus unto him. Having
diligently sought out the books of the old Testament, and put them in order, I
have sent them unto you: the names whereof are these: the 5 books of Moses:
Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers, Deuteronomie; then Jesus the son of
Naue, Judges, Ruth, the 4 books of Kings, two books of Chronicles, the
Psalms of David, the Proverbs, which is also called the Wisdom of Solomon;
Ecclesiastes, the Canticles, Job, the Prophets, Esaias, Hieremie, one book of
the twelve Prophets, Daniel, Ezechiel, Esdras. Some so translate the words of
Melito, as if he reckoned the wisdom of Solomon, as a separate book, and so
meant the book that is commonly called the Wisdom of Solomon, and is by us
accounted to be apocryphal: but Ruffinus translateth as we do; and that we
have rightly expressed the meaning of this worthy Bishop, and that he only
added this, as a glorious title to the book of Salomons Proverbs, which (as
Lib. 4. 22.
Eusebius says) the ancients usually called (...), the reader will soon be
satisfied, if he peruse that, which D. Raynolds has touching this point in his
Praelect. 14.
prelections. Lib. 3. c. 10.
Eusebius she weth that Josephus according to the ancient tradition of the
Jews, numbered only 22 Canonical f Paulo ante annum mundi 4890.
books of the old Testament, as we do, and in his Chronicle he says
expressly, that the books of the Macchabees, are not in the canon.

Read (says Cyrill Cateche: 4.
of Jerusalem in his Catechism) the divine Scriptures, that is, the 22 books
of the old Testament: and a little after, Read therefore these 22 books, but
with the apocrypha have nothing to do; meditate upon the divine Scriptures,
which we confidently read in the Church: the holy Apostles, the guides of
truth, who delivered unto us these books, were more wise and religious then
thou art. Seeing therefore thou art but a son; transgress not the precepts of
the Fathers. Now these are the books which thou must read, and then numbreth
all the books of the old Testament, and omitteth all those that are
controuersed; saving that he adds that of Baruch, thinking it a part of
Hieremies prophesies. Of the same opinion is De mensuris and ponderibus and
contra Epicureos, haeresi octaua.
Epiphanius, making no mention of any of the books rejected by us as
apocryphal, but only the book of Wisdom, and Jesus the son of Sirach;
which he says are profitable, but not to be esteemed as the 22 books (or 27
as some count them) that were kept in the arc of the covenant, which are the
books by us acknowledged to be canonical.

Amphilochius ad Seleucum de recta ^ducatione inter opera Nazianzeni.
Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, writing to Seleucus has these words I will
reckon unto thee all the books that proceeded from the holy Ghost; and that
thou may clearly conceive that which concerns this matter, I will first
number unto thee the books of the old Testament, and then he names the 5
books of Moses, Joshua, and the Judges, Ruth, 4 books of the Kings, 2 of the
Chronicles; 2 of Esdras, Job, the Psalms, 3 of Solomon, the proverbes,
Ecclesiastes, Canticles, 12 Prophets, Hose, Amos, Micheas, Joel, Abdias, Jonas,
Naum, Abacuch, Sophonie, Ha^ge, Zacharias, Malachias, the 4 Prophets Esai,
Hieremie, Ezekiel, Daniel, and concludes that to these some add Hester. The
reason why some doubted of Hester I have elsewhere showed, out of Sixtus
Senensis, to have been, the Apocryphal additions to the book. I have some
where cited this book as a part of Gregory Nazianzens works: because some
think it so to be, and put it amongst his works. But De. veris and genuinis
scripturae libris page 952.
Gregory has delivered his opinion clearly touching this matter, though that
book happily be not his. Be conversant (says he) day and night in the
divine oracles; but least such books as are not of this sort, deceive thee,
(for many erroneous books are inserted:) receive the true and just number of
books that are divine: and then names all the books that we admit: save
that he omitteth the book of Hester, upon the same reason that I noted out of
Sixtus Senensis: and when he has named these, he adds those of the new
testament; and then pronounces, that whatsoever is not within this number, is
to be accounted amongst bastard and counterfeit books.

Origin, expounding the first Psalm, puts down a catalogue of the holy
Scriptures of the old Testament, writing thus in precise words, as (...) l. 6.
c 24. editione grae. Pa. (...): c. 25.
Eusebius tells us; We must not be ignorant that the books of the old
Testament, as the Hebrews do deliver, are 22, which is the number of their
letters: and then names all the books admitted by us, and adds, that the
books of Macchabees are without this number. In Synop^ (...) Scripturae
Athanasius agrees with Origin, writing in this sort: All our Scripture, that
are Christians, was given by divine inspiration; neither has this Scripture
infinite books, but a definite number, and contained in a certain canon; and
these are the books of the old Testament: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers,
Deuteronomie, Iosuah, Judges, Ruth, the first and second of Kings accounted one
book: the third and fourth of Kings accounted one book: Chronicles first and
second accounted one book; Esdras the first and second one book; the Psalms
of David 151. Proverbs of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Job, 12 Prophets
contained in one volume, Osee, Amos, Micheas, Ioell, Abdias, Jonas, Naum,
Ambacum, Sophonias, Aggaeus, Zacharias, Malachias, 4 other Prophets Esai,
Hieremie, Ezechiel, Daniel; the books therefore of the old Testament are 22 in
number, answerable to the Hebrew letters; Beside these there are certain other
books of the old Testament, that are not in the canon, and these are read
only to the Catechumens or Novices: Amongst these he numbreth the Wisdom of
Solomon, the Wisdom of Jesus the son of Sirach, Judith, Tobit; but
mentions not the books of Macchabees at all; to these he adds the book of
Hester, accounting it Apocryphal, being misperswaded of the whole, by reason
of those Apocryphal additions, as before I noted out of Sixtus Senensis. In
the conclusion of his Synopsis he mentions together with the former, four
books of Macchabees, and the story of Susanna; but, says, they are in the
number of them that are contradicted.

The council of Laodicea decrees in this sort: Let no books be read in the
Church, but the books of the old and new Testament, and then adds, Canone 59.
these are the books of the old Testament that are to be read. Genesis,
Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomie, Iosuah, Judges, Ruth, four books of
Kings, 2 of Chronicles, Esdras, the book of the Psalms 150. the Proverbs of
Solomon, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Job, Hester, 12 Prophets Osee, etc: Esaias,
Hieremie, Ezekiel, Daniel. The canons of this council are confirmed by the
sixth general council holden in Canone 2..
Trullo. To these we may add Orthodoxae fidei ^ l. 4 c. 18.
Damascene, who having numbered all those books, and those only, as
canonical, that we do; adds, that the book of Wisdom, and of Jesus the
son of Sirach, are good books, and contain good lessons of virtue, but that
they are not numbered in this account, neither were laid up in the arc. De
sectis scholae action secunda in Bibliotheca (...). tom 4.
Leontius advocatus Byzantinus says, there are only 22 books of the old
Testament, and reckons all those, and those only, that we do. All these
worthies that we have hitherto produced to testify in this case, are of the
Greek Church, wherefore let us pass to them of the Latin. In Prolog. in
^almos.
Hilary Bishop of Poictiers says, the law of the old testament is contained in
22 books, according to the number of the Hebrew letters; which are so
disposed, and put in order, according to the tradition of the ancient, that
there are five books of Moses, that Iosuah is the sixth; the Judges, and Ruth,
the seventh: the first and second of Kings the eigth; the third and fourth the
ninth; 2 of Chronicles the tenth: Esdras the eleventh; Psalms 12; Solomon's
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles 13, 14, 15; the 12 Prophets 16; Esaias,
Hieremie with the Lamentations and epistle, Daniell, Ezechiel, Job, and Hester,
do make up the number of 22 books; some have thought good to add Tobie, and
Judith, and so to make the books to be 24 in number, according to the number
of the Greek letters.

Ruffinus in the explanation of the Creed, which is found amongst the works of
Cyprian, and so attributed to him, sets down a Catalogue of those books,
which according to the tradition of the ancient, are believed to have been
inspired by the Holy Ghost, and delivered to the Churches of Christ, containing
all those books which we admit, secluding all those that are now in question:
It must be known, says he, that there are other books which are not called
Canonical, but Ecclesiastical, by the ancient: as the Wisdom of Solomon,
and that of the son of Sirach. And in the same rank we must put the book of
Tobias, and Judith, and the books of the Machabees: and in the New Testament
the book of Pastor, all which truly they would have to be read in the Church,
but not to be alleged for proof of any matter of faith that was questioned,
or doubted of; and then concludes, that he held it very fit to put down
these things, which were delivered by tradition from the Fathers, that they
that are to learn the first elements and rudiments of Christian Religion, may
know out of what fountains to draw.

In Prologo galeato.
Hierome in his prologue, which he prefixed before the books of the Old
Testament, by him translated out of Hebrew into Latin, says, There are 22
books of the Old Testament; and that as there are but 22 Hebrew Letters, by
which we write whatsoever we speak; so there are 22 books, by Praefat. in
Esdram and Nehemiam ad Domnionem and Rogatianum. Quae non habentur apud
Hebraeos, nec de viginti quatuor senioribus sunt procul abiicienda.
which as by Letters and beginnings in the doctrine of God, the tender infancy
of the just man, that yet is like a child hanging on the breast, is informed
and instructed: and then names all the books which we admit, and after
adds, Whatsoever is beside these, is to be put amongst the Apocrypha; and
that therefore the book of Wisdom, of Jesus the son of Sirach, of Judith,
Tobias, and Pastor, are not in the Canon. And the same Hierome in his Preface
before the Books of Solomon, having made mention of the book of Wisdom, and
Ecclesiasticus, and delivered his opinion, that it is untruly called the
Wisdom of Solomon, and attributed to him; then adds, that, as the Church
reads the books of Judith, Tobias, and the Macchabees, but does not account
them amongst the Canonical Scriptures; so these 2 Books may be read for the
edification of the people, but not for the confirmation of any doubtful point
of doctrine. Lib. 8. haeres. 12.
Sixtus Senensis confesses that Philastrius rejects the Books of
Macchabees. And the same In Bibl. pat. de haeres. catal. 3. cap. 9.
Philastrius in the he heresy of the Prodianitae, taxes them amongst other
things, that they used the book of Wisdom, which Jesus the son of Sirach
wrote long after Solomon's time.

Lib. 2. c. 32. Dan. 13.
The Author of the Book De mirabilibus Scripturae, that goes under the name
of Augustine, has these words, De lacu vero and Abacuck translato, in Belis
Draconisque fabula, idcirco in hoc ordine non ponitur; quod in authoritate
divinae Scripturae non habentur. It is true, that Augustine, and the African
Bishops of his time, and some other in that age, finding these books which
Hierome and the rest before cited, reject as Apocryphal, to be joined with
the other, and together read with them in the Church, seem to account them to
be Canonical. Caietan and others answer, that those Fathers speak of the
Canon of manners, not of faith: and of Books not simply, hut in a sort
canonical, so that they differ not from the other Fathers before alleged,
that deny them to be Canonical, as not being simply, and absolutely so. How
fit and true this answer is, I will not stand to examine: but this is most
certain, that Augustine himself seems something to lessen the authority of
this Book: for whereas the example of Contra Ep. Gaudentii, l. 2. c. 23.
Razias killing himself, is pressed against him, to prove that it is lawful
for a man to kill himself: after other aunswers, he says, the Jews do not
esteem this Scripture called the history of Mac^bees, in such sort as the law,
the Prophets, and the Psalms, to which Christ gives testimony as to them
that bear witness of him, saying, it behooved that all those things should be
fullfilled Luke 24. v. 44.
that are written of me, in the Law, the prophets, and the Psalms; but it is
received of the Church not unprofitably, if it be soberly read, and heard:
especially in respect of those Macchabees, that as true martyrs, endured
grievous and horrible things of the persecutors, for the law of God: And the
council Canon: 2 4
of Carthage, whereat Augustine was present, prescribing that noe books should
be read in the Church as canonical, but such as indeed are canonical,
leaves out the books of Macchabees, as it appears by the Greek edition;
though they have foysted them into the Latin.

But howsoever these did not so exactly look into these things, as they of
the Greek Church, and many of the Latin Church before named, but admitted
those books as in a sort canonical, that they found joined together with the
other indubitate scriptures, which they had of the translation of the
Septuagint: yet after Hierome had translated them out of the Hebrew, and
prefixed his prologues and prefaces, before the books translated by him;
almost all the Bishops and men of account in the Latin or West Church, so
approved the same, that they admitted no other books as Canonical, but those
that he did

Pope Moral: in Job. l. 19. c. 17.
Gregory the first, citing a certain testimony out of the first book of
Macchabees has these words: we offend not if touching this thing we allege
and produce a testimony out of books though not canonical, yet published for
the edification of the people. This was the opinion of Pope Gregory, Gregory
the first, Gregory the great, our Apostle as they of the Romish faction tell
us, and therefore it will not be safe for us to leave the faith first delivered
unto us. To the Pope I will add certain Cardinals.

Bonauentura in his preface before his exposition of the Psalter, undertakes
to show which are the books of Scripture: Scripture, says he, consists of
the old and new Testament, and the whole body of canonical Scripture is
contained in these 2; then passing by the books of the new Testament, he
reckons all those, and those only that Hierome does: sorting them into their
several ranks and orders, as the Hebrews do. And in another place he says,
In Hexaemeron. sermon. 19. p. 57.
there are 4 sorts of writings in which a student must be conversant; the
books of holy Scripture, the writings of the Fathers, such sayings as have bin
gathered out of them, and the writings of Philosophers. And because in the
books of Philosophers, there is no knowledge to give remission of sins: nor
originally in the sums, because they have bin extracted out of the originalls
of the Fathers; nor in them, because they have been taken out of the Scripture;
therefore that is principally and in the first place to be studied, and there
we must seek that knowledge as in the fountain; and then, that all may know
which and how many these books of Scripture are that he will have to be thus
studied, he says, according to Hierome there are 22 in the old Testament, and
in the new there are eight.

prologo in Iosuam.
Hugo cardinalis repeateth certain verses, expressing which books are
Canonical, and which Apocryphal, the verses are these:

Quinque libros Moisi, Iosue, Iudicum, Samuelem,
Et Melachim, tres praecipuos, bis sexque Prophetas,
Hebraeus reliquis censet praecellere libris.
Quinque vocat legem, reliquos vult esse Prophetas.
Post hagiographasunt, Daniel, David, Hester, and Esdras,
Job, Paralipomenon, and tres libri Solomonis.
Restant Apocrypha, Jesus, Sapientia, Pastor,
Et Machabaeorum libri, Judith, atque Tobias.
Hi, quia sunt dubii, sub canone non numerantur:
Sed quia vera canunt Ecclesia suscipit illos.
Here he numbreth the books Canonical and Apocryphal as we do. And the same
Hugo in prologu^ galeatum, speaking of the books rejected by us says, that
these books are not received by the Church for proof of doctrine, but for
information of manners. And in another Prologo in Tobiam.
place he says, they are not counted amongst the Canonical. Cardinal In vlt.
Hester. Item praefat. comment ad Clem. 7.
Caietan says, those books only are to be accounted Canonical which Hierome
so accounted, and admits none of those that are now questioned: this he
wrote at Rome as himself tells us in the year 1532.

From the Church of Rome, which was the principal amongst these of the West,
let us proceed to see what other Churches thought of this matter. Sum: part.
(...) q. 89. artic. 8.
Thomas Aquinas, proposing the question whether the souls of them that are
departed, do know what things are done here: it being objected, that the dead
do often appear unto the living, as Samuel appeared unto Saul: concerning
Samuel he answers that it may be said that he appeared by divine revelation,
according to that in Eccle siasticus 46. or else, if the authority of that
book be not admitted, because it is not in the Canon of the Hebrews, it may
be said, that that apparition was procured by the devil.

Part: 3. tit. 18. c. 6. paragr. 2.
Antoninus Archbishop of Florence, affirms that the authority of the six
books questioned, is not sufficient to prove any thing that is in
controversy, and that Thomas secunda secundae, and Lyranus in his prologue
before the book of Tobias, do say, that those books are not ofsoe great
authority, that any sufficient proofs may be drawn from them in matters of
faith, as from the other books. And therefore pronounces, he thinks they
have such authority as the writings of the Fathers approved by the Church. And
Ibid. paragr 3.
he mentions a certain work entitled Catholicon, the authors name is not
known: but the same author, as he tells us, pronounces, that none of these
books were received for proof of matters of faith, but only for information of
manners. By this of Antoninus, who was present at the council of Florence, it
will easily appear to be merely supposititious, that we find in the
abridgment of that council by Caranza, that these books were pronounced to be
canonical: for had they bin so, neither would he nor others have rejected
them after the holding of this council: neither would such a decree have bin
omitted by all others that put out the counsels, at large and abridged.

Praefat. lib. 14.
Radulphus Flaviacensis, in his commentaries upon Leuiticus, speaking of books
pertaining to the sacred history, has these words. The books of Tobias,
Judith, and of the Macchabees, though they be read for the edification of the
Church yet have no perfect authority. De 6 aetatibus mundi.
Beda, after the history of Ezra, adds; thus far the divine scripture
contains the course of times, what things afterward we found digested among
the Jews, they are taken out of the book of Macchabees, Josephus, and the
writings of Africanus. It appears by the Epistle of Hilarie B. of Arles, that
in Massilia and in some other places of France, there were that took exception
to Augustine alleging a place out of the book n Inter opera Aug. tomo. 7.
of Wisdom cap. 4. Raptus est ne malitia mutaret intellectam eius; and
affirmed, that this testimony, as not being canonical, should have been
omitted.

De scripturis and scriptoribus sacris c. 6. item cap. 12.
Hugo de sancto victore, having reckoned the 22 books of the old Testament,
says: there are besides certain other books as the Wisdom of Solomon, the
book of Jesus the son of Sirach, Judith, Tobias, and the book of
Macchabees, which are read, but are not written in the canon: these he
matcheth p Exceptionum l: 2. c. 9.
in authority with the writings of the Fathers. Richardus de sancto victore,
delivers his opinion of the same books in the same sort; and makes them to
be q De authorit. vete: test am: Epistol. contra Petrobrusiano^.
of no greater authority then the writings of the Fathers.

Petrus Cluniacensis abbas, after an enumeration of all the books that are
canonical, says; there are yet besides these authentical books, 6 other
books not to be rejected, Judith, Tobias, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the two
books of Macchabees; which though they attain not to the high dignity of the
former, yet they are received of the Church as containing profitable and
necessary doctrine. Ockam, to the same purpose says, that according to
Hierome in his Prologue before the book of Proverbes: and Gregory Dialog.
part. 3. tract. 1. lib. 3. cap. 16.
in his Moralls, the book of Judith, Tobias, and the Macchabees,
Ecclesiasticus, and the book of Wisdom, are not to be received for
confirmation of any matter of faith. For Hierome says, as Gregory also does,
that the Church reads the books of Judith, Tobias, and the Macchabees, but
accounts them not amongst the Canonical Scriptures. So also it reads those
2 volumes of Ecclesiasticus, and Wisdom for the edification of the people, but
not for confirmation of points of faith and Religion.

in quaest. Armen l. 19. c 19.
Richardus Radulphus Archbishop of Armach, and Primate of Ireland, says, it is
defined in general Councels, that there are 22 authentical books of the Old
Testament. Lib. z. doct. fid. art. 2. c. 22.
Thomas Waldensis Provincial of the Carmelites here in England, an enemy to
Wickliff, whose works were greatly approved by Pope Martin and the Cardinals
at that time, has these words: The length, breadth, and depth of the city are
equal; for as in breadth it can enlarge it self no farther, then to the love
of GOD and our neighbor: nor in height nor depth, then to GOD the rewarder of
all; so in length, which is the Catholic Faith, it cannot grow beyond the 12
Articles contained in the Symbol, and found scattered in some of the 22
books; especially seeing the Holy Ghost says in the conclusion of all
Canonical Scripture, Let him that will, take of the water of life freely. I
profess unto every one that hears the words of this prophecy, if any man
shall add, GOD shall add to his plague.

Praefat. exposit. in Tobiam.
Lyra writes thus: Now that I have by Gods help written upon the Canonical
books of holy Scripture, beginning at Genesis, and so going on to the end;
trusting to the help of the same GOD, I intend to write upon those other
books that are not Canonical; such as are the book of Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus, Judith, Tobias, and the books of Macchabees: and adds, that
it is to be considered that these books which are not Canonical, are
received by the Church, and read in the same, for the information of manners,
yet is their authority thought to be too weak to prove things that are in
controversy. And writing upon the first of Esdras, 1. c. he says, that though
the books of Tobias, Judith, and the Macchabees, be historical books, yet
he intends to pasle them over: because they are not in the Canon, neither
with the Jews, nor with the Christians. Praef. in Mar. quaest. 2.
Tostatus Bishop of Abulen, approves the judgment of Lyra. Ximenius that was
made a Cardinal in the time of Leo the 10^, put forth the Bibles called Biblia
Complutensia; and in the Preface before the same, treating of the books by us
thought to be Apocryphal, he says, they are not in the Canon; and that the
Church reads them rather for edification of the people, then to confirm any
doubtful points of doctrine: and that therefore they are not Canonical.

Dionysius Carthusianus in his Prologues before the books of Ecclesiasticus,
and Tobias, denies them to be Canonical: as also the book of Judith: and
writing upon the first Chapter of Macchabees, he denies it to be Canonical.
De tradendis discip. l. 5.
Ludovicus Vives, treating of History sacred and profane; now come in, says
he, the books of Kings, and the Chronicles, the Apocryphal books of Hester,
Tobias, and Judith; Esdras, which being divided into four books, the two
first are accounted Canonical by the Hebrews, the two latter are Apocryphal.
And in Comment. in Aug. de civ. dei. l. 18. c. 31.
another place, speaking of the History of Susanna and Bell: he puts them
amongst the Apocrypha. With these accords De Eccles. dogm. l. 1. c. ult.
Driedo.

To these may be added the Glosses: The ordinary Gloss, was begun by
Alcuinus, as Antoninus Florentinus, and Hist Franc. l. 4. c. 1.
Gaguinus do think; or by Strabus, Fuldensis, as Trithemius and Bibliothecae,
lib. 4.
Sixtus Senensis think: but it was afterward enlarged by diverse, which
gathered sundry sentences, and sayings, out of the writings of the Fathers, and
put them into it. This Gloss grew to be in great request, and used in all
Churches of the West. In the preface thereof are these words: There are some
books canonical, some not canonical; between which there is as great
difference, as there is between that which is certain, and that which is
doubtful. For the canonical books were composed by the immediate direction
and suggestion of the holy spirit; they that are not canonical, are very good
and profitable, but their authority is not reputed sufficient to prove the
things that are questionable. This the author thinks so clear, that he
fastneth the note of ignorance upon all such as think otherwise; and
professes, that therefore he held it necessary to prefixe this preface,
because there are many, who not giving themselves much to the study of holy
Scripture, suppose that all those books that are bound up together in the
Bible, are to be in like sort honored and esteemed; not knowing how to put a
difference between books canonical, and not canonical, which the Hebrews
separate from the canon, and the Greeks account apocryphal; and so oftentimes
make themselves ridiculous to them that are learned. He cites the authority
of Origin, Hierome, and Ruffinus, rejecting the six books questioned; and
though he knew the opinion of Augustine, yet does he not follow it, only he
says, that amongst the books not canonical, they that are rejected by
Augustine, as Baruch and the third and fourth of Esdras, are less to be
esteemed, then those that he allows. And immediately after this preface,
follows Hieromes epistle to Paulinus, and afterward, his prologus galeatus;
and his prologue before the books of Solomon. And the gloss every where
inculcateth, when it comes to these six books, that they are not canonical.
Incipit liber Tobiae, etc. Here begins the book of Tobias which is not
canonical: etc. In the edition of the Bibles with the Glosses there is found
an exposition of the prologues of Hierome; written and composed by Brito, more
ancient then Lyra, for he is cited by 2 prolog. in exposit. suas.
him,: and honored with the title of a famous and worthy man, who professes
that the books questioned are not canonical.

Did. 15 canone sancta Roman^.
Gratian in the decree makes no mention of the opinion of Gelasius, touching
the canonical Scriptures, disliking, as it seems, his opinion, and yet not
willing to oppose against it. But the Did. 16. cano^ canones qui, glossa in
verbum apocrypha.
Gloss upon the next distinction says; there are certain apocryphal books
that is without author, as the Wisdom of Solomon, the book of Jesus the
son of Sirach, called Ecclesiasticus, the book of Judith, the book of
Tobias, and the books of the Macchabees; these books are said to be
apocryphal, and yet they are read but happily not generally. De Eccles. dogma.
l. 1. c. 4.
Driedo cites this place of the gloss, and reprehendeth the author of it, as
not giving the true reason why these books are called apocryphal, but yet
thinks as he does, that they are apocryphal.

Sanctes Pagninus, in his epitome of historical books that are canonical,
prefixed before the Bible, translated by him into Latin, accounts all those
that Hierome does, to be canonical; the rest hagiographall. Bruciolus, in the
preface of his commentaries upon the Bible, translated by him into Italian,
says, he has commented upon all the books of the old testament, and yet he
has not commented upon the six books that are questioned. In the Bibles put
out at Antwerpe, by Arias Montanus, with the interlineall translation, all
those books are omitted. In the edition of the Bible printed at Antwerpe by
Birkmannus, that very year that the council of Trent was holden, to determine
this point, touching the Canonical and Apocryphal Scriptures and the like:
the author, suppressing his name, prefixeth a preface before the same his
edition: and in it rejects all the books now questioned, in more peremptory
sort, then many of the former did.

Here we see a cloud of witnesses, in all ages, and in all parts of the world,
witnessing to the truth of that we affirm, touching the canon of the
Scripture, and rejecting those books as Apocryphal, or not Canonical, which
we reject, even till and after the time of Luther: so that the Church wherein
our Fathers lived and died is found as I said, to be in this point a
Protestant Church: wherefore let us proceed to other particular points of
controversy.

CHAP. 2.
Of the sufficiency of the Scripture.

THat the Church formerly did not deny the sufficiency of the Scripture for
the direction of Christian men in matters of faith and religion, as the
Romanists now do; but acknowledged and taught, that it contains all things
necessary to salvation, accordingly as we now profess, it appears by the
testimonies of these divines Lib. 1. d. 1. q. 1. artic. 2.
Gregorius Ariminensis, sometimes Prior general of the friars Heremites of the
order of Saint Augustine, writing upon the sentences, has these words: That is
properly a theological discourse, that consists of sayings or propositions
contained in the holy scripture, or of such as are deduced thence, or at the
least of such as are consequent, and to be deduced from one of these: this
says he, is proved, ex communi omnium conceptione; nam omnes arbitrantur tunc
solum theologice aliquid probari, cum ex dictis probatur sacrae scripturae, out
of the common conceit and apprehension of all men: for all men do think that
then only a thing is proved theologically, when it is proved out of the
sayings of holy Scripture: and if we distinguish theological conclusions,
from principles theological, I affirm that all those verities that are not
formally and in precise words contained in holy scripture, but are necessarily
deduced from things so contained in it, are conclusions theological, whether
they be determined by the Church or not: for the Church determines that a
proposition is to be believed precisely, because it sees, it is necessarily
deduced from the words of holy Scripture: but no other that is not so deduced,
is to be accounted a theological conclusion: which is proved out of the
sayings of Saint Augustine in his fourteenth book de Trinitate cap. 1. where
he says, he does not conceive, that all that, that may be known by man in
humane things, pertains to this science, but those things only whereby the
most wholesome faith, that leads to true happiness is begotten, nourished,
defended, and strengthened: but it is evident, that every such thing, is either
expressly and in precise terms contained in holy scripture, or is deduced
from things so contained in it: for otherwise, the Scripture should not be
sufficient to our salvation, and the defense of our faith, which is contrary to
Saint August: 2 de doctrina Christiana where he says, Quicquid homo extra
didicerit, si noxium est ibi damnatur, si vtile, ibi inuenitur: that is,
whatsoever a man shall learn without and beside the scripture, if it be
hurtful, it is there condemned, if profitable it is there found. Here we have
a pregnant testimony, of a man of eminent place, and great worth, peremptorily
resolving for the sufficiency of the Scripture, and assuring us, that this was
not his private conceit, but the general opinion of all men in his time, and
be fore.

Prolog. 1. sent q. 2.
Scotus agrees with Ariminensis, his words are these, Whatsoever pertains to
the heavenly and supernatural knowledge, and is necessary to be known of man
in this life, is sufficiently delivered in the sacred Scriptures; and in Prolog
q 3. ad tertiam q.
another place, Sicut theologia beatorum habet terminum, ita and nostra ex
voluntate Dei revelantis: terminus autem praefixus a voluntate divina, quantum
ad revelationem generalem, est eorum quae sunt in sacra scriptura: quia sicut
habetur Apocalyp. ultimo, Qui apposuerit ad haec, apponet ei Deus plagas quae
apponuntur in libro isto; igitur theologia nostra de facto non est nisi de his
quae continentur in scriptura, and de his quae possunt elici ex ipsis; that is,
As the Theology of those blessed ones that are in heaven has a certain
bound, without, and beyond which it extends not it self; so also that
theological knowledge that we have, has bounds set unto it by the will of
God, that reveals divine and heavenly truth unto us, and the bound prefixed
by the will of God, who generally will reveal no more, is within the compass
of such things, as are found in the holy Scripture; because, as it is in the
last of the Revelation, whosoever shall add unto these things, GOD shall add
unto him the plagues that are added in this book.

Prolog. l. 2. p. 1. c. 1
Ockam in his Dialogues says; There is one opinion, that only those verities
are to be esteemed Catholic, and such as are necessarily to be believed for
the attaining of salvation, which either expressly are delivered in Scripture,
or by necessary consequence may be inferred from things so expressed; and that
they that follow this opinion, allege sundry authorities for proof of the
same, as that of Augustine: Ego solis scripturarum libris e Epist. ad Hieron.
didici hunc timorem, honoremque defer, ut earum nullum authorem in aliquo
errasse firmissime credam, etc. alios autem ita lego, ut quantalibet
sanctitate, quantave doctrina polleant, non ideo verum putem quia ita ipsi
senserint, sed quia per alios authors canonicos, vel probabiles rations, quod
a vero non aberrent, mihi persuadere potuerunt. I have learned to give this
honor and reverence only to the books of Scripture, as that I should believe
that none of the authors of them in ought have erred, etc: But others I so
read, that how great soever their sanctity and learning be, I do not
therefore think that to be true which they have written, because it was their
opinion, but because they are able to persuade me, either by some other
canonical Authors, or by probable reasons, that they have not erred from the
truth. And in another place; Quis nesciat sanctam scripturam f De unico
baptism.
canonicam tam veteris quam noui testamenti certis terminis suis contineri,
eamque posterioribus omnibus Episcoporum libris praeponi, ut de illa omnino
dubitari and disceptari non possit, vtrum verum vel utrum rectum sit quicquid
in ea scriptum esse constiterit: Episcoporum autem literas, quae post
confirmatum canonem; vel scriptae sunt, vel scribuntur, and per sermonem forte
sapientiorem cuiuslibet in ea re peritioris, and per aliorum Episcoporum
graviorem auctoritatem, doctioremque prudentiam, and per concilia reprehendi
licere, si quid in iis forte a veritate est deviatum? Who knows not that the
holy Canonical Scripture, as well of the Old as the New Testament, is
contained within it is certain bounds: and that it is preferred before all the
Books of Bishops that have been written since: so that there may be no
doubt made, nor dispute raised concerning it, whether whatsoever is certainly
known to be registered in it, be true or right. But that the letters of
Bishops, which either have been or are written since the confirmation of the
Canon, may be reprehended if in any thing they have strayed from the truth,
both by the speech perchance wiser, of some one better skilled in that matter,
and by the more grave authority and more learned wisdom of other Bishops, and
by general counsels. And Hierom; Quod de Scripturis authoritatem non habet
eadem facilitate contemnitur qua probatur: That which has not authority and
confirmation from the Scriptures is with like facility rejected as it is urged.
Others he shows to be of a contrary opinion; but being pressed to give
instance of things necessarily believed, and yet not contained in the
Scripture, they give no other but certain matters of fact; as that the
Apostles composed the Symbol called the Apostles creed, that Peter was at Rome,
and things of that nature.

Ockam in this place delivers not his own opinion, but only recites the
contrary opinions of other men: but in another place, inveighing against the
Canonists, and going about to prove that it principally pertayneth to divines,
to define, and determine, what is catholic, and what heretical; after many
convincing reasons, he adds this in the conclusion. Dialog. l. (...). p. 1.
cap. 2.
The defining of things in this kind, pertayneth principally to the professors
of that science, to which nothing may be added, and from which nothing may be
detracted; but of this sort is the profession of divines; and therefore Moses
says in the person of God Deuteronomie 4. Ye shall not add unto the word I
speak unto you, neither shall ye take from it: to which that of Solomon
answers, Proverb. 30. where speaking of the word of God, he says: Add
nothing to his words, least thou be reproved, and found a liar: And hence it is
that the holy Ghost does terribly threaten by John the Evangelist, in the last
of the Revelation, all them that add or take any thing from the holy
Scripture; saying, If any man shall add more then this, God shall add unto
him the plagues that are in this book, and if any man shall take any thing
from the words of the Prophecy of this book, God shall take his part out of
the book of life, and out of the holy city. By all which it is evidently
collected, that nothing is to be added to the holy Scripture, nor nothing to
be taken from it.

Lib. 1. sent. q. 1. EE.
Cardinal Cameracensis agrees fully with Ariminensis before cited; for first
he distinguishes principles, and conclusions theological; principles he
makes to be the verities of the sacred canon; conclusions to be those
verities which are not sound formally, and in express words, or precise
terms, in Scripture, but may necessarily be deduced from things so contained;
whether they be articles, or not; whether they be determined by the Church,
or not determined: and then pronounces, that that only is a theological
discourse which consists of sayings and propositions contained in the sacred
Scriptures, or of such as may be deduced from them, and that then only we
say a thing is theologically proved, when it is concluded out of the words of
holy Scripture.

To these we may add Doctrinal. fid. l. 2. art. 2. c. 19.
Waldensis, his words are these, That Wickliffe affirms, that neither Friars
nor Prelates may define any thing in matters of faith, unless they have the
authority of sacred Scripture, or some special revelation, I dislike not, but
I condemn his way wardnesse and craft, and think it necessary least we wrest
the Scriptures and err in the interpretation of them, to follow the tradition
of the Church, expounding them unto us, and not to trust to our own private
and singular conceits. ^ Gerson acknowledges as k Sermon: in die
circumcisionis domini consid. prim^.
much as the rest: his words are these: What evils, what dangers, what
confusions have followed the contempt ofsacred Scripture, which is sufficient
for the government of the Church, or else, Christ was an imperfect lawgiuer,
experience will teach us. The author of that most pious and worthy work
called Part. 6. c. 79.
Destructorium vitiorum has sundry things for confirmation of this point: As,
says he, corporal things here below may in some sort be known, without the
benefit of corporal light: for one may know the length, breadth, and other
dimensions of such a thing, and may in the dark discern, whether it be long
or short, but whether it be fair or foul, white or black, we cannot
certainly know: So it is in things that are to be discerned intellectually,
for though Philosophers excelling in mundane wisdom, and lacking the light of
faith, had some kind of knowledge of God, as that he is the beginning and
cause of all things, yet could they not know how fair, how good, how
merciful, and how glorious he is: neither did ever any man know it; but
either by divine revelation, or by the information of the holy Scripture; so
that the holy Scripture is that light, by which in this state of wayfaring men,
we may have sufficient knowledge of all things necessary to salvation: whence
it is, that the Psalmist says: Thy word is a lantern to my feet, and a
light to my steps. But as experience does teach, that he that will be
lighted by the light of a candle, must have the candle before him, and must
follow it: but that if he shall cause it to be brought after him in the
darkness of the night, it will not give him light to any purpose: so they
that walk in the darkness of this life, if they desire to be lighted by the
candle of Gods word, and to direct their goings in the way of truth without
falling, they must have the light of Gods word before their eyes, and must
follow it by well doing. But even as, if a candle be carried out in the
darkness of the night, where brute beasts, as horses and the like, are, they
will run from it: whereas birds will come toward it: So bestiall men that
are like horses and mules, fly from the light of the Scriptures, according to
that of John. 3. Every one that does evil, hates the light, neither does he
come to the light, least his works should be reproved.

For confirmation of that he says, he alleges a most excellent discourse
of Bishop Super Evangel.
Grosthead: who entreating of that history in the 1 Kings. 19. where the Angel
of the Lord said to Elias, go forth and stand in the mountain before the
Lord, and he stood and saw, and behold a wind passed by him, overthrowing the
mountains, and tearing the rocks in sunder, but the Lord was not in the
wind: and after the wind an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the
earthquake: and after the earthquake fire, but the Lord was not in the fire:
and after the fire a still small voice, and there was the Lord: shows that
God is not found in any other science, but in the holy Scripture only which is
given by divine inspiration: and for farther illustration hereof notes, that
there were three wels dug by Isaak, Genesis, 26. For he dug the first,
and the Philistines strove for it: likewise the second, and they claymed it
also: wherefore he left them both, and dug a third, which he peaceably
enjoyed, and called the name of it Robooth, that is, latitude, because the
waters of it were enlarged: and to the first of these wells, he compares
natural sc^ences, to wit, the seven liberal arts, as logic, in which there
is much brawling and contending: to the second, such science as we learn for
gain sake, and to get preferment, as is the knowledge of humane laws,
according to those verses. Dat Galenus opes and sanctio Iustiniana.
Ex aliis paleas, existis collige grana.
To the third he compares divine knowledge, and says, that that well was
rightly named Robooth, that is, latitude, because the waters of it were
enlarged: So the heavenly doctrine was published to all parts of the world by
the Apostles, and other faithful preachers, according to that of the Psalmist,
Their sound is gone forth into all the earth: and the Lord inviteth his elect
to come and drink the waters of this well, saying, all ye that are thirsty
come to these waters; and the words of Christ move all earnestly to thirst
after these waters, when he says, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst
after righteousness: but the ungodly having tasted of the wine of mundane joy,
and temporal riches, hate, dislike, and put from them this water, and
therefore the Lord says well of them by the Prophet Esaias: 8. Because this
people have refused the waters of Siloe that run softly and without noise,
and have taken rather Rasin and the son of Romelia, I will bring upon them
the mighty waters of of the flood. Siloe is interpreted sent, and it signifies
the doctrine of the divine Law, sent unto us by Christ, the Apostles, and other
faithful ones, which doctrine the Pastors of the Church are bound under the
pain of damnation to know and teach; whereupon Isidore says, de summo bono
lib. 3. c. 46. The Priests shall be damned for the iniquity of the people, if
either they neglect to teach them being ignorant, or to reprove them when they
offend, the Lord having said by the Prophet, I have set thee as a watchman
over the house of Israel, and if thou shall not tell the wicked of his
wickedness, that he forsake his evil way, he shall dye in his iniquity, but I
will require his blood at thy hand. Notwithstanding all this, many of the
modern Priests cast from them this learning, and say, we will none of it,
because it is not de pane lucrando, that is, it serves not to bring in gain
and profit; and give themselves to the study of humane laws, which are not so
necessary for the saving of souls as the law of God: because as Odo says here
upon the Gospel, sermon 39. If Christ had known, that we might more easily
attain salvation by the Laws of Justinian, he would surely have taught them
us with his own mouth, and have let that alone which he taught us, and
delivered unto us, et in qua continetur implicit, vel explicit, omnis
scientia ad salutem necessario requisita, and in which is contained expressly
or implicitly all knowledge necessarily required to salvation, according to
that of S. Augustine 2. de doctrina Christiana in fine. Whatsoever a man
learneth without and beside the holy Scripture, if it be hurtful it is there
condemned, if it be profitable it may there be found. But many Churchmen
leave this learning, and take unto them Rasin, and the son of Romelia; Rasin
signifies a picture; and Romelia, high and mighty thunder, so that by Rasin,
and the son of Romelia we may understand painted and glorious words, and
that wordy thunder of humane laws, which kinds of learning many
Ecclesiastical persons assume, that they may be by such profession exalted in
the courts of great Lords; and for this cause, as the Prophet adds, the Lord
shall bring upon them the mighty and great waters of the flood, that is,
infernal punishments, so says Odo.

Hitherto he has alleged the words of Grosthead and Odo. In Part. 4. c. 12.
another place he says concerning them that so contemn the word of God, that
the Lord complains of such by the Prophet Ierem. 2. saying, My people has
done two evils, they have forsaken me the fountain of living water, and have
dug to themselves broken cisterns, to which, as Gulielmus Parisiensis says,
the decree or canon law may fitly be compared, which is a broken cisterne that
cannot hold water, which though it have water to day, shall have none to
morrow, because it shall be abrogated: whereas touching the Law of God it is
otherwise: and therefore the Psalmist says: thy righteousness, O Lord, is an
everlasting righteousness, and thy law is truth. Yet is the holy Scripture
much contemned by the profession of the Canonists; so that the knowledge of
holy Scripture, and profession of Divinity, may say to an ill Advocate, or
Lawyer, as Sara said to Abraham, in the 16 of Genesis: Thou dealest ill with
me: I gave thee my handmaid into thy bosom, who seeing that she had conceived,
despised me: for, as Gulielmus Parisiensis says, de vitiis part. 4. cap. 6.
The profession of Canonists contemns the profession of Divines, and science
of holy Scripture, because they are not so gainefull, as it is. When Ismael and
Isaac played together, Ismael mocked Isaac, so that Sar^ was forced to
entreat Abraham to cast out the bondwoman and her son. So happily it were
behoofefull and profitable for the Church, that this Science in a great part
should be cast out; because it not only contemns the divine Science, and Law
of God, but blasphemeth it: and in so doing contemns and blaspheameth God
himself, who is the lawgiuer.

Here we have the opinion of three worthy men touching the sufficiency of the
Scripture, and the dangers, confusions, and horrible evils, that followed upon
the multiplying of humane inventions. Many more might be alleged to the same
purpose; but these may suffice to let us know what the doctrine of the Church
was in the days of our Fathers; for they deliver not their private conceits,
but tell us what all good and judicious men conceived of these things in their
times.

But some men will say, we find often mention of traditions in the writers of
former ages, so that it seems, they did not think the Scriptures to
contain all things necessary to salvation. For the clearing of this doubt, we
must observe that by the name of tradition, sometimes, all the doctrine of
Christ and his blessed Apostles is meant, that was first delivered by lively
voice, and afterward written. Sometimes the delivering of the divine and
canonical books from hand to hand, as received from the Apostles, is named a
tradition. Sometimes the sum of Christian religion contained in the Apostles
creed, which the Church receives as a rule of her faith, is named a tradition;
but every one of those articles is found in the Scripture, as Waldensis rightly
notes, though not together nor in the same form; so that this colection may
rightly be named a tradition, as having been delivered from hand to hand in
this form, for the direction of the Churches children; and yet the Scriptures
be sufficient. Sometimes by the name of traditions the Fathers understand
certain rites and ancient observations; And that the Apostles delivered some
things in this kind, by word, and lively voice, that they wrote not, we easily
grant; but which they were, it can hardly now be known, as Waldensis rightly
notes. But this proves not the insufficiency of the Scripture; for none of
those Fathers speak of points of doctrine, that are to be believed without and
besides the Scripture, or that cannot be proved from thence; though sometimes
in a general sort, they name all those points of religion, traditions, that
are not found expressly, and in precise terms, in Scripture, and yet may
necessarily be deduced from things there expressed. Lastly by the name of
tradition, is understood the sense and meaning of the Scripture, received from
the Apostles and delivered from hand to hand together with the books.

There are, says Defens: lib. de officio pij. viri prope principium.
Cassander, 3 sorts of traditions; for some concern the doctrine of faith,
others rites and ceremonies; and a third sort, things done. They that concern
rites and ceremonies, are variable according to the different circumstances of
times; they that are historical, are for the most part uncertain and are not
necessary to salvation: they that are dogmaticall are certain and perpetual:
but De officio pij viri in principio.
by dogmaticall traditions we understand, not any divine verity not written,
or any point of doctrine not contained in the Scripture, but such points of
doctrine, as though they are not found in precise terms in holy scripture, yet
are deduced from the same rightly understood, and interpreted; as the Apostles
did understand, and expound them to their hearers, and they to such as came
after them. So that this tradition is nothing else but the explication and
interpretation of the Scripture: and therefore it may be said not unfitly,
Scripturam esse implicatam quandam and obsignatam traditionem, traditionem vero
esse Scripturam explicatam and resignatam. that the Scripture is a kind of
tradition inuolued and sealed up: and that tradition is Scripture unfolded,
explained, and opened. This is that, which Contr. haeres. cap. 2.
Vincentius Lyrinensis long since delivered, to wit, that the Scripture is
sufficient, and contains all things necessary to be known of a Christian man,
for the attaining of salvation: but that for the avoiding of the manifold
turnings of heretics, perverting the same to their own perdition, we must
carefully look to the tradition of the Church, delivering unto us the true
sense and meaning of it. By this which has been said, it appears, that the
Church wherein our Fathers lived and died, was, in this point touching the
sufficiency of the Scripture, an orthodoxe and true Protestant Church, as it
was in the former, touching the canon of the Scripture.

CHAP. 3.
Of the original text of Scripture, of the certainety and truth of the
originalls, and of the authority of the vulgar translation, I have discoursed
at large in my fourth book, and the 27. 28. chapters of the same; and made it
appear, that the principal and best learned divines, at, and since Luthers
time, taught no otherwise touching these points then we now do, so that I
need not insist upon the proof hereof.

CHAP. 4.
Of the translating of the Scripture into vulgar languages, and of the
necessity of having the public liturgy, and prayers of the Church, in a
tongue understood.

TOuching the translating of the Scriptures, it is evident, that both
aunciently, and of late time, they have been translated into the several
languages, of almost all the countries and kingdoms of the whole world, where
ever Christianity prevailed. Sixtus Senensis biblio sa^ct: l 4. vbi de
Chrysostomo loquitur.
There is extant a translation of the old and new testament in the Armenian
tongue, which the Armenians now use, put forth, as they suppose, by
Chrysostom: of this, George the patriarch of Alexandria makes mention, in the
life of Chrysostom; reporting, that when by the Emperors decree, he was sent
in banishment into Armenia, and stayed at Cucusum, he brought the inhabitants
of that region to the faith of Christ; and caused the Psalms of David,
together with the holy gospells, and other histories of the old Testament, to
be translated into the Armenian tongue; that so the people of that country,
might the sooner and more easily attain the knowledge of holy Scripture. And
Lib. 5. de cu randis graecorum affectibus post medium.
Theodoret testifies that the holy Scriptures were translated into the
Armenian tongue before his time, though he name not the author.

The Slavonians affirm, that they have the Scriptures in their vulgar tongue,
turned by Saint Hierome; and Hierome himself, in his epistle to Sophronius,
seems to some learned men to intimate so much. But yet there is another
translation also of the Scriptures into the Slavonian tongue, later then that
of Hieromes, as Diat tib. de linguis Europae
Scaliger has observed, written in the Servian character, and used in Rascia,
Bosina, Bulgaria, Moldavia, Russia, Moscovia, and other nations, of the
Slavonian language, that celebrate their liturgies after the Greek ceremony;
of which later Methodius the companion of Cyrill is reported to have been the
author. The former imputed to Hierome, is written in the Dalmatian character,
and is used amongst the Liburnians, and Dalmatians, Istrians, Moravians,
Silesians, Bohemians, Polonians, etc.

Vulphilas the Goth, (of whom Sixtus Senensis bibl. l. 4.
Socrates makes mention in his ecclesiastical history) who lived in the
year 370, first found out the Gothicke alphabet, and first of all delivered to
the Goths all the divine Scriptures, translated e (...). 4. c. 27.
by him out of Greek into the Gothicke tongue; and catholiquely expounded
them, striving much against the Arrians; yet in the end, as Theodoret
reports, he declined to the part of Valens the Arrian Emperor, moved so to
do by the threats and promises of Eudoxus the Arrian.

Neither were the Scriptures translated only into these languages, but into
the languages of many other nations, as (...), Indi, Per^ ^opes, and (...),
etc. Chrysostom. hom. (...) ^an.
Chrysostom and Hier. praefa: in Evangelia.
Hierome affirm: and in particular into the Egyptian, Persian, Indian,
Scythian, and Sarmatian tongues; and into the languages of all other nations
that received the Christian faith, as Lib. 5 de curandis Graecorum affect. post
medium.
Theodoret tells us. As likewise in the times following, we read of the like
translations of the Scripture, into sundry languages of such Nations, as were
afterward converted to the Faith, or whose languages after altered. So
Vasaeusin chro. Hisp. ad annum 717.
John Archbishop of Sivill about the year 717, translated it into the
Arabique, which then was the vulgar speech of that part of Spain. And Ioannes
Trev. l. 5. c. 24.
Beda about the same time some part of it, into the Saxon or English. Aventinus
l. 4. annal. p. 434.
Methodius about the year 860, into the Slavonique; Iacobus de Voragine,
Archbishop of Genua, about the year 1290, translated the whole divine
Scripture into the Italian tongue, and so did Bruciolus in our age. Sixtus
Senensis Biblioth. sanct. l. 4. in Iacobus Archicp. Genuensis.
About 200 years since the whole Bible was translated into French, in the time
of Charles the 5th; and as the Rhemists tell us, in their preface before the
New Testament by them translated into English, since Luthers time, diverse
learned Catholics have published the Bible, in the several Languages of
almost all the principal provinces of the Latin Church; so that the Papists
themselves do not simply condemn the translating of the Scripture into the
vulgar tongues. n Preface to the Rhemish Testament.


But there are some amongst them, as Controv. 5. q. 3. art. 4. explicatione
articuli.
Stapleton tells us, who out of zeal rather then knowledge, do think the
Lay people should be wholly restrained from reading the Scriptures in vulgar
tongues: others more moderate and discreet then these (as they would be
thought) are of opinion that all are not to be restrained, nor all permitted
to read them, but some certain only. And therefore the Preface to the New
Testament.
Rhemists tell us, that order was taken by the Deputies of the Indice lib.
pro^b. regula 4
Council of Trent in this behalf, and confirmed by supreme authority, that
the holy Scriptures, though truly and Catholiquely translated into vulgar
tongues, yet may not be indifferently readde of all men, nor of any other then
such as have express license thereunto by their lawful ordinaries, with good
testimony from their Curates or Confessors, that they are humble, discreet,
and devout persons, and like to take much good, and no harm thereby. This was
the decree of Pius 4: but Clement the 8th, in a later edition of the same
Index, with new additions, Observat. in regulam. 4.
says, that this power of permitting Laymen to have the Scriptures in the
vulgar tongue, was taken away by the mandate, and practice of the Roman Church,
and of the general inquisition, so that they may not permit any to have the
whole Bible in the vulgar tongue, or any parts of the Old or New Testament, or
any summaries or epitomies, though historical of the same Bibles; and this he
prescribes to be inviolably kept. Thus does he condemn the practice of all
the Churches of God, which had the Scriptures translated into vulgar Languages;
(for to what end should they be translated, if no man might use them?) and
together with them his Predecessor Pius the 4th, and all the learned Prelates
that concurred with him; and falls into the folly or indiscretion which
Stapleton condemns, as we heard before. Thus variable and uncertain are
these Roman Bishops, who yet would be taken not only to be built upon the
Rock, but to be that Rock upon which the Church is builded, against which the
gates of hell cannot prevail.

But, as Stapleton tells us, in the place above cited, There were certain
Catholic and great men, (and in the margent he names Sir In Dialog.
Anglicanis.
Thomas More) who thought it fit, as tending to the honor of God, and
salvation of the people, to deliver unto them the Scriptures in the vulgar
tongue, without any restraint, leaving it free to all to read them that will;
for that so many good and godly Christians who would receive great comfort, and
be much edified thereby, are not to be deprived of that most excellent
benefit, which they may have by reading them, in respect of few or many
unlearned or unstable men, who deprave the scripture to the perdition of
themselves and others, as S. Peter says in his 2 Epistle cap. 32. No more then
it had been fit that Christ the Lord, should have forborne to come and save
others, in respect of such wicked ones, to whom his coming is a rock of
offense, and a stone to stu^ble at: or that he that is the true light, that
lighteneth every man that comes into the world should therefore have kept him
self away, or not appeared to the world, because men loved darkness more then
light; And surely if the vulgar free and ordinary reading of the scripture,
were to be denied and restrained, in respect of the wicked who abuse it, the
scripture must never have bin in the Hebrew, Greek, or Latin tongues; for all
these tongues were vulgar to the Jews, Grecians, and Romans; This opinion
Stapleton confesses to be probable and godly, and yet he disliketh it.

And yet it is confirmed by the authority of the Fathers, who earnestly exhort
the people to the reading of the scripture, as a thing necessary to salvation.
So does Chrysostom, in sundry places, 2 Homily upon Matthew. Semper hortor and
hortari non desinam, vt non hic tantum attendadatis ijs quae dicuntur, verum
etiam quum domi fue^s, assidue diuinatum scripturarum lectioni (...).
3. (...) Lectionem diuinarum scripturarum ad solos monachos putatis pertinere
cum multo magis vobis quam illis sit necessaria.
Homily upon Lazarus. At nescio inquit quae scripto sunt in scripturis. Q^?
Nam^n (...), number Roman^. number alia lingu^ dicta sunt? an non (...) dicuntur?
3. Homily upon the second to the Thessalonians. non solum c^ (...) ^tis, sed
and (...) diuinos libros in manus sumite
28. Homily upon Genesis. 9. Homily upon the Epistle to the Colossians, where
he says, the Apostle commands secular men that are married to read the
scripture; and whereas St Paul to the Colossians 3. has these words, Let the
word of Christ dwell plentifully in you in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing your selves in Psalms, hymmes and spiritual songs, Chrysostom in
his ninth Homily and Hierome in his commentaries upon the same place, collect,
and infer, that the Scriptures are to be read of Lay men, and that by the
precept of the Apostle. It is therefore untrue, that Stapleton vbi supra art.
4. (...) fol. ^rgumenti.
Stapleion has, that Chrysostom does not exhort the people to the reading of
the scripture, as a thing necessary, but as fit and profitable for them, that
lived idly in a rich city, thus to occupy them selves; as if it had been
only to keep them from doing nothing, that they were to read the book of
God. Neither is it any better, that he has in answer hereunto, that
Chrysostom spoke not exactly, but as a preacher or orator; as if in the
pulpit a Preacher might exhort the people with all earnestness, to that which
is not fit to be done; or as if there were not many now adays, that live
idly in rich cities.

From the translating of the Scriptures into vulgar tongues, and the peoples
private reading of the same, let us come to speak of the public liturgy of
the Church, and the common prayers in the vulgar tongue. Here I will first show
what the practice of the Church has been; and secondly, what the opinion of
Judicious men is and has been touching this point: That in the Primitive
Church they had the service in the vulgar tongue, it is evident by the
testimonies of the ancient. For first Lib. (...). p. 799.
Origin writing against Celsus, and answering that calumniation of them that
said, Christians used certain barbarous words and names of God, in their
prayers, supposing virtue to be in them, more then in Greek or Latin words,
or names; tells them, there is no such thing: but that they that are true and
right Christians, in their prayers use not the names of God found in the
Scripture written in Hebrew; but the Grecians use greek words; the Latins,
latin: and all pray, and praise God, in their own tongue; and he that is the
Lord of all tongues hears the^, in what tongue soever they pray: and
understands them speaking in so different languages, no less then if they
all used one language.

Bellarmine says, in the time of the Apostles the whole people was wont to
answer Amen in the celebration of divine service, and not as now by one
appointed in their steed: For Justin Martyr testifies expressly in his 2
apology that the whole people was wont to answer amen, when the Priest ended
his prayer or thanksgiving; and it is evident that the same use was continued
a long time after, both in the East and West, as it appears by the liturgy of
Chrysostom, where the things that were to be said by the priest, deacon, and
people, are distinctly set down. And by Cyprian in his sermon upon the Lords
prayer: where he says, the people do answer, we lift them up unto the Lord,
when the priest wills them to lift up their hearts, and by Hierome praefat:
lib. 2. in epist. ad Galatas, who writes that in the Churches of the city of
Rome the people are heard with so loud a voice, sounding out amen, as if it
were a thundering from heaven. Thus far Bellarmine in his 2 book de verbo
Dei, chap. 16: which argues that they had their service in a known tongue,
for otherwise how could they thus have answered to the several parts of the
divine service as they were appointed to do: surely the long answers of the
people to the priest in their prayers, found in sundry Anaphora Syror. etc.
liturgies are a demnostration that it was so.

cap. 9.
August. de chatechizandis rudibus, has these words. Let them know, that there
is no other voice that enters into the ears of God, but the affection of the
mind: and then they will not deride the prelates and ministers of the Church,
if happily they discern any of them to use barbarismes, or solecismes, in the
invocation of God, or not to understand the words they pronounce, nor aptly and
distinctly to utter them: not as if these faults were not to be amended, that
so the people might answer amen, to that which plainly and distinctly they
understand: but that they should learn lovingly to bear with these defects,
having learned, vt sono in foro, sic voto in ecclesia benedici: and that
forensis illa nonnunquam forte bona dictio, nunquam tamen benedictio dici
potest.

Aluar. histor. Aethiop. c. 159.
The Aethiopians or Habassines anciently had, and still have the common
prayers, and whole liturgy, in their own vulgar tongue, into which language
Supplement. ^ist. lib. 8.
Sabellicus reports, that both the old and new Testament were translated out
of the Chalde. The Armenians have their divine service in the Armenian tongue,
as Hist. oriental. cap. 78.
Iacobus a vitriaco, descript. terrae sanctae.
Brocardus, De Sarmatia li. 2 c. 1.
Michouius, Peregrinat. c. de Armen.
Breitenbachius, and many others, partly out of their own knowledge and partly
from certain relation have recorded. The Guagnin. descrip. Moschouiae: cap.
(...). 5 Posseuin. de rebus Moscoviticis. p. 4. 5 Sigismund: de rebus
Moscouiticis. p. 34.
Moscouites and Russians have their service in their vulgar language, which is
a kind of Slauonian, intermingling sometimes certain greek hymns: the
epistle, and gospel, that the people may the better hear and understand, are
read with a loud voice without the quier, in the middle of the Church. Neither
have those Russians only their service in the vulgar, that are subject to the
great Duke of Mosco, but they also that are subject to the King of Polonia.
Vitriac. hist. Oriental. c. 76. 7 Osorius de rebus Emanuel. l. 3.
The Nestorians have their service in a degenerate Chalde, or Syriack, and so
have the Posseuin. apparat. sacr: in Diamperiense concilium.
Indians from which their vulgar differs very little. The Iacobites of
Mesopotamia, Babylon, Palestine, Syria, and Cyprus, have their liturgy in the
Syriaque tongue, (and it is that which is called In biblioth. patrum romans 6. p.
27.
anaphora Basilii as it is thought) which though it be not well understood by
their common people (their vulgar, as now it is, differing something from it,)
yet that it was commonly understood, when that liturgy was first ordained, it
appears by the long answers of the people to the priest, in their prayers
which we find in it. The Maronites likewise have their service in the
Syriaque, their vulgar being the Arabique. As also the Egyptians have their
service in the same bastard Chaldee or Syriaque, their vulgar being the
Arabique: but these first read the Gospel in Chalde and afterward in
Arabique.

Apud Thom. a Jesus. li. 7. c. 11.
Marianus Victorius Reatinus says, that as the Chalde tongue depends of the
Hebrew, and grows out of it, so the Syriaque, Arabique and Ethiopian tongues
have dependence on the Chalde, and are grown out of it, so that they also have
the name of the Chalde: and these five tongues have such agreement amongst
themselves, and are so like, that he that perfectly understands * Guido
Fabritius in his preface before the new Testament says, the Hebrew tongue is
divided into 3. dialects, the Babilonicall or Chaldaicall: the Syrian, or
Hierosolymitan: the Arabique, or tongue of Ismaell as the Jews call it. The
first was the dialect of such Jews as never returned after the captivity of
Babylon, where they had learned a kind of mixed language, the second of such as
returned to Jerusalem and brought back a mixed language, and after their
return by new mixtures made it farther to degenerate from the original
surity.
one, may in a great part understand the other. And therefore it is not to be
maruailled, if all these Churches last mentioned have their service in the
Chaldee or Syriaque: for it is in a sort their mother tongue, and noe doubt was
perfectly understood by them, when their liturgies were first devised. The
Georgians, Circassians, and Mengrellians, are said to have their service in
Greek; and so are the Syrians, or Melchites, but if that Liturgy which
Andraeas Masius translated out of the Syriaque, and which is found in the 6
Tome of Biblioth. Patrum, and is named Anaphora Basilii, be theirs, then
surely they celebrate not in Greek.

But to leave these Eastern Churches, and to come to those that are nearer to
us; we may divide all the Churches of this part of the world into three sorts;
For some of them aunciently understood and spoke Latin, as they did in
Augustine's time in those parts of Africa wherein he lived, and therefore it is
not to be marvailed at if they had their Liturgy in the Latin tongue, for
they understood it better then the Punique: so that he preached unto them in
Latin. That generally they understood and spoke Latin, it is evident by that
which Confess. l: (...). c. 14.
Augustine says of himself: Latina didici sine ullo metu, atque cruciatu,
inter etiam blandimenta nutricum, and ioca arridentium, and laetitias
alludentium. That is, I learned Latin without any fear or vexation, whiles
the nurses sought to please me, while men sported and played with me. In
another place, he has these words. Deverbis Apost. sermon. 26.
Proverbium notum est Punicum, quod quidem Latin vobis dicam, quia Punica non
omnes nostis: That is, The Punique Proverb is known, which I will utter unto
you in Latin, because you do not all understand the Punique tongue: whereby
it appears, that the Latin tongue was better understood in some parts of
Africa, then the Punique. The Latin tongue was also vulgar in Italy, in
France, and Spain; for when they received the Roman Laws, they learned the
tongue also, and began to speak Latin, though their own tongue were not
presently extinct. So that it is not improbable but that they had their service
in Latin; but whether they had, or not, it is evident they had it in a tongue
they understood.

For touching France, in vit. Mart. l. 1
Severus Sulpitius writes, in the life of Martin, that when there was no
little difference about his election, the Lector whose course it was to read
that day, enclosed in the multitudes, was kept out from the place, and could
not perform that duty: whereupon the Ministers being troubled, while he came
not that was looked for; one of them that stood by, took the Psalter, and
read that verse, that he first found; and the Psalm was this: Our of the
mouths of babes and sucklings have thou ordained praise, that thou may
destroy the enemy, and defensorem, and the defender; which, when the people
heard, they made a great shout, and that part that was opposite to Martin, was
confounded, for the principal man that opposed him was named Defensor, and the
people thought that it was by Gods special direction, that this Psalm was
read, to put down the faction that opposed against Martin. By this it
appears, that the Scripture was read in Latin, and yet in a tongue
understood by the people; for otherwise how could they have been thus affected?

And that it was so read in ancient times, as to be understood, it is clear
by the form of blessing, used in the constituting of Lectors, which was this,
as it appears by an old manuscript cited by Ex vetusto manuscript. l. de
ordin. lect. Apud Cassand. liturg. c. 26.
Cassander: Benedicere dignare hos famulos tuos, in officium lectorum, ut
assiduitate lectionis sint apti pronunciare verba vitae, and mentis ac vocis
distinctione populo monstrare intelligibilia: That is, Vouchsafe to bless
these thy servaunts designed and appointed to the office of Lectors, that by
the daily and ordinary use of reading, they may be fitted to pronounce to the
people the words of life, and with distinction both of understanding and
voice, to show unto the people the things they read, so as that they may be
understood of them that hear them. And in the Pontif. Romans excus. Venet. 1561.
in ordin. Lect.
Pontifical we find these words directed to the Lectors, Studete verba Dei
videlicet lectiones sacras, distinct, and aperte, ad intelligentiam, and
aedificationem fidelium, absque omni mendacio falsitatis, proferre. That is.
Be ye careful to utter, publish, and rehearse the words of God, to wit, the
sacred lessons, distinctly, and clearly, to the understanding, and edification
of the faithful without all lying, falsehood, and untruth.

How generally they understood and spoke Latin in Spain heretofore, it may
appear by their present language, a barbarism of Latin; as also by the laws
the Goths gave unto them, called the Gothique Code, written in good Latin;
And by Lucan, Seneca, and sundry other principal lights of the Latin tongue.
So that Hist. Hispan. l. 5. c. 4.
Marineus Siculus fears not to say, that if the Goths and Moors and other
barbarous nations, had not come into Spain, the Spaniards would still have
spoken as good Latin, as the Romans did in the time of Tullie. So that it is
not unlikely but that the Spaniards aunciently had their service in Latin; but
whether they had or not, it is evident they had it in a tongue understood, by
that we read in Isidor. Hispalensis de offic. eccles. l. 1. c. 10.
Isidore. Oportet vt quando psallitur, psallatur ab omnibus; cum lectio
legitur, facta silentio aeque audiatur a cunctis. That is, It is fit that
when the singing begins, all should sing; when the lesson is read, there
being a general silence kept, all should equally, and in one and the same
sort hearken to that which is read; And again; Ideo and diaconus clara voce
silentium admonet, vt sieve dum psallitur, sieve dum lectio pronunciatur, ab
omnibus vnitas conseruetur, vt quod omnibus praedicatur, aequaliter ab omnibus
audiatur. That is, And therefore does the deacon also with a clear and loud
voice call upon all to keep silence; that as well when the singing is, as when
the lesson is read, all may do one and the same thing, that all may hear that
which is pronounced equally to all.

Some other parts there were that had not such use of the Latin tongue as
these had; who having Alphabets, and characters of their own; so that they
could write and express things in their own tongues, had the whole liturgy
and divine service, in their vulgar tongue; Of this sort were all those
nations, kingdoms, and people, that speak the Slavonian tongue, Hos. de sacro
vernacule legendo.
which was the language of more then the third part of Europe: besides the
Mengrellians, Circassians and Gazarites in Asia. The Brerewoods enquiries, c. 8.
characters of this language are of two sorts, for there is the Servian
character, and the Dalmatian. All the Christians of Rascia, Bosina, Servia,
Bulgaria, Moldavia, Russia, Moscovia, and all other nations of the Slavonian
language in the Eastern parts, that celebrate their liturgies after the Greek
ceremony, and profess obedience to the Patriarch of Constantinople, have the
Scriptures in their own tongue translated as it is said by Methodius, the
companion of Cyrill, in preaching the gospel to Gentile nations, and written
in the Servian character, as also their liturgies are. Postel. de lingua
Dalmatica.
The Dalmatian characters are in use in Dalmatia, Liburnia, Istria, Moravia,
Silesia, Bohemia, Polonia, etc.

It is a received opinion, that Hierome first devised the Dalmatian characters,
and translated the Scriptures into the Dalmatian tongue; but it seems that in
process of time his translation was neglected, the Latin service brought in,
and those characters out of use; For Lib. 4. p. 434.
Aventinus reports, that Methodius having found out Litteras Venedas.
letters, and translated the Scripture into the Slavonian tongue, persuaded the
Dalmatians to explode the Latin tongue, to hiss out the Roman rite or
ceremony, and make use of their own tongue in the holy service of God.

De missa latin facienda, in locis communibus.
Eckius confesses that heretofore the divine service was in the Dalmatian
tongue throughout all Illyricum. The priests of Liburnia, says Vbi supra.
Aventinus, which in this our age is subject to the Archduke of Noricum, are
yet still ignorant of the Roman tongue, and do say their divine service in
their own, that is, in the Slauonian tongue. And De ration: scribendi citatus
a Cassandro liturgic: cap. 36.
Johannes Baptista Palatinus, says, the Slauonians and those of Illyricum have
their service and common prayers in their vulgar tongue, and all the people
understand it as we do our native language. Auentinus says, that Methodius
went into the kingdom of Boiaria, and sought to persuade the inhabitants of
Liburnia, Noricum, Pannonia, and Veneda, to abandon the (...) Vbi supra.
Latin, and to have their service in the vulgar; but Richoualda the Bishop,
and Adeluinus the Archbishop of Salsburge, and the priests of Salsburge hodie
appellatur.
(...) which successively had governed the Churches in those parts, for the
space of 85 years, according to the decree of Charles the great; resisted him,
and forced him to fly into Morauia. But afterward that which he attempted
took effect as it appears by Auentinus in the words before cited; for they
of Liburnia had their service in the vulgar in his time.

De sacro vernacule legendo.
Hosius confesses, that the service in the vulgar tongue was in Bohemia and
Polonia, and that there were some living when he wrote, that might remember,
when in Clepardia in the temple of St Cross the priests said service in the
vulgar or Slauon tongue. De rebus Poloni. l. 3. p. 32.
Cromerus says that the two Bishops Methodius, and Cyrillus, did good
service in bringing the people of those parts to the knowledge of God in
Christ, and that they caused the Slauonians to have their service in their own
tongue, the Pope giving assent and approving that they did. And the same Lib.
15. page 249.
Cromerus says, the service was in the Slauon tongue in Croconia.

That the Morauians had the service in their own tongue we have proof
sufficient, for John the eight took precise order, and commanded it should be
so. His Apud Baron. tom. 10. anno. 880. numero. 19. page 662. and inter epist.
Ioannis. 8. apud Binnium. epist: 247.
Epistle written to the Prince of Morauia is extant, in which epistle he has
these words. Whereas one Constantine a Philosopher found out letters and
characters of the Slauon tongue, that so in it they might sound forth the
praises that are due to God; we exceedingly commend the same, and do command
that the praises of Christ our God and his works be uttered and set forth in
the same; for we are admonished to praise God not in three tongues only but in
all, by the sacred authority that commanded saying, Praise the Lord all ye
Gentiles, and praise him together all people, Psalm 117.. And the Apostles
being filled with the holy Ghost spoke in all tongues and uttered the great and
wonderful works of God Act: 2. Hence also Paul, that heavenly trumpet,
sounds forth and exhorts every tongue to confess, that our Lord Jesus
Christ is in the glory of God the Father: concerning which things he
admonishes us sufficiently, and manifestly, in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, requiring us no otherwise to speak with tongues, but so, that
we may edify the Church. Neither is it contrary to the right faith and sound
doctrine, to sing mass in the same Slauon tongue, or to read the holy
Gospel, or the divine lessons of the old or new Testament, rightly translated
and interpreted, or to sing all other parts of divine service, appointed for
certain hours and times; because that he that made 3 principal tongues, to
wit, the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, created also all other, for to set forth
his praise and glory. Notwithstanding we command, that in all the Churches of
your country the Gospel be first read, for the greater honor, in Latin; and
afterward the translation into the Slauonian tongue, in the hearing of the
people that understands not Latin; as it seems the custom is in some
Churches; and if it seem good to thee and thy judges, and great men, to hear
mass rather in Latin, we command that the mass be celebrated for thy self
and them in Latin.

Hist. Bohem: cap. 13.
Aenaeas Syluius, afterward Pius the second, reports that Cyrill, having
brought Suatocopius to become a Christian, and to be baptized, won the Mora^,
and sundry other nations of the Slauonians, to Christianity: and afterward
being at Rome, besought the Pope, that with his good liking he might say
service in the Slavonian tongue, to the people of that Nation, whom he had
baptized; concerning which thing when there was no little dispute in the sacred
Senate, and many disliked this motion, there was suddenly heard a voice, as it
had been from Heaven, saying, Let every spirit praise the Lord, and let every
tongue confess unto him, whereupon the Pope yielded to his motion, and gave
consent that he should do as he desired.

There is no doubt, but that there were many crossings in this kind, and that
sometimes they had the service in one tongue, and sometimes in another, not
only in diverse countries, but even in the same accordingly as the different
factions prevailed. Vuratizlaus Duke of the Bohemians desired of Pope
Hildebrand, that he would give consent that they might say divine service in
the Slavon tongue, and it seems by the Popes answer, it had bin so before,
as in other places, so here; for he 7 Lib. ep. 11.
says, neque ad excusationem iuvat, quod quidam religiosi viri, hoc quod
simpliciter populus quaerit, patienter tulerunt, seu incorrectum dimiserunt,
cum Primitiva Ecclesia multa dissimulaverit, quae a sanctis Patribus postmodum
firmata christianitate, and religione crescente, subtili examinatione correcta
sunt. That is, neither does it serve to excuse, and make good this petition,
that some religious men patiently endured and suffered that to be done, that
the people simply desired, or that they let it alone uncorrected, or altered it
not, seeing the Primitive Church was content to wink at diverse things, which
the holy Fathers afterward, when Christianity was firmly settled, and
Religion increased, upon diligent and exact examination, thought good to
correct and alter. Derebus Eccles. c. 7.
Walafridus Strabo testifies, that in his time the divine service was still
celebrated in the vulgar Germane tongue, amongst certain Scythian Nations,
especially those that are called Tomitani, and that certain Germans do
inhabit in those parts.

There was a third sort of people to whom the Gospel was preached, that were
so Otfridus inter epistolas Hincmari Rhemensis in epistola ad Luitberium excus.
Par. 161^. page 633. Theotisca lingua velut agrestis habetur, dum a propriis
nec scriptura, nec art aliqua ullis est temporibus expolita: quippe qui nec
historias suorum antecessorum ut multae gentes caeterae commendant memoriae.
Quod si raro contigit, aliarum gentium linguam, id est Latinorum, vel potius
Graecorum explanant.
rude and unlettered at the time of their conversion, that they knew not how to
write any thing in their own tongue, having no characters or letters of their
own, nor any monuments of antiquity, or report of things past, but in the
Latin tongue: these could have no form of divine service delivered unto them
at the first in their own tongue. So that happily to some in this case, the
Book of God was at first delivered in Latin, to be expounded by such as
understood it, to them that understood it not: not as thinking it best so to
have it in a tongue not understood, but because they could not do otherwise.
And therefore John the 8th, understanding that they of Moravia had an alphabet
and characters, so that they could express things in writing, commands the^
to have their service in the Slauonian tongue. And so in those places where
they could not have the book of God in the vulgar tongue at the first, yet so
soon as they had means, they caused the same to be put into the vulgar.

And therefore Inter epistolas Hincmari praefatio in librum antiqu^ lingua
Saxonica scriptum page 634.
it is reported that Ludovicus the Emperor, having a great care of Religion,
and seeking the salvation of his subjects souls, whereas till that time the
people of Germany, that understood nothing but the Theudiscall tongue, could
not read the Scriptures, but the learned only, having now met with one
Otfridus, a learned and holy Monk, commanded him to Poetice transfer.
translate the Old and new testament into the German tongue, quatenus non solum
liteteratis, verumetiam illiteratis, sacra divinorum praeceptorum lectio
panderetur, that so the sacred reading of the divine precepts might be made
common to the learned and unlearned: which work he took in hand, and
perfected, at the Emperors command, very willingly, having bin moved and
admonished from above so to do, and it was approved by Luidbertus Archbishop
of Mentz. If the Index of prohibited books had been out, which Pius 4. first,
and Clement the 8t since, published to the world, the Emperor, Archbish.
Translator, and people using the translation, had incurred grievous censures,
and had been branded as Heretics. But this point of the new religion of
Rome, was not then known, and therefore as they could, in all parts of the
world, they translated the Scriptures into the vulgar tongue.

Whether the Saxons at the coming of Augustine into England, could write any
thing in their own tongue, it is much doubted, and many think they could not:
so that happily the Bible was not delivered to them in the vulgar at the first;
but afterward when they knew how to write in that tongue, it was. For, as we
read, Io. Trevilan. vbi supra.
Beda translated a part of it into the Saxon tongue. Hist. Anglor. l. 4. cap.
24.
And the same Beda reports, that before his time there was a certain
brother, in the monastery of the Abbess Hilda, who having received excellent
grace of God, was wont to make poems, fit to set forward religion and piety;
so that whatsoever he learned by interpreters out of the holy books, the same
things presently after he would express in verse, in his own tongue, that
is, in English, most sweetly, and so as that he would pierce the hearts of
such as heard him; and therefore the abbess commanded, that he should be
taught the whole series and course of the holy history, that he might express
the same in his own tongue: and so he did, for whatsoever by hearing he could
possibly learn, he turned into most sweet poems, so that his teachers became
his hearers; for he composed poems and songs, concerning the creation of the
world. and the beginning of mankind, the whole history of Genesis, Isreal's
going out of Egypt, and entering into the land of promise, and sundry other
histories of holy Scripture; of the incarnation, passion, resurrection, and
ascension of Christ into heaven, of the coming of the holy Ghost, the doctrine
of the Apostles, the terror of the future judgment, the fear of hell
punishment, and the happiness of the kingdom of heaven: and sundry other
benefits and judgments of God. In all which he sought, to draw men from
delighting in things that are evil, to the love and practice of that which is
good. Which poems no doubt were written, if they knew how to write at that
time. Thus were they willing in those days, to take all occasion to make the
Scripture known to the people, as far forth as possibly they might.

And therefore it is not to be doubted, but that when they had the Scripture
only in Latin, yet it was interpreted to the people, that they might
understand it, according to that of John Billet, In proemio citatus a Cassandro
liturgy. c. 36.
in summa de diuinis officijs; In the primitive Church no man was permitted to
speak in a tongue not understood, unless there were one to interpret: for to
what purpose were it for a man to speak and not to be understood? truly to
none at all. Hence grew that laudable custom in some parts of the Church, that
so soon as the gospel should be read in the Latin, it should presently be
expounded to the people in the vulgar. And this which he says is confirmed,
by the authority and testimony of In fine lib: 3. contra haereses.
Epiphanius; who describing all the several orders in the Church, amongst
others he reckons them that were, (...). That is, Interpreters that
expressed in one tongue, that which was uttered in another, as well when the
lessons were read, as when the preacher spoke to the people.

By all that which has been said, it appears, that the desire of Gods
Church was ever, to communicate the Scriptures and books of God, to all people
in the tongue they understood; That the most part of the Christian Churches,
had the book of God in their own tongue; And that if any had not, it was
either because they could not tell how to write any thing in their barbarous
tongues: or because the tongue, wherein they first received them, altering,
they were not understood then, as formerly they had been of their ancestors,
to whom they were first delivered in the same. So in Italy, France, and Spain,
aunciently they generally understood and spoke Latin, and therefore had the
Scriptures delivered unto them in that tongue; but in time the Latin which
they spoke was so corrupted, and so degenerated into barbarism, that the
people of those parts understood very little, of that which was written in the
purer Latin formerly understood; and therefore in process of time they were
forced to have the Scriptures newly translated, into this new dialect, or
rather corruption of the Latin. So had they the Bible translated into Italian,
French, and Spanish, as before I showed.

Their prayers and liturgies indeed were not altered; yet was there never any
judicious man, that thought it fittest, to have the service of God performed
without understanding; but all the best and most pious in every age, thought it
necessary by all good and possible means to provide, that the people might
have their service of God, in a tongue they understood. We have heard already
John Billet peremptorily affirming, that in the primitive Church no man was
permitted, to speak in a tongue not understood, unless there were one to
interpret; and that it was the custom of some Churches, so soon as the
gospel was read in the Latin, to expound the same in the vulgar tongue: but,
says he, Vbi supra.
What shall we say of our times, wherein scarce, or not at all, either he that
reads, or hears, understands what he hears or reads? So that we may
say truly, as the Prophet sometime complained, The priest shall be as one of
the people: Videtur ergo tacendum potius esse quam psallendum, it seems
therefore it were better to keep silence then to sing.

Haymo a worthy and learned Bishop, writing upon the Cap. 14.
1 Epist. to the Cor. has these words, If he that understands only that
tongue, wherein he was borne and bred, stand by thee, when thou solemnly
celebratest the mystery of the mass, or make a sermon, or powrest forth the
words of blessing, how shall he answer amen to thy blessing, not knowing
what thou say? that is, how shall he answer that confirmatory word, amen,
when he Sedulius in 1. Cor. 14. Qui nullam praeter propriam intelligit lingua^,
quod proprium est auditoribus, quomodo dicet amen? hoc est, quomodo tuae
benedictioni perhibebit testimonium vel consensum, cum ignoret ipsius lingu ae
qualitatem?
understanding only his own tongue, knows not what thou say in that
barbarous tongue? And least any man should take advantage, and urge, as the
Papists are wont to do, that because he speaks of a barbarous tongue, his
words are not to be understood, of him that speaks in one of the three
learned tongues, he shows, that he that speaks in the Hebrew tongue, to
him that understands nothing but Greek, or in the Greek, to him that
understands nothing but Latin, or in Latin, to him that understands
nothing but Greek, is a barbarian. Yea if a Roman, and such a one, as is not a
Grecian, pronounce the symbol or creed in Greek, he is a barbarian to him,
that understands nothing but Latin, though he be of the same nation, and
people.

In (...) Cor. 14.
Thomas Aquinas mentions this, but gives another interpretation of the word,
but not so fit; making them to be barbarians, that excel in strength of body,
but are defective in strength of reason, which how far wide it is from the
scope of the Apostle, a blind man may see. But in the same place, proposing
the question, how he that understands no other tongue, but that of the
country wherein he was borne, can conform himself and say, amen, to the
prayers he understands not; his answer is, that he may comforme himself in
a generality, but not in particular, seeing he knows not in particular, what
it is that the minister says, though in general he know that he prays,
or blesses. And farther, asking why the prayers and blessings are not in the
vulgar, that more fully and particularly the ignorant might conform themselves
unto the same; his answer is; that happily it was so in the primitive Church,
but now that the faithful are instructed, and know what it is they hear in
the service of the Church, the blessings are in Latin; How weak an answer
this is to proceed from such a man, who sees not? for when he says they know
what they hear, either he means in particular, and then he contrarieth his
former words; or only in general; and then, they can give no consent, but in
general: and so the question is not answered, why the prayers and blessings
are not in the vulgar, that so being distinctly understood, there might be a
distinct conforming to the same.

Lyra writing upon the same place has these words. When a Lay man says the
Lords prayer, or any other, devoutly, his affection is lifted up toGod;
reficitur affectus, non intellectus: sed quando intelligit, reficitur affectus,
and intellectus: and this the Apostle shows to be true in respect of the
public prayers, because if the people understand the prayer or blessing of
the Priest, melius reducitur in deum, and devotius respondet Amen. And then
proceeding to those words, If thou bless, etc. has these words, What shall
he do that supplieth the place of the unlearned? Which words import as much,
as what does it profit the simple people that understand not? as if he should
say, little or nothing, because they know not how to conform themselves, to him
that is the minister of the Church, by answering Amen, and that for this cause
in the Primitive Church, the blessings and all other things pertaining to the
public service of God, were in the vulgar tongue; but after that people were
multiplied and increased, and they had now learned to conform themselves to
the Priest, by standing when the Gospel is read, and by adoring the Eucharist,
the service was in Latin, and that it suffices now, that the Clearke does
answer for the whole people.

Here is confession, that the people profits little or nothing, when the
prayers and blessings are in a tongue they understand not; that therefore the
Primitive Church had the service in the vulgar; that while it is in Latin they
cannot themselves, but another must answer Amen for them; and that yet, now
they have learned by standing or kneeling, differently to conform themselves
to the Priest, according to the different things he does; (which a deaf man
that never heard word, may do by observation of the eye) it is well enough.

But Cardinal Caietan upon the same place has these words: Out of this
doctrine of the Apostle Paul, it may be gathered, that it were better, and more
for the edification of the Church, to have the public prayers that are read
in the hearing of the people, pronounced in a tongue common to the clergy and
people, and understood of them both, then in Latin. opusc. tom. 3. tract. 15.
And when he was challenged by the Parisians for saying, it were better to
have the prayers said in the Church in the vulgar, rather then in the Latin
tongue; his answer was, that they recited not his words fully: for he had not
said, it were better, but it were better for edification, nor that the prayers
should be said, but that the public prayers should be said in the vulgar
tongue; and this his assertion, he said, was grounded upon the authority of
the Apostle.

instruct. Christian.
Cardinal Contarenus, proposing the question, what is to be thought of such
prayers as ignorant men make without understanding, answers, that it is to be
conceived that they are of force, in respect of the affection of the mind, and
intention they have to pray unto God, though they know not what they desire, or
pray for; but that they want the fruit which they should have, if they
understood those prayers that they utter with their mouths: for then they
would direct the intention of their minds, and their desires to God, for the
obtaining in particular of such things as with the mouth they pray for; and
they would be more edified, by the pious sense and understanding of their
prayers; And he concludes, that they pray not in vain, but that they would
pray better, if they understood the meaning of their prayers. And to the same
purpose (...) Article ^3. division.
Harding against Bishop Iuell, says, it were better the people should say
their prayers in their own tongue, that they might the better understand them.

Cap. Quoniam in ple^que extra: de officiis iudicis ordinarii.
Innocentius the 3d seems to have had due consideration hereof, and therefore
he prescribes, that, because in sundry parts there are mixed within the same
city or diocese, people of different languages, having in the unity of the
same faith, different rites and manners; the Bishops of such Cities or
Diocesses, shall provide fit men to celebrate divine service, according to the
diversities of their rites and languages, and to minister the sacraments of the
Church unto them, instructing them both by word, and example. Some restrain
the words of Innocentius to the Greek and Latin tongues only, as if he had
only allowed the having of the service in different tongues, in those cities
and places, where Greeks and Latins met. Hosius de sacro vernacule legendo p
665. says the Pope meant not to make any innovation, but his meaning was that
the Graecians and Sclauonians that already 300 year had the service in their
own tongue should have priests to say service unto them in the same.
But I see not why these words should be thus restrained; seeing there is no
question but this Pope would allow that which John the 8^ his predecessor and
others had don, in permitting, nay in commanding the service to be in the
Slauonian tongue. And besides, how he could say that the Greeks in some parts
of the world agreed with the Latins in the faith, whom he so bitterly
reproves for very maine differences in religion, and who as Thomas a Jesus
testifies most stiffely hold their own religion, though they live under
Princes of the Roman profession, I know not.

Wherefore to grow to a conclusion, it appears that anciently all Churches,
and that ever most of the Christian Churches, had their service in a tongue
vulgarly vndestood; that if any had not, it was either because they knew not
how to write any thing in their own tongue; or because that which was their
natural tongue ceased to be so, after they first had the service in it; that
many had so in the West Church when Luther first showed his dislike of Romish
errors and abuses: that there never wanted worthy divines, Bs and Praelates of
great esteem, who urged the unfitness, of having it in a tongue not vndestood,
and the necessity of the vulgar; that all in whom there was any spark of
grace, sought to have it understood; And therefore as I noted before out of
John Billet, sundry Churches though they had their service in Latin, yet
caused the same things that they read in Latin to be expounded in the vulgar;
others, as the Bs in the third Cap. 71.
council of Tours, that such things should be read to the people in the vulgar,
as might inform and instruct them, in all points of Christian faith and
religion: their words are these. We all with unanimous consent have thought fit
to ordain, that every B. shall provide and have homilies containing necessary
admonitions, that so they that are under him, may be taught: our meaning is,
that these homilies shall contain instructions touching the catholic faith,
according to their capacities, concerning the everlasting rewards of the good,
and eternal damnation of the wicked, the resurrection and last judgment, and
such works and course of life, whereby men may attain, or whereby they are sure
to be excluded from eternal life. And we ordain, that every B. take care, to
translate the same homilies, plainly and perspicuously, into the vulgar Roman
or German tongue, that all may the more easily understand the things that are
uttered unto them.

Among other articles proposed in the council of Trent by the Ambassadors of
Ferdinand the Emperor, concerning the necessary reformation of the Church, one
was, that Anno 1562 apud Goldastum constit imperial tom. 2 p. 376.
Happily it were to be permitted, that in some places, prayers faithfully
translated into the vulgar tongue, might be intermingled with those things that
are sung in latin. Likewise in the articles of reformation exhibited to the
council of Trent, by Charles the 9^. Apud Gold. constit. imper. tom. 3. p. 570.
In sacrificio paraecialibus Euangelium aperte and dilucide and pro populi
captu copiose ex suggestu exponatur, quo in loco quae plebano praeeunte fient
preces lingua fiant vernacula, peracta autem re diuina latin and mysticis
precibus, lingua etiam vernacula publicae ad Deum preces fiant. and ibidem
plura. Which thing if it had bin granted by the council, no new nor strange
thing had bin brought in, for as De sacramen. eucharist. page 134.
Hosius testifies, the Church never forbad, to sing in the Churches in the
vulgar tongue, in time and place.

It were to be wished, says Erasmus, that the whole service of God, might be
celebrated and performed, in a tongue understood of the whole people, as in
ancient times it was wont to be, and that all things should be so plainly
and distinctly sounded out, that they might be understood of all that list to
s De mod orandi.
attend. And Defensio. li de officio pij viri. page 141.
Cassander, fully agreeing with Erasmus, and alleging to this purpose the
Popes permitting of it to the Slauonians upon the hearing of a voice from
heaven, and the authority of Caietan, says; It were to be desired that
according to the mandate of the Apostle, and the ancient custom of the
Church, consideration might be had of the people in the public prayers of the
Church, and in the hymns and lessons, which are there read and sung for the
peoples sake; and that the ordinary and vulgar sort of believers, might not for
ever be wholly excluded, from all communion of prayers and divine readings:
and he adds; that unless there be a reformation in this and other things,
there is no hope of any durable peace or consent of the Church: and professes,
he cannot see but that they to whom the government of the Church is committed,
shall one day give an account, why they suffered the Church to be thus
miserably disquieted and rent in sunder, and neglected to take away the causes,
whence heresies and schisms do spring, as in duty they should have done. So
that in this point as in the former, we see the Church wherein our Fathers
lived and died was a true Protestant Church.

CHAP. 5.
Of the three supposed different estates of mere nature, grace, and sin: the
difference between a man in the state of pure and mere nature, and in the
state of sin; and of original sin.

THey of the Church of Rome at this day imagine, that God might have created a
man in the state of pure nature, or nature only, as well without grace, as
sin; Cameracensis (...) senten: d. 1. q 2. Scotus lib 3. d 27. quaest. (...)
and that in this state of pure or mere nature, without any addition of grace,
he might have loved God above all, and have kept all the commandments of God
collectiuely, so as to break none of them, at the least for a short time,
though happily he could not have holden on constantly so to keep them all, as
never to break any of them: seeing there would have been a contrariety,
between reason, and that appetite that follows the apprehension of sense, in
that state of pure or mere nature. So that, according to this conceit, grace
was added not to enable man to love God above all, to keep the several
commandments, which he has given, and to do the works, of moral virtue,
(For all these he might have been able to perform, out of the power of
nature, without any such addition,) but to make him able constantly to keep
all the commandments of God collectiuely, so as never to break any one of
them, and to keep them so as to merit eternal happiness in heaven.

Hence they infer diverse things: First, that the loss of grace or original
righteousness, that was given to Adam, does not deprive those of his posterity
of the power of loving God their Creator above all, of keeping his
commandments divisiuely, and doing the several works of moral virtue,
though happily not with that facility, that in the state of grace he might
have done them. Secondly, That Infidels and such as have no fellowship with the
Saints and people of God, nor any part in his grace, may decline sin, and do
the works of moral virtue. Thirdly, That all the contrariety that is found in
the powers of the soul, the rebellion of the inferior faculties against the
superior, the pronenesse to evil, and difficulty to do good, would have
been the conditions, of mere nature without addition of grace or sin, and
consequently, that they are not sin in the state wherein we are; that these
evils are not newly brought into the nature of man by the fall; that as man
would have been mortal in the state of mere nature, because compounded of
contraries, so out of the contrariety of sensitive and rational desire, he
would have found a rebellion in himself, of the inferior faculties against
the superior; that as a heavy thing falls not downward while it is stayed,
but falls so soon as the stay is taken away, by reason of the same nature it
had, while it was stayed, and as a ship that lay quietly while it was stayed
with an anchor, upon the removing of the same is driven with the winds, yet in
no other sort then it would have been before, if it had not been stayed; so
all these contrarieties, differences, and pronenesse to desire things contrary
to the prescript of right reason, would have been in mere nature as the
conditions of it, and would have showed themselves if grace had not hindered
them; and that there is no other difference between a man in the state of pure
or mere nature, and in the state of original sin, then there is between a
man that never had any clothing, and him that had, but by his own fault and
folly is stripped out of all; between whom there is no difference in the nature
of nakedness, but all the difference stands in this, that the one is in
fault for not having clothes, the other not so. For they suppose man would
have been carried as strongly to the desire of sinful things, in the state of
pure nature, as now, that freewill is not made more weak, then in that state
it would have been, nor the flesh become more rebellious then it would have
been without grace, before the entrance of sin.

This opinion ^ Bellarmin follows, and professes, that though some of
excellent b Degratia primi hominis l. vnic. c. 5.
learning think, that both Thomas, and the best and most approved of the
schoolmen, were of a contrary judgment, yet they are deceived in so thinking,
and that this is the opinion of them all.

Against these erroneous conceits, that are indeed the ground of all the
points of difference, between them and us, touching original sin, freewill,
the power of nature, the works of infidels, and the like, we oppose this
proposition: That no state of pure or mere nature can be conceived, but that
either a man must be lifted above himself by grace, or fall below himself by
sin. And this proposition is proved by unanswerable reasons: For if the
principal powers of the soul, cannot perform their own proper actions, by
any natural faculty, nor without the addition of grace, and a kind of divine
force, and help, then can there be no conceit of a state of pure or mere
nature, seeing the nature of a thing implies the powers pertaining to it, and
a possibility to bring forth the actions of such powers: But it is evident that
the principal powers of man's soul, cannot by any natural faculty perform
their proper actions, because the first truth and chiefest good, are the
objects of the reason, and the will, and these are infinite, and the natural
capacity of reason and the will is finite, so that whatsoever we understand
and conceive concerning God, is so much less, and comes so much short of his
infinite perfection, as the capacity of our understanding is less then the
infinite being of God.

But how then will some man say, can man attain his good being so high,
excellent, and far removed from him, and so infinitely beyond, and without
the compass of his natural faculty. The answer hereunto is, that though
nothing can be lifted up, to be any thing above the nature of it, yet by
foreign help a thing may be carried or lifted above it self, or above the
nature of it, that is, above that to which the natural faculty of it
extends it self, as a stone may by the hand of man be cast up on high,
whether it has no faculty to move it self: so the soul may be raised and
lifted by grace in the acts of her powers, above that to which by any natural
faculty, they can extend themselves: For though by nature men cannot know God
as he is in himself, but only so far forth as by his effects and glorious
works he may be known, yet God may present himself unto them in the light of
grace, as he is in himself, and make his infinite greatness to appear unto
them: All the knowledge that naturally we have of God is by considering those
perfections that are found in the creatures, that implye in them no
imperfection, and which whatsoever has, is better then those things are that
have the not: for persuading our selves that they are some where found in the
highest degree, and without that mixture of imperfection that cleaves to them
in this or that particular, we name that thing God, wherein they are so found
in so excellent sort: now all these perfections that we conceive and apprehend
are finite, for they are perfections found and discerned in the creatures, and
the degrees of them, are the degrees of things finite, so that unless we have
another illumination by grace, whereby we may come to some apprehension of
God, as he is in himself, we know not God as God, neither do we worship and
honor him as God, because not as infinite, and all our worship is idolatry,
giving that unto the resemblance, that pertains to the truth, as Cusanus
shows at large de docta ignorantia l. (...) c. 26.
and so he must, or else man can never attain that which is is his proper
good. Actus rationalis creaturae, says Alensis. p: 3: q: 61: memb. 1. oportet
quod ordinetur ad bonum quod est supra naturam, quod est summum bonum and
infinitum; quia ergo non est possibilis extensio rationalis creaturae supra
seipsam, ideo non est eipossibile per natural vt ordinet suum actu^ sieve
perueniat in suum finem, and ideo necesse est quod iuuetur a gratia. The act of
a reasonable creature, must be directed to a good above nature which is the
chief good, and infinite; because therefore a reasonable creature cannot raise
it self above it self, therefore it is not possible that by the power of
nature it should order its act, or attain its end: and therefore it must be
helped by grace.

So then there is no immediate knowledge of God, as he is in him self, no
knowledge that in time for his own sake he made all things of nothing, no
knowledge how and in what sort we depend on him, how his providence reaches to
us, how he guides us in all our ways, and consequently how we should love
him, fear him, and trust in him, and depend upon him; And if within the
compass of nature there be no such knowledge of God, then is there no right
love of God; For no man can rightly love God, unless he rightly know him; And
if we do not rightly love God, we can do nothing well, nay we cannot but
continually do evil; Grego: Ariminensis l. 2. d. (...). q. (...).
For every thing that a man wills and affects, is either God, or some other
thing besides God; If a man love God and not for himself but for some other
thing, this act is sinful and culpable, and not morally good. If a man love
any other thing besides God, and love it not finally for God, the act of his
love rests finally in some other thing that is not God, and he loves it for
it self without any further reference, and so inioyeth some other thing
besides God, as if it were the uttermost and most principal good, which act is
culpable. Now if a man remaining within the compass of nature withour addition
of grace, cannot but do evil, then can there be noe state of nature that is
not sinful, without grace, and consequently there can be no state of pure
or mere nature, seeing every thing that is culpable and faulty in any kind,
is contrary to the nature of the thing wherein it is found, and a corruption of
nature. But that all the principal actions of men without grace are culpable
and faulty it is evident; because they love God for some other thing and not
for himself, never coming to any knowledge of him as he is in himself, and
they love other things for themselves, and finally, without any reference to
God. So that grace is necessarily required in man, for the performance of his
actions, so as not to sin. And it is true that vbi supra.
Gregorius Ariminensis has, that Adam in the state of his creation, was not
sufficiently enabled, to perform any act morally good, or so to do any good
thing as not to sin in doing it, by any thing in nature, if he had not had
special grace added. Whence it will follow that there is no power to do good,
or not to sin, in the nature of a man, but from grace; that when grace is
lost, there is an impossibility of doing good, and a necessity of doing evil.

The Papists and we agree that original sin is the privation of original
righteousness; but they suppose there was in nature without that addition of
grace, a power to do good, and that it was not given simply to make man able
to do good, but constantly, and so as to merit heaven; so that it being taken
away, a man may decline each particular sin, and do the several works of
virtue, though neither so as never to sin, nor so as to merit heaven
thereby; But we say there neither was nor could be any power in nature as of
it self, to do any act morally good, or not sinful; that grace was given
to enable men, to perform the actions of their principal powers, about their
principal objects, and to do good; and that it being taken away, there is
found in them an impotencie to do any act of virtue, and a necessity of
sinning in all their moral actions, till they be restored again to the state
of grace; that the difficulty to do good, pronenesse to evil, contrariety
between the powers and faculties of the soul, and the rebellion of the meaner
against the superior and better, are not the conditions of nature, as it was
or might have been in it self before the entrance of sin, but that all
these proceed from the putting of the powers of the soul, by the loss of
grace, out of that course, which by the law of GOD and nature they were to
hold. For does not the condition of man's nature require, that amongst things
inquired after, thought of, and known, God should be the first? and amongst
things desired and loved, nothing should be desired and loved more or before
him, nor otherwise then for him? and is it not clear and evident, that if God
be the first thing that is thought of, sought after, and loved, and that
nothing be sought after or respected, but after and for GOD, that there will
be noe pronenesse to evil, difficultire to do good, contrariety between the
powers of the soul, and rebellion of the meaner and inferior against the
better and superior? surely there is none that can or will make question of
it. Now it is confessed by the best learned amongst the Schoolmen, that
howsoever it be not so in the course of our understanding, in this state
wherein we are, yet according to the course of the nature of our understanding
simply considered, it should be so, that Sensitivus appetitus rationis quasi
particeps fuerat effectus, sed cum a deo voluntas ad seipsam defecir, appetitus
spreto rationis imperio sui iuris esse caepit: atque hinc innumerae
cupidirates, innumeri timores atque morbi, ex quo etiam factum est, vt cum in
primo actionum suarum prncipio occaecatus sit intellectus, and in particulari
bono vltimum sinem collocarit, and suae dignitatis ignarus in corpus sese and
sensum demerserit, and in corporis naturam degenerarit, in corporis
volupratibus assequendis, and doloribus fugiendis finem suum constituerit.
Contarenus de libero arbitrio.
GOD should be the first thing sought after and known by us.

Secundum naturam (says 1. Sent. d. 3. q. 1.
Scotus) Deus est primum cognitum, quia naturalis cognitio procedit ab
indeterminato ad determinatu^, indeterminatu^ negative est magis
indeterminatum, quam privative indeterminatum: ergo praeconcipitur illi; and
illud indeterminatum privative secundum nostram cognitionem praeconcipitur
determinato, quia ens and res prima impressione imprimuntur in anima nostra
secundum Auicennam 1. Metaphys. c. 5. ergo indeterminatum negative omnino primo
est objectum nostro intellectui. At rationaliter posterius creatura
cognoscitur: quia primo concipitur hoc bonum, deinde bonum universal
abstractum secunda abstractione, puta quod est indeterminatum privative, deinde
bonum prima abstractione abstractum, quod scilicet est indeterminatum negative.
And therefore it is noted by the learned, that there is a double knowledge and
apprehe^sion of things; the one distinct, the other confused; in the confused
knowledge of things that is first apprehended by us, that first affects the
sense, but in distinct knowledge cognitorum primum est communissimum, and quae
propinquiora sibi sunt priora, and quae remotiora, posteriora; quia nihil
concipitur distinct, nisi quando concipiuntur omnia quae includuntur in
ratione eius essentiali.

And to the same purpose it is that Bonaventura itinerarium mentis in deum. c.
5.
Bonauentura has, Cum non esse priuatio sit essendi, non cadit in intellectum
nisi per esse; esse autem non cadit per aliud; quia omne quod intelligitur, aut
intelligitur vt non ens, aut vt ens in potentia, aut vt ens in actu; si igitur
non ens non potest intelligi nisi per ens, and ens in potentia non nisi per ens
in actu, and esse nominat ipsum purum actum entis, esse igitur est quod primo
cadit inintellectum, and illud esse est, quod est purus actus: sed hoc non est
esse particulare, quod est esse arctatum, quia permixtum est cum potentia, nec
esse analogum, quia minime habet de actu, eo quod minime est: restat igitur
quod illud esse, est esse diuinum: mira igitur est coecitas intellectus, qui
non consider at illud quod prius videt, and sine quo nihil potest cognoscere:
sed sicuti oculus intentus in varias colorum differentias, lucem per quam videt
caetera, non videt, and si videt non tamen aduertit: sic oculus mentis nostrae
intentus in ista entia particularia, and vniversalia, ipsum esse extraomne
genus, licet primo occurrat menti, and per ipsum alia, tame^ non aduertit; vnde
verissime apparet, quod sicut oculus vespertilionis se habet ad lucem: ita se
habet oculus mentis nostrae ad manifestissima naturae. Quia assuefactus ad
tenebras entium, and phantasmata sensibilium, cum ipsam lucem summi Esse.
entis intuetur, videtur sibi nihil videre: non intelligens, quod ipsa caligo
summa est mentis nostrae illuminatio, sicut quando videt oculus puram lucem,
videtur sibi nihil videre.

By this which has bin said, it is evident, that according to the course of
nature not disordered, nor put out of course, the first thing that is inquired
after, thought of and known, is GOD, and that he is the first good that is
desired and loved, and that no other thing is desired or loved but after him,
and for him. So that none of the things formerly mentioned can be found in the
nature of man, unless it be put out of course. Whence grows the contrariety
between the meaner and better, superior and inferior faculties of the soul,
but from hence, that the soul in this state of her aversion from God, takes
the beginning of all her knowledge from the senses, apprehends particular
things as good upon the first view, and to be desired, which afterward upon
better consideration, in respects not considered at the first, she finds are
not good nor desirable? And whence is the rebellion of the inferior against
the superior, but from hence, that the superior having cast off the
dependence it formerly had upon God and respect unto him, the inferior also
casts off the respect it had to it? Bernard. sermon. ad milit. Templi c. 11. de
sepulchro.
Quid iustius esse poterat, quam talionem recipere? Vita Deus animae est, ipsa
corporis; peccando voluntary volens perdidit vivere, nolens perdat and
vivificare; sponte repulit vitam-cum vivere noluit, non valeat eam dare cui,
vel quatenus voluerit; noluit anima regi a Deo, non queat regere corpus: si non
non paret superiori, inferiori cur imperet? Invenit conditor suam sibi rebellem
creaturam, inveniat animasuam sibirebellem pedissequam; transgressor inventus
est homo divinae legis, inveniat ipse aliam legem in membris suis repugnantem
legi mentis suae, and captivantem se in legem peccati: porro peccatum separat
inter nos and Deum, separet proinde mors inter corpus nostrum and nos.

From hence likewise is that danger of erring, whereunto man is subject; for
apprehending particular things first, his knowledge is imperfect, and confused;
and not without much labor, and danger of erring, does he come to the distinct
knowledge of any thing, And hence also flows that ignorance that is found in
men; for taking the beginning of all the knowledge they have from the senses,
they know no more touching any thing then may be discerned by the accidents
and outward effects of it, and so never come to know any thing in the essence
of it, or immediately as it is in it self. So that according to that which
before I noted, out of the book called Destructorium vitiorum; as a man may
know in the dark, the length, breadth, and other dimensions of a thing, but
not whether it be fair or foul, white or black. So men in this obscurity of
discerning, may find out that there is a God, and that he is the beginning and
cause of all things: but they cannot know how fair, how good, how merciful,
and how glorious he is, that so they may love him, fear him, honor him, and
trust in him as God, unless they have an illumination of grace,

The difference therefore between those of the Church of Rome and us, touching
original sin, consists in two points. First, In that they make the former
defects of ignorance, difficulty to do good, pronenesse to evil,
contrariety between the powers of the soul, and the rebellion of the meaner
and inferior, against the better and superior, consequents of nature, as it
might and would be in it self simply considered, without all defection and
falling from God: that original righteousness was given, to prevent and stay
the effects that these naturally would have brought forth, and that these are
not the consequents of Adams sin, but that only the leaving of them free to
themselves to disorder all, is a consequent of the loss of that righteousness
which was given to Adam, and by him forfaited and lost: that they proceed from
the guilt of sin, but that they make not them guilty in whom they are. But we
say that these are no conditions of nature simply considered, that they cannot
be found but where there is a falling from God, that they are the consequents
of Adams sinful aversion from God his Creator, that they are a part of
original sin, and that they make men guilty of grievous punishment, so long
as they remain in them.

The second thing is, that original sin is indeed according to their opinion
the privation of original righteousness: but as original righteousness was not
given simply to enable men to decline evil and do good, but collectiuely,
constantly, and meritoriously to decline evil and do good: so the privation
of it does not deprive men of all power of declining evil and doing good, but
only of the power of declining all evil, and doing all good collectiuely and
meritoriously. But we say that original righteousness was given, simply to
enable men to decline evil and to do good, and that without it the nature of
man could not perform her proper and principal actions, about her principal
objects: So that the privation of it, depriveth a man of all power of knowing,
loving, fearing, honoring, or glorifying God as God, and of all power, of
doing any thing morally good or not sinful; and puts him into an estate,
wherein he cannot but love and desire things that God would not, or so as he
would not have him; yea of loving other things more than God: and and so as to
dishonor God in any kind, rather than not to enjoy the things he desires.

So that if we speak of original sin formally, it is the privation of
those excellent gifts of divine grace, inabling us to know, love, fear, serve,
honor, and trust in God, and to do the things he delights in, which Adam
had and lost. If materially, it is that habitual inclination that is found in
men averse from God, carrying them to the love and desire of finite things more
then of God, and this also is properly sin, making guilty of condemnation, the
nature and person in which it is found. This habitual inclination to desire
finite things inordinately, is named concupiscence; and this concupiscence is
two fold as p. 2. q. 105. memb. 2. art. 1.
Alensis notes out of Hugo, for there is concupiscentia spiritus, and
concupiscentia carnis, there is a concupiscence of the spirit, or superior
faculties; and of the flesh or inferior; the former is sin, the latter sin
and punishment. For what is more just then that the will refusing to be
ordered by God, and desiring what he would not have it, should find the
inferior faculties rebellious and inclined to desire things the will would
have to be declined?

It remains therefore that we proceed to prove, that this doctrine was
received, taught, and continued in the Churches wherein our Fathers lived and
died, till and after Luthers time. I have showed already that Gregorius
Ariminensis professes, that Adam in the state of his creation, was not enabled
to perform any act morally good, or so to do any good thing, as not to sin in
doing it, by any thing in nature, without addition of grace; which thing he
proves out of the master of the sentences, whose words are these, speaking of
the first man before his fall. 2 sent. d. 29.
Egebat itaque homo gratia, non vt liberaret voluntatem suam quae peccati serva
non fuerat, sed vt praepararet ad volendum efficaciter bonum, quod per se non
poterat. That is, The first man needed grace, not to free his will, for it
never had been in bondage, but to prepare and fit it effectually to will that
which is good, which of it self it could not do.

And he confirms the same out of Saint August: his words are these, De
correption. and great. c. 11.
Istam gratiam non habuit homo primus, qua nunquam vellet esse malus; sed
habuit in qua si permanere vellet, nunquam malus esset; and sine qua etiam cum
libero arbitrio bonus esse non posset; sed eam tamen per liberum arbitrium
deserere posset; nec ipsum ergo Deus esse voluit sine sua gratia, quem reliquit
in eius libero arbitrio, quoniam liberum arbitrium ad malum sufficit, ad bonum
au^m nihil
parumest, nisi adiuuetur ab omnipotenti bono: quod adiutorium si homo ille per
liberum non deseruisset arbitrium, semper esset bonus, sed deseruit, et
desertus est. that is, The first man had not that grace, that might make him so
will good, as never to become evil; but truly he had that, wherein if he
would have continued, he should never have bin evil, and without which,
notwithstanding all the freedom of his will, he could not be good; yet by the
freedom of his will he might loose it; wherefore God would not have him to be
without his grace, whom he left in the freedom of his will, because free will
is sufficient of it self to do evil, but it is of little force, (or rather as
the true reading is of no force, and nothing) to do good, unless it be helped
of the omnipotent good, which help if man had not, forsaken by his free will,
he had ever been good; but he forsook it, and was forsaken.

Thirdly he proves the same in this sort: Si Adam ante peccatum potuisset per
suas vires naturales praecise agere actum moraliter bonum, ipse potuisset
facere se de non bono bonum, posito quod aliquando fuisset sine omni actu
voluntatis, cum suis ta^tum naturalibus; aut de bono meliorem, deo illum non
specialiter adiuvante. that is, If Adam had power before the entrance of sin
precisely by the strength of his natural faculties to do an act morally good,
then he might have made him self good of not good, supposing that sometimes
in the state of mere nature he had no act of will; or at the least he might
have made himself of good better, without the special help of God; but this
consequent must not be admitted; for if Adam might thus have done, the good
Angels might have done so, but that is contrary to St Augustine, his words are
these: Si boni Angeli fuerunt prius sine bona voluntate, eamque in seipsis deo
non operante fecerunt: ergo meliores a i De ciuitate Dei li. 12. c. 9.
seipsis, quam ab illo facti sunt; Absit. At si non potuerunt seipsos facere
meliores, qua^ eos ille fecerat, quo nemo melius quic quam facit: profecto and
bonam voluntatem qua meliores essent, nisi operante adiutorio creatoris, habere
non possent. that is, If the good Angels were first without any good motion of
will, or the goodness of the will, and afterward, God not working, wrought it
in themselves, then they made themselves better then they were made of him,
which God forbid we should ever think. But if they could not make themselves
better then he made them, then whom no man can do any thing better, truly unless
the help of their Creator wrought them to it, they could not have that
goodness of will whereby they might become better then they were before.

That which he thus proves touching the state of man before the fall, is
undoubtedly true in the state of the fall; and therefore all the most pious and
judicious men in every age, have taught as we now do, that since the fall of
Adam, there is no power left in any of his posterity before they be renewed by
grace, to decline sin or to do any work morally good, and that may be truly
named a work of virtue. And these cannot but farther agree with Ariminensis
and us touching the impotencie of nature before the entrance of sin, to do any
good act, or act of virtue, of it self, without the addition of grace. For if
grace had not bin given in the state of the creation simply to enable to do
good, but that there had bin a power of doing good in nature, without and
before the addition of grace, then upon the loss of it there had followed no
such impotencie in the present state, as these men affirm there did, and they
that hold the other opinion deny. All these affirm that all the posterity of
Adam are plunged into such an estate of ignorance by this fall, that without
special illumination of grace, they know not sufficiently concerning any thing
that is to be done or committed, that it is to be done or committed, and
wherefore, and in what sort: and into such an estate of infirmity and
impotencie in respect of the will, that they cannot will any thing that is to
be willed, for such cause, and in such sort as it is to be willed, and withsuch
circumstances as are required, to make an act to be morally good, and truly
virtuous.

De libero arbit. l. 3. c. 17.
St Austine says, that Adam and Eve, so soon as they had sinned, were cast
headlong into error, misery, and death, and that it was most just they should
so be; for what says he is more just then vt amittat quisque quo been vti
noluit, cum sine vlla posset difficultate si vellet; id est, vt qui sciens
recte non facit, a^ittat scire quid rectu^ sit; and qui recte facere, cum
posset, noluit, amittat posse cu^ velit? that every one should loose that which
when with ease he might he would not use well; that is, that he that having
knowledge does not right, should loose the knowledge of that which is right:
and that he that would not do well when he might, should loose the power of
doing well when he would. Enchirid. c. 24.
And elsewhere speaking of the first sin of the Angels and men; he says,
that, when they fell, Subintrauit ignorantia rerum agendarum, and
concupiscentia noxiarum; that is, there entered in ignorance of things to be
done, and desire of things hurtful that are to be declined. Prosper in his
Cap. 39
book in defense of the preachers of grace against Cassian, reprehendeth him
because he had said in his collation de protectione Dei, that Adam gained the
knowledge of evil after his fall, but lost not the knowledge of good which he
had received, and tells him that both these propositions are untrue; so that
he thinks that Adam lost the knowledge of good.

De sacram. fidei l. 1. part 6 c. 12. 13. 14.
Hugo de sancto Victore says, the first man was endued with a threefold
knowledge, cognitione scilicet creatoris sui, ut cognosceret a quo factus erat;
and cognitione sui, ut cognosceret quid factus erat, and quid sibi faciendum
erat; deinde cognitione quoque illius quod secum factum erat, and quid sibi de
illo, and in illo faciendum erat. That is, he was endued with knowledge of his
Creator, that he might know of whom he was made, with knowledge of himself,
that he might know what he was made, and what he was to do; lastly, with
knowledge of that which was made together with him, and what he was to do
with, and in it. For no man is to doubt but that man had perfect knowledge of
all those visible things, that were made for him, and with him, as much as
pertained either to the instruction of his soul, or the necessity of bodily
use. This knowledge man has not lost by the fall, neither that whereby he was
to provide things necessary for the flesh, and therefore God was not careful
afterward to instruct him touching these things by the Scriptures, but he was
to be taught that knowledge that concerns the soul only, when he was to
be restored, because he had lost that only by sinning. And in the same place
he excellently describes the knowledge of God that Adam had, to have bin not
by hearing only from without, as now, but by inspiration within, not that
whereby now believers by faith seek after God as absent, but that whereby by
presence of contemplation, he was more manifestly seen of him as knowing him.
And concludes, it is hard to express the manner of the divine knowledge the
first man had, but that only this is certain, that being taught visibly by
inward inspiration, he could no way doubt of his Creator.

In like sort the same ibid. part. 7. c. 11. and 17.
Hugo shows most excellently, that man has lost all rectitude of will; for
whereas there was given to man a double desire, iusti, and commodi: of that
which is just, and that which is pleasing: the one voluntary, the other
necessary; that by the one he might merit, or demerite; by the other he might
be punished or rewarded (for if he had no desire of that is pleasing, he could
neither be rewarded by having, nor punished by being deprived.) He has lost
the one, and is punished in the other which remains: when either he is kept
from inioying the things he orderly desires, or left free to desire such
things, as orderly are not to be desired. If man have lost all desire of that
which is just as just, as here he says he has; then surely he sins in all
his actions, and is deprived of all moral rectitude; for what moral rectitude
is in him, that loves nothing, because it is just, farther then it may be
commodious, and in that respect pleasing?

The schoolmen are wont to urge, that a man may naturally love God above all;
for seeing he naturally loves that which appears unto him to be good, why
should he not love God above all, who is the chief good? To this Luthers answer
is this, that there is a twofold love; for there is amor amicitiae, and amor
concupiscentiae, a love whereby a man wills the good of him that he loves,
and a love whereby he desires to make use of the good of that he loves, and
to make it serve his turn. In the first sort a man loves his friend; by the
latter his horse: now says Luther, it is true, that every sinful man loves
God with the latter kind of love, desiring to make use of God to serve his own
turn: but it is not possible for a natural man to love God as a man loves
his friend, that is, to desire that God may rule, and reign, and be glorified
as God, to rejoice when his will is done, though it be contrary to that we
desire; to be grieved when he is offended. And this surely is confirmed by
Epist. 11. page 1406.
Bernard, for he says, that there are 4 degrees of love. For 1, a man loves
nothing but himself. 2^ Heloueth other things, and amongst other things God for
himself finding that he cannot be without him. Thirdly, He loves God, for God.
Fourthly he loves him self for God. The two former are natural, and as I
think finfull: the two latter I am well assured in the judgment of Saint
Bernard proceed from grace, and not from nature, for he says, That is first
that is natural, and then that which is spiritual; and that scarce any of the
elect of God go beyond the first of these two latter degrees in this life. So
that according to that which before I alleged out of Gregorius Ariminensis,
every one that wills any thing, either wills God, or some other thing that
is not God; if God, and not for God, but for some other thing expected to be
had from him, or by him, this is vti fruendis, to make use of that, for the
having of some thing as more loved, that should be enjoyed as the best and most
loved of all other things, and this is most perverse, as Saint Augustine
tells us. If we love any thing else besides God, and not for God, it is
likewise an iniquity. So that seeing naturally it is impossible to love for
God, it is impossible to love any thing rightly; and consequently all the
actions of natural and unregenerate men are sin. And that they are so
indeed, it is proved by such authorities as may not be excepted against.
Cyprian de bono patientiae in principio says, the true virtue of patience
cannot be in Infidells; now there is the same reason of one virtue and of all,
his words are these. Hanc se sectari Philosophi quoque profitentur, sed tam
illis patientia est falsa, quam and falsa sapientia; vnde enim vel sapiens esse
vel patiens posset, qui nec sapientiam nec patientiam Dei novit, quando ipse de
ijs qui sibi sapere in mundo videntur moneat and dicat, perdam sapientiam
sapientum, and prudentiam prudentum reprobabo? Contra Iulianum Pelagianum, l.
4. c. 3.
Augustine says, Thou will say if a Gentile shall cloth the naked, is it
sin, because it is not of faith? truly in that it is not of faith, it is
sin; not because the action of clothing the naked in it self is sin: but
to glory in such a work and not in the Lord, none but an impious man will deny
to be sin. If a Gentile that lives not by faith, shall cloth the naked,
deliver him that is in danger, bind up the wounds of him that is wounded,
bestow his goods to honest and friendly purposes: and shall not suffer himself
to be brought by any torments to bear false witness; I ask of thee, whether
he do these good works well or ill? for if he do these things ill, that
are good, thou can not deny but that he sins, that does any thing ill: if
thou say he does these good things, and does them well, then an evil tree
brings forth good fruit, which he that is truth it self says cannot be.
If thou shall say that a man that is an Infidel is a good Sequitur ibidem apud
Augustinum. Sed forte dicturus es miseri^ors voluntas bona est. Recte istud
dice^etur, si que madmodum fides Christi, id est, fides quae per dilectionem
operatur, semper est bona, ita misericordia semper esset bona; si autem
reperitur and misericordia mala, qua persona pauperis accipitur in judicio,
propter quam postremo rex Saul meruit a Domino vtique misericorde damnari, quia
contra eius praeceptum captivo regi per humanum pepercit affectum, attentius
cogita ne forte misericordia bona non sit, nisi quae huius bonae fidei fuerit.
Imo responde, vt hoc sine dubitatione perspicias, vtrum bonam misericordiam
existimes infidelem. Porto si vitium est male misereri, procul dubio vitium est
infideliter misereri. Quod si and ipsa per seipsam naturali compassione opus
est bonum, etiam isto bono male vtitur qui infideliter vtitur, and hoc bonum
male facit, qui infideliter facit, qui autem male facit aliquid, profecto
peccat. Ex quo colligitur etiam ipsa bona opera quae faciunt infideles, non
ipsorum esse, sed illius qui been vtitur malis. Ipsorum autem esse peccata,
quibus and bona male faciunt, quia ea non fideli, sed infideli, h^c est, stulta
and noxi^ voluntate faciunt. Qualis voluntas nullo Christiano dubitante est
arbor mala, quae facere non potest nisi fructus malos, id est, sola peccata.
Omne enim, velis nolis, quod non est ex fide, peccatum est.
tree, then he pleases God, for that which is good cannot but please God who
is good.

But Julian the Pelagian answers, as the Papists do at this day: I
acknowledge, says he, that they are steriliter boni, that is, their good is
barren and brings forth no fruit, who not doing the good things they do for
God, receive not from him the reward of eternal life. The answer of Saint
Augustine is out of the 6 of Matthew: If thine eye be evil, thy whole body
shall be full of darkness, etc: Know that this eye is the intention, with
which every one does that he does; and learn by this, that he that does not
his good works, out of a good intention of a good faith, that is, of that
faith that works by love, all the whole body that consists of such works
as members, is full of darkness, that is, the blacknes of sins. Or truly
because thou grantest that such works of infidels as seem to thee to be
good, bring them not to eternal salvation and the kingdom of heaven: know
thou that we say that that good will, that good work by which only a man may
be brought to the everlasting gift and kingdom of God, can be given to none,
without that grace that is given by him, that is the only mediator between
God and man. All other things that seem to be commendable amongst men, let
them seem to thee to be true virtues, let them seem to thee to be good
works, and done without all sin. For my part this I know, that the will is
not good that does them, for an unbelieving will and ungodly is not good. Let
these wills be according to thy judgment good trees, it suffices that with
God, or in Gods judgment, they are barren, and so not good. Let them be
fruitful amongst men, amongst whom also they are good, upon thy credit and
authority, thy commendation, thy planting, if thou will have it so: so that I
obtain this whether thou will or not, that the love of this world, whereby
every one is a friend of this world, is not of God; and that the love that
makes a man enjoy the creatures whatsoever they be without the love of the
creator, as the chiefest and utter most good, is not of God. Now the love of
God whereby we come to God, is not but from God the Father by Jesus, together
with the holy Ghost. By this love of the creator, each one uses the creatures
rightly, and without this love of the creator, no man uses the creatures well.

And again, August. ibid.
Noveris non officiis, sed finibus a vitiis discernendas esse virtutes.
Officium est autem quod faciendum est: finis vero propter quod faciendum est.
Cum itaque facit homo aliquid vbi peccare non videtur, si non propter hoc facit
propter quod facere debet, peccare convincitur. Quae tu non attendens fines ab
officiis separasti, and virtutes veras officia sine finibus appellandas esse
dixisti. Ex quo te tanta absurditas sequitur, vt veram cogaris appellare
iustitiam, etiam cuius dominam repereris avaritiam. Siquidem manus abstinere ab
alieno, si officium cogites, potest videri esse iustitiae. Sed cum quaeritur,
quare fiat, and respondetur, ne plus pecuniae litibus pereat: quomodo iam hoc
factum verae poterit esse iusticiae, cum serviat avaritiae?

And again. Ibid.
Absit vt virtutes verae cuiquam serviant, nisi illi vel propter illum cui
dicimus Psalm. 79. Deus virtutum converte nos. Proinde virtutes quae carnalibus
delectationibus, vel quibuscunque commodis and emolumentis temporalibus
serviunt, verae prorsus esse non possunt. Quae autem nulli rei servire volunt,
nec ipsae verae sunt. Verae quippe virtutes Deo serviunt in hominibus, a quo
donantur hominibus. Quicquid autem boni fit ab homine, and non propter hoc fit,
propter quod fieri debere vera sapientia praecipit, etsi officio videatur
bonum, ipso non recto fine peccatum est. and ideo, De civitate Dei, l. 19. c.
25.
Virtutes non relatae ad Deum, vitia potius sunt, quam virtutes: Nam licet a
quibusdam tunc verae and honestae putentur esse virtutes, cum ad seipsas
referuntur: nec propter aliud expetuntur, etiam tunc inflatae ac superbae sunt:
and ideo non virtutes virtutes, sed vitia iudicandae sunt. August. in Ps. 31.
Bona opera extra fidem, simillima sunt celerrimo cursui extraviam.

And again, De civit. Dei l. 19. c. 25.
Quamlibet videatur animus corpori, and ratio vitiis laudabiliter imperare, si
tamen Deo animus and ratio ipsa non seruit, sicut sibi serviendum esse ipse
Deus praecepit, nullo modo corpori vitiisque recte imperat. Nam qualis corporis
atque vitiorum potest esse men's domina, very Dei nescia, nec eius imperio
subiugata, sed vitiosissimis daemonibus corrumpentibus prostituta? Proinde
virtutes quas sibi habere videtur, per quas imperat corpori and vitiis ad
quodlibet adipiscendum vel tenendum, nisi ad Deum retulerit, etiam ipsae vitia
sunt potius quam virtutes.

1 Lib. de vocatio: gentium cap. 7.
Prosper agrees with Saint Austine: his words are these sine cultu very Dei
etiam quod virtus videtur esse, peccatum est; nec placere ullus Deo sine Deo
potest. Qui vero Deo non placet, cui nisi sibi and Diabolo placet? That is,
without the worship of the true God, even that which seems to be virtue is
sin; neither can any man please God without God; And whom does he please
that pleases not God but himself and the devil? And the same Prosper in his
Cap. 1.
3d book de vita contemplativa, Apostolus non dixit, omne quod non est ex
fide, nihil est; sed dicendo, Omne quod non est ex fide, peccatum est:
declaravit quod omnia gesta, sinon fuerint ex fide, non sint aliqua bona
credenda, sed vitia, quae non invant suos operarios, sed condemnant,
inflatosque praecipitant, atque a finibus aeternae salutis eliminant; That is,
the Apostle did not say whatsoever is not of faith is nothing, but by saying it
is sin, he declares that whatsoever things have not been done out of faith,
are not to be thought good, but faults and vices, which do not help the
workers of them, but condemn them, and cast them headlong down being puffed
up, and banish them out of the confines of eternal salvation. And the same
Lib. sent. ex Augustino sentent. 106.
Prosper in another place, Omnis infidelium vita peccatum est, and nihil bonum
sine summo bono, ubi enim deest agnitio aeternae, and incommutabilis veritatis,
falsa virtus est etiam in optimis moribus, That is, the whole life of Infidels
is sin, and there is nothing good without the chief good; and wheresoever
the knowledge of the eternal and incommutable verity is wanting, let a man's
manners be never so good, it is no true virtue he seems to have.

There is nothing good without faith, says Chrysostom, and that I may use a
similitude, and make a comparison, they that flourish in good works and know
not God, seem to me to be like the relics of the dead wrapped up fairly.
Basil in his Qu^st. 7.
second book de baptismate, proposing the question whether it be possible, or
whether it be acceptable to God, that he that serves sin, should do the
works of righteousness, brings the explication of this question out of the
Old Testament, where GOD says; the sinner that offers to me a calfe, is as
he that kills a dog, and in the New Testament the Lord says, he that does
sin is the servant of sin, and no man can serve two masters; wherefore we
are to be exhorted to make the tree good and her fruit good, and first to
purge and make clean that which is in the inside of the cup and of the
platter, and then all that is without will be clean.

Lib. 22. c. 10. super 31. cap. Job.
Gregory in his morals, writing upon those words of Job, If my mouth have
kissed my hand, has these words. Sancti viri sciunt se non virtute propri^ sed
praeveniente superna gratia ad meliora vota vel opera commutatos; and quicquid
sibi mali inesse cognoscunt de mortali propagine sentiunt meritum: quicquid
vero boni in se inspiciunt, immortalis gratiae cognoscunt donum, eique de
accepto munere debitores fiunt, qui and praeveniendo dedit eis bonum velle quod
voluerunt, and subsequendo concessit bonum posse quod volunt. Let them that are
otherwise minded, tell us, whether the moral actions of Infidels be good or
evil, if good, then they are from grace, whereof they are not partakers, if
evil, then have they the thing proved about which we contend.

Beda writing upon the 14th to the Romans upon those words, Whatsoever is not
of faith is sin, says as Prosper, that all the whole life of Infidels is
sin, that nothing is good without the chief good, that where the knowledge
of the eternal and incommutable verity is not, if the manners and
conversation of them that have it not, be never so good, they have no true
virtue.

Bernard in his book Cap, 40.
de gratia and libero arbitrio: Liberi arbitrii conatus ad bonum and cassi sunt
si non gratia adiuventur: and nulli si non excitentur: caeterum in malum dicit
scriptura proni sunt sensus and cogitationes hominis. That is, the endeavoring
of freewill to do good is in vain, if it be not helped by grace, and none at
all if it be not stirred up by grace; but the scripture says the senses and
thoughts of men are prone to evil. Neither can they say that he speaks
only of meritorious good, and such as is rewardable in heaven; for he
speaks generally of good; as it appears, in that he opposes it not to
some other kind of good, but to evil.

Comment: in 14. caput: epistolae ad Romanos.
Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury fully agrees with the rest, affirming in
the same words that Prosper and Beda did before, that the whole life of
infidels is sin, that there is nothing good without the chief good, and that
where the knowledge of the eternal and incommutable verity is wanting, if the
manners and conversation of them that have it not be nouer so good and
commendable, they have no true virtue. Peter Lombard the master of the
sentences sometimes Bishop of Paris writing upon the same place, has the
same words: and so has the ordinary gloss.

Citatus ab Ariminensi li. 2. d. 26. 27. 28. q. 1. artic. 1.
Grosthead the renowned Bishop of Lincoln in his sermon upon the Aduent, the
beginning whereof is this, There shall be signs in the sun and in the Moon,
has these words; Bright and glittering stars of virtue seemed to shine and
appear in the moral doctrine of natural men, and in the conversation of many
Gentiles, as of the Scipioes and others: but now it is truly manifest and
clear, that without the faith of Christ there is no true virtue, in the
doctrine or conversation of any man. And in his cap. 37.
Enchiridion he says, that this was the opinion of St Augustine; where
treating of the four Cardinal virtues, and proposing the question, whether
Cato and the Scipioes had such virtues, he says thus: We grant with
Augustine that no man ever had or could have true virtue without the faith of
Jesus Christ: and proves it immediately after in this sort. Non enim potest
esse amor ordinatus, vbi contemnitur and non amatur quod maxim amandum est,
cum non ametur nisi quod scitur aut creditur: vnde patet, quod qui nescit, aut
non credit dominum Iesum Christum, non amat aut contemnit quod maxim amandum
est, quapropter in tali virtus non est: quod etiam probat Augustinus talibus
argumentis, dicens, Absit vt in aliquo sit vera virtus nisi sit iustus etc:
that is, There can be no orderly love of things where that is contemned and
not loved, that is to be loved most of all, whence it is clear and evident,
that seeing nothing can be loved but that which is known or believed, he who
knows not or believes not the Lord JESUS CHRIST, contemns or at least
loves not, that which is most of all to be beloved, and therefore in such a
one there can be noe true virtue, which also Augustine proves by arguments of
this sort, saying, GOD forbid that true virtue should be conceived to be in
any man unless he be just etc. By these passages of the Bishop of Lincoln
it appears, says Ariminensis, that he thought, as we do, that noe act
morally good, can be done without the special grace of GOD, for if there
be noe virtue without such grace, then can there be noe act morallie good:
which is yet more fully cleared: for every virtuous and moral good act, either
is orderly love, or presupposes it: so that if there can be noe orderly love
without GODS grace, there can be noe act of virtue, or act morally good. With
this famous Bishop of LINCOLN we may join Thomas Bradwardine, the noe
less famous and renowned Archbishop of CANTERBVRIE, who is his Sum de
causa Dei contra Pelagium at large confirms and proves the same. So that it
seems by Beda, Anselme, Grosthead and this BRADWARDINE, that this was ever
the doctrine of the Church of England, as now it is.

De liberate Christiana li. 2. cap. 34.
Pupperus Gocchianus that lived a little before Luthers time, says, The whole
life of infidels is sin, there is nothing good without the chief good: where
there wants the knowledge of the eternal truth, if men's manners be never so
commendable they have no true virtue; he that offends in one, that is, in
charity is guilty of all; he therefore that has not faith and charity, every
action of his is sin. And he adds, Cap. 35.
that when Augustine says, that they that have not charity may do good
things, but not well, his words are not to be understood, as if the things
which they do without charity were good, when they do them without charity,
but that they would be good, if they were done in charity, or that they are of
such nature and kind, which being done in charity, may be good: otherwise he
should be contrary to himself, where he says that every action of him that
has not charity is sin.

Explicat. Orthodoxae fidei page 273.
Andradius says, that there was much difference touching this point not only
amongst the latter, but the more ancient divines also: and that some did so
deiect all the actions and endeavors of infidels, as to affirm that none of
them are or can be without sin; It is true indeed that there were ever some
in the latter ages of the Church that contradicted this verity, which we have
hitherto proved, but they were such as had a touch of Semipelagianisme.

Lib. de gratia and libero arbitrio contra Cassianum, c ^9. definit. 8.
Prosper speaks of a rule found in the collations of Cassian, Cauendum nobis
est, ne ita ad Deum omnia sanctorum referamus, vt nihil nisi id quod malum est,
humanae ascribamus naturae. That is, We must take heed least we so attribute
all the merits of the Saints to God, as to ascribe nothing to nature, but that
which is evil and perverse. This rule sundry carefully followed in the midst
of the Church in all the latter ages, who so acknowledged that no man can merit
heaven without Gods grace, that yet they thought they might do many things
morally good, by nature without grace. But Prosper bitterly reprehendeth this;
his words are these. Quasi natura ante gratiam non sit in damnatione, non sit
in caecitate, non sit in vulnere: aut non gratis iustificati sint, quorum inde
sunt merita vnde iustitia. That is, As if nature before grace were not in a
state of condemnation, were not in blindness, and greivously hurt, or as if
we were not freely justified, all whose merits are from thence, whence is our
righteousness. And all they that rightly understood the doctrine of the
Church, cleared by Saint Augustine against the Pelagians, concurred with
Prosper, and taught as we do now, that all the works of infidells and men
not renewed and justified by Gods special grace were sins.

Yea so great is the force of this truth, that since the council of Trent,
some of great esteem and place, in a sort give way unto it. For Didacus
Alvarez an Archbishop within the dominions of the king of Spain, has written
a learned work de Auxiliis gratiae, and dedicated it with good allowance to
the king that now is; wherein he Lib. 6 d. (...). page 4^ (...). 431. etc.
says, that though every moral act that is good ex genere and obiecto, as to
give alms to a poor man out of natural compassion, be of that nature, that
it may be done in reference to God, as loved above all, as the author of
nature, or as the cause and object of supernatural happiness, yet no such can
be so done de facto, but by the act of charity. So that by a man
unregenerate, no such act can be done in reference to God, formally, or
vertually. Now I suppose there is no moral act that can be done by man,
but it must be referred, formally or vertually to some last end, and if not to
God, as he says the works of Infidells cannot, then to some other end, and
then of necessity they must be sin, for whatsoever is done in reference to
any thing besides God as the last end, is done perversely and sinfully, The
good man, no doubt, saw the truth touching this point; and therefore says,
that there is no true virtue without charity, that the works of Infidels are
not only not meritorious, but not truly good, nor the works of virtue: and
proves the same at large out of Augustine; whence it will follow that they are
sin; for every moral act is either a work of virtue and truly good,
though in an inferior sort, or sin; but this he durst not say, He therefore
says. Dupliciter potest dici vera virtus. Primo. in ordine ad bonum
particulare, and ad finem proximum eiusdem virtutis sieve ad obiectum illius
particulare non apparens sed vere bonum, velut ordinabile quantum est in se ad
principale bonum quod est ultimus finis, ut dare eleemosynam ex naturali
pietate non apponendo malam circumstantiam, est actus verae virtutis
comparatione obiecti seu boni particularis. Secundo comparatione ultimi finis
seu boni vniuersalis ut non tantum in se ille actus sit ordinabilis ad bonum
principale quod est finis ultimus, sed etiam ex part operantis referatur actu
vel virtute.
and so puts himself into a necessity of contradicting himself: for if an
infidel when he gives an alms, cannot do this act in reference to GOD, as
the last end, either formally, or vertually, then he must do it formally, or
vertually, in reference to some other thing most loved by him; and if he do
so, then he puts an ill circumstance to this his action, and so it cannot
but be sin.

Thus then we have strongly proved, out of the testimonies of such as best
understood the doctrine of the Church, that grace was given to Adam in the day
of his creation, not only to make him constantly and collectiuely to do all
the moral duties that were required of him, and to merit supernatural
happiness, as if he might have done the several duties, and performed the
several acts of moral virtue without it; but simply to enable him to do
good, and decline evil, so that it being taken away, man knows not his true
good, nor is any way inclined to seek it as he should do. For whereas there
was a threefold eye in Adam, as Institutionis monasticae sermon. 35.
Hugo de Sancto Victore notes; Carnis, quo mundum and quae in mundo cernebat:
rationis, quo se, and quae in se: contemplationis, quo deum: primum perfect
habet, secundum ex part, tertium omnino non habet, nam postquam tenebrae
peccati intraverunt; oculus contemplationis extinctus est ut nihil videret;
oculus rationis lippus factus est, ut dubie videret: solus oculus carnis in sua
claritate permansit. That is, Of the flesh by which he saw the world, and the
things that are in it: of reason whereby he saw and understood himself, and
all the things that were in himself: and of contemplation, by which he was to
see God: the first he has still in perfection, the second in part, the third
he has wholly lost; for after the darkness of sin entered, the eye of
contemplation was put out, so as to see nothing at all; the eye of reason was
dimmed so as to see doubtfully; only the eye of the flesh remained in
perfection. And two kinds of evil are brought into the nature of man,
Privativa, amissio notitiae in intellectu, and rectitudinis in voluntate, and
conversionis ad deum tanquam ad proprium obiectum: positiva, perpetuae and
tristes dubitationes de Deo, de providentia Dei, iudicio, promissionibus,
comminationibus, in voluntate conversio ad obiecta contraria legi: That is,
there are Bellarm. de amissione gratiae and statu peccati l. 5. c. 15 No new
inclination positiuely carries us to evil, but the old set free by loss of
grace, as a thing propendeth to fall not by addition of new weight, but by
taking away the former stay, and as a horse is incited to run, not by the
spur, but by taking away the bridle.
newly brought into the nature of man, evils of two sorts: privatiue, as the
loss of the true and right knowledge of God in the understanding, of rectitude
in the will, and of due conversion to God as her proper object: positive, as
perpetual doubtings of God, of the providence of God, his judgment, promises,
threats, in his will a conversion to the desiring of things the Law forbids.

This corruption of man's nature is excellently described by De vocatione
gentium l. 1. c. 6.
Prosper, Humana natura in primi hominis praevaricatione vitiata, etiam inter
beneficia, inter praecepta and auxilia Dei, semper in deteriorem est proclivior
voluntatem, cui committi, non est aliud quam dimitti. Haec voluntas vaga,
incerta, instabilis, imperita, infirma ad efficiendum, facilis ad audendum, in
cupiditatibus caeca, in honoribus tumida, curis anxia, suspicionibus inquieta,
gloriae quam virtutum avidior, fame quam conscientiae diligentior, and per
omnem sui experientiam, miserior fruendo his quae concupiverit, quam carendo:
nihil in suis habet viribus nisi periculi facilitatem. And again, Cap 7.
Omnes homines in primo homine sine vitio conditi sumus, and omnes naturae
nostrae incolumitatem, eiusdem hominis praevaricatione perdidimus, inde tracta
mortalitas, inde multiplex corporis, animique corruption, inde ignorantia, and
difficultas, curae inutiles, illicitae cupiditates, sacrilegi errores, timor
vanus, amor noxius, iniusta gaudia, poenitenda consilia, and non minor
miseriarum multitudo, quam criminum.

By this which has been said it appears, that the Church wherein our
Fathers lived and died, ever taught as we do, touching the state of man's
creation, fall, and original corruption: and ever rejected the fancies of
those more then Semipelagians, that brought in the errors the Romanists now
maintain, and so was in this as in the former points, a true, orthodoxe, and
Protestant Church.

CHAP. 6.
Of the blessed Virgins conception.

Having spoken of Original sin and showed the nature of it; the next thing
that is questioned, is the generality of it; for we say that amongst al them
that have been borne of women, there never was any found that was not
conceived in sin, besides Christ the Lord, who had God for his father, and a
virgin for his mother; of whose spotless conception, his Fathers divinity, and
mothers virginity, were proof sufficient. But they of the Church of Rome at
this day, for the most part say, that the blessed virgin the mother of our
Lord, was conceived likewise without spotte of original sin.

Leo the tenth was moved to determine this question touching the conception of
the virgin in the council of Lateran; But Cardinal Opuscul. tom. 2. tractatus
1. de concep: B. virginis. c. (...).
Caietan writes a learned discourse touching the same matter, and offers it
to Leo praying him to be well advised: and in this tract, for proof of her
conception in sin, he produces the testimonies of 15 canonized Saints; For
first S. Augustine writing upon the 34 Psalm, says, that Adam died for sin,
that Mary who came out of the loins of Adam died for sin, but that the flesh
of the Lord which he took of the virgin Mary, died for to take away sin. And
in his 2d book de baptismo parvulorum, He only who ceasing not to be God,
became man, never had sin, neither did he take the flesh of sin, or sinful
flesh, though he took of the flesh of his mother that was sinful. And in his
tenth book de Genesi ad litteram, he says, Though the body of Christ were
taken of the flesh of a woman, that was conceived out of the propagation of
sinful flesh: yet because he was not so conceived of her, as she was
conceived, therefore it was not sinful flesh, but the similitude of
sinful flesh. And Saint Ambrose upon those words, Blessed are the
undefiled, has these words: The Lord Jesus came; and that flesh that was
subject to sin in his mother, performed the warrefare of virtue. And
Crhysostome upon Matthew says: Though Christ was no sinner, yet he took the
nature of man, of a woman that was a sinner. And Eusebius Emissenus in his
second sermon upon the nativity, which begins, Ye know beloved etc. has
these words, There is none free from the tie and bond of original sin, no
not the mother of the redeemer. Saint Remigius, upon those words of the
Psalm, O God my God, look upon me: says; The blessed virgin Mary was made
clean from all stain of sin, that the man Christ Jesus might be conceived
of her without sin. Saint Maximus in his sermon of the assumption of the
blessed virgin, says; The blessed and glorious virgin was sanctified in her
mothers womb from all contagion of original sin, before she came to the
birth, and was made pure and undefiled by the holy Ghost. Saint Beda in his
sermon upon missus est (and the same is in the ordinary gloss) says, that
The holy spirit coming upon the virgin, freed her mind from all defiling of
sinful vice, and made it chaste, and purified her from the heat of carnal
concupiscence, tempering and cleansing her heart. Saint Bernard in his epistle
to them of Lions says: It is believed that the blessed virgin after her
conception, received sanctification while she was yet in the womb; which
excluding sin, made her birth holy, but not her conception. Saint Erardus a
Bishop, and a martyr, in his sermon upon the nativity of the virgin, cries
out: O happy damsel, which being conceived in sin, is purged from all
sin, and conceiueth a son without sin. Saint Anthony of Padua in his
sermon of the nativity of the blessed virgin says: The blessed virgin was
sanctified from sin by grace in her mothers womb, and borne without sin.
Saint Thomas Aquinas (for he also was a canonized Saint) in the third part of
his sum quaest. 27. art. 2. says, that the blessed virgin because she was
conceived out of the commixtion of her parents, contracted original sin.
Saint Bonauenture upon the third of the sentences, distinct. 3. p. 1. artic.
1. quaest. 1. says, We must say the blessed virgin was conceived in original
sin, and that her sanctification followed her contracting of original sin:
this opinion is the more common, the more reasonable, and more secure. More
common, for almost all hold it. The more reasonable because the being of nature
precedeth the being of grace. The more secure because it better agrees with
the piety of faith, and the authority of the Saints, then the other. Saint
Bernardine, in sermonum suorum opere tertio, in his tract of the blessed
virgin, sermon the fourth, says. There was a third sanctification, which was
that of the mother of God, and this takes away original sin, conferreth
grace, and remoueth the pronenesse to sin mortally, or venially. Saint
Vincentius the Confessor, in sermon de conceptione virginis, says, The
blessed virgin was conceived in original sin: but that the same day and
hour, she was purged by sanctification from sin contracted, so soon as ever
she had received the spirit of life. And besides all these holden to be
Saints in the Church of Rome, he says, there were a great multitude of
ancient doctors, who speaking particularly and distinctly of the virgin, say
she was conceived in original sin: whose sayings who pleases may find in
the originalls: or may find them in the books of Johannes de Turrecremata, and
Vincentius de Castro Nouo writing upon the conception of the virgin, whence
they are taken. Thus far Caietan.

In 3. sent: d. 3. part. 1. artic. 1. q. 2.
Bonauentura professes, that the opinion of the blessed virgins spotless
conception was so new in his time, that he had never read it in any author,
neither did he find it to be holden by any one, that he had ever seen, or
heard speak. And In 3. l sent. d. 3: citatus a Caietano vbi supra.
Adam Angelicus says: If the sayings of the Saints be to be believed, we must
hold that the blessed virgin was conceived in original sin: and none of the
Saints is found to have said the contrary. Yet in time some began to bring in
this opinion, and to make it public; as Scotus, and Franciscus de Maironis:
but very doubtfully, and fearfully: for In 3. sent. d. 3. q. 1.
Scotus having spoken of both opinions touching the conception of the virgin,
says in the conclusion: that God only knows, which of them is the truer:
but if it be not contrary to the authority of the Church or of holy Scripture,
it seems 3. Lib. did. 3.
probable to attribute that to the virgin, that is more excellent. And that
indeed he had reason to fear least he should contrary the Fathers and holy
men that went before, it will easily appear by that of the master of
Sentences: It may truly be said, and we must believe according to the
consenting testimonies of the Saints, that the flesh which CHRIST took was
formerly subject to sin, as the rest of the flesh of the virgin, but that it
was so sanctified, and made pure, and undefiled, by the operation of the holy
Ghost, that free from all contagion of sin, it was united to the word.

But see how strangely things were carried: this opinion which was unknown to
the Church for more then a thousand years, and at the first broaching of it
had few patrons, yet in time grew to be so generally approved, that almost
all they of the Latin Church, thought they did God good service in following
this opinion^ many visions, revelations, and miracles were pretended in favor
of it, and the Council of Basil decreed for it. Bridget canonized for a Saint,
professed it had been particularly revealed to her: but Catharina Senensis, a
Prophetess also, and more authentically canonized then the former, professed
that the contrary was revealed to her, as the Antoninus sum. p. 1. tit. 8. c.
2. prope finem.
Archbishop of Florence reports in his sum. And Tractatus citati superius
c. 1
Caietan says; if miracles be pretended for proof, great caution is to be
used, both in respect of the strange works: and in respect of the illusions
that may fall out in things of this kind. In respect of the strange works
that are done, because the Angel of Satan transformeth himself into an Angel
of light; and can do many great and strange things, which we would think to
be true miracles, and such things as God only can do: as the works of
healing, strange mutations in the Elements, and the like. Whence it is, that it
is said, Antichrist shall do so many miracles in the sight of men, that if it
were possible the very elect should be deceived. Moreover as the Apostle
testifies 1 Cor. 14, and blessed Gregory in his tenth Homily, miracles were
given to Infidels, not to believers; but to the Church, as faithful, and not
faithless, the prophetical and Apostolical revelation was given for her
direction. So that though that course of proof that is by miracles, was
appointed by Christ, Mark the last, in respect of Infidels: and though it be
h Cap. cum ex iniuncto extra: de haereticis.
allowed by the Church, to make good the personal condition of some man, as
when one pretends to be sent extraordinarily of God: yet unless most
clearly a true and undoubted, not wonder, but miracle, were done in the sight
of the Governors of the Roman Church, expressly to testify that this
particular is true, the Roman Bishops ought not to determine any doubtful
thing in matter of faith, upon the doing of a miracle. And the reason is,
because God has appointed an ordinary course for the resolving of points of
faith, so that if an Angel from Heaven should say unto us any thing contrary
to this way, we were not to believe him, as the Apostle says in the first to
the Galathians. Add hereunto, that the miracles which the Church admits in
the canonization of Saints, which yet are most authentical, are not altogether
certain, seeing the credit of them depends upon the testimony of men, and
every man is a liar. And he concludes, that Cap, 3.
these things being so, wise men think, that pretended miracles and
revelations in this kind, contrary to so many Saints, and ancient Doctors,
argue rather that the Angel of Satan is transformed into an Angel of light,
and that whatsoever things are alleged in this kind are mere fancies, and
counterfeite stuff, then that they prove the truth of this conceit; and
that proofs in this kind are fitter for silly women, then councels to take
notice of.

It appears by Saint Epist. 174.
Bernard, that in his time they of Lions in France, out of a superstitious
conceit, as he rightly censureth it, began to celebrate the Feast of the
Conception of the blessed Virgin, supposing that she was conceived without
sin; but he opposes himself against this innovation, and says, the
observation of the Church has no such thing, reason infers it not, nor
ancient tradition commends it, that we are not more learned and devout then
our Fathers, that in like sort others may bring in the Feast of her parents
Conception, that patriae non exilii frequentia haec gaudiorum, and numerositas
festivitatum cives non exules decet: That, whereas some brought out a certain
pretended writing of divine revelation, it was not to be regarded, and that
another might bring forth the like writing, wherein the holy Virgin might be
found to command the same thing to be done, in honor of her parents,
according to the command of the Lord, Honor thy father and thy mother, so did
he show his dislike. Yet after this many Churches received the same
observation; and in process of time all were brought to keep the same day
holy: yet so that many of them professed, that they would keep it holy, not in
respect of her preservation, but of her sanctification from sin. So that we
see, that this point of Romish superstition, was never admitted by the Church,
but protested against by all the most worthy members of it; which thing besides
that which has already been alleged, the reader may find farther confirmed
by Ariminensis; who not only contradicts this fancy himself, but produces
many authorities for the reproof of it. So that herein also the Church wherein
our Fathers lived, and died, is found to have been a Protestant Church, as in
the former.

But some man will say, many of those that we produce for witnesses that she
was conceived in sin, yet think that she was sanctified in the womb, and
borne without sin. For answer hereunto, we must observe that which Gregorius
Ariminensis has, that many thought she was sanctified in the womb, l Did.
31. q. z. artic. 3.
and borne without original sin, as sin, and making guilty of
condemnation: but not without concupiscence inclining to evil, which was
wholly taken away, or so restrained by the superabundance of grace, when the
holy spirit overshadowed her, that she might be the mother of God; that it
should never be an occasion of sin: this opinion the Li. 3. d. 3.
master of sentences follows: and this opinion the Schoolmen follow for the
most part.

But De praesentia Dei ad Dardanum ep. 57. post medium. p. 319.
August: says, Ista sanctificatio qua efficimur and singuli templa Dei, and in
vnum omnes templum Dei, non est nisi renatorum, quod nisi nati homines esse,
non possunt. Si homo regenerari per gratiam spiritus in vtero potest, quoniam
restat illi adhuc nasci, renascitur ergo antequam nascitur, quod fieri nullo
modo potest. Seeing therefore none can be sanctified before he be borne,
neither can any man be cleansed from original sin before his birth; in
as much as that is not taken away, but by the infusion of grace. And the gloss
upon the eigth to the Romans says, Christ was the first that was borne without
sin. And Anselme in his second book cur Deus homo, has these words: Though
Christ's conception were pure, and without the sin of carnal delight, yet the
virgin her self, of whom he took flesh, was conceived in iniquity, and her
mother conceived her in sin, and she was borne with original sin, because
she also sinned in Adam in whom all sinned.

And diverse of the Fathers feared not to make her subject to actual sin. Romans
5. 12.
Homil. 17. in Lucam.
Origin writing upon Luke, insisting upon those words of Simeon to Mary, a
sword shall pierce thorough thy soul, has these words: What is this sword
that pierced the heart, not only of others, but of Mary also? It is plainly
written, that in the time of his passion all the Apostles were scandalized, as
the Lord himself had said, you shall all be scandalized this night: they were
all therefore so scandalized, that even Peter the prince of the Apostles denied
him thrice. What shall we think that when the Apostles were scandalized, the
mother of our Lord, was free from being scandalized? Surely if she suffered no
scandal in the time of the Lords passion, Christ dyed not for her sins; but if
all have sinned, and have bin deprived of the glory of God, and are justified
by his grace, and redeemed, then surely Mary was scandalized at that time: and
that is it that Simeon now prophesies, And even thy soul, (which know that
being a virgin, and never knowing man, thou broughtest him forth, which
heardest of the Angel Gabriel, the holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
power of the most high shall ouershadow thee,) a sword of infidelity shall
pierce; thou shall be stricken with a sword of doubting: and thy thoughts
shall rent thee into diverse parts, when thou shall see him who^ thou heardest
to be the son of God, and whom thou knew to be generated in thee without the
seed of man, to be crucified, to die, to be subject to humane punishments, and
at the last with tears and strong cries complaining and saying, if it be
possible let this cup pass from me.

Apud Sixtum Senensem. li. 6. cap. 138.
Chrysostom upon the 13 Psalm agrees with Origin: his words are these: When
Christ was crucified, there was none found that did good: the Disciples all
fled away, John ran away naked, Peter denied him, the sword of doubting
went through the soul of Mary her self. And Quaest: veteris and noui
Testimenti q 73.
Augustine to the same purpose has these words. And that which he adds
saying, and a sword shall pierce thy soul, that the thoughts of many hearts may
be revealed: thereby doubtless, he signified, that even Mary herself, of
whom the son of God took flesh, should doubt in the time of Christ's death,
but so, as to be confirmed in his resurrection. And In 2. Luc.
Theophylact upon the same place of Luke, Happily by the sword he
understands the dolor, happily the scandal wherewith Mary was scanalized,
for seeing him to be crucified, happily she thought how he that was borne
without the seed of man, who had done miracles and raised the dead, could be
crucified, spitte upon, and die: and that he says, the cogitations of many
hearts shall be revealed, imports no more but the thoughts of many that shall
be scandalized, shall be revealed: and being reprehended, they shall find
present remedy: and so shall thou o virgin, be revealed, and manifested, what
thou thoughtest of Christ: and then thou shall be confirmed in the faith: so
likewise Peter shall be manifested, when he shall deny him: but the power of
God shall be showed when he receaueth him upon his repentance.

Homil. 45. in Mathaeum.
Chrysostom writing upon those words: behold thy mother and thy brethren etc.
and those words of Christ, Who is my mother, and who are my brethren? says,
that Christ uttered these words, not as being ashamed of his mother, or denying
her that bare him, (for had he bin ashamed of her, he would not have passed
through her womb:) but showing that it would nothing profit her, that she was
his mother, unless she did all those things that beseemed her: for this that she
now attempted, argued too much ambition: for she would make it known to the
people, that she had power over and could command her son, not conceauing any
great matter of him, and therefore she came unseasonably. See therefore,
says he, the want of discretion, in her and them, for it had been fit for
them to come in, and to have heard with the multitude: or if not, to have stayed
till he had ended his speech, and then to have come unto him: but they call
him out, and this they do before all, showing too much ambition, and willing
to show that with great power they command him. And in another place, Homil.
46. in Mathaeum.
It is admirable to see, how the disciples, though very desirous to learn, yet
knew when it is fit to ask him: for they do not this in the sight and
hearing of all: and this Matthew shows saying, and coming unto him: and Saint
Mark, they came unto him privately, or when he was alone: It had been fit
his mother and his brethren had done so, and that they should not have called
him out and made such a show as they did. And writing upon John, and entreating
of those words of the virgin (when the wine began to fail,) they have no wine,
says, Homil. in Ioannem 20.
She was willing to do them a pleasure, and to make herself the more
illustrious by her child: and happily she was carried with some humane
affection, as his brethren were, when they said, show thy self to the world,
desiring to reap glory from his miracles: and therefore he auswereth
something sharply, saying, what have I to do with thee? my hour is not yet
come: and a little after, speaking of her calling him out mentioned in the
former place, he says: She had not that opinion of him that was fit, but
because she had brought him forth, she thought to command him in every thing,
after the manner of other mothers, whom she should have honored and worshipped
as her Lord: and therefore he says, who is my mother? And Super Mathaei 12.
v. 48.
Theophylact writing upon the same words, says: the mother of Christ would
take upon her to be a mother, and show that she had power over her son, for
as yet she conceived noe great thing of him: and therefore she would draw
him out unto her, while he was yet speaking, being a little proud, that she
had such a son at her command. What does Christ therefore? because he knew
her intention, hear what he says. Who is my mother? which he said not to
wrong his mother, but to correct her mind, desirous of glory, and subject to
such affections as men are wont to be. Euthymius in his Commentaries observes
the former place in Chrysostom, but dares not reprehend it, as Lib. 6. c. 58.
Sixtus Senensis tells us.

But they will say De natura and gratia contra Pelagianos lib. uni^. cap. 36.
Augustine affirms, that the Mother of our Lord was without sin; surely it
will be found that he says no such thing; the circumstances of that they
allege out of Augustine are these; The Pelagian commemorateth sundry holy
ones, which are reported not only not to have sinned, but to have lived
righteously, as Abel, Enoch, Melchizedech, Abraham, Isaak, Jacob etc. and
adds to these certain women, as Deborah, Anna, Samuels mother, Judith,
Esther, another Anna the daughter of Phanuel, Elizabeth, and the mother of our
Lord and Savior, whom he says that piety requires us to confess to have
been without sin. The words of Augustine, in answer to the Pelagian are
these: except therefore the holy Virgin Mary, (of whom for the honor of our
Lord, I will make no question at all, now that we are to speak of sins; for
hence do we know that more grace was given to her wholly to over come sin,
who was honored so much as to conceive and bear him, whom we know to have had
no sin; this Virgin therefore excepted) if we could gather together all those
holy men and women, as now living, and ask of them whether they were without
sin, what answer think we would they make? I pray tell me whether that which
this man says, or that which the Apostle John? surely how much soever they
excelled in sanctity while they were in this body, they would all cry out with
a loud voice, If we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is
no truth in us.

ubi supra.
Gregorius Ariminensis notes, that Augustine speaks not of original sin,
but actual, and that this ample grace to overcome sin, was not given her
till the spirit ouer-shadowed her, and the power of the most High came upon
her, that she might conceive and bear him that never knew sin, so that
before she might commit sin, which yet he will not affirm, because the
modern Doctors for the most part think otherwise, so intimating that all did
not. And surely the words of Augustine, do not import that she had no sin,
but that she overcame it, which argues a conflict: neither does he say, he
will acknowledge she was without sin, but that he will not move any
question touching her, in this dispute of sins and sinners. So passing by the
point, and not willing to enter into this dispute with the Pelagian, who
conceived it would be plausible for him, to plead for the purity of the
Mother of our Lord, and disgraceful for any one to except against her. By that
which has been said it appears, that the Church of God never resolved any
thing, touching the birth of the blessed Virgin without sin, nor whether she
were free from all actual sin, or not.

If happily it be alleged, that the Church celebrated the Feast of her
nativitie, and therefore believed that she was borne without sin. First,
touching the celebration of this Feast, it is evident, that it was not
ancient: vide Baronii Martyrologium men's. September.
That it was not in the days of Saint Augustine, (as some imagine, because on
that day there is read in the Church a Sermon of Saint Augustines, touching the
solemnity of that day,) it is proved out of Saint Augustine himself, for in
his 21 Sermon de sanctis he has these words. We celebrate this day the
birthday of John the Baptist, which honor we never read to have been given
to any of the Saints. Solius enim Domini and beati Ioannis dies nativitatis in
universo mundo celebratur, and colitur: That is, For the birthday of our Lord
only, and of John the Baptist is celelebrated and kept holy throughout the
whole world: illum enim sterilis peperit illum virgo concepit, in Elizabetha
sterilitas vincitur, in beata Maria conceptionis consuetudo mutatur; That is, A
woman that was barren bare the one, and a virgin the other, in Elizabeth
barrennes is overcome, in blessed Mary the ordinary course of conceiving is
changed. And in his 20^h sermon, he has these words: Post illum sacrosanctum
Domini natalis diem, nullius hominum nativitatem legimus celebrari, nisi solius
beati Ioannis Baptistae. In aliis sanctis and electis Dei, novimus illum diem
coli, quo illos post consummationem laborum, and devictum triumphatumque
mundum, in perpetuas aeternitates praesens haec vita parturit. In aliis
consummata vltimi diei merita celebrantur, in hoc etiam prima dies, and ipsa
etiam hominis initia consecrantur; pro hac absque dubio causa, quia per hunc
Dominus adventum suum, ne subito homines insperatum non agnoscerent voluit esse
testatum. That is, After that most sacred day of the birth of our Lord, we
read not that the nativity of any one amongst men is celebrated, but of John
the Baptist only; touching other Saints, and other the chosen of God, we know
that that day is celebrated, in which, after the consummation of their labors,
after their victories and triumphs over the world, this present life brings
them forth to begin to live for ever. In others the consummate virtues of the
last day are celebrated, in this the first day, and the beginnings of the man
are consecrated; for this cause no doubt, because the Lord would have his
coming made known to the world by him, least if his coming had not been
expected and looked for, it might happily not have been acknowledged. Neither
does the reading of the sermon of Saint Augustine on that day pertaining to the
solemnity of the day, prove that this day was kept holy before his time; for as
vbi supra.
Baronius shows, the sermon was fitted originally to the solemnity of the
feast of the Annunciation, and the words were these, Let our land rejoice
illustrated with the solemn, day of so great a virgin, which are altered and
read in the breviarie in this sort, Let our land rejoice illustrated by the
birth day of so great a virgin. And it is evident by the Can. 36.
council of Mentz holden in the time of Charles the great in the year 813,
that this feast was not celebrated in the Church of Germany and France in those
times. As likewise it appears by the Ex capitularibus Caroli magni and
Ludovici Pij, l. 1. c. 164 l. 2 c. 35. l. 6. c. 186. citat. a Baronio in
Martyrol. september.
constitutions of Charles and Ludovicus Pius.

Secondly, the celebrating of the birthday of the blessed virgin, will no
more prove that she was borne without all sin, then that John the Baptist
was so borne; concerning whom Bernard says, he knows he was sanctified
before he came out of the womb, but how far this sanctification freed him
from sin, he dares not say or define any thing. Thus we see that the
Church wherein our Fathers lived and died, was a Protestant Church, in these
points touching the conception and birth of the blessed virgin, as well as in
the former.

CHAP. 7.
Of the punishment of original sin and of Limbus puerorum.

De amissione gratiae and statu peccati, l. 6. c. 1.
BEllarmine shows, that there are four opinions in the Roman Church touching
the punishment of original sin, and the state of infants dying unregenerate;
for Ambrosius Catharinus in his book of the state of children dying
unbaptized, Albertus Pighius in his first controversy, and Savanarola in h^s
book of the triumph of the cross, do teach, that infants dying without
baptism, shall after the judgment enjoy a kind of natural happiness, and
live happily for ever, as it were in a certain earthly paradise: howsoever for
the present they go down into those lower parts of the earth, which are
called Limbus puerorum. These men suppose, that infants incur no stain or
infection by Adams sin; but that for his offense being denied the benefit of
supernatural grace, which would have made them capable of heaven happiness,
they are found in a state of mere nature, in which as they cannot come to
heaven, so they are subject to no euili that may cause them to sorrow. For
though they see that happiness in heaven, whereof they had a possibility, yet
they no more greiue that they have not attained it, then innumerable men do
that they are not Kings and Emperors, as well as others, of which honors they
were capable as well as they, in that they were men. The second opinion is,
that infants dying in the state of original sin not remitted, are excluded
from the sight of God, and condemned to the prison house of the infernal
dwellings for ever, so that they suffer the punishment of loss but not of
sense; and that they are subject to no dolor or grief inward or outward, this
he says is the opinion of Thomas Aquinas, and some other Schoolmen. The third
opinion is, that they are in a sort subject to the punishment of sense, that
is, to grief and dolor, which flows out of the consideration of their great
and inestimable loss of eternal happiness, but because they cannot have
remorse, not having lost that eternal good by their own negligence and
contempt, therefore they are not subiectto that dolor that is properly named
the worm that never dies, whereof we read in the ninth of Mark. Their
worm dies not and their fire never goes out But Bonaventura sent. l. 2. d
33. art. 2. quaest. 2: shows, that if they have any such dolor and grief it
is without patience and hope, and so joined with murmuring and despair; and if
it proceed from deliberation, it cannot be without actual obliquity, neither
can it but redound into the flesh: so that if there be any such grief, there
is not only privatiue, but positive and sensible grief also, there is
therefore a worm and bell punishment.
There is a fourth opinion, which is that of De fide ad Petrum, c. 27.
Augustine, who says: We must firmly believe, and no way doubt, that not
only men that have had the use of reason, but infants also, dying in the state
of original sin, shall be punished with the punishment of eternal fire;
because though they had no sin of their own proper action, yet they have
drawn to themselves the condemnation of original sin, by their carnal
conception. To this opinion Gregorius Ariminensis inclined, fearing exceedingly
to depart from the doctrine of the Fathers, and yet dares not resolve any
thing, seeing the modern doctors went another way. And to the same opinion De
gratia and libero arbitrio, l. 1 tract. 3. c. 2.
Driedo inclines likewise.

Thus then we see that Pelagianisme was taught, in the midst of the Church
wherein our Fathers lived, and that not by a few but many; For was not this the
doctrine of many in the Church, that there are four mansions in the other
world of men sequestered from God, and excluded out of his presence. The first
ofthem that sustain the punishment as well of sensible smart, as of loss, and
that for ever, which is the condition of them that are condemned to the lowest
hell. The second of those that are subject to both these punishments, not
eternally, but for a time only, as are they that are in purgatory. The third
of them that were subject only to the punishment of loss, and that but for a
time, named by them Limbus patrum. The fourth of such as are subject only to
the punishment of loss, but yet eternally; and this named by them Limbus
puerorum? nay were there not that placed these in an earthly paradise? and was
not this Pelagianisme? Surely Contra Iuli. anum, l. 5. c. 8.
August: tells us, that the Pelagians excluded such as were not made
pertakers of Gods grace, out of the kingdom of heaven, and from the life of
God, which is the vision of God, and yet supposed that they should be for ever
in a kind of natural felicity; so that they imagined a third state and place,
between the kingdom of heaven and hell, where they are that endure, not only
the punishment of loss, but of sensible smart also; where they are whose worm
never dies; and whose fire never goes out; and this is the opinion of
Papists, against which Saint Hypognost. l. 5.
Austine mightily opposes himself. The unregenerate is excluded out of the
kingdom of heaven, where Christ remains that is the fountain of the living.
Give me, besides this another place, where there may be a perpetual rest of
life; the first place the faith of Catholics by divine authority, believes
to be the kingdom of heaven: the second Hell, where every apostata, and such
as are aliens from the faith of Christ, shall suffer everlasting punishment:
but that there is any third place we are altogether ignorant, neither shall we
find in the holy Scripture, that there is any such place. There is the right
hand of him that sits to judge, and the left; the kingdom, and hell; life,
and death; the righteous, and the wicked: On the right hand of the Judge are
the just, and the workers of iniquity on the left. There is life to the joy of
glory, and death to weeping and gnashing of teeth. The just are in the Kingdom
of the Father with Christ; the unrighteous in eternal fire prepared for the
devil and his Angels. By which words of Augustine it is evident, that there is
no such place to be admitted, as the Papists imagine their Limbus puerorum to
be: neither did the Church wherein our Fathers lived and died, believe any
such thing, though many embraced this fancy,

And therefore Gregorius Ariminensis having proved out of Augustine, and
Gregory, that infants that die in the state of original sin not remitted,
shall not only suffer the punishment of loss, but of sense also, concludes
in this sort. Because I have not seen this question expressly determined
either way by the Church, and it seems to me a thing to be trembled at, to
deny the authorities of the Saints: and on the contrary side, it is not safe to
go against the common opinion, and the consent of our great Masters, therefore
without peremptory pronouncing for the one side, or the other, I leave it free
to the Reader to judge of this difference, as it seems good unto him.

CHAP. 8.
Of the remission of original sin, and of concupiscence remaining in the
regenerate.

IN the remission of all sin there are two things employed; the taking away of
the stain or sinfulness, and the removing of the punishment, that for such
sinfulness justice would bring upon the sinner. In actual sin there are
three things considerable. First, an act or omission of act. Secondly, an
habitual aversion from God, and conversion to the creature remaining after the
act is past, till we repent of such act, or omission of act; and this is the
stain of sin remaining, denominating the doers sinners, and making them
worthy of punishment. And thirdly, a designing to punishment after the act is
past. In remission therefore of actual sin there must be; first, a ceasing
from the act or omission; secondly, a turning to God and from the creature, and
thirdly, for Christ's sake, who suffered what we deserved, a taking away of the
punishment that sin past made us subject to.

In original sin there are only two things considerable; the stain or
sinfulness, and the designing of them that have it to punishment. The stain
of original sin consists of two parts: the one privatiue, which is the
want of those divine graces that should cause the knowledge, love, and fear of
God: the other positive, and that is an habitual inclination to love our
selves more then God, and inordinately to desire whatsoever may be pleasing to
us, though forbidden and disliked by God; and is named concupiscence. This sin
first defiles the nature, and then the person; in that it so misinclineth
nature, as that it has the person at command, to be swayed whether it will.
The remission of this sin implies a donation of those graces, that maycause
the knowledge, love, and fear of God, a turning of us from the love of our
selves, to the love of God, and forChrists sake a removing of the punishment we
were justly subject to, in that we had such want, and inordinate inclination.
The donation of grace makes original sin cease so to misincline nature, as
formerly it did, and so as to have the person at command to be swayed whether
it will; it makes it not cease to misincline nature in some sort, and so to be
a sin of nature, it makes it cease to be a sin of the person, freeing it
from being subject to it, and putting it into an opposition against it; so that
it is no farther a sin of the person, then it is apt to be led by it, to be
hindered from good, or drawn to evil. The nature and person are freed from the
guilt of condemnation; the nature in respect of the sin that remains in it
is subject to punishment; the person is not free from those punishments which
the remaining sin of the nature it has, brings upon it, as death etc: The
person is freed from being subject to any punishment, farther then it must
needs be in respect of nature. So that original sin or concupiscence
remains in act in the regenerate, moving to desire things not to be desired;
and so a sin of nature, making it subject to punishment; but it does not
remain in act illiciendo and abstrahendo mentem, eiusque consensu concipiendo,
and pariendo peccata; that is, it does not so remain in act, as to allure and
draw the mind, and to gain the consent of it to conceive and bring forth
sin, and so remains not in the guilt of condemnation, nor as a sin of the
person.

If therefore when the question is proposed, whether concupiscence in the
regenerate which grace restrains and opposes, be sin; we understand by
sin a thing that is not good, an evil that is not a punishment only, but a
vice and fault; and such an evil as positiuely and priuatiuely repugneth,
against the law which the spirit of God writes in the hearts of the believers;
an iniquity; a thing that God hates, and which we must hate and resist
against by the spirit, that it bring not forth evil acts; if we understand by
sin such a disposition of nature, as God by the law of creation at first
forbad, and cease not still to forbid to be in the nature of man; it is
undoubtedly sin, a sin I say of nature, though not of person. And hereunto
De doctrine. iustificationis l. 3. c. 7. p. 67.
Stapleton agrees; for whereas it is objected out of Contra Julian. lib. 5. c.
3.
Augustine, to prove that concupiscence in the regenerate is sin; that as
blindness of heart is a sin, in that men by reason of it believe not in God,
and a punishment of sin wherewith the proud heart of man is punished, and a
cause of sin, when men through error of their blind heart do any evil thing;
So that concupiscence of the flesh, against which the good spirit opposes good
desires, is a sin, in that there is in it disobedience against the mind that
should command; and a punishment of sin, because it was justly brought upon
him, whose disobedience against God deserved so; and a cause of sin, when it
obtains a consent: he answers, setting aside all other answers as not
sufficient, that concupiscence in that place is said by Augustine, not only to
be a punishment and cause of sin, but sin also, not as if it were truly and
properly a sin, making God displeased with the regenerate in whom it is; but
that it is a sin of nature, respecting the first integrity of it, and not of
the person; according to that of the Apostle, It is not I that do it, but the
sin that dwells in me that is in my flesh. For the reason which he
brings why it is sin, does evidently show this. Because, says he, there
is in it disobedience against the dominion of the mind, it is therefore a
certain sin, or fault, contrary to the integrity of nature, in which there
was no disobedience of the flesh: as it is a fault of the eye, to be dim, and
of the ear to hear imperfectly. And though Sapleton say he had no author to
follow in this interpretation: yet he might easily have found, that Alexander
of Ales long since was of the same opinion, making concupiscence in the
regenerate a sin of nature and not of the person, as I have Lib. 3. c. 26
else where showed at large.

If this be so, what then will some man say is the difference, between the
Romanists and those of the reformed Churches? surely it is very great, for
these teach that concupiscence was newly brought into the nature of man by
Adams sin, that in the unregenerate it is properly sin, that it makes them
guilty and worthy of eternal condemnation that have it. But the Romanists say
it was not newly brought in by Adams fall: that it is a consequent of nature:
that it is more free, and at liberty to produce the proper effects of it now,
then it would have been if grace had not been lost, but not more then it would
have been in nature simply considered without grace or sin; and that it
never made them guilty that had it. These say, that in the regenerate it is so
far weakened, as that it has no power to sway him that is so renewed, to what
it pleases; that the guilt of condemnation which it drew upon man before his
regeneration, is taken away; that yet still it is a sin of nature, making
guilty of punishment, that yet still it is hated of God, and must be hated of
us: But the Romanists say, the guilt that is taken away, is not the guilt
whereby concupiscence makes guilty, but out of which it came, that man
deserved to have concupiscence free and at liberty: And therefore De amiss.
gratiae and statu peccati, l. 5. c. 13.
Bellarmine says, the guilt of concupiscence may be conceived in three sorts.
First, To be a guilt rising from it, and founded in it, making him guilty that
has it, as the guilt of theft is that whereby he is guilty that has committed
theft. Secondly, That may be said to be the guilt of concupiscence, not that
flows from it, but from which it flows; as if a man should cut off his
hand, he might be said to be guilty of the hand that is cut off, not because it
is a sin making guilty to have a hand cut off, but because he is guilty of
the not having a hand, that has cut it off himself: so we are to understand
the guilt of concupiscence, not as if the having of it did make a man guilty,
but because Adam by sin, made himself guilty of having concupiscence at
liberty to solicit him to ill, that was formerly restrained. Thirdly the
guilt of concupiscence is that which it causes, if it obtain consent to those
motions it makes; not for that a man is guilty because he has concupiscence,
but because he yields to it. So that according to their opinion, when there
is a remission of the offense, that set concupiscence at liberty, it is no
guilt to have it, for it is natural. Four things therefore are to be proved
by us. First, That concupiscence was no condition of nature. Secondly, That it
makes guilty of eternal condemnation, if it be not remitted. Thirdly, That
God hates it, and that we must hate it, as long as any remains of it are
found in us. Fourthly, That the first motions of it are sin.

The first of these four is clearly delivered by Saint Augustine in his Cap.
13.
third book against Julian, his words are these, An vero cuiuscunque frontis
sis, audeas suspicari, in prima hominum constitutione, priusquam culpam debita
damnatio sequeretur, istam carnalem concupiscentiam aut extitisse in paradiso,
aut inordinatis, vt eam nunc videmus motibus, pugnas adversus spiritum
faedissimas edidisse? And in his Cap. 14.
fourth book where Julian obiecteth, that if we grant, that that
concupiscence of the flesh, against which we resist by continency, was not in
paradise before sin, but that it flowed from that sin, which the devil
first persuaded the first man to commit, it will be consequent that the senses
of seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, and handling, are not of God but of the
devil; he answers, that Julian is ignorant or makes show to be ignorant,
per quemlibet corporis sensum, aliud esse sentiendi vivacitatem, vel
vtilitatem, vel necessitatem; aliud sentiendi libidinem, Vivacitas sentiendi,
qua magis alius, alius minus, in ipsis corporalibus rebus, pro earum modo atque
natura quod verum est percipit, atque id a falso magis minusve discernit.
Vtilitas sentiendi est, per quam corpori vitaeque quam gerimus, ad aliquid
approbandum, vel improbandum, sumendum vel reijciendum, appetendum, vitandumve
consulimus; Necessitas sentiendi est, quando sensibus nostris etiam quae
nolumus ingeruntur. Libido autem sentiendi est, de qua nunc agimus, quae nos ad
sentiendum, sive consentientes mente, sive repugnantes, appetitu carnalis
voluptatis impellit. Haec est contraria delectationi sapientiae, haec
virtutibus inimica. And in his Cap. (...).
fifth book he has these words; Dixi inobedientiam carnis, quae in carne
concupiscente aduersus spiritum apparet, diabolico vulnere contigisse. And
again, Hanc legem peccati repugnante^ legi mentis, a Deo illatam propter
vltionem, and ideo poenam esse peccati. But I will no longer insist upon this
point, having sufficiently proved in that part that is of original sin, that
all these evils did flow from Adams transgression, and were no conditions of
nature,

The next thing that is to be proved is, that concupiscence till it be
remitted, makes them in whom it is, guilty of eternal condemnation: This is
proved out of Saint Contra Julian. l. 6. c. 6.
Augustine, his words are these: Iulianus concupiscentiam bonam praedicat, Nos
autem qui eam malam dicimus, and manner tamen in baptizatis, quamvis reatus
eius (non quo ipsa erat rea, neque enim aliqua persona est, sed quo reum
hominem originaliter faciebat) fuerit remissus, atque vacuatus; absit ut
dicamus sanctificari, cum qua necesse habent regenerati, si non in vacuum Dei
gratiam susceperunt, intestino quodam bello tanquam cum host confligere, atque
ab ea peste desiderare atque optare sanari. And afterward, Et concupiscentia
quae manet oppugnanda atque sananda, quamvis in baptismo dimissa sint cuncta
omnino peccata, non solum non sanctificatur, sed potius ne sanctificatos
aeternae morti obnoxios possit tenere, evacuatur.

Contra Iulianum l. 2. prope finem page 332. In baptismate mortuum est peccatum
in to reatu quo nos tenebat: and iam non eodem modo appellatur peccatum quo
facit reum, sed quod sit reatu primi hominis factum, and quod rebellando nos
trahere nitatur ad reatum, nisi adiuvet nos gratia Dei per sefum Christum
Dominum nostrum, ne sic etiam mortuum peccatum rebellet, ut vincendo reviviscat
and regnet.
Gregorius Ariminensis fully agrees with Augustine, and contradicts
Bellarmine: his words are these, Original sin is in a sort taken away, and
in a sort remains after Baptism: for it is taken away in respect of the
guilt, not of the essence; that is, that vice, or that quality that is named
concupiscence, and is before Baptism original sin, abides truly in the
essence of it after Baptism, but not in the guilt; that is, it makes not men
guilty of condemnation after Baptism, as it did before; and for proof hereof
he alleges the testimony of S. Augustine in his book de peccato originali:
his words are these: Obesset ista carnalis concupiscentia etiam tantummodo quod
inesset; nisi peccatorum remissio sic prodesset, ut quae in eis est, and nato,
and renato, nato quidem and inesse and obesse, renato autem inesse quidem, sed
non obesse possit. In tantum enim obest natis, ut nisi renascantur, nihil
possit prodesse, si nati sunt de renatis. Manet quippe in prole, ita ut reatum
faciat, originis vitium, etiamsi in parente reatus eiusdem vitii remissione
ablutus est peccatorum. That is, Carnal concupiscence by only being in a man
would undo him; if remission of sins did not so help the matter, that it
being in men borne, and borne a new; in men. as borne into the world, it is,
and is to their hurt, and evil: in men k L. 2. d. 31. q. 1. art 4.
borne anew, it only is, but is not to their hurt. For it is so far forth
hurtful l Cap. 39.
to men borne, that unless they be borne a new, it nothing profits them to
have been borne, of such as were newborn. For original sin does so abide
in the child, as to make him guilty, though the guilt of the same sin be
taken away in the parent, by remission of sins.

The Master of sentences in his Did. 3^.
2d book, agrees with Saint Augustine: his words are these: Unless it be by
an ineffable miracle of the Creator, Baptism does not cause the Law of sin
which is in our members to be extinguished, and not to be: it causes indeed
all the evil a man has thought or done, to be abolished, and to be accounted
as if it had never been done: but it suffers concupiscence (the bond of
guilt, where with the devil by it, held the soul, and separated it from God
her Creator, being loosened) to remain, that there may be a continual fight.
Bonaventura writing upon the same place, says: Concupiscence imports in the
unregenerate an immoderate desire of commutable good, in such sort as to
captivate reason, and to pervert the soul, so that it must prefer commutable
good, before that which is incommutable: this concupiscence cannot be found in
any, but it must make him, in whom it is, guilty of condemnation; the strength
of this concupiscence, is so broken and overthrown, by the grace of
regeneration, that it has no power to captiuate reason, to pervert the soul,
and bring upon it a necessity of preferring things finite before infinite; and
so the guilt of condemnation is taken away: but it has still power to move and
solicit us to evil, and we by Gods grace have power to resist and overcome.
For as the Master of the sentences says in the same place; though
concupiscence remain after Baptism, yet does it not rule and reign as
before, but it is diminished, weakened, and made less forcible, that it may
rule no longer, unless any man will give strength unto his enemy, by going
after the lusts thereof.

So that it is evident, that the Church of God taught as we do, that
concupiscence in it own nature is a sin, making guilty of grievous
punishment: that when it is weakened, and cease to be so potent as formerly it
was, yet it cease not to be of the same kind that formerly it was, as Vbi
supra.
Gregorius Ariminensis shows: and therefore seeing it was before a sin, it is
still in some sort a sin that God hating it before, he hates it still: and we
also are to hate it, and by all means to seek to weaken and destroy it. In
consultatione de articulis religionis artic. 2.
Cassander says, that a very worthy and famous divine affirms, that it is
sin in the regenerate, though it be not imputed. And he adds that the
difference between them that say it is sin; and them that say it was sin
properly, and made guilty of condemnation, but now being weak ned, and the
guilt taken away, it is not properly sin, is a mere logomachia.

And therefore in the conference at Worms, the colloquutors agreed touching
this point: formula concordiae de peccato originis and concup^centia i^ta
Wormatiae ann. 1541. inter Eccium and Mensingum, item Bucerum and Philippum
Melancthonem, vt reperitur ibidem apud Cassandrum.
the form of their agreement is this; We confess with unanimous consent, that
all that come of Adam according to the ordinary course, are borne in original
sin and under the wrath of God. Original sin is the privation and want of
original righteousness, joined with concupiscence. We agree also, that the
guilt of original sin is remitted in baptism, together with all other
sins, by the merit of Christ's passion. But we think that concupiscence, a
vice or fault of nature, an infirmity and disease, remains: taught so to
think, not only by the apostolical scriptures, but by experience also. And
touching this disease we agree, that that which is material in original
sin, remains in the regenerate, that which is formal being taken away by
baptism. And we call that the material part of original sin, that took
beginning from sin, that inclines unto sin, and repugneth against the law of
God, as Paul also calls it: and in this sort it is briefly said in the
Schools, that the material part of original sin, remains in the
baptized: and that the formal is taken away: By the formal part of sin they
understand the privation or want of those divine graces, that should cause the
knowledge, love, and fear of God, the inordinate inclination to love ourselves
and finite things, so as not to regard God, and the consequent guilt of
condemnation accompanying such privation and inordinate inclination: by the
material part they understand, not concupiscence as it is in strength,
captiuating all to the sinister love of our selves, and things finite: but as
weakened it still solliciteth to evil, but so that easily it may be resisted,
if we make right use of the grace, that God has given us: this remainder of
concupiscence is evil, inclines to evil, God hates it, and we must hate it
etc. And therefore it is most absurd that the council of Trent has, that God
hates nothing in the regenerate, and the reason they give is very weak, that
therefore he hates nothing in them, because there is no condemnation unto
them: for many things may be disliked, in them that shall not be condemned.

It remains that we speak concerning first motions, Bonauentura describes
p Compend. theolog. veritatis. lib. 3. qui inscribitur de corruptela pecca:
cap. 10.
first motions to be, the motions of sensuality according to the impulsion of
concupiscence, impetuously tending to the fruition of a delectable creature.
First motions (says he) are either primo primi, or secundo primi: primo primi
sunt naturales, secundo primi sunt sensualitatis: primo primi sequuntur
naturalium qualitatum actionem, secundo primi imaginationem: these first
motions he pronounces to be sin for three causes. First, because they move
to that which they should not, and to that which is unlawful. Secondly because
they are in a sort voluntary: though not in themselves, yet in that they are
not hindered by the will, or in respect of precedent apprehension. Thirdly, they
are sin in respect of delight annexed: for when the soul is joined by
delight to the creature, it is darkened and made worse, as when it is joined to
God, it is enlightened and bettered. These says he are venial sins, because
the will has not a complete dominion over these motions of sensuality, as
over those acts that proceed from the command of the will, but yet it might have
hindered them, and therefore they are venial sins; and so they continue, so
long as they stay and proceed not so far as to have the wills consent; but
if they proceed so far, as that the will consents to take delight therein,
though not to proceed to action, it is a mortal sin. This is the opinion of
Bonauenture a cardinal and a canonized Saint, and with him agree sundry
others: so that in this point, the Church formerly taught as we do now.

CHAP. 9.
Of the distinction of venial and mortal sin.

BEllarmine says, that the Romanists with one consent do teach, that some
sins in their own nature, (no respect had to predestination, or reprobation;
a De amissione gratiae and statu peccati l. 1. c. 4.
to the state of men regenerate, or not regenerate) are mortal, other venial;
and that the former make men unworthy of the favor of God, and guilty of
eternal condemnation; the other only subject them to temporal punishments
and fatherly chastisements. But we know the Church of God believed otherwise.
For first, Ce vita ispirituali lect. 1.
Gerson proves, that every offense against God, may justly be punished by him
in the strictness of his righteous judgment, with eternal death, yea with
utter annihilation; because there is no punishment so evil, and so much to be
avoided, as the least sin that may be imagined. So that a man should rather
choose eternal death, yea utter annihilation, then commit the least offense
in the world. Secondly he proves the same, because all divines do agree, that
wheresoever there is eternity of sin, there must be eternity of punishment;
now where there is no remission, there sin must of necessity remain for
ever: for though sin soon cease in respect of the act, yet every sin
remains after the act is past, in respect of the stain and guilt, till it be
remitted; whence it follows, that every sin in it own nature, and without
grace to remitte it, remains eternally, and deserves eternity of punishment
and is mortal.

We say therefore that some sins are mortal and some venial, not because
some deserve eternity of punishment, and others do not; for all deserve
eternity of punishment, and shall eternally be punished, if they remain
without grace, and vnremitted eternally: but because some sins, either in
respect of the matter wherein men do offend, or ex imperfectione actus, in that
they are not committed with full consent, exclude not grace, the root of
remission, and pardon, out of the soul of him that commits them: whereas
other, either in respect of the matter wherein they are conversant, or the full
consent wherewith they are committed, cannot stand with grace. So that,
contrary to Bellarmines position, no sin is venial in it own nature, without
respect had to the state of grace. And this is proved against him, by the
authority of such me^, living in the Church in the days of our fathers, as he
must not except against. Prima lecundae quaest. 87. art. 5.
Thomas Aquinas says, eternity of punishment answeareth not to the
grieuousnesse of sin, but to the eternal continuance of it without
remission: and that therefore, eternity of punishment is due, to every sin of
the unregenerate so continuing, ratione conditionis subiecti, in respect of the
condition and state of him that commits it, in whom grace is not found, by
which only sin may be remitted. Whence it will follow, that every sin of
the unregenerate so continuing, is worthy of eternal punishment, and shall so
be punished, and therefore is mortal: And on the contrary side every sin of
the regenerate, that may stand with grace, and not exclude it, is rightly said
to be venial: that is, such as leaves place for that grace, that can and will
procure remission: of which sort are all the sins of the elect of God, called
according to purpose, which are not committed with full consent.

Cardinal Caietan writing upon those words of Thomas Aquinas, clears this
point exceeding well: Grace only, says he, is the fountain whence flows
remission of sin: nothing therefore positiuely makes sin venial, or
remissible, but to be in grace: nor nothing makes a sin positiuely
irremissible, or not venial, but the being out of the state of grace: for to
be in the state of grace, is to have that which will procure remission of sin,
and to be out of the state of grace, is to be in a state wherein remission
cannot be had. So that that which positiuely makes sin venial, or not
venial, is the state of the subject wherein it is found: if we respect
therefore the nature of sin, as it is in it self, without grace, it will
remain eternally in stain, and guilt, and so will subject the sinner to
eternal punishment: so that every sin in it self, deserves eternal
punishment and is mortal: but yet such is the nature of some sins, either in
respect of the matter wherein they are conversant, or their not being done with
full consent, that they do not necessarily imply an exclusion of grace, out of
the subject in which they are found, and so do not necessarily put the doers
of them, into a state positiuely making them not venial, by removing grace the
fountain of remission. So that to conclude, no sin is positiuely venial, as
having any thing in it that may claim remission: for no sin implies or has
any thing in it of grace the fountain of remission: but some sin either ex
genere, or ex imperfectione actus, in respect of the matter wherein a man
offends, or in that it is not done with full consent, to the exclusion of
grace, may be said to be remissible or venial, negative, per non ablationem
principii remissionis, in that it does not necessarily imply the exclusion of
grace the fountain of remission: and some sins either in respect of the
matter, or manner, do imply such exclusion, and are therefore named mortal.

Part. 1. sol. ^43.
Richardus de Sancto Victore agrees with the former, and more clearly
confirms our opinion then they do. The circumstances of that we find in
him touching this point are these: One had written unto him desiring to be
resolved in a certain doubt; the doubt was this: how it could be true, that
he had learned of his teachers, that venial sins deserve only temporal
punishments, and mortal eternal; whereas yet in those that go to hell, if
any of those sins that they call venial be found, they must be punished,
and every punishment sustained in hell, is eternal, seeing out of hell there
is no redemption; whence it will follow, that even those sins that are named
venial, deserve eternal punishment: for they are punished eternally in the
damned, and it must not be thought, that the punishment inflicted for them, is
more then they deserve. All this concerning the eternity of the punishment of
every sin of the reprobate, he acknowledges to be true: and therefore
shows that some sins are said to be venial, and mortal: but for other
considerations then some supposed. His resolution therefore of the doubt
proposed is expressed in these words, That sin seems unto me to be
veuiall, which found in the regenerate in Christ, of it self alone never
brings upon them eternal punishment, though they repent not particularly of
the same: and that is mortal, which though it be alone, brings eternal
death upon the doers of it, without particular repentance: that therefore is a
venial sin, which of it self alone, and if there be nothing else to hinder,
is ever sure to be pardoned and remitted in the regenerate, so as never to
bring condemnation upon them: and that is mortal, that of it self alone,
puts the doer into a state of condemnation and death.

Here we see sins are distinguished, some are said to be venial, and some
mortal; but none are said to be venial, without respect had to a state of
regeneration, as Bellarmiue imagines. To these we may add Iacobus Almain in
tractatu 3. c. 20. Roffensis in refutatione articuli 32 Lutheri citat^ a
Bellarmino de am^ssione gratiae l. 1. c. 4.
Almain and Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and sundry other: but it needs not;
for howsoever our Adversaries make show to the contrary, they all confess that
to be true that we say; for every sin eternally punishable, deserves
eternal punishment; but every the least and lightest sin, that we can commit,
without grace, and remission, remains eternally in stain and guilt; and is
eternally punishable, whence it will follow, that every sin deserves
eternal punishment; and so is by nature mortal Bellarmine c. 11. affirms,
that venial sins are not against, but beside the law; but Durandus, and others
teach, that when men sin venially, they do that the law forbids, and so do
contrary to the law, not only besides it: Dur. l 2. d. 42 q 6.
. So that in this point as in the former, the Church wherein our Fathers lived
and died, is found to have bin a Protestant Church.

CHAP. 10.
Of free will.

Cardinal Contarenus has written a most divine and excellent discourse
touching free will; wherein he shows the nature of free will, and how the
freedom of will is preserved or lost; in this discourse, First, he shows
what it is to be free; and then 2^, what that is, which we call free will.
What it is to be free, he shows in this sort; As he is a servant that is not
at his own dispose to do what he will, but is to do what another will have him
to do, so he is said to be free who is at his own dispose, so as to do nothing
presently because another will have him, but what seems good unto himself,
and he has a liking to do. The more therefore that any thing is moved by, and
of it self, the more free it is. So that in natural things we shall find, that
accordingly as they are moved by any thing within or without themselves in
their motions, they come nearer to liberty, or are farther from it: so that a
stone is in a sort free when it goes downward, because it is carried by
something within: but it suffers violence, and is moved by something from
without, when it ascends: yet does it not move it self, when it goes
downward, but is moved by an impression of that weight, which it put not into
it self, but the author of nature, and moves but one way; so that it is far
from freedom and liberty even in this motion also. Living things move
themselves; and not one way only, as the former, but every way; as we see
plants, and trees, wherein the first and lowest degree of life is discerned,
move themselves downwards, upwards, on the right hand, and on the left: yet
discern they not whether, neither do they move themselves out of any
discerning, and so are far from liberty. Brute beasts are moved by themselves
in a more excellent sort: for having discerned such things as are fitting to
their nature and condition, there is raised in them a desire of the same: so
that they may very properly and truly be said to move themselves, because they
raise in themselves the desire that moves them: yet is there no freedom or
liberty in them.

For there is no liberty truly so called, but where there is an apprehensio^,
not of things of some certain kind only, but of all things generally, of the
whole variety of things, of the proportion which they have within themselves,
and of the different degrees of goodness found in them: and answerable hereunto
a desire of good in general, and a greater or less desire of each good,
according as it appears to be more or less good, and so a preferr^ng of one
before another, and a choosing of what it thinks best. So that reason is the
root of all liberty: for in that reason discerns good in general, the will
in general desires it, in that it shows there is a good, wherein there is
all good and no defect, the will if it have any action about the same, cannot
but accept it: in that it shows that one thing is better then another, the
will prefers or less esteems it, in that it shows some reasons of good,
and some defects and evils, the will chooses, or refuses: when reason finally
resolves a thing now and in this particular to be best, the will inclines to
it.

This generality of knowledge is not found in any thing below the condition of
man: other living creatures have an apprehension of some certain things only;
they have no knowledge of good in general, but of certain good things only,
nor no desire of good in general, in the extent of it, but of such particular
good things as are fitted to them: these therefore have neither free and
illimited apprehension nor desire of good; but limited, restrained, and shut
up within a certain compass: so that they are like to a man shut up in
prison, who though he may move himself and walk up and down, yet cannot go
beyond a certain limitation and bounds set unto him. But man was made to have
an apprehe^sion of all things, to discern the nature of each, and the different
degrees of goodness found in them: and accordingly to desire good in general,
to desire each thing more or less, as it appears more or less good: never
to rest satisfied, till he come to an infinite good: to desire the same for it
self, as originally good, and as the last end, because above or beyond it
there is nothing to be desired: and to desire nothing but in reference unto it,
seeing nothing is good but by partaking of it.

And hence it is easy to see, how the liberty of our will is preserved: and how
and in what sort it is lost: for seeing the desire of the chief good and last
end, is the original of all particular desires: if God be proposed unto us as
our last end, and chief good, in whom, from whom, and for whom all things are:
then our will without restraint, and without all going aside, and intangling,
or intricating it self, shall freely love whatsoever is good: and each thing
more or less, according as it comes nearer to God, and nothing but that which
is pleasing to him: thus is our liberty preserved and continued. But if we
depart from God, and make any other thing our chief good, and last end: then we
seek that which is infinite, within the compass of that which is finite, and
so languish, never finding that we seek, because we seek it where it is
not to be found: and besides bring our selves into a strait, so as to regard
nothing though never so good, farther then in reference to this finite thing,
which we esteem as if it were infinite: neither do we set up any other
thing unto our selves to be our chief good, but our selves. For as Picus
Mirandula notes, the ground of the love of friendship is unity: now first
God is more near to every of us then we are to our selves: then are we nearer
to our selves, then any other thing: and in the third place there is a
nearenesse and conjunction between other things and us. So that in the state
of nature instituted, we loved God first, and before, and more then our
selves: and our selves no otherwise but in and for him: but falling from that
love, we must of necessity decline to love our selves better then any thing
else, and seek our own greatness, our own glory, and the things that are
pleasing to us, more then any thing else: and because the soul unmindful of
her own worth and dignity, has demersed herself into the body and senses,
and is degenerated into the nature and condition of the body, she seeks
nothing more the^ bodily pleasures as fitting to her, and declineth nothing
more as contrary to her, then the things that grieve and afflict the outward
man.

This is the fountain of all the evils that are found in our nature: this
puts us into horrible confusions: for having raised our selves into the
throne of God by pride, and fancied unto our selves a peerless and
incomparable greatness, we are no less grieved at the good of other men:
then if it were our evil: nay indeed it is become our evil: for how can our
excellence be pearls, and incomparable, if any other excel or equal us, or
have any thing wherein he is not subordinate to us: thus do we run into
envy, and all other evils, and endleslely disquiet and afflict our selves. And
secondly we are hereby deprived of our former liberty; for neither do we know
all the variety of good things, as we did, our knowledge being from sense nor
their different degrees, that so we might have power to desire them, and to
prefer each before other, according to the worth of it; neither can we
desire any good but as serving our turn; so that what does not so, we cannot
esteem.

Touching the will of man since the fall; it is resolved by all divines, that it
has lost the freedom it formerly had from sin, and misery; but some
understand this in one sort, and some in another. For some affirm, that men
have so far forth lost their liberty from sin by Adams fall, that they
cannot but sin, in whatsoever moral act they do; which thing I showed to
have been believed, by the Church wherein our Fathers lived and died. But they
of the Church of Rome at this day, dislike this opinion, for they suppose, that
though our will be not free from sin, so as collectiuely to decline each
sin, and that though in the state wherein presently we are we cannot but
sin, at one time or other, in one thing or other; yet we may decline each
particular sin divisiuely, and do the true works of moral virtue. Much
contending there is, and has been touching freewill; wherefore for the
clearing of this point two things are to be noted. 1 from what, and 2dly
wherein this liberty may be thought to be.

The things from which the will may be thought to be free are five. 1 The
authority of a superior commander, and the duty of obedience. 2ly The
inspection, care, government, direction, and ordering of a superior. 3ly
Necessity, and that either from some externe cause enforcing, or from nature
inwardly determining, and absolutely moving one way. 4ly, Sin, and the
dominion of it. 5ly Misery. Of these five kinds of liberty, the 2 first agree
only to God, so that in the highest degree (...), that is, freedom of will, is
proper to God only; and in this sense Calvin and Luther rightly deny, that the
will of any creature is, or ever was free. The third kind of liberty, is
opposite not only to coaction, but natural necessity also: In opposition to
coaction, the understanding is free; for howsoever a man may be forced, to
think and believe, contrary to his inclination, that is, such things as he
would not have to be true; yet the understanding cannot assent to any thing
contrary to her own inclination, for the understanding is inclined to think
so of things as they are, and as they may be made to appear unto her to be,
whether pleasing to nature or not: but the understanding is not free from
necessity.

But the will in her action is free, not only in opposition to coaction, but
to natural necessity also. Natural necessity consists herein, that when
all things required to enable an agent, to produce the proper effect thereof
are present, it has no power not to bring forth such effect, but is put into
action by them. So the fire having fit fuel in due sort put unto it, and being
blowed upon, cannot but burn. The liberty of the will therefore appears
herein, that though all those things be present, that are pre-required to
enable it, to bring forth the proper action of it, yet it has power not to
bring it forth, and it is still indifferent and indeterminate, till it
determine and incline it self; God indeed works the will to determine it
self; neither isit possible that he should so work it, and it should not
determine it self accordingly; yet does not Gods working upon the will, take
from it the power of dissenting, and doing the contrary; but so inclines it,
that having liberty to do otherwise, yet she will actually determine so.

Here Luther, and Calvin are charged with the denial of this liberty of the
will; and many strange absurdities are attributed to them; for first Luther is
said to have affirmed, that the will of man is merely passive; that it
produces not any act, but receives into it such acts, as God alone without
any concurrence of it, works and produces in it. But all this is nothing but
a mere calumniation; for Luther knows right well, that men produce such
actions as are externally good and evil, willing, and out of choice; and
confesses that we do the good things that God commands us, when we are made
partakers of his grace, but that God works us to do them; We believe, we
fear, we love: but it is God that works us to believe, fear, and love.
Certum est nos facere cum facimus, says Saint De gratia and libero arbit. c. 16
Augustine, sea Deus facit ut faciamus. It is most certain that we do those
things we are said to do, but it is God that makes us to do them, not only
by persuading, inviting, and inwardly drawing us by moral inducements, but by
a true and real efficiencie. So that according to Luthers opinion, we move not
but as moved; nor are active, but as having first bin passive: nor turn our
selves, but as first wrought upon, and made to turn: yet do we truly move
our selves, and truly, freely, and cheerfully choose that which is good, and
turn ou rselues from that which is evil, to that which is good. Alvarez de
auxiliis diuinae gratiae disput. 86. lect. 8.
Divines say that Facere vt velimus est operar^ in nobis aliquid quo disponamur
and efficaciter inclinemur and determinemur ad volendum Alva:
facere vt velimus, and facere ipsum velle, differ very much: that is, they say
it is one thing to make us to will, and another to produce the act of willing.
God works both, but in a different sort, the first sine nobis facientibus
nos velle: Secundum autem operatur, nobiscum simul tempore consentientibus and
cooperantibus; that is, God works the first of these alone; we make not our
selves to will, the second he produces together with us, willing that he
would have us, and producing that we do. So that in the former consideration
we are merely passive, in the latter active: which neither Luther nor any of
his followers ever denied. Calvine, they say, confesses, that the will
concurreth actiuely to the act which God produces; but without any freedom
at all: unless we speak of that freedom, which is from coaction. It is true
indeed that Calvine denies us to be free from necessity: but he speaks of
the necessity of sinning; but he never denies us to be free h Vide Chemnicij
examen de cretide libero arbitrio.
from natural necessity, that is, from being put into action, so as natural
agents are, that is, without all choice and liking ofthat we incline to do.
It is evident that Calvine confesses the will of man to be free to do evil;
and he denies it not to be free to perform acts civilly good, or morally
good ex genere, and obiecto; yea he thinks that the will freely and out of
choice, wills whatsoever it wills; as in the state of auersion it freely
wills that it should not, so when God conuerteth it, he turns the course
of the actions and desire of it, and makes it freely and out of choice to
turn to good. En^hirid. cap. 30.


That men have lost the freedom from sin, and put themselves into a
necessity of sinning Saint Al^recte faciendi licentiam.
Augustine shows: Libero arbitrio male vtens homo, and se perdidit, and
ipsum: sicut enim qui se occidit, vtique vivendo se occidit, sed se occidendo
non vivit, nec seipsum potest resuscitare cum occiderit: ita cum libero
peccaretur arbitrio, victore peccato, amissum est and liberum arbitrium, a quo
enim quis devictus est, huic and servus addictus est. Quae sententia cum vera
sit, qualis quaeso potest servi addicti esse libertas, nisi quando eum peccare
delectat? Liberaliter enim seruit, qui sui domini voluntatem libenter facit. Ac
per hoc ad peccandum liber est, qui peccati servus est; vnde ad just faciendum
liber non erit, nisi a peccato liberatus; esse institiae caeperit servus. Ipsa
est vera libertas propter recte facti Bernard in cant. sermon. 81.
laetitiam, simul and piaservitus propter praecepti obedientiam. Sed ista
libertas ad been faciendum, vnde erit homini addicto and vendito, nisi redimat
ille cuius illa vox est, si vos filius liberaverit, vere liberi eritis? Quod
antequam fieri in homine incipiat, quomodo quisquam de libero arbitrio in bono
gloriatur opere, qui nondum liber est ad operandum been: nisi se vana superbia
inflatus extollat, quam cohibet Apostolus dicens, Gratia salui facti estis per
fidem?

Here we see necessity of sinning, and freedom from natural necessity, do
stand together in the corrupted nature of man: Anima^a carentia ratione carent
liberate, sensu aguntur, feruntur impetu, rapiuntur appetitu, neque enim
iudicium habent quo se diiudicent sieve regant^sed ne instrumentum quidem
iudicij ratione. Hanc vim a nature solus homo non patitur, and ideo solus inter
anim^tia liber: and tamen interveniente peccato patitur quandam vim and ipse,
sed a voluntate non a natura; vt ne sic quidem ingenita liberate privetur;
quod enim voluntarium, and liberum Bernard. ibidem. Joan. 8.
Nescio quo prauo and miro modo ipsa sibi voluntas peccato quidem in deterius
mutata, necessitatem facit; vt nec necessitas cum voluntaria sit, excusare
valeat voluntatem; nec volnntas, cum sit illecta, excludere necessitatem. Est
enim necessitas haec quodam modo voluntaria: est favorabilis vis quaedam,
premendo blandiens, and blandiendo premens; voluntas est quae se cum esset
libera servam fecit peccati, peccato assentiendo; voluntas nihilo minus est,
quae se sub peccato tenet voluntary serviendo. Vide quid dicas, inquit aliquis
mihi: tune voluntarium dicis, quod iam necessarium esse constat? Verum quidem
est quod voluntas seipsam addixerit, sed non ipsa se retinet, magis retinetur
and nolens. Been hoc saltem das, quod retinetur. Sed vigilanter retine
voluntatem esse, quam retineri fateris. Itaque voluntatem nolentem dicis? Non
vtique voluntas retinetur non volens: voluntas enim volentis est, non nolentis.
Quod (...) volens retinetur, ipsa seretinet. Quid ergo dicet, aut quid
respondebit ei, cum ipsa fecerit? Quid fecit? Seruam se fecit; vnde dicitur,
qui peccatum facit, servus est peccati. Propterea cum peccauit (peccauit autem,
cum peccato obedire decrevit) servam se fecit. Sed fit libera si non adhuc
facit. Facit autem in eadem servitute se retinens: neque enim non volens
voluntas tenetur: voluntas enim est. Ergo quia volens, servam seipsam fecit:
non modo fecit, sed facit. Sed non me, inquis, decredere facies necessitatem
quam patior, quam in memetipso experior, contra quam and assidue luctor. Vbinam
quaeso hanc necessitatem sentis? Nonne in voluntate? Non ergo parum firmiter
vis, quod and necessario vis. Multum vis quod nolle nequeas, nec multum
obluctans. Porro vbi voluntas, and libertas; quod tamen dico de naturali, non
de spirituali, qua liberate (vt dicit Apostolus) Christus nos liberauit. Nam
de illa idem ipse dicit: vbi spiritus Domini, ibi libertas. Ita anima miro
quodam and malo modo, sub hac voluntaria quadam and male libera necessitate,
and ancilla tenetur and libera: ancilla propter necessitatem, libera propter
voluntatem: and quod magis mirum, magisque miserum est, eo rea quo libera,
eoque ancilla quo rea; ac per hoc eo ancilla, quo libera. And afterward, Non
quod volo hoc ago, sed me non alio prohibente: and quod odi illud facio, sed me
non alio compellente. Atque vtinam haec prohibitio and haec compulsio, ita
esset violenta, vt non esset voluntaria: forsitan enim sic possem excusari: aut
certe ita esset voluntaria, vt non violenta: profecto enim sic possem corrigi.

It is true that natural men may do things that are good ex genere and
obiecto, and perform such external actions, as serve to entertain this
present life; but to do any thing morally good, not only ex genere and
obiecto, but ex fine and ci cumstantiis, there is no power left in corrupted
nature. It is excellent to this purpose that we read in Saint Hypognost. l.
3. August. lib. 1. retract. c. 15. voluntas in tantum libera est, quia in
tantum liberata est: alioquin tota cupiditas, quae voluntas proprie nuncupanda
est. Ep. 106. sine gratia nos dicimus ad non peccandum nihil voluntatis
arbitrium valere. Prosper contra: Collatorem c 19. says that man since the
fall Labitur memoria errat iudicio, nutat incessu. And cap. 21. Infidelitas
rapuit fidem, captivitas abstulit libertatem, nec potuit illic vlla portio
residere virtutum, quo t^ta irruperat ^ma vitiorum. Aug. de spiritu and litera
c. 3. Liberum arbitrium nihil nisi ad peccandum valet si lateat veritatis (...)
^ut si agnita veritas non delectet and ametur.
Augustine: Per velle malum, recte perdidit posse bonum, qui per posse bonum,
potuit vincere velle malum. Per peccatum igitur liberum arbitrium hominis
possibilitatis perdidit bonum, non nomen and rationem. Esse fatemur liberum
arbitrium omnibus hominibus, habens quidem iudicium rationis, non per quod sit
idoneum, quae ad Deum pertinent, sine Deo aut inchoare aut certe peragere: sed
tantum in operibus vitae praesentis, tam bonis, quam etiam malis. Bonis dico,
quae de bono naturae oriuntur; id est, velle laborare in agro, velle habere
amicum, velle habere indumenta, velle fabricare domum, artem discere diversarum
rerum bonarum, velle quicquid bonum ad praesentem pertinet vitam etc. Malis
vero dico, vt velle idolum colere, velle homicidium. And again, de verbis
apostoli sermon: 13. Agis quidem Deo non adiuvante libera voluntate, sed male. Ad
hoc idonea est voluntas tua, quae vocatur libera, and male agendo fit
damnabilis ancilla. Cum dico tibi sine adiutorio Dei nihil agis, nihil boni
dico: nam ad male agendum habes sine adiutorio Dei liberam voluntatem; quanquam
non est illa libera. A quo enim quis devictus est, huic and servus addictus
est: and omnis qui facit peccatum, servus est peccati. And again contraduas
epistolas Pelag: ad Bonifacium lib: 1. c. 3. Arbitrium in bono liberum non
erit, quod liberator non liberauerit, sed in malo liberum habet arbitrium. And
afterward, Haec voluntas quae libera est in malis, quia delectatur malis, ideo
libera in bonis non est, quia liberata non est. And again, De gratia and
libero arbitrio, lib. 1. cap. 15. Semper est in nobis voluntas libera, sed non
semper est bona. Aut enim a iustitia libera est, quando seruit peccato, and
tunc est mala: aut a peccato libera est, quando seruit iustitiae, and tunc est
bona. Gratia vero Dei semper est bona, and per hanc fit vt sit homo bonae
voluntatis, qui prius fuit malae voluntatis. And in his book de correptione
and gratia, cap. 1. Liberum arbitrium and ad malum, and ad bonum faciendum
confitendum est nos habere: sed in malo faciendo liber est quisque iustitiae,
servusque peccati: in bono autem liber esse nullus potest nisi fuerit
liberatus. And ad Bonifacium, lib. 3. cap. 8. Liberum arbitrium captivatum non
nisi ad peccatum valet, ad iustitiam vero nisi divinitus liberatum, adiutumque
non valet. Again, epistola 107. ad Vitalem: Liberum arbitrium ad diligendu^
Deum primi peccati granditate perdidimus. Lib. 2. d. 29 art. 2.
Ariminensis says, Voluntas determinata est ad malum actum, scilicet quod si
sine speciali Dei auxilio eliciet actum, utique eliciet malum. And I have
showed that many other concurred with him. It is excellent therefore that
Hypognost. l. (...).
Augustine has. Ergo damnas (inquit Pelagianus) opera liberi arbitrij? Audi
haeretice stulte, and inimice fidei veritatis: Opera liberi arbitrij bona, quae
ut faciant praeparantur per gratiae praeventu^, nullo liberi arbitrij merito,
and ipso faciente, gubernante, and perficiente, ut abundent in libero arbitrio
non damnamus, quia ex his vel huiusmodi homines Dei iustificati sunt,
iustificantur, iustificabuntur in Christo. Damnamus vero authoritate divina
opera liberi arbitrij quae gratiae praeponuntur, and ex his tanquam meritis, in
Christo iustificari extolluntur. L. 2. d. 28. q. 1. art. 1.
Ariminensis: Ex his infero corollarium; quod nemo potest mereri primam gratiam
de condigno, nec etiam de congruo, contra aliquorum sententiam modernorum:
nomine autem gratiae intelligo quodcunque Dei speciale adiutorium ad been
operandum. Compend. theol. veritatis l. (...). c. 2.
Bonaventura. Sciendum quod habilitatio sive praeparatio ad gratiam triplex
est; scilicet Efficiens, formalis, materialis; prima est a Deo, secunda a
gratia gratis data; tertia a nobis. Anima namque habet facultatem and
instrumenta cognoscendi and diligendi Deum ex Natura; sed non habet cognitionem
veritatis, and ordinem dilectionis nisi ex gratia.

In another place he has these words, Compend. theol. veritatis l. 2. c. 56.
Aqui, ^a adae. q. 109. art. 6. Praeparatio ad fruendum Deo per donum habituale:
ad susceptionem huius doni, per auxilium Dei intus moventis animam and
inspirantis bonum propositum.
Libertas arbitrij triplex est, scilicet a necessitate, a peccao, a miseria.
Prima libertas est naturae, secunda, gratiae: tertia, gloriae: item prima est
bonorum and malorum, secunda est tantummodo bonorum, tertia est in coelo
regnantium. Libertas malorum est velle peccare, and etiam posse peccare.
Liberum arbitrium liberius est in bonis, quam in malis, quia in bonis est
tantummodo servitus miseriae, in malis autem est servitus miseriae and peccati:
sed in patria est liberrimum, quoniam omnis talis servitus destruetur. Nota
quod licet Deus non possit male facere and similiter Angelus, and animae
beatae, tamen est in eis liberum arbitrium: quia bonum eligunt, and malum
declinant, non ex infirma necessitate, sed libera voluntate. Eodem modo
dicendum est de diabolo, quod habet liberum arbitrium, bonum tamen semper
respuit, and malum eligit: sed hoc non facit in eo violenta coactio, sed
voluntaria obstinatio. Liberum arbitrium habet se in quibusdam indifferenter ad
bonum and ad malum, ut in primis parentibus ante lapsum: in quibusdam plus se
habet ad malum, quam ad bonum, ut in regeneratis per baptismum: in quibusdam
plus se habet ad bonum quam ad malum, ut in sanctificatis in utero: in
quibusdam necessario se habet ad malum, ut in infidelibus non regeneratis: in
quibusdam necessario se habet ad bonum, ut in confirmatis, sicut fuit beata
Virgo post conceptionem filij.

And in another place. Compend. theol. veritatis l. (...). qui est de
corruptel^ peccati c. 10. Sap. 9.
Homo pronior ad malum quam ad bonum; and hoc multis de causis. Primo quia
sicut dicitur: corpus quod corrumpitur, aggravat animam trahens illam ad malum,
and non sic erigens ad bonum. Secundo Quia sicut dicit Augustinus: plus valet
malum inolitum, quam bonu^ insolitum. Tertio, Quia naturaliter facilius est
descendere, quam ascendere: and unus magis trahit deorsam, quam december sursum.
Quarto, quia incitans ad malum praesens est, sed finis virtutum incitans ad
bonum absens est. Delectabile autem apprehensum persensum, vel imaginationem,
quasi de necessitate movet concupiscentiam. Quinto, quia plures circumstanti'ae
requiruntur ad bonum, quam ad malum. Sexto, quia tendimus ad nostrum
principium, scilicet ad nihilum. 7o Quia fomes, qui mouet ad malum semper intra
nos est: gloria vero quam quaerimus extra nos est. 8o Quia vires animae sunt
actiuae ad diligendum temporalia: sed passiuae and materiales ad ea, quae sunt
gratiae and gloriae. Quia non possunt haberi virtutes per modum acquisitionis,
sed per modum receptionis. Vnde malum possumus facere per nos, sed bonum non
possumus facere sine gratia adiutrice.

Peter Lib. 2. d. 41.
Lombard, proposing the question whether all the intentions, and actions of
them that lack faith be sin, has these words; Si sides intentionem dirigit,
and intentio bonum opus facit; vbi non est fides, nec intententio bona, nec
opus bonum esse videtur. Quod a quibusdam non irrationabiliter astruitur, qui
dicunt omnes actiones and voluntates hominis sine fide malas esse, quae fide
habita bonae existunt, vnde Apostolus ait, Omne quod non est ex fide peccatum
est. Quod exponens Augustinus ait, Omnis infidelium vita peccatum est, and
nihil bonum est sine summo bono: vbi deest agnitio aeternae veritatis, falsa
virtus est etia^ in optimis moribus. Et Iacobus in epistola canonica ait, Qui
offendit in vno, scilicet in charitate, factus est omnium reus. Qui ergo fidem
and charitatem non habet, omnis eius actio peccatum est, quia ad charitatem non
refertur. Quod enim ad charitatem non refertur (vt supra meminit Augustinus)
non fit quemadmodum fieri oportet, ideoque malum est. Non ergo mandata
custodit, qui charitate caret, quia sine charitate nullum mandatorum
custoditur. Impossible est (vt ait Apostolus) sine fide aliquid placere Deo.
Quae ergo sine fide fiunt, bona non sunt: quia omne bonum placet Deo. His autem
obijcitur quod supra dixit Augustinus, scilicet quod in seruili timore, etsi
bonum fiat, non tamen been: nemo inuitus been facit, etiamsi bonum est quod
facit. Hic enim dicit bonum fieri sed non been, ab illo qui charitatem non
habet. Qui enim seruiliter timet chiritate uacuus est: de quo tamen hic dicit,
quia bonum facit, sed non been. Qui etiam super illum locum Psalmi. Turtur
inuenit sibi nidum vbireponat pullos suos dicit, quod Iudaei, haeretici, and
Pagani opera bona faciunt, quia vestiunt nudos, and pascunt pauperes, and
huiusmodi, sed non in nido ecclesiae, id est, in fide: and ideo conculcantur
pulli eorum. Quibus illi respondent, dicentes bona opera appellari huiusmodi,
quae sine charitate siunt, non quia bona sint qua^do sic siunt, quod euidenter
supra Augustinus docuit: sed quia bona essent, si aliter fierent: quae in suo
genere sunt bona, sed ex affectu sunt mala. But he says, there are others of
another opinion, making the actions of men to be of three sorts, and denying
all the actions of infidels to be sin. Opera cunsta quae ad naturae subsidium
siunt, semper bona esse astruunt. Sed quod In Psalm. 13.
Augustinus mala esse dicit, si malas habeant causas; non ita accipiendum est,
quasi ipsa mala sint: sed quia peccant, and mali sunt, qui ea malo fine agunt.

Thomas Bradwardin in his sum against the Pelagians of his time, clearly
resolves, that the will of man since the fall, has noe power to bring forth
any good action, that may be morally good, ex fine and circumstanti^s. And
Aluarez, though he think that all the actions of infidels are not sin, yet
says, that none of them is truly an act of virtue, noe not in respect to the b
Lib. 6. d. 50.
last natural end. Consult. art. 18.
CASSANDER says, that the article of the Augustane confession touching
original sin, agrees with the doctrine of the Church, when as it teaches
that the will of man has some kind of liberty, to bring forth a kind of
civil justice, and to make choice in things subject to reason: but that
without the spirit of God, it has no power to do any thing that may be just
before God, or anything spiritually just. And all orthodoxe divines agree
against the Pelagians, that it is the work of grace, that we are made just of
unjust, truly, and before God; that this grace creates not a new will, nor
constrains it against the liking of it, but corrects the depravation of it,
and turns it from willing ill, to will well; drawing it with a kind of
inward motion, that it may become willing of unwilling, and willingly consent
to the divine calling.

The Pelagians the enemies of Gods grace, being urged with those texts of
Scripture, wherein mention is made of grace, sought to avoyde the evidence of
them, affirming that by grace, the powers, faculties, and perfections of
nature, freely given by God the Creator at the beginning, are understood; when
this would not serve the turn, they understood by grace the remission of sins
past, and imagined that if that were remitted wherein we have formerly
offended, out of that good that is in nature we might hereafter so bethink
our selves, as to do good and decline evil. Thirdly, When this shift failed
likewise, they began to say, that men happily will not bethink themselves of
that duty they are bound to do, or will not presently and certainly discern
what they are to do without some instruction or illumination; but that if they
have the help of instruction and illumination, they may easily out of the
strength of nature decline evil, and do that they discern to be good.
Against this it is excellent that Saint Bernard has, Non est eiusdem
facilitatis, scire d De gratia and li^o arbitrio (...) ^tio.
quid faciendum sit, and facere. Quoniam and diversa sunt, caeco ducatum, ac
fesso praebere vehiculum Non quicunque ostendit viam, praebet etiam viaticum
itineranti: aliud illi exhibet qui facit ne deviet, and aliud qui praestat ne
deficiat in via. Itanec quivis doctor statim and dator erit boni, quodcunque
docuerit. Porro duo mihi sunt necessaria, doceri, ac iuvari; tu quidem homo
recte consulis ignorantiae, sed si verum sentit Apostolus, spiritus adiuvat
infirmitatem nostram. Immo vero qui mihi per os tuum ministrat consilium, ipse
mihi necesse est ministret per spiritum suum adiutorium, quo valeam implere
quod consulis.

When they were driven from this device also, they betook themselves unto
another; to wit, that the help of grace is necessary, to make us more easily,
more constantly, and universally to do good, then in the present state of
nature we can; and to make us so to do good, as to attain eternal happiness
in heaven. And this is, and was the opinion of many in the Roman Church, both
aunciently, and in our time. For many taught that men in the present state of
nature as now it is, since Adams fall, may decline each particular sin, do
works truly virtuous and good, fulfill the several precepts of Gods law,
according to the substance of the work commanded, though not according to
the intention of the lavv-giver; Camaracensis. 1. sent. d. 1. q. 2. art. 2. ait
multos doctores asserere hominem e^tra gratiam per sola naturalia posse
diligere Deum super omnia.
that they may love God above all, as the author and end of nature. So that to
these purposes there was no necessity of the gift of grace, but that grace is
added to make us more easily, constantly, and universally to do good, and to
merit heaven. And therefore De Iustificat. l. 2 cap. 4. Respectu prima gratia,
meritum ex congruo jampridem explosum est. Stapleton ibid.
Stapleton confesses, that many vvrote unadvisedly, as well amongst the
Schoolmen heretofore, as in our time, in the beginnings of the differences in
religion, but that now men are become vviser. I would to God it were so, but
it will be found, that howsoever they are in a sort ashamed of that they
do, yet they persist to do as others did before them: for Bellarmide gratia
and libero arbitrio, l. (...). c. (...). and cap. 9.
they teach still that men may decline each particular sin, do the true
works of moral virtue, do things the law requires, according to the
substance of the things commanded, though not so as to merit heaven, or never
to break any of them. De gratia and libero ^bit. 10, l. 6. c. 7.
Bellarmine indeed denies, that we can love God above all in any sort,
without the help of grace. But I^ primam secundae quaest. 109. art. 3.
Cardinal Caietan says, that though we cannot so love God above all, as to
do nothing but that which may be referred to God as the last end, yet so as
to do many good things in reference to him as the last end. And Bellarmine if
he deny not his own principles must say so; for first he defends, vbi supra,
l. 5. c. 9.
that man may do a work morally good without grace, and do it to obey God
the author of nature: And elsewhere he proves, L. 5. c. 5.
that man cannot perpetually do well in the state of nature without grace,
because it is so turned away from God to the creature by Adams sin, and
specially to himself, that actually, or habitually, or in propension, he
places his last end in the creature, and not in God: and so cannot but offend,
if he be not watchful against this propension. Whence it follows, that
seeing a man must place his chief good in God, if he do good, and that
naturally he can do good, he can naturally place the same in God. That which
he some-where has, vbi supra l. 5. c. 9.
that it is enough to intend the next end explicit, and that it will of it
self be directed to GOD the last end, seeing every good end moves virtute
finis ultimi, is idle: for it moves not but virtute finis ultimi amati: nam
finis non movet nisi amatus, ergo amat finem ultimum.

So that many formerly, and almost all presently in the Church of Rome, are
more then Semipelagians, not acknowledging the necessity of grace to make us
decline evil, and do good, but to do so constantly, universally, and so as
to merit heaven: But Augustine, Prosper, Fulgentius, Gregory, Beda, Bernard,
Anselme, Hugo, many worthy Divines mentioned by the Master of Sentences, yea^he
Master himself, Grosthead, Bradwardine, Ariminensis, the Catholic Divine
that Stapleton speaks of, those that Andradius notes, Alvarez, and other,
agree with us, that there is no power left in nature to avoid sin, and to do
any one good action, that may be truly an action of virtue, and therefore they
say, grace must change us, and make us become new men.

De liber. arb.
Cardinal Contarenus notes, that the Philosophers perceiving a great
inclination to evil to be found in the nature of mankind, thinking it might
be altered and put right, by inuring them to good actions, gave many good
precepts and directions, but to no purpose: for this evil being in the very
first spring of humane actions, that is, the last end chiefly desired, which
they sought not in God, but in the creature, no help of Nature or Art was able
to remedy it: as those diseases of the body are incurable, which have infected
the fountain of life, the radical humiditie. GOD only therefore who
searches the secret and most retired turnings of our soul and spirit, by the
inward motion of his holy spirit, changes the propension and inclination of
our will, and turns it unto himself. And in De praedest.
another place, he has these words. We must observe that at this present,
the Church of God by the craft of the devil, is divided into two sects, which
rather doing their own business then that of Christ, and seeking their own
glory, more then the honor of GOD and the profit of their neighbors, by
stiff and pertinacious defense of contrary opinions, bring them that are not
wary and wise to a fearful downfall. For some vaunting themselves to be
professors of the Catholic Religion, and enemies to the Lutherans, while
they go about too much to maintain the liberty of man's will, out of too much
desire of opposing the Lutherans, oppose themselves against the greatest lights
of the Christian Church, and the first and principal teachers of Catholic
verity, declining more then they should unto the heresy of Pelagius. Others
when they have been a little conversant in the writings of S. Augustine,
though they have neither that modesty of mind, nor love toward God, that he
had, out of the pulpit propose intricate things, and such as are indeed mere
paradoxes to the people. So that touching the weakness of nature, and the
necessity of grace, we have the consent of all the best and worthiest in the
Church, wherein our Fathers lived and died.

The nextthing to be considered is, the power of freewill in disposing it self
to the receipt of grace. In 1. sent. q. 6. prolog. art. 3. and 2. sent. d. 28.
q. 5.
Durandus is of opinion, that a man by the power of free will, may dispose and
fit him self for the receipt of grace, by such a kind of disposition, to
which grace is to be given by pact, and divine ordinance, not of debt. Amongst
the latter divines there are that think, that as one sin is permitted that
it may be a punishment of another, so God in respect of alms, and other
moral good works done by a man in the state of sin, uses the more speedily
and effectually to help the sinner, that he may rise from sin; and that God
infallibly and as according to a certain law, gives the helps of preventing
grace, to them that do what they can out of the strength of nature: and this
is the merit of congruence, they are wont to speak of in the Roman Schools.

But as I noted before, Gregorius Ariminensis resolutely rejects the conceit
of merit of congruence. Stapleton says it is exploded out of the Church. And
Lib. 7. d. 55.
Aluarez, that S. Augustine, and Prosper, whom Aquinas and the Thomists follow,
reject the same. August. l. 2. contra duas epistolas Pelagii c. 8. Si sine Dei
gratia per nos incipit cupiditas boni, ipsum caeptum erit meritum, cui tanquam
ex debito, * Aug. l. 1. quaestionum ad Simplicianum Quare tamen and huic ita,
and huic non ita? Homo tu quis es? debitum si non reddishabes quod gratuleris:
si reddis non habes quod quetaris.
gratiae veniat adiutorium, ac sic gratia Dei non gratis donabitur, sed meritum
nostrum dabitur. etc. 6. lib. 4. and lib. de praedest. sanctorum: and de dono
perseuerantiae. Et Prosper lib de gratia and libero arbitrio ad Ruffinum, ait;
Quis ambigat tunc liberum arbitrium cohortationi vocantis obedire, cum in illo
gratia Dei affectum credendi, obediendique generauerit? Alioquin sufficeret
moneri hominem, non etiam in ipso nouam fieri voluntatem, sicut scriptum est,
Praeparatur voluntas a domino. Neque obstat (says ^bi supra.
Aluarez) quod idem Solomon Proverb. cap. 16. inquit, hominis est praeparare
animam. Intelligit enim hominis esse, quia libere producit consensum, quo
praeparatur ad gratiam: sed tamen id efficit, supposito auxilio speciali Dei
inspirantis bonum and interius mouentis, sic explicat istum locum August. lib.
2. contra duas epistolas Pelag. cap. 8. And so those words are to be
understood, If any one open the door I will enter in, Reuela. 3, and Isa^ 30.
The Lord expects that he may have mercy on you: for he expects not our
consent, as coming out of the power of nature, or as if any such consent were
a disposition to grace, but that consent he causes in us. Fulgentius lib de
incarnatione cap. 19. Sicut in nativitate carnali omnem nascentis hominis
voluntatem, praecedit operis diuini formatio: sic in spirituali natiuitate, qua
veterem hominem deponere incipimus. Bernard, de gratia and libero arbitrio, in
initio: Ab ipsa gratia me in bono praeuentum agnosco, and provehi sentio, and
spero perficiendum. Neque currentis, neque volentis, sed dei miserantis est.
Quid igitur agit ais liberum arbitrium? breuiter respondeo: saluatur; toll
liberum arbitrium, non erit quod saluetur, toll gratiam non erit vnde
saluetur, opus hoc sine duobus effici non potest: uno a quo fit, altero cui vel
in quo fit, Deus author est salutis, liberum arbitrium tantum capax; nec dare
illam nisi Deus, nec capere valet nisi liberum arbitrium: quod ergo a solo Deo,
and soli datur libero arbitrio, tam absque consensu esse non potest
accipientis, quam absque gratia dantis, and ita gratiae operanti salutem
cooperari dicitur liberum arbitrium, dum consentit, hoc est, dum saluatur:
consentire enim saluari est.

Yet must we not think that God moves us, and then expects to see whether
we will consent: Concilium Arausicanum Can. 4. Si quis vt a peccato purgemur
voluntatem nostram Deum expectare contendit, non autem vt etiam purgari
velimus, per sancti spiritus infusionem, and operationem in nos, fieri
confitetur: resist it ipsi spiritui sancto, per Salomonem dicenti, praeparatur
voluntas a domino, and Apostolo salubriter praedicanti Deus est qui operatvr in
nobis, and velle and perficere pro bona voluntate. So that God does not stir
and move the will, and so stay to see whether it will consent or nor, but
works, moves, and inclines us to consent. s Aluarez. li. 9. disp. 97.


The good use of grace proceeds, not from the mere liberty of our will, but
from God working by the effectual help of preoperating grace, and causing a
man freely to consent and cooperate. If not, God were not the total cause,
which as the first root brings forth all that, which discerns the
righteous from the sinner. Quis te discernit? Our consent, and effect of
predestination. The will does not first begin her determination and consent:
The influx of free will into a good action, or the good use of grace exciting,
is supernatural: as being about a supernatural object, therefore it must
proceed from a supernatural cause etc: God is a cause, and the first eause:
in that a cause, he has reference to the effect, in that the first to the
second; when therefore by his helping grace, he works together with us to
will and perform, his operation has a double respect: first to our will,
which it effectually moves to work this; and secondly to our act of willing
which it produces together with our will: for our will has no operation but
in one respect only, that is, of the act it brings forth; but it has no
influence upon it self, antecedently to the production of the act. So then God
is the first determiner of our will; for i^ the created will originally begin
her own determination, it will follow that it is the first free, the first
root, and the first cause of her own determination: which must not be
granted: for seeing a created thing that is free, is free by participation, it
must of necessity be reduced to a first free, as to a former cause: otherwise
duo prima, principia. So that God by his effectual grace, not only morally,
but truly efficiently, moves and inclines the will, to the love and liking of
what he will, in such sort that it cannot but turn, nor cannot dissent in
sensu composito, though it may in sensu diuiso: The meaning of this is, that
the effectual motion of Gods grace, and an actual dissenting, resisting, or
not yielding, cannot stand together: but the efficacy of Gods grace, and a
power of disenting, do stand together. For the efficacy of grace does not take
away the power, but so directs the will, as infallibly in such liberty to
bring forth that he pleases. Cap^eolus.
Est simultas potentiae ad opposita, non autem potentia simultatis ad opposita
simul habenda: there is in some created thing at the same time, a possibility
of having or doing things opposite, as to sit or walk, but there is no
possibility of having these together. So there is in free will moved by
effectual grace a power to do, or not to do in sensu diuiso, because the
efficacy of grace and power of dissenting may stand together, but not in sensu
composito, that is, that the motion of grace and actual dissenting should
stand together. This is the opinion of Lib. 9. d. 94.
Aluarez and many other opposing the Jesuits: neither had Calvin or Luther any
other apprehension of these things. So that the necessity, efficacy, power, and
working of Gods grace, is rightly delivered by sundry in the Roman Church even
till this day. It is not to be marvelled therefore if it be said, that the
Church wherein our Fathers lived and died, believed and taught as we now do.

Aloisius Lippomannus, in catena, ad lectorem, has these words. Illud te
admonitum esse volumus, vt si in toto hoc opere Chrysostomum aliquando legeris
dicentem, homini quoties is sua attulerit, and conatum omnem fecerit, abunde
postea a Deo gratiam suppeditari, caute, and prudenter pium doctorem legas, ne
in errorem illum decidas, vt credas gratiam Dei dari propter merita nostra: nam
si ex meritis, non est gratia: cum nec istud ipsum sua afferre, and conatum
omnem facere, sine praeueniente Dei gratia possit esse, juxta illud Psalmi: and
misericordia ejus praeueniet me; itemque, and misericordia ejus subsequetur me
in omnibus diebus vitae meae, ac illud sanctae Ecclesiae: tua nos quaesumus
domine gratia semper praeueniat and sequatur: cui nos quoque scrupulo provide
occurrentes, in duobus fortassis aut tribus locis paucula quaedam in
Chrysostomum apposuimus.

Gocchianus de liberate christiana l. 2. c. 23. Maria salutatur gratia plena,
vt quic quid in ea and per eam diuina dispositione fieri conspicitur, totum ex
dono dei nullis praecedentibus meritis, designetur etc. habes qualiter in
exordio humanae reparationis praesumpsio humanae facultatis dejicitur. In eo,
quod Maria plena gratia nunciatur, praedicatur in eaplenitudo gratiae, ut nihil
proprii meriti, sed totum quod in ea est gratia esse designetur. August. in
enchirid. Quid humana natura in homine Christo meruit, ut in unitate personae
unici filii Dei, singulariter esset? Quae bona voluntas? cuius boni propositi
studium? quae bona praecesserunt, quibus mereretur iste homo, ut una fieret
persona cum Deo? nempe ex quo homo esse caepit, non aliud caepit esse quam Dei
filius, idemque hominis filius, etc. Magna hic and sola Dei gratia ostenditur,
ut intelligant homines, per eandem gratiam eius se iustificari a peccatis, per
quam factum est ut homo Christus nullum habere posset peccatum. Eccehabes in
Mediatore Christo gratiam commendatam, qui cum esset unicus Dei filius, non
gratia, sed natura, and ob hoc plenus veritatis, factus est hominis filius; ut
esset etiam gratiae plenus, verbum caro factum est. Cum in Christo in quo omnia
instauranda, tanquam in font vnde totius humani generis derivatur salvatio,
nihil aliud invenitur, quam gratia; unde alicui aliquid aliud de proprio potest
provenire, per quod potest salvari? Miranda quidem, imo potius miseranda
humanae praesumptio facultatis, quae cum per humilitatem gratis salvari possit,
propria impediente superbia salvari non velit, Omnes, inquit Esaias, sitientes
venite ad aquas; and qui non habetis argentum and aurum, properate, emite, and
comedite, emite absque ulla commutatione vinum and lac. Gocch. ibid. l. 2. c.
23.
Idem spiritus movet hominis voluntatem, ut bonum velit quod prius noluit, and
bonam voluntatem adiuvat ut bonum volitum ad effectum perducat, nulla
cooperatione propriae voluntatis facultatis, sed sanatae and renovatae. Cap. 20.
Aug. de patientia; Gratia non solum adiuvat iustum, verum etiam iustificat
impium; and ideo etiam cum adiuvat iustum, and videtur eius meritis reddi; nec
sic desinit esse gratia, quoniam id adiuvat, quod ipsa est largita. M^scel. 2.
l. 2. ut. 137.
Hugo de Sancto Victore: Benefaciendi tres sunt gratiae; praeveniens,
cooperans, and subsequens; prima dat voluntatem; secunda facultatem, tertia
perseverantiam. So that in the matter of free will and grace, the Church
wherein our Fathers lived and died, is found to have been a Protestant Church.

CHAP. 11.
Of Justification.

THey of the Church of Rome do teach, that there is a threefold justification.
The first, when a man borne in sin, and the child of wrath, is first
reconciled to God, and translated into a state of righteousness and grace. The
second, when of righteous he becomes more righteous: And the third, when
having fallen from grace, he is restored again.

The first Justification implies in it three things, remission of sins past,
acceptance and receiving into that favor, that righteous men are wont to find
with God; and the grant of the gift of the holy spirit, and of that sanctifying
and renewing grace, whereby we may be framed to the declining of sin, and the
doing of the works of righteousness. These being the things employed in the
first justification of a sinner, it is agreed by all, that when in sorrowful
dislike of former mis-doings we turn unto God, all our sins past are freely
remitted, thorough the benefit of Christ's satisfaction imputed unto us; as
also that for the merit of Christ's active righteousness, consisting in the
fulfilling of the Law, we are accepted and find favor with God, as if we
had always walked in the ways of God, and pleased him. And both these are
necessary; Scotus l. 1. d. 17. q. 2. art. 2. and l. 4 d. 1. q. 6.
for if a man cease to be an enemy, he does not presently become a friend;
and though he pardon him that offended him, so as not to seek revenge of the
offense, yet does it not follow that presently he receives him into favor;
but it is possible he should neither respect him as an enemy, nor as a
friend; and neither will evil unto him as to an enemy, nor good as to a
friend. So likewise it suffices not that God remitte our sins, and seek not
our evil, for Christ's passion, but it is necessary also that he be so
reconciled, as to embrace us as friends, and to do good unto us: this we have
by the merit of Christ's active righteousness, who having a two fold right to
heaven, the one of inheritance, because borne the son of God; the other of
merit, because he had done things worthy the reward of heaven; made use only
of the one, and communicates the other unto us. Neither is this all, that the
sinner when he is to be justified, seeks after; for he never rests
satisfied, till he have not only obtained remission of sins past, and
acceptance with God, but the grant of the gift of the spirit also, and of
that grace that may keep him from offending God so as formerly, and incline
him to do the things that are pleasing unto him. And therefore in the
conference at Annos 541.
Ratisbon, the Divines of both sides agreed, that no man obtayneth remission of
sins, nisietiam simul infundatur charitas sanans voluntatem; vt voluntas
sanata, quemadmodum ait Augustinus, incipiat implere Legem. Fides ergo viva
est, quae, and apprehendit misericordiam Dei in Christo, and credit iustitiam
quae est in Christo sibi gratis imputari, and quae simul pollicitationem
spiritus sancti, and charitatem accipit.

So that it is evident that to be justified, has a three fold signification?
For first it imports as much as to be absolved from sin, that is, to be
freed from the woeful consequents of that disfavor and dislike, that
unrighteousness and sin subjecteth us unto. Secondly, To be accepted and
respected so as righteous men are wont to be: And thirdly to be framed to the
love and desire of doing righteously. And in this sort does Dominicus a Soto
explicate this point: and with him do all they agree, who say, that grace does
justify formaliter charitas operative, and opera declarative, that is, that
grace does justify formally, charity as that which makes men do the works
of righteous men, and that good works by way of declaration make it manifest,
that they are righteous that do them. For they understand by grace a state of
acceptance, that is, such a condition, wherein men are not disfavoured as
having done ill, but respected as if they had done all righteousness: which is
in truth a relation, as the Protestants teach: For what is it but a relation,
in reference to another, to be respected by him, and accepted to him? And in
this sense a man may be justified, that is, accepted as if he had never done
ill, or failed in any good, for the righteousness of another And to this purpose
it is that the Protestant divines do urge that the word of justifying is
verbum forense, and that it signisyeth as much as to pronounce for one in
judgment; which may be conceived two ways; first so as to clear him from
the imputation of having sinned, that bath sinned, and to pronounce that he
has done righteously that has not; and in this sense if God should justify
the sinner, his judgment were not right; and to atas this to him were absurd,
as our adversaries rightly tell us: or else, to clear and free one from
punishment, as if he had never offended, and to adiudge such freedom to him as
righteous men are wont to enjoy, such as he might look for, if righteous, and
to grant him the gift of renovation making him accline ill and do good.
. Nay they all confess, that all they that are justified, are so accepted, for
the obedience, merit, and satisfactory sufferings of Christ, when they are
first reconciled to God. So that it is strange that they should urge as
sometimes they do, that a man can no more be justified, that is, accepted
as if righteous, for the righteousness of another, then a line can be, or be
accounted straight, for the straightnes of another: For, as Durandus rightly
notes, though one man's merit and well doing, cannot be imputed to another, as
to be, or be accounted his merit, and he esteemed to have merited and done
well; yet it may be so communicated, as that the fruit, benefit, and good of
it, shall redound to him, and he be accounted worthy respect, for the others
sake, as if he had done well. Neither do they nor can they make any question
hereof, if they will but understand what they say; For whereas three things are
required of a man, if he will be subject to no evil, and enjoy good: viz. not
to have done evil; to have done good; and to do good in the present and time
to come: though we be framed to the doing of good hereafter, yet we can
neither be freed from the punishment our former evil doings deserved, but by
the benefit of his sufferings, that suffered what he deserved not, to free us:
nor to be accepted having done nothing worthy acceptance, but for his merit:
who did all good in our nature to procure us acceptance.

Lib. 15: c. 5.
Andreas Vega confesses that men may be absolved from their sins, that is,
freed from the punishment of them, by the imputation of Christ's righteousness:
and that they may become acceptable and dear unto God, in such sort as just
men are, formally, by being beloved of him: but that if we speak
Philosophycally of justice, it is in the predicament of quality and not of
relation: which we willingly yield unto. And though he say, Lib. 15. c. 2.
no man ever in express words affirmed before Bernards time, that Christ's
righteousness is imputed to e Epistol. 109.
us: yet he thinks it may rightly be said to be imputed, both for
satisfaction and merit: that is, so as to free us from punishment, and bring
good upon us, as if we had merited it: and that to these purposes it is imputed
to us, as if it were ours. Cap. 3.
And farther he adds, that as God does nothing in nature, but by his son as
God: so he will do nothing pertaining to our justification and restoration,
but for him, as he is man: and that there is no benefit bestowed on us, or good
done unto us, but it presupposes a new application, and imputation of the
merits of Christ. So that every one is newly made partaker of Christ's merits,
and owes new thanks to him, so often as new gifts and benifittes, are
conferred and bestowed upon him: and he fears not to pronounce, that the
righteousness of Christ is imputed unto us, not only when we are baptized,
(as he says a man excellently learned unadvisedly affirms,) but in other
sacraments, and as often as men receive any new gift from God: yea that a new
g Cap. 10.
imputation of Christ's righteousness is necessarily required, for the
remission of those venial sins, into which the justified fall, and the
freeing of us from temporal punishments. Sermon. in coena domini.
Bernar: Nemo leuia peccata contemnat, impossible est enim cum iis saluari,
impossible est ea dilui, nisi per Christum, and a Christo: and L. 83. q. q. 68.
August: tam de eo qui leuioribus peccatis obnoxious est, quam de eo qui
grauioribus pronunciat: quod si sibi relinquerentur interirent.

All therefore acknowledge, as he thinks, that the righteousness of Christ
is imputed; but there are, as he tells us, 2 opinions in the Church of Rome
touching this point, the one, that Christ's righteousness is no otherwise
communicated or imputed to us, but in that for the merit of it, we are
accepted, all things necessary to fit us for justification are given unto us,
righteousness making us formally just, that is, inclining us to decline evil
and do good, is infused into us, and what soever is profitable to set us
forward, and to make us continue in the same, is bestowed on us.

Others renowned for learning and piety do think, that for the attaining of
heaven happiness, not only in a twofold righteousness is necessary, the one
inherent, the other imputed, as to the former; but that this imputed
righteousness of Christ, is twice offered and presented, by Christ to God the
Father; First that we may be justified, that is, that our sins may be
remitted, we accepted, and renewing grace may be given unto us. And secondly
that we may avoid and decline, the extremity and severity of Gods judgment,
that he may accept our weak endeavors, and admit us to heaven,
notwithstanding the imperfection and defects thereof: that for his sake the
imperfection and impurity of our righteousness may be covered.

This opinion is clearly delivered by Cardinal De iustificatione.
Contarenus: and he tellethus it was allowed in the conference at Ratisbon, by
the divines of both sides: his words are these. Seeing we have affirmed that we
artaine a twofold righteousness by faith: a righteousness inherent in us, as
charity, and that grace whereby we are made partakers of the divine nature, and
the justice of Christ given and imputed unto us, as being graft into Christ,
and having put on Christ: it remains that we enquire, upon which of these
we must stay and rely, and by which we must think our selves justified
before GOD, that is, to be accepted as holy and just, having that justice which
it beseems the sons of God to have. I truly think, that a man very
piously and Christianly may say, that we ought to stay, to stay I say, as upon
a firm and stable thing, able undoubtedly to sustain us, upon the justice of
Christ given and imputed to us, and not upon the holiness and grace that is
inherent in us. For this our righteousness is but imperfect, and such as cannot
defend us, seeing in many things we offend all, etc. But the justice of Christ
which is given unto us, is true and perfect justice, which altogether pleases
the eyes of God, and in which there is nothing that offends God. Upon this
therefore as most certain and stable, we must stay our selves, and believe
that we are justified by it, as the cause of our acceptance with God: this is
that precious treasure of Christians, which whosoever finds, sells all that
he has to buy it.

Art. 8. page 28 29. 30.
Ruard Tapper follows the other opinion, and says, that whereas according to
Bernard; our righteousness is impure, though sincere and true, we must not
conceive that this impurity defiles our righteousness, as if it self were
stained, or any thing were wanting in it, for so it should not be true, and
right; but that it is said to be impure, because there are certain stains
and blemishes together with it, in the operations of the soul; for GOD only
is absolutely free from sin, and in many things we sin all: our
righteousness therefore according to his opinion, is imperfect in virtue and
efficacy, because it cannot expel and keep out all sin, out of the soul
wherein it is, by reason of the infirmity of the flesh; but the good works of
the just, do abide the severity of Gods judgment, neither can they be blamed,
though tried most exactly, and discussed in all their circumstances, yea though
the devil should be permitted to say what he can against them, for they have
no fault nor deformity.

Here for the better clearing of this point, it is to be observed, that it is
confessed by all, that the most righteous live not without sin, and
consequently that they have need continually of remission of sins.

It is resolved amongst all Catholics, says L. 14. c. 17
Andreas Vega, that there was never any found amongst the Saints, the blessed
Virgin only excepted, that in the whole course of their lives, avoided all
venial sins. Job. 14
Job asks who shalll be clean from filthiness? and answers himself,
according to the translation which the ancient Doctors followed, and namely
Cyprian, Ambrose, Augustine, Gregory, and others, no one though he live but one
day upon earth. And Psalm. 143. ps. 32.
David says generally, no man living shall be justified in thy sight, and in
another place, for this impiety of sin shall every holy one pray unto thee:
he says not every sinner, but every holy one (says Saint 2 de peccat.
meritis c. 7.
Augustine) for it is the voice of the Saints, If we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us, and Solomon says, there is
no man righteous on earth, that does good, and sins not; and those sayings
of the Apostles are well known; in many things we sin all: If we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, etc. And who is he that never needed in
his whole life to say that part of the Lords Prayer, forgive us our trespasses?

And all this is strongly proved, in that if we look on the lives of all the
Saints, which are marvailously commended in Scripture, we shall find none of
them that had not some blemish, as in the most beautiful body. Let us begin
with the more ancient, for we intend not to accuse the just, but to show the
infirmity of man, and the mercy of GOD, upon, and toward all. Enoch, as
Ecclesiasticus testifies, pleased GOD, and was translated into paradise, but
in that it is written in Genesis, he pleased GOD, after he begat Methusalem,
Homil 57.
Basil does not without cause collect, that he formerly did not so please GOD;
and the same Basil says, that that great Father of the faithful, is found to
have been some-where unfaithful: and not without cause, for when God first
promised Isaak unto him, though he fell on his face, yet he laughed in his
heart, saying, think thou that a son shall be borne, to him that is an
hundred years old, and that Sarah who is ninety years old shall bring forth?
Whereupon Hierome speaks of Sarah and him in this sort; they are reproved for
laughing, and the very cogitation and thought is reprehended, as a part of
infidelity; yet are they not condemned of infidelity, in that they laughed, but
they received the garland of righteousness, in that afterward they believed.
Besides these the Scripture gives ample testimony, to Noah, Daniel, and Job,
who only in Ezechiel it says, may escape the anger of God ready to come on
men; and yet Noah fell into dr^nkennes, which is a sin; and Daniel professes
he prayed unto the Lord, and confessed his own sin, and the sin of his
people: Job also is commended in the Scripture, and of God himself, as being a
sincere man, righteous, fearing God, and departing from evil, and that not in
an ordinary sort, but so as that none of the most righteous then in the world,
might be compared unto him, as St Austine rightly collecteth, out of the words
of God unto Satan: This man though he were a singular example, of innocence,
patience, and all holiness, and though he endured with admirable patience,
horrible tribulations and trials, not for his sins, but for the manifestation
of the righteousness of God; yet as Augustine and Gregory (who as loud sounding
trumpets set forth his praises) freely confess, he was not without venial
sin. Which thing is strongly confirmed, in that the same most sincere lover
of righteousness, confesses of himself, saying, Job. 7.
I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee o thou ^eeper of men? And being
reproved by the Lord, and in a most mild sort willed, to say what he could for
himself, he answered without any circuition, that he had spoken foolishly:
and therefore the Scripture as it were carefully declining, the giving occasion
to any one, to attribute so great innocence to Job, as to make him sinles,
said not, that he sinned not, but that he sinned not in all those things, that
he suffered before that time, when he answered his wife, if we have received
good things of the hand of the Lord, why should we not patiently suffer the
evils he brings upon us? Numer. 20.
Moses beloved of God and men, and the most meek of all the inhabitants of the
earth, Aug. de vtilitate p^t.
doubted something of the promise of the Lord, when he stroke the rock twice
with the rod, to bring out water for the people, being distressed for want of
water: and that his doubting, displeased the Lord God, and he let him know so
much, both by reproving him and punishing him, and therefore presently he said
to him and Aaron, because ye believed me not, to sanctify me before the
children of Israel, you shall not bring in this people, into the land which I
will give them. The Scripture also highly commends Samuel, but as August:
notes; that neither he, nor Moses, nor Aaron, were v Aug 2. de pecc^torum
meritis and re^:
without sin, David sufficiently declared, when he said; thou wast merciful
unto them, and did punish all their inventions, for as August: notes, he
punishes them that are appointed to condemnation in his wrath, the children of
grace in mercy, but there is no punishment, no correction, nor no rod of (...)
P^ 9^.
God due, but to sin. Zachary and Elizabeth are renowned for eminent
righteousness, for they are both said to have been just before God, walking in
all his commandments without reproof; but that Zachary himself was not
without fault and sin, Gabriel showed when he said unto him, behold thou
shall be silent, and not able to speak. And the same may be proved out of Paul
who says, that Christ only needed not daily as the priests of the law, to
offer sacrifice first for their own sins, and then for the sins of the
people. And it is one thing (as the fathers of the council of Mileuis, have
well noted, in their epistle to Innocentius) to walk without sin, and
another thing to walk without reproof, for he that walks so, that no man
can justly complain of him, or reprehend him, may be said to walk without
reproof, though sometimes thorough humane frailety, some lighter sins do
seize upon him; because men do not reprove, nor complain, but only of the
more grievous sins. And to what end should we run thorough other examples
of the Saints? Whereas the lights of the world, and salt of the earth, the
Apostles of Christ, that received the first fruits of the spirit, confessed of
themselves, that in many things they offended and sinned.

And therefore the Church taught this ever with great consent. 2 contra Marc.
Tertullian: Quis hominum sine delicto? Li. 3. ad Quirin.
Cyprian proves by Job, David, and John, that no man is without sin, and
defiling: In Ps. 118.
Hilarie upon those words, thou have despised all them that depart from thy
righteousness; If God should despise sinners he should despise all; for there is
none without sin, In Ionam.
Hierome showing that the Ninivites upon good ground and for good cause,
commanded all to fast, both old and young, writes thus; The elder age
begins, but the youngger also follows in the same course, for there is
none without sin, whether he live but one day or many years; for if the
stars be not clean in the sight of God, how much less a worm, rottennes,
and they that are holden guilty of the sin of Adam, that offended against
God. And in another place, we follow the authority of the Scripture, that no
man is without sin. e Q^r 8. ad A gas.
And Li 2. de pec cat. meritis and re^i: cap. 14.
Saint Augustine; whosoever are commended in Scripture, as having a good heart,
and doing righteously, and whosoever such after them, either now are, or shall
be hereafter, they are all truly great, just, and praise worthy, but they are
not without some sin, nor no one of them is so arrogantly mad, as to think
he has no need, to say the Lords prayer, and to ask forgiveness of his sins.
And in his 31 sermon de verbis Apostoli, he has these words: Haehetici
Pelagiani and Coelestiani dicunt iustos in hac vita nullum habere peccatum,
redi haeretice ad orationem, si obsurduisti contra veram fidei rationem,
Dimitte nobis debita nostra dicis an non dicis? Si non dicis, etsi praesens
fueris corpore, foris tamen es ab ecclesia. Ecclesiae enim oration est, vox est
de magisterio Domini veniens. Ipse dixit, sic orate, discipulis dixit,
Apostolis dixit, and nobis qualescunque agniculi sumus dixit, arietibus gregis
dixit, sic ^rate. Videte quis dixerit and quibus dixerit, Veritas discipulis,
pastor pastorum arietibus dixit, sic orate, Dimitte nobis debita nostra; etc:
Rex militibus, dominus servis, Christus Apostolis, veritas hominibus
loquebatur, sublimitas humilibus loquebatur. Scio quid in vobis agatur. Ego vos
appendo, ego de trutina mea renuncio, prorsus dico quid in vobis agatur. Hoc
enim ego plus quam vos scio, dicite, Dimitte nobis debita nostra sicut etc:
Oration ista regeneratorum est, id est, baptizatorum: Postremo quod totum
superat filiorumest. Nam si non est filiorum, qua front dicitur Pater noster?
etc. And in his retractations he says expressly, no man does so keep the
mandates of g Cap. 13.
righteousness, as that it should not be needful for him in praying to say,
forgive us our debts. And De bono perseverantiae.
els-where; that amongst those three articles, which the Church defends
against the Pelagians, one is, In quantacunque iustitia, sine qualibuscunque
peccatis, in hoc corruptibili corpore neminem vivere. Homil. 58.
Basil: No speech is so profitable unto me, as that touching repentance,
because there is no man without sin. De ecclesiast. dogmat. c. 49.
Gennadius: There is no holy nor just man that is without sin; yet does he
not therefore cease to be holy. Moral. 18. c. 4.
Gregory inquireth how that may be understood, that Job says; his heart
reproved him not; whereas before he had accused himself saying, I have sinned:
and he professes, that if he shall go about to justify himself, his own
heart will condemn him: and he answers himself in this sort; that there are
sins that may be avoided by the just, and that there are some that even the
righteous cannot decline; of the first kind he says it is to think evil, of
the second to consent to evil thoughts. Rightly therefore he that confesses
himself a sinner says, his heart reproved him not, because though sometimes
happily he were wanting in rectitude, in that he thought evil, yet by a
strong fight of the mind he resisted the same. De praecept. and dispens.
Bernard. Ipsi de se fatentur apostoli in multis offendimus omnes, and si
dixerimus, quia peccatum non habemus, ipsi nos seducimus; that is, the Apostles
confess of themselves, in many things we sin all, and if we say, we have
no sin, we deceive our selves. De perfect. iustit. resp. 17.
August. treating of those words, that we may be holy and undefiled. Hoc
agitur, inquit, ut hoc simus, si immaculati intelligendi sunt, qui omnino sine
peccato sunt; si autem immaculati sunt, qui sunt sine crimine, etiam in hac
vita fuisse atque esse, negare non possumus: legitur homo sine crimine, legitur
sine querela; at non legitur sine peccato, nisi filius hominis, unus idemque
filius Dei unicus. And Moral. 21. c. 9
Gregory: In hac vita multi sine crimine, nullus vero esse sine peccatis valet.

Vegal. 14. c.
Yea the Fathers teach, not only that no man does, but also that no man can
live without venial sin. Ps. 118.
Hilary in illa verba, amputa a me opprobrium, etc, Propheta in corpore positus
loquitur, and neminem viventium scit sine peccato esse posse. Augustine, Homil.
2. in Apocalypse. Non Angels indigent poenitentia sed homines, qui sine peccato
esse non possunt, and subiungit. Non dicam Laici, sed etiam Sacerdotes, una die
esse non debent fine poenitentia, quia quomodo nullus dies est, in quo homo
possit esse sine peccato, sic nullo die debet esse sine satisfactionis remedio.
Et de bono perseverantiae cap. 13. citat ex Ambrosio, and approbat, Cauere
difficile; exuere autem impossible surreptiones, in quibus dubium non est,
quandoque nos peccare venialiter. In lib. de fide ad Petrum cap. 41. ut
firmissime tenendum traditur, neminem ex adultis sine peccato esse posse.
Gregorius homil. 17. in Evangel; Humana vita sine culpa transiri non potest. Et
alibi, Etiam a just is peccata haec minuta asserit inevitabilia 18, Moral. c.
4. Beda in illa verba, Ecce agnus Dei. Quamdiu sunt sancti in hoc corpore,
peccato carere nequeunt. (...) Bernard. in lib. de praecepto and dispens.
Fateor sane impossible cuivis mortalium, vel venialiter interdum non
delinquere. And the Council of Trent anathematizeth all those that shall say,
that the justified man may so avoid and decline all venial sin, as not to
commit any in the whole course of his life, unless it be by special
privilege, as in the blessed Virgin.

But yet Andreas L. 14. c. 21.
Vega thinks, that the just by the assistance of Gods grace, may decline all
venial sin, so as in the whole course of their life to fall into none; which
his saying he confesses, will seem hard to most men, even as it seemed
formerly to himself. But he says, if it be not granted that the
commandments of GOD may be kept collectiuely, as well as divisiuely, then
that he requires is impossible, for he requires the fulfilling of all
collectiuely, so as not to do any of them is sin. If a man command his
servant, to carry so much of something, out of the field into his house every
hour, though he have power to carry so much any hour, yet if he have not
power to carry it every hour, it seems he requires that which is
impossible, and his mandate is unjust. And besides, if we have power to do
the things the Law requires, divisiuely only, and not collectiuely, then we
cannot fulfill the Law, ex toto, sed ex part tantum, which is the opinion of
the Protestants, whom the Council condemns.

It is true that he notes touching this point, that they cannot avoid, but
that God has commanded things impossible, who say, that men may divisiuely
do each thing the Law requires, but not collectiuely all the things it
requires, seeing God commands us to do all these things collectiuely; and
yet this is the opinion of most Divines in the Roman Church. So that they are
forced by the evidence of truth, to confess together with us, that God has
commanded such things, as in the present state, by reason of the infirmity of
our sinful nature, cannot be fulfilled by us.

Neither can Vega avoyde the evidence of the testimonies of the Fathers, and
the Decree of the Council of Trent, so that he must be forced to confess,
that no man can so collectiuely fulfill the Law as not to sin, and
consequently, that no man can perform that the law requires. For his
distinction of logical or metaphysicall, and moral impossibility, will not
help the matter; for howsoever it be true, that God may give grace, freeing
the will, and inabling it to do good, in such sort as to decline all ill, (and
in his opinion every justified man might have such grace, if he were not
wanting to himself) yet according to the course, which generally he has,
does, and will ever hold, for reasons best known to himself, he gives not
that superexcellent grace, and man's condition is still such, as that continuing
in it, he connot avoid all sin.

Iustificat. l. 6. cap. 2.
Sapleton treating of the fullfilling of the law, lays down these
propositions. 1 They that are renewed in Christ Jesus, receive the grace of the
ho^y spirit, whereby they may fulfill the law, De spiritu and littera. c. 19.
Lex, says S. Augustine, data est vt gratia quaereretur, gratia data est vt
lex impleretur, and Cap. 9.
voluntas ostenditur infirma per legem, vt sanet gratia voluntatem, and
voluntas sanata impleat legem, non constituta sub lege, nec indigens lege.
Item, Cap. 30.
Lex non evacuatur per fidem, sed statuitur, quia fides impetrat gratiam, qua
lex impleatur. Contra Faustum l. 19. c. 31.
Ad praecepta facienda adiuuat per gratiam, sicut promissa implenda curat per
veritatem. Lib. 17. c. 6.
Impletur lex cum vel fiunt quae ibi praescripta sunt, vel cum exhibentur quae
ibi Prophetata sunt, gratia pertin^t ad charitatis plenitudinem, verit as ad
prophetiarum impletionem, and quia vtrumque per Christum, ideo non venit
soluere legem aut Prophetas, sed adimplere.

This first proposition he qualifieth by a second, in this sort. Haec impletio
g Cap. 3.
legis non intelligitur, necessario and praecise, in omnibus mandatis legis,
toto tempore and cursu iustitiae humanae, sed ille censetur implere, qui
voluntate^ and affectu^ habens implendi, vniuersa legis eatenus implet,
quatenus humana fragilitas, in reliquiis naturae corruptae, per gratiam adiuta
implere in hac vita vel potest, vel solet. And this proposition he says is
clearly proved, and strongly confirmed, by the known doctrine of the Church,
Council. Mileuita. Can. 6. 7. and 8. Council. Aphrica. c. 81. and sequen. Aug. l
2 de peccato: meritis and remissi. De spiritu and litt. lib. 4. contra ep.
Pelagiani de perfect: Iustitiae.
long since clearly delivered against the Pelagians, that none of the just do
live without sin. Whereas therefore, it is said of Zachary and Elizabeth,
that they were both just before God, walking in all the commandments, and
iustifications of the Lord, without blame; and of David, that he was a man
after Gods own heart, doing all his will; and of Asa, that he did that which
was right in the sight of the Lord, as David his father did, and that his heart
was perfect before the Lord all his days, as likewise it is said of
Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Josias; It is not to be understood that they were so
just, as to be without sin, for the sins of them all are recounted in
scriptvre. Zachary was incredulous, and therefore became dumb; the adultery
and murder of David are well known; 2 Chronicles. 19.
Iehosaphat is reprehended by the Prophet for helping wicked Ahab: 2 Chronicles. 32.
Ezechias fell through the pride of his heart; Josias sinned grievously, in not
resting in the words of Necho, 2 Chronicles. 35. But they are said to have been
just, because they had a desire to fulfill all, though through frailty they
offended in many things. Contra Pelag. lib. 3.
Hierome shows that men are so just in this life, as that yet they are not
without sin, Positum, inquit, est in nostra potestate non peccare, sed hoc
pro modo, and tempore, and condition humanae fragilitatis, perpetuitas autem
impeccantiae, soli Deo reservatur, nec quia ad breue tempus abstinere possum,
coges me vt possim iugiter, and dicimus hominem posse non peccare si velit, sed
hoc pro tempore, pro loco, pro imbecillitate coporis, quamdiu intentus est
animus, quamdiu chorda nullo vitio laxatur in cithara. And Saint Augustine.
Nullus sanctus and iustus caret peccato, nec tamen ex hoc desinit esse iustus,
cum affectu teneat sanctitatem. m Lib. de ecclesiasti: dogmatibus c. 86.


Thirdly to this proposition he adds in the same place, That the just though
they be not without sin yet decline those that are mortal, or if n cap. 5.
at any time they fall into them they rise again by repentance.

cap. 6.
Fourthly, though the righteousness of the just be not perfect in this world,
so as to be free from all mixture of sin, yet it is perfect suo modo, in that
it continually endeavors to be free from sin, going on from day to day.
Leo de qua. dra^. ser. 2.
Haec est perfectorum vera iustitia, vt nunquam praesumant se esse perfectos:
ne ab itineris nondum finiti intention cessantes, ibi incidant in deficiendi
periculum, vbi proficiendi deposuerint appetitum. August. in Ps. (...).
Quantumcunque hic profecerimus, nemo dicat sufficit mihi, iustus sum, qui sic
dixit remansit in via, non novit pervenire. Vbi dixit sufficit ibi haesit.

Cap. 8.
Fifthly, Iustit ia bonorum operum in fide, est vera coram Deo iustitia,
vtcunque mixta peccatis and imperfecta, tum quoad vniuersa mandata implenda,
tum quoad modum implendi, vereque and plene legi Dei satisfacit, non solum quia
quam proxime arcedit ad plenam and perfectam iustitiam, aut quia grauioribus
saltem criminibus caret, aut etiam quia id agit proficiendo de die in diem, vt
omni prorsus peccato careat, and plene satisfaciat, sed adhuc praeterea, quia
quicquid deest ad plenam, and perfectam adimpletionem, mandata praetermittendo,
and frequenter venialiter peccando, sive propter imperfectionem, in modo and
ratione implendi, id totum Christi misericordia and gratia indulget, atque
ignoscit, facitque indulgendo, vt perinde simus coram Deo iusti, ac si vntuersa
ad amussim omnia mandata, eademque perfectissime fecissemus.

This doctrine of Stapleton thus delivered, is such as no Protestant can
dislike, neither can he dissent from them, if he constantly persist in the
same, but that he may make show of some difference between him and them, he
says, that a three fold fraud of the Protestants touching remission of
sins, is to be avoided. First, In that they make our justification, so
consist in the sole remission of sins by faith, that the sacraments confer
nothing to our justification. But this is untrue, for they teach no such thing,
but that baptism and repentance, are necessarily required, in them that are to
be first justified. The second supposed fraud is, that actions of virtue, and
the careful endeavor to walk in the commandments of God, are not necessary
to our second justification, or the augmentation, progress, and daily
perfecting of the same more and more. But this is a calumniation as the former;
for they make the second justification, to consist of two parts. The daily
progress in well doing, whereby the righteousness inherent is more and more
perfected. And the daily remission of such sinful defects, as are found in
their actions. Neither do they say, that mortal sins, and such as do
vastare conscientiam, stand with justification; and therefore the daily
remission which the justified man seeks, is not of those. The third fraud, to
wit, that this remission of sins is obtained by faith only, without all
those means that are necessary to attain the same, is but his own
imagination; for howsoever faith only apprehend this remission, yet other
things necessarily concur, as fitting to the receiving of the same.

Hitherto we have strongly proved that no man can live in this world without
venial sin, and consequently that no man fulfilleth the law exactly. We
have likewise showed that the best learned in the Roman Church do think, that
the justified do so fulfill the law, as that they have need of continual
remission of sins. Only onething may be alleged against this that we have
hitherto insisted upon, Chemnitius (says Bellarmine de iustific. l 4. c. 14.)
v^geth that he that fulfilleth the whole law a^b no sin, that in many things
we si ne all and that therefore (...) the whole law. This argument they do
not well answer, that think venial sins to be properly sins and against
the law, s^ ^cy must ^ay it is possible to fulfill, not because it may wholly
be kept, but in the greater part. Thomas 1. 2. quest. 88. art. 1. a^serit
peccata ven^ia, non esse peccata simpliciter, sed imperfecte, and secundum
quid, neque esse contra legem, sed praeter legem.
that venial sins are not against but besides the law, that they are
improperly sins, and that they do not offend nor displease God, and that
therefore the committing of those no way hinders, but that the fulfilling of
the law may be accounted perfect. But Lib. 14. cap. 13.
Andreas Vega learnedly refuteth this fancy, and shows at large, that they
are properly and absolutely sin, for that they are actus mali simpliciter,
quippe qui voluntarij and circa materiam indebitam, and a recta ratione
deviant, ac dissentiunt, and poena, ac reprehensione digni iure apud omnes
censentur. And sundry others agree with him in the same. So that it is clear,
that though the gift of righteousness be given to the justified, and they
inclined to do the things the law requires, yet it does not make them to
decline all evil, or to do all good that the law requires, but so to
decline evil, as not to suffer it to be predominant, and so to do good, as
principally to delight in well doing, and above all things to desire to please
God.

Only one thing remains that is questionable, whether the good works of the
justified be sin or not. That they are we have the testimony of 9 Moral. c.
1:
Gregory, Sanctus vir omne meritum virtutis nostrae vitium esse conspicit, si
ab interno arbitro districte iudicetur, ideo recte subiungit, si voluerit
contendere cum eo, non poterit ei respondere vnum pro mill, et 9. Moral. c.
28. Quamvis lamentis supernae compunctionis infundar: quamvis per studia rectae
operationis exe^cear, in tua tamen munditia, video quia mundus non sum.
Intentam quippe in Deum animam, ipsam adhuc corruptibilis caro diuerberat,
eiusque amoris pulchritudinem, obscaenis and illicitis cogitationum motibus
faedat. Et 9. Moral. c. 14. Omnis humana iustiua iniustitia conuincitur si
districte iudicetur: prece ergo post iustitiam indiget, vt quae succumbere
discussa poterat, ex sola iudicis pietate convalescat.

And Li. 11. c. 40.
Vega confesses, that not only the life of all the holiest in this world, is
stained with many venial sins, but also that the good works of the most
perfect, come short of that goodness, with which it were fit, we should
worship, praise, and honor God, they are not so pure, so holy, so fervent,
as the greatness of God and of his benefits bestowed on us, might justly require
and exact of us.

De Iustific. li. 6. c. 21.
Stapleton says Non est tanta eorum iustitia vt vel sine peccato semper sit,
vel nihil illi addi queat. De perfect. iustitiae.
August: contra Coelestium, In illa plenitudine charitatis praeceptum illud
implebitur, Diliges Dominum Deum tuum ex toto cord tuo, and ex tota anima tua,
etc: Nam cum est adhuc aliquid carnalis concupiscentiae, quod vel continendo
fraenetur, non omnimodo ex tota anima diligitur Deus. Stapl. ib. c. 10.
Propter concupiscentiam minuitur, distrahitur, and impeditur illa dilectio.
Non amatur Deus perfect ex tota anima in hac vita: non quia avertitur a Deo,
sed quia avocatur, non quia a Deo abstrahitur, sed quia distrahitur. Denique
non quia charitas Dei per hunc conflictum tollitur, sed quia vsus ipsius
charitatis impeditur, vt site distinguit Thomas 2. 2, q. 44. ar. 4. ad 2. Fit
autem haec avocatio, haec distractio, haec diminutio delectationis sanctae in
ipsa anima, quia sine anima caro non concupiscit, quamvis caro concupiscere
dicatur, quia carnaliter anima co^cupiscit. August. l. 4. c. 2. contra Julian
Concupisce^tia inquantum inest nocet, non quidem ad perdendum de sort
sanctorum nisi ei consentiatur, tamen ad minuendam spiritualem delectationem
sanctarum mentium, illam scilicet de qua dicit Apostolus, Condelector legi Dei
secundum interiorem hominem. There is an imperfection in our love of God, and
we come short of that which the Law requires of us, for we should love him
so, as to love or desire nothing more, nothing so much, nothing but for him,
nothing that he would not have loved, nothing otherwise then he would have us:
but this we do not, therefore we break this law. Their Stapl 16. c. 11.
answer is, that these laws do only teach us, what we are to desire, and
what we are hereafter to attain, but do not bind us under the pain of
sin. If we ask them why, they answer, because our nature is so corrupted,
that we cannot fulfill them, and thus does Stapleton answer this question; but
himself presently shows the insufficiency of this answer, for he tells us
out of August: that the righteousness of the first man was such, as to obey God,
and to have no law of concupiscence, De peccat: merit: and remission. lib. 2.
cap: 23. And out of the same August. De Ciuitate Deil. 14. c. 10 Erat amor eius
imperturbatus in Deum, that is, he was wholly carried unto God without
distraction or perturbation. And adds, that this primitive righteousness,
(which the law of nature bound man to have,) the law was to prescribe and
require, quia ideo data est, vt extinctam propemodum naturae legem in hominibus
restauraret; August. qu: in vetus testiment. q. 4. And that the rule of the
law, which is a perpetual and immutable law of justice in God, was not to be
altered or any way bowed and iuclined in respect of the deprauation of our
nature; He says therefore that the rule, without any change remains the
same, and commands all manner of perfection: and that not to have the
perfection it requires, is a transgression of the law, in all them that by
Adams sin are so corrupted, unless this corruption be remitted. So then this
law binds the unregenerate; and do the regenerate owe less to God? It
remains therefore a clear truth, that the most just do not perform the
works of virtue, with that purity and fervencie of affection, that the law
requires, according to that of S. Paul who confesses, that what he would do
that he did not, and what he would not that he did, that to will, was present
with him, but that he found no ability to perform.

Ambrosius de fuga saeculi citatus ab August. contra duas epist. Pelag. ad
Bonifacium lib. 4. cap. 11. has these words, Frequenter irrepit terrenarum
illecebra cupiditatum, and vanitatum offusio mentem occupat, vt quod studeas
vitare, hoc cogites animoque voluas. Quod cauere difficile est homini, exuere
autem impossible. Non in potestate nostra est cor nostrum, and nostrae
cogitationes, quae improuiso offusae, mentem animumque confundunt, atque alio
trahunt quam tu proposueris, ad saecularia reuocant, mundana inserunt:
voluptaria ingerunt, illecebrosa intexunt, ipsoque in tempere quo elevare
mentem paramus, insertis inanibus cogitationibus, ad terrena plerumque
deijcimur.

And Contra Luciferianos.
Hierome, Fiat tibi inquit Deus secundum fidem tuam, hanc ego vocem audire
nolo, si enim secundum fidem meam fiat mihi peribo. Et certe credo in Deum
patrem, credo in deum filium, and credo in Deum spiritum sanctum, credo in vnum
Deum: and tamen secundum meam fidem nolo mihi fieri. Saepe quippe venit
inimicus homo and inter dominicam messem zizania interserit. Neque hoc dico,
quod maius quicquam sit quam sacramenti fides, quam puritas animae: sed
indubitata ad Deum fides ardue reperitur. Verbi gratia dictum sit, vt quod
volumus perspicuum fiat, ad orationem assisto, non orarem si non crederem, sed
si vere crederem, illud cor quo Deus videtur mundarem, manibus tunderem pectus,
genas lacrimis rigarem, corpore inhorrescerem, ore pallerem, iacerem ad Domini
mei pedes eosque fletu perfunderem, crine tergerem, haererem certe trunco
crucis, nec prius amitterem, quam misericordiam impetrarem. Nunc vero
creberrime in oratione mea aut per porticus deambulo, aut de faenore computo,
aut abductus turpi cogitatione, etiam quae dictu erubescenda sunt gero. Vbi est
fides? siccine putamus or ass Ionam? sic tres pueros? sic Danielem inter
leones? sic certe latronem in cruce?.

And this is confirmed by the author of the book called Scala coeli, written
in English long since a manuscript whereof I have seen, When thou would
have the mind of thy heart upward to God in thy prayer, thou feel so many
thoughts in vain, and of thine own deeds before done, or what thou shall
do, that it cannot be so: yet do we rightly require it should be so. Thou
shall love God with all thy heart, and all thy soul, and thy might, it is
impossible to any man, to fulfill this bidding so fully as it is said, living
in earth, and yet nevertheless our Lord bad us to love so, for this intent as
S. Bernard says, that we should know thereby our feebleness, and then meekly
cry mercy, and we shall have it.

Saint In Cantica sermon. 50.
Bernard making two constructions of that precept, Thou shall love the Lord thy
God etc. The one, that it requires that we should first taste the sweetness of
the Lord, and love him as the first thing that is dear unto us, and our selves
in and for God, no otherwise, as finding nothing in our selves worth regarding,
but for him, without whom we are nothing. The other, that it requires us to
love nothing so much as God, to be affected toward him as most worthy to be
beloved, and to desire that we might so taste of his goodness, as to love him
first, and nothing but for him. The former of these 2 he says, is impossible
to be had in this life. Quis enim sibi arrogare id audeat quod se Paulus ipse
fatetur non co^prehe^disse? Nec latuit praeceptore^ praecepti po^dus hominu^
excedere vires, sed iudicauit vtile, ex hoc ipso suae illos insufficientiae
admoneri: and vt scirent sane ad quem iustitiae finem niti pro viribus
oporteret. Ergo mandando impossibilia, non praevaricatores homines fecit, sed
humiles, vt omne os obstruatur, and subditus fiat omnis mundus Deo. Quia ex
operibus legis, non iustificabitur omnis caro coram illo. Accipientes quippe
mandatum, and sentientes defectum, clamabimus in coelum, and miserebitur nostri
Deus, and sciemus in illa die, quia non ex operibus iustitiae quae fecimus nos,
sed secundum suam misericordiam saluos nos fecit.

And that all our best works are defective, and that it is not safe to trust
to them; the same Bernard shows in his sermon De verbis Apostoli, Qui
gloriatur in domino glorietur.
Perfecta and secura gloriatio est, cum veremur omnia opera nostra, sicut
testatur beatus Job de seipso, and cum Esaia Propheta omnes iustitias nostras,
non aliud quam panum menstruatae reputandas esse cognoscimus; nihilominus tamen
confidimus etiam, and gloriamur in domino, cuius misericordia tanta est super
nos, vt a grauioribus quidem, quae ad mortem peccata sunt, custodiat nos, and
tam benign imperfectionis nostrae delicta, and conuersationis impuritatem
nobis manifestare, cognitam condonare dignetur, quatenus in humilitate and
sollicitudine, and gratiarum action firmiter radicati, iam non in nobis, sed
in domino gloriemur.

De justificat. art. 8. p. 19.
Ruard Tapper says, our righteousness is imperfect, in virtue and efficacy,
in that it cannot expel, and keep all sin out of the soul: whence it will
follow, that it is sinnefully defective in it self. For righteousness keeps
out sin by way of contrariety, and each contrary if it be in such degree as
it should, keeps out the contrary; if therefore it be in such degree as it
should be, it will suffer no sin. For God requires of us an entire
obedience; and as he that will leave a sin in such sort as he should, must
leave all: so he that will have any one virtue so as he should, must have all,
and consequently can have noe sin. Bellarmine de justificat: lib: 4. cap: 14:
says, He that keeps the whole law, and offends in any one, is guilty of
all, and that therefore if those sins which we call venial, (as many the
best in the Roman Church defend,) be simply and absolutely sins, and violations
of the law, whosoever commits any one of them and breaks the law in so
doing, is in a sort guilty of the breach of all, and keeps noe one of them as
he should.

Wherefore by the clear confession, of many the worthyest in the Church in
former times, and by necessary consequence from that all taught, it is evident,
that our righteousness is imperfect, not only by reason of the mixture of
sins, but of the sinful defect and imperfection, found in the good works
which we do Which thing Augustine long since excellently delivered, ad
Bonifacium lib. 3. cap. 7. Virtus quae nunc est in homine iusto, hactenus
perfecta nominatur, ut ad eius perfectionem pertineat etiam ipsius
imperfectionis, and in veritate agnitio, and in humilitate confessio. Tunc enim
est secundum hanc infirmitatem, pro suo modulo perfecta, ista parva iustitia,
quando etiam quid sibi desit intelligit. and 1 Retract. c. 19. Omnia mandata
facta deputantur, quando quicquid non fit ignoscitur. and in Confess. Vae
hominum vitae quantumvis laudabili si remota misericordia iudicetur.

Wherefore seeing it is clearly confessed, that the righteousness of the just
is impure, as Bernard speaks, not only in respect of the mixture of sin,
but of sinful imperfection, found in the best works of virtue, done by them.
I think we may safely follow their opinion who say, that for the attayning of
heaven happiness, not only a twofold righteousness is necessary, the one
inherent, the other imputed, but that this imputed righteousness of Christ, is
twice offered and presented by Christ to God the Father, first that our sins
may be remitted, we accepted, and renewing grace may be given unto us: and
secondly, that for his sake the imperfections and defects of our inherent
righteousness found in us, by renewing grace may be covered, that we may
avoyde the extremity and severity of Gods righteous judgment, and that he may
accept our weak endeavors, and admit us into heaven, notwithstanding all our
failings.

Posid. de vita Aug. c. 27.
Pos^idonius writes of Ambrose, that when he was ready to dye he used these
words, Non sic vixi vt me pudeat inter vos vivere: sed nec mori timeo, quia
bonum Dominum habemus: and he says that S. August. when he was now aged, was
wont much to admire and praise this saying of S. Ambrose, Ideo enim eum dixisse
nec mori timeo, quia bonum Dominum habemus; ne crederetur praefidens de suis
purgatissimis moribus praesumpsisse, Non sic vixi vt me pudeat inter vos
vivere: Hoc dixerat ad illud quoa homines de homine nosse poterant. Nam sciens
examen aequitatis divinae, de bono Domino se dicit magis, quam de meritis suis
confidere: cui etiam in oratione quotidiana Dominica dicebat: Dimitte nobis
debita nostra, etc. And Cuthbertus that writes the life of Beda says, that he
also was wont often to repeat this saying of S. Ambrose.

S. Aug. cont. Crescon l. 3. c. 80. speaks thus, Ad existimationem hominum
magna testium qui me noverunt suppetit copia, ad Dei vero conspectu^ sola
conscientia, quam contra vestras criminationes, cum intrepida^ geram, non me
tamen sub oculis omnipotentis iustificare audeo, magisque ab illo effluentem
misericordiae largitatem, quam judicij summum examen expecto, cogitans quod
scriptum est, Cum rex iustus sederit in throno, quis gloriabitur castum se
habere cor, aut quis gloriabitur mundum se esse a peccato? Which thing Gerson
also shows De verbis Christi, Venite ad me omnes. Haec and his similia
Diabolo tentanti, and peccatum suae diffidentiae vel desperationis ingerere
volenti soleo respondere: ne quando praevaleat inimicus meus super me. At si
quando me cogitatio in conspectu divinae maiestatis rapuerit, ibi certe
longealiter procedo, quia tunc me pulvere^ cineremque esse recognosco. Tunc me
peccatorem miserrimum, and supplicio dignissimum profiteor, and cum omni
reverentia veniam deprecor. Tunc quasi super terram sto, and alas submitto,
quas in altercatione Diaboli quasi in coelo volans extensas teneo: vt semper
and coram Diabolo erectus inveniar, and humilis coram Deo.

Guil. in vita Bernard. c. 12.
Of S. Bernard it is reported, cum extremum iam spiritum trahere videretur, in
excessu mentis suae, ante tribunal domini sibi visus est praesentari, affuit
antem and Satan ex adverso, improbis eum accusationibus pulsans; vbi vero ille
omnia fuerat prosecutus, and viro Dei pro sua fuit part dicendum, nihil
territus aut turbatus ait, Fateor non sum dignus ego, nec proprijs possum
meritis obtinere regnum coelorum; caeterum duplici iure illud obtinens Dominus
meus, haereditate scilicet patris, and merito passionis; altero ipse contentus,
alterum mihi donat, ex eius dono iure illud mihi vendicans non confundor. In
hoc verbo confusus inimicus, conventus ille solutus, and homo Dei in se
reversus est. De simil. c. 6.
Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury brings in a godly man thus speaking to the
Angels, Quod in regno Dei vestra quaerimus aequalitate beari, dono and gratiae
Jesus Christi Domini nostri id ascribimus: qui ad hoc dignatus est homo fieri,
pati, mori, vt nos ab omni delicto, in sanguine suo iustificatos, ipsius regni
consortes efficeret.

And the same Anselme is Hosius Tom. 1. page 291. confessionis Cathol. c. 73.
said, to have prescribed certain interrogatories, to be proposed to such as
were ready to die, Inter quas extrema est, Credis te non posse nisi per mortem
Christi saluari? respondet infirmus etiam. Tum illi dicitur: age igitur dum
superest in te anima, in hac sola morte fiduciam tuum constitue; in nulla re
alia fiduciam habe; huic morti te totum commit, hac sola tetotum contege,
totum te immisce in hac morte, totum confige, in hac morte totum involue; and
si Dominus Deus voluerit te iudicare, dic: Domine, mortem Domini nostri Jesus
Christi obijcio inter me and iudicium tuum: aliter tecum non contendo; and si
tibi dixerit quia peccator es, dic: Domine, mortem Domini nostri Jesus Christi
pono inter te and peccata mea; si dixerit tibi, quod meruisti damnationem, dic:
Domine, mortem Domini nostri Jesus Christi obtendo inter me and mala merita mea,
ipsiusque mortem offero pro merito, quod ego debuissem habere, nec habeo; si
dixerit, quod tibi est iratus, dic: Domine, mortem Domini nostri Jesus Christi
oppono inter me and iram tuam.

And Ibid p. 292.
Hosius says, the book called Hortulus animae has the same interrogatories;
and that the Franciscan Friars observant, had the same in the frierie at Trent,
translated into Italian, and that he had seen Sacerdotale Romanum, in which
this interrogation is found, Credis non propriis meritis, sed passionis Domini
nostri Jesus Christi virtute et merito, ad gloriam peruenire? Respondet
infirmus, credo: Iterum sacerdos, Credis quod Dominus noster Jesus Christus pro
nostra salute mortuus sit; and quod ex propriis meritis, vel alio modo, nullus
possit saluari, nisi in merito passionis eius? Respondet infirmus credo; Et in
fine dicit sacerdos; si Dominus Deus voluerit te secundum peccata tua iudicare,
dicas: Domine Deus, ego pono mortem Domini nostri Jesus Christi inter me and
iudicium tuum: et quamuis meruerim aeternam mortem propter peccata mea,
interpono tamen meritum passionis eiusdem, loco meriti, quod ego miser habere
deberem and non habeo Item, Domine pono eandem passionem and mortem Domini mei
Jesus Christi inter me et iram tuam, and in manus tuas Domine co^mendo spiritum
meum. Citat: ab Hosio: ibid.
There is extant a certain form of confession attributed to S Bernard, in
which he speaks to God in this sort, Recordare Domine Jesus, quia tuum non est
perdere quicquam eorum, quae Pater tuus dedit tibi: quin tibi proprium est
misereri semper and parcere, neminem perdere sed salvare; nam Pater tuus misit
te in mundum, non vt iudices mundum: sed vt vitam habeamus per te; vt sis
propitiatio nostra, and advocatus noster, non contra nos. Quod enim debuimus,
tu soluisti, quod peccavimus, tu luisti; quod negleximus, tu supplesti;
proficiat ergo nunc Domine, et in extremis meis plenaria, imo superflua
satisfactio, amarissima mors tua, and pretium inaestimabile fusi sanguinis tui,
co^memoratio satisfactionis tuae, etc: Hosius ibid
Ante annos 200, quidam Dominicanus Coloniae, quomodo fore^t aegroti
consolandi, docuit his verbis, Morti jam vicinus, prorsus nihil suis bonis
operibus confidere debet, nec propter mala diffidere: sed omnem spem in merita
Christi, and ejus immensam misericordiam collocare; haec est fides Catholica,
and Christiana, quae neminem fallere potest. So that hitherto we find, the
Church wherein our Fathers lived and died, was a Protestant Church, and that
they were taught to die in the same faith, that we now are.

But some man will say, howsoever these disclaimed all merit, and confidence in
works, as living in bad times, wherein iniquity abounded, and charity was
waxen cold, yet others of a more excellent quality, pleaded their own
righteousness and innocence, desiring to be judged according to the same. So
David Ps. 26. and elsewhere. And so when the Lord had said to Ezechias, set thy
house in order, for thou must die, he turned his face to the wall, and prayed
unto the Lord, and said, Es: 38.
I beseech thee Lord remember, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with
a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And Paul 2. Tim.
4. with more confidence, when his dissolution was at hand, and he was ready to
be offered up, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith, and henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give me in that day. Of
Hilarion Hierom reports, that when he was ready to die, he used these words,
Egredere, quid times, egredere anima mea, quid dubitas, sexaginta annis
seruiuisti Christo, and morte^ times? and in haec verba spiritum exhalauit.

But the answer hereunto is easy, for the divines do note, that there is
justitia causae, facti, personae, a righteousness of some particular cause, of
some particular fact, and of the person. Causae, and so David oftentimes
desired of God, to be judged in the differences, between him and his
adversaries that wronged him, according to his righteousness and innocence in
those quarrels. Of fact, so it is said that Phinees stood up and wrought
vengance, and it was imputed to him for righteousness, that is, he was judged
to have done a righteous act in so doing. The righteousness of the person is
twofold, for there is a righteousness that is sincere, true, and pure; and there
is a righteousness that is true, and sincere, but not pure. None of the Ss ever
pleaded the former kind of righteousness, nor desired to be judged according to
the same. For David in that respect declineth judgment saying, Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for no flesh is righteous in thy sight; and again,
If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who should be
able to abide it? But in the latter sort, they do plead the truth, and
simplicity of their hearts, and the sincerity of the righteousness that is found
in them. And this for 2 reasons, first in that hereby they are assured, that
they pertain to God, that has thus begun to do good unto them, and so confirm
themselves, in the hope and expectation of that they desire, by the
consideration of the good he has already done unto them. And besides also, for
that they know this is the condition, wherewith all the promises of God made
unto them for their good are limited; and therefore if they found not this
they could expect nothing of God, and finding this they need not to doubt to
obtain any thing that is necessary for the^. And in this sort do Cardinal
Contarenus, and Albertus Pighius men of no small esteem in the Roman Church,
clear these objections. So that it remains firm which I have delivered,
that the righteousness which is inherent in the just, is impure and imperfect,
and that it is not safe to rely upon it.

But because this is a matter of great consequence, I will demonstrate, that
the same was taught before, at, and after Luthers time, by men of best place
and quality, in the Church wherein our fathers lived. De verbis Esaiae Vidi
dominum sedentem etc. sermon. 5.
Bernard distinguishes 4 kinds of righteousness. Our righteousness he says is
Recta, sed non pura: of which our Fathers said no less truly then humbly, All
our righteousness is as the poluted rags of a menstruous woman. For how can
our righteousness be pure, wherein it cannot be but there should be sin? The
righteousness of the first man, was both right, and pure, but because it was
not firm and constant, it lost purity, and retained not so much as the
rectitude it had. In the Angels there is righteousness right, pure, and
firm, of an high and excellent nature, but much inferior to that of God. Non
enim innata est iis, sed a Deo collata, ut natura ipsa, quod ex se est, non
modo iustitiae, sed etiam iniustitiae capax inveniatur. Numquid non ista est
pravitas quaedam quam in angelis suis vera illa iustitia legitur invenisse?
That is. The righteousness that is found in the Angels, is not inborne, but
given to them, and bestowed on them: so that their nature, as of it self, is
capable not only of righteousness, but of unrighteousness also. And is not
this a kind of pravity and iniquity, which that true and perfect justice is
said to have found in his Angels? For he that was not ignorant of the justice
of God, says, no one living shall be ivstified in thy sight. He says not, no
man, but no one living, happily that thou may know that he excepteth not the
Angelical spirits. For they live, and so much more truly then men, as they
are nearer to him in whom is the fountain of life. Yet these are just, sed ex
eo non coram eo, munere eius, non in eius comparatione, that is, from him, not
before him, by his gift, but not in comparison with him.

For the clearing of this point Pet. Pomponatius notes, that there is defectus
in specie, defectus in genere, and defectus in latitudine entis, that is,
Things do fail and come short of perfection 3 ways, for there are some things
that want that perfection that pertains to things of their particular kind:
some things that want not that perfection, and yet come short of that, which
some other of the same general kind have: and somethings that have all
perfection, that any thing of their kind any way can have, and yet come short
of that which is found in the latitude and extent of perfection and being.
Examples of the first, ignorance, error, blindness, etc. in men. Of the second,
the want of reason in bruit beasts, which are living creatures as well as men,
and yet come short of that perfection that is found in men; and likewise the
sons of men come short of that perfection of intellectual light, that is
found in the Angels. Of the third in all the most perfect creatures, which come
short of that which is found in God, who is being it self: they are this, and
not that, they have being after not being, and would have not being after
being, if they were left to themselves, they are good, but not connaturally,
they are no less capable of evil then of good, they are good, but mutably
good, and so in respect of GOD, imperfectly good. In this sense Job says, God
found folly in his servants, and vanity in his Angels. This kind of defect or
evil, is without all fault, sin, or blame of things wherein it is found: and
is incident to the nature and condition of all created things, which are
compounded of being and not being, perfection and want: and consequently have
some thing of good, and some thing of evil. That defect that is in respect of
perfections, that other things of the same general kind have, is likewise a
natural consequent of the different degrees of things, and nothing is blamed
for being thus defective. So the righteousness that was in Adam, was inferior
to that of the Angels confirmed in grace, yet was it not sinful.

But the righteousness of the just, comes short of that which pertains to
men. And though it be right, true, sincere, and not dissembled, yet has it
such defects, that it is impure. What may all our righteousness be before God?
will it not be found and esteemed as the Prophet says, to be like the rags
of a menstruous woman, and if it be strictly examined, will not all our
righteousness be found to be unrighteous and defective? What therefore will
become of our sins, when our righteousness is not able to answer for it
self? Therefore crying out earnestly with the Prophet, Lord enter not into
judgment with thy servant, let us with all humility fly to mercy, which only is
able to save our souls. Bernardus super Cantica sermon. 61. Vbi tuta firmaque
infirmis securitas and requies, nisi in vulneribus saluatoris: Tanto illic
securior habito, quanto ille potentior est ad salvandum; fremit mundus, premit
corpus, diabolus insidiatur, nec cado: fundatus enim sum super firmam petram.
Peccavi peccatum grande, turbatur conscientia, sed non perturbabitur, quoniam
vulnerum Domini recordabor. Ego vero fidenter quod ex me mihi deest, vsurpo
mihi ex visceribus Domini, quoniam misericordia effluit, nec desunt foramina
per quae effluat. Ps. 22.
Foderunt manus eius etc. and per has rimas licet mihi sugere mel de petra,
oleumque de saxo durissimo. Cogitabat cogitationes pacis, and ego nesciebam.
Quis enim cognovit sensum Domini, aut quis consiliarius eius fuit? At clauis
^eserans, clavus penetrans factus est mihi, vt videam voluntatem Domini. Meum
meritum, miseratio Domini: non plane sum meriti inops, quamdiu ille
miserationum non fuerit. Nunquid iustitias meas cantabo? Domine memorabor
iustitiae tuae solius: ipsa est enim and mea: nempe factus es tu iustitia mihi
a Deo. Nunquid mihi verendum ne vna ambobus non sufficiat? non est pallium
breve, quod (secundum Prophetam) non possit operire duos. But because happily
some exception may be taken to Saint Bernard, as if he had some singular
opinion, I will show that all the glorious lights of the Church, ever believed
as he did, and as we do. Theodoret in Ps: 23. Quae existimantur
remunerationes, propter solam diuinam benignitatem hominibus praebentur. Omnes
enim hominum iustitiae, nihil sunt ad dona, quae a Deo nobis suppeditata sunt,
nedum ad futura munera, quae omnem humanam cogitationem transcendunt. Chrysostom:
in Ps. 4. Etiamsi innumerabilia recte fecerimus a miserationibus and clementia
audimur. Etiamsi ad ipsum virtutis fastigium pervenerimus, servamur a
misericordia. Et in Ps. 6. super illa verba, Miserere mei Domine quoniam
infirmus sum. Hac voce omnes egemus, etiamsi innumerabilia recte and ex virtute
fecerimus, and vel ad summam peruenerimus iustitiam.

August: in Ps. 142. Omnes dereliquistis me dicit Dominus: quid vultis mecum in
iudicium intrare, and vestras iustitias commemorare? Commemorate iustitias
vestras; ego novi facinora vestra. Nolo tecum habere causam, vt ego proponam
iustitiam meam, tu convincas iniquitatem meam. Ne intres in iudicium cum servo
tuo, Quare hoc? Quare times? Quoniam non iustificabitur coram te omnis viuens.
Omnis itaque viuens iustificare forte potest se, coram se, non coram te.
Quomodo coram se? sibi placens, tibi displicens, coram te aute^ non
iustificabitur omnis vivens. Quantumlibet rectus mihi videar, producis tu de
thesauro tuo regula^, coaptas me ad ea^ et pravus invenior.

Grego: moral: vlt. Si autem de his diuinitus districte discutimur: quis inter
ista remanet salutis locus, quando and mala nostra pura mala sunt; and bona
quae nos habere credimus, pura bona esse nequaquam possunt? Beda in
explicatione Ps. 24. Ne memineris delicta, sed potius memento mei Domine, ut
miserearis secundum misericordiam tuam, id est, te condignam, non secundum iram
me condignam; tu dico ad quem pertinet, qui solus misereris, solus mederis,
solus peccata dimittis; and hoc non facias propter merita mea, sed propter
bonitatem, id est suavitatem tuam. Et in Ps. 31. Beati quorum remissae sunt
iniquitates, etc. Instruit videlicet, vt nemo vel libertatem arbitrii vel
merita sua sufficere sibi ad beatitudinem credat, sed sola gratia Dei se
salvari posse intelligat. Alcuinus in Ps. 50. Sordidare me potui, sed emundare
nequeo, nisi tu Domine Jesus sancti sanguinis tui aspersione, mundum me facias.
Et in Ps. 142. Ad meum cum respicio nihil aliud in me nisi peccatum invenio,
tota liberatio mea tua est iustitia, item, Dei miseratione in nomine
salvatoris, non nostris meritis vivificati sumus.

Radulphus Ardens, homil: super Evangelium Dominicae quartae Adventus. Quid
ergo dicemus fratres, nisi vel quantumcunque bonum fecerimus, semper nos
indignos dicamus? Nec hoc dicamus solo ore, quasi mentiendo ex humilitate, sed
mente credamus, ore confiteamur. Iuxta quod ipsa veritas admonet, dicens. Cum
omnia feceritis quae praecepta sunt vobis, dicite, servi invtiles sumus, quod
debuimus facere non fecimus. Et Homil: super Evang. Dominicae Septuagesimae.
Sicut Deus est liber ad promittendum, ita est liber ad reddendum, praesertim
cum tam merita quam praemia sint gratia sua. Nihil enim aliud quam gratiam suam
coronat in nobis Deus, qui si vellet in nobis agere districte, non
iustificaretur in conspectu eius omnis viuens. Vnde Apostolus qui plus omnibus
laboravit, dicit: Existimo quod non sunt condignae passiones huius temporis,
etc.

Gerson de consolat: theolog: l. 4. pros. 1. Quis gloriabitur se mundum cor
habere? etc: Quis non constitutus sub iudicijs Dei terribilis in consilijs suis
super filios hominum trepidaverit? Hinc afflictus Job, verebar omnia opera mea,
etc. Et iterum, Si voluerit mecum contendere, non potero vnum respondere pro
mill; cui conformis est oration prophetica, Non intres in iudicium cum seruo
tuo Domine, quia non iustificabitur in conspectu tuo omnis vivens; and rursus,
Si iniquitates observaveris Domine, Domine quis sustinebit. Porro quid Esaias
se cum caeteris involuens sibique vilescens protulerit legimus, Omnes iustitiae
nostrae tanquam pannus menstruatae. Quis igitur iustitias suas velut
gloriabundus ostentaverit Deo, plus quam pannum confusionis suae mulier viro?

Gabriel Biel writing upon the Canon of the Mass fol. 209. lect. 82.
Alleges and approves this saying of Bernard sermon. 5. de dedicatione
ecclesiae; Nonnunquam de anima mea cogitans, videor mihi in ea fateor velut duo
contraria invenire; si ipsam prout in se est, and ex se intueor, nihil de ea
verius sentire possum, quam ad nihilum esse redactam, cum sit onerata peccatis,
obfusa tenebris, irretita illecebris, pruriens concupiscentiis, obnoxia
passionibus, and impleta illusionibus, prona semper ad malum, and in vitium
omne proclivis, etc: nimirum si ipsae quoque iusticiae nostrae omnes ad lumen
veritatis inspectae, velut pannus menstruatae inveniuntur, iniustitiae quales
deinceps reputabuntur? si lumen quod in nobis est tenebrae sunt, ipsae tenebrae
qnantae erunt? Facile cuique est si sua before vniversa, and sine
dissimulatione vestiget, and judicet sine acceptione personae, attestari per
omnia apostolicae veritati, and libere proclamare, qui se putat aliquid esse
cum nihil sit, ipse se seducit. Quid est homo quia magnificas eum, ait fidelis
and devota confessio; aut quid apponis erga eum cor tuum? Quid? sine dubio
vanitati similis Gal. 9. Job. 7.
factus est homo; ad nihilum redactus est homo; nihil est homo; Quomodo tamen
penitus nihil est, quem magnificat Deus? Quomodo nihil erga quem appositum est
cor divinum. Tanquam nihil reputatur homo in judicio veritatis tuae, sed non
sic in affectu pietatis tuae; nimirum vocas ea quae non sunt, sicut ea quae
sunt: and non sunt, ergo quia vocas ea quae non sunt: and sunt, quia vocas:
licet enim non sunt quantum apud se, apud te sunt vtique juxta Apostolum; non
ex operibus, sed ex vocante. Sic nimirum consolaris in tua pitate, quem in
veritate tua humiliasti; vt magnifice dilatetur in tuis qui merito angustiatur
in suis: siquidem vniversae viae domini misericordia and veritas requirentibus
testamentum tuum and testimonia tua Pupperus Gocchianus de liberate Christ.
part. 3. c. 12, Christus sic operatur iustificationem in sanctis suis, quamdiu
sunt in hac vita, vt tamen semper in ijs sit aliquid adijciendum, quod
petentibus benign adijciat, and confitentibus misericorditer ignoscat. And the
same Gocchianus has many things against the merit of works, as I will farther
show, when I come to speak of merit.

But to leave particular men, it is evident that the Church of God taught so as
we now do, by those questions whereof I spoke before, which were wont to be
proposed to men that were ready to dye. Casper Vlenbergius says, our Fathers
thoroughout the Christian world, even till our time, by those questions by them
used, and the answers which they taught men to make to them, lead as it were
by the hand the simpler sort to the knowledge of Christ, and the attaining of
eternal salvation. And because those questions and answers, contain and
comprise in a brief sort, the whole sum of the doctrine of salvation, and
the very marrow and kernel of Christianity, as the same Vlenbergius rightly
notes, I will set them down together, as they are found in the book
entitled De art been moriendi. Primo quaeratur sic, frater laetaris quod in
fide Christi morieris? respondeat etiam. Frater poenitet te non tam been
vixisse sicut debuisses? respondeat etiam. Frater habes emendandi animum si
spatium vivendi haberes? respondeat etiam. Frater credis te non posse nisi per
mortem Christi salvari? respondeat etiam. Agis ei gratias ex toto cord de hoc?
respondeat etiam. Age ergo dum est in te anima tua ei semper gratias, and in
hac ejus morte te totum contege, in hac sola morte fiduciam tuam constitue, in
nulla alia re fiduciam habe, huic morti te totum commit, hac sola te totum
contege, totum immisce te in hac morte totum confige, in hac morte te totum
involve, and si Dominus Deus te voluerit judicare, dic, Domine, mortem Domini
mei IESV CHRISTI objicio inter te and me, and judicium tuum, aliter tecum non
contendo; si dixerit quod mereris damnationem, dic, mortem Domini mei IESV
CHRISTI objicio inter te and me, and mala merita mea, ipsumque dignissimae
passionis meritum offero, pro merito quod ego habere debuissem, and heu non
habeo; dicatur iterum. Domine, mortem Domini mei IESV CHRISTI pono inter me,
and iram tuam: deinde dicat ter, In manus tuas Domine commendo spiritum meum.

And as this was the doctrine of the Church even till our days, so in Luthers
time, and after, many that joined not with him in the thorough reformation of
the Church, yet concurred with him in this point. Pope In 4. sent. de sacram.
Euchar. ^ol. 61.
Adrian the sixth, Non sine magna temeritate, and damnabili elatione animi, quis
innititur propriis meritis, aut praeparationi per confessionem oris, cordis
compunctionem, aut alias tanquam ex ijs dignus sit, venerabile Sacramentum
Eucharistiae sumere; sunt enim merita nostra and praeparatio, velut baculus
arundineus, cui dum quis innixus fuerit confringitur, and perforat manum
innitentis, and quasi pannus menstruatae sunt omnes justitiae nostrae, ut
habetur Esa. 64: Iugiter enim supra pannum bonae vitae, quem justitiae operibus
reximus, stillamus saniem diversorum criminum. Quae igitur ex ijs poterit esse
fiducia ad Deum, qui neminem diligit nisi ex toto cord conversum? Recte igitur
suasit salvator cum feceritis omnia quae praecepta sunt vobis, dicite servi
inutiles sumus, quae debuimus facere fecimus, Luc. 16. etc. Restat igitur ut
nemo confidat in se homine, quia sic recedit cor ejus a Deo. Hierem. 17.
Maledictus qui confidit in homine, and ponit carnem brachium suum, etc: sed pro
digna praeparatione, diffidat de omni sua industria, and cum Daniele non in
suis justificationibus proferat preces suas, sed in miserationibus domini
multis and magnis nimis Dan: 9. sic habitabit in adjutorio altissimi, and in
protectione Dei coeli commorabitur: quia ad neminem Deus aspicit, nisiad
pauperculum, id est, humilem spiritu, qui se non effert in cogitatione velut
taurus, sed parua de se sentiens, totum projicit in Deum: Es: vlt. Ad quem
aspiciam nisi ad pauperculum?

The Fol. 138.
Enchiridion of Christian institution, published in the provincial council of
Colen, has these words. Scimus quandam esse plenam and absolutam justiciam,
seu charitatem, quam in hac vita nemo assequitur, sed tantum in futura, quando
videbimus facie ad facie^, and cognoscemus sicuticogniti sumus: sed alia minor
est huic vitae competens, qua ex fide viuimus and ambulamus. Haec etsi omnes
motus terrenae cupiditatis, nondum omnino absorbeat atque consumat, consensum
tamen prohibet ac extinguit, ac insuper facit, vt magis ac magis in bono
proficere pergamus: quae etsi a perfectione iusticiae long adhuc absit, ea
tamen imperfectio iustificationem nostram non remoratur, nec accusationi seu
damnationi legis subjacet, saltem in ijs qui sunt in Christo Jesus. Nam qui
Christo (in quo lex quod accusaret, nihil inuenit) per fidem concorpores facti
sunt, legis imperium beneficio Christi euaserunt: adeo vt, silex imperfectionem
eorum accusare pergat, respondere possint. Quid nobis tecum est lex? non tui
sed alterius sumus. Tu quae es quae judicas seruos alienos? domino nostro
stamus aut cadimus, huic sic visum est ex gratuita misericordia nos indignos
assumere, and quicquid in nobis imperfectionis est co^donare, quid ad te? Quid
nobis alienu^ inuides beneficiu^? Recepit nos ille in membra sua, scuto suae
bonae voluntatis protexit nos, sua justitia nos induit. Qua^obrem si nos
impetere pergas, eum tibi opponemus, cui per fidem inhaerescimus, in eo certe
non habes quicquam, proinde nec in nobis, qui de corpore ejus per gratuitam
misericordiam facti sumus. Fol. 138.
Et ibid. paulo ante. Per fidem donum iustificationis tunc demum accipis, cum
perterrefactus ac concussus in poenitentia, rursus erigeris per fidem, credens
tibi remissa esse peccata propter meritum Christi, qui in se credentibus
remissionem peccatorum pollicitus est: and cum simul sentis te jam alio affectu
quam prius rapi, hoc est, eo affectu quo peccata quae prius delectabant, jam ex
animo odis, and ad faciendum bonum, carnis infirmitati fortiter repugnans,
intus accenderis, tametsi is affectus nondum sit in bono perfectus and
absolutus. Hanc enim imperfectionem quam viribus tuis supplere non potes,
supplebis ex fide in Christum, credens justitiam Christi (cujus membrum factus
es) tuum imperfectum suppleturam, si tamen perpetuo pro viribus quas tibi
dominus suppeditauerit, coneris eam quam accepisti gratiam promouere, and
praeteritorum oblitus, non respiciens iterum retro, in anteriora te extendere
annitaris.

Martinus De certitudine salutss.
Eisengreinius, alleges and allows this of the council of Colen, and
sundry other passages of learned and renowned men, in the latter ages of the
Church before our time, tending to the same purpose, as namely those things I
formerly cited out of Anselme and Hortulus animae: to these Page 500.
he adds Thaulerus a famous preacher amongst the Dominicans at Colen more
then two hundred years since, who prescribing how the Pastors should comfort
the sick, has these words, Morti jam vicinus, prorsus nihil suis bonis
operibus confidere debet, firma fiducia in meritum Christi saluatoris, and in
abyssum maris ejus misericordiae, in cruenta vulnera ejus, cum omnibus suis
peccatis se totum immergat: minutissima Christi vulnera omne peccatum mortalium
obnubilare ac tegere possunt.

And with him he joyneth Ludovicus Berus, who in his book de mortis periculo x
Page 463.
writes thus. The devil is wont to tempt men that are ready to die, but let
the sick man reject all those temptations, and let him invoke God and say
thus Auerte faciem tuam a peccatis meis, and respice in faciem Christi tui Jesus
saluatoris nostri. Tentator; Scelera tua superant arenam maris. Aegrotus.
Copiosior est Domini misericordia. Tentator. Quomodo speras iustitiae praemium
tu totus iniustus? Aegrotus. Iustitia mea Christus est. Tentator. Tu sceleribus
opertus quomodo migrabis in requiem? Aegrotus. Cum latrone qui audiuit in cruce
hodie eris mecum in Paradiso. Tentator. Vnde ista fiducia qui nihil boni
feceris? Aegrotus. Quia bonum habeo Dominum, exorabilem iudicem, gratiosum
advocatum, Christum Iesum omnipotentem saluatorem. Tentator. Detraheris in
tartara. Aegrotus. Caput meum in coelo est.

In confutatione Prolegomenon Brent^l. 5. in fine.
Hosius has these words, Non gloriamur de meritis nostris, non habemus in
illis fiduciam nostram collocatam, de hoc solo gloriamur, in hoc solo
confidimus, quod membra sumus illius corporis tui, quod pro nobis passum,
crucifixum, and mortuum, abunde pro peccatis totius mundi satisfecit. Quamobrem
si merita requiris, ecce proferimus tibi merita corporis tui, quod cum de
nostro sit, nostra sunt and illius merita: proferimus tibi meritum passionis
tuae, ineritum crucis tuae, meritum mortis tuae: haec sunt merita nostra, quae
tu clementissime Domine nobiscum pro immensa benignitate tua communicare
dignatus es: Secundum haec merita abs te iudicari postulamus, his meritis freti
coram tribunali tuo nos intrepidisistimus: nostra sunt quia nostri sunt
capitis; nostra sunt quia nostri sunt corporis, a quo nos nefario schismate
nunquam praecidimus: haec merita interponimus inter nos and iudicium tuum,
aliter tecum iudicio contendere nolumus: de quo solenniter protestamur. These
words of Hosius, Eisengreinius says, are worthy to be written in letters of
gold. c page 475.


In fide and Iustific. fol. 45.
Albertus Pighius writes thus, In hominibus duplex considerari potest
iustitia, sicut duplex invenitur regula cui conformari debeant: altera qua
iusti sunt coram hominibus, aut inter homines, nempe respondentes legibus
quibus constat iustum inter homines; vt neminem afficientes iniuria, imo
benevolentia, humilitatis, charitatisque officijs prosequentes proximos,
omnibus in omni ordine, reddentes quod suum est. Altera est iustitia qua iusti
sunt coram Deo. Quod tamen trifariam fere intelligere possumus. Vel quod nostra
iustitia, cum divina conferatur. Sic non iustificatur in conspectu eius vlla
creatura: vt cuius puritate, merito inquinantur omnia. Velintelligitur homo
iustificari coram Deo, hoc est coram tribunali diuini iudicij, dum regulae
divinae iustitiae, qua part ipsum respicit, exact respondet. Regula est lex:
illa^ dupliciter intelligere possumus, vel in sua illa absoluta perfectione; Vt
cum praecipitur vt diligamus Deum, ex tota anima, tota mente, totis viribus,
page 46.
Vel prout illa ipsa divinae iustitiae lex and regula nos respiciens, nostrae
infirmitati aptata condescendit and convenit. Si hoc modo intelligas, ex
voluntatis humanae inconstantia, and inclinatione quadam ad carnis sui hospitis
amica and desideria, quae ab illa lege diuinae iustitiae nos deflectere, and ad
se attrahere, ac sollicitare nunquam cessat, adhuc invenire non est iustum
quenquam coram Deo inter filios Adae, sed verum reperietur etiam de hac ipsa
quamvis imperfecta iustitia, quod non iustificabitur in conspectu Dei omnis
vivens; Siquidem iustitia haec, est ad suam regulam, etiam nostrae infirmitati
attemperatam exacta correspondentia, and commensuratio in actionibus nostris
omnibus. Totum enim vniuersumque hominem denominans iustitia haec, secundum
omnes eius parts, and omnes singularum partium actiones, vt illi regulae suae
correspondeat, and in officio suo constet necesse est, cuicunque haec iustitia
convenit. Neque enim qui partem vnam aliquam legis seruauerit, praevaricator in
caeteris, hic iustus est. Imo: Quicunque (inquit Iacobus) totam legem
servauerit, offendit autem in vno, factus est omnium reus. Si dixerimus quoniam
peccatum non habemus, etc. Christus omnes nos neminem quantumvis iustum
excipiens docuit orare, Di^ nobis debita etc. Aversatur Deus omnem iniustitiam.
Constat ergo quae de nobis omnibus foret sententia, si Deus voluisset districto
nobiscum judicio agere: si non misericordissime nobis succurrisset in filio:
and nostra justitia vacuos, ejus involuisset justitia. Quod verissime
intellexit ille, qui ait: Si iniquitates observaveris Domine, Domine quis
sustinebit? Ne intres in judicium, etc. Fol. 47.
In Christi autem obedientia, quod nostra collocatur justitia; inde est, quod
nobis illi incorporatis, ac si nostra esset accepta ea fertur: ita ut ea ipsa,
etiam nos justi habeamur. Et velut ille quondam Jacob, cum nativitate
primogenitus non esset, sub habitu fratris occultatus, atque eius vest
indutus, quae odorem optimum spirabat, seipsum insinuavit Patri, ut sub aliena
persona benedictione^ primogeniturae acciperet. Ita and nos, sub Christi
primogeniti fratris nostri preciosa puritate delitescere, bono eius odore
fragrare, eius perfectione, vitia nostra sepeliri, and obtegi, atque ita nos
piissimo patri ingerere, ut iustitiae benedictionem, ab eodem assequamur
necesse est. This of Pighius is acknowledged by our adversaries, and they are
wont to allege his example, to show how dangerous it is to read the writings
of Protestants, seeing a man so well grounded as he was; was drawn into this
opinion by reading of Calvin.

The most reverend Canons of the Metropoliticall Church of Colein, in their
antididagma opposed against the book of reformation of Religion, intended by
their Archbishop Hermannus, follow the same opinion that Pighius does, their
words are these. Fol. 30.
Iustificamur a Deo justitia duplici, tanquam per causas formales and
essentiales. Quarum una and prior est consummata Christi justitia: non quidem
quomodo extra nos in ipso est, sed sicut and quando eadem nobis (dum tamen fide
apprehenditur) ad iustitiam imputatur. Aliter vero iustificamur formaliter per
iustitiam inhaerentem. Cu^ tamen inhaerenti iustitiae (quod sit imperfecta) non
innitimur principaliter: sed ea tanquam interiori quodam experimento,
certificamur, nobis (qui talem renovationem spiritus nostri, in nobis sentimus
and experimur) remissionem peccatorum factam, and Christi consummatam iustitiam
nobis imputari, atque ita Christum per fidem in nobis habitare. Non ignoramus
nos nulli alii merito praeterquam solius Christi, neque item ulli alii
iustitiae, quam iustitiae Christi, sine qua omnino nulla est iustitia, tanquam
fundamento fidei nostrae inniti debere. Quanquam oporteat nos interim, internae
illius renovationis, quae fit per charitatem, quam spiritus sanctus in corda
nostra diffundit, tanquam arrabonis, aut certe experientiae impetratae
remissionis peccatorum, and imputationis justitiae Christi, rationem habere.

Apud Goldast. constit. imper. tom. 2.
The book commended to Charles the fifth, as opening a way for the composing
of the controversies in Religion then moved, and by him offered and recommended
to the Divines, appointed of both sides in the assembly at Ratisbon, for to
confer about the composing of the differences in Religion, clearly
contains the same doctrine that the most reverend Canons of Colein delivered
before. For in the 5 Article of the same book, the Authors and composers of
it, amongst other good things communicated to us in our Justification, reckon
the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and say, that we are said to be
justified by faith, that is, accepted and reconciled unto God, in that it
apprehends mercy, and the righteousness that is imputed to us for Christ's
sake and his merit, and not for the dignity and perfection of the
righteousness which is communicated unto us in Christ; And farther they say,
that the faithful soul does not rely upon that righteousness that is
inherent in it, but upon the only righteousness of Christ given unto us,
without which there neither is, nor can be any righteousness. And they add
hereunto, that they that truly repent of their sins, should most firmly, and
with great assurance of faith, resolve, that they please God for Christ's sake,
who is a Mediator between God and them, because he is a worker of
propitiation, a High Priest, and an Intercessour for us, whom the Father has
given unto us, and all good things together with him. And therefore though they
say not, as the Canons of Colen, that Christ's righteousness is the formal
cause of our justification: yet Lib. 7. c. 21.
Vega thinks they followed the same opinion, because besides inherent
righteousness, they affirm that another righteousness, namely that of Christ,
is communicated to us, by which especially we are made righteous, and upon
which only we must rely.

The Interim published by Charles the 5, with the assent of the imperial
states, delivers the same touching justification, that the former authors
have done. And the divines of both sides in the conference at Ratisbon, agreed
in the same explication of the article of justification that we have hitherto
delivered.

A great contention there is and has been, whether the righteousness of
Christ imputed to us, be the formal cause of our justification, and whether
we be formally justified by his imputed righteousness or not. But Lib. 7. c.
23.
Andraeas Vega supposes, that it is a mere logomachie, and verbal
contention; which his conjecture I think will be found more then probable. For
as I have already showed, in the justification of a sinner three things are
employed. 1 To be free from dislike, disfavor, and punishment, as if he had
never offended. Secondly, to be respected, favored, and indeared unto God, in
such sort as righteous men are wont to be, as if he had done all righteousness.
And thirdly To have the grant of the gift of righteousness, to keep from
evil, and incline him to good in the time to come. All these denominations are
respective, and a man may be so denominated from something without. For one man
is reconciled to another, in that he no longer intends evil unto him: and
one man is dear unto another, and we are dear unto God formally, by that love
whereby we are beloved of him. And because that which gives satisfaction to
God, and that which makes him well pleased toward us, is that for which
formally, or in respect whereof, God wills our good and not evil; by both
these we may be said though in a different sort, to be formally justified.
Wherefore having sufficiently cleared the point of controversy, touching the
first justifying, and reconciling of a sinner to God, and made it appear, that
the Church ever believed as we now do; it remains that we speak of the
second justification.

The second justification consists, in the 1. John 1. If we say we have ^o
sin we deceive our selves etc. but if we confess our sins, God is
faithful and just to remit unto us our sins, and to cleanse us ^om all
iniquity; this perpetuali wishing away of sins Christ sign^fied lotione pedum.
remission of such sins, as the justified man daily through infirmity falls
into, and the progress and going on in well doing, and the daily prevailing
against sin, whereby the kingdom of sin is weakened, and the kingdom of
grace and righteousness is confirmed, and more strongly established in us.
Touching the second justification, there is no difference between us and them
that so delivered the doctrine of the first justification, as I have before
expressed, but between the Romanists and us, there are sundry things
co^trouerted. For 1 t many of the^, deny the venial sins into which the
regenerate do fall, to be properly sins, and therefore think not aright of the
remission of the^. 2^ They imagine, that sundry external obseruatio^s ex opere
oper^to give grace, and remit those sins, whereas in truth, and in the opinion
of others, they avail no otherwise, then they stir up devotion, and raise in
us good motions and desires, to purge out the remains of sin, and to seek
the remission of it. Thirdly, they make the good works of men justified, to
deserve increase of grace, and the reward of eternal life, of condignity. But
I will show in that which follows, that the doctrine of merit was never
admitted in the Church, neither before, nor after Luthers time. In this
justification, men are justified merely by faith as in the first, so far
forth as it imports remission of sins: but in that it imports an increase,
confirmation, and growth in that good that is begun in us: our working of
virtue and good endeavors causing the same, may be said to justify, that is,
to make us more just inhere^tly then before, and more strongly inclined to
good; in which sense S. John says, Qui iustus est iustificetur adhuc.

The third kind of justification, which is said to be the restoring of men
once justified, and afterward fallen from grace, to the state of grace again,
is merely imaginary. For they that are called according to purpose and so
justified, do never totally nor finally fall from God.

The sins which men run into, I have elsewhere showed to be of 2 sorts:
Inhabiting only, or Reigning: the former in the judgment of our adversaries
themselves, do stand with grace, and the state of justification. Sins regnant
are (as Theodoret writing upon the sixth to the Romans, and after him, others do
rightly note) of 2 sorts: for either they reign as a tyrant, or as a king: a
king reigns with the love and liking of his subjects, who wish nothing more
then to live under him, and think there is no happiness but in his slavery: a
tyrant with dislike. They that are justified and called acording to purpose,
never have sin reigning in them as a king, but sometimes as a tyrant they have.
Hugo de sancto victore de sacramentis fidei l. 2. part. 13. c. 12. sed dicunt.
si David peccando charitatem amisit: quomodo ergo verum est, quoth scriptum est de
ipso, quod spiritus Domini non recedebat a David, ab eo die and de inceps? Si
enim charitas recessit: quomodo spiritus Domini remansit? Quasi vero spiritus
domini secu^du^ multa alia remanere non potuerit, etiamsi secundum donum
charitatis recesserit. Nonne and in illis sieve cum illis remanet, quos cadentes
custodit ne pereant: quos tamen stantes non custodit ne cadant? Iustus cum
ceciderit non collidetur: qiua Dominus supponit manum suam.
For though David and Peter were strangely transported, with the violent
passions of fear and lust, yet who will ever think, that these lost all their
former good affections toward God, and thought it their happiness to be subject
to his enemies? Nay it is clearly delivered concerning Peter, by Theophylact,
and sundry others, that though the leaves were shaken off, yet the root
remained vnmarred.

Justification likewise, as I have showed in the same place, imports 2
things, An interest, right, and title to the kingdom of heaven, and a claim
to it by virtue and force of the same right and title: the one of these may
cease and be suspended, when the other remains. If a man that has much due
unto him upon good assurances, do some act for which he is excommunicated, or
outlawed, he loses not the title and right he had to the things due unto him
upon those assura^ces, but if the same things be detained, all prosecution of
his right is suspe^ded, and all actual claim cease, during the time he
continues in that estate. So in like manner, if a man called according to
purpose and justified, who can never finally fall from God, fall into grievous
sin, and such as is in some sort regnant, as David did, he loses not the
right and title he formerly had: but the actual claim to that whereto he
has title is suspended. So that he falls not totally from justification, but
so only as for the present to have no actual claim to any thing by virtue o^
it. The remission of his original sin, the right to heaven obtained in
baptism, the force and virtue of repentance of former sins, and the right to
the rewards of actions of virtue formerly done, remain still: neither needs
he newly to seek remission of sins formerly remitted, but of this only, and
the remission of the other will be revived again, and he may make claim to all
those things he had formerly right unto, by virtue of the former right. This is
clearly delivered by Alexander of Ales p. 4. q. 12. memb. 4. art. 6. In 4.
sent. did. 22. q. 1. art. 2.
Scotus, In 4. senten. d. 22. q. 1.
Durandus; and the rest of the Schoolmen. So that the elect and chose^ of God
once justified, never falling totally from justification, are never to be newly
justified again: but the daily and lighter sins they run into, stand with the
right they have to the favors of God, and eternal happiness, and the actual
claim to the same by that right. The more grievous deprive the^ of the claim
only, and not of the right; and when they are justified and acquitted from
these by particular repentance, they are restored to their former claim only,
having never lost their right; so that they cannot properly be said to be newly
justified, but only to be justified from such particular sins, as they newly
run into.

Having spoken of justification and the nature of it, as it is considered in it
self; it remains that we come to speak of the things required in men, for
the disposing and fitting of them, that they may be capable of this grace.
There were amongst the Schoolmen, as St. de. justific. l. 2. c. 4.
Stapleton tells us, and after them in the beginning of these controversies
in religion, who extenuating the corruption of nature, taught unadvisedly, that
men without and before the motions of grace, may do certain moral good
works, in such sort, as thereby to fit themselves, for the receipt of the
grace of justification, and to merit it ex congruo. Who to express this their
false conceit, were wont to say, facienti quod in se est, Deum non denegare
gratiam, that is, that God will not fail to give grace, to such as do the
uttermost that lies in them. But the same Stapleton tells us, that the more
sound and judicious ever taught, that there is no power nor will in man to
dispose and fit himself, for the receipt of this grace, unless he be moved
by preventing grace, stirring, inciting, and inclining him to turn to God; and
that the merit of congruence, has been long since hissed out of all Schools.

Touching these preparations wrought in men by preventing grace. First it is
agreed between those of the Church of Rome, and those of the reformed
Religion, that faith to believe in general the truth of things revealed and
contained in Scripture, is necessary in the first place, and before all other
things. Secondly, that in particular there must be a viewing of the things
there found; that the consideration of man's original state there described,
the fall, corruption of nature, and manifold sinful evils into which each man
is plunged, together with the apprehension of Gods displeasure against the
same, is necessarily required. Thirdly, a fear and sorrow, growing out of the
discerning of this unhappy condition wherein we are. Fourthly, an inquiry by
what means we may escape out of these evils. Fifthly, faith to believe, that
God most inclinable to relieve us, rather then man should utterly perish, sent
his own Son into the world, to suffer the punishment of sin, to satisfy his
justice, to bring grace, and dissolve the works of the devil; that so all
that in sense of former evils, fly to him for mercy and deliverance, may
escape and be saved. Sixthly, having found so happy means of escape, a flying
unto God, in earnest desire to be received to mercy for Christ's sake, to be
freed from the guilt of sin, to be reconciled to God, and to have grace to
decline evil, and do good in the time to come. All these things in the
judgment of the Divines of both sides, are necessarily required, in them that
are to be justified.

The most reverend Canons of the Metropoliticall Church of Colen, in the book
called Antididagma Coloniense, make the things required in them, on whom the
benefit of justification is bestowed, to be of two sorts. For there are some
that only dispose and prepare us, other by which we receive the same. Of the
former sort is the general persuasion of faith, touching the truth of things
in Scripture; the particular consideration of things concerning the knowledge
of God, and our selves; sorrow, fear, dislike of our present estate, desire to
be delivered out of it, to be reconciled to God, and to have grace to decline
evil and do good. Of the latter sort is the persuasion of faith, whereby we
assure our selves without doubting, that God will not impute our sins unto us,
that thus penitently turn unto him, but that the course of his mercies now and
ever, shall be turned toward us for his Son Christ's sake,

This is that special faith, they of the reformed Religion speak of, and the
Romanists seem so much to dislike: whereas yet the best and most judicious
amongst them, ever did, and still do admit the same. Andraeas Vega l. 9. c. 7.
says, that there has been a great controversy about this matter, not only
between Catholics, and such as they esteem heretics, but even amongst the
most learned Catholics of this age, at Rome, at Trent, at Ratisbone, and in
sundry other places: many affirming that a man without special revelation, may
undoubtedly believe, and certainly assure himself, that he is in grace, and
has obtained remission of all his sins. This persuasion rising as a
conclusion out of, In that God ^ath promised r^ssion to all that truly turn,
and he finds his heart to be so turn^d.
two propositions, the one of faith, the other evident unto us in our own
experience, is a persuasion of faith; because whenever a conclusion is
consequent upon two propositions, the one of faith, the other evident in the
light of reason and experience, it is to be believed by faith, or as John
Bacon, certitudine consequente fidem. This opinion, as L. 9. c 36.
Vega tells us, Considerat. 2. ult. cap. 2. ad Tim.
Claudius Belliiocensis followed, in his Commentaries upon Timothy: And the
most reverend Canons of the Metropoliticall Church of Colen, together with the
Authors of the Enchiridion of Christian Religion, published in the Provincial
Council of Colen under Hermannus, so much esteemed (as Consult. art. 4.
Cassander tells us) in Italy, and France; The Authors of the book offered
by Charles the 5, to the Divines of both sides; And as some say, Hieron.
Angestus.

But for the better clearing of this point, First I will produce the
testimonies of such as lived before Luthers time. Secondly, I will make it
appear, that the same truth was defended after Luthers time, till the
Council and after. Origin writing upon those words, Romans 8. Ipse spiritus
testimonium perhibet spiritui nostro etc: writes thus, Ipse spiritus
adoptionis per quem in filiu^ quis adoptatur, reddit testimonium and confirmat
spiritum nostrum, quod sumus filij Dei, posteaquam a spiritu seruitutis in
adoptionis spiritum venerimus, cum jam nihil inest timoris, id est, nihil
propter poenam gerimus, sed propter amorem patris cuncta perficimus.

Cyprianus ad Demetrianum has these words, Viget apud nos spei robur and
firmitas fidei, and inter ipsas saeculi labentis ruinas erecta men's est, and
immobilis virtus, and de Deo suo semper anima secura. De coena Domini; An ma se
sanatam et sanctificatam agnoscens, fletibus se abluit, and lachrymis se
baptizat. De mortalitate; Quis hic anxietatis et sollicitudinis locus est? Quis
inter haec trepidus and maestus est, nisi cui spes and fides deest? Ejus enim
est mortem timere, qui ad Christum nolit ire: eius est ad Christum nolle ire,
qui se non credat cum Christo incipere regnare. Scriptum est enim, justum fide
vivere, si justus es and fide vivis, si vere in Deum credis, cur non cum
Christo futurus, et de Domini pollicitatione securus, quod ad Christum voceris
amplecteris? And again in the same place; Deus de hoc mundo recedenti tibi
immortalitatem atque aeternitatem pollicetur, and tu dubitas? Hoc est Deum
omnino non nosse; hoc est Christum credentium Dominum et magistrum, peccato
incredulitatis offendere; hoc est in ecclesia constitutum, fidem in domo fidei
non habere.

Ambrose sermon. 5. writes thus; Quisquis illi fermento Christi adhaerescit,
efficitur and ipse fermentum, tam sibi vtilis, quam idoneus vniuersis, and de
sua certus salute, and de aliorum acquisitione securus. And S. Chrysostom
writing upon those words Romans 8. Ipse spiritus etc. affirms, that from the
testimony of the spirit we have such certainety, as leaves no place for
doubting.

Augustine sermon. 28. de verbis Domini; O homo faciem tuam non audebas ad coelum
attollere, oculos tuos in terram dirigebas, et subito accepisti gratiam
Christi. Omnia tibi peccata dimissa sunt. Ex malo seruo factus es bonus filius.
Ideo praesume non de operatione tua sed de Christi gratia. Non ergo hic
arrogantia est sed fides: praedicare quod acceperis non est superbia sed
devotio. Ergo attolle oculos ad patre^, qui te per lauachrum genuit, ad patre^
qui per filium te redemit, and dic, Pater noster etc. And in his 22 tract, upon
John; 'Credo promittenti, saluator loquitur, veritas pollicetur, ipse dixit
mihi, Qui audit verba mea, and credit ei qui misit me, habet vitam aeternam, et
transitum facit de morte in vitam, and in judiciu^ non veniet: ego audiui verba
Domini mei, credidi. I am infidelis cum essem, factus sum fidelis, sicut ipse
monuit, transij a morte ad vitam, ad judicium non venio, non praesumptione mea,
sed ipsius promissione. In Ps. 149. Est quidam modus in conscientia gloriandi,
vt noueris fidem tuam esse sinceram, noveris esse spem tuam certa^, noveris
charitatem tuam esse sine simulatione. Ser. 6. de verbis Apostoli; Ex ipsa
dilectione justitiae, integra fide, catholica fide, spiritu^ Dei nobis inesse
cognoscimus. Trac. 75. in Joan. In illo die, inquit, vos cognoscetis, quia ego
in patre, and vos in me, and ego in vobis. In quo die; nisi de quo ait, and vos
viuetis? Tunc enim erit, vt possimus videre quod credimus, nam and nunc est in
nobis, and nos in illo: sed hoc nunc credimus, tunc etia^ cognoscemus, quamvis
and nunc credendo nouerimus, sed tunc contemplando noscemus. De trinitate li.
13. c. 1. Non sic videtur fides in cord in quo est, ab co cuius est, sed eam
tenet certissima scientia, clamatque conscientia. Cum itaque propterea credere
jubeamur, quia id quod credere jubemur videre non possumus, ipsam tamen fidem
quando inest in nobis videmus in nobis: quia et rerum absentium praesens est
fides, and rerum quae foris sunt intus est fides, and rerum quae non videntur,
videtur fides. Lib. 8. cap. 8. Qui diligit fratrem, magis nou it dilectionem
qua diligit quam fratrem quem diligit. Tractat: 5. in epist. Ioannis; nemo
interroget hominem: redeat vnusquisque ad cor suum, si ibi inuenerit charitatem
fraternam, securus sit quia transijt a morte ad vitam. Tractat: in Psalm. 85.
Dicat vnusquisque fidelium, Sanctus sum. Non est ista superbia elati, sed
confessio non ingrati. De bono perseuerantiae cap: 2. Sicut ergo sanctus cum
Deum rogat vt sanctus sit, id vtique rogat^t sanctus esse permaneat; ita vtique
and castus, cum rogat vt castus sit: continens, vt continens sit: justus, vt
justus sit: pius, vt pius sit: and caetera quae contra Pelagianos dona Dei esse
defendimus, hoc sine dubio petunt, vt in eis perseuerent bonis, quae se
accepisse nouerunt.

Leo in his 8. sermon on the Epiphanie says; Ipsam matrem virtutum omnium
charitatem, in secretis suae mentis inquirat: and si in ea dilectionem Dei and
proximi toto cord intent repererit, ita vt etiam inimicis suis eadem velit
tribui, quae sibi optat impendi, quisquis hujusmodi est, Deum and rectorem and
habitatorem sui esse non dubitet. Gregory moral. l. 9: c: 17. upon these words
of Job, Etiamsi simplex fuero hoc ipsum ignorabit anima mea: writes thus;
Plerumque si scimus bona quae agimus, ad elationem ducimur: si nescimus minime
seruamus. Quis enim aut de virtutis suae conscientia non quantulumcunque
superbiat? Aut quis rursum bonum in se custodiat quod ignorant? Sed contra
vtraque quid superest, nisi vt recta quae agimus, sciendo nesciamus: vt haec
and recta aestimemus and minima: quatenus and ad custodiam sensificet animum
scientia rectitudinis, and in tumorem non eleuet aestimatio minorationis. And
cap. 27. he says: Sciendum vero est, quod viri sancti ita incerti sunt vt
confidant, atque ita confidunt, vt tamen ex securitate non torpeant.

Anselme, writing upon the 8. chapter of the epistle to the Romans says: Ipse
spiritus diuinus testimonium reddit spiritui nostro, id est, recognoscere and
intelligere facit spiritum nostrum, quia sumus filij Dei. Et per hoc quod ipse
spiritus sanctus charitatem nobis infundit, quae nos facit imitatores esse
diuinae bonitatis, vt diligamus inimicos nostros, and benefaciamus his qui
oderunt nos, sicut pa^er coelestis solemn suum oriri facit, super bonos and
malos, atque pluit super justos and iniustos, euidenti testimonio declarat
menti nostrae, nos esse filios Dei, cuius bonitatem pro modulo nostro sequimur.
In 2. Cor. 13. Qui fidei sensum in cord habet, hic scit Christum Iesum in se
esse, and uos ita scitis eum in uobis esse, nisi forte reprobi estis, hoc est
enim reprobum esse, nescire fidem professionis suae. Et vos cognoscitis, quia
per sensum fidei, and per affectum dilectionis, ac strenuitatem rectae
actionis, est Christus in vobis nisi forte reprobi estis, id est, ab eo quod
prius caepistis, retro conuersi, and a Deo rejecti.

Bernardus epist. 107. Iustus autem quis est, nisi qui amanti se Deo, vicem
rependitamoris? Quod non fit nisi revelante spiritu per fidem homini aeternum
Dei propositum super sua salute futura. Quae sane reuelationon est aliud quam
infusio gratiae spiritualis: per quam dum facta carnis mortificantur, homo ad
regnum praeparatur quod caro et sanguis non possident, simul accipiens in vno
spiritu et vnde se praesumat amatum, et vnde redamet ne gratis amatus sit. In
Cantica sermon. 69. Prorsus habet ecclesia Dei spirituales suos, qui non modo
fideliter, sed and fiducialiter agant in eo, cum Deo quasi cum amico loquentes,
testimonium illis perhibente conscientia gloriae ejus. Da mihi animam nihil
amantem praeter Deum, et quod propter Deum amandum est: cui viuere Christus non
tantum sit, sed and diu jam fuerit: cui studij et otij sit prouidere Deum in
conspectu suo semper: cui solicit ambulare cum Domino Deo suo, non dico
magna, sed vna voluntas sit, and facultas non desit: da mihi inquam talem
animam, and ego non nego dignam sponsi cura, majestatis respectu, dominantis
fauore, sollicitudine gubernantis: and si voluerit gloriari non erit insipiens,
tantum vt qui gloriatur in domino glorietur. And afterward, Ex propriis quae
sunt penes Deum, agnoscit nec dubitat se amari quae amat. And a little
afterward. Vides quomodo non solum de amore suo certum te reddat, si quidem tu
ames illum: sed etiam de sollicitudine sua quam pro te gerit, si te senserit
sollicitum sui. In Octava Paschae, Sermon. 2. Sane novum supervenisse spiritum,
certissime conversatio nova testatur.

Idem Epist. 107. Ponamus hominem in seculo seculi adhuc and suae carnis amore
retentum: and cum terrestris hominis imaginem portet, incubantem terrenis, nil
de coelestibus cogitantem: quis hunc non videat horrendis circumsusum tenebris,
nisi qui in eadem mortis umbra sedet: quippe cui nullum adhuc suae salutis
signum eluxerit, cui necdum in aliquo interna testetur inspiratio an boni de se
quippiam aeterna teneat praedestinatio? At vero si superna eum miseratio
dignanter quandoque respexerit, immiseritque spiritum compunctionis, quatenus
ingemiscat and resipiscat, mutet vitam, domet carnem, amet proximum, clamet ad
Deum, proponatque de caetero vivere Deo, non seculo: ex qua deinde superni
luminis gratuita visitatione, and subita mutatione dexterae excelsi, agnoscat
se merito quidem non iam irae sed gratiae filium, quippe qui paternum erga se
divinae bonitatis experitur affectum, quod se utique hactenus in tantum
latuerat, vt non solum nesciret vtrumnam dignus foret amore, an odio,
verumetiam odium magis and non amorem propria conversatio testaretur, erant
enim tenebrae adhuc super faciem abyssi: nonne is tibi videtur quasi de abysso
profundissima, and tenebrosissima horrendae ignorantiae, in aliam quandam
quoque trahi abyssum, eregione amoenam and lucidam claritatis aeternae? and
tunc demum quasi dividit Deus lucem a tenebris, cum peccator sole illucescente
iustitiae, abiectis operibus tenebrarum induitur arma lucis: and is quem prior
vita ac propria conscientia tanquam revera filium gehennae deputaverat
ardoribus sempiternis, ad tantam visitantis se orientis ex alto dignationem
respirans, gloriari etiam incipit, praeter spem in spe gloriae filiorum Dei,
quam iam nimirum e vicino revelata facie exultans novo in lumine speculatur,
and dicit: Signatum est super nos lumen vultus tui Domine: dedisti laetitiam in
cord meo. O Domine, quid est homo quia innotuisti ei: aut filius hominis quia
reput as eum? iam se o bone Pater, vermis vilissimus, and odio dignissimus
sempiterno, tamen confidit amari, quoniam se sentit amare: imo quia se amari
praesentit, non redamare confunditur. Iam apparet in lumine tuo o
inaccessibilis lux, quid boni penes te, etiam cum malus esset, miserum maneret
homunculum. Amat proinde non immerito, quia amatus est sine merito. Amat sine
fine, quia sine principio se cognoscit amatum. Prodit in lucem ad miseri
consolationem, magnum consilium quod ab aeterno latuerat in sinu Aeternitatis:
quod nolit videlicet Deus mortem peccatoris, sed magis vt convertatur and
vivat. Habes homo huius arcani indicem spiritum iustificantem: eoque ipso
testificantem spiritui tuo quod filius Dei and ipse sis. Agnosce consilium Dei
in iustificatione tui. Confitere and dic: Consilium meum iustificationes tuae.
Praesens namque iustificatio tui, and divini est consilii revelatio, and
quaedam adfuturam gloriam praeparatio.

Idem de quatuor modis orandi. Surge, toll lectum tuum, etc. Et tu ergo si iam
surgis desiderio supernorum, si grabatum tollis, corpus scilicet a terrenis
elevans voluptatibus, vt iam non feratur anima a concupiscentiis eius, sed
magis ipsa vt dignum est, regat illud, and ferat quo non vult, si demum ambulas
quae retro sunt obliviscens, and ad ea quae ante sunt, te extendens desiderio,
and proposito proficiendi, curatum te esse non dubites. Item sermon. 1. in
annunciatione beatae Mariae. Si credis peccata tua non posse deleri nisi ab eo
cui soli peccasti, and in quem peccatum non cadit, been facis: sed add adhuc,
vt and hoc credas, quia per ipsum tibi peccata donantur. Hoc est testimoniu^
quod perhibet in cord nostro spiritus sanctus, dicens: Dimissa sunt tibi
peccata tua. Sic enim arbitratur Apostolus, gratis iustificari hominem per
fide^.

Gulielmus Altisiodorensis in sent. lib. 3. tract. 6. Quidam dicunt, quod
quidam sciunt se non habere charitatem, scilicet qui sunt in actu vel proposito
peccandi. Alij dubitant se habere charitatem cum habent aeque fortes rations
ad vtramque partem contradictionis. Alij putant se habere charitatem. Alij
sciunt se habere charitatem, scilicet qui gustauerunt dulcedinem Dei, and in
quibus fere extinctus est fomes, vt Maria Magdalena et Aegyptiaca post multos
fletus. And a little after distinguishing 2 kinds of knowledge properly so
named, he says, by the one we know we are in grace and not by the other.

The book called part. (...).
regimen animarum agrees with Altisiodorensis, making 5 sorts; some that know
they have not; some that doubt; some that think they have; quidam qui
experiuntur se habere charitatem, vt illi qui gustant diuinam dulcedinem, in
quibus fomes fere extinctus est, and qui semper vel bona faciunt vel affectant;
quidam certi sunt se habere charitatem vt sunt illi quibus Deus reuelauit
secreta coelestia, sic fuit Paulus.

part. 1. de grata, c. 10.
Pantheologia likewise says, Quidam dicunt, quod aliqui sciunt se esse in
gratia experimentaliter, sicut illi qui sentiunt dulcedinem divinae bonitatis,
and in oratione gustant quam suav is est Dominus. Alios scire se esse in gratia
Dei supernaturaliter sicut sunt illi qui ita dotati sunt a Deo and perfecti
quod jam non habent rebellionem fomitis, sed habent plenam pacem spiritus, and
sentiunt se elevatos in contemplatione divina sicut fuerunt Paulus, and Maria
Magdalena.

Alexander of Ales 3. part. 9. 61. memb. 7. art. 3. First reckons the opinion
of 5 sorts of men formerly mentioned, to wit, of men knowing they are not in
grace; of men doubting; of men thinking they are; of men experimentally knowing
it, as do they, qui sentiunt dulcedinem divinae bonitatis in oratione, and
gustant quam suavis est Dominus. And lastly of men who have knowledge that they
are in grace; qui ita sunt dicati Deo and perfecti, quod iam non habent
rebellionem fomitis, sed habent plenam pacem spiritus, and sentiunt
concupiscentias carnis in se consopitas, and sentiunt se omnino elevatos in
divinam contemplationem, sicut fuit Beata Magdalena, and Paulus qui ait ad Rom
8. Quis separabit etc. And then he distinguishes contemplative and affectiue
knowledge, that some make a knowledge by science, and a knowledge by
experiment, the one an infallible the other a fallible medium, and thinks
that we may know by certain experiments that we are in grace; which
experiments are, charitas apud vim rationalem, pax apud irascibilem, laetitia
apud concupiscibilem. That a man may have certain knowledge that he is in
grace, he proves out of Revel. (...). To him that overcommeth I will give the
hidden Manna, etc. which no man knoeth but he that reeciueth it, therefore he
that receives it does know it; but that hidden Manna etc: is not understood
only, of the enjoying of diuiine sweetness in glory in heaven, but by grace in
this world; but he that receives it knows it, therefore he that receives
the divine sweetness by grace knows it, therefore he knows he has grace,
by it, as by a certain experiment. Besides, the taste that is well affected,
cannot but discern the sweetness that is put unto it, therefore if the soul
be rightly affected, it cannot but discern the divine sweetness put to it; but
the discerning of divine sweetness is by grace, therefore a soul rightly
affected, cannot but know that it has grace, therefore grace is experimentally
known, as by the sense of divine sweetness. 2. Cor. vlt. Do ye not know your
selves that Christ Jesus is in you except you be reprobates? This the Apostle
speaks to the Corinthians, therefore there is some man who if he be not a
reprobate, knows that Christ is in him, and if he know this, he kuoweth he
has grace, because Christ is not in us but by grace; whence it follows, that
he knows experimentally that he has grace.

John Bachon, lib. 3. did. 30. q. 1. says expressly that men may be certain
they are in grace by a certainety following faith, or flowing out of faith. In
our age Cardinal Caietan, Commentar: in Joan. 14. Dat Deus etiam hoc, vt
sciamus quae a Deo nobis donata sunt, etc. Cuilibet diligenti ipsum promittit,
non quod se manifestabit, sed quod se insinuabit, dictio enim graeca significat
velut tacit and clam indicare, quoniam Jesus cuilibet diligenti se, indicat
sei psum intus, interna illustratione and inspiratione, diversimode, prout
electi experiuntur, accipientes manna absconditum, quod nemo novit nisi qui
accepit. And writing upon those words, 1. Io: 2: In hoc scimus quontam
cognovi^us eum, he says. Intendit Johannes ad litteram monstrare, signum
infallibile internae lucis divinae in nobis esse, si mandata eius servauerimus.
Roffensis says, Sacramenta ideo potissimum sunt instituta, vt per vsum illorum
citra vllam dubitationem confidamus, gratiam nos esse consecutos. de sacr.
eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 6.

Vega. l. 9. c. 7.
The Authors of the book offered by Charles the fifth to the Divines appointed
for the conference at Ratisbon, in the fifth article plainly affirm, Oportere
vt vere paenitentes fide certissima statuant, se propter mediatorem Christum
Deo placere. The same was agreed unto by the Divines of both sides. Cardinal
Contarenus president of the meeting and conference approved it; and as the same
Vega says, many Catholics in the Council at Trent; before the publishing of
the decree, followed the same opinion as most probable, and sought to confirm
it by many arguments. Vega. l. 9. c. 46
And he reports, that amongst others there was one learned man, that
professed, he held the denying of the certainety of grace, to be a worse
error then that imputed to Luther, for whereas the Lutherans attribute too
much to faith, this opinion derogateth from faith, the sacraments, and the
merits and works of virtue.

Yet in the end there was a Sessio 6. can. 13. Si quis dixerit, omni homini ad
remissionem peccatorum assequendam necessarium esse, vt credat certo, and
absque vlla haesitatione propriae infirmitatis and indispositionis peccata sibi
esse remissa, anathema sit.
decree passed for the uncertainty of grace, but in such sort, that who would
held their former opinions still, and made such constructions of the decree as
they pleased: as it appears by Ambrosius Catharinus, in his apology against
Dominicus a Soto, wherein he defends an absolute certainety of grace, and a
certainety of faith, and yet will not be thought to be touched, by the censure
of the council.

Martinus Eisingreinius, a man of no small account, has a whole book in
explication and defense of this one decree of the council, and tells us, the
council never meant simply to condemn the certainety of grace, but only that
kind of certainety that heretics imagine, which is without all examination
of themselves, their estate, the truth of their profession, their dislike of
sinful evils, and desire of reconciliation, and grace to decline evil and
to do good, to persuade themselves they are justified. And whereas most men,
conceive the meaning of the council to be, that he is accursed, that
thinks it necessary for the attayning of remission of sins, that every man
should persuade himself, without any doubting in respect of his own
indisposition, that his sins are remitted, and that thus to persuade himself
procures remission: he makes the meaning of it to be, that whosoever without
consideration of his estate whether he be rightly disposed or otherwise,
presumes of Gods grace and favor, is worthily anathematized, but if a man
having examined himself, find a disposition, in dislike of former evils, to
return unto God, to seek remission and grace not to offend in like sort any
more, he may notwithstanding the decree of the council, nay he ought to assure
himself of remission, and grace. And there upon brings forth a cloud of
witnesses for confirmation of the certainety of grace. But whatsoever we
think of the construction he makes of the words of the decree, he page 162.
resolves, that a man may be as certain that his sins are remitted, and he
received to grace, as that twice two are four, twice four eight, and that
every whole is greater then his part, or as a man is resolved touching the
things he sees with his eyes, and handles with his hands.

1. part iustitiae quadripartitae, l. 2. fol. 222.
Gaspar Casalius a Bishop of Portugal, that was present in the council of
Trent, writes largely against that kind of imagined certainety, which
Eisingreinius says the council meant to condemn. And then goes forward; An
non licet homini unquam credere firmiter se esse iustum a peccatis, saltem a
mortalibus? Quidem in ea forma nunquam licet vt ex dictis patet, quia est illa
fides sieve confidentia, and superba and imprudentissima. An licet in alia
forma? Vtique licet. In qua forma licet? habendo respectum ad divinas
promissiones conditionales, and ad conditiones quas requirunt. Etenim omnes
tenemur firmiter credere, fide divina cui non potest subesse falsum, tam de
nobis ipsis quam de aliis, omnes Adae filios de facto iustos esse, aut
iustificari, quotquot habent eas conditiones, quas diuina promissio, sive
diuina lex conditionalis, ad id requirit in nobis. Hoc constat, quia omnes
tenemur tali fide credere, Deum veracem in omnibus dictis suis, pertinentibus
ad doctrinam, promissiones, and cunctis aliis: adhibito autem diligenti in
nobis de nobis examine, dum quis seipsum probat, and ad iudicium rationis ac
legis trahit, licet vnicuique iudicare de se, prudenter tamen procedendo cum
examine and discretione, quod eas conditiones requisite as habet, vel non habet,
Si enim hoc non liceret nobis, non diceret Paulus 1 Cor. 11. Probet autem
seipsum homo, and sic de pane illo edat, and de calice bibat. Nec diceret
Apostolus Ioannes, 1 Ioh. 4. Nolite omni spiritui credere, sed probate spiritus
si ex Deo sint, quoniam multi Pseudoprophetae exierunt in mundum. Ecce
committitur nobis probatio adhibitis his quae ad rem ipsam adhiberi debent tum
nostritum spirituum. Licet ergo nobis iudicare de nobis been vel male, prout in
nobis invenerimus: dummodo prudenter agamus, cum prudentia intuentes,
discurrentes, and concludentes. Mox vero prout quis cum prudentia de se
iudicaverit, quod conditiones a Deo requisitas habeat, potest etiam iudicare de
seipso quod iustus sit, si certo, certo, si cum formidine, cum formidine,
firmae enim praestant divinae promissiones iuxta suas conditiones, and ex part
illarum nullus est defectus nec esse potest.

So that according to this opinion, a man certainly finding in him the
performance of the condition required, may assure himself of his justification
and acceptance with God: and this assurance is an act of faith. No man living,
says L. 9. c. 39.
Vega, should ever draw me to doubt, neither indeed could I doubt if I would,
of my being in the state of grace, if I might infer it out of two
propositions, the one believed, and the other some other way evident unto me.
For there are many propositions de fide, which can no otherwise be proved to
be de fide, but because they clearly follow upon things believed, and some
proposition evident in the light of nature; As Scotus shows, that this
proposition, the father differs really from the son, is a proposition of
faith, because it is inferred out of these two, The father begat and the son
was begotten, and this other evident in the light of nature, Omnis generans
realiter differt a genito. Qui pertinaciter dubitaret de propositione illata
evidenter ex vn^ credit^, and alia evidenti, esset haereticus, hic enim cum non
posset dubitare de consequentia, nec de euidenti, dubitaret de credita.

It will be said, that granting such a proposition to be de fide, as
follows out of two propositions, whereof one is believed, and the other some
other way evident unto us: yet it will not follow that we may be certain,
that we are in the state of grace. Because that cannot be inferred out of two
such propositions, seeing one of them must depend on experience, and the
knowledge of our inward actions, which as some think cannot be certainly
known by us. Let us see therefore whether a man may certainly discern; the
quality and condition of his soul, and the motions, actions, and desires of
the same. There are that think, that our inward actions are unknown unto us,
and that the nature of the heart is such, as is known only to God; But Saint
Paul says, 1 Cor. 2. that the spirit of a man, knows the things that are in
him. And besides, if we could not know our inward actions, we should not be
commanded or forbidden to do such actions, neither should we be required to
confess our inward sins, if we could not know them. All which things are
absurd and heretical. It is clear therefore, that we may know and discern
our inward actions, that we may know what we do, what we will, and in what
sort, and to what end we will it. We may know therefore, whether we sorrow
for sins, because we have thereby displeased God, or for some other reason;
whether we esteem the loss of Gods favor the greatest evil; whether we
would rather regaine it, then have all things without it; whether we would not
be willing to leave any thing, though never so dear unto us, if we should
understand, that we must either leave it, or not come into favor with God.

It is true, says Vega l. 9. ca. 47. Dispositio non vnum aliquem actum,
comprehendit, sed observationem omnium mandatorum diuinorum, and dolorem de
omnibus peccatis, and in nullo peccato perseuerare, neque per ignorantiam,
neque per negligentiam, neque per obliuionem aut in considerationem^
Vega, that we may know all these things; but because there may be some
sin, that we think not of, thorough forgetfulness, ignorance, or want of
consideration, from which if we depart not, we cannot obtain the favor of
God; therefore we cannot certainly know, whether we be so disposed, as is
required for the receipt of grace. But this is a silly allegation, for
Roffensis adversus Lutherum artic. 14. says. Ignoratio peccatorum nihil
obstat, quo minus quisquam vere conteri posset, nisi velis cavillum ex vocabulo
quaerere; neque enim dubito quin Maria Magdalena vere contrita fuerat, quam si
Christus interrogasset an vere fuisset contrita, potuit respondisse, se vere
contritam esse, vereque doluisse pro peccatis, nec tamen est credibile, quod
singula peccata quae prius in tot vanitatibus suis admisit, integre venerint in
ejus memoriam. Sed omittamus hanc quae singular poenitudinis exemplar fuerat:
de communibus loquamur peccatoribus. Number aliquot ex his opinaris, ad
sacramentum absolutionis accedere cum vero dolor? Number eos usque adeo stupidos
arbitraris, ut non sentiant an vere and non ficte doleant? Quod si conscientia
fuerit ijs judex quod vere doleant, cur (te quaeso) respondere non licet se
vere dolere? Quid huic rei peccatorum obsistit ignoratio? cum pro cunctis
dolere possint tam ignoratis quam cognitis. Nam qui damni perpendit
immensitatem, quod ex peccato conquisivit, is odiet facile peccatum, and
detestabitur tam in alijs quam in seipso, neque minus id quod occultum est quam
quod est agnitum. So that we may reason thus, If a man sorrow, or sorrow not
for sin; or not for the true causes, or not so much as he should; either he
may know when he does right, and when he fails, or not: If he may, then a man
may know when he is in such a disposition, as is required in him that is to be
justified. If he may not, then he has no power to sorrow, or to sorrow in this
or that sort. For no man has power to do that act, that he knows not how to
do: neither does any man know how to do a thing, but he knows likewise when
he does the same thing, whether he do so or not. If he have no power to sorrow
for sin, or to sorrow so and in such sort as he should, then God has
commanded things impossible to be done, Impossible, I say, in respect both of
Nature and grace.

Vega. l. 9. c. 39.
They will say a man knows when he sorroweth rightly for each particular
sin, but not when for all in general: But against this as before, if he
know how rightly to sorrow for all, then he knows when he does so, but he
knows how rightly to sorrow for all. If he know not rightly how to sorrow for
all, then he cannot rightly sorrow for all; If he cannot rightly sorrow for
all, then either God has not commanded so to do, or he has commanded
impossibilities: if he have not commanded us in this sort to sorrow for all,
then for none, for we If a man may know that he sorroweth rightly for one
sin, he is sure he sorroweth for all as much as is necessarily required to
justification.
cannot rightly sorrow for one, unless we sorrow for all: for if we might,
we might have remission of one, and not of another, then we might be in the
state of salvation and damnation together.

L^. 9. c. 46.
Vega having debated the matter, alleging the objections and answeares of
both sides, for and against the certainty of grace, in the end concludes, that
having maturely considered all that is said on either side, he thinks it
more probable, that some spiritual men, may so far profitte in spiritual
exercise and in divine familiarity, that without all rashness, they may believe
certainly, and without all doubting, that they have found grace and remission
of sins with God; and brings many excellent proofs of that his saying; As,
that the law of friendship requires so much; for it cannot be, that one
friend should not power forth his very soul to another. And that familiarity
and exceeding love, that the Canticles show that God bears toward his
Church, and sometimes shows to it, make it evident, there are always some to
whom God speaks so familiarly, that they are certain, and no way doubt of
his love. Besides, the resolution and security with which many of the Saints
of God go out of this world, that ardent desire, quo charitas cum perfecta
fuerit, clamat, Cupio dissolui and esse cum Christo, illa laetitia, qua
permulti exultant, dum intelligentes sibi propinquum esse diem mortis, dicunt
cum Davide: Laetatus sum in his quae dicta sunt mihi, in domum Domini ibimus.
Alacritas etiam and admiranda constantia Martyrum, and despicientia omnium
tormentorum, are a sufficient proof of this; they would never do so that
doubted of their estate. Ibid. apud Veg.
Ambrose in Ps. 118. Videmus in saeculo innocents laetos ad iudicium
festinare, odisse moras, celeritatem affectare iudicij. Beatus itaque ille qui
coeleste judicium laetus expectat: scit enim sibi regnum coelorum, Angelorum
consortium, coronam quoque bonorum repositam esse meritorum. And Ib. apud Veg.
Catharinus in his purgation of himself, shows the same in the examples of
many Saints; Such confidence Ezechias may be thought to have had, 2. Reg. 12.
when he prayed thus; Remember Lord how I have walked before thee etc: where
this his prayer is approved by Gods answer, I have heard thy prayer etc.
Ibidem.
The testimony of the spirit seems to require, vt aliquibus saltem viris
perfectis, and spiritualibus, hoc ipsum de adoptione in particulari semper
contestetur interius: vt quilibet iustorum ex eo testimonio vere possitaudacter
clamare, Abba, pater; Et verbum istud spiritui nostro, huc videtur nos vocare
and inflectere. Cumque illud testimonium, quicquid sit de intelligentia Pauli,
dubium non sit, vt and sancti doctores saepe tradiderunt, persaepe interius
exhiberi a spiritu sancto, loquente interius familiarissime cum his, qui ei
toto cord famulantur, consentaneum non est, neque verisimile, quin aliquando
ita sese illis aperiat, vt omnem abigat for^dinem de ipsorum poenitentia, and
eorum iustificatione, praesertim cum test Paulo, ad hoc detur nobis, vt
sciamus, quae nobis a Deo sunt donata.

This certainty he calls moral, distinguishes it from the certainty of
^aith, that he may avoid the decree of the council of Trent: and yet says it
excludes all doubt and fear, of the being otherwise of that he is thus
certain of: and says if any man will name this a certainty of faith he will
not strive. ^
The difference he makes between them is this, that in the one men are sure
and know, they neither are nor can be deceived: in the other they know and are
certain that they are not, not that they cannot be deceived. But this
difference cannot staud, for if a man know and be certain that he is not
deceived, he must certainly know, that no such thing does now fall out, as does
fall out when men are deceived in apprehensions of this kind, and consequently,
that now and things so standing, he cannot be deceived. For example, a man
dreaming, thinks he is waking, and undoubtedly persuades himself, he sees
or does something, wherein he is deceived, because it is but representation in
a dream; but he that is waking, knows that he waketh, that he sees that
which he thinks he sees, that in this persuasion he is not, nor cannot be
deceived things so standing.

Amongst the Articles agreed upon in the Apud Bucer. page 45.
conference at Ratisbon, 1541, this is one, Docendum est ut qui vere poenitent,
semper fide certissima statuant, se propter Mediatorem Christum Deo placere:
quia Christus est propitiator, Pontifex, and interpellator pro nobis, quem
pater donavit nobis, and omnia bona cum illo. Quoniam autem perfecta rectitudo
in hac imbecillitate non est, suntque multae infirmae and pavidae conscientiae,
quae cum gravi saepe dubitatione luctantur, nemo est a gratia Christi, propter
ejusmodi infirmitatem excludendus: sed convenit tales diligenter adhortari, ut
ijs dubitationibus promissiones Christi fortiter opponant, and augeri sibi
fidem sedulis precibus orent: juxta illud, Adauge nobis Domine fidem. So that
touching this point it is evident that the Church of God ever taught, that
which we now teach.

Neither have we departed from the doctrine of the Church, in that we teach
that faith only justifies. For many of the ancient have used this form of
words; as Origin ad Romans 3. Dicit Apostolus sufficere solius fidei
justificationem, ita ut credens quis tantummodo justificetur, etiamsi nihil ab
eo operis fuerit expletum. Hilar. can. 8. in Math. Fides sola justificat.
Basil. homil. de humilitate. Haec est perfecta and integra gloriatio in Deo,
quando neque ob justitiam suam quis se iactat, sed novit quidem seipsum verae
justitiae indigum, sola autem fide in Christum justificatum. Ambros. ad Romans 3.
Iustificati sunt gratis, quia nihil operantes, neque vicem reddentes, sola fide
justificati sunt dono Dei. Chrysostom. Homil. de fide and lege naturae: Eum qui
operatur opera iustitiae sine fide non potes probare vivum esse, fidem absque
operibus possum monstrare, and vixisse, and regnum coelorum assecutam, nullus
sine fide vitam habuit, latro autem credidit tantum, and iustificatus est. Aug.
l. 1. contra 2 Epistolas Pelag. c. 21. Quantaelibet fuisse virtutis antiquos
praedices justos, non eos salvos fecit nisi fides mediatoris. 83. q. q. 76. Si
quis cum crediderit mox de hac vita decesserit, iustificatio fidei manet cum
illo: nec praecedentibus bonis operibus, quia non merito ad illam, sed gratia
pervenit, nec consequentibus, quia in hac vita esse non sinitur. Theophylact.
ad Galat. 3. Nunc plane ostendit Apostolus, fidem vel solam, iustificandi
habere in se virtutem. Bern. ser. 22, in Cantic. Quisquis pro peccatis
compunctus, esurit and sitit iustitiam, credat in te qui iustificas impium, and
solam iustificatus per fidem, pacem habebitad te. Et ep. 77. citans illud. Qui
crediderit and baptizatus fuerit salvus erit. Caute, inquit, non repetiit, qui
vero baptizatus non fuerit, conde^nabitur, sed tantu^ qui vero non crediderit,
innuens nimirum solam fidem interdum sufficere ad salutem, and sine illa
sufficere nihil.

Sometimes by these phrases of speech they exclude all that may be be without
supernatural knowledge, all that may be without a true profession. Sometimes
the necessity of good works in act or external good works. 3. The power of
nature without illumination and grace. 4. The power of the Law. 5. The
sufficiency of any thing found in us to make us stand in judgment, to abide
the trial, and not to fear condemnation. And in this sense faith only is
said to justify, that is, the only mercy of God, and merit of Christ
apprehended by faith: and then the meaning of their speech is, that only the
persuasion and assured trust that they have, to be accepted of God for Christ's
sake, is that that makes them stand in judgment, without fear of
condemnation. And in this sense all the Divines formerly alleged, for proof
of the insufficiency of all our inherent righteousness, and the trust which
we should have in the only mercy of God, and merit of Christ, do teach as
we do, that faith only justifies. For neither they nor we exclude from the
work of Justification, the action of God as the supreme and highest cause of
our justification: for it is he that remitteth sin, and receives us to
grace: nor the merit of Christ, as that for which God inclines to show mercy
to us, and to respect us: nor the remission of sins, gracious acceptance,
and grant of the gift of righteousness, as that by which we are formally
justified: nor those works of prenenting grace, whereby out of the general
apprehension of faith, God works in us dislike of our former condition,
desire to be reconciled to God, to have remission of that is past, and grace
hereafter to decline the like evils, and to do contrary good things. For by
these we are prepared, disposed, and fitted for justification; without these
none are justified. And in this sense, and to imply a necessity of these to be
found in us, sometimes the fathers and others say, that we are not justified by
faith only. And we all agree, that it is not our conversion to God, nor the
change we find in our selves, that can any way make us stand in judgment
without fear, and look for any good from God, otherwise then in that we find
our selves so disposed and fitted, as is necessary for justification, whence we
assure our selves, God will in mercy accept us for Christ's sake.

CHAP. 12.
Of Merit.

MErit as Cardinal Contarenus rightly notes, if we speak properly, imports
an action, or actions, quibus actionibus aut earum autori, ab altero iusticia
postulante, debeatur praemiu^. No man can merit any thing of God. Vide Ianseni
um^n concordiam euangeli^am cap. 98. p. 704.
First because we are his servants, and owe much more service unto him the^
bond-slaues that are bought for money owe unto their masters: and though no
reward were promised, we were bound to obey his commands. Yet if we look on
the bounty of God, he deals with us being bondmen, as (...) Lib. 1. d. 17 q.
1. in solutione quaest.
with hired servants, reco^pencing that with a reward which we stood bound in
duty to perform. 2. Because no profit comes unto God from any thing we can *
Apostolus ad Rom: 8. Aestimo inquit quoth non sunt condignae passiones hujus
temporis, ad futu^am gloriam quae re^elabitur in nobis. S^ non sunt cond^gnae
non ergo ex debito justitiae, sed ex dono gratiae, gloria pro il^s datur, unde
Glossa ibidem. passiones hujus temporis non s^t omnes s^mul con^g nae, id est,
sufficientes, si districte ageretur nob^m, ad promerendam ^tam aeternam.
do: the good and salvation of our souls he accounts his gain, and out of
his goodness so esteems of our good works, as if they were profitable unto
him. 3. Because though our works were profitable unto God, and though we were
able to do them of our selves, yet we could never repay unto him so much good,
as we have already and do daily receive from him: but now it is so, that he
first bestows on us one gift, which he may afterward reward with another. 4
Because in many things we offend all, and so have need of pardon: so far are
we from meriting any thing at Gods hands. 5 Because no meritorious act is so
great a good as eternal life, and so not equivalent unto it, and therefore so
great a reward cannot in strictness of justice be due unto it. Actus secundum
se consideratus (says ^ Scotus) absque acceptatione diuina secundum strictam
justitiam, non fuisset dignus tali praemio ex intrinseca bonitate, quam haberet
ex suis principiis, quod patet, quia semper praemium est majus bonum merito,
and justitia stricta non reddit melius pro minus bono: ideo been dicitur quod
semper Deus praemiat vltra meritum condignum, vniuersaliter quidem vltra
dignitatem actus qui est meritum; quia quod ille actus sit condignum meritu^,
hoc est vltra naturam and bonitate^ actus intrinseca^, ex mera gratuita
acceptatione diuina. Et forte adhuc, vltra illud ad quod de co^muni lege esset
actus acceptandus, quandoque Deus praemiat ex mera liberalitate. And again,
Lib. 4. did. 49. q. 6. de tertio dubio. De praemio quod est aeterna beatitudo,
dico quod loquendo de stricta justitia, Deus nulli nostrum propter quaecunque
merita, est debtor perfectionis reddendae tam intensae, quam est beatitudo,
propter immoderatum excessum illius perfectionis vltra illa merita: sed esto
quod ex liberalitate sua determinasset, meritis confer actum tam perfectum
tanquam praemium, tali quidem justitia qualis decet eum, scilicet,
supererogantis in praemijs: tamen non sequitur ex hoc necessario, quod per
illam justitiam sit reddenda perfectio perennis tanquam praemium: imo abundans
fieret retributio in beatitudine vnius momenti.

6. To merit is to make a thing due, that was not due before, whence it
follows that no man can merit eternal life. Bellarm. de justificat. lib. 5.
c. 12.
For they that define merit do say, that no man can merit so great a good as
eternal life ex condigno, unless he be first justified, reconciled to God,
and made partaker of the divine nature, but whosoever is so justified,
reconciled to God, and made partaker of the divine nature, has right to
eternal life, in that he is justified, reconciled, and made partaker of the
divine nature. Therefore seeing to merit, is to make that due that was not due
before, noe man can merit eternal life. And De justificat. l. 5. c. 20.
Bellarmine confesses, that many think eternal life cannot be merited; but
only some degrees in the same. and for this reason, as it appears by the
epistle of Cardinal Contarenus to Cardinal Farnesius, the divines of both
sides in the conference at Ratisbon, thought good to omit and suppress the
name of merit. 1 For that it might be thought a derogation to the goodness and
bounty of God, that gives us freely eternal life, to say that we meritte it.
And secondly, for that it might be conceived, that it was not due before in
respect of free gift, and that our working could merit it, though it were not
due to us by gift. Let us see therefore what the Church of God has taught
touching merit.

The Author of the answer to Bells challenge named by him the downfall of
Popery, article the fifth chapt: 3. page 220. protests, that Bell does greatly
wrong the Romanists, in saying it is a part of their faith, and that it was
defined in the council of Trent, that good works done in Gods grace, are
co^dignely meritorious of eternal life; for the council defined no such
thing, and they that hold it, hold it not as a point of faith, but as an
opinion only. Whereupon Vega, who was one of the duines of the council of
Trent, writes de fide and operib^ quaest: 4. that some noble School divines,
being moved with no light arguments, and using a certain sober and prudent
moderation, have denied that there is any condign merit of eternal
happiness; and he says quest. 5. Gregor. 1. d. 17. q. 1. Duran. q. 2.
Marsil. in 2. Walden. de sacram. c. 7. Burgensis in psalm. 35. Eckius in centur:
de praedest.
that Gregory, Durand, Marsil, Walden, Burgensis, and Eckius, do deny condign
merit. Sotus also another divine of the said council lib. 3. de natura and
gratia cap. 7. says, that there is some difference amongst catholics about
condign merit, and chap: 8. after he had proved condign merit out of the
council and otherways, yet concludes not that it is a point of faith, but
only calls it conclusionem probatissimam, a most approved conclusion. And
Bellarmine lib: 5: de iustificatione cap: 16: after he had rehearsed two
opinions of catholics, whereof the one seems to deny condign merit, the
other admits it only in a large sense, proposes and defends the third
opinion, which defends condign merit absolutely, only as verissimam, and
communem sententiam theologorum, most true, and the common opinion of divines.
This confession might suffice to prove, that the Church never admitted of the
doctrine of merit of condignity, as any point of her faith, in the days of our
Fathers, seeing even since these differences grew that are now afoote,
between those of the reformation, and the stiff maintainers of all confusions
formerly found in the state of the Church and religion, there are many found
amongst the enemies of reformation, that reject the merit of condignity. Yet
for the better satisfaction of the reader, I will more fully and at large set
down the opinions, of them that opposed against the doctrine of meritte
properly so named before LVTHERS time.

Lib. 1. d. 17. quaest. 1.
Gregorius Ariminensis, besides the reason formerly alleged, that no act of
man, though done in, and out of the habit of charity, is so great a good as
eternal life, and equivalent to it, and consequently that so great a reward as
eternal life, cannot be due unto it ex debito iustitiae; has sundry other
reasons for proof of the same. Intelligendum est, says he, etiam ipsa hominis
bona merita esse Dei munera, quibus cum vita aeterna redditur, quid aliud nisi
gratia pro gratia redditur? haec Augustinus. Idem Antecedens probatur ratione:
Nam constat quod animae carenti charitate simul and gloria: Deus quantum ad
neutram est illi debtor: and si dat charitatem, gratis donat. Nunc autem
nullus diceret, quod ex eo quod Deus donat aliquod munus alicui, fiat ei
alterius muneris debtor. Ergo non ex eo quod Deus gratis dat charitatem,
debetur consequenter ipsi animae gloria, sive beatitudo aeterna. Et si dicatur
quod non ideo debetur alicui vita aeterna, quia habet charitatem, aut quia data
est charitas illi, sed quia secundum acceptam charitatem operatur. Contra, quod
omnes operationes nostrae secundum charitatem factae, and omnia merita nostra
sunt Dei dona, ut dicit Augustinns 13 de trinitate cap. 10. and autoritate
ejusdem praeallegata, and per consequens non ex illis est Deus debtor alterius
praemij. Ad quartum dicendum, quod cum sit justitia vnicuique reddere quod suum
est, id est, sibi debitum, secundum sententiam Augustini 1. de Libero Arbitrio,
sic vita aeterna just meritorie redditur operanti. Et dicitur corona
justitiae, sicut ei debita est, pro talibus operibus meritorijs. Eis autem non
est simpliciter debita, nec ex natura ipsorum, sed solum ex gratuita
ordinatione Dei, qui ex abundantia misericordiae suae, statuit tales actus vita
aeterna praemiare: propter quam statutam gratiae legem, sibi debita dicitur and
just retribui, and secundum hanc considerationem, posset etiam dici stipendium
bonorum operum vita aeterna. Ad quem intellectum loquitur etiam Augustinus in
lib. de gratia, and lib. arbit. and tamen simpliciter gratis donatur, and vt
ibi dicit Augustinus gratia pro gratia redditur. Vnde and glossa super illud
Apostoli 2 ad Tim. 4. Bonum certamen certavi, cursum consummavi, fidem servavi:
in reliquo reposita est mihi corona justitiae, quam reddet mihi Dominus in illa
die justus Iudex, etc. dicit, quod vita aeterna est gratia pro gratia. Et ideo
sicut notat Augustinus super eisdem verbis 1. lib. ad Simplicianum, quamvis
Apostolus dixerit reddet, quasi jam sit ex debito, cum tamen ascendit in altum,
scilicet Christus, captivavit captivitatem, non reddidit, sed dedit dona
hominibus, volens per hoc Augustinus innuere, quod cum aeterna vita datur
justis, non tam redditur quam donatur. Ex eodem sensu intelligendae sunt
glossae, cum justus dicitur retribuendo bona pro bonis, and misericors
retribuendo bona pro malis, non quia non sit utrobique misericordia, sed quia
magis apparet misericordia in dando bona pro malis, and in dando bona pro bonis
generaliter loquendo, videtur quaedam justitia ratione conformitatis meriti ad
praemium, in hac generali ratione, quia utrumque bonum est, in hac tamen
speciali retributione utique misericordia est, vnde in glossa prius allegata
sequitur immediate, and ipsa tamen justitia, qua retribuuntur bona pro bonis,
non est sine misericordia. Huic etiam concordat commune dictum doctorum
dicentium, quod Deus praemiat ultra condignum, ergo vita aeterna non debetur ex
condigno meritis nostris.

L. 2. d. 27. q. 2. item l. 1, d. 17. q. 2.
Durandus clearly and fully agrees with Scotus and Ariminensis,
distinguishing merit of condignity, making it to be of two sorts. Quoddam est
meritum de condigno large sumpto, pro quadam dignitate quam Deus ex ordinatione
requirit in operibus nostris, ad hoc vt remunerentur vita aeterna, and haec
dignitas est in nobis per gratiam and charitatem habitualem. Aliud est meritum
de condigno stricte and proprie accepto, and tale meritu^ est actio voluntaria,
propter quam alicui merces debetur ex justitia, sic quod si non reddatur, ille
ad que^ pertinet reddere injuste facit, and est simpliciter and proprie
injustus, and tale meritum de condigno invenitur inter homines, sed non est
hominis ad Deum. Quod patet, quia quod redditur potius ex liberalitate dantis,
quam ex debito operis, non cadit sub merito de condigno stricte sumpto; sed
quicquid a Deo accipimus, sive sit gratia, sive sit gloria, sive bonum
temporale, vel spirituale, praecedente in nobis propter hoc quocunque bono
opere; potius and principalius accipimus ex liberalitate Dei, quam reddatur ex
debito operis; ergo nihil penitus cadit sub merito de condigno sic accepto.
Facilius and minus est reddere aequivalens ejus quod quis accepit ab alio, quam
eum constituere debitorem, sed nullus potest reddere Deo aequivalens; Deo and
parentibus nemo potest reddere aequivalens secundum philosophum; ergo multo
minus est possibile, quod ex quocunque nostro opere Deus fiat nobis debtor:
All that we are and have, whether good actions, good habits or good use of
things, it is all from the goodness of God, ex dono gratuito nullus obligatur ad
dandum amplius, sed potius recipiens magis obligatur danti, ideo ex bonis
habitibus, and ex bonis actibus sieve vsibus nobis a Deo datis, Deus non
obligatur nobis ex aliquo debito justitiae, ad aliquid amplius dandum, ita quod
si non dederit sit injustus, sed potius nos sumus Deo obligati: and sentire seu
dicere oppositum est temerarium seu blasphemum. Ex hoc quod Deus dat quaedam
non obligatur ad dandum alia, ita vt non dando sit injustus, and si quid pro
bonis operibus nostris nobis datur vel redditur, potius and principalius est ex
liberalitate Dei dantis, qua^ ex debito nostri operis. Quod si quis dicat quod
quamvis Deus non constituatur nobis debtor ex aliquo nostro opere,
constituitur tamen debtor ex sua promissione. Non valet propter duo; Primum
est quia promissio divina in scripturis sanctis, non sonat in aliquam
obligationem, sed insinuat meram dispositionem liberalitatis divinae; Secundum
est quia quod redditur, no^ ex debito praecedentis operis, sed ex promissione
praecedente, non quidem redditur ex merito operis de condigno; sed solum vel
principaliter ex promisso. Sicut reddere justum preciu^ pro re accepta ab
aliquo est actus justitiae, ita recompensare mercedem, vel praemium laboris
nostri operis est actus justitiae. Et ideo in illis in quibus est simpliciter
justum, etiam simpliciter ratio meriti and praemij seu mercedis; in quibus
autem no^ est simpliciter justum sed secundum quid, in his non est simpliciter
ratio meriti, sed secundum quid: inter Deum autem and hominem, non potest esse
justum simpliciter, sicut nec aequale, sed solum justum secundum quid, scilicet
domina-, tivum, quia totum bonu^ qvod est hominis, est Dei and a Deo, and multo
amplius quam actiones serui sint sui Domini in humanis, propter quod meritum
hominis apud Deum, non potest esse meritum simpliciter de condigno, sed solum
secundum praesuppositionem divinae ordinationis, ita scilicet vt homo id
consequatur a Deo per suam operationem quasi praemium, ad quod Deus ei virtutem
operandi deputavit. Et supra dicit; maximam esse inaequalitatem inter opus
nostrum and vitam aeternam, nec valere quod quidam dicunt, quod sit quaedam
aequalitas secundum quod ex gratia spiritus sancti procedit, and quod valor
ejus attenditur secundum virtutem spiritus sancti moventis nos in vitam
aeterternam. Bellar. de Iustific. l. 5. c. 16. Durandus videtur omnino velle
merita nostra ex gratia Dei procedentia, and posita promissione, adhuc non esse
talia vt ijs ex justitia debeatur merces, sed ex sola Dei liberalitate.

Thomas Waldensis tom. 3. de sacramentalibus c. 7. confuting this saying
imputed to Wickliffe, Confidat homo in merito proprio, quia ad mensuram illius
Deus necessario praemiabit, alleges out of Aug: Deus non inveniret aliquid in
hominibus nisi ad interitum, si cum ijs ageret per pondera meritoru^. Super
illud Ps. 94. Praeoccupemus facie^ ejus in confessione. Quomodo distinguis,
vota quae reddis Deo: vt eum lauds, te accuses, quia illius est misericordia,
vt peccata nostra dimittat: na^ si vellet pro meritis agere, non inveniret,
nisi quos damnaret; haec Aug: Et cum illud obiiceretur 2 Timothy 4. Bonum certamen
certaui, cursum consummaui etc: Quamvis bona opera recoluit, tame^ non in eis
confidit, qui soli Deo gloria^ dedit. Et cum omnia faceret: non aute^ ego,
inquit, sed gratia Dei mecum. Hanc item normam observat Psalmista cum dicit.
Retribuet mihi Dominus Psalm. 17.
secundum iustitiam meam, and secundum innocentiam mea^ super me. sed his
verbis praemisit: quoniam voluit me. Gratiam ergo voluntatis ejus prae ^umens,
descendit ad innocentiam actionis. Et Cassiodorus: dicit Apostolus, De reliquo
reposita est mihi corona justitiae etc: non quoth suis aliquid meritis humilis
applicabat, sed quia praemissis beneficijs domini, jam deberi posse praemium
confidebat. Hoc non erat in meritis co^fidere, sed in beneficijs Domini. Et
supra: Nec hoc dico quin accepta gratia fiducia^ praestet orandi, sed omnino
non oportet vt fiduciam in ea constituat quisquam impetrandi. Hoc solum
conferunt haec prima dona, ab ea misericordia, quae tribuit haec, vt speremus
and ampliora. And he adds, Quantum mea sapit modicitas, haec ipsa
determinatio scripturarum, quam sic ex Apostolo and Psalmista annotant sancti
patres, congruentius jungeretur locutionibus de meritis hominum, quam absolute
diceretur quod homo ex meritis est dignus regno coeloru^, aut hac gratia, vel
illa gloria: quamuis quidam Scholastici inuenerunt ad hoc dicendum, terminos de
condigno and congruo. At Chrysostomus dicit, Quid dignum facimus in hoc seculo,
vt participes domini nostri, in regnis coelestibus fieri mereamur? Ideo just
dicit Apostolus, Existimo quod non sunt condignae passiones hujus temporis ad
futuram gloriam. Reputo igitur saniorem theologum, fideliore^ catholicum, and
scripturis sanctis magis concordem, qui tale meritum simpliciter abnegat, and
cu^ modificatione Apostoli and scripturaru^, concedit quia simpliciter quis non
meretur regnu^ coeloru^, sed ex gratia Dei, aut voluntate largitoris. Sic enim
dicit Apostolus, Non quoth sufficie^tes simus existimare aliquid a nobis: sed
sufficie^tia nostra ex Deo est. 2. Cor. 3. Haec locutio crebra esset in ore
peritorum fidelium, vt Pelagianis qui gratiam Dei ^acent vel abnegant, and in
meritis hominum omnino confidunt, ex part gratiae Dei inueniremur esse
discordes, sicut omnes sancti priores vsque ad recentes Scholasticos, and
co^munis scripsit ecclesia. Vnde in oratione Canonis ad Deum. Non aestimator
meriti, sed veniae quaesumus largitor admit etc: Feria quarta passionis: Vt
qui de meritorum qualitate diffidimus, non judicium tuum, sed misericordia^
consequi mereamur. Et in secreta oratione dominicae secudae adve^tus: Vbi nulla
suppetu^t suffragia meritoru^, tuae nobis indulgentiae succurre praesidijs.
Meritum nostrum in articulo minime Deus attendit, sieve rationem congrui, vel
condigni, sed gratiam suam, aut voluntatem suam, aut misericordiam suam.

Paulus Burgensis in additione in Psalm. 35. Manifestum quod misericordia Dei
maxim relucet in Coelo, vbi beati misericordiam Dei plene consequuntur, vt in
Math: 5. cujus ratio est, nam gloriam coelestem nullus de condigno secundum
legem communem meretur. Vnde Apostolus ad Rom: 8. Non sunt condignae passiones
etc: Epist. 19.
Cassander says, he found it thus written by a certain schoole-man in an old
manuscript, Nota quod cum dicitur, Deus pro bonis meritis dabit vitam aeternam:
pro, primo notat signum, vel viam, vel occasionem aliquam: sed si dicatur
propter bona merita dabit vitam aeternam, propter, notat causam efficientem.
Ideo non recipitur a quibusdam, sed hanc recipient, pro bonis meritis, and
consimiles earum, assignantes differentiam inter pro and propter. Lib. 1. c. 39.
Thomas Bradwardin in summa contra Pelagianos, Disputat meritum non esse causam
aeterni praemij, cumque scriptura and doctores confirment, Deum praemiaturum
bonos propter merita sua bona, propter non significare causam proprie, sed
improprie, vel causam cognoscendi, vel ordinem, vel denique dispositionem
subjecti. Bernard: de gratia and libero arbitrio. Merita nostra sunt via regni
non causa regnandi. Camaracensis in 4. quaest: 1: artic: 1. Quia causa est
illud ad cujus esse sequitur aliquid. Dupliciter potest aliquid dici causa: vno
modo proprie, quando ad praesentiam esse vnius, virtute ejus ex natura rei
sequitur esse alterius, and sic ignis est causa caloris: alio modo improprie,
quando ad praesentiam esse vnius sequitur esse alterius, non tamen virtute
ejus, nec ex natura rei, sed ex sola voluntate alterius, and sic actus
meritorius dicitur causa respectu praemij: (subdit autem) causa sine qua non,
non debet simpliciter and absolute dici causa, quia proprie non est causa. And
the same Cameracensis proves at large, that there is no condign meriting of
eternal life.

Manipulus Curatorum, fol. 129. Quare melius dicimus, adveniat regnum tuum,
quam dicamus adveniamus in regnum tuum? dico quod ad denotandu^, quod gloria
Paradisi non habetur ex propriis meritis, sed ex mera gratia Dei, iuxta verbum
Apostoli dicentis, Non ex operibus iustitiae quae fecimus nos. Sed secundum
misericordiam salvos nos fecit, non autem dicimus, adveniamus, quia ut dictum
est, ex meritis nostris non possumus ad illud venire, nemo potest venire ad me,
nisi pater meus traxerit illum, ut dicitur Joan. Citatus ab Hosio conf. cathol.
c. 73. tom. r. p. 286.
Stephanus Brulepher l. 1. d. 17. following the opinion of Scotus, lays down
two propositions, the first, Nullus actus elicitus ex charitate, and secundum
inclinationem charitatis, quantum cunque bonus sit, est dignus vita aeterna ex
natura rei: probatur, Non sunt condignae passiones etc. Christus in Evangelio
cum feceritis omnia, etc. Sed si homo faceret actus ex natura rei dignos
aeterno praemio, non esset servus inutilis: the second, Omnis actus elicitus ab
habente charitatem; and secundum inclinationem charitatis, solum est dignus
vita aeterna, propter passivam acceptationem Dei. Quid sit autem acceptare,
Scotus explicat ipse dicens, acceptare est velle aliquem secundum dispositionem
quam nunc habet, esse dignum tali praemio, quem prius non voluit esse dignum;
verbi gratia, sit aliquis gravis peccator, non modo non dignus coelesti
praemio, verumetiam dignissimus qui sempiterno supplicio afficiatur,
convertatur is ad Deum, studeat eum placare jejuniis, orationibus, eleemosynis;
quamvis haec omnia natura sua non sint ejusmodi, ut sint coelesti praemio
digna; tamen secundum has dispositiones acceptat Deus hominem ex gratuita sua
bonitate, and vult esse dignum tali praemio.

Anselm. Si homo mill annis serviret Deo etiam ferventissime, non mereretur ex
condigno dimidium diem esse in regno coelorum, l. de mensurat. crucis. Apud.
Hos. ib.
Simon de Cassia, Neminem Deus nisi per misericordiam salvat, nec reprobat nisi
justo judicio. Drogo l. de Sacramento dominicae passionis: Terra mentis nostrae
est velut chaos quoddam, confusione teterrimum and involutum, ignorans tam
sinem suum quam principium, and naturae suae modum, nisi quod a summo Creatore
de nihilo mirabiliter factam se credit, and post hanc vitam, vel ad inferos pro
suis meritis, vel ad coelos pro misericordia sui autoris transferendam. Citatus
ab Hosio ibid.
Rogerus Benedictinus scribens vitam Brunonis Archiepiscopi Colon. ante annos
500 sic orditur, sapientiae nimirum est scire, unde sit donum quod quis
accipit, ne a se sibi hoc esse, aut a Deo quidem sed sibi debitum putet, si
enim quaerimus quid nobis debeatur, nihil inveniemus nisi supplicium,
misericordia autem Dei praerogauit nobis gratiam, ut haberet quibus redderet
gratiam pro gratia, and hoc jam esset debitum, quia Deus voluit, non quiahomo
meruit, quid enim habes, ait Apostolus, quod non accepisti, si autem accepisti
quid gloriaris quasi non acceperis? Bernard, Sufficit ad meritum, scire quod
non sufficient merita; in Cantica ser. 68. Et sermon. 61. Meum proinde meritum
miseratio domini: non plane sum meriti inops, quamdiu ille miserationum non
fuerit; quod si misericordiae domini multae, multis nihilominus ego in meritis
sum; quid enim si multorum sim mihi conscius delictorum? nempe vbi abundavit
delictum, superabundavit and gratia. Et si misericordiae domini ab aeterno, and
usque in aeternum, ego quoque misericordias domini in aeternum cantabo. Number
quid justitias meas? Domine memorabor iustitiae tuae solius: ipsa est enim and
mea, nempe factus es mihi tu justitia a Deo. and ser. 68. Merita habere cures,
habita donata noveris, fructum speraveris Dei misericordiam, and omne periculum
evasisti, paupertatis, ingratitudinis, praesumptionis. Haimo in ps. 131. Nemo
debet de suis meritis praesumere, sed omne^ salvatione^ ex Christi meritis
expectare Hier. in Es. 64. Si nostra consideremus merita desperandu^ est, si
tua^ autem clementia^ qui flagellas omne^ filium que^ recipis, audemus preces
fundere, tu enim pater noster es. Orig. in 4. ad To. Cum considero sermonis
eminentiam, quod dicit, operanti secundum debitum reddi, vix mihi suadeo quod
possit vllum opus esse, quod ex debito remunerationem Dei deposcat.

Theodoret: explicans illud Sophoniae vlt.
, Vae qui accepit super eam opprobrium, Hominum inquit salus ex sola Dei
misericordia pendet, neque enim hanc adipiscimur praemium and mercedem
iustitiae, sed Dei bonitatis donum est. Explicans illud Psalmi 23. Hic accipiet
benedictionem a Domino. Ingeniose admodum misericordiam cum benedictione
coniunxit. Etenim quae existimantur remunerationes, propte^ lam diuinam
benignitatem hominibus praebentur. Omnes enim hominum iustitiae nihil sunt ad
dona, quae a Deo nobis suppeditata sunt, nedum ad futura munera, quae omnem
humanam cogitationem transcendunt. Basil: in Psalm. explicans illud, Propter
nomen tuum propitiaberis peccato meo. Ego te inquit oro vt propitius sis
peccatis meis, non propter exactam meam poenitentiam, sed propter benignitatis
nomen quod habes; explicans illum Psalm. 142. locum Exaudi me in iustitia tua.
Quid facuo homo? infra dicis non iustificabitur in conspectu tuo omnis viuens,
and si iniquitates observaueris etc: and hic secundum iustitiam exaudiri petis?
quid est igitur quod dicit? iustitiam hic benignitatem Dei dicit, and hoc
multis in locis vider^ potest, and valde merito. Apud homines enim iustitia
misericordia caret, apud Deum vero non ita, sed immixta est misericordia, atque
ita immixta, vt ipsa iustitia benignitas vocetur. Chrysostom: in Psalm. 4. Etiamsi
innumerabilia recte fecerimus, a misericordia and clementia audimur, etiamsi ad
ipsum fastigium virtutis pervenerimus, servamur a misericordia. Ambros: in
Psalm: 118. Semper homo etiamsi sanctus and iustus sic debet orare, vt exaudiat
eum secundum misericordiam suam, non secundum meritum virtutis alicuius.

Hitherto I have sufficiently proved, that both the latter Schoolmen and the
more ancient fathers, rejected the merit of condignity; I will only add the
testimony of a great learned man, that lived immediately before Luthers time,
and the opinion of some of the best learned after his time, and so conclude
this point. Gocchianus part: 3. c. 6. Aquinas scripto tertio in sent: d. 18.
dicit actum charitate informatum, mereri vitam aeternam ex condigno, quia inter
huiusmodi meritum and praemium, invenitur aequalitas secundum rectam
aestimationem, and huiusmodi meritum innititur divinae iustitiae. Contra Paulus
Romans 4. si Abraham ex operibus etc: vbi dicit glossa Aug. in lib. de spiritu
and littera, quod actus hominis quantumvis sit informatus charitate, tamen non
potest esse tam perfectaeiustitiae, vt ex debito mereatur praemium beatitudinis
aeternae, and examplificat de Apostolis, In multis offendimus omnes, and
iterum, si dixerimus quia peccatum non habemus etc: Quis vestrum habens servum
etc: docet suos quod ex operibus iustitiae de fide formata procedentibus, non
debet expectari praemium aternae beatitudinis ex debito iustitiae, tanquam
fecissent Deum sibi debitorem per huiusmodi. 1 Quia nihil vtilitatis Deo ex
nostris operibus accrescit. 2 Quia quicquid facere possumus, ex debito
servitutis debuimus; Attend servum tam in agro quam domo laborantem, and tamen
a Domino suo ex debito iustitiae nec gratias merentem; Vt ex praemissis
advertere potes, homo per quoscunque actus suos qualitercunque factos, mereri
non potest, quia omnium operum suorum quae facere potest debtor est, and ideo
ecclesia i^ fide Christi fundata innititur meritis Christi, and per ease credit
and sperat saluari, ipse enim meruit nobis a peccatis and a diabolo
liberationem, vitae iustificationem and glorificationem, vt in omnibus
honorificetur Deus. 3 Ostendit idem Esaias, facti sumus vt immundi omnes nos,
and quasi pannus menstruatae vniuersae iustitiae nostrae; Quae ergo proportio
nostrorum bonorum operum, quae tam erunt judici abominabilia, and aeternae
beatitudinis, quae tantae pulchritudinis and dulcedinis perfectione abundat?

Anno 1541. In the time of Charles the fifth and by his appointment, there was
a conference between six learned divines at Ratisbon, for the conposing of the
differences in religion, whereof three were chosen for the Roman, and three for
the reformed part; at which conference Cardinal Contarenus was present. At
this conference the collocutors of both sides, agreed in all the points that
concern Justification, composed the differences touching the same, and offered
the form of their agreement to the Emperor and the imperial states. In this
agreement they left out the matter of merit; which when some disliked, and
there wanted not in Rome that took exception to their so doing; Cardinal
Contarenus writes to Cardinal Farnesius, and shows at large, that there is
no merit properly so named, out of the grounds of Philosophy and Divinity.
And strongly proves, that there is no merit of eternal life; because if there
be, then either men merit it before or after Justification, not before, then
enemies etc: not after, because to merit is to make that due that was not due
before, whereas the happiness of eternal life is due to the justified, by the
right of his justification, so that the works of the justified do not make
the same newly due.

CHAP. 13.
Of works of Supererogation and counsels of perfection.

THe Papists imagine certain degrees of moral goodness: the lowest whereof,
who so attayneth not, does sin, as not doing that the precept requires; the
higher, such as men are counseled unto, if they will be perfect, though not
by any precept urged thereunto; they that attain to such height of virtue, are
said by them to do works of supererogation. But De consilijs Evangelicis and
statu perfectionis.
Gerson shows, that these men err, in that they discern not between the
matter of precepts and counsels, imagining that the precept requires the
inferior degrees of virtue, and the counsels the more high and excellent:
whereas the precept requires all the actions of virtue in the best sort they
can be performed, and the counsels are conversant in another matter, namely,
in showing us the means whereby most easily, if all things be answerable in
the parties, men may attain to the height of virtue. Hereunto agrees In
concordia^ evangelicam, c. 100.
Iansenius, alleging the authority of Aquinas, secunda secundae quaest. 184.
Artic. 3. who affirms that the perfection of Christian life, consists
essentially in keeping the commandments: and of another, who says, that
watchings, fastings, nakedness, and forsaking all, are not Christian
perfections, but the instruments of perfection, not the ends of Christian
discipline, but the means whereby men do oftentimes attain to the height of
virtue: so that as Gerson, and In sent. l. 3. d. 34. qu. 3.
Paludanus do show, some men at sometime, and in some state of things, may
attain to as great height of perfection, living in marriage, and possessing
much, as they that live single, and give away all they have: Bellar. lib. 2. de
Monachis. cap. 6.
But the conceit of the Jesuits is, that the entering into a Monastical life,
wherein are implied the vows of single life and voluntary poverty, is
essentially of so great merit, and acceptance with God, that it is a kind of
Baptism freeing from all temporal punishments otherwise due for precedent
sins.

CHAP. 14.
Of Election and Reprobation depending on the foresight of something in the
parties elected or rejected.

WHy these or these men are predestined or reprobated, Li. 1. d. 40. qu. 1.
art. 2.
Ariminensis says, some yield a positive reason, to wit, works, or the well
using of free will; others, a privative, to wit, the not resisting against
grace: against these opinions he opposes these conclusions; the first, that
no man is predestined, for that God foresaw he would use the liberty of his
will aright; the second, that no man is predestined, because God foresaw, he
would not resist against his grace; the third, that whom God did predestinate,
he did freely, and only of mercy predestinate them, according to the good
pleasure of his will. See the diverse opinions touching Predestination formerly
found in the Roman Church, in In 1 sent. q. 12
Cameracensis.

CHAP. 15.
Of the seven Sacraments.

DVrandus L. 4. d. 26. q. 3.
denies Matrimony to be a Sacrament properly so named, and of the same nature
with the rest, or to give grace. L. 8. c. 5.
Canus says, the Divines speak uncertainly of the matter and form of
Matrimony, and that they do not certainly resolve, whether it give grace or
not. Part. 4. q. 5. memb. 2. art. 1. q. 5. memb. 3. art 2. q. 9. memb. 2. art.
2.
Alexander of Hales says, that there are only four, which are in any sort
properly to be said Sacraments of the new Law, that the other three supposed
Sacraments had their being long before, but received some addition by Christ
manifested in the flesh, that amongst them which began with the new Covenant,
only Baptism and the Eucharist were instituted immediately by Christ, received
their forms from him, and flowed out of his wounded side: whence it comes,
that water is the matter of Baptism, and bread and wine of the Eucharist,
without any other consecration, but that which they receive from the words of
Sacramental form: but the matter of the other two supposed Sacraments,
requires consecration, and hallowing, before it can be the matter of those
Sacraments, so that though the words of form be pronounced, they have no
virtue of Sacraments, but from precedent consecration: Whereby it appears,
that they take their force from the prayers of the Church, by the Ministry
whereof they were appointed, and not from the words of form, as the other do.
Hence also it comes, that they are variable both in their matter and form.
The Apostles, says Alexander of Hales, confirmed with the only imposition of
their hands without any certain form of words or outward matter or Element,
but afterward it was otherwise ordained, both in respect of the one, and the
other: the forms of Baptism, and the Eucharist being appointed by Christ, are
kept inviolably without all change: but touching the words of form to be used
in any other of the supposed Sacraments, there is no certainty, but they are
diversely and doubtfully desiuered. The reason whereof is, because they are of
humane devising. By this which has been said, it may appear, that the other
pretended Sacraments are not of the same nature with Baptism and the
Eucharist, as even De sacram. in genere l. 1. de definit. Sacram. c. 9.
Bellarmin himself is forced to confess: the sacred or holy things, says he,
which the Sacraments of the new Law signify, are threefold; the grace of
Justification, the Passion of Christ, and eternal life, as Thomas teaches;
touching Baptism, and the Eucharist, the thing is most evident, concerning the
other it is not so certain.

CHAP. 16.
Of the being of one body in many places at the same time.

THE possibility of the being of one body in many places at the same time, was
ever denied by many worthy members of the Church, and consequently the local
presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, whether definitive, or
circumscriptiue, was likewise rejected, as a thing impossible. To affirm,
says Quolib. 3. q. 1. art. 2.
Aquinas, that one body may be locally in this place, and yet also in another
at the same time, implies a contradiction: and therefore the power of God
extends not to the effecting of any such thing. Lib. 4. did. 10. quaest. 2.
Scotus confesses, that Egidius, Godfredus de font, Alanus, and Henricus, are
of the same opinion with Thomas. Lib. 4. did. 11. q. 1. and. 11.
Durandus says, that which is present in one place definitiuely or
circumscriptiuely, cannot in any such sort be in many places at the same time.
Whereupon he pronounces, that the body of Christ is no otherwise in the
Sacrament, but by reason of a certain habitudinary union between it, and the
sacramental elements: whence it was wont to be said, that Christ's body is
personaliter in verbo, localiter in coelo, sacramentaliter in Eucharistia:
Personally in the eternal word, locally in heaven, sacramentally in the
Eucharist. The first that taught otherwise, and brought in the local presence,
was Scotus, whom Li. 4. q 4.
Occam followed, though he deny not, but the former opinion had great favorers.

CHAP: 17.
Of Transubstantiation.

THe conversion of the bread and wine into Christ's body and blood, all of us,
says In 3 part. qu. 75. art. 1.
Caietane, do teach in words, but in deed many deny it, thinking nothing
less. These are diversely divided one from another: for some by the Conversion
that is in the sacrament, understand nothing but Indentity of place, that is,
that the bread is therefore said to be made the body of Christ, because where
the bread is, the body of Christ becomes present also; others understand by the
word Conversion, nothing else but the order of succession, that is, that the
body succeeds, and is under the vailes of those accidents, under which the
bread, which they think to be annihilated, was before. This opinion in
substance Scotus follows, though in the manner of his speech he seems to
decline it. Some admit both the word and thing, but yet not wholly, but only in
part, as Durandus. Lib. 4. did. 11. qu. 2.
Bonauentura says, that some seeing the accidents to remain both in their
being and operation, think the matter of the sacramental element still
remains; Other, the form; but that the more Catholic or general opinion
is, that the whole substance of the elements is turned into Christ's body and
blood. We see, he makes the doctrine of Transubstantiation to be but an
opinion. Centilogij conclus. 39.
Occam says, there are three opinions of Transubstantiation, of which, the
first supposes a couersion of the sacramental elements; the second an
annihilation; the third affirms the bread to be in such sort
transubstantiated into the body of Christ, that it is no way changed in
substance, or substantially converted into Christ's body, or does cease to be,
but only that the body of Christ in every part of it becomes present in every
part of the bread. This opinion he says, the Master of sentences mentions,
not much disliking it; yet is it not commonly holden. 4. sent. q 6.
Cameracensis says, that the more common opinion is, that the substance of
bread does not remain, but wholly cease; and that though this opinion be not
evidently deduced from the scriptures, nor concluded out of any determination
of the universal Church for ought he can see, yet he is resolved to follow it.
Tom. 2. de sacram. Eucharistiae, cap. 43.
Waldensis says, he found in a certain old book of decrees, that in the
year 1049. there was a meeting of Archbishops, Bishops, and other religious
persons in a Synod, and that when they were come together, they began to
speak of the body and blood of Christ, some saying one thing, some another;
but that before the third day of meeting, they that denied the substantial
conversion of the sacramental elements, were silent. Cap. 19.
But in the same book he reports out of Christopolitanus Zacharias, his
book entitled Quatuor vnum, that there were some, perhaps many, but hardly to
be discerned and noted, that thought still, as Berengarius did, whom they then
condemned, and yet condemned him with the rest, in this respect only disliking
him, for that refusing the form of words the Church used, with the nakedness
of his manner of speaking, he gave offense, not following the use of the
Scriptures, which every where call things that are signs, by the names of
things signified, especially in the matter of Sacraments, the more lively to
express their virtue and efficacy: these men ceased not to charge others
secretly, that they knew not the nature of figurative speeches, and therefore
not without gross error, killing the soul, took signs for the things,
whereof they are signs; scorning not a little the folly, of them that say, the
appearing accidents of bread and wine after the conversion, do hang in the
air, or that the senses are deceived. In the same place he says, that
Guitmundus reports some other that were not of the faction of Berengarius,
but with great vehementie, contrary and opposite unto him, to have been of
opinion, that the bread and wine in part are changed, and in part remain;
these supposed so much only to be changed, as is to serve for the
communicating of the worthy receivers: others thought the whole to be changed,
but that when unworthy men come to communicate, the body and blood of Christ
cease to be present, and the substances of bread and wine return, and are
there present to be received by them. But that it may yet more clearly
appear, that the opinion of Transubstantiation never passed currantly in the
Church, let us add another testimony of the same Waldensis, Cap. 64:
who says, that some supposed the conversion that is in the Sacrament, to be
in that the bread and wine are assumpted into the unity of Christ's person: some
thought it to be by way of Impanation: and some by way of figurative or
Tropicall appellation. The first and second of these opinions, found the better
entertainment in some men's minds, because they grant the essential presence
of Christ's body, and yet deny not the presence of the bread still remaining to
sustain the appearing accidents. These opinions he reports to have been very
acceptable to many, not without sighs, wishing the Church had decreed, that
men should follow one of them; Whereupon John Paris writes, that this way of
Impanation so pleased Guido the Carmelite, sometimes Reader of the holy Palace,
that he professed, if he had been Pope, he would have prescribed and
commanded the embracing of it. Neither was it less pleasing to many in
Waldensis time, who, as he says, did as it were wish in their hearts, it were
free from them to defend it, and that a decree in the Church were passed in the
favor of it.

CHAP. 18.
Touching or all Manducation.

ALexander 4. part. qu. 1^. memb. 2. art. 2.
of Hales, and Lib. 4 sent. did. 12. art. 3. qu. 1.
Bonaventura do teach, that no man can eat the flesh of Christ, and drink
his blood, without faith: and that the eating of Christ is mystical, not
corporal, Bonaventura shows; for that whereas there are three things implied
in corporal eating, to wit, a mastication or chewing, a traiection into the
stomach and belly, and a conversion of the thing eaten into the substance of
the eater; this later, which is most essential in eating, cannot agree unto
the body of Christ, which is not turned into our substance, but rather in
mystical sort turns us into it self. It appears by that of Waldensis
cited before, that many thought, the wicked do not eat the flesh of Christ,
seeing they supposed so much only of the bread to be turned into the body of
Christ, as is to be received by the believers; or if all be turned, that yet
the body of Christ cease to be in the Sacrament, when a wicked man is to
receive it, and that the bread returns again.

CHAP. 19.
Of the real sacrificing of Christ's body on the Altar, as a propitiatory
sacrifice for the quick and dead.

TOuching the real sacrificing of Christ's Body on the Altar, the Church never
taught any such thing, as the Romanists now teach, as appears by these
testimonies following. Although, says In Canonem Missae lect. 85
Biel, Christ were once offered, when he appeared in our flesh, he is offered
notwithstanding daily hidden under the vailes of Bread and wine, not touching
any of those things which import punishment or suffering (for Christ is not
daily wounded, he suffers not, he dies not) but for two other causes, the
consecration and receiving of the holy Eucharist, may be named a sacrifice and
oblation: first, because it is a representation and memorial of the true
sacrifice and holy oblation made on the Altar of the Cross; secondly, because
it makes us partakers of the effects of the same: now the resemblances of
things, as Augustine notes, writing to Simplicianus, are called by the names
of those things whereof they are resemblances, as we are wont to say, when we
behold a painted table or wall, this is Cicero, this Salustius. Wherefore
seeing the celebration of this sacrifice is a lively resemblance of the Passion
of Christ, which is the true sacrificing of him, it may rightly be named the
sacrificing of him. Peter Lombard, Thomas, and the other Schoolmen, says 2
Tom. contr. 3. l. 5. de Eucharistia qui est 1. de missa, c. 15.
Bellarmine, were not careful of that, which is now in question, touching the
daily renewed Real sacrificing of Christ, but only sought to show how the
sacrifice of the Mass, may be called an offering of Christ, that is, a slaying
of him; and therefore proposing the question, whether the Eucharist be a
sacrifice, they answer, for the most part, that it may be said to be an
offering or sacrifice, because it has a resemblance of the true and Real
offering which was on the Altar of the Cross, and because it communicates
unto us the effects of the true and Real killing of Christ.

CHAP. XX.
Of Remission of sins after this life.

THat Remission of sins after this life was not taught, nor believed in
former times by the Church, appears by the judgment of these Divines who
teach the contrary. The prayers of the living, says L. 1. did. 45. quaest. 1.
Durandus, may be understood to benefit the dead two ways: either in respect
of remitting the fault, or diminishing or taking away the punishment: in the
first sort, the prayers of the living cannot profit the dead, because either
the sin, wherein they depart out of this life, is mortal, or venial; if it be
mortal, he that so departs is not capable of Remission: if venial, he
needs no help, because such remission of sin consists in the ordering the
will aright again, whereby men rightly dislike, that they ill affected before:
now the wills of them that depart hence in grace, and yet with venial sin,
so soon as they are out of the body, are brought into due order, because, as
weight and lightness, carry the things that are heavy or light, if there be no
impediment, to their own places; so Grace and Charity carry men going hence,
to the possessing of eternal happiness, so that all things hindering or
staying, from the present enjoying thereof, are bitter and unpleasant. Now
because not only punishments for mortal sins formerly committed, but also
venial sins, if any be found in him that dies in state of grace, hinder
from such desired enjoying, therefore they must needs be disliked: in which
dislike, the will is reordered again, which in the liking of that it should
not, was disordered, etc. The merits, says Lib. 4. did. 21. quaest. 1.
Scotus, of him that dies in charity, are a sufficient cause of the remission
of venial sins, neither is this cause hindered from working the proper effect
thereof, in him that dies, as it often is, in him that lives; for in him that
lives, there is a stop and hindrance, so long as he remains actually in
sin; but after death there is no stop, because then a man commits no
sin, and therefore by such merits sins are remitted: Whence it follows,
that in the instant of death, all venial sins are remitted, to men dying in
state of grace. Lib. 4. q. 15. mem. 3. art 3.
Alexander of Hales makes grace to be of three sorts; the first, that which is
given in baptism; the second, that which is found in men repenting of sin
committed after Baptism; and the third, that which is in men departing hence,
which he calls final grace: this last, he says, takes away all
sinfullnesse out of the soul, because when the soul parts from the body,
all pronenesse to ill, and all perturbations which were found in it, by reason
of the conjunction with the flesh, do cease, the powers thereof are quieted,
and perfectly subjected to grace, and by that means all venial sins
removed: so that no venial sin is remitted after this life, but in that
instant, wherein grace may be said to be final grace, it has full dominion
and absolute command, and expels all sin. Whereas therefore, the Master of
sentences, and others do say, that some venial sins are remitted after this
life, we must so understand their sayings, that therefore they are said to be
remitted after this life, because it being the same moment or instant, that
does continuate the time of life, and that after life, (so that the last
instant of life, is the first after life) they being remitted and taken away in
the very moment of dissolution, are said to be remitted after this life: for
otherwise, the wills of men after death are unchangeable, and there is no more
place left for merit. Hereunto Dialog. lib. 4. c. 46.
Gregory seems to agree, saying, that the very fear that is found in men
dying, does purge their souls going out of their body, from the lesser sins.
Seeing therefore, as In Psalm. qui habitat, ^er. 10.
Bernard says, if all sin be perfectly taken away, whi^ is the cause, the
effect must needs cease, which is punishment: it follows, that seeing after
death, there is no sin found in men dying in state of grace, there remains
no punishment, and consequently no purgatory.

CHAP. 21.
Of Purgatory.

TOuching Purgatory, Bellarm. li. 2. de Purgatorio, cap. 11.
whether they, that are to be purged, be purged by material fire, or by some
other means, it is doubtful: likewise Cap. 6.
touching the place, the Roman Church has defined nothing. Whereupon some
think, that souls are purged, where they sinned, some in one place, some in
another: neither is there any more certainty Cap. 9.
touching the continuance of sinful souls in their purgation. In did. 19.
qu. 3. art. 2.
Dominicus a Soto thinks, that no man continues in this purgation ten
years: his reason is, for that seeing, men may pacify Gods wrath, by very
short penance in this life, where they can neither endure any great extremity,
nor are perfectly apprehensiue of smart and grief, therefore much sooner in
the other, where they may endure greater extremity, and are more apprehensiue
of it; so that the extremity of their passion, may counteruaile long
continuance in pain. This of Soto, if we grant to be true, says Bellarmine,
no soul needs stay in purging one hour: neither indeed ca^ he prove, that
any does, by Scripture, or Fathers, or any resolution of the Church, but only
because they use to pray for men departed a long time after their death; which
does no more prove, that they need prayers so long as they are prayed for,
then pardons for thousands of years prove Purgatory to continue so long; and
by certain visions, which sometimes Cap. 13.
he regards not. For howsoever sundry visions reported by Beda, Dionysius
Carthusianus, and in the first book of the life of Bernard import, that the
souls of men in Purgatory are tormented by devils, yet he thinks that the
children of God, ouercomming Satan in the last conflict, and being secure of
their future state for ever, are never molested by Satan any more. Thus then we
see, that notwithst^ding any thing defined in the Church, the souls of men may
be purged from all the dross of sinful remainders, and freed from all
punishments, in the very moment of dissolution, which is that we say. Hereupon
Li. 4. did. 45. quaest: 1.
John Bacon says, there be some, who think that Purgatory after this life
cannot be proved by the authority of the Scripture, and that these do say, the
books of Macchabees are not Canonical, and that the Apostle, 1. Cor. 3.
speaks of that fire, that shall purge the elements of the world, in the last
day: And touching that saying of Christ, of sin, that shall never be remitted
in this world, nor that to come, they say it proves not the remission of any
sins in the other world, but that this form of speaking is used, only for
the better enforcing of that he intends to deliver; as if a man should say to
a barren woman, thou shall never bear child, neither in this world nor in that
which is to come.

CHAP. 22.
Of the Saints hearing of our prayers.

THat the Saints do hear our prayers, or are acquainted with our particular
wants, was never resolved in the Church of God. In canone^ missae, lect. 31.
Biel says, that the Saints by that natural, or evening knowledge, whereby
they see and know things, as they are in themselves, do not know or discern our
prayers, neither mental nor vocal, by reason of the immoderate distance
between them and us: and touching that morning knowledge, whereby they see
things in the eternal word, it no way pertaining to their essential felicity,
to see and know our desires, and it being uncertain, whether it appertain to
their accidental happiness, he says, it is not certain, but that it may
seem probable, that God reveals unto them all those suites, which men
present unto them. The Lib. 4. d. 45.
Master of sentences says, it is not incredible, that the souls of the
Saints, that delight in the secrets of Gods countinance, in beholding the same,
see things that are done in the world below. De Sacram: lib: 2. cap. 11.
Hugo de Sancto Victore leaves it doubtful whether the Saints do hear our
prayers or not, and rejects that saying of Gregory, brought to prove that
they do, Qui videt videntem omnia, videt omnia. The interlineall gloss upon
Esaias 63. says Augustine, was of opinion, that the dead, though Saints, know
not what the living, though they be their own children, do here in this
world. Which appears to be true by his own words, pronouncing, that if so
great Patriarchs as was Abraham, knew not what befell to the people that came
of them, it is no way likely that the dead, do intermeddle with the affairs of
the living, either to know them, or to further, and set them forward: whereupon
he concludes, that, for ought is known to the contrary, the Saints remaining
only in heaven, and praying for us only in general, God by the ministry of
Angels, or immediately by himself, without their particular intermedling,
gives us the things we have need of. In 4 sent. li. 3. tract. 8. cap. 5.
quaest. 6.
Willihelmus Altisiodorensis says, that many do think, that neither we do
properly pray to the Saints, nor they pray for us in particular, but that
improperly only we may be said to pray to them, in that we desire God that the
favor which they find with him, resting from their labors, and their works
being gone after them, may procure us their brethren, acceptance likewise,
whom they have left behind them in the warfare of this world. Whereupon the
prayers are, Adiuuent nos eorum merita etc. In the margent he says, that this
was a common opinion in his time.

CHAP. 23.
Of the Superstition and Idolatry committed formerly in the worshipping of
Images.

THat many in the Roman Church did see the abuse and superstition, that was in
the use of Images, appears by Picus Mirand. his Apology of his conclusion
proposed in Rome, that neither the Cross, nor any other image is to be
worshipped with divine worship; by Rational. divin l. 2. de picturis.
Durand. blaming many things in the practice of the Church at that time, and by
De defect. viror. Eccles.
Gerson, disliking the honor then given to Images, their number and fashion,
as being occasions of Idolatry in the simple; which to be true, the words of In
Psalm. 113.
Augustine are proof sufficient, who demands who it is, or where he may be
found, that adoreth or prays, beholding an Image, as the manner was in the
Roman Church, and is not in such sort affected, that he persuades himself it
hears him, and is able and ready to grant him the things he desires, and
seeks in his prayer.

CHAP. 24.
Of Absolution.

ABsolution is now supposed by those of the Church of Rome, to be a
Sacramental Act, giving grace, ex opere operato, and so remitting sin, both
quoad culpam and poenam: but in the Primitive Church it was nothing else, but a
restoring of men formerly put from the Sacrament, and cast out of the Church,
to the Churches peace, and use of the Sacraments again; as appears by
Cyprians Epistles. Neither was Absolution given in those times till penance
were first performed. Amongst the ancient, says Panopliae l. 4. c. 70.
Lindan, Absolution was seldom given, but after penance performed; only in
time of persecution, pestilence, war, or dangerous sickness of the party,
the manner was, sometimes to give absolution presently at the suit of the
penitent, and to require of him the performance of penance afterward, if he
escaped those dangers. Hence in time it came, that ordinarily, they gave
Absolution first, and then imposed penance to be performed afterward, Now
because they could not conceive, from what this Absolution should free them,
not being formerly subjected to any censure of the Church, some began to
think, that it freeth them from the stain of sin, and the punishments due
unto the same, thereby making it a Sacramental Act, yet so, as many retained
a right persuasion still. The Priest, says Part. 4. q. 21. memb. 1. Bonavent.
in 4. did. 18. art. 2. q. 1.
Alexander of Hales, is a Mediator between God and man: to God he ascends,
as an inferior, by way of petition, and as a suitor; to man he descends, as
a Commander and Judge. In the first sort, he obtayneth for men, by his
prayer, and procures acceptance with God: in the second, he reconcileth them
to the Church, his prayer obtayneth grace, his absolution presupposes it, so
that the Keys of the Church extend to the remission of sin, by way of request
obtaining it, not by way of authority giving it.

CHAP. 25.
Of Indulgences and Pardons.

TOuching Indulgences or Pardons; they were originally nothing else, but the
releasing of some part of that penance, that had been enjoined, as appears
by the whole course of antiquity. Whereupon it was a long time, the opinion of
many in the Roman Church, that Indulgences are of force, only in indicio
Ecclesiae, not in iudicio Dei: and that they free men only from enjoined
penance, which the form of them was wont to import, it being ever added in
those relaxations, ab iniunctis poenitentiis; and Opusc. tom. 1. tract. 15. c.
1. 2. 3.
Caietan shows the same, affirming, that an Indulgence is principally an act
of jurisdiction, and the freeing from enjoined penance. That which bred another
conceit in the Roman Church in later times, was an error in practice: for
whereas aunciently they never remitted any part of the penance they had
enjoined, but out of the consideration of the extraordinary signs of
repentance, appearing in the penitent, arguing that to be performed in shorter
time, than was expected, which was intended; in later times they granted these
relaxations and remissions in favor, when there was no inducement, in respect
of any thing, appearing in the parties. Now because to free them from these
penitential exercises, tending to the preventing of Gods Judgments, before so
much was performed, as was necessary for the turning away of his displeasure,
might seem hurtful, rather than beneficial to them, to whom such favors
were showed, in that they were left to Gods judgments, into whose hands it is
fearful to fall, they began to bethink them, how they might supply the
defects of penitential conversion unto God, in those they thus pardoned, and
not leave them to the danger of his future judgment. This they could not
otherwise devise to do, but by casting the overplus of other men's
satisfactions upon them, and releeuing them out of the treasury of the Church:
which grows, as they suppose, out of the satisfactorie sufferings of Christ
and his Saints, multis tamen doctoribus aduersantibus, as Opusc. tom 1. tract.
8 qu. 3.
Caietan notes; where he shows, that Durandus teaches, that the Saints had
no superfluous merits, not rewarded in themselves. Touching Indulgences, In 4.
did. 20. quaest. 3.
Durandus says, little can be said of any certainety, or as undoubtedly true,
seeing the Scripture speaks not expressly of them, neither the Fathers, as
Augustine, Hillarie, Ambrose, Hierome, and the rest; so that in speaking of
them, we must follow the common course. Touching the force of these pardons,
how uncertainly and inconstantly their greatest doctors dispute, it is not
unknown; for Bonaventura notes, that many were of opinion, that pardons have
no other use, nor have any further force or virtue, but only to remit certain
days penance, if the cause, in respect whereof they be granted, be equivalent
unto the penance, which was to have been performed; so making them to be, but
only a commutation of penance, and not a relaxation or remission. De indulgen.
tijs consid. 2.
Gerson says, the judicial and public power of the keys extends not it
self principally, or directly, to the diminishing or taking away of any
punishments, but such, as it self inflicted, or might have inflicted, as are
the punishments of Excommunication, irregularity, and other disablings to
perform Civil or Ecclesiastical acts. And in Consid. 11.
another place he says, the granting of Indulgences extends not it self to
punishments, following the corruption of nature, and flowing from original
sin; for it is certain that the Pope does not absolve, and free men from
thirst, hunger, infirmities and death; so that such absolutions extend only to
the punishments above mentioned, and such as may be inflicted by the just
Judgment and prescription of him that imposes penance for actual sins. When
there the power of the Keys extend only, to such as are on earth, or to them
also that are in Purgatory, the opinions, he says, of men are contrary and
uncertain: Consid. 8.
but howsoever, this he pronounces confidently, that only Christ can give
such pardons for thousands of days and years as many Popes assume to
themselves power to grant.

CHAP. 26.
Of the Infallibility of the Popes judgment.

TOuching the infallibility of the Popes judgment: it was so far from being a
thing resolved of in the Church of God before our time, that Cont. 3. q. 4.
Stapleton confesses, it is yet no matter of faith, but of opinion only;
because so many famous and renowned Deuines, have ever holden the contrary, as
Gerson, Almaine, Occam, almost all the Parisians, all they that thought the
council to be above the Pope, Adrianus Sextus, Durandus, Alfonsus a Castro:
and many more.

CHAP. 27.
Of the power of the Pope, in disposing the affairs of Princes and their
states.

LAstly, Touching the power of the Pope, in disposing the affairs of Princes
and their States, there were ever many worthy men, that opposed themselves
against his unjust and Antichristian claims. There are some says Doctrinal.
fidei, lib. 2. art 3. quaest. 78.
Waldensis, that err, supposing, that the root of all terrene power,
depends in such sort of the Pope, that it is derived unto Princes, by
commission from him; and that if they abuse the same, he may take the
disposing of such affairs as belong unto them, into his own hands. This they
endeavor to prove, because the Ecclesiastical power is more eminent and
excellent than the power of Princes; but this their proof is too weak: for
let vt run through all examples of things which are different in degree of
excellency, and one of them more worthy than another, we shall see that the
Sun is better than the Moon, yet the power and virtue of moystening that is
in the Moon, is not imparted to it from the Sun; the soul is more excellent
than the body: yet the body was before the soul came into it, and in it many
works of sense are performed, which the spirit by it self cannot perform;
gold is better then lead, yet does it not give being unto it: so that though
it were granted, that Episcopal dignity is more high and eminent then the
authority of Princes, yet the first spring of Regal power, is in the King from
God, and not from the Pope. There is, says Waldensis, one doctor Adam, a
Cardinal, who in a dialogue between a Bishop and a King, indeauoureth
altogether to derive the authority of Kings from the Papal power, both in the
being and exercise of it, and reserueth only a power of execution to Princes,
at the command of the high bishop: this error he condemns, and says, that
howsoever the solemnities of the oath, unction, crowning, and the like are
performed to Kings by Bishops, yet has not kingly dignity her beginning from
Priesthood, but by the ministry of Priests, Kings receive it from God, and are
put in possession of it. Fawning and deceitful flattery, says De potestate
ecclesiastica cnosid. 12.
Gerson, whispereth in the ears of Ecclesiastical persons, especially of the
Pope, in shameless manner saying unto them, O sacred Clergy, how great, how
great is the height and sublimity of thy Ecclesiastical power! how is all
secular authority, compared thereunto, altogether nothing! For as all power in
heaven and earth was given to Christ, so Christ left it all to Peter, and his
Successors: so that Constantine the Emperor gave nothing to Pope Syluester,
that was not his before, but only restored that which had bin unjustly
detayned: besides, as there is no power but of God, so is there none, whether
Temporal or Ecclesiastical, Imperial or Regal but from the Pope, in whose
thigh CHRIST has written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: of whose power to
dispute, is sacrilegious boldness, to whom no man may say, Sir, why do you
so? though he alter, over-turne, waste and confound all States, Rules,
Dominions, and Possessions of men, whether Civil, or Ecclesiastical; let me
be judged a Liar, says he, if these things be not found written, by them that
seem wise in their own eyes, and if some Popes have not given credit to such
lying and flattering words. Nay, I am greatly deceived, if before the holding
of the sacred Synod of Constance, this tradition did not so far forth
possess the minds of very many men, rather literal then literate, that
whosoever should have taught the contrary, should have been noted and
condemned for heresy.

THE FOVRTH BOOK, OF THE PRIVILEGES OF THE CHVRCH.
CHAP. 1.
Of the diverse kinds of the privileges of the Church, and of the different
acceptions of the name of the Church.

NOw it remains, that we proceed to the other parts of our first general
division, to wit, the privileges that pertain to the Church, and the diverse
and different degrees, orders, and callings of them, to whom the government of
it is committed. The privileges, that pertain to the Church, are of two
sorts: The first, proper to the best, and most essential parts of it, to wit,
the elect and chosen of God; as are the promises and assurances of everlasting
love and happiness: the second, such as are communicable unto others, not
partaking in that highest degree of unity, the parts of the Church have
amongst themselves, or with Christ their head. These are specially four: the
first, the possession of the rich treasure of heavenly truth; whence it is
called by Contra haereses l 3. c. 4.
Irenaeus Depositoriu^ dives; and by the 1 Timothy, 3. 15.
Apostle, the pillar and ground of truth. The second is the office of teaching
and witnessing the same truth. The third, the authority to judge of such
differences, as arise amongst men, concerning any part of it. The fourth, is
power to make laws, for the better guiding and governing of them, that
profess this truth.

Touching the first, that we may the better understand, in what degree and
sort, and upon what assurances, the Church is possessed of the knowledge and
profession of the truth revealed in Christ; we must observe the diverse
acceptions of the name of Church: for accordingly, more or less in this kind
is attributed to it, and verified of it. The Romanistes make the Church to be
of three sorts. For there is (as they say,) Ecclesia virtualis,
repraesentativa, and essentialis. By the name of virtuall Church, they
understand the Bishop of Rome, who, being by Christ's appointment (as they
suppose) chief Pastor of the whole Church, has in himself, eminently and
virtually, as great certainty of truth, and infallibility of judgment, as is
in the whole Church, upon whom depends all that certainety of truth, that is
found in it. By the name of representative Church, they understand the assembly
of Bishops in a general Council, representing the whole body of the Church,
from the several parts whereof they come. By the name of the essential
Church, they understand the whole multitude of the believers.

This essential Church, either comprehends all the faithful, that are and
have been, since CHRIST appeared in the flesh; or all that are, and have been
since the Apostles time; or only those that now presently live in the world.

CHAP. 2.
Of the different degrees of infallibility found in the Church.

IF we speak of the Church, as it comprehends the whole number of believers,
that are, and have been, since CHRIST appeared in the flesh, it is absolutely
free from all error and ignorance of Divine things, that are to be known by
revelation, Quid enim latuit Petrum, etc. For, as Tertullian says rightly and
aptly to this purpose, What was hidden and concealed from Peter, upon whom
Christ promised to build his Church, and to whom he gave a Lib. de praescript
adversus haereticos.
the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven? from John the Disciple he so dearly
loved, which leaned on his breast at the mystical Supper? and the rest of that
blessed company? that should after be manifested to succeeding generations? so
that touching the Church taken in this sort: there is no question, but it is
absolutely led into the knowledge of all truth, without any mixture of
ignorance, error, or danger of being deceived.

Let us come therefore to the second acception of the name of the Church, as it
comprehends only all those believers, that are, and have been since the
Apostles time. The whole Church, taken in this sort, may be ignorant in sundry
things, which though they be contained within the compass of revealed truth,
yet are not of necessity to be expressly known by all that will be saved:
but that the whole Church in this sort conceived, should err in any thing of
this nature, it is impossible; seeing error, which is an aberration,
declining, or swaruing from the truth once delivered, necessarily implies a
kind of particularity and novelty.

Neither only is the whole Church (comprehending all the believers that are,
and have been since the Apostles time) freed from error in matter of faith;
But we think it impossible also that any error, whatsoever, should be found
in all the Pastors and guides of the Church, thus generally taken. Secondly,
though there may be some question, whether any error may be found in all them,
whose writings now remain, yet because they have all written of nothing, but
that which is absolutely necessary to be known, for the attayning of
everlasting salvation, and that was ever generally received, it is not possible
they should all be convinced of error. Thirdly, though all, whose writings
remain, have not written of a thing; yet if all that mention it, do
constantly consent in it, and their consent be strengthened by universal
practice, we dare not charge them with error. Yea, though their consent be
not strengthened by such practice, if it be concerning things expressed in the
Word of truth, or by necessary and evident deduction to be demonstrated from
thence, we think no error can be found in all them, that speak of things of
that nature, if in every age of the Church some be found to have written of
them. Eorum quae dull (...) esse possunt circa fidem, quaedam sunt quae ex
Scripturis divinis deductione infallibili inferri p^ssunt: quaedam, quae non
possunt: quemadmodum per beatum Hieronymum beatam Virginem esse corporaliter in
coelo, ex scripturis certitudinaliter haberi non potest: sicut etiam ^c quod
(...), de quibus dicitur Math. 27. multa corpora sanctorum surrexeru^t cum eo,
etc. corporaliter ascenderint in coelum* nec quod corporaliter non ascenderint
infallibiter deduci non potest ex scripturis divinis. Occam. lib. 3. 1. ^ractat
3. part. cap. 10.
But in things that cannot be clearly deduced from the rule of faith, and word
of divine and heavenly truth, we think it possible, that all that have
written of such things, might err and be deceived.

This matter is excellently handled by Pererius in Genesim. lib. 7. q. 7.
Cornelius Iansenius cap. 14^. concordiae Euangelicae. Bellarm. de gratia 1.
hominis li. 1. c. 12, 14. ostendit neminem ex veteribus dicere paradisum
perijsse, and omnes qui de eo scripserunt, affirmar^ adhuc superesse; and tamen
aliter sentire Pererium Eugubinum, Iansenium, Hieron. ab Oleastro and Vatablum.
Pererius, Augustinus Eugubinus, Cornelius Iansenius, and Hieronymus ab
Oleastro: who hold it probable, that Paradise does not remain in original
beauty, notwithstanding the consent of all the ancient (that have written of
that matter) to the contrary. So likewise, Caietan: in proaem. comm: in Genes.
Caietaine and Andradius de script: sacrae and traditionum authoritate. li. 2.
fol. 257. 260.
Andradius profess, they dare go against the torrent of all the Doctors, and
dissent from them, in the interpretation of some parts of Scripture.

Bellarm. de gra. prim: hominis lib. 1. cap. 14.
Bellarmine blames Pererius, Eugubinus, and the rest, for that they durst
embrace an opinion contrary to the judgment of antiquity: yet does he not
fasten upon them any note of heresy, or sauouring of heresy.

Touching the Church, as it co^prehendeth only the belieuers that now are, and
presently live in the world, it is most certain and agreed upon, that in
things necessary to be known and believed expressly and distinctly, it never
is ignorant, much less does err. Yea, in things that are not absolutely
necessary to be known and believed expressly and distinctly, we constantly
believe, that this Church can never err, nor doubt pertinaciously, but that
there shall ever be some found ready to embrace the truth, if it be manifested
unto them, and such as shall not wholly neglect the search and inquiry after
it, as times and means give leave.

As therefore we hold it impossible, the Church should ever by Apostasy and
missebeliefe wholly depart from God (in proving whereof, Bellar. de ecclesia
militante lib. 3. c. 13.
Bellarmine confesses, his fellows have taken much needless pains, seeing
no man of our profession thinks any such thing;) so we hold that it never
falls into any heresy: so that he is as much to be blamed, for idle and
needeles busying himself, in proving that the visible Church never falls
into heresy, which we most willingly grant. g Occam dialog. 1. part. lib. 3.
cap. 28.


CHAP: 3.
Of the meaning of certain speeches of Calvin, touching the erring of the
Church.

THat Bellar. de ecclesia militant, l. 3. c. 13.
which he alleges out of Calvin, and others, as if they supposed the true
Church to be sometimes altogether invisible, and that the outward profession of
the truth does sometimes wholly fail, is to no purpose; for they mean not
that it is wholly invisible at any time, but that it is not always to be
esteemed by outward appearance; that sometimes the state of things is such,
that the greatest, in place of Ministry in the Church, pervert all things; and
that they, that defend the truth, make themselves a reproach.

To this purpose, Dialog. part. 1. li. 5. cap. 28.
Occam has diverse excellent things out of Hierome: and Con^: profanas haer:
nouitates.
Vincentius Lirinensis shows, that the poisoned doctrine of the Arians did
infect, not only a part, but almost the whole Church: so that almost all the
Bishops of the Latin Church were misseled, and few found to defend and
maintain the truth, as beseemed them.

There are therefore four things, Calvin. instit* l. 4. c. 8. sect. 11. 12.
cited by Bell. de militante ecclesia lib. 3. cap. 14.
which Calvin says. The first, that the Church may not so far presume of the
assistance of the spirit of truth, as that she may devise new articles of
faith; and, without the certain direction of the word of God, proceed in the
determination of doubts in matters of religion. The second that she must not
rely upon traditions, and a pretended unwritten word, but must co^tain her
self within the compass of that heavenly doctrine, which is comprehended in
the scripture. The 3d, that so containing her self she connot err. The 4th,
that we have no assurance, that Church shall always so precisely follow the
directions of the word of truth, as that she shall never err; but so
farrefoorth only, that she shall ever be free from all error in things
necessary to salvation, and such things that men cannot be ignorant of, to err
in, without pertinacy, or ouer-grosse and damnable negligence; yea, that she
is secured from erring in any thing, with heretical pertinacy.

This last part of Calvin's speech it is, that the Jesuit disliketh, that he
says, The Church is not absolutely freed from error, but from some kind of
error only. Yet Melchior Canus de auctorirate ecclesiae Catholicae, li. 4. c.
2. Picus theoremate 4. ecclesia vniuersalis in ijs quae pertinent ad
substantiam fide^ errare non potest: in alijs potest, vt ostendit Thomas etc.
Melchior Canus confesses, that sundry great Divines seem to be of this
opinion: as the Author of the Interlineall gloss; Thomas Aquinas, Cardinal
Turricremata, and Alfonsus a Castro; Yea, Picus Mirand^la in his theoremes is
of the same opinion, confirming it by the authority of Aquinas, who thinks,
that the Church may err in Canonizing of Saints, and proposing such to be
honored, whom God rejects from his presence, as vessels of his wrath.

Notwithstanding, the Bellarm. de eccle sia militante. l. 3. c. 14.
Romanists at this day seem to hold, that the whole Church, that presently is
in the world, cannot err in any thing, that either concerns faith or
manners, which they endeavor to prove by these reasons.

CHAP. 4.
Of their reasons, who think the present Church free from all error in
matters of faith.

FIrst, for that it is the pillar and ground of truth: secondly, for that it
is guided by Christ her head, and spouse: and thirdly, because it is led by the
spirit of truth. These reasons will be found exceeding weak, if we examine
them. Let us therefore take a particular view of them.

1 Timothy 3. 15.
First the Apostle (say they) calls the Church the Pillar and ground of
truth; therefore it cannot err. These words cannot prove that, for
confirmation whereof our adversaries allege them; seeing he speaks in this
place of a particular Church, to wit, the Church of the Ephesians, in which he
left Timotheus, when he departed from it. Now, that particular Churches may
err in matter of faith, and become heretical, our adversaries make no
question.

That the Apostle speaks of the Church of Ephesus, and calls it The pillar
and ground of truth, it appears by all circumstances of the place. These
things have I written, says he, hoping to come shortly unto thee; but if I
tarry longer, that thou may know, how to behave thy self, in the house of
God. That house of God, in which Paul left Timothy, in which he directs him,
how to behave himself till he come, he calls The Church of God, and Pillar
of truth; that Timothy might bethink him the better, how to demean himself
in the government of it.

The Church of God is named the Pillar of truth; not, as if the truth did
depend on the Church; or, as if God could not otherwise man fest it, than by
her Ministry; or, that our faith should be built on the authority of it; or,
that we should think it absolutely free from all ignorance and error: but
because it does strongly hold and maintain the saving profession of the truth,
notwithstanding all the violence of wicked and cruel enemies, as both the
Ordinary gloss, and that of Lyra do interpret it; and for that by
instructions, admonitions and comforts, it strengthens, stays, and
supporteth such as otherwise would fall, as the Interlineall gloss seems to
express it. So then the Church is The pillar of truth, not, because it is
absolutely free from all error, or, that our faith should be builded upon the
infallibility of it; but because it always retayneth a saving profession of
heavenly truth, and by strength of reasons, force of persuasions, timelinesse
of admonitions, comforts of Sacraments, and other means of saving grace, (The
powerful force whereof the sons of God do feel) it strengthens and
stays the weakness of all them, that depend upon it.

This is it, that Calvine means, when he says the Church is called, The
pillar of truth, because it firmly holds the profession of it, and
strengthens others by the knowledge of it. Bellarmines cavil, that, if this
were all, the Church might more fitly be compared to a chest, than a Pillar, is
not worth the answering: for it does not only preserve the truth as a hidden
treasure, but by public profession (notwithstanding all forces endeavoring
to shake it) publishes it unto the world, and stays the weakness of
others, by the knowledge of it; in which respect it is fitly compared to a
Pillar, and not unto an Arc or chest:

The second reason is much more weak than the former. For thus they argue: The
Church is governed by Christ, as by her head and spouse; and by the spirit, as
by the soul and fountain of her life; therefore if she err, her error must
be imputed unto Christ, and to the spirit of truth. This their consequence is
blasphemous and impious. For who knows not, that particular men, companies of
men, and Churches are governed by Christ, as by their head and spouse, and by
the spirit of truth, as being the fountain of their spiritual life; as the
Churches of Corinth, Galatia, and the Revel. (...). 12.
Churches mentioned in the Revelation of S. John, called golden Candle sticks,
in the midst whereof the Son of God did walk, yet had they their dangerous
and grievous errors, and defaults, for which they were blamed; so that by the
argument of our adversaries men may blame the spirit of truth for their
errors.

That which the Jesuit adds, that Christ the husband of the Church is bound
to free it from all error in matter of faith, whence any great evil may
ensue, is as childish an argument, as may be devised. For if great and grievous
evils may be found in the Church, then, notwithstanding this argument, errors
also. Now that the Church is subject to great and grievous evils, he that
makes any question, seems to know nothing at all. As therefore God gives
that grace, whereby the children of the Church may avoyde great and grievous
evils, and never with-draweth the same, but for punishment of former sin, and
contempt of grace: so he gives the gracious means of illumination, and never
withdraws the means of knowledge, but when the contempt of the light of
knowledge, and the abusing of it, procure the same. So that the sins and
errors of the children of the Church, proceed from themselves, and not from
any defect, or want of Christ, the husband of the Church.

The third reason is, he that hears not the Church, must be holden for an
Ethnike, therefore it cannot err. See the same proved at large by Erastus,
writing of the Presby teries and excommunications, and by Doctor Bilson now B.
of Winch in his book of the perpetual government of the Church c. 4.
But they should know, that Christ speaks in that place of the Sanedrim of
the Jews, which whosoever refused to obey, they held him as an Ethnicke. Yet
was not that great Council of State, among the Jews, free from danger of
erring. If these words of our Savior be applied to the Church, as they are
ordinarily by the Fathers, they must be understood by the censures of the
Church, which are not always just and righteous, De vera religione c. 6.
as Augustine shows, and not of her doctrinall determination.

But, says Bellarmine, the Councels were wont to denounce Anathema to all that
obey not their decrees: therefore they thought they could not err. To this we
answer, that they denounce Anathema, not because they think every one that
disobeyeth the decree of the Council to be accursed, but because they are
persuaded in particular, that this is the eternal truth of God, which they
propose, therefore they accurse them that obstinately shall resist, as Gal. 1.
Paul wills every Christian man, to Anathematize an Angel coming from
Heaven, if he shall teach him any other doctrine, then he has already learned,
yet is not every particular Christian, free from possibility of erring.

The other argument, that because the Church is holy, and her profession holy,
therefore she cannot err, will prove as well, that particular Churches cannot
err, as the universal. If they say, the universal Church is holy, and the
profession of it holy, in such adegree as freeth it from error, it is petitio
principii.

Their next argument is, that if the Church be not free generally from erring,
but only from erring in things necessary to salvation, many Catholic verities
may be called in question and doubted of: for that there are many things that
pertain to faith, which are not necessary to salvation. This argument holds
not: for though the Church which comprehends only the number of believers,
that are at one time in the world, may err, yet have men other means to find
out the truth, as namely, the Scriptures, and resolutions of former times,
which whosoever finds, is bound to believe, though the rest of the Church not
finding them, may in the mercies of God be saved.

That which is alleged out of the Fathers, is to no purpose: for they speak
of the Church, as it comprehends the faithful that are, and have been, which
we confess cannot err in matters of faith.

CHAP. 5.
Of the promises made unto the Church, how it is secured from error, and of
the different degrees of the obedience, we owe unto it.

THe right understanding of the promises made, and due consideration of the
parties to whom they are made, will lead us to the right understanding of the
Churches infallibility, and assurance of truth. For, seeing, though they be
made to all the faithful generally, and to the particular Churches as well as
to the whole, yet they are understood to be performed proportionably,
according to the measure, and degree, of each part, but to the whole Church
wholly, and entirely; the Church being particular, not only in respect of
place, but also of time, the whole is not necessary to be performed, to the
Church of one time, (unless we speak of the Primitive, wherein the whole was
originally) but to the Church that comprehends the whole number of believers,
that are and have been: in which sense that promise is to be understood, Ioh.
16. 13.
that the spirit shall lead the Church into all truth.

Hither we may refer, those different degrees of obedience, which we must
yield to them, that command and teach us, in the Church of God, excellently
described, and set down, by W^ldensis doctrinal. fidei lib. 2. art. 2. cap. 27.
Waldensis. We must, says he, reverence, and respect, the authority of all
Catholic Doctors, whose doctrine and writings the Church allows: we must
more regard the authority of Catholic Bishops: more then these, the authority
of the Apostolic Churches; amongst them, more specially the Church of Rome;
of a general Council, more the^ all these: yet we must not listen so to the
determinations of these, nor so certainly assent unto the^, as to the things
contained in the Scripture, or believed by the whole universal Church, that
has bin ever since the Apostles time, but as to the instructions of our
Elders, and fatherly admonitio^s. We must, says he, obey without scrupulous
questioning, with all modesty of mind, and reverence of body, with all good
allowance, acceptance and repose in the words of them that teach us, unless
they teach us any thing, which the authority of the higher and superior
controlleth; yet so as then the humble, and obedient children of the Church,
must not insolently insult upon them, from whom they are forced to dissent, but
must dissent with a reverent, childe-like, and respectfull shamefastness.

Thus he proves out of Lib. 2 de baptismo, contra Donatistas c. 3.
Augustine, Tom: 7. lib. 2. De baptismo contra Donatistas. Who knows not,
(says S. Augustine) that the sacred and Canonical Scriptures of the old and
new Testaments, are contained within their set and certain bounds; and that
they are so, and in such sort, set in a higher degree of authority, then any of
the writings of the succeding Bishops, that of them we may not doubt nor make
any question, whether it be true or right, that is there contained: but the
writings of the Bishops of the Church, which either have been published since
the perfecting of the Canon of Scripture, or which shall be hereafter, may be
censured and reproved, by the wiser judgment of any, that are skillful in the
same things, whereof they write; or by the grauer authority of other Bishops,
and the wisdom of them that are learned themselves, and able to teach others:
and by the determinations of Councels, if happily they have gone aside from the
truth; And the Councels themselves, which are holden in several Countries and
Provinces, must give place to the authority of general councels, gathered and
assembled out of the whole Christian World: and of plenary Councels,
oftentimes, the former are to be corrected by the later, when by experience,
and more perfect knowledge of things, that which was shut, is opened, and that
known which was hidden before. Every of these must be content to yield one to
another, without the puff of sacrilegious pride, without swelling arrogancy,
without euious contending, with all holy humility, with all Catholic peaceable
disposition, and Christian charity.

Thus then we think, that particular men and Churches may err damnably,
because notwithstanding, others may worship God aright, but that the whole
Church, at one time, cannot so err; for that then, the Church should cease
utterly for a time, and so not be Catholic, being not at all times; and
Christ should sometimes be without a Church; yet, that errors, not preiudicing
the salvation of them that err, may be found in the Church that is at one time
in the world, we make no doubt; only the whole symbolicall and catholic
Church, which is, and was, being wholly free from error.

Thus touching the possession of the rich treasures of heavenly truth, I have
sufficiently cleared our judgment, which is the same, that all wise and learned
men have ever been of, to wit, that the Church which comprehends the whole
number of belieuers, that are and have been, since Christ appeared in the
flesh, (so including the Apostles) can neither err in, nor be ignorant of any
thing that was to be revealed by Christ, the eternal Word and Angel of the
great Covenant of God. Secondly, that the Church, that comprehends all the
faithful that are and have been since the Apostles, may be ignorant of some
things, which in process of time shall be known, but cannot err in any thing.
Thirdly, that all the Pastors of this Church, cannot err. Fourthly, that all
the Pastors, that have committed the treasure of their wisdom and learning to
writing, cannot err in any thing wherein they consent in their writings:
because it is not possible, that they should all have written of any thing, but
such as touch the very life of the Christian faith generally received in all
their times. Fifthly, that it is not possible, that all that do speak of a
thing, consenting together, should err, if it be a matter of substance, and if
in every age some have written of it, though many that have written, be silent
and say nothing of it. Sixthly, that the most famous and renowned in all ages,
consenting in any thing, that touches the substance of the Christian faith,
and no man dissenting from them, (without note of nouelty and singularity,) may
not without intolerable rashness, be charged with error. Vincentius
Lirinensis says, if heresies be inueterate, and so have time and means to
corrupt the monuments of antiquity, for the confutation of them, we must flee
to the Scriptures only. So did Luther and the rest in the beginning, seeming
to decline the trial by the Fathers, because the corruptions of their writings
were so many, as could not easily be discovered at the first: but now having
found out by the help of so many learned men, both of our adversaries, and
amongst our selves, that have traveled in that kind, which are their undoubted
works, and which doubtful or undoubtedly forged, we willingly admit the
trial by the Fathers.
Seventhly, that though the writings of the ancient may be much corrupted, so
that the consent of antiquity cannot always be easily known, yet there will be
ever some means to find it out, and to discry the errors, and frauds of the
corruptors: and so I understand that of Vincentius Lirinensis, that the
judgment of antiquity is to be sought out, at the very first rising of heresies
and not afterward when they are grown inveterate; for that then they will
corrupt the monuments of antiquity. 8, That the whole present Church may be
ignorant of some things, and err in them; but that in matters necessary to be
known and believed expressly, it cannot err, and that it cannot err in any
the least thing, with pertinacie, such and so great as is found in Heretics.
Ninthly, that Councels and Popes, may err in matters of greatest consequence.

This our opinion thus laid down, is defended by Waldensis, Occam, and
others. Waldensis doctrine. fidei l. 2. art. 2. cap. 19. ibidem certiores
iudices esse dicit in causa fidei patres successive, quam Synodum Antisti^um
generalem, and cap. 20 ait Gregorium non comparare 4. concilia scripturis, sed
similitudinem quandam insinuate, sicut Christus in Evangelio, Volo ut sitis
perfecti sicut pater vester.
Waldensis says, the Church, whose faith never fails, according to the
promise made to Peter, who bare the figure of the Church, when Christ said, I
have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, is not any particular Church, as
the Church of Africa, within the bounds whereof Donatus did enclose it: nor the
particular Roman Church, but the universal Church, not gathered together in a
general Council, which has sometimes erred, as that at Ariminium under
Taurus the Governor, and that at Constantinople under Justinian the younger,
but it is the Catholic Church, dispersed through the whole world, from the
Baptism of Christ unto our times, which does hold and maintain the true
faith, and the faithful testimony of Jesus.

CHAP. 6.
Of the Churches office of teaching and witnessing the truth; and of their
error, who think the authority of the Church is the rule of our faith, and
that she may make new articles of our faith.

THus having spoken of the Churches assured possession of the knowledge of the
truth, in thenext place we are to speak of her office of teaching, and
witnessing the same: touching the which, our adversaries fall into two
dangerous errors: the first, that the authority of the Church is Regula fidei,
and ratio credendi, the rule of our faith, and the reason why we believe. The
second, that the Church may make new articles of faith.

Touching the first of these erroneous conceits, the most of them do teach,
that the last thing to which the persuasion of our faith resolves it self,
and the maine ground whereupon it stays, is the authority of the Church
guided by the spirit of truth. For (say they) if infidels and misbeleeuers
demand of us, why we believe the Trinity of persons in the Unity of the same
Divine essence, the Incarnation of the Son of God, the Resurrection of the
dead, and the life of the world to come: we answer, because these things are
contained in the Scriptures. If they proceed farther to ask, why we believe
the Scripture: we answer, because it is the word of God: if, why we believe
it to be the word of God: because the Church does so testify of it: Primum
inter credibilia, quod est ratio credendi alia, and ad quod fit ultima ma
resolutio credibilium, est, credere Ecclesiam regi a spiritu sancto. Durand. l.
3. did. 24. quaest. (...). Vera esse contenta in scriptura, and a Christo
revelata, per nullam viam scimus, nisi quia hoc credit Ecclesia, and sic
audivimus a patribus nostris. Greg. Arimin. l. 1. did. 1. q. 1. art. 4.
if, why we believe the testimony of the Church, because it is guided by the
spirit of truth: so that, that upon which our faith settleth her persuasion
touching these things, is the authority of the Catholic Church, led and
guided by the spirit of truth.

If it be said, that it is one of the things to be believed, that the Church
is thus guided by the spirit, and therefore that the authority of the Church
cannot be the reason and cause of believing all things, that pertain to the
Christian faith, because not of those things which concern her own authority:
Relect. con^o. 4. de potestate ecclesiae in se. q. 3. art. 2. resp. ad
argumentum 5.
Stapleton who professes to handle this matter most exactly. Sometimes seems
to say, that this article of faith, that the Church is guided by the spirit,
and appointed by God to be a faithful mistrisse of heavenly truth, is not
among the Articles of faith, nor in the number of things to be believed. Which
the Rhemists upon these words, The 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Church is the pillar and ground of truth, most constantly affirm, saying, We
must believe, hear, and obey the Church, as the Touchstone, Pillar, and
firmament of truth: for all this is comprised in the principle, I believe the
holy Catholic Church.

Sometimes, that though perhaps in that Article it be employed, that we believe
whatsoever the Church teaches us, yet not necessarily, that we believe, that
the Church is a faithful and infallible witness, and mistress of truth.

And sometimes, as in his Fol. 189.
triplication against Whitaker, he says, that when we profess that we believe
the holy Catholic Church, we do not only profess to believe that there is
such a Church in the world, but that we are members of it, and do believe and
embrace the doctrine of it, as being guided infallibly by the spirit of truth;
and that we are taught in the Articles of our faith, that the Church ought to
be listened unto, as to an infallible mistress of heavenly truth. Surely it
seems, his brain was much crased when he thus wrote, saying, unsaying, and
saying, he knew not what. That which he adds, that this proposition, God does
reveal unto us his heavenly truth, and teach us the mysteries of his kingdom
by the ministry of his Church, is a transcendent, whereupon that article,
wherein we profess to believe the Catholic Church, does depend, as all the
rest do, and is not an Article of the Creed; does but more and more show the
distemper of his head. But in that which he adds for confirmation hereof,
that we do not profess in the first Article of our faith, to believe God as
the reuealer of all hidden and heavenly truth, and to rest in him as in the
fountain of all illumination, is the note and brand of an impious miscreant.
For this doubtless is the first thing employed in our faith toward God, that
we yield him this honor, to be the great master of all truth, upon whose
authority we will depend, renouncing all our own wisdom, and knowing, 1 Cor.
2. 11.
that as no man knows the things of a man, but the spirit of a man; so no man
knows the things of God, but the spirit of Got; Math. 16. 17.
and, that flesh and blood cannot reveal these things unto us, but our father
which is in heaven.

That the precept of loving God above all, is not distinctly set down among
the rest of the ten commandments, but is employed, though principally in the
first, yet generally in all, is to no purpose. If he think, it is not at all
contained in the Decalogue, his folly is too too great.

CHAP. 7.
Of the manifold errors of Papists, touching the last resolution of our
faith, and the refutation of the same.

THus we see, he cannot avoid it, but that the Church is one of the things to
be believed, and therefore cannot be the first and general cause of believing
all things that are to be believed. For when we are to be persuaded of the
authority of the Church, it is doubtful unto us, and therefore cannot free us
from doubting, or settle our persuasion; because that which setleth the
persuasion, must not be doubted of.

There is no question then, but that the authority of the old Testament may be
brought to prove the new, to him, that is persuaded of the old, and doubts of
the new; and the authority of the new, to prove the old, to him, that is
persuaded of the new, and doubts of the old: but to him that doubts of
both, we must not allege the authority of either of these, but some other
thing: so likewise, we may prove the authority of the Scripture by the Church,
to him that is already persuaded of the Church; and of the Church by the
Scripture to him, that is persuaded of the Scripture; but to him that doubts
of both, we must bring other reasons. For no man proves a thing doubtful, by
that which is as much doubted of, as it self. So that to prove the authority
and infallibility of the Church, by the testimony and authority of the Church,
which is the thing doubted of, is, as if one taking upon him to be a Lawgiuer,
whose authority is doubted of, should first make a law, and publish his
proclamation, and by virtue there of give himself power, to make laws; his
authority of making the first law, being as much doubted of as the second.

Thus then it being clear and evident, that it is one of the things that are
to be believed, that the Church is guided by the spirit, if Stapleton be
asked, why he beleeueeth it to be so guided, he says, he so believes,
because the spirit moves him so to believe. But he should know, that three
things concur to make us believe that whereof we are doubtful. The light of
Divine understanding, as that whereby we apprehend the things of God; The
spirit, as the author of this illumination; and the reasons and motives, by
force whereof, the spirit induces, moves, and persuades us. Even as in the
apprehension of things within the compass of the light of nature, when we are
to be persuaded of a thing, seeming doubtful unto us, not only the actio^ of
him that persuades us, and the light of natural understanding, are required
to the effecting of it, but also the force of reasons winning us to assent to
that, we are to be persuaded of. We therefore demand not of Stapleton, who it
is that persuades us to believe, or what that light of understanding is, that
makes him capable of such persuasion; but, what those reasons, or motives are,
by force whereof, the spirit settleth his mind, in the persuasion of the truth
of those things, he formerly doubted of.

Triplicatio fol. 188.
Surely he says, the highest and last reason, that moves a man to beleeu the
things that partaine to faith, is the authority of the Church. Let us suppose
it to be so, touching all other things; yet can it not be so, in respect of
those things, we are to believe touching the authority of the Church it self.
What is the motive then, whereby the spirit moves us to believe, that the
Church has divine authority? He says, because it is so contained in the
Scripture; and in the Articles of the Creed. See then if he be not forced to
run round in a circle. He believes other matters of faith, because contained
in the Scripture; and the Scripture, because it is the word of God; and that it
is the word of God, because the Church delivers it to be so; and the Church,
because it is led by the spirit; and that it is led by the spirit, because
it is so contained in the Scripture, and the Creed. This kind of circulation,
Campiani 10 rations.
Campian reckons amongst the Sophismes, he wrongfully imputes unto us: but
it will ever be found true, that the Prophet pronounces of the wicked; Psalm.
11. 10.
Impij ambulant in circuitu; The wicked run round, till they be giddie, and
are in the end, where they were, when they began.

Out of this maze Stapleton cannot get himself, unless he fly to humane
motives and inducements, and make them the highest and last reason of his
faith, and so indeed he does. For fearing that he has not said well, in
saying he believes the Church is guided by the spirit, because it is contained
in the Scripture, he adds another reason, why he so believes, because it
is the general opinion, and conceit of all Christian men, that it is so
guided: and so indeed his persuasion stays it self upon humane grounds,
though he be unwilling that men should so think, and conceive.

Th^se mazes and labyrinths, other Papists seeking to avoid, run without any
such show of fear, as Stapleton bewrays, into most gross absurdities; some
thinking, that the authority of the Church is the reason moving us to believe
all other things; and that we believe that the Church is led and guided by
the spirit, and that the truth of God, which the Church teaches us, moved
thereunto by humane motives; namely for that, that must needs be the truth,
which so many miracles have confirmed, which a few weak and silly men,
contemptible in the eyes of the world, have won all the world to believe, and
have holden out the defense of it, against all the furies of enemies
whatsoever: which they could not have done, had not the spirit and power of the
most high been with them, making them more then conquerours. This is the
opinion of Durandus. li. 3. did. 24. q. 1. art. 1. and distin: 25. q. 3.
Durandus, who makes humane motives and inducements, the highest and last
reason of his faith; to which also Stapleton flies, though unwillingly. Others
think, that we believe by the sole and absolute command of the will, either
finding nothing, or nothing of sufficient force to persuade us. Both these
conceits are to be examined by us.

Concerning the first, we are to observe, that the Schoolmen make two kinds
of faith, calling the one fidem infusam, an infused faith, wrought in us by the
inlightning spirit of God, and staying it self upon the truth of God: the
other fidem acquisitam, a humane and natural faith, grounding it self upon
humane authority, and wrought by humane motives and persuasions. So that
according to the opinion of these men, we believe the Articles of our Christian
faith, and whatsoever is contained in the books of the Prophets and Apostles,
because we are persuaded, that they were revealed by Almighty God; and this
pertains to infused faith, as they think: but that they were revealed, there
is nothing that persuades us, Greg. A^iminensis l. 1. d. 1. q. 1 fol. 7.
but the authority of the Church, and because we have so learned, and received
of our forefathers: and this pertains to humane faith, and is merely a
natural and humane persuasion, like that the Saracens have, touching the
superstition of Mahomet, who therefore believe them, because their Ancestors
have delivered them unto them.

If this opinion were true, (as Melchior Canus rightly notes, the final stay
of our infused faith, and the first reason moving us so to believe, should not
be the truth of God, but humane authority. For we should believe the Articles
of our faith, because they were revealed, and believe they were revealed,
because our Ancestors so delivered unto us, and the Church so believes. And
from hence it would farther follow, that seeing the assent yielded to the
conclusion, can be no greater, nor more certain, then that which is yielded to
the premises, whence it is deduced and inferred, we should have no greater
certainty of things Divine and revealed, then such as humane means and causes
can yield. Canus l. 1. c. 8.
And so, seeing we can never be so well persuaded of any man, or multitude of
men, but that we may justly fear, either they are deceived, or will deceive:
if our faith depend upon such grounds, we cannot firmly and undoubtedly
believe. Nay it is consequent upon this absurd opinion, that the Children of
the Church, and they of the household of faith, have no infused or Divine faith
at all: for that, whatsoever is revealed by the God of truth, is true, the
Heathens make no doubt, but doubt whether any thing were so revealed: and that
any thing was so revealed, if these men say true, we have no assurance but by
humane means and causes.

But the absurdity hereof, the same Canus out of Calvin, does very learnedly
demonstrate, reasoning in this sort. If all they that have been our teachers,
nay, if all the Angels in Heaven, shall teach us any other, or contrary
doctrine to that we have received, we must hold them accursed, and not suffer
our faith to be shaken by them, as the Apostle charge us in the Epistle to
the Galatians: therefore our faith does not rely upon humane causes or grounds
of assurance. Calv. instit. l. 1. c. 7. 4.
Ne men's nostra vacillet, altius petenda, quam ab hominum vel ratione, vel
auctoritate, scripturae authoritas. Besides, our faith, and that of the
Apostles and Prophets, being the same, it must needs have the same object, and
the same ground and stay to rest upon, in both: but they builded themselves
upon the sure and immovable rock of Divine truth, and authority: therefore
we must do so likewise. If any man desire farther satisfaction herein, let him
read Canus, and Calvin, to whom in these things Canus is much beholding.

Others therefore, to avoid this absurdity, run into that other before
mentioned, that we believe the things that are divine, by the mere and
absolute command of our will, not finding any sufficient motives and reasons of
persuasion: and hereupon they define faith in this sort: Fides est assensus
firmus ineuide^s, that is, faith is a firm, certain, and full assent of the
mind, believing those things, the truth whereof no way appears unto us. For
father explication, and better clearing of this definition of faith, they make
two kinds of certainty; for there is, as they say, certitudo evidentiae, and
certitudo adhaerentiae; that is, there is a certainty of evidence, which is of
those things, the truth whereof appears unto us; and another of adherence and
firm cleaving to that, the truth whereof appears not unto us. This later
they suppose to be the certainty that is found in faith, and there upon they
hold, that a man may believe a thing merely because he will, without any
motives or reason of persuasion at all: the contrary whereof when Picus
Mirandula proposed, among other his conclusions to be disputed in Rome, he
was charged with heresy for it. But he sufficiently cleared himself from all
such imputation, and improued their fantasy that so think, by unanswerable
reasons, which I have thought good to lay down in this place.

It Apologia qu. 8. de liberta te credendi.
is not, says he, in the power of a man, to think a thing to be, or not to
be, merely because he will; therefore much less firmly to believe it. The
truth of the antecedent we find by experience, and it evidently appears
unto us, because if a doubtful proposition be proposed, concerning which the
understanding and mind of man resolves nothing, seeing no reason to lead to
resolve one way or other, the mind thus doubtful cannot incline any way, till
there be some inducement, either of reason, sight of the eye, or testimony or
authority of them we are well conceipted of, to settle our persuasion.
Secondly, a man cannot assent to any thing, or judge it to be true, unless it
so appear unto him; but the sole act of a man's will, cannot make a thing to
appear and seem true or false, but either the evidence of the thing, or the
testimony and authority of some one, of whose judgment he is well persuaded.
Thirdly, though the action of understanding quoad exercitium, as to consider of
a thing, and think upon it, or to turn away such consideration from it,
depend on the will; yet not quoad specificationem, as to assent or dissent: for
these opposite and contrary kinds of the understandings actions, are from the
contrary and different appearing of things unto us. Fourthly, the sole command
of the will cannot make a man to believe that, which being demanded why he
believes, he gives reasons and alleges inducements: but so it is, that in
matters of our Christian faith, we allege sundry reasons, moving us to believe
as Christians do, as appears by the course Scotus prol. sententiarum qu. 2.
of all Divines, who lay down eight principal reasons moving men to believe
the Gospel; namely the light of prophetical prediction, the harmony and
agreement of the Scriptures, the diligence of them that received them,
carefully seeking to discern between truth and error, the authority and
gravity of the writers, the reasonableness of the things written, and the
unreasonableness of all contrary errors, the stability of the Church, and the
miracles that have been done for the confirmation of the faith it professes.
Fifthly, if there be two, whereof one believes precisely, because he will, and
another, only because he will not believe, refuses to believe the same
thing, the act of neither of these is more reasonable then the other, being
like unto the will of a Tyrant, that is not guided at all by reason, but makes
his own liking, the rule of his actions. Now, who is so impious to say, The
Christians, that believe the Gospel, have no more reason to lead them so to
do, then the Infidels that refuse to believe?

With Picus, in the confutation of this senseless conceit, we may join
Sententiarum quaest. 1. art. 2. sicut impossible est assentiri sine ratione,
ita videtur impossible assentiri plus quam ratio probat, vel vi detur probare.
Cardinal Cameracensis, who farther shows, that as a man cannot persuade
himself of a thing, merely because he will, without any reason at all; so,
having reason, he cannot persuade himself more strongly and assuredly of it,
then the reason he has, will afforde; for if he do, it is so far an
unreasonable act, like that of a Tyrant before mentioned. Durandus 3. ^nt.
distinct. 24 quaest 3.
Durandus likewise is of the same opinion. Assentiri nullus potest, nisi ei
quod apparet verum: igitur oport^t qued illud quod creditur, appareat rationi
verum, vel in se, vel ratione m^dij per quod assentitur; and si non in se, sed
tantum ratione medij, illud medium apparebit verum, vel in se, vel per aliud
medium; and si non est processus in infinitum, oportet quod deueniatur ad
primum, quod apparet rationi esse verum in se, and secundum se: That is, No man
can yield assent to any thing, but that which appears to him to be true:
therefore whatsoever a man believes, must seem and appear unto him to be
true, either immediately and by it self, or in respect of that medium, by force
whereof he is persuaded to believe; and if it do not appear unto him to be
true in and by it self, but only in respect of the medium, that medium must
appear true, either in respect of it self, or by another medium; and because
there is no infinite proceeding in these things, we must at last come to some
first thing, which in and by it self, must appear to be true.

CHAP. 8.
Of the last resolution of true faith, and whereupon it stays it self.

IN natural and humane knowledge, there are two sorts of things: some that
are evident unto us immediately in, and by themselves; and some, that are not.
The former of these, are likewise of two sorts: for there are some known only
by intuitiue knowledge, as contingent things: so that we cannot apprehend the
truth of any proposition framed of such things, unless we intuitiuely
apprehend the things, whereof such propositions are framed; (as, that Peter and
John now walk, now leap for joy, or tremble for fear, we cannot know,
unless we intuitiuely behold, both these men, and these things to agree unto
them.) Other things there are universal, necessary, and always of one sort:
these may be evidently known by abstractiue knowledge. Of these, there may be
framed two sorts of propositions: for there are some propositions per se notae,
originally clear and evident, the termini or single words whereof, being
rightly conceived by us, we cannot but know the truth of the whole
propositions: (as, that every whole and entire thing, is greater and better
then any part of it.) Aliacensis 1. sent, citat. Lincoln. 1. poster. cap. 1.
And other propositions there are, which are not thus originally clear and
evident, upon the right understanding of the termini or single words whereof
they are composed, but a man doubts of them, till he see them deduced by
clear and evident consequence from the former; these things a man is properly
said to learn.

Thus having spoken of things evident in themselves, let us come to the things
that in themselves are never evident unto us, either that they are or what they
are: but that they are, and what they are, appears unto us by a foreign
medium, without the compass of the things themselves. Of this sort are those
things we are persuaded of, upon the report of others; this is the certainty
we have of things believed: the truth of them in themselves appears not
unto us, nor is seen of us; in which sense faith may rightly be named a firm
assent without evidence; and there may be a certainty of adherence, as the
Schoolmen call it, without evidence; yet must the credit of him that
speaks, be known unto us, and we must evidently discern, that he does
speak unto us, upon whose testimony we rely.

The Schoolmen make three sorts of things; some that are believed because they
are first known, as the first principles originally clear and evident unto
us, and the conclusions demonstratiuely proved out of those principles: other
things, that are believed and never known, as all the matters of fact that
are reported in the Scripture, which we can never know by the immediate
evidence of the things themselves, but mediately, in that we know they are
delivered unto us by him that cannot lie. And a third sort of things that are
first believed, and afterward the understanding being enlightened, and the
heart cleansed, they are discerned of us to be true.

The opinion of the ordinary Papists is, that the things pertaining to our
faith, are believed, because God reuealeth and delivers them to be so, as we
are required to believe; but that we know not that God has revealed any such
thing, but by humane conjectures and probabilities: so weakly do they make
our faith to be grounded. We confess, that faith may rightly be said to
be a firm assent, without evidence of many of the things believed, in
themselves: but the Medium, by force whereof we are drawn to believe, must
be evident unto us, as Durandus does rightly demonstrate.

De vtilit credendiad Honoratum c. 1^.
Augustine notes, that there are three things found in the soul of man;
Opinion, Belief or Faith, and Science; the first of these is necessarily and
ever joined with imperfection and defect, to wit, danger and fear of erring:
the third is ever perfect, excluding both: the second, standing in the midst,
is of a middle nature, and depends upon the third. For otherwise, to believe
their reports, whose credit is not known unto us, is levitie and rashness.
Faith therefore, that is commendable, and without fault, presupposes
knowledge, and right believing grows out of it. We hold therefore, that every
true Christian does most evidently discern and know, that it is God that
speaks in the Scriptures; which Calvin excellently expresses. Lib. 1.
instit. c 7. 5.
Illius virtute (says he) illuminati, iam non aut nostro, aut aliorum iudicio
credimus a Deo esse Scripturam, sed supra humanum iudicium certo certius
constituimus, non secus, ac si ipsius Dei numen illic intueremur, hominum
ministerio ab ipsissimo. Dei ore fluxisse. After we are enlightened by the
spirit, we do no longer trust, either our own judgment, or the judgment of
other men, that the Scriptures are of God; but above all certainety of humane
judgment, we most certainly resolve, as if in them we saw the Majesty and
glory of God, as Moses saw it in the Mount, that by the ministry of men, they
came unto us from Gods own most sacred mouth

Heereunto does S. Augustine fully agree, showing that the authority of the
Church, is but an introduction to the spiritual discerning of divine things,
and that men rest not in it. Whereupon he says, De vtil. credendi adHonoratum
c. 16.
Homini non valenti verum intueri, vt ad id fiat idoneus, purgarique se sinat,
praesto est auctoritas, quam partim miraculis, partim multitudine valere nemo
ambigit: that is, Men that are not yet able to discern the heavenly truth,
that they may be fitted to it, and suffer themselves to be purged from their
impurity, hindering them from it, have the benefit of the direction of
authority, which stands upon two things: the one, the greatness of miracles,
and wondrous works done; the other, multitude. Christ Cap. 14. 15 16
says Augustine) being to bring a salving medicine into the World, and to
reform the most corrupt and wicked manners of the sons of men, by miracles
got himself authority, by authority won credit, by the credit he had gotten;
drew multitudes after him, which cotinuing long in one course of profession, in
tract and continuance of time, gained the reverent estimation of antiquity, and
so strengthened the opinion of Religion professed by them. These things (says
In sententiis.
Augustine) are not necessary to men of spiritual and heavenly understanding:
but we are now to show how men may become wise, and attain the knowledge of
spiritual things, This they cannot attain to, unless they be purged from
their souls uncleanness: from which they cannot be purged, unless they
listen to them, that are already wise and exercised in things that are divine,
and therefore they must begin with authority.

Hugo de Sancto Victore makes three sorts of believers: for there are (says
he) qui sola pietate credere eligunt, qui vtrum credendum sit, vel non
credendum, ratione non comprehendunt, alii ratione approbant quod fide credunt,
alii puritate cordis, and munda conscientia, interius iam gustare incipiunt,
quod fide crediderunt. The first are moved to believe out of piety, finding the
Majesty of God to present it self unto them in the word of truth, and happy
communion of the people professing the same, challenging their attention and
readiness to be taught by him: In the second the light of divine reason
causes approbation of that they believe: In the third sort, the purity of
divine understanding, apprehends most certainly, the things believed, and
causes a foretasting of those things, that hereafter more fully shall be
enjoied. They that are thus established in the faith, do now already begin to
foretast that, which they long in heaven distinctly to know and enjoy, and
begin already to have God present with them, by force of divine contemplation;
so that if all the world should be turned into miracles, they could not remove
them from the certainety of their persuasion. Hence it is, that Pycus says in
his Conclusions, that as faith which is but a bare credulity, is in degree of
perfection less then Science, so true faith is greater and more certain,
then any science gotten by demonstration.

Thus then we may easily discerue, what is the formal reason of our faith, or
inducing us to believe. In things that are therefore believed, because known,
as in the principles and conclusions of natural knowledge, the evidence of
things appearing to us, is the formal reason of our belief and persuasion. In
things first believed, and afterward known, the evidence of the things
appearing unto us, being enlightened by the light of grace. In things only
believed, and not known, the authority of God himself whom we do most
certainly discern, to speak in the word of Faith, which is preached unto us.
Si Calvin. instit: lib. 1. cap. 7. 4.
puros oculos, and integros sensus, illuc afferamus (says Calvin) statim
occurret Dei majestas quae subacta reclamandi audacia, nos sibi parere cogat.
If we bring pure eyes, and perfect senses, the Majesty of God presently
presents it self unto us, in the divine Scripture, and beating down al
thoughts of contradicting or doubting of things so heavenly, forces us to
obey. Lib, 1. 7. 5.
For Non dubium vim numinis illic vigere and spirare sentimus, qua ad parendum
scientes quidem, ac volentes, viuidius tamen and efficacius, quam pro humana,
aut voluntate, aut scientia, trahimur ac accendimur. We find a greater light of
understanding, shining unto us in this doctrine of faith, then is found within
the compass of nature: a satisfaction touching many things, in which humane
reason could not satisfy us in: a joy and exultation of the heart, such and so
great, as grows not out of nature. This makes us assure our selves, the
doctrine which thus affects us, is revealed from God: that they are the only
people of God, and have the means of happiness, where this treasure of
heavenly wisdom is found: that those books are the richest jewel, that the
world possesses, and ought to be the Canon of our faith, which this people
delivers unto us, as received from them, to whom these things were first of
all made known, and revealed.

So then that God speaks in the Scripture, and is the Author of it, we know
more certainly, than any thing that is known by natural light of reason: and
thereupon we believe all things therein contained, though many of them are
such, as can never be known of us, as those that are historical and other
such as are not known at first, though after we have believed, we begin to
understand and know them. Hereunto agree the best learned, and most devout and
religious amongst the Schoolmen. For the greater part of them were given to
curious disputes, but void of all devotion, as Gers. de examinatione
doctrinarum.
Gerson complains. Lib. 1. qu. 1. sum: theologicae memb. 4. art. 2.
Alexander of Hales says, there is a certainty of speculation, and a
certainetie of experience: a certainty in respect of the understanding, and a
certainetie in respect of the affection: a certainty in respect of the
spiritual man, and a certainety in respect of the natural man: and
pronounces that the things apprehended by us in divine knowledge, are more
certainly discerned by such as are spiritual, in the certainty of experience,
in the certainety which is in respect of affection, and by way of spiritual
taste and feeling, than any thing is discerned in the light of natural
understanding. Quam dulcia faucibus meis eloquia tua! Psalm. 118.
(says the Prophet David) How sweet are thy words (O Lord) unto my mouth!
They are sweeter than the honey, and the honey comb. And again, I have known
long since, that thou have established them for ever. Thus then it is true,
that the authority of Gods Church, prepares us unto the faith, and serves as
an introduction, to bring us to the discerning and perfect apprehension of
divine things, but is not the ground of our faith, and reason of believing. And
that doubtless is the meaning of those words Contra ep. fundamenti, c. 5.
of Augustine, that he would not believe the Gospel, if the authority of the
Church did not move him thereunto.

CHAP. 9.
Of the meaning of those words of Augustine, that he would not believe the
Gospel, if the authority of the Church did not move him.

THe Divines give two explications of these words of Augustine. For Dialog. l.
1. part. 1. c. 4. vbi ait totam multitudinem viuentium non esse ma^oris
auctoritatis quam evangelium sanctum, quia debet illud defendere vsque ad
sanguinem.
Occam and some others say, the Church, whereof he speaks, is not the
multitude of believers, that now are in the World, but the whole number of
them, that are, and have been, since Christ appeared in the flesh; so
including the Apostles: in which sense, they confess the Church comprehending
in it the Apostles, and writers of the whole Scripture of the new Testament, is
of greater authority, then the books of the Gospel written by them, and
delivered to posterities. Others, taking the name of the Church, to signify
only the believers that now presently are in the world, say the meaning of
Augustine is, that he had never believed the Gospel, if the authority of the
Church had not been an introduction unto him: Not that, his faith rested upon
it, as a final stay, but that it caused him so far to respect the word of
the Gospel, to listen unto it, and with a kind of acquisite and humane faith,
to believe it, that he was thereby fitted to a better illumination, by force
whereof he might more certainly know, and believe it to be of God. To which
purpose Doctrinal. fidei li. 2. art. 2. cap. 21. vbi ad. fert exemplum
Nathanielis, quem Philippus induxit ad credendum in Christum, quemadmodu^ nos
inducunt parents and paedagogi: nec tamen sunt maioris auctoritatis quam
Christus.
Waldensis out of Thomas Aquinas observes, that as the Samaritans believed
that Christ was the promised Savior, upon the report of the woman, that talked
with him, made unto them; but afterward having seen him, and talked with
him, they professed that they believed, not for her saying any longer: for
themselves had heard him speak, and did know that he was the Savior of the
world indeed. So men at the first begin to believe moved so to do, by the
authority of the Church; but rest not in it, but in the infallible assurance of
divine truth. Upon the mistaking of this saying of S. Augustine, and an
erroneous conceit, that our faith stays wholly upon the authority and
testimony of the Church, has grown that opinion, that the authority of the
Church is greater, than the authority of the Scriptures.

CHAP. 10.
Of the Papists preferring the Churches authority before the Scripture.

TOuching which odious comparison, I find some show of difference amongst the
Papists, but none indeed. Some affirm, that the authorities of the Church,
and of the Scripture, being in diverse kinds, may in diverse sorts, and
respects, either of them be said to be greater, then the other: to wit, the one
in nature of an evidence, the other of a Judge; and that therefore the
comparing of them in authority is unfit and superfluous. Others say, that the
Church is greater then Scriptures. Annotat. in 2. ad Galat.
The Rhemists seem to be of the first sort, seeking to conceal that, which
indeed they think, because they would not incur the dislike and ill opinion
of men, naturally abhorring from so odious a comparison. Yet in the same place
they do make the comparison, and prefer the Church before the Scriptures. 1.
In respect of antiquity, in that it was before them. 2. In excellency of
nature, in that the Church is the spouse of Christ, the Temple of God, the
proper subject of God, and his graces, for which the Scriptures were, and not
the Church for the Scriptures. 3. In power of judging of doubts and
controversies, the Church having judicial power, the Scripture not being
capable of it. 4. In evidence, the definition of the Church being more clear
and evident, then those of the Scriptures.

Relect. contro. 4. de potestate ecclesiae in se. q. 5. in explicatione q.
Stapleton says, the comparison may be made, and the Church preferred before
the Scriptures, four ways. 1. So, as if the Church might define contrary to
the Scriptures, as she may contrary to the writings of particular men, how
great soever. In this sense, they of the Church of Rome make not the
comparison, neither do we charge them with any such thing, though Stapleton be
pleased to say so of us. 2. So, as the Church may define, though not contrary
to, yet beside the Scripture or written Word of God. This comparison is not
made properly, touching the pre-eminence of one above another in authority, but
the extent of one beyond the other, as Stapleton rightly notes. In this sense
the Romanists make the Church greater in authority than the Scriptures, that
is, the extent of the Churches authority, larger than of the Scriptures, to
bring in their traditions: but this we deny, and will in due place improve
their error herein. Thirdly, in the obedience they both challenge of us, where
they all say, that we are bound with as great affection of piety, to obey and
submit our selves unto the determinations of the Church, as of the Scriptures:
both being infallible, of divine and heavenly authority, against which no man
may resist, and that it is a matter of faith so to think. Yea, some of them,
as Stapleton in the same place, are not ashamed to say, that we are bound with
greater certainty of faith, to subscribe unto the determinations of the
Church, than of the Scriptures; and that it is the authority of the Church,
that makes us accept, embrace, and believe the Scriptures. Fourthly, in the
nature of the things themselves, in which respect, they prefer the Church
before the Scriptures; as being in it self more excellent then the Scriptures:
as the subject by which the spirit works, is more excellent then the thing
he works by it.

CHAP. 11.
Of the refutation of their error, who prefer the authority of the Church
before the Scripture.

THat we may the better discern, what is to be resolved, touching these two
latter comparisons between the Church and the Scriptures; we must remember
that which I have before noted, touching them both. For first, the name of the
Church sometimes comprehends only the believers, that now presently are
living in the world. Sometimes not only these, but all them also, that have
been since the Apostles times. Sometimes all that are, and have been since
Christ appeared in the flesh.

If the comparison be made between the Church, consisting only of the
faithful that now are and the Scripture, we absolutely deny the equality of
their authority; and say it is impiety to think, that both may challenge an
equal degree of obedience, and faith to be yielded to them: for it cannot be
proved, that the Church, thus taken, is free from error; nay themselves with
one consent confess, Canual. 5. c. (...) p. 170.
that general Councels, representing this Church, may err, though not in
matters of substance, which they purposely meet to determine, yet in other
passages, and in the reasons, and motives, leading to such determinations: and
consequently the whole Church may err in the same things: the one, in their
opinion, being no more infallible, than the other. Yea, some of them fear not
to pronounce, Multi opinannantur concilium generale errare posse, quia non
innititur praecise diuinae reuclationi, led procedit secundum sensum proprium
assistente sibi influentia generali etc. Occam lib. 3. tract: 1. part. 3. cap:
8.
that Popes and general Counsels may err damnably, and that the Church
itself may err in matters not fundamental, though without pertinacy, as
Picus in his theoremes, and Waldensis, who freeth only the universal Church,
consisting of the faithful that are, and have been, from error, and not the
present Church, as I showed before. We are so far then, from preferring the
Church thus taken, (as Stapleton in the place above mentioned, professes he
takes it) in authority before the Scripture, that we think it impiety, to
imagine it to be equal.

That the authority of the Church makes us to believe, with an humane, and
acquisite faith, we deny not, but that it makes us to believe with a divine
faith, we deny, as before. If the comparison be made, between the Church
consisting of all the faithful that have bin since, and besides the Apostles,
and writers of the holy Scriptures, though we think the Church thus taken to be
free from any error; yet dare we not make it equal to the Scripture: For that
the Scripture is infallibly true, as inspired immediately from the spirit of
truth, securing the writers of it from error; The Church not in respect of the
condition of the men, of whom it consists, or the manner of the guiding of
the spirit, (each particular man being subject unto error) but in respect of
the generality and universality of it, in every part whereof, in every time, no
error could possibly be found: And for that, whatsoever is universally
delivered by it, is thereby proved to be from the Apostles, of whose faith we
are secure. Thus then the whole Church thus taken, is subject to the Scripture,
in all her parts, and has her infallibility from it: and therefore in her
manner of having the truth, is inferior unto it, neither are we bound to
receive her doctrines as the sacred Scriptures. Besides, though the Church
taken in this sort be free from error, yet not from ignorance of many things,
wherein we may be instructed by the scripture. So that it is possible for a man
to understand the natural and literal sense of some parts of Scripture, and
from thence some things, that were not in such sort known and delivered by
any, that went before: as Andradius, and Caietanus, do prove at large.

If the comparison be made between the Church, consisting of all the
belieuers, that are and have been, since Christ appeared in the flesh, so
including the Apostles, and their blessed assistants the Evangelists: we deny
not, but that the Church is of greater authority, antiquity, and excellency
than the Scripture of the new Testament, as the witness is better then his
testimony, and the Lawgiuer greater then the Laws made by him, as Stapleton
alleges. But he is to prove the present Church greater in authority than the
Scripture: which he undertakes, but performs not. His reason, that the
Scripture was given for the good of the Church, and that therefore the Church
is better than the Scripture, proves not the thing intended. For, as the
people are more excellent in degree of being, and nature of things, than the
laws that be made for their good, yet are the laws of more authority, and
must overrule and direct the people: so though the Scriptures, being but
significations, declarations, and manifestations of divine truth, be not better
in degree of things, than the Church, yet in power of prescribing, directing,
and ouer-ruling our faith, they are incomparably greater. That which the
Rhemists add, to show the greatness of the Church above the Scripture,
because the Church has judicial power, to determine doubts and controversies,
whereof as they suppose, the Scripture is not capable, I will examine in the
next part, when I come to speak of the power of judging, which the Church has.

This error of the Romanists imagining the authority of the Church to be
greater than the Scripture, all the best learned in the Church of Rome ever
resisted, as Waldens. doct. fidei lib. 2. art. 2. cap. 21.
Waldensis, Occam lib. 1. part. 1. c. 4.
Occam, Gers. de vita spiritual. animae. lect. co^ollario. 7.
Gerson, and sundry others.

CHAP. 12.
Of their error who think the Church may make new articles of faith.

Unto this error is joined, and out of this has grown another not unlike,
that the Church may make new articles of faith; which though Stapleton and some
other of our time seem to disclaim, yet do they indeed fall into it. For the
better understanding whereof we must observe, as Dialog. 1. part. l. 2. c. 14.
Occam fitly notes, that an Article of faith is sometimes strictly taken,
only for one of those divine verities, which are contained in the creed of
the Apostles: sometimes generally for any Catholic verity. This question is
not meant of articles of faith in the first sense, but in the second; and so
the meaning of the question is, whether the Church that now is, may by her
approbation make those assertions and propositions to be Catholic verities,
that were not before, or those heretical that were not. A Catholic vetity is
a divine truth, which every Christian is bound to believe. The things which
Christian men are bound to believe, are of two sorts, and consequently there
are two sorts of Catholic verities; to wit, some so nearly touching the
matter of eternal salvation, that a man cannot be saved, unless he
expressly know and believe them; others farther removed, which if a man
believe implicit, and in praeparatione animi, it suffices; These must be
believed expressly and distinctly, if their coherence with, or dependence on
the former, do appear unto us, so that the manifest deduction of them from the
former, will make them such, as must be expressly believed.

Our adversaries confess, that the approbation and determination of the
Church, cannot make that a truth which was not, nor that a Divine or Catholic
truth, that was not so before: but they think, that the Church by her bare and
sole determination, may make that verity to be in such sort Catholic, that
every one, understanding of such determination, must expressly believe it,
that was not so, and in such degree Catholic before. But we think, that it
is not the authority of the Church, but the clear deduction from the things
which we are bound expressly to believe, that makes things of that sort, that
they must be particularly and distinctly known and believed, that were not
necessarily so to be believed before: Diceret forte aliquis quod simplices non
debent credere nisi ea quae Papae and Cardinales tradunt credere explicit, nec
debent inuestigare secreta scripturae, sed communibus contenti de intellectu
praeoprio non debent prsumere, vt aliquid credant explicit nisi quod ijs Papa
and Cardinales tradiderint: dicendum est quod simplices non debent praesumere,
sed sacrae scripturae firmiter inhaerere, vt quod euidenter conspexerint ex
sacris scripturis inferri, hoc explicit credant, sieve fuerit sieve non fuerit a
Papa and Cardinalibus declaratum: and ratio hujus est, quoniam Papa and
Cardinales non sunt regula fidei nostrae: sed si contra regulam fidej, quam
scriptura docet, definire praesumpserint, non sequendi, sed a^ Catholicis
arguendi sunt. Occam tractat. 2. part. 2. cap. 10. Quidam moderni dicunt multas
esse veritates consonas scripturae, quae non sunt Catholicae, quia non
definitae a Papa: and multos errores non habendos pro haeresibus, quia non
damnati a Papa: sed si aliqua sit veritas scripturae consona, and definiatur a
Papa, dicunt quod sit Catholica. Occam li. 2. part. 1. cap. 11. 12. improbat
hanc opinionem: and cap. 14. ostendit Papam non sacere nouam Catholicam
veritatem, sed tantum vt nec asserendo nec opinando dicatur contrarium illius
quod ante fuit Catholica veritas: and quod dicentes contrarium,
excommunicationis sententiae subdantur. Waldens. doctrinal. fidei: lib: 2. art.
2. c. 22. ait, ecclesiam non posse condere nouum articulum fidei. cum iam
creuerit in perfectum etc.
and therefore before, and without such determination, men seeing clearly the
deduction of things of this nature from the former, and refusing to believe
them, are condemned of heretical pertinacy; and men not seeing that deduction,
after the decree of a Council has passed upon them, may still doubt and
refuse to believe, without heretical pertinacy.

We cannot therefore condemn the Grecians as heretics, as the Romanists do,
because we cannot persuade our selves of them generally, that they see that,
which they deny touching the proceeding of the holy Ghost, deduced from the
indubitate principles of our Christian faith, or that they impiously neglect
the search of the truth. What is it then (will some men say) that the decree
of a Council does effect? Surely nothing else, but the rejecting of such as
are otherwise minded, from the societies of those men and Churches, with whom
the decree of the Council does prevail; and with all wise men, the more wary
and fearful pronouncing any thing of those matters, concerning which so grave
authority has passed her sentence. The Papists proceed further, and think it
heretical pertinacie, to gainsay the decrees of a Council, though they find
the reasons, by which they of the Council were moved so to think and
determine, to be too weak, and not to conclude the thing intended, Scotus in
4. did. ^1. q. 3. soluti omnes rations adductas pro confirmatione dogmatis
transsubstantiationis, et tamen tenet, quia definitum ab ecclesia. Biel in
Canonum missae. lect. 41. ostendit rations probantes transubstantiationem non
esse efficaces, tenendam tamen hanc veritatem propter Ecclesiae determinationem.
as, in the matter of Transubstantiation, they think it heresy to gainesay
the decrees of those Councels that have defined it, and yet many of them judge
all the reasons, alleged to prove it, too weak to prove it. In deed if it
were certain, as they suppose, that a general Council could not err, this
were a sufficient deduction, These things are decreede in a general Council:
Therefore ture; because it is consequent, that that is true, which is affirmed
by him that cannot err.

Thus we see what it is to be thought, touching this question, whether the
Church may make new Articles of faith: only one thing must be added for the
further clearing hereof. The Papists think, that the Church may add to the
Canon of the Scripture books not yet admitted, as the books of Hermas the
Scholar of Paul, entitled Pastor, and the constitutions of Clement; which if
it should do, we were to receive them with no less respect, then the Epistle
of James, and other books of the New Testament. Qui adhuc credunt Scripturarum
canonem imperfectum, et posse adhuc augeri per authoritatem Ecclesiae, cum
Iudaeis plenitudinem temporis expectant sub Iudaico forsitan Messia. Wald.
doctr. fidei l. 2. art. 2. cap. 20.
This we think to be a most gross heresy, and contrrry to their own
principles, who making the number of Canonical books a tradition, must
necessarily receive it from a certain and constant report of the ancient. But
hereof no more in this place, because the exact handling of it pertains to
another place, to wit, touching the Scriptures.

CHAP. 13
Of the Churches authority to judge of the differences that arise, touching
matters of faith.

THus having spoken of the Churches assured possession of divine truth, and her
office of teaching, testifying, and proposing the same, the next thing that
follows, is her authority to judge of the differences that may arise,
touching matters of the faith taught by her, or any part thereof, and more
specially touching the interpretation of the Scriptures and word of God.
Judgment is an act of reason, discerning whether a thing be or not, and
whether it be that it seems to be, and is thought or said to be.

This judgment is of two sorts: The first, of definitive and authentical
power. The second of Recognition. The judgment of authentical power, defining
what is to be thought of each thing, and prescribing to men's consciences so to
think, is proper to God: being originally found in the father, who by his
son as by the immediate and prime messenger, and Angel of his secret
Counsel, and by the holy Ghost as the spirit of illumination, makes known
unto men what they must think, and persuades them so to think. So that the
supreme judgment wherein the conscience of men does rest, in the things of
GOD, is proper to GOD, who only by his spirit teaches the conscience, and
gives unto it assurance of truth. Neither is God the supreme Judge, only
inrespect of the godly, who stay not, till they resolve their persuasions into
the certainty of his divine testimony and undoubted authority, but also in
respect of the wicked, who in their erroneous conceits are judged by him, and
of whose sinister and vile courses he sits in judgment, while he
confounds their tongues, divides them one from another, makes them cross
themselves, and brings all they do to nothing. This judgment all are forced
to stand unto, and this is that, that makes a final end of all controversies,
according to that of Acts. 3. 34.
Gamaliel; If this thing be of God it will prosper and prevail, and we
inresisting it, shall be found fighters against God, if not it will come to
naught. Thus then the judgment of God the father as supreme, the judgment of
the son as the eternal word of God, of the spirit as the fountain of all
illumination, making us discern what is true, is that, in which we finally
rest. The judgment or determination of the word of God is that, wherein we
rest as the rule of our faith: and the light of Divine understanding, as that,
whereby we judge of all things.

The judgment of Recognition is of three sorts. For there is a judgment of
discretion, common to all Christian men, a judgment of direction proper to the
guides of the Church, and a judgment of jurisdiction proper to them, that are
in chief places of authority. The first of these is nothing else, but an act
of understanding, discerning whether things be or not, and whether also they
be that which they seem to be. The second endeavors to make others
discern likewise: and the third by authority suppresseth all those, that shall
think and pronounce otherwise, then they judge that have the judgment of
Jurisdiction.

Touching the judgment of Recognition, we acknowledge, the judgment of the
universal Church, comprehending the faithful that are and have been, to be
infallible. In the Church that comprehends only the believers that live at
one time in the world, Est iudicium certa and veridi-, ca cognitionis quo
vnusquisque been iudicat de ijs quae noscit, and illud iudicium pertinetad
quemlibet in qualibet art peritum. est aliud iudicium authoritatis seu
iudicialis sententiae: 1 Modo loquendo de iudicio in ecclesia militante est
certum iudicium de ijs quae necesse est credere explicit: and semper erunt
aliqui Catholici, qui tali modo in vera fide explicit permane bunt: sed circa
illa quae non sunt necesaria explicit crededere, non semper erit tale
iudicium: quia de multis, licet pie dubitare, nunquam tamen omnes circa lista
pertinaciter errabunt vel dubitabunt: iudicium vero authoritatis non est semper
certum in ecclesia, sicut patuit tempore Liberii. Occam. dial. l. 5. part. 1.
c. 28.
there is always found a right judgment of discretion, and right pronouncing
of each thing necessary, all never falling into damnable error, nor into any
error pertinaciously; but a right judgment of men by their power of
jurisdiction mantayning the truth, and suppressing error, is not always found.

So that sometimes almost all, may conspire against the truth, or consent to
betray the sincerity of the Christian profession, as they did in the Counsels
of Ariminium and Seleucia, in which case as Occam aptly observes out of
Hierome, men have nothing left unto them, but with sorrowful hearts to refer
all unto God. If (says Hierome) iniquity prevail in the Church which is the
house of God, if justice be oppressed, if the madness of them, that should teach
and guide others, proceed so far, as to pervert all the straight ways of
God, to receive rewards, to do wrong, to tread down the poor in the gates,
and to refuse to hear their complaynts, let good men in such times hold their
peace, let them not give that which is holy unto dogs, let them not cast
pearls before swine, least they turn again and trample them under ^eete, let
them imitate Jeremy the Prophet, who speaks of himself in this sort, I sat
alone, because I was full of bitterness. Even so (says Occam) when heresies
prevail in the Christian world, when truth is trampled under feet in the
streets, and Prelates, and Princes being enemies to it, endeavor with all
their power to destroy it, when they shall condemn the doctrine of the
Fathers, molest, disquiet, and murder the true professors, let good men in
such times, hold their peace, keep silence, and be still, let them not give
holy things to dogs, nor cast pearls before swine, least they turn and
tread them under feet, least they wrest and abuse the Scriptures to their own
perdition, and the scandal of others: but let them with the Prophet sit alone,
and complain that their souls are full of bitter heaviness.

CHAP. 14.
Of the rule of the Churches judgment.

THus having set down the diverse kinds of judgment, which must determine and
end all controversies in matter of faith and religion, it remains to show
what is the rule of that judgment, whereby the Church discerns between truth
and falsehood, the faith and heresy, and to whom it properly pertains to
interpret those things which touching this rule are doubtful.

As the measure of each thing is that, by virtue whereof we know what it is,
and the quantity of it; so the rule is that, by application whereof, we know
whether it be that which it should be, and be so, as it should be. The rule of
action is that whereby we know whether it be right, and performed as it should
be, or not. The rule of doctrine is that, whereby we know whether it be true
or false.

Theologorum sententiam de foelicitate supernaturali altissimis philosophiae
radicibus nixam and stabilitam stare dilucide comprobabo: foelicitas est
possessio atque adeptio primi boni: bonum adipisci dupliciter possunt res
creatae aut in seipsis, aut in ipso, nam and in seipso hoc bonum est super
omnia exaltatum, suae inhabitans diuinitatis abyssos, and per omnia diffusum in
omnibus inuenitur: vmb^a potius foelicitatis quam vera foelicitas est attingere
Deum in creatura, non in ipso Deo quemadmod^ creatura non summabonitas, sed
summae bonitatis, id est diuinae, tenuis vmbra est: Vnde vera and consummata
foelicitas ad De^ faciem contuendam quae est omne bonum, vt ipse dixit, and ad
perfectam cum illo principio, a quo emanauimus, v ^em, nos reu^ (...) ^dducit:
ad hanc ^licitatem sola religio Christiana nos dirigit, and impellit Pi cus
Heptapl^, l^. 7. in prooemio.
The rule of our faith in general, whereby we know it to be true, is the
infinite excellency of God; (who in eminent sort possesses all those
perfections, which in the creatures are divided, and found in an inferior
sort:) in the full and perfect union with whom, and inioying of whom,
consists all happiness.

For by this rule we know, that the doctrine of faith, which only professes to
bring us back to God, to possess and enjoy him, (not as he is participated of
us, but as he is in himself) and makes us, already, to begin to taste the
sweetness of so great and happy an union, is not only true, but Divine and
Heavenly, such as nature could not teach us, but is to be learned only of God
himself.

It being presupposed in the generalily, that the doctrine of the Christian
faith is of God and contains nothing but heavenly truth; in the next place we
are to inquire, by what rule we are to judge of particular things contained
within the compass of it. This rule is first, the summary comprehension of
such principal articles of this divine knowledge, as are the principles whence
all other things are concluded, and inferred. These are contained in the creed
of the Apostles. Secondly, all such things as every Christian is bound
expressly to believe, by the light and direction whereof he judges of other
things, which are not absolutely necessary, so particularly to be known.
These are rightly said to be the rule of our faith, because the principles of
every science are the rule whereby we judge of the truth of all things, as
being better and more generally known, then any other thing, and the cause of
knowing them.

Thirdly, the Analogy, due proportion, and correspondence, that one thing in
this diuiue knowledge has with another, so that men cannot err in one of
them, without erring in another; nor rightly understand one, but they must
likewise rightly conceive the rest. Fourthly, whatsoever books were delivered
unto us, as written by them, to whom the first and immediate revelation of
divine truth was made. Fifthly, whatsoever has been delivered by all the Saints
with one consent, which have left their judgment and opinion in writing.
Sixthly, whatsoever the most famous have constantly and uniformly delivered, as
a matter of faith, no man contradicting, though many other Ecclesiastical
writers be silent, and say nothing of it. Seventhly, that which the most and
most famous in every age constantly delivered, as matter of faith, and as
received of them that went before them, in such sort that the contradictors and
gainsayers were in their beginnings noted for singularity, nouelty and
division, and afterward in process of time (if they persisted in such
contradiction) charged with heresy.

These three latter rules of our faith we admit, not because they are equal
with the former, and originally in themselves contain the direction of our
faith, but because nothing can be delivered, with such and so full consent of
the people of God, as in them is expressed, but it must needs be, from those
first Authors and founders of our Christian profession. The Romanists add unto
these the decrees of Councels, and determinations of Popes, making these also
to be the rules of faith: but because we have no proof of their
infallibility, we number them not with the rest.

Thus then we see, how many things, in several degrees and sorts, are said to
be rules of our faith. The infinite excellency of God, as that whereby the
truth of the heavenly doctrine is proved. The articles of faith, and other
verities ever expressly known in the Church, as the first principles, are the
canon, by which we judge of conclusions from thence inferred. The Scripture, as
containing in it all that doctrine of faith, which Christ the Son of GOD
delivered. The vnifor^e practice, and consenting judgment of them that went
before us, as a (...) and undoubted explication, of the things contained in the
Scripture.

The Scripture (says Contra profanas haeret: novitates.
Vincentius Lirinensis,) is full and sufficient to all purposes: but because of
the manifold turnings of heretics, it is necessary* that the line of
Prophetical and Apostolical interpretation, be drawn^ ^owne, and directed
unto us, according to the rule of Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense. So
then, we do not so make the Scripture the rule of our faith, but that other
things, in their kind, are rules likewise, in such sort, that it is not safe,
without respect had unto them, to judge of things by the Scripture alone. For
without the first rule, we cannot know the Scripture to be of God. Without the
second and third, we have no form of Christian doctrine, by the direction
whereof to judge of particular doubts and questions: without the other rules,
we cannot know the authors, and number of the Books of Scripture, nor the
meaning of the things therein written. The Apostles wrote to them they had
formerly taught more at large: neither can the scriptures be understood now,
but only by such as will ^ee taught by the successors of the Apostles and
guides of the Church, though being so taught, they may find assuredly by the
scriptures themselves, that they do understand them aright.
For who shall be able to understand them, but he that is settledin these
things, which the Apostles presupposed, in their delivery of the Scripture.

We do not therefore, so make the Scripture the rule of our faith, as to
neglect the other, nor so admit the other, as to detract any thing from the
plenitude of the Scripture, in which all things are contained that must be
believed.

CHAP. 15.
Of the challenge of Papists against the rule of Scripture, charging it with
obscurity, and imperfection.

THis rule our adversaries least esteem of, charging it with obscurity and
imperfection, and thereupon rely upon humane interpretations, and uncertain
traditions. Touching their first challenge made against this rule of the
scripture, as being obscure and dark, and so not fit to give direction to our
faith, unless it borrow light from some thing else: we answer, there is no
question, but there are manifold difficulties in the scripture, proceeding
partly from the high and excellent nature of the things therein contained,
which are without the compass of natural understanding, and so are wholly
hidden from natural men, and not known of them that are spiritual, without
much travail, and studious meditation; partly out of the ignorance of tongues,
and of the nature of such things, by the comparison whereof, the matters of
divine knowledge are manifested unto us. But the difference between their
opinion and ours, concerning this difficulty is, first in that they think the
scripture so obscure and hard to be understood, that Heretics may wrest and
abuse it at their pleasures, and no man be able to convince their folly, by the
evidence of the Scripture it self. Secondly, in that they think, that we
cannot by any helps be assured out of the Scripture it self, and the nature
of the things therein contained, that that is the true meaning of it, which we
think to be, but that we rest in it, only for the authority of the Church.
But we say, that men, not neglecting that light of direction, which the Church
yields, nor other helps and means, may be assured out of the nature of the
things themselves, the conference of places, the knowledge of tongues, and the
suitable correspondence, that one part of divine truth has with another, that
they have found out the true meaning of it, and so be able to convince the
adversaries and gainesayers.

CHAP. 16.
Of the interpretation of Scripture, and to whom it pertayneth.

TOuching this point, there are two questions usually proposed; the one to whom
the interpretation of the Scripture pertains: the other by what rules and
means, men may find out the true meaning of it. T^ching the first, our
Adversaries jangle much, with many declamations, against private
interpretations, and interpretations of private spirits, and make the world
believe, that we follow no other rule of interpretation, but each man's private
fancy.

For answer hereunto, we say with Cont. 5. q. 4. art. 2. explicat. (...).
Stapleton, that interpretations of Scripture may be said to be private, and
the spirits whence they proceed, named private, either Ratione personae, modi,
or finis: That is, in respect of the person who interprets, the manner of his
proceeding in interpreting, or the end of his interpretation. A private
interpretation, proceeding from a private spirit in the first sense, is every
interpretation delivered by men of private condition. In the second sense, is
that, which men of what condition soever, deliver, contemning and neglecting
those public means which are known to all, and are to be used by all that
desire to find the truth.

In the third sense that, which proceeding from men of private condition, is
not so proposed and urged by them, as if they would bind all other to receive
and embrace it, but is intended only to their own satisfaction. The first
kind of interpretation, proceeding from a private spirit, is not to be
disliked, if the parties so interpreting neither neglect the common rules and
means, of attayning the right sense of that they interpret, contemn the
judgment of other men, nor presumptuously take upon them, to teach others, and
enforce them to believe that, which they apprehend for truth, without any
authority so to do.

But private spirits in the second sense, that is men of such dispositions, as
will follow their own fancies, and neglect the common rules of direction, as
Enthusiasts, and trust to their own sense, without conference and due respect
to other men's judgments, we accurse. This is all we say touching this matter:
wherein I would feign know, what our adversaries dislike. Surely nothing at
all, as it will appear to every one, that shall but look into the place above
alleged out of Stapleton. But say they, there must be some authentical
interpretation of Scripture, which every one must be bound to stand unto, or
else there will be no end of quarrels and contentions, The interpretation of
Scripture is nothing else, but the explication and clearing of the meaning of
it. This is either true or false. The true interpretation of the Scripture, is
of two sorts. For there is an interpretation, which delivers that which is
true, and contained in the Scripture, or from thence to be concluded, though
not meant in that place which is expounded.

This is not absolutely and perfectly a true interpretation, because though it
truly delivers such doctrine as is contained in the Scripture, and nothing
contrary to the place interpreted, yet it does not express that, that is
particularly meant, in the place expounded. There is therefore another kind of
true interpretations, when not only that is delivered which is contained in
the Scripture, but that which is meant in the particular places expounded.

Likewise false interpretations are of two sorts: some delivering that which is
utterly false, and contrary to the Scripture; some others only failing in
this, that they attain not the true sense, of the particular places expounded.
An example of the former, is that interpretation of that place of Genesis 6. 2.
Genesis, The sons of God saw the daughters of men, etc. Tertul. de ivelandis
Virg nibus. Debet adumbrari facies tam periculosa, quae vsque ad coelum
scandola i^culata est etc. Justinius Martyr and Clemens, Genesis 6. Dei filios qui
hominum filias conspexerunt Angelos interpretan^ Andrad: de script. and
traditionum authoritate. l. 2. fol. 262.
which some of the Fathers have delivered, understanding by the sons of God,
the Angels of Heaven, whose fall they suppose proceeded from the love of women.
Which error they confirm by that of the Apostle, that women must come vayled
into the Church for the Angels: that is as they interpret, least the Angels
should fall in love with them. A false interpretation of the later kind;
Andrad: ib: fol. 257.
Andradius shows, some think that exposition of the words of the Prophet
Esaie, Esaias. 53.
Quis enarrabit generationem eius? Who shall declare his generation, delivered
by many of the Fathers, understanding thereby the eternal generation of the
son of God, which no man shall declare. Whereas, by the name of generation, the
Prophet means that multitude, that shall believe in Christ, which shall be so
great, as cannot be expressed.

An authentical interpretation, is that, which is not only true, but so
clearly and in such sort, that every one is bound to embrace and to receive
it. As before we made 3 kinds of judgment, the one of discretion common to all,
the other of direction common to the Pastors of the Church, and a third of
jurisdiction, proper to them that have supreme power in the Church: so
likewise we make three kinds of interpretation; the first private, and so
every one may interpret the Scripture, that is, privately with himself
conceive, or deliver to other, what he thinks the meaning of it to be; the
second of public direction, and so the Pastors of the Church may publicly
propose what they conceive of it; and the third of jurisdiction, and so they
that have supreme power, that is the Bishops assembled in a general Council,
may interpret the Scripture, and by their authority suppress all them that
shall gainesay such interpretations, and subject every man that shall disobey
such determinations as they consent upon, to excommunication and censures of
like nature.

But for authentical interpretation of Scriptures, which every man's conscience
is bound to yield unto, it is of an higher nature: neither do we think any
of these to be such, as proceeding from any of those before named and
specified; to whom we grant a power of interpretation. Touching the
interpretations which the Fathers have delivered, we receive them as
undoubtedly true, in the general doctrine they consent in, and so far forth
esteem them as authentical: yet do we think that holding the faith of the
Fathers, it is lawful to dissent from that interpretation of some particular
places, which the greater part of them have delivered, or perhaps all that have
written of them, and to find out some other not mentioned by any of the
Ancient.

CHAP. 17.
Of the interpretation of the Fathers, and how far we are bound to admit it.

THe Fathers, ( Andradius defens. etc. l. 2. fol. 257. et 260.
says Andradius) especially they of the Greek Church, being ignorant of the
Hebrew tongue, following Origin, did rather strive, with all their wit and
learning, to devise Allegories; and to frame the manners of men, then to clear
the hard places of the law and the Prophets. Nay, even Hierome himself, who
more diligently then any of the rest, sought out the meaning and sense of the
Prophetical and divine Oracles, yet often to avoyde the obscurities of their
words, betaketh himself to Allegories. In this sense it is that Caietan
prooemio comment. in Genesis
Cardinal Caietan says, he will not fear to go against the torrent of all
the Doctors; for which saying Andradius shows, that Canus and others do
unjustly blame him. For though we may not go from the faith of the Fathers,
nor from the maine truth of doctrine, which they deliver in different
interpretations, yet may we interpret some parts of the Scripture otherwise,
then any of the Ancient ever did, weighing the circumstances of places, the
nature and force of words in the Original, and having other helps necessary.

Neither is this to contemn the uniform and maine consent of the Fathers, but
rather more exactly to illustrate and explain those things, which they did
allegorically understand, or not so diligently travail in, as is fit for them
that come after, to do. It is not then so strange a thing to say, that there
are many places of Scripture, the true literal, and natural sense whereof, we
cannot find in any of the Ancient. Neither is this to charge them with error
in faith: seeing the sense they give, tends to the furtherance of the true
faith, and the better forming of men's manners to godliness. Wherefore, we
fear not to pronounce with Andradius, that whosoever denies, that the true
and literal sense of sundry texts of Scripture has been found out in this
last age (wherein I^ praefat. in Novi Testamenti Syriaci Latinam interpret.
as Guido Fabritius rightly notes, all things seem to be renewed, and all
learning to be newly borne into the world, that so Christ might be newly
fashioned in us, and we newborn in him) is most unthankful unto God, that
has so richly shed out his benefits upon the children of this generation, and
ungrateful toward those men, who with so great pains, so happy success, and
so much benefit to Gods Church, have travailed therein.

Neither is Andradius only of this opinion, but Iansenius, and Maldonatus also,
who both of them do in sundry places profess, they rest not satisfied in any
interpretation given by the Fathers, but prefer other found out in this age.
For example, in the explication of that place of John, Of his fullness, we have
all received, grace for grace; Comment. in Ioh. c. 1.
Maldonatus, refuses all the interpretations of the Fathers, and gives this
of his own, We have received, of Christ's fullness, most excellent gifts of
grace, yet no man has received al, but every one is defective, yea, every one
lacks something, that another has. But he may acknowledge the goodness of
God toward him, in that he has some other in stead of it, which the other
has not, and so may rightly be said to have received grace for grace,
because in stead of that grace he wants, and another has, he has received
some other, which the other wants. Many other instances might be given out
of Caietane, Andradius, Iansenius, Maldonatus, and other worthy Divines of the
Church of Rome: but this may suffice.

CHAP: 18.
Of the diverse senses of Scripture.

THus having set down to whom the interpretation of the Scripture pertains,
it remains, that we speak of the rules, directions, and helps, that men
have to lead the^ to the finding out of the right meaning of it. But, because
some suppose the Scripture has many and uncertain senses, before we enter into
the discourse of the rules, which must direct us in interpreting, we must
speak something of the multiplicity of senses, supposed to be in the words of
Scripture, which may seem to contrary all certainety of interpretation. There
is therefore a double sense of the sacred words and sentences of Scripture, for
there is a literal sense, and a spiritual or mystical sense. The literal
sense is either proper, or native, when the words are to be taken, as
originally in their proper signification they import, or figurative, when the
words are translated from their natural and proper signification, to signify
something resembled by those things, they do primarily import. John 10. 16.
As when Christ says, he has other sheep, which are not of this fould.

The spiritual or mystical sense of the Scripture is, when the words either
properly, or figuratively, signify somethings, which are figures and
significations of other things. This is Threefoold: Allegorical,
Tropologicall, Anagogicall. The first is, when things spoken of in the old
Testament, are figures of somethings in the New. So it was literally true,
that Galat. 4. 22.
Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondwoman, the other by a free: but these
two sons of Abraham imported some other thing in the state of the new
Testament, to wit, two different sorts of men. Illyrycus in claue Ser pturae,
de multiplici sacra^um literarum sensu, haec doctissime tradit collecta ex
varijs authoribus.
And here we may observe the difference, between an Allegory and a Type. A
Type is, when some particular person, or fact, in the old Testament,
demonstrateth, and shadoweth out unto us some particular person, or fact in the
new. An allegory, when something in the old Testament, in a spiritual, and
mystical sort, shadoweth out unto us in a generality, things in some
proportion answering in the new. So 1. Sam. 17. 50.
David, ouercomming Goliath, was a Type of Christ, and allegorically did shadow
out that victory, which we obtain in the state of the new Testament, over
those ghostly enemies that rise up against us.

The Tropologicall sense of Scripture is, when one thing delivered and reported
in the Scripture, signifies some other thing, pertaining to the behavior and
conversation of men: as when God forbade to Deuteronomy: 25 4. 1 Cor. 9. 9.
muzzle the mouth of the ox, that treads out the corn. This prohibition did
literally signify, that God would not have laboring oxen restrained from
feeding, while they were treading out the corn. But this respect, which God
had unto these his creatures of inferior condition, did signify, that much
less they which labor for our souls good, are to be denied the things of
this life.

Anagogicall, when the things literally expressed unto us, do signify
something in the state of heaven happiness. Psalm. 95, 8. Hebr: 4. 1.
God swear in his wrath, to the Israelites, that they should not enter into his
rest, meaning the land of Canaan: but the Apostle from thence concludes, that
unbelievers shall not enter into that eternal rest of the Saints in heaven;
because the rest of the Israelites in the land of Canaan, after their manyfold
dangers, vexations and travels, was a figure of the eternal rest in heaven.
This division of the manifold senses of Scripture is taken out of Eucherius.

Hierom makes three kinds of exposition of Scripture, Historical,
Tropologicall, and Spiritual: that which he names spiritual comprehends
both those before expressed by Eucherius, to wit, Allegorical and Anagogicall.
Augustine makes the exposition of the Scripture to be twofold, Historical, and
Allegorical. The former he makes to be twofold, to wit, Analogicall, and
Aetiologicall: and the later he makes to comprehend that, which properly is
called Allegorical, and the other two, to wit, Tropologicall, and Anagogicall.

The reason of this diversity of mystical senses is, because the old Testament
was a figure of the new; and the new, of future glory. This multiplicity of
senses breeds no uncertainty in the Scripture, nor Aequivocation, because
the words of the Scripture do not doubtfully signify so diverse and different
things, but the things certainly signified by the words, are signs and
significations of diverse things. All these are founded upon one literal and
certain sense, from which only in matter of question and doubt an argument may
be drawn. The thing wherein Origin offended, was not, that he found out
spiritual and mystical senses of the divine Scripture, but because he
thought there is no literal true sense of them, but mystical only, so
overthrowing the truth of the sacred history of the book of God. And the
fault of many others in former times was, that following him too much, they
neglected the literal sense, and ouercuriously sought out allegories, and
mystical senses; whereas yet the literal sense alone has force and power to
establish truth, and improve error. Sixtus Sennens* Bibliothecae l. 3. de vsu
and vtilitate historicae and mysticae expopositionis.
And this doubtless is the first and chiefest use and necessity of following
the literal sense. Another is, for that, being the foundation of the
mystical, if we find it not out, we may run into many errors. The
Manichees out of those words of the Psalmist, where he says, that God has
made a Tabernacle for the Sun in heaven, out of which, it comes in the
morning, as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, to show the brightness of his
countenance to the sons of men; reading, Posuit tabernaculum suum in sole,
God placed his Tabernacle, or appointed and made himself a Tabernacle in the
Sun, inferred, that Christ ascended into the highest heavens, without our
flesh, leaving his body behind him, within the compass of the globe of the
Sun, so that his flesh is to be adored in the Sun, as in a Tabernacle
wherein it rests and remains. Intellectus sacri eloquij, inter textum and
mysterium, magna est libratione pensandus. Multae enim eius sententiae tanta
allegoriarum conceptione sunt gravidae, vt quisquis eas adsolam tenere
historiam nititur, earum noticia per suam incuriam priuetur* nonnulli vero ita
exterioribus inseruiunt, ^t si quis eas subtilius penetrare desiderat, intus
quidem nihil inueniat, sed etiam sibi quod foris loquuntur abscondat. Greg.
moral. l 21. in cap. 31. cap. 1.
Now as their course is not to be excused, which follow the mystical sense
only, and neglect the literal: so they are no less faulty, that follow the
literal sense only, and do not at all consider the mysteries of spiritual
understanding, and information of Christian and godly conversation, which in
the word of God, do offer themselves unto them. For they make the Scriptures,
especially of the old testament, where so many things of outward observation,
ceremony, and purification were prescribed, unsavory, and to seem less
divine, than the laws and prescriptions of the Gentiles, as the Athenians,
Lacedaemonians, and other, and the manifold histories of former times, to serve
little to edification.

Between both these extremes, a mean is to be kept, that neither the one,
nor the other be neglected: so that we must neither be like them, that
rejecting the literal exposition, seek out fond and childish Allegories, and
so overthrow the truth of the divine history, as Origin did, or neglect the
knowledge of it, publishing their own idle and ridiculous conceits, as if they
were the great and hidden mysteries of the Christian faith and religion; nor
like those, which rest in the bare and naked words, and syllables, without
collecting from thence, such instructions as are fit. The former (says Sixtus
Senensis) are to know, that howsoever they imagine, the literal exposition of
the Scripture to be easy, obvious, and triuiall, yet it is indeed the hardest
of all other. Whereupon, both Hierome and Augustine confess, that at first, to
decline the obscurities and difficulties of the text of Scripture, they
followed mystical senses, as being more easy; but afterward when they grew in
age, and so in ripeness of judgment they sought out the other, which is
literal.

Thus we see the difference between the literal and mystical sense of
Scripture, and how and in what sort the one is the ground of the other. Which
that we misconceiue not, nor take one for another, we must remember, that by
the literal sense of Scripture, we understand not that only, which the words
do properly afford, but which they primarily afford, according to the
intention of him that uses them, and the construction of them that hear them.
The mystical sense opposite hereunto, is that which is not primarily intended
by him that speaks words, having such mystical sense. All the allegories
therefore, parables, and Aenigmaticall speeches which are used in Scripture,
not being verified either in the intention of the speaker, or construction of
the hearer, in sort as the words properly import, but as signifying things
resembled by the things they properly import, do literally signify that,
which by comparison of such things, they make us understand.

Here it is not out of place, to observe the difference between a proverb,
parable, allegory, and aenigmaticall speech or riddle. A proverb is a
sententious saying, much in use, and famous, for the most part somewhat
obscure, by metaphorical words expressing something to us, and alluding to
something not distinctly expressed. Though sometimes any famous and common
saying, be named a Proverb. A Parable is, when one thing is compared and
resembled to another; so Christ compared the kingdom of Heaven to leaven, to a
grain of mustard seed, to ten virgins, to a net cast into the sea. Though
sometimes the similitude of a thing, and not any such speech, wherein
comparison is made between one thing, and another, is named a Parable.

Iansenius in concordiam Evangel. c. 52. fol. 402.
Abraham recepit filium suum in parabola, that is, Abraham received his son
from such an estate, as was most like to the state of the dead. An allegory
is, when he that speaks intends to signify, and insinuate some other
thing, than his words in their primary use, and signification do import. Math.
^7. 3.
Behold, says Christ, the sower went out to sow, etc. A Riddle, or
Aenigmaticall speech, is an obscure allegory. Iudicum c. 9.
The trees went forth to anoint them a King: and again: Cap. 14.
Out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong came sweetness. The
Scripture is full of these Allegories, Parables, Proverbiall and Aenigmaticall
speeches; GOD in teaching us, taking that course, he knows fittest for us,
and making us understand things heavenly, and invisible, by those that are
earthly and visible.

And as God does thus speak unto us in parables, Allegories, and Riddles, so
did he show the Prophets of old, in dreams and visions, the things that are
heavenly, by those that are earthly, and the things that are invisible, by
those that are visible: as in the Revelation, Revel. (...).
Saint John saw seven golden Candlesticks, and one like the Son of man
walking in the midst of them. Occam l. 3. (...). tract. part. 3. c. 19.
There is none of these Aenigmaticall, Allegorical, or Parabolicall speeches,
nor none of these visions, but either by some things known to them, to whom
they were proposed, or by special explication added to them, or per novi facti
exhibitionem, by seeming the thing performed, that was so obscurely shadowed
only, may be understood. Not from ehe mystical or spiritual senses above
mentioned.
From these without these helps of understanding; we can conclude nothing
that is doubtful. An example of understanding Aenigmaticall and hard speeches,
by force of some things known unto us, giving light unto them, is the riddle
of Samson, Out of the eater came meat, etc. which sny one, knowing that out of
a Lion he had taken honey, would understand, but another could not. By
explication added, Revel. 1. 20.
as the mystery of the seven stars, and seven golden Candlestickes, is
expounded to John, that saw the vision of them. By evidence of the thing
exhibited and performed, John 2. 19. 22.
Destroy this Temple, (says Christ) and in three days I will build it, and
raise it up again. The disciples after they saw him risen from the dead,
remembered these words, and understood that they were spoken of our Savior, of
the Temple of his body, and the resurrection of it. Math. 24. 15
So likewise, when they saw the miserable and abominable overthrow of
Jerusalem, and the Temple, they could not but understand what was meant by the
prophecy of Daniel, touching the abomination of desolation, standing in the
holy place.

Thus having cleared that doubt, which some make, touching the multiplicitie of
senses of the words of Scripture, as if there were no certain meaning of them,
and having showed which is that sense, we must principally seek after, as being
the foundation of the rest, it remains that we come to speak of the rules of
direction, and the helps we have, to attain to the understanding of the true
meaning of the Scripture. For as Hierome fitly notes, In epist. ad Gal. in
cap. 1.
Non putemus in verbis scripturarum esse euangelium, sed in sensu, non in
superficie, sed in medulla, non in sermonum folijs, sed in radice rationis. We
must not think that the Gospel consists in the words of Scripture, but in
the sense and meaning, not in the outward rind and skin, but in the inward
pith and marrow, not in the leaves of the words, but in the root and ground of
reason.

CHAP: 19.
Of the rules we are to follow, and the helps we are to trust to, in
interpreting the Scriptures.

TOuching the rules we are to follow, the helps we are to trust unto, and
the things required in the interpretation of Scripture, I think we may thus
resolve. First there is required an illumination of the understanding: for the
natural man perceives not the things of God, for they are spiritually
discerned, but the spiritual man judges all things, and himself is judged of
none. Secondly a mind free from the thought of other things depending on God,
as the fountain of illumination, desirous of the truth, with resolution to
embrace it, though contrary to the conceits of natural men. Thirdly, the
knowledge of the rule of faith, formerly set down, and the practice of the
Saints according to the same. Fourthly, a due consideration, what will follow
upon our interpretation, agreeing with, or contrary to, the things generally
received, and believed among Christians: in which consideration the conference
of other places of Scripture, and the things there delivered is necessary. For
the consideration of the circumstances of the places interpreted, the occasion
of the words the things going before, and following after. Sixthly, the
knowledge of all those Histories, Arts, and Sciences which may help us. For,
seeing grace presupposes nature, and the Scripture does not teach us, but
presupposes we know already, the things that may be discerned by the light of
nature, many do not understand sundry passages of Scripture, because they
bring not with them, to the study of it, that degree of natural knowledge,
which is requisite. Seventhly, the knowledge of the original tongues, and the
phrases and Idiotismes of them. So that to resolve this matter yet more
distinctly and fully, there are some things required for the attaining of the
right understanding of Scripture, as making us capable of such understanding,
of which sort is the illumination of the mind: some things as means, whereby
we attain unto it. These are of two sorts, either disposing and preparing
only, as often reading, meditating, and praying, or else guiding us in the very
search it self. The^se are either general and most infallible, as the rule of
faith, which if we follow, we are sure not to depart from the general verity
of the Christian faith: or more proper and special, directing us to the true
finding out of the meaning of particular places of Scripture. There is
therefore between our adversaries, and us, no difference in this matter, if
they will understand themselves. For we confess, that neither conference of
places, nor consideration of the antecedentia and consequentia, nor looking
into the originals, are of any force, unless we find the things, which we
conceive to be understood and meant in the places interpreted, to be consonant
to the rule of faith. Stapl. cont. 6. q. 7. exp. art.
And they confess, that though alone, and without respect had to the rule of
faith, they be but probable means of direction, and not absolutely certain,
yet that being joined with the rule of faith, they help and are exceedingly
necessary.

De causis difficultatis scripturae and remedijs. remed. 2.
Illyricus in his Clauis scripturae, speaking of the difficulties that are
found in Scripture, and how they may be cleared, shows that nothing is more
necessary for the understanding of the Scripture, than to be rightly taught the
general principles, and axioms of Divinity, out of which do flow, and on
which do depend, whatsoever things are contained in the Scripture; and then
comes to the other media assigned before. Neither is there any of our
Divines, that ever thought otherwise.

CHAP: 20.
Of the supposed imperfection of Scriptures, and the supply of Traditions.

THus having showed what that difficulty and obscurity is, which is found in
Scripture, who must interpret it, and by what rules they must be guided in the
interpretation of it; it remains, that in the next place, we clear the
scriptures, from the other imputation of our adversaries, which is
imperfection, which they endeavor to supply by addition of traditions. The
necessity of writing, for the preservation and safe keeping of those treasures
of learning, and wisdom, which we desire should remain and be known to
posterities, appears, in that few things remain, of Socrates, Pythagoras,
and others, renowned, in the times wherein they lived for wisdom and learning,
because they left nothing in writing, as also by that Job. 19. 24.
of blessed Job, Oh that my words were written etc. as if there were no other
means to preserve the remembrance of things, that they should never be
forgotten, but writing only. The Ancients had the knowledge of God without
writing, but how soon it decayed, it easily appears. Surely it failed in
every family, in one at the least, till the time of Jacob father of the 12.
Patriarchs. And therefore, after God took the whole posterity of Jacob to be
his peculiar people, (a favor which he showed not to any of his fathers
before) he gave them his laws in writing: which Scripture or writing was so
full and perfect, Bellar. l. 4. c. 8. de verbo non scripto. Non de^unt inquit,
aliqui Catholicorum, qui negant vllam fuisse traditionem non scriptam apud
Iudaeos.
that the Jews had nothing delivered unto them, pertaining to the knowledge or
service of God, that was not written.

The instance that our adversaries give to the contrary, is concerning the
females, and males dying before the eighth day, who not being circumcised, they
presume they were sanctified to God, and found remission of their Original and
birth sin, by some other sacred rite, and Sacramental means appointed by
God, though not written. Andrad. defen. l. 2. fo. 125.
This instance is clearly refuted, by Andradius. If (says he) we shall more
diligently look into the thing itself, we shall find, that the Jews had no
set, or certain rite of religion, wherewith to sanctify and cleanse their
women children, or males that died before circumcision, from the pollution of
original sin: and if perhaps any did sometimes use any form, or rite, it was
rather a matter of private, and voluntary devotion, than of necessity. For
whereas parents stand bound, by the general law of God and nature, with all
thankful acknowledgment, to receive their children, as a great and special
benefit from God, this their faith, piety, and thankefullnesse joined with
desire of, and prayer for their Good, prosperous, and happy estate, was
accepted, and found favor with God, on the behalf of their children.
Whereupon Moral. l. 4. c. 2.
Gregory pronounces, that the faith of the parents, was of the same force with
them of the old time, that the Baptism of water is with us. And whereas
Augustine says, it is not likely that the people of God, before the
institution of Circumcision, had noe Sacrament wherewith to present their
children to GOD, though the Scripture have not expressed it, it is not to be
understood, (says Andradius) of any outward ceremonies necessary for the
sanctification of those Infants, but of any rite, and offering them to GOD,
whether mental only, or outwardly object to the eye, and sense.

That which Andradius adds, that it could not be known, but by tradition
only, that the faith of the parents was in stead of circumcision, before
circumcision was instituted, and after the institution of it to them that might
not lawfully, or could not possibly be circumcised, is frivolous; for men knew
it, and concluded it out of the general, and common rules of reason, and
equity.

Touching the state of the people of God, since the coming of Christ, our
adversaries make no doubt, but they can easily prove, that the writings, which
the Church that now is, has, are defective and imperfect. This they endeavor
to prove: First, because the Scriptures of the New Testament, were written upon
particular occasions offered, and not of purpose to contain a perfect rule of
faith. Secondly, because they were written by the Apostles and other
Apostolic men, out of their own motions, and not by commandment from Christ
the Son of GOD. But unto both these Arguments alleged by our Adversaries,
we answer, that they contain matter of very gross error.

For first, who sees not plainly, that the Evangelistes writing the history
of Christ's life and death, Saint Luke in the book of the Acts of the Apostles,
describing the coming of the Holy Ghost; the admirable gifts of grace powered
upon the Apostles, and the Churches established, and ordered by them: and the
blessed Apostle Saint John, writing the Revelations which he saw, concerning
the future state of things, to the end of the world; meant to deliver a perfect
sum of Christian doctrine, and direction of Christian faith. It is true
indeed, that the Epistles of the Apostles, directed to the Christian Churches
that then were, were occasionally written, yet so, as by the providence of God,
all such things as the Church believes, not being found in the other parts of
Scripture purposely written, are most clearly, and at large delivered in these
Epistles.

Secondly, touching the other part of their Argument, which they bring to
convince the Scripture of imperfection, because they that wrote it, had no
commandment to write, we think it needs no refutation, for Aug. lib. 1.
de consensu Evangelista^um cap. ult. quicquid il le de suis factis et dictis
nos legere voluit, hoc scribendum illis tanquam suis manibus imperauit.
the absurdity of it is evident and clear of it self. 2 Pet. 1. 20. 21.
For who knows not, that the Scriptures are not of any private motion, but
that the holy men of God, were moved, impelled, and carried by the spirit of
truth to the performance of this work, doing nothing without the instinct of
the Spirit, which was unto them a Commandment.

The imperfection and defect supposed to be foundin the Scripture, our
adversaries endeavor to supply, by addition of traditions. The name of
Tradition, sometimes signifies every Christian doctrine, delivered from one,
to another, either by lively voice only, or by writing, as Exodus 17. Scribe hoc
ob monumentum in libro, and trade in auribus Iosuae: Write this for a
remembrance in a Book, and deliver it in the ears of Iosuah, Act. 6. 14. The
written Law of Moses, is called a Tradition. Audivimus eum dicentem, quoniam
Jesus destruet locum istum, and mutabit traditiones quas tradidit nobis Moses.
We heard him say, that Jesus shall destroy this place, and change the
traditions, which Moses delivered unto us. Sometimes the name of tradition
signifies that which is delivered by lively voice only, and not written. 1
Cor. 11. 23
That which I received of the Lord, says the Apostle, that I delivered unto
you. In this question, by tradition, we understand such parts of Christian
doctrine or discipline, as were not written by them, by whom they were first
delivered.

For thus our Adversaries understand Traditions, which they divide into diverse
kinds. First, in respect of the Authors, so making them of three sorts,
Divine, Apostolical and Ecclesiastical. Secondly, in respect of the matter
they concern, in which respect they make them to be of two sorts: for either
they concern matters of faith, or matters of manners: and these latter again
either temporal or perpetual, universal or particular. All these in their
several kinds they make equal with the words, precepts, and doctrines of
Christ, the Apostles and Pastors of the Church left unto us in writing. Neither
is there any reason why they should not so do, if they could prove any such
unwritten verities. For it is not the writing, that gives things their
authority, but the worth and credit of him that delivers them, though but
by word and lively voice only.

The only doubt is, whether there be any such unwritten traditions or not.

Much contention there has been, about Traditions, some urging the necessity
of them, and other rejecting them. For the clearing whereof we must observe,
that though we reject the uncertain and vain traditions of the Papists, yet
we reject not all. For first we receive the number and names of the authors
of books Divine and Canonical, as delivered by tradition. This tradition we
admit, for that, though the books of Scripture have not their authority from
the Approbation of the Church, but win credit of themselves, and yield
sufficient satisfaction to all men, of their Divine truth, whence we judge the
Church that receives them, to be led by the spirit of God; yet the number,
Authors, and integrity of the parts of these books, we receive as delivered
by tradition.

The second kind of tradition which we admit, is that summarie
comprehension, of the chief heads of Christian doctrine, contained in the
Creed of the Apostles, which was delivered to the Church, as a rule of her
faith. Illa verba quae audiuisti^ per diuinas Scripturas sparsa sunt inde
collecta and ad vnum redacta etc. Aug. ad catechumenos lib. 1. de symbolo cap.
1.
For though every part thereof be contained in the Scripture, yet the orderly
connection, and distinct explication of these principal articles gathered into
an Epitome, wherein are employed, and whence are inferred, all conclusions
theological, is rightly named a tradition. The 3d is that form of Christian
doctrine, and explication of the several parts thereof, which the first
Christians receiving of the same Apostles, that delivered to them the
Scriptures, commended to posterities. This may rightly be named a tradition,
not as if we were to believe any thing, without the warrant and authority of
the Scripture, but for that we need a plain and distinct explication of many
things, which are somewhat obscurely contained in the Scripture: which being
explicated, the Scriptures which otherwise we should not so easily have
understood, yield us satisfaction that they are so indeed, as the Church
delivers them unto us.

The fourth kind of tradition, is the continued practice of such things, as
neither are contained in the Scripture expressly, nor the examples of such
practice expressly there delivered, though the grounds, reasons, and causes of
the necessity of such practice, be there contained, and the benefit, or good
that follows of it. Of this sort is the Baptism of Infantes, which is
therefore named a tradition, because it is not expressly delivered in
Scripture, That the Apostles did baptize infants, nor any express precept
there found, that they should so do. Yet is not this so received by bare and
naked tradition, but that we find the Scripture to deliver unto us the grounds
of it. The fifth kind of traditions, comprehends such observations, as in
particular, are not commanded in Scripture, nor the necessity of them from
thence concluded, though in general without limitation of times, and other
circumstances, such things be there commanded. Of this sort, many think the
observation of the lent fast to be, the fast of the fourth and the sixth days
of the week, and some other.

That the Apostles delivered by lively voice, many observations, dispensable,
and alterable, according to the circumstances of times, and persons, we make no
question. Only this we say, Waldensi^ tom. 3. titulo 7. cap. 63. traditiones
apostolicas a pure ecclesiasticis iam temporis vastitate nescimus discernere.
that they are confounded with Ecclesiastical traditions; so that which they
are, does hardly appear, and that they do not necessarily bind posterities.
The custom of standing at prayer on the Lords day, and between Easter and
Whitsontinde, was generally received, as delivered by Apostolic tradition,
and when some began to break it, is was confirmed by the Concilium Nicen.
can: 20. The custom of ministering baptism only at Easter and Whitsontide
except in case of necessity was very general. whereupon Leo reprehendeth the
Bishops ^f Sicilia for that contemning this tradition of the ancient they did
baptize on the day of Epiphany.
Council of Nice, yet is it not thought necessary to be observed in our time.

Out of this which has been said, we may easily resolve what is to be
thought touching traditions. For first the Canon of scripture being admitted as
delivered by Tradition, (though the divine truth of it, be in it self clear
and evident unto us, not depending of the Churches authority,) there is noe
matter of faith delivered by bare and only tradition, as the Romanists seem
to Imagine. Yea this is so clear, that therein they contrary themselves,
indeauouring to prove by scripture the same things they pretend to hold by
tradition as we shall find, if we run through the things questioned between
them and us. The only clear instance they seem to give, is touching the
perpetual virginity of Mary, which they say cannot be proved by scripture, and
yet is necessary to be believed.

But they should know, that this is no point of Christian faith. That she was
a Virgin before, in, and after the birth of Christ, we are bound to believe as
an article of our faith, and so much is delivered in scripture and in the
Apostles Creed: but that she continued so ever after, is a seemly truth,
delivered unto us by the Church of God, fitting the sanctity of the blessed
Virgin, and the honor due to so sanctified a vessel of Christ's incarnation,
as her body was: and so is de pietate, but not de necessitate fidei, as the
Schoolmen use to speak. Neither was Heluidius condemned of Heresy, for the
denial hereof, but because pertinaciously he urged the denial of it, upon
misconstruction of scripture, as if the denial of it had been a matter of
faith. Touching this Allegation of our Adversaries, concerning Mary's
perpetual Virginity, we must know, that howsoever they pretend to hold it
only by tradition, They proved it out of the 44. of Ezechiel 2. as Hiero.
shows in his comment upon this place. Index biblicus in regijs biblijs
vacabulo Maria multis scripturae locis significari perpetuam virginitatem
Mariae ostendit
yet the Fathers, that defend it against Heluidius, endeavor to prove it by
the Scripture. Their instance of Childrens Baptism, is most apparently against
themselves, for they confess it may be proved by scripture. Bellar. de sacra.
baptis. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Bellarmine proves it by three reasons, taken from the scripture. The first
is, from the proportion between Baptism and Circumcision, the Circumcision of
Children then, and the Baptism of them now. This argument he says as they
propose it, cannot be avoided. The second from these two places John. 3. Except
a man be borne a new, of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of Heaven. And that other, Suffer little children to come unto me,
for unto such belongs the Kingdom of Heaven.

This Argument he says is strong, effectual, and pregnant, to prove the
necessity of the Baptism of Infants. The third is taken from the Baptizing of
whole families by the Apostles, in which by all likelihood, there were infants.

Surely in this point of traditions, our adversaries bewray their great folly
and inconstancy, making it evident to the whole world, they know not what they
say. Bellarmine says, that many things, touching the matter and form of
sacraments, are holden by tradition, as not being contained in scripture: and
yet in the particulars, We shall find an uncertainty touching the form and
words of form of all those pretended Sacraments of marriage, penance unction
and confirmation: which in scripture are not (...) unto us as sacraments.
there is nothing defined in the Church of Rome touching these things, which he
indeauoureth not to prove by scripture. Some allege, for proof of tradition,
the consubstantiality of the son of God with the Father, and the proceeding
of the holy Ghost from them both. Others constantly affirm, that these things
are proved by scripture. Some of them say Pugatory is holden by tradition,
others think it may be proved by scripture, g Melchior Canus endeavoring to
prove the necessity of traditions, produces sundry things as not written, as
invocation of Saints, worshipping of images, the Priests consecrating, and
partaking in both parts of the sacrament. That ordination and confirmation, are
to be conferred, and given, but only once: which when he has alleged, he
dares not say, the scripture does not deliver them for fear of gainesaying
the truth in some of them, and his own o Canus lib. 3. c. 3. fundamentum. 3.
fellows in other. And therefore he says, These things perhaps, the
scripture has not delivered. L. 1. de sanct. beatit. and l. 2. c. 12. de
sanctorum imaginibus probat testimoniis scripturae imagines esse colendas.
For Bellarmine thinks, the Scripture does strongly prove the Invocation and
worship of Saints and Angels: and who is so impudent to deny, that the
Ministers of the Church, are bound by the commandment of Christ, contained in
the Scripture, to consecrate and participate in both parts of the Sacrament?
That confirmation, and ordination, once conferred, are not to be reiterated,
may be concluded out of the nature of them, described unto us in the Scripture.
So that for matters of faith, we may conclude according to the judgment of
the best and most learned, of our adversaries themselves, that there is nothing
to be believed, which is not either expressly contained in Scripture, or at
least by necessary consequence from thence, and other things evident in the
light of nature, or in the matter of fact, to be concluded. That there were
many speeches and divine sayings of our Savior Christ, which though they were
never written by the Evangelists, the Apostles, and others conversant with him
in the days of his flesh, knew and faithfully preserved and kept, Lucae 2. 19.
as Mary did all things, which she heard him speak, and saw him do, (of which
sort was that, alleged by the Apostle, Acts 20. 35
It is more blessed to give then to receive) we make no question: but that
there are any of those unwritten speeches, or Actions, necessary to be known
for our salvation, or containing any other matter of divine knowledge, then is
written, or that are certainly known unto the Church now, we utterly deny.
All the historical things ( Panopl. l. 4. c. 20.
says Bishop Lindan) which are reported concerning Christ, not contained in
Scripture, are fabulous, or uncertain. Which doubtless was the reason, why
more errors were found in the writings of the first Tertul. Iraen. Arnobius,
Papias, Lactantius, etc.
Fathers of the Primitive Church, then in those that were further removed from
those first beginnings, because they were abused by the false and uncertain
reports of traditions, which in those times men greedily hearkened after, as
living with the^, which had been conversant with the Apostles or their
Scholars, as we shall find by that is reported of Eusebius. l. 3. c. 35.
Pererius in Genesin l. 3. q. 5. ait errorem Chiliastarum quo multi veterum
fuerunt implicati ab Asiae presbyteris esse proseminatum. Iraeneus l. 3:
advers. haereses c. 39. persuadere studet Christum dominum annos prope 50 in
terris vixisse, idque probat vel eo potissimum argumento quod presbyteri Asiae
Apostolorum discipuli id sibi ab Apostolis traditum docuerunt.
Papias, and it appears by the writings of others.

Thus having made it clear and evident, that it is not safe to rely upon
traditions in things concerning the faith, let us come to those traditions,
which concern the manners and conversation of men.

That the Apostles delivered many things of this nature to the Churches, some
by way of precept, some by way of Council and advice only, some to particular
Churches, and some to all, some to continue but for a time, and some to
continue for ever, we make no doubt. Of this sort is the observation of the
Lords day, the precept whereof is not found in Scripture, though the practice
be, and so may be named a tradition. And sundry other things there are, which
doubtless the Apostles delivered by tradition, but they are confounded with
Ecclesiastical traditions, as Tom. 3. tit. 7. c. 63.
Waldensis aptly notes, that we might the more reverence the constitutions of
the Church, and are dispensable by the guides of the Church: because the
Apostles, and Apostolic men that delivered them, did not deliver them as
reporting the immediate precepts of Christ himself, but by virtue of their
Pastoral power and office; and so it little concerns us, exactly to know,
whether they were delivered by the Apostles themselves, or their next
after-commers: For if they were delivered by the Apostles, yet are they
dispensable by the authority of the Church: and if not by them, but by others,
they may not be dispensed with, nor altered, but by the same authority.

CHAP. 21.
Of the rules, whereby true Traditions may be known from counterfaite.

THus having set down the kinds and sorts of traditions, it remains to
examine, by what means we may come to discern, and by what rules we may
judge, which are true and indubitate traditions. The first rule is delivered by
Lib. 4. contra Donatistas, c. 23.
Augustine; Quod vniuersa tenet ecclesia, nec conciliis institutum, sed semper
retentum est, non nisi auctoritate Apostolica traditum, rectissime creditur.
Whatsoever the whole Church holds, not being decreed by the authority of
Councelles, but having been ever holden, may rightly be thought, to have
proceeded from Apostolic authority. The second rule is, whatsoever all, or the
most famous, and renowned, in all ages, or at the least in diverse ages, have
constantly delivered, as received from them that went before them, no man
contradicting or doubting of it, may be thought to be an Apostolical
tradition. The third rule, is the constant Testimony, of the Pastors of an
Apostolic Church, successively delivered: to which some add, the present
testimony of any Apostolic Church, whose declinings when they began, we
cannot precisely tell. But none of the Fathers admit this rule. For when they
urge the authority and testimony of Apostolic Churches, for the proof, or
reproof of true or pretended traditions, they stand upon the consenting voice,
or silence, of the Pastors of such Churches, successively in diverse ages
concerning such things. Some add the testimony of the present Church: but we
enquire after the rule, whereby the present Church may know true traditions
from false: and besides, though the whole multitude of believers, at one time
in the world, cannot err pertinaciously, and damnably, in embracing false
traditions, in stead of true; yet they that most sway things in the Church may,
yea even the greater part of a general council; so that this can be no sure
rule for men to judge of traditions by. And therefore De traditionibus, l. 3.
c. 4.
Canus reasons foolishly, that whatsoever the Church of Rome practiceth,
which she may not do without special warrant from God, and yet has no
warrant in Scripture so to do, the same things and the practice of them she
has received by tradition. He gives example in the present practice of the
Romish Church, in dispensing with, and remitting vows and oaths, and in
dissoluing marriages, (not consummate by carnal knowledge,) by admitting men
into orders of Religion. But this practice of the Romish Church, we condemn,
as wicked, and Antichristian.

CHAP. 22.
Of the difference of books Canonical and Apocriphall.

THus having answered our adversaries objections, touching the obscurity, and
imperfections, of the scripture, which we affirm to be the rule of our faith;
it remains, that in particular we consider, which are the books of this
Scripture, containing the rule of our faith, and where the indubitate, and
certain verity of them, is to be found, whether in the originals, or in the
Translations. The books which Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles delivered to
the world, contain the Canon, that is the rule of piety, faith, and religion,
which the sons of men received by Revelation from heaven, and therefore are
rightly named Canonical. The matter of these books, we believe to have been
inspired from the holy Ghost, for our instruction; whose authority is so
great, that no man may doubt of them. The writers of these books, were in such
sort guided, and directed by the spirit of truth, in composing of them, that
not to believe them, were impious. Whereupon Aug Hieronym.
Augustine writing to Hierome, says, Ego solis eis scriptoribus, qui Canonici
appellantur, didici hunc timorem, honoremque defer, vt nullum eorum scribendo
errasse firmissime teneam; at si quod in iis invenero, quod videatur contrarium
veritati, nihil aliud existimem, quam mendosum esse codicem, vel non esse
assecutum interpretem, quod dictum est, vel me minime intellexisse non ambigam:
alios autem ita lego, vt quantalibet sanctitate, doctrinave polleant, non ideo
verum putem, quia ita senserunt, sed quia mihi per illos auctores canonicos vel
probabiles rations, quod a vero non abhorreat, persuadere potuerunt. That is,
I have learned to yield that reverence and honor to those writers only that
are called Canonical, to think that none of them could err in writing; but
if in them I find any thing that may seem contrary to the truth, I persuade
my self that either the Copy is corrupt, or the interpreter defective and
faulty, or that the fault is in my not understanding of it: but other authors
I so read, that how great soever their learning and sanctity be, I do not
therefore think any thing to be true, because they have so thought, but
because they persuade me that it is true, by the authority of the Canonical
authors,, or the probability of Reason.

Besides the indubitate writings of those Canonical Authors, there are other
books written of the same argument, which because the credit and authority of
the authors of them is not known, are named Apocryphal.

Books are named Apocryphal, first because the author of them is not known:
and in this sense some of the Books of Canonical Scripture, as the books of
Chronicles, of Hester, and a great part of the Psalms may be named
Apocryphal, though improperly, and unfitly: (The authority of the authors of
them, not being doubted of, though their names, and other personal conditions
be not known.) De lib. canonicis, l. 3. fo. 287
And therefore Andradius reprehendeth the Gloss, which defines those things
to be Apocryphal, quae incerto authore prodita sunt, the author and publisher
whereof is not known.

Secondly, books are therefore named Apocryphal, because the authority and
credit of them is called in question, it being doubted, whether they proceeded
from the inspiration of the holy spirit; so that they cannot serve for the
confirmation of any thing that is called in question. In this seuse In prologo
Galiato.
Hierome calls the books of the Macchabees, and the rest of that kind,
Apocryphal, though they were read privately and publicly, for the edification
of the people, and the information of manners.

Lib. Apocryphi appellantur, non quod habendi sint in aliqua auctoritate
secreta, sed quia nulla testificationis luce de nescio quo secreto, nescio
quorum praesumptione prolati sunt Aug. contra Faustum Manichaeum. l. 11. cap. 2.
Thirdly, such books are named Apocryphal, as are merely fabulous and full
of impiety, and therefore interdicted, and forbidden to be read, or regarded
at all. The auncientest of the Fathers, name these only Apocryphal, and so
does Hierome sometimes, calling those of the second rank, Hagiographall:
Andrad. de lib. canonicis fol. 286.
though this name be sometimes given to those Canonical books which pertain
not to the Law nor the Prophets, as the book of Job, the Psalms, the books
of Solomon, Esdras, the Chronicles, etc. so dividing the whole Canon of the
Scripture, of the old Testament, into the Law, the Prophets, and the
Hagiographall books, that is, those, which not having any proper name of
difference, retain and are known, by the common name of holy writ.

CHAP. 23.
Of the Canonical and Apocryphal books of Scripture.

THe books of the old Testament were committed to the Church of the Jews:
whereupon that is one of the things in respect whereof, the Romans 3. 1, 2.
Apostle prefers them before the Gentiles, that to them were committed the
Oracles of God. This Church of the Jews, admitted but only 22 books, as
delivered unto them from God, to be the Canon of their faith, according to the
number of the letters of their Alphabet, as Cont. Appianum l. 1. Eusebius l. 3.
c. 10
Josephus shows. For though they sometimes reckon four and twenty, and
sometimes seven and twenty, yet they add no more in one of these accounts, than
in the other. For, repeating Iod thrice, for honor of the Name of GOD, and so
the number of the letters rising to four and twenty, they number the books of
Canonical Scripture to be four and twenty, dividing the book of Ruth from
the Judges, and the Lamentations from the Prophecies of Jeremy, and reckoning
them by themselves, which in the former account they joined with them. These
books thus numbered Prefat. in lib. Reg.
Hierome fitly compares to the four and twenty Elders mentioned in the
Revelation, Qui adorabant, and prostratis vultibus, offerebant coronas suas,
Which prostrating themselves, adored and worshipped the Lamb, acknowledging
that they received their Crowns of him: Stantibus coram quatuor animalibus,
oculatis ante, and retro, in praeteritum and futurum respicientibus. Those
four admirable living creatures, having eyes before, and behind, looking to
things past, and to come, standing before him. And because five of the Hebrew
letters are double, Damascen l. 4 orthodoxae fid. c. 18
they sometimes reckon the books of the holy Canon so, as that they make them
rise to the number of seven and twenty, reckoning the first and second of
Samuel, of Kings, of Chronicles, and of Esdras, by themselves severally, which
in the first account were numbered together, two of every of these being
accounted, but as one book, and dividing Ruth from the Judges. These only did
the ancient Church of the Jews receive, as Divine and Canonical.

That other books were added unto these, whose authority not being certain and
known, are named Apocryphal, fell out on this sort. Acts, 6. 1.
The Jews in their latter times, Glossa ordinatia and
before, and at the coming of Christ, were of two Lyrani in eundem locum.
sorts; some properly and for distinctions sake named Hebrews, commorant at
Jerusalem, and in the holy Land; others named Helenists, that is, Jews of the
dispersion, mingled with the Grecians. These had written sundry books in
Greek, which they made use of, together with other parts of the Old Testament,
which they had of the Translation of the Septuagint: but the Hebrews received
only the two and twenty books before mentioned. Hence it came, that the Jews
delivered a double Canon of the Scripture, to the Christian Churches: the one
pure, indubitate, and divine, which is the Hebrew Canon; the other in Greek,
enriched with, or rather adulterated by the addition of certain books written
in those times, when God raised up no more Prophets among his people. This
volume thus mixed of diverse sorts of books, the Christians received of the
Jews. These books joined in one volume, were translated out of Greek into
Latin, and read by them of the Latin Church, in that Translation: Iudaeus,
Aquila, Symachus, and Theodosion, Iudaizantes haeretici sunt recepti Hier.
praef. in lib. Iobi.
for there was no Catholic Christian, that ever translated the Scriptures of
the old Testament, out of Hebrew into Latin, before Hieromes time, nor none
after him, till our age.

Hence it came, that the Fathers of the Greek Church, having Origin, and
sundry other learned in the Hebrew tongue, and making search into the
antiquities and originals of the Jews, received as Canonical, only the two
and twenty books, written in the Hebrew, and did account all those books,
which were added in the Greek to be Apocryphal. The Latins receiving them
both in one Translation, and bound up in one volume, used sundry parts of the
Apocryphal books, in their prayers, and readings, together with the other,
and cited them in their writings: yet did none of them make any Catalogue of
Canonical, and Apocryphal books, and number them amongst the Canonical,
before the Concilium Carth. 3. can. 47
third Council of Carthage, wherein Augustine was present, at which time also
Innocentius E^uperio ep. 5. cap. ult.
Innocentius lived; which Fathers seem to add to the Canon diverse books
which the Hebrews receive not. Hierome translating the Scriptures out of the
Hebrew, and most exactly learning what was the Hebrew Canon, rejected all
besides the two and twenty Hebrew books, as the Grecians did before, and as
after him, all men of note in the Latin Church did.

There was great exception taken to Hierome, for aduenturing to translate the
scripture out of Hebrew, and among others Aug: Hieron. epist. 10.
Augustine and the Africans, seemed not much to like it. They therefore reckon
the books of Scripture, according as they found them in use in the Latin
Church, not exactly noting the difference of the one, from the other: yet not
denying, but that the Hebrew Canon consisted only of two and twenty books, and
that many took exceptions to them, when they alleged any testimonies out of
those books, the Hebrews admit not. Against which exceptions, De
praedestinatione Sanctorum. c. 14.
Augustine no otherwise justifies himself but by the use of the Church in
reading them. Which proof is too weak to prove them Canonical, seeing the
prayer of Manasses, confessed by our adversaries to be Apocryphal, the third
and fourth of Esdras, the book called Pastor, and some other, were likewise
read by them of the Church, cited by them in their writings, and many things
translated out of them, into the public prayers, and Liturgies of the Church.

Thus then these Fathers not looking carefully into the originals, name all
those books Canonical, which the use of Gods Church approved as profitable,
and containing matter of good instruction, and so numbered the books of
Wisdom, and the rest with the Canonical. Whose opinion yet, as Caietane
thinks, was not that they were absolutely Canonical, but in a sort, in that
they contain a good direction of men's manners. These the Greek Fathers
rejected from the Canon, admitting only those which the reformed Churches at
this day admit, as also almost all the divines of the Latin Church, after
Hierome, do.

That some of the Greek Fathers rejected the book of Hester, it was, (as
Bibliothecae sanctae. l. 1. page 20.
Sixtus Senensis rightly notes) by reason of those Apocryphal additions,
which they not being skillful in the Hebrew tongue, did not discern from the
true parts of it, which error made them to reject the whole book as
Apocryphal, This was also the reason, why they admitted those Apochryphall
additaments, joined to the book of Daniel.

Howsoever, it appears that all they, which diligently looked into these
things, did admit all those books which we admit and reject all those which
we reject. Neither is there any one amongst all the ancient, before the third
Council of Carthage, that clearly, and of set purpose, numbreth the books q
In Synopsi.
controuersed between us and our adversaries, with the books of the Canon.
Eusebius l. 4. cap. 25.
Melito, then Bishop of Sardis, going purposely into the East parts of the
world, that he might diligently search out the monuments and sacred books of
divine knowledge, reckons those only Canonical, which we do, save that he
adds the book of Wisdom. Eusebius 6. c. 24.
Origin admits and acknowledges only two and twenty books of the old
Testament. Athanasius likewise numbreth the books of the Canon in the same
sort, and adds, There are also certain other books which are read only to
the Catechumens, and nouices. In prolog. explanat. Psalmorum.
Hilarious says, the law of the old Covenant, is contained in two and twenty
books, answerable to the number of the Hebrew letters. De genuinis scripturae
libris, and cygneorum carminum. lib: ad Seleucum de recta educatione.
Nazianzene also, is of the same opinion, and 4. Catechesision.
Cyrillus Bishop of Jerusalem, only he adds the book of Baruch, thinking
it to be a part of Ieremies Prophecies: but suffers not any others to be
added, saying, The Apostles and first Bishops which delivered these only, were
wiser, and much more to be esteemed, than such as now go about to add others.
Of the same judgment are Contra Epicur. haeres. 8. and de mensuris, and
ponderibus.
Epiphanius, In expositione Symboli.
Ruffinus, In prolog. Galiato.
Hierome, and In Job. li. 19. cap. 17.
Gregory. And Eusebius. li. 3. cap. 10.
Josephus confirms the opinion of these Fathers saying, that from the time of
Artaxerxes, till the age wherein he lived, all things were committed to
writing, which concerned the state of Gods people and Religion: but that they
were not of equal authority, with those, which were formerly written, because
after that time, the indubitate succession of the Prophets ceased.

Unto these authorities of the Fathers, some of our adversaries (as De lib.
Canonicis, l. 3. pap: 289.
Andradius and others) do answer, that they speak of the Canon of the
Hebrews, and not of the Canon of the Church; so not denying absolutely these
books to be canonical, but that they are not so esteemed by the Jews: but
this answer Praefatio in lib. Solom. Ep. Chromatium and Heliodorum.
the words of Hierome do most clearly refute. As (says he) the Church, not
the Synagogue of the Jews, reads the books of Iudeth, Tobias, and the
Maccabees, but receives them not as Canonical Scriptures: so likewise it may
read these two books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus for the edification of
the people, but not for confirmation of doubtful points of doctrine. And
therefore Bellarmine, Sixtus Senensis, and others, clearly confess, that this
answer of Andradius is insufficient.

They therefore add another, to wit, that the Canon was not perfectly known,
and confirmed, in the time of those Fathers. We ask them when it was
confirmed. If they say, in the Council of Nice, which (as In praefat. in lib.
Iudeth,
Hierome says some report) received the book of Iudeth, as Canonical, though
Ponopliae li: 3. cap. 3. Si Nicena Synodus olim hunc ludeth libr. cum alijs, in
Canonem redegerat, cur annis 80. post came non recenset Laodicena? cur Nazianz:
eius non meminit? sed legitur computasse ait Hier. quod mihi dubitantis
suspicionem subindica^e videtur.
Lindan say it is not likely it did, and that Hierome did not say it did so,
but that some reported so; we ask how it came to pass, that so many
Catholic Divines, after the Nicene Council, rejected these books as they did
before. If they say, they were confirmed in the Council of Cartharge, that was
but a provincial Council, as was that of Laodicea, in which they are not
mentioned. If they say the Council of Carthage was confirmed in the sixth
general Council holden at Trullo; we answer, first, that it was no more
confirmed there, Laodicense Conc lium manifest confirmatum est a Synodo
Trullan^: Canus lib. 2. cap: 9.
than that of Laodicea: and as Lib. 2. cap. 9.
Canus notes, the sixth Council does not expressly name the third Council
of Carthage, but only speaks of Canons agreed upon in new Carthage. Quod
acta 6, Synodi parengrapha sint Alberti Pighij Diatribae.
Secondly, we say, that those Canons of the sixth Council, wherein this
pretended confirmation is found, are of no credit with the Romanists; so that
it is clear, that neither the Nicene Council, nor this other, did confirm
the authority of the books questioned, as appears by the consent of almost
all the worthiest Divines in the Church, after those Counsels till our age, as
Moral. lib. 19. in cap 29. Iobi 1. 17.
Gregory, Lib. 4. cap. 18, Orthodoxae fidei.
Damascenus, Eruditionis Didascalicae, lib. 4. cap. 2.
Hugo de Sancto Victore, Exceptionum lib. 2. cap. 9.
Ricardus de sancto Victore, De auctoritate veteris Testamenti, folio 25.
Petrus Cluniacensis, In praefat. in lib. Tobiae.
Lyranus, Prolog. in Ecclesiasticum.
Dionysius Carthusianus, In prolog. in Ecclesiasticum.
Hugo Cardinalis, In summa theologica. 1, part. quaest. 89, art. 8. ad. 2.
Thomas Aquinas, Dialog. lib. 3. 1. tractatus part. 3. cap. 16.
Occam, Theoremat: 5.
Picus Mirandula, Doctrinal. fidei, lib. 2. art. 2, cap. 22.
Waldensis, Lib. 19. cap. 19. in quaest. Armeniorum.
Armacanus, De Eccles. dog. lib. 1. cap. vlt.
Driedo, Caietane, and others.

CHAP. 24.
Of the uncertainty and contrariety found amongst Papists touching books
Canonical and Apocryphal now controversed.

But let us come particularly to the books controversed, and see how sweetly
our adversaries agree with themselves, in admitting or rejecting them. First,
touching the book of Baruch, though the Council of Florence and Trent, have
confirmed it to be Canonical: yet Li. 2. c 9.
Melchior Canus says, it is doubtful, whether it be or not; and yet says, if
it be not Canonical, the Councels of Florence and Trent have erred, and the
people of God been long abused, and the Church in greevous error. Lib. 12.
cap. 6.
And elsewhere again he says, the Church has not certainly resolved, that it
is Canonical, and that it yields no certain, clear, and indubitate proof
in matters of faith. In catal. scriptur. l. r. c, 4.
Driedo denies it to be canonical, and says, Cyprian, Ambrose, and others of
the Fathers cited the Book of Baruch, as also the third and fourth of Esdras,
not as Canonical, but as containing matter of good instruction, not contrary,
but consonant to the faith. The additions of the book of Hester, Biblioth. l.
(...). p. 19
Sixtus absolutely rejects, as vain and foolish, contrary to the judgments
of the Papists; yet admits the additions to Daniel. These also In cat.
scriptur. lib. r. c. ult.
Driedo rejects, notwithstanding the decree of the Tridentine Council, Lib.
2. cap. 32.
as the author of the book De mirabilibus Scripturae did long before, calling
the story of Bell and the Dragon a fable. Lib. 2. cap. 9.
Melchior Canus professes he dares not pronounce it heretical, to deny any,
or all of the controversed books of the Old Testament, and yet confidently
pronounces it heretical to deny any of the books of the New Testament, which
were sometimes doubted of; so that it seems a man may dissent from a general
Council, and not be an Heretic, and that the Council of Trent proceeded not
upon so good grounds of reason, in approouing the one, as the other, contrary
to their judgment, who say, we may as well doubt of the Books of the New
Testament, whereof some doubted in former times, as of these of the Old.

But it is easy to show their error who so think, and to confirm the
opinion of Canus, that there is not so great reason, why we should doubt of the
one, as the other. For first, the Books of the New Testament were never
doubted of, but by some few, in comparison of them that received and approved
them: the most and most renowned for piety, learning, and right judgment, ever
receiving them. For, to begin with those, of which there has been most doubt,
The Epistle to the Hebrews, and the book of the Revelation of S* John. In
epist. ad Dardanum de terra promissionis.
Hierome witnesses, that they never wanted the approbation of the worthiest
and greatest parts of Gods Church. Illud (says he) nostris dicendum est, hanc
epistolam quae inscribitur ad Hebraeos, non solum ab Ecclesiis Orientis, sed ab
omnibus retro Ecclesiasticis scriptoribus, quasi Pauli Epistolam suscipi, licet
eam plerique vel Barnabae, vel Clementis, arbitrentur esse, etc. Let our men
know, that the Epistle to the Hebrews, is not only received, and approved, by
all the Churches of the East, that now presently are, but by all
Ecclesiastical writers of the Greek Churches, that have been heretofore, as
the Epistle of Paul: though many think it rather to have been written by
Barnabas or Clemens: and that it skilleth not who wrote it, seeing it was
written by an Author approved in the Church ofGod, and is daily read in the
same. If the custom of the Latins receive it not among the Canonical
Scriptures, no more do the Greek Churches admit the Revelation of Saint John:
and yet we following the authority of the Ancient, receive them both.
Secondly, the Churches of the Gentiles, to which the Books of the New
Testament were delivered, were in parts of the world far remote one from
another, and did not immediately all of them receive all the parts of these
divine books, from the Authors of them, but from those particular Churches, to
which they were specially directed, or in the midst whereof the writers of
them remained, at the time of the writing of them. And therefore it is not to
be marvailed at, if being delivered and transmitted from one to another, some
received them sooner, and some later. But the Books of the Old Testament were
delivered to one national Church only, and yet these now controversed were
never received by it. Thirdly, these Books of the New Testament, whereof some
informer times did doubt, were written in the Apostles times, whom GOD honored
with the first, immediate, and undoubted revelation of Divine truth: these,
after the succession of the Prophets were ceased. Fourthly, the books of the
Old Testament now controversed, were not written in the Hebrew, but in Greek,
by such of the Jews as were of the dispersion, and therefore never received by
the Hebrews, nor counted amongst the sacred Books of the Canon; which they
divided Aug. li 2. cont epist. Gaudentij, c. 23. scripturam quam appellant
Maccabaeorum, non habent Iudaei, sicut Legem, and Prophetas and Psalmos, quibus
Dominus testimonium perhibet ta^quam testibus suis, Lucae 24. 4^. Sixtus
Bibliothecae Sanctae li. 1. de varia partitione librorum canonicorum.
into the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms; to which Christ gives testimony
in the Gospel. Lastly, the reason moving some, to doubt of the books of the
new Testament, was the uncertainty of the names of the authors, or something
mistaken, misconstrued, or not understood in the books, which in time was
cleared, and they afterward generally received. But the Apochryphall books of
the old Testament, were rejected, as being written, when there was no more
undoubted succession of Prophets, by the whole Church of the Hebrews, and ever
after by the best and worthiest guides of the Christian Churches.

That the books of the new Testament, called in question by some, were
doubted of upon such weak reasons, as has been said, will easily appear.
The Epistle to the Hebrews was therefore doubted of by some, because the
difference, and diversity of the style, made them think it not to be Paul's,
whose name it carried, and by others, because the author of it seemed to them,
to favor the error of the Nouatians, in denying the reconciliation of such,
as fall after baptism. The second Epistle of Peter some doubted of, because of
the diversity of the style, which Hierome rejects. The Epistle of James,
because of the uncertainty of the author, it being doubtful, which James was
the author of it. The Epistle of Jude, because the author of it, alleges the
authority of an Apochryphall book of Enoch, as they imagined. The second and
third of John, because they are said to have been written by John the elder,
some denied to be the Epistles of John the Apostle, ascribing them to another
John. The Revelation was doubted of, first, because of the doubtfullnesse of
the Title of John the Divine; secondly, because of the difficulty, and
obscurity, of the words of this Prophecy, or Revelation; and lastly, because
the author of this book, seems to favor the heresy of the Millenaries. But
the Latin Church received this book, as Canonical, as also the best and most
learned of the Greeks, Eusebius l. 7. c: 24
as Dionysius Alexandrinus, though he deny it to have been written by John
the Evangelist: Heresi 51, 75.
Epiphanius condemns the Alogi, as heretics, because they deny the
Gospel, and Revelation of Saint John. De praescriptionibus.
Tertullian reckons it among the errors of Cerdon, that he rejected the
books of the Acts, and the Revelation: and writing against Lib. 4.
Marcion, he shows, that he also did deny the same book. Lib. 1. cap. vlt.
Irenaeus says, this Revelation was manifested unto John, and seen of him,
but a little before his time. Dialog. cum Triphone.
Justinius Martyr does attribute this book to John, and does account it a
Divine Revelation. Origin in his Preface before the Gospel of John, says,
that John the son of Zebedee, saw in the Revelation, an Angel flying through
the midst of heaven, having the eternal Gospel. The Council of Conc. Anci
ran. cap vlt.
Ancyra pronounces it to be sacred, and that John was the author of it.
Graecos qui Hier. test, Apocalypsin non recipiebant, and paucos and obscuros
fuisse necesse est. Bellar: de vet bo Dei l 1. c. 19.
Thus then I hope it does appear, that there is not so much reason to doubt of
the books of the new Testament, called sometimes in question, as of those of
the old: seeing the former were never doubted of, but by some few, upon
reasons frivolous, the weakness whereof being discovered, all Catholic
Christians, with one consent received them, accounting them no better than
Heretics, which either doubted of them, or denied them; whereas the later
were rejected by the whole Church of the Jews, by all antiquity, and the whole
current of Gods Church, some few only excepted, being ignorant of the
tongues, and not exactly looking into the monuments of antiquity, Canones
Apostolorum, can. 84. Tobiam, Iudeth, and E^clesiasticum inter canonicos non
numerant. Gelasius Papa cum concilio 70, Episcoporum nullam 2. Maccabaeo^um
mentionem facit. Genebrard. in Chronolog. page 9 4. Esdrae ad canonem pertinere
vult. Bellar. de verbo Dei, lib. 1. c. 20. vbi ostendit dubium esse qui^ multi
sen^erint de;, Es ^rae.
and divided amongst themselves, some admitting more, and some not all those,
which our adversaries now receive.

Wherefore as we cannot but condemn the inconsiderate rashness, of such
either Caiet^n: Luther.
of the Romish, or reformed Churches, as in our time make question of any of
the books of the new Testament, that are, and have been, long read in the
Churches of GOD, as Canonical, throughout the whole world; so likewise we
think their boldness inexcusable, who in these last ages make those books
Canonical, which never were so esteemed by Gods Church before; and go about
to bind all men's consciences so to receive them, against the current of
antiquity and the judgment of the best learned, in every age, even to our
times.

CHAP: 25.
Of the diverse editions of the Scripture, and in what tongue it was originally
written.

THus having showed, that the Scripture contains a perfect rule of our faith,
and having likewise made it appear, what books they are, which are
canonical, and contain this rule of our Christian faith and Religion; it
remains that we search out, what editions there are of these Scriptures, and
which are authentical, and of indubitate authority and credit. The whole
Scripture of the old Testament, was written in Hebrewe, Iunius in Bellar.
contro: 1. li. 2. art. 9.
save that some few things, were translated into the books of Esdras, and
Daniel, out of the public records, and monuments of the Chaldees in that
tongue, as the copies of letters, and public acts and proceedings, all things
which the spirit of God did absolutely deliver, being expressed unto us in the
same books in Hebrewe.

The opinion of some has been, that the whole Scripture of the old Testament
perished, and was lost in the time of the captivity of Babylon, and that it was
newly composed by Esdras. To which purpose they allege the authority of In
epist: ad Chilonem, ep. 181. in monte Carmelo secessu facto, Esdras omnes*
diuinos libros ex mandato Dei eructauit.
Basil who seems to say some such thing: and likewise the testimony of the
author of the fourth book of Esdras, where it is said, that the books of the
law being burnt, God sent the holy Ghost into Esdras, separated him from the
people, for the space of forty days, caused him to provide box tables, and
men writing swiftly, and that in forty days they wrote twoe hundred and four
books; but this book being Apochryphall, and full of Cabalisticall vanity,
does rather weaken, then strengthen this opinion. That which is alleged out of
the second of Esdras, and the eight, does not prove, that Esdras did newely
compose the books of Scripture, but only that he brought them Bellar. l. 2. c.
1. de verbo dei.
forth: which implies, that they were not utterly lost, nor did wholly perish.
Neither indeed is it likely, though that Scripture which was kept in the Temple
was burnt, that Ezechiell, Daniell, Jeremy, Haggai, Zachary, Mardocheus, and
Esdras himself, were so negligent, as not to preserve the books of the
Scripture. So that all that Esdras did, was nothing else, but the bringing
together, and putting into order the scattered parts of this scripture, and
the correcting of such faults, as in time by the negligence of the writers,
were crept into the several Copies of it. This point is handled at large by
Bellarmine, and excellently cleared by him, and therefore it is needless to
insist upon it longer. So then the same scripture, which Moses and the Prophets
delivered, Esdras sought out and religiously commended unto the people.

Only In prolog. Galeato.
Hierome is of opinion, that he found out new Hebrewe letters, and left the
old to the Samaritans, which Bellarmine out of In 9. Ezechiclis.
Hierome confirms, because the last letter of the Hebrewe Alphabet, was like
the Greek T, and had a similitude of the Cross, as that of the Samaritanes
now has, but that now, has no similitude with it. Epist. ignoto amico. 5. d.
Picus Mirandula professes, that having conferred with sundry Jews, about
this matter, they all constantly denied this alteration of letters. And to what
purpose should Esdras alter the form of letters, which MOSES and the Prophets
had used? Neither does Hierome, in the place cited by Bellarmine, speak of the
Greek T, but says only, that the last of the ancient Hebrew letters, had a
similitude of the Cross, as now that of the Samaritans has.

But this being a matter of no great moment, let every man judge as he thinks
best. This then we constantly hold, that as the whole Scripture of the Old
Testament, was written in Hebrew, so the same never perished wholly, in any of
the captiuities of the Jews, but was religiously preserved, even the same
which Moses and the Prophets delivered to the people of God.

After the return of the people from Babylon, their tongue and language was
mixed of the Hebrew, and Chaldee, and named the Syriacke tongue, from the
Region or Country where it was used; in which Christ made all his Sermons to
the people, as being best understood of them. Yet were not the books of the
New Testament written in this Language, but in Greek, because they were to be
made common to the Churches of the Gentiles, among which, the Greek tongue was
most generally understood.

Hugo de S. Victore erudit: theologicae in speculum ecclesiae de celebratione
missae cap. 7.
There are three tongues most famous in the world, as Hugo de Sancto Victore
notes: the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, propter regnum, sapientiam, legem: the
first, because of the Monarchy of the Romans, who, as they subjected the
people, which they did conquer, to their laws and customs, so they did force
them to learn their language: the second, because in it, the great
Philosophers and Wise men of the world, left the monuments of their wisdom,
and learning to posterities: the third, because in it, God delivered his Law,
and the interpretation of it, by Moses, and the Prophets, to the people of
Israel, his chosen. Amongst all these, the Greek was most generally
understood by the learned of all Nations, because in it, all the renowned wise
men of the world, had written, and all that were studious, learned it, that
they might understand their writings.

Hence it came, that the books of the New testament were written in Greek,
because God would not honor one Nation of the world more then another, nor
force his people to borrow the books of Scripture one from another.

Only some doubt there is, touching the Gospel of Matthew, and the Epistle to
the Hebrews, which are supposed to have been written in Hebrew, and the
Gospel of Mark, written, as some say, in Latin. That the Gospel of Matthew
was written in Hebrew, In Catal. Script. Eccles. de Matthaeo verba faciens.
Hierome, and others affirm. In praef. Novi Test. Syriaci Trans.
Guido Fabritius says, it was written in Hebrew, but in vulgar Hebrew, which
is the Syriacke, that they of Jerusalem did speak: which opinion Bellarm. l.
2. de verbo dei c. 4. Andrad. de lib. canon. l. 3. fol 320.
others seem to incline unto, the Gospel in Hebrew, which some bring forth,
being of no credit. The Epistle to the Hebrews, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 13 l. 3. c, 33.
some say was written in Hebrew, and translated by Luke, or Barnab as into
Greek. Guido Fabritius in praef. praedicta. The original latin text of Mark
is said to be kept at Venice till this day.
The Syrians say, the Gospel of Mark was first written in Latin, and that
afterward he translated both it, and the whole New Testament beside into
Syriacke, which they say, they have preserved to this day. This Syriacke
Translation of the New Testament, was not known in these parts of the world,
till our age, as Eadem praef.
Fabritius Boderianus notes* who thereupon breaks out into the praises of
our times, if the men of this generation either knew the happiness thereof, or
how to use it. Howbeit that Mark was Author of this Syriacke translation,
which the Syrians in this age have delivered unto us, Bellar. l. 2. de verb.
Dei c. 4.
we cannot persuade our selves, because none of the Fathers that lived in
Syria, and Egypt, as Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Eusebius, Athanasius,
Theophilus, Epiphanius, Hierome, Cyrill, Theodoret, and Damascen, make any
mention of it: and besides, it is apparently defective in diverse things: as
the learned note. So then, the indubitate originals of these parts of the New
Testament in Hebrew or Syriacke, if they were written at first in these
tongues, being lost, and the Church deprived of them, the Greek is holden to
be Original, in respect of all the books of the New Testament. For that,
either they were all written in it, or translated into it, by the Apostles, or
Apostolic men.

CHAP. 26.
Of the translations of the old Testament out of Hebrew into Greek.

THus having delivered, in what tongues the Scriptures, and books of God were
written, it remains that we enquire, what the principal translations of them
have been, and whether the indubitate verity of them, be in the originals, or
in the translations. Bellar. l. 2. de verbo Dei c. 5: ostendit aliquos ita
sensisse.
There was, as some suppose, a translation of the old Testament out of Hebrew
into Greek, before the time of Alexander the great: but the first that was in
note, and remained long in esteem in the world, was that of the Septuagint, in
the time of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus; Epiphanius de mensuris and ponderibus.
Who, intending to furnish a Library at Alexandria, with all the choicest
books the world would afford, amongst other places, sent to Jerusalem, to
the rulers and guides of the people there, who sent unto him, the books of
Moses and the Prophets, written in Hebrewe, in letters of gold. Which he not
understanding, sent the second time, for interpreters, and they f De doctrina
Christiana, l. 2. c. 15.
sent unto him 72, in imitation of Moses, who when he went up to the Mount to
receive the Law, being commanded to take with him 70, of the Elders of
Israel: added two to the number prescribed, lest taking six out of some
Tribes, and but five out of other, some dislike might have grown amongst them.
These in 70, days translated the whole old Testament, out of Hebrew into
Greek. For though Josephus and the Jews say, they translated only the books
of Moses, Bellar: de verbo Dei, l. 2. c. 6.
yet the consenting voice of all the Fathers, affirming that they translated
the whole, moves us rather to think, the whole was translated by them, then
only the books of Moses; unless we say with Iunius in Bellar: contro: 1.
lib. 2. cap. 6.
Iunius, for the reconciling of this difference, that only the books of
Moses, were translated by the first 72. sent to Ptolomee, and the rest
afterward, by 72 also, though not the same.

That which some report, that they were shut up in several celles, which
long after were to be seen at Alexandria, Hiero: in Pentateuchum Mosis praefat.
Hierome rejects as a fable; showing, that no such thing is reported by
Aristaeus, that was present at the business, h Epiphanius de mensuris and
ponderibus.
and that no remaynder of any such celles, was to be found at Alexandria, but
that they met in one place, and conferring together every day, till the ninth
hour, in 70 days, perfected the whole work; and Augustine leaves it
doubtful. This fable is urged by some to prove, that these translatours were
Aug. saepe ac saepius 72 prophetas appellat, et eodem quo prophetae, spiritu
incitatos illa etiam scripsisse, in quibus ab Hebraea oratione dissentiunt,
confirmat, Andrad. de vulgatae editionis auctoritate l. 4. fol. 355.
guided by a prophetical spirit, and so could not err: which false and
absurd conceit, Hierome condemns likewise.

The second translation of the old Testament, out of Hebrew into Greek, was
that of Aquila, in the time of Adrian the Emperor: the 3. of Theodotion, in
the time of Commodus. The fourth, of Symachus, in the time of Seuerus. The
fifth, without name of author, was found in the City of Hiericho, in the time of
Antonius Caracalla. The sixth, in Nicopolis, in the days of Alexander the son
of Mammca. The Hiero: ad Aug. ep. and praefat. lib. Job.
seventh, of Origin, who translated not, but corrected the translation of the
Septuagint, adding some things out of Theodotions translation, which additions
he noted with the mark of a shining star, detracting other things, which he
pierced through with a spitte. Epiphanius de mensuris and ponderibus.
The eight, of Lucian the Martyr, was not a translation, but a correction only
of such faults, as were crept into the translation of the Septuagint. This was
found at Nicomedia, in the time of Constantine, Eusebius lib. 9. cap: 6: Hiero:
in li. 16. comment. Esaiae ad Eustochium prooem: de illis verbis, sepulchrum
pate^s est gu^ur eorum, ait non haberi in Hebraico, nec esse in 70
interpretibus, sed in editione vulgata, quae communis dicitur, and in toto orb
diuersa est.
Lucian being martyred long before, in the days of Dioclesian the Emperor.

The ninth, of Hesichius, was likewise but a correction of such things as were
amiss in the vulgar editions of the Septuagint. It appears by Hierome, in
his preface before the books of Chronicles, that they of Alexandria and Egypt,
used that edition of the Septuagint, which Hesichius corrected: they of
Constantinople, that of Lucian the Martyr: and they of the Provinces, and
Countries lying between these, that which Origin corrected.

The Greek translation found to need correction, and corrected by these, as
it seems, was called by the name of the common edition, not as being a
different translation, from that of the Septuagint, but as being that, which
was common in all men's hands, and much altered, and corrupted, from the
original purity which these worthy men endeavored to restore it to again.
Hiero. in Epist. ad Suniam and Fretellam.
And was so named because there was another, preserved in greater purity, in
that worthy work of Origin, that filled all the famous libraries in the world,
in those times; Epiphanius de mensuris and ponderibus. Eusebius lib. 6. cap, 16.
in which first dividing every page into six columns, or pillars, in the
first, he put the Hebrewe in the Hebrewe Characters; in the second, in Greek;
in the third, the interpretation of Aquila; in the fourth, of Symmachus; in the
fifth, of the Septuagint; in the sixth, of Theodotion, and named the volumes thus
disposed, in respect of the four translations, Tetrapla, a four fould work;
in respect of these translations, and the Hebrewe in two kind of Characters,
placed in two several pillars or Columns, Hexapla, a sixefould work; to
which afterward adding in two other pillars, or columns, the fifth and sixth
translations, before mentioned, found in Hiericho, and Nicopolis, he named the
whole Octapla, an eightfould work.

CHAP. 27.
Of the Latin Translations, and of the authority of the vulgar Latin.

THus having delivered what translations there are, and have been of the old
testament out of Hebrewe into Greek, let us see, what translations there are,
and have been of the old, and new Testament, into Latin. They, says De
doctrina Christiana lib. 2. cap. 11.
Augustine, that translated the old Testament, out of Hebrewe into Greek, may
easily be numbered; but they that translated the old and new Testament out of
Greek into Latin, cannot be numbered. Yet amongst so many and diverse
translations, it seems there was one more common then the rest called by Ad
Leandrum episcopum in expositionem beati Job. epist. cap. 5. nouam
translationem dissero, sed vt comprobationis causa exigit, nunc nouam nunc
veterem per testimonia assumo: Seeds apostolica vtraque vtitur.
Gregory, the old translation, and by Hierome upon In Esaiae cap. 49.
Esaias, the vulgar; who disliketh it, and prefers the translation of
Symmachus, and Theodotion, before it, in the interpretation of the place of the
Prophet he there expounds. The first that translated the old Testament out of
Hebrewe into Latin was Hierome, and the last, till our age; whereupon great
exception was taken to him for it, as appears by his several Epistles,
wherein he excuses and defends himself. Yet notwithstanding all these
dislikes, and exceptions, it appears by In a place above cited.
Gregory, that a new translation began to be in use in the Church, not long
after Hieromes time: which is thought to be that, we now call the vulgar.
Bellar. li. 2. ca. 9. de verbo dei.
Whether this translation be Hieromes, or not, there is great variety of
judgment. Some, as Pagnine, and Paul Bishop of Forosempronium, deny it to be
Hieromes: others, as Augustinus Eugubinus, and Picus Mirandula, affirm it to
be his: Other, as Driedo, and Sixtus Senensis, think it to be mixed of the old
and new.

Bellarmine delivers his opinion in certain propositions, whereof the first
is, that we have the Latin text of the new Testament, not of Hieromes
translation, but of his correction only: the second, that we have the Psalms
of the old tra^slatio^, formerly in use: the reason whereof is thought to be,
because the Church fearful to give any offense to the weak, would not admit
any alteration in them, being daily read, and sung in the assemblies of the
faithful: the third, that we have the books of Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, and
the Maccabees, of the old translation, the author whereof is not known: the
fourth, that we have all the rest of Hieromes translation.

This translation, some think so perfect, as that it is not to be corrected
according to the Originals, if in any thing it dissent from them, but that
rather, they are to be holden corrupt, in all such places of difference. Now
because this Translation in many places, and sundry things, is found to dissent
from the Originals, therefore they infer a great corruption of the
originalls. This is the erroneous conceit of Lindan, L. 2. c. 13.
Canus, and others of that sort, against whom in the just defense of the truth
of the originals, the best learned in the Church of Rome oppose themselves, as
John Isaacke, Arrias Montanus de varia in Hebraicis lib. lectione, ac de
Mazzoreth ratione et usu in Regiis Bibliis.
Arrias Montanus, Driedo, Andrad. in his 4. book entreating of the authority
of the vulgar translation, shows his own opinion, as also the judgment of
John Isaac, and Driedo for the iu^ification of the originalls.
Andradius, Sixtus Senensis, and many more. The chiefest argument of the adverse
part is, for that if this translation be not pure and faultlesse, the Church
had not the word of God, so long as it used this translation only. For answer
hereunto, Andradius demands, if the Church were not as perfect, and as
assuredly possessed of the truth, before this translation of Hierome, as since;
if it were, he demands if they that lived in those times, did not as much
admire the Translation of the Septuagint, and the Latin translations out of
it, as they do the vulgar. Now, that they did, he proves at large, out of
sundry of the ancient, who held that the Septuagint were led in translating,
with a prophetical spirit, freeing them from danger of error, so far forth,
that Hierome was greatly disliked, for adventuring to translate after them, as
if he could correct any thing that they had done. Yea so great opposition did
he find, Praefat. in Paralip. etc. scribit: Si versio 70, integra haberetur ut
ab iis edita fuit, se frustra laboraturum in Bibliis transferendis.
that he was forced to give way to the clamours, and outcries of his
adversaries, to attribute much unto them, and to make show that he would never
have begun this work of a new translation, if that of the Septuagint had
remained, and been preserved in original purity; In 2. and 8. cap. Esaiae, and
17: Ieremiae, aliaquia ante Christi adventum interpretati sunt nequaquam
percepisse, alia, ne gentis suae gloriam obscurarent, noluisse sub Egyptiorum
oculos subiicere. Andrad. l. 4. defens. fid. Trid. Ibidem.
though sometimes he fear not to pronounce, that they passed by many things
of purpose, mistook many things of ignorance, and suppressed other, because
they would not make known the dishonor of their nation to strangers. Now
(says Andradius) I would know, whether in all the places, wherein the
translations then in use, differed from the originals; the originals were
corrupted. If they were, then our translation, which comes nearer to the
originals, and leaves the former translation sis corrupt, and so while these
men endeavor to defend, they overthrow the authority of the vulgar
translation. But some perhaps will demand, whether the Church of God in those
times, had not the true Scriptures of God, and whether the Church of God at any
time have been without an approved translation. Hereunto Andradius answers,
that the Church does approve translations, not pronouncing that there is
nothing amiss in them, or that they depart not from the true sense, and right
meaning of any particular place, but that the Divine Mysteries are therein
truly delivered, and nothing that concerns faith, religion, or good manners,
ignorantly, or fraudulently suppressed.

The Council of Trent defined, that the vulgar Latin translation shall be
holden as authentical; but he says, Andreas Vega who was present at the
Council, reported that the Fathers of the Council meant not to determine,
that it is not defective, or faulty, but that it is not erroneous, and faulty,
in such sort, as that any hurtful, or pernicious opinion in matters of faith,
or manners, may necessarily be deduced from it. And that this was the meaning
of the Council, he says, Andreas Vega alleged the authority of the
Cardinal of Saint Cross, afterward Pope, who delivered so much unto him. So
that the Church of God does not receive any translation, as free from all
error, and in that sense authentical, but thinks that to be the peculiar
excellency of the originals, which are by some unjustly disgraced, and called
in question, as if they were so corrupted, that translations should be
preferred before them.

CHAP. 28.
Of the truth of the Hebrew text of Scripture.

FOr first, touching the Hebrew text, which some suppose has been corrupted
by the Jews, it is not likely that of purpose they would corrupt it: for then
they would specially have corrupted those places, which make most clearly
against them, and for the Christians; but those places are not corrupted, as
Andradius shows, and proves by the testimony of John Isaake, who was won
to Christianity, by the pregnancy of a Chapter of Esayes prophecy in Hebrew.

Neither is it likely, Aug. lib. 15. de ciuitate Dei cap: 13.
dum aliis inuiderent authoritatem, sibi abstulisse veritatem; that while they
were unwilling that we should have any authority, for confirmation of our
faith in their Scriptures, they would deprive themselves, of the truth of them,
which they ever held the richest treasure in the world. Ipsa prophetia quid
aliud nisi a nostris putaretur conficta, si non inimicorum codicibus
probaretur. I deo ne occideris eos, ne ipsius entis nomen extinxeris, ne quando
obliuiscantur legis tuae; disperge illos in virtute tua: Si enim in vno loco
essent terrarum, non adiuvarent testimon o praedicationem evangelij quae
fructificat in toto orb terrarum: ideo disperge illos in virtute tua, vt eius
ipsius, cuius fuerunt negatores, persecutores, interfectores, vbique sint
testes per legem, etc. Aug. Paulino epist. 59.
Especially seeing it has ever been thought by the wisest in Gods Church,
that God in his providence, has therefore preserved these forlorn, and
forsaken Creatures, and dispersed them into the several Nations, and kingdoms
of the World, that they might give testimony to the truth of our faith, by
those monuments of Moses, and the Prophets, which they honor and embrace, as
received from God himself.

Thus then, we are persuaded, that there is no great nor general corruption of
the Hebrew text of Scripture, and that the faults which by negligence, in time
crept into it, are but few, and such as by help of the Mazzoreth, may easily
be amended. But because Lib. 4. desensionis fidei Tridentinae.
Andradius, Lib. 2. de verbo Dei cap. 2.
Bellarmine, and other of our adversaries, have undertaken the defense of the
truth, and confutation of their fellows error in this point, I will no longer
insist upon it: let us come therefore to the new Testament.

CHAP. 29:
Of the supposed Corruptions of the Greek text of Scripture.

IN the new testament, says, Bibliothecae li: 7. haeres. 1.
Sixtus Senensis, out of Ad Suniam and Fritellam.
Hierome, if any question arise amongst them that read the Scriptures, in
Latin, and there appear difference and variety amongst the translations, we
must have recourse to the Greek as to the fountain, assuring our selves, that
there were ever some incorrupt and true Copies of the new Testament, found
amongst them, that read the same in Greek, out of which the Latin might be
corrected; and that if some faults be found in the Greek Copies, by the
negligence, or mistaking of them that wrote them out, they may easily be
discerned, by laying together sundry Copies, casually corrupted, it so falling
out, that what in one book is depraved, by the fault of the writers, in
another is found right. Now says he, whereas certain heretics did say, that
either Hierome did not translate the same Greek that now is, or that he
translated it very ill, it is to be answered, that the Greek is the same,
which all Christians read and translated, before and after Hierome; but that he
translated it not, but only in some things corrected the old translation, he
found in use before, and that yet notwithstanding, that vulgar and old
translation, is not wholly to be abandoned and rejected: for that, though it
do not exactly agree with the Greek, which is the original, yet it omitteth
nothing in matter of faith, or truth of story, nor has any thing contrary to
the truth of religion.

The Romanists, to prove that the Greek text of the new Testament is
corrupted, and consequently that it is not safe to correct the Latin
translations by it, allege certain places, which they presume, they can
easily demonstrate to be corrupted. Lib. 2. cap. 7. de verbo dei.
Bellarmine gives instance in these that follow. In the 1 Cor: 15. the Greek
that now is, has in all Copies, The first man was of the earth, earthly, the
second man is the Lord from heaven: the later part of this sentence, Lib. 5.
contra Marcionem.
Tertullian supposes to have been corrupted, and altered by the Marcionites,
instead of that the Latin text has, The second man was from heaven, heavenly,
as In 1. Cor. 15.
Ambrose, In eundem locum.
Hierome, and many of the Fathers read also. Touching this place we answer,
that not only the Greek Copies now extant have it, as we read and translate,
but the Syriacke and Arabicke also, and that De Orthodoxa fide l. 3. c. 12
Damascene de Orthodoxa fide reads in the same sort.

Contra Iudaeos lib. 2. c. 8.
Notwithstanding because many of the Fathers both Greek and Latin, follow the
other reading, we think it very doubtful which is the original verity. This
difference of the reading of the Apostles words, is a matter of no great
moment, seeing neither of them contain any thing contrary to the rule of
faith, or verity of Christian religion, The second place they produce, is 1
John: 4. 3. Where the Greek has, Every spirit that confesses not etc. but
the Latin, every spirit that dissolueth Jesus. It is true, that Socrates in
his history, Li. 7. 32:
says, that the ancient Greek Copies had as the Latin now has, and that
these words were put out, by such as divided the person of Christ: yet seeing
not only all copies of the Greek text, but the Syriacke translation also
has, Every spirit that confesses not etc. and Cyprian so cites the place,
and Exposi. in ep: Johan: tractatu, 6.
Augustine reads and interprets both; we think it likewise very
doubtful, which is the original verity.

The next place is the 1. Cor: 7. where in the vulgar Latin we read in this
sort. He, that is with a wife, is careful for the things of the World, how he
may please his wife, and is divided, that is, distracted with many cares: but
in the Greek it is thus, He that has a wife, is careful for the things of
the world, how to please his wife; there is a difference between a wife and a
virgin, or they are divided one from another. That the former is the true
reading of the Apostles words, Bellarmine proves, because Hierome against Lib.
1: loquitur de latinis codicibus and in illis ait legi, divisa est mulier and
virgo: quod quanquam habeat suum sensum, and a se quoque pro qualitate loci sic
edissertum sit, tamen non esse apostolicae veritatis pronunciat.
Iouinian affirms it to be so, and some other of the Fathers follow the same.

But he should know, that not only the most part of all the Greek Copies have
as we translate, but the Syriacke, and Arabicke translations also. Besides,
Basil, the Greek Scholiast, Theophylact, and Hierome himself against*
Heluidius, and to Eustochium de Custodia Virginitatis. So that this proof of
the corruption of the Originalls, proves too weak. The next allegation
concerning the 12. to the Romans, of serving the Lord, and serving the time,
is much weaker. For Beza shows that some Greek Copies have, as the vulgar
has, and as Bellarmine says, the truth is, serving the Lord. That the story
of the Adulteress in the 8 of John, is not found in many Greek Copies, does
not prove the general corruption of the Greek text, which is the thing our
adversaries undertake to prove. For if it did, the Latin also should be
rejected, as corrupted and false. For as Lib: 2. contra Pelagianos.
Hierome witnesses, many of the Latin Copies wanted this story, as well as
the Greek. Sixtus bibliothecae li. 1. de 2. ordine librorum novi testamenti.
Some of the ancient, were of opinion, that this story was first found, in the
Apocryphal Gospel, according to the Hebrews. But whatsoever we think of
it, it makes nothing against the authority of the Greek text, seeing it was
ever found in some Greek Copies though not in all.

In their preface before the new testament translated by them.
The Rhemists, to disgrace the Greek, allege sundry places, where they say,
our translators choose rather to follow the vulgar Latin, then the Greek,
thereby acknowledging, that it is corrupt. But if we examine the particulars,
we shall find, that this their allegation, is nothing else, but a lying and
false report. For they ever follow some, and those the best and most incorrupt
Greek Copies, as In his annotations upon the several places objected by the
R^emists.
Beza shows. Wherefore failing in this allegation, they betake themselves to
another, not of falsehood, but of superfluity: the first instance whereof that
they give, is the sixth of Matthew, where the Lords prayer in the vulgar Latin,
ends with that petition, deliver us from evil, leaving out for thine is the
Kingdom, the power, and the glory, which they suppose to be superfluously
added in the Greek. But these men should know, that though it were granted,
that these words were superfluous, yet nothing is thereby derogated from the
Greek, seeing some Greek Copies, and they very ancient, omit them, as Beza
shows. Their next instance, is Romans 11. where the vulgar Latin has, If of
grace, not of works: otherwise grace should be no more grace: to which is
added by way of Antithesis, and opposition, in the Greek, If of works, not of
grace, otherwise works, should be no more works. It will be very hard for our
adversaries to prove, that these latter words are superfluously added, being
found not only in the most Greek Copies, but in the Syriacke translation. But
if it were granted, yet there is one Greek Copy of great antiquity, that
omitteth these words, as well as the vulgar Latin. The next instance is the
sixth of Mark, and the 11. Verily I say unto you, it shall be easier for Sodom
and Gomorrha, etc. If it were granted, that these words were superfluously
added, which yet there is no reason to do, seeing besides very many Greek
Copies, the Syriacke translation has them also, yet would this make nothing
for the improuing of the credit of the Greek, seeing as Beza professes,
there are three Greek Copies that omit them. The like may be said, touching
the next allegation of Matthew, the 20, 22, 23. where these words, and be
baptized with the baptism, that I am baptized with, are supposed to be
superfluous; for there are some Greek Copies that omit them, as well as the
vulgar.

Thus having examined the several allegations of our adversaries, against the
authority, and credit, of the Greek Text of the New Testament, we see that
they fail in them, neither being able to convince it of falsehood, nor
superfluity. Wherefore to conclude this matter, we say with Hierome, that the
Latin editions are to be corrected by the Greek; and that by the providence
of GOD, the verity of the Scriptures of the New Testament, has ever been
preserved in the original: That those faults and errors which are crept into
some Copies, may easily by the help of others, be corrected, and that there is
no difference in matter of substance, in so great variety of Copies, as are
found in the world. If any man say, the Greek has been corrupted since the
days of Hierome, and that therefore, though he in his time, thought the
translations might be corrected by the originals, yet now we may not take the
same course; we answer, it may easily be proved, that all those supposed
corruptions, which they now find in the Greek, were found in it, in Hieromes
time. For there are but two places, to wit, 1. Corinthians. 15. and 1. John 4. 3.
where all Greek Copies, have otherwise then they say the truth is, and these
places were corrupted, (if there be any error in the present reading,) before
Hieromes time. Thus much touching the sufficiency of the Scriptures, and the
editions, wherein the authentical verity of the same is to be sought.

CHAP. 30.
Of the Power of the Church in making Laws.

NOw it remains that we come to the next part of our division touching the
power of the Church, in making laws. Cameracensis in principio in primum
sententiarum.
As the will of God, willing and purposing the being of each thing, is the
first, and highest cause, of things: so the same will of God, determining what
is fit to be, what, of what kind, in what sort, each thing must be, that
it may attain, and possess, the uttermost degree of perfection, the orderly
disposition of things, requires, to be communicated to it, is the first and
highest law to the whole world. And as the will of God determining what is
fit, defining what ought to be, and what must be, if the Creatures attain
their highest perfection, is a general law to all Creatures: so when he
makes known to creatures rational, and of an understanding nature, which
have power to do or omit things thus fit to be done, that though he
leave it in their power, and freedom of choice, to do, or omit them, yet
they shall be tied, either to do them, or to loose the good they desire to
enjoy, and incur the evils they would avoid: It is more specially named a
law of commandment, precept, or direction, binding them upon whom it is
imposed, to the performance of that it requires.

The Precepts and Commandments of Almighty God, are of two sorts: for either
they are such, as in respect of the nature and condition of the things
themselves, are good, and so bind all men, at all times: or else they are
positive, prescribing things variable according to the diversities of times,
and the different condition of men living in them, The former kind of laws,
God imposed upon men, in the day of their creation, or redemption, and
restoration, together with the very nature, and being, which he gave them:
the later prescribing things not naturally and perpetually good, but good only
at some time, to some men, and to some purposes and uses, to which they serve,
were not imposed at first, together with the institution of nature, or the
restoration of the same by grace, but are then imposed, when the things they
prescribe are judged good, and beneficial, So God prescribed, before the
coming of Christ his son, those sacrifices, and offerings, which now he
regards not: and has now instituted those Sacraments, Ceremonies, and rites
of Religion, which before were not known in the world.

Thus we see, that the original of all laws is the will of God: who, as he
reserueth for himself, the honor of being the supreme, first, and highest
cause of all things, and yet communicates part of his Divine power, to
subordinate and inferior causes: so though he alone be the great lawegiuer to
every creature, yet he communicates part of his authority, to such among the
sons of men, as he is pleased to make greater than others, giving them power
to command, and prescribe laws unto them.

Touching this matter thus generally delivered, there is noe difference
between us, and our adversaries. For it is confessed on both sides, that God
who is the great lawgiuer to the whole world, has chosen out some from amongst
the rest of the sons of men, whom he has been pleased to honor with his
own name, to set upon his own seat, and to make rulers and lawgiuers unto his
people: but the question is, within what bounds this power is contained, and
how far the band of laws, made by such authority extends.

CHAP. 31.
Of the bounds, within which, the power of the Church in making laws is
contained, and whether she may make laws concerning the worship of God.

TOuching the first, the question is usually proposed, whether the Rulers of
Gods Church, and people, may make laws concerning Gods worship, and service.
For the clearing whereof, Contro 5. de potestate ecclesiae circa cultum
religionis quaest. 6. art. 1. in explicatione articuli.
Stapleton distinguishes the things pertaining to the worship and service of
God, into three sorts. The first, such as are seals, assurances, and in their
sort, and kind, causes of grace; as the sacrifices in old time, and the
sacraments now: the second, such as remove the impediments of grace, dispose
to the receipt of it, and work other spiritual and supernatural effects,
though they give not grace in so high degree as the first; as the signing with
the sign of the Cross, sprinkling with holy water, and the like: the third,
such as are used only for order, and comeliness, in the performance of the
principal, and essential duties of Gods worship, and service. These being
the diverse sorts of things, pertaining to the worship and service of God,
the question and controversy between us and our adversaries, is only
touching things of the second rank. For they confess, the Church has no
power, to institute things of the first sort, and we willingly grant unto it,
a most ample power, in things of the third sort. Let us first therefore lay
down their opinion, and then examine the truth, or falsehood of it.

Their opinion is, that the Church has power to institute Ceremonies, and
observations, though not to justify, and give grace, as do the sacraments,
yet to cure diseases, drive away devils, purge out venial sins, and to work
other the like spiritual, and supernatural effects; and that not only by way
of imp^tration, and by force of the prayers of the Church, which has prayed,
that they that use such things may enjoy such happy benefits, but ex opere
operato, by the very work wrought, the use of these things, applying the
merits of Christ, to the effecting of these inferior effects, as the
Sacraments do, to the effects of Justification and remission of sins.

The sign of the Cross, says De ima^inib. Sanctorum l 2. cap. ^0.
Bellarmine, drives away Devils, three ways; first, by the devotion of them
that use it, it being a kind of invocation of his name, that was crucified for
the redemption of the world, expressed not by words, but by this sign:
Secondly, by the impression of fear, which the very sight and apprehension of
it works in the devil, as being the thing whereby Christ wrought his
overthrow: Thirdly, ex opere operato; in which sort Infidells using this sign,
have wrought these effects.

The Rhemists upon 1. Tim, 4. 5. Every Creature is good, etc. have these
observations: First, that every creature is by nature, and condition of
creation good: Secondly, that Satan unjustly usurps upon these creatures,
in, and by them, seeking to hurt the bodies, and souls of men: Thirdly, that
by prayer, and invocation of Gods name, notwithstanding the curse upon all
creatures, and Satan's readiness to do us harm, they are good and
comfortable to us, so that in them we taste the sweetness of Divine
goodness: Fourthly, that the blessings of Gods Church, and her Ministers, do
not only stay and hinder Satan's working, remove the curse, and make the
creatures serve for our good, accordingly as at the first they were appointed,
but apply them also to so sacred uses, as to be instruments of remission of
sins, justification, and infusion of grace; as appears in the sacraments
instituted by Christ: Fifthly, that besides, and out of the use of Sacraments,
the prayers and blessings of the Church, do sanctify diverse creatures, to the
working of spiritual, and supernatural effects, as to expel Devils, cure
diseases, and remitte venial sins; and that not only, as sanctified things
are wont to do, in that they stir up, and increase devotion, and the fervor
of piety, but in that the Ministers of the Church, by their sovereign
authority, have annexed to the use of them, power to work such effects. This
last proposition contains the whole matter of difference between them and
us; for touching all the former, we consent and agree with them.

For clearing of this point, we lay down these propositions: First, that by
ordinary prayers, the Creatures of God are sanctified to ordinary uses.
Secondly, that the presenting them, or some part of them, in holy places, and
to holy persons, to be blessed of them, makes the use of them more
comfortable, then the former blessing, but adds no supernatural force,
efficacy or grace unto them. Thirdly, that Christ appointed, and the Church
daily sanctifies, the Creatures of God, and elements of this world, to be
the matter of his Sacraments. Fourthly, that bread being appointed to be the
matter of the Sacrament of the body of Christ, and water of Baptism, the
Christians in ancient time, held that bread, which had been offered and
presented at the Lords Table, (out of which a part was consecrated for the use
of the Sacrament,) more holy then other bread: And this is that bread, Lib. 2.
de peccatorum merit. and remiss. c. 26.
Augustine says, was given to the Catechumens: as also they religiously kept
of that water, which had been hallowed for the use of Baptism, and by the use
of it, strengthened their assurance, of enjoying the benefits, which are
bestowed on men, in Baptism. Neither can our adversaries clearly prove, any
separate sanctifying of water to have been used in the Primitive Church. If
they could, it were nothing else but the bringing of some part of this element,
into holy places, with humble desire, that they which in memory of Baptism,
should use it, and so have their faith strengthened, might more and more
receive the effects of saving grace, as the Christians of Russia, and Damianus
Agoes de moribus Aethiop.
Aethiopia, unto this day, on the Epiphany, on which day they remember the
Baptism of Christ, go into the water, praying unto God, that the effects of
the Sacrament of Baptism, may more and more be seen and appear in them.
Fifthly, that the Church consecrateth sundry outward things, to the use of Gods
service, not giving them any new quality, force, or efficacy, but only
praying, that God will be pleased to accept that, which is done in, or with
them, and to work in us, that, the use of them imports. Sixthly, holy men
having the gift of miracles, did use sometimes water, sometimes oil, sometimes
other things, and gave them to be used by other, for the working of miraculous
effects, after the example of Elizeus, and Christ himself: of which sort is
that of Joseph mentioned by Haeresi 30
Epiphanius, who filling a vessel with water, signing it with the sign of the
Cross, and casting it into a certain fire, caused it to burn, though Satan
hindered it before, that it could not burn; as likewise that of Hier. in
Hilar. vit.
Hilarion, who gave a kind of hallowed oil to certain, who, by using it, were
cured of their diseases. But the consecrating of oil, salt, water, and the
like things, by men not having the gift of miracles, to drive away devils, cure
diseases, remit venial sins, and work other spiritual and supernatural
effects ex opere operato, by application of the merits of Christ, was never
known in the Primitive Church, nor any such form of exorcising or blessing as
they now use.

That which the Rhemists allege, touching the Liver of a fish used by Tob. 11.
Tobie, the piece of the holy earth where Christ was buried, preserving a man's
chamber from the infestation of devils, and the force of holy relics,
tormenting them, makes nothing to this purpose, all these examples being
miraculous. (...) Sam. 16. 23.
Touching the harp of David, quieting Saul, there is a reason for it in
Nature, though the repressing of Satan's rage, were miraculous. That Infidels
have sometimes driven away devils by the sign of the Cross, it was by the
special dispensation of Almighty God, who would thereby glorify his Son;
whose Cross the world despised; and not as if this Ceremony had force, ex
opere operato, to work such effects. That the name of Jesus, did miraculously
cast out Devils, in the Primitive Church (which is the next allegation) who
ever made doubt? but what makes this to the purpose? That which they allege,
that Saint Gregory did usually send his benediction, and remission of sins, in,
and with such tokens, as were sanctified by his blessing, and touch of the
Martyrs relics, as now his successors do the like hallowed remembrances of
religion, is very vain. Epist. lib. 3. indict: 12. cap. 30. l. 7. indict. 1.
cap. 34.
For Gregory did not send any such blessing of of his own, or remission of
sins, by force of it, as now his successors do, but only certain things,
that had pertained to Christ or his Apostles: These were often accompanied with
miracvlous effects in those times, as appears by Gregory in the places cited.
as part of the wood of the cross of Christ, or of the chains wherewith the
Apostles were bound, and with them the blessing of Christ and those Apostles,
to such as should conform themselves, to his sufferinges, or their faith. That
which they allege out of the Canon. 24.
third Council of Carthage, touching the blessing of milk, honey, grapes and
corn, bewrays their ignorance. For that Canon speaks not of any such
blessing; but forbids any thing, besides bread and wine mingled with water
for the matter of the Sacrament, and grapes and corn to be presented on the
Altar. Canon. 3.
The Canon of the Apostles is to the same effect, forbidding any thing, but
new grapes, and corn in their season, and oil for the lights, and incense to
be used, in the time of the oblation, to be presented on the Altar, willing the
first fruits, to be carried to the Bishops house, and prescribing what shall
be done with such presents. The Can: 28.
sixth general Council, finding that some did give to the people, with the
Sacrament, these grapes etc: forbad it, and prescribed that being blessed, they
should be delivered privately to the Catechumens, and others, that they might
praise God, who has given so good, and pleasing things, for the nourishment of
men's bodies; but speaks nothing of blessing of them, to be instruments of
remission of sins, and of the like spiritual and supernatural effects.

Thus we see, our adversaries cannot prove, that the Church has power to
annexe unto such Ceremonies, and observations, as she deuiseth, the remission
of sins, and the working of other spiritual, and supernatural effects,
which is the only thing questioned between them, and us, touching the power of
the Church. So that all the power the Church has, more then by her authority,
to publish the Commandments of Christ the son of God, and by her censures,
to punish the offenders against the same, is only in prescribing things that
pertain to comeliness and order.

Comeliness requires, that not only that gravity, and modesty, do appear in
the performance of the works of Gods service, that beseems actions of that
nature, but also that such rites, and ceremonies, be used, as may cause a due
respect unto, and regard of the things performed, and thereby stir men up,
to greater fervor and devotion. Caeremoniae, Ceremonies, are so named, as Lib.
5. and Valerius Maximus lib. 1. ca. 1.
Liuie thinks, from a Town called Caere, in the which the Romans did hide
their sacred things, when the Gauls invaded Rome. Other think, Ceremonies
are so named a Carendo, of abstaining from certain things, as the Jews
abstained from swines slesh, and sundry other things, forbidden by God as
unclean.

Ceremonies are outward acts of religion, having institution either from the
instinct of nature, as the lifting up of the hands and eyes to heaven, the
bowing of the knee, the striking of the breast, and such like: or immediately
from God, as the sacraments, or from the Churches prescription, and either
only serve to express such spiritual and heavenly affections, dispositions,
motions, and desires, as are or should be in men; or else to signify, assure,
and convey unto them, such benefits of saving grace, as God in Christ is
pleased to bestow on them. To the former purpose, and end, the Church has
power to ordain Ceremonies; to the later God only.

Order requires, that there be set hours for prayer, preaching and
ministering the sacraments, that there be silence, and attention, when the
things are performed, that women be silent in the Church, that all things be
administered according to the rules of discipline. Thus we see within what
bounds, the power of the Church is contained, and how far it has authority
to command, and prescribe, in things pertaining to the worship and service of
God.

CHAP. 32.
Of the nature of Laws, and how they bind.

Now it remains that we examine, how far the band of such laws extends,
as the Church makes, and whether they bind the conscience, or only the
outward man. For the clearing whereof, first we must observe, in what sense it
is, that laws are said to bind; and secondly, what it is, to bind the
conscience. Lawgiuers are said to bind them, to whom they give laws, when
they determine and set down, what is fit to be done, what things they are,
the doing whereof they approve, and the omission whereof they dislike, and
then signify to them whom they command, that though they have power and
liberty of choice, to do, or omit, the things prescribed, yet that they will
so, and in such sort, limitte them, in the use of their liberty, as that
either they shall do that they are commanded, or be deprived of the good they
desire, and incur the evils they would avoid. None can thus tie and limit
men, but they that have power to deprive them of the good they desire, and
bring upon them the contrary evils. So that no man knowing what he does,
prescribes, or commands any thing, under greater penalties, then he has
power to inflict, nor any thing but that whereof he can take notice, whether
it be done or not, that so he may accordingly reward or punish, the doing, or
omission of it.

Hence it follows, that mortal men forget themselves, and keep not within
their own bounds, when either they command, under pain of eternal
damnation, which none but God can inflict, (according to that of our Savior,
Math. 10. 28.
Fear not them, that can kill the body: but fear him rather, that has power,
to cast both body and soul into hell fire.) Gers. de vita spirituali animae
lect. 4. Corollar. 1. 2.
or take upon them to prescribe inward actions, of the soul or spirit, or the
performance of outward actions, with inward affections; whereas none but God
that searches the heart, can either take knowledge of things of this kind,
or convent the offenders, and judge and try them. Thus then we see, what it
is to bind, and that none can bind men to the performance of any thing, but
by the fear of such punishments, as they have power to inflict.

CHAP. 33.
Of the nature of Conscience, and how the Conscience is bound.

IN the next place we are to see, what the nature of Conscience is, and how
the Conscience is bound. Conscience is the priuity, the soul has, to things
known to none, but to God and her self. Hence it is, that conscience has a
fearful apprehension of punishments for evils done, though neither known,
nor possible to be known, to any, but God, and the offendour alone. The
punishments that men can inflict, we never fear, unless our evil doings be
known to them. For, though we have conscience of them, and be privy to them,
yet if they be hidden from them, we know they neither will, nor can punish
us. To bind the conscience then, is to bind the soul and spirit of man, with
the fear of such punishments (to be inflicted by him that so binds) as the
conscience fears, that is as men fear, though none but God and themselves be
privy to their doings. Now these are only such as God alone inflicteth: and
therefore seeing none have power to bind but by fear of such punishments, as
they have power to inflict, none can bind the conscience, but God alone.
Quamvis peccet quis transgrediendo leges humanas, non tamen ligant
conscientiam: patet per simile de praeceptis medicorum, quae despicere quis non
potest sine peccato, and tamen non ligant conscientiam. Gers. de vita
spirituali anim. lect. 4. corol. 5. ubi reprehendit eos qui fulminant et tot
condunt leges, quot nunquam legere possumus.
Neither should the question be proposed, whether humane laws bind the
conscience, but whether binding the outward man, to the performance of outward
things, by force, and fear of outward punishments, to be inflicted by men, the
not performance of such things, or the not performance of them with such
affections as were fit, be not a sin against God, of which the conscience
will accuse us, he having commanded us to obey the Magistrates and Rulers he
has set over us. For answer whereunto we say, there are three sorts of
things commanded by Magistrates. First, evil, and against God. Secondly,
injurious in respect of them to whom they are prescribed, or at least
unprofitable to the Commonwealth in which they are prescribed. Thirdly, such
as are profitable, and beneficial to the society of men, to whom they are
prescribed. Touching the first sort of things, God has not commanded us to
obey, neither must we obey, but rather say to them that command us such things,
with the Acts 4. 19.
Apostles, whether it be fit to obey God, or men, judge you. Yet we must so
refuse to obey, that we show no contempt of their office, and authority, which
is of God, though they abuse it. Touching the second sort of things, all that
God requires of us, is that we show no contempt of sacred authority, though
not rightly used, that we scandalize not others, and that we be subject to
such penalties, and punishments, as they that command such things, do lay
upon us; so that God requires our willing, and ready obedience, only in
things of the third sort. The breach and violation of this kind of laws, is
sin, not for that humane laws have power to bind the conscience, or that it
is simply, and absolutely sinful to break them, but because the things they
command, are of that nature, that not to perform them, is contrary to
justice, charity, and the desire we should have, to procure the common good
of them, with whom we live. We are bound then sometimes to the performance of
things prescribed by humane laws, in such sort that the not performance of
them is sin; Stapleton contro. 5. de potest. eccles. circa leges mor. quaest.
7. art. 2. in explic. art.
not ex sola legislatoris voluntate, sed ex ipsa legum vtilitate, as Stapleton
rightly observed. But some man will say, What do the laws then effect? seeing
it is the Law of Justice, and charity that does bind us, and not the
particularitie of Laws, newly made. To this we answer, that many things are
good and profitable, if they be generally observed, which without such
general observation, will do no good: as for one man to pay tribute, or for
one man to stay his goods from transportation, is no way beneficial to the
Commonwealth; which would be very profitable, if all did so. Now the Law
procures a general observation: whence it comes that a man is bound by the
Law of charity, and justice, to that, after the making of a Law, which
before he was not bound unto.

And this is it that Stapleton means, when he says, that humane Laws do
bind the conscience, not ex voluntate legislatoris, sed ex ipsa legum
vtilitate, and ratione. Not because they prescribe such things, but because the
things so prescribed, if they be generally observed, are profitable to the
Commonwealth.

By this which has been said, it appears, that they do impiously usurp,
and assume to themselves that which is proper to God, Gers. de auferribilitate
Papae considerat. 8. aequali tenore quaeritur observari lex humana, sive sit
illa canonica, secularis, vel ciuilis, quemadmodum custodiri divinam absq: ulla
variatione necesse est: inde venit illa Christi quaestio Math. 5. Irrit^
fecistis mandatum Dei propter ^aditiones vestras.
who will have all their Laws taken for divine Laws, and such as bind
the conscience no less then the Laws of GOD, who publish all their Canons
and constitutions in such sort, that they threaten damnation to all offenders:
Whereas no creature has power, to prescribe, command or prohibit any thing,
under pain of sin, and eternal punishment, unless the party so
commanded, were formerly either expressly, or by implication, either
formally, or by force and virtue of some general duty, bound unto it by Gods
law before; because God only, has power of eternal life or death.

The soul of man, as it receives from GOD only, the life of grace, so it
loses the same, when he for the transgression of his laws, and precepts,
forsakes it. For as none but he, can give this life, so none but he, can
take it away: he only has the keys of DAVID, he opens, and no man
shuts, he shuts and no man opens. Hence it follows, that no lawgiver
may command any thing, under pain of eternal punishment, but God only,
because he only has power to inflict this kind of punishment. And that no
man incurreth the guilt of eternal condemnation, but by violating the laws of
God. Whereupon Augustine defines sins, to be thoughts, words, and deeds,
against the law of God.

That men do sin, in not keeping, and observing the laws of men, it is
because, being generally bound by Gods law to do those things, which set
forward the common good, many things being commanded, and so generally
observed, grow to be beneficial, which without such general observation,
flowing from the prescript of law, were not so: and so though not formally, yet
by virtue of general duty, men are tied to the doing of them, under pain of
sin, and the punishments that deservedly follow it.

CHAP. 34:
Of their reasons, who think, that humane Law es do bind the Conscience.

THe reasons which Bellar. 1. tom. contro. 5. l. 3. de laicis c. 11.
Bellarmine and other of that faction bring, to prove that humane laws do
bind the conscience, are so vain and frivolous, that they deserve no answer:
yet least our adversaries should think, we therefore pass them over without
examination, because we fear the force and weight of them, I will breefely
take a view of them, and let the Reader see their weakness. To bind, says
Bellarmine, is either the essence or essential property of a law; therefore
all laws, whether they be of God, or of men, do bind in the same sort. He
should have said, therefore all laws doc bind, whether they be of God, or of
men. For to say. It is the essential property of a law to bind, therefore
all laws do bind in the same sort, is as if a man should thus reason, It is
essential to all natural bodies to have motion, therefore the same kind of
motion; whereas yet the fire goes upward, and the earth downwards, things
without life move but one way, either toward, or from the center of the
world; things living every way. His next reason is more childish then this:
for he reasons thus, If laws do bind only in that they are divine, then
all divine laws should equally bind. This reason concludes nothing against
us. For first, no man says, that laws bind only, because divine, (for it is
essential to every law to bind) but that they bind the conscience, because
they are divine. And secondly, we add, that all divine laws, do equally
bind the conscience. For the conscience does as much fear Gods displeasure,
and eternal punishment, for one sin, as for another, though not so great
displeasure, nor so greiuous punishment. And so they equally bind the
conscience; though there be no equality, either of the sins, or of the
punishment, the conscience fears, and seeks, to decline.

His third reason, that Gods commandment makes those actions that were before
indifferent, to be actions of virtue, therefore men by their precepts, do so
likewise, is very strange, and therefore he endeavors to confirm it. The
reason (says he) why Gods precepts, and commandments, make actions that were
indifferent, as to eat swines flesh, or not to eat it, to be actions of
virtue, is because they are rules of men's manners and conversation, but men's
laws likewise are rules of men's lives, manners and conversation, therefore
they in like sort make those actions that were before indifferent to be actions
of virtue. To this we answer, that there are many great differences, between
these two rules. First, for that, the one contains, a certain, and
infallible direction; the other oftentimes leads out of the way. Secondly,
that the laws of God, are rules in such sort, that the very thoughts of the
heart, diuerting from that, which they prescribe, are sinful; but men's laws
are kept and fullfilled, with how bad affections soever, the things be done,
that are prescribed. Thirdly, because the use of nothing being lawful unto us,
in respect of conscience, longer, nor farther, then God the supreme Lord of
all, allows the same; it is an action of virtue, to abstain from things,
denied unto us by GOD, either in the first institution of nature or by his
positive law: but men having no such power, no such thing is consequent upon
their commandments, or prohibitions. Lastly, Gods law, both that which is
natural, that is, given when nature was first instituted, and that which is
positive, is the rule of men's lives absolutely: which if they be conformed
unto, they are morally good; if they vary from, they are evil and wicked: but
the laws of men, are rules only in respect of outward conversation, framing
it to the good of the commonwealth. So that a man, even according to the rules
of Philosophy, may be a good Citizen, that is not a good man. His next reason
is taken, from the comparison of a King and his Viceroy, the Pope, and his
Legate, and the laws, and edicts of these, binding in the same sort.

To this we answer, that the comparison holds not: first, because the King
and his Viceroy, command the same things, and to the same ends; but if we
compare God, and men, the laws of God, and the laws of men, we shall find a
great difference between them, both in the things they command, and the ends
for which they command; the one requiring inward actions, and the performance
of outward with inward affections; the other outward only. Secondly, because
both the King, and his viceroy, have power to take notice of all kind of
offenses, committed against both the one and the other, and to punish them with
the same kind of punishment; but there are many offenses committed against God,
by every man, whereof men can take no notice; and if they could, yet have no
power to inflict such punishments, as God does. That which Bellarmine h^th,
that faults and punish ments are relatiues, and that therefore none can
subject a man to punishment but he that can bind him to the doing of that
under pain of sin against God, for the no^ doing whereof he is punishable, is
too childish a parologisme. For it is true, that faults and punishments are
relatiues, but proportionably: faults against God and punishments inflicted by
him: and faults against men and the punishments, men are wont to inflict: We
may therefore conclude; that wheresoever there is any punishment some fault
w^nt before: the reproof that an unskillful Paynter is subject unto is a
punishment of his fault in paynting ill: but not of his sin against God: for
defects, in this kind are not breaches of his law.
His last reason is taken from that place of the Apostle, where he requires us
to be subject, to power and authority, for conscience sake. To this we
answer, first that it is a matter of conscience, to be subject in all things:
for subjection is required generally, and absolutely, where obedience is not.
Secondly, we say, that it is a matter of conscience, to seek and procure, the
good of the commonwealth; and that therefore, it is a matter of conscience to
obey good, and profitable laws, so far, as we are persuaded, our obedience
is profitable. Thus have we breefely examined their reasons, who think, that
humane laws bind the conscience, the weakness whereof, I hope all men of
any judgment will easily discern.

Wherefore to conclude this matter, touching the Churches power in making
laws, there are three things which we dislike in the doctrine, and practice of
the Roman Church. First, that they take upon them to prescribe Ceremonies, and
observations, having power to confer grace, for the remission of venial
sins, and the working of other spiritual and supernatural effects.
Secondly, that they assume unto themselves that which is proper unto God, and
seek to rule in the conscience. Thirdly, that by the multiplicitie of laws,
they dangerously ensnare the consciences of men, and oppress them with heavy
burdens. To this purpose, is the complaint that De vita spirituali animae: and
in eodem loco ait hanc fuisse querelam quam olim ad beatum Bernardum detulerunt
quidam ex Monachis, and propter quam compescendam scripsit volumen pulcherrimum
de praecepto and dispensatione: et idem de Vibano 5. inquit, quod gloriabatur
se Papa esse ob hanc causam praecipue quod nullis poenis excommunicationum et
irregularitatum esset obnoxious, qui si dilexisset proximos sicut seipsum et hoc
adver tisset, relaxasset fortassis tot laqueos, tot onera, tot pe^icula.
Gerson long since made, that the Laws of the Church were too many, and in a
great part childish and unprofitable, bringing us into a worse estate then that
of the Jews, as Scotus l. (...). d. 40 q. 1. Quantum ad caeremonialia, lex
nova est long facilior quam vetus, in quantum a Christo data est: et in
margin, Pondera hoc contraprae sumptuosos Praelatos, slatuta in laqueum
damnationis subditorum quotidie multiplicantes.
Augustine to Ianuarius complained, when things were much better than in latter
times they have been. Neither says Gerson, are they content to burden us with
the multiplicitie of their laws; but as if they preferred their own
inventions before the Laws of God, they most rigorously exact the performance
of the things their own laws prescribe, and neglect the Laws of God, as
Christ told the Pharisees, and hypocrites of his time, pronouncing against
them, that by their vain traditions, they made the laws of God of none
effect. To show how unjust and unreasonable the Roman Lawgiuers are, in
burdening men with so many traditions, De vita spirit. animae lect. 2.
the same Gerson fitly observes, that Adam in the time of his innocence, had
but one commandment, which yet unhappily he brake: and that therefore, they
seem to have no sense of man's miserable and wretched condition, nor any way to
compassionate his infirmity, that charge him with so many precepts, besides
those of God and Nature. Whereupon he gravely and wisely concludes, that he
supposes, that the wisest, and best, amongst the guides of Gods Church, had
not so ill a meaning, as to have all their constitutions, and ordinances taken
for laws, properly so named, much less strictly binding the conscience; but
for threatenings, admonitions, counsels, and directions only. And that, when
there grows a general neglect, they seem to consent to the abolishing of
them again. For seeing, lex instituitur, cum promulgatur, vigorem habet, cum
moribus vtentium approbatur, Laws are made, when they are published by such as
have authority, but have life, force, and vigor. when the manners of men
receiving, and obeying them, give them allowance. General, and long continued
disuse, is, and justly may be thought, an abolishing, and abrogating of humane
laws: Whereas contrariwise, against the Laws of God, and Nature, no
prescription, or contrary use, does ever prevail; but every such contrary
custom, or practice, is rightly judged a corruption, and fault.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH TOGETHER WITH AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING A DEFENSE
OF SVCH PARTS AND PASSAGES OF THE FORMER BOOKS, AS HAVE BEEN EITHER EXCEPTED
AGAINST. OR WRESTED, TO THE MAINtenance of Romish errors.

By RICHARD FIELD, Doctor of Divinity.

OXFORD, Printed by WILLIAM TVRNER, Printer to the famous University, Ann.
Dom. 1628.

The Epistle to the Reader,
AS in the days of Noe they all perished in the waters, that entered not into
the Arc prepared by Gods own appointment, for the preservation of such as
should escape that fearful and almost universal destruction: So is it a most
certain and undoubted truth, good Christian Reader, that none can fly from
the wrath to come, and attain desired happiness, but such as enter into that
society of men which we call the Church, which is the chosen multitude of them
whom God has separated from the rest of the world, and to whom he has in more
special sort manifested himself by the knowledge of revealed truth, then to
any other. So that nothing is more necessary to be sought out and known, then
which, and where this happy society of holy ones is, that so we may join our
selves to the same, and inherit the promises made unto it: according to that of
the holy Patriarch Noe: Blessed be the God of Sem, and let Chanaan be his
servant: the Lord persuade Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Sem. The
consideration whereof moved me, when I was to enter into the controversies of
these times, first and before all other things, carefully to seek out the
nature and being of this Church, the notes whereby it may be known, which it
is amongst all the societies of men in the world, and what the privileges are
that do belong unto it: of all which things I have treated in those four
Books of that argument, which not long since I offered to thy view and
censure. Now it remains that in this insueing Book then promised, I show in
what sort almighty God, who sits between the Cherubins in this his holy
Temple, reuealeth himself from off the mercy seat, to such as by the calling
of grace he has caused to approach and draw near unto himself, and how he
guides, and directs them, to the attaining of eternal felicity. Many and
sundry ways did God reveal himself in ancient times, as it is in the Epistle
to the Hebrews. For sometimes he manifested himself to men waking, by
visions: sometimes to men sleeping, by dreams: sometimes he appeared in a
pillar of a cloud: sometimes in flaming fire: sometimes he came walking a soft
pace among the trees of the garden, in the cool of the day: sometimes he rent
the rocks, and claue the mountains in sunder: sometimes he spoke with a still
and soft voice: sometimes his thunders shook the pillars of heaven, and made
the earth to tremble, as in the giving of the law, when he came down upon
Mount Sinai; what time the people by Moses direction went forth to meet him:
but when they heard the thunders, and the sound of the trumpet, and saw the
lightnings, and the mountain smoking, they fled and stood a far off, and
said unto Moses, Talk thou with us, and we will hear thee, but let not God
talk with us, lest we die.

This their petition Almighty God mercifully granted, and knowing whereof they
were made, resolved no more to speak unto them in so terrible and fearful
manner, but rather to put heavenly treasures into earthen vessels, that is, to
enlighten the understandings, and to sanctify the mouths and tongues of some
amongst themselves, and by them to make known his will and pleasure to the
rest. In this sort after the giving of the law he employed the Priests and
Levites in a set and ordinary course, appoynting that the people should seek
the knowledge of the same at their mouths; and in case of great confusion, and
general defects of these ordinary guides, raised up Prophets, as well to
denounce his judgments against offenders, and to reform abuses; as also to
foreshew the future state of things, and more and more to raise in men, a
desire, hope, and expectation of the coming of the promised Messiah, whom in
the fullness of time he sent into the world as the happiest Messenger of glad
tidings, that ever came unto the sons of men, and the Angel of the great
covenant of peace, causing this proclamation to be made before him, This is my
well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear him. In him were hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, so that as it was said of him, He has
done all things well, so likewise, that Never man spoke, as he spoke. But
because he came not into this lower world, to make his abode here perpetually,
but to carry up with him into heaven, our desires first, and then our selves:
after he had wrought all righteousness, and performed the work for which he
came, he returned back to God that sent him; Choosing out some of them that
had been conversant with him in the days of his flesh, that had heard the
words of his divine wisdom, and were eyewitnesses of all the things he did
and suffered; and sending them as his father sent him, who were therefore named
Apostles. These had many excellent preeminences, proper to those beginnings,
and fit for the founding of Christian Churches: as immediate calling,
infallibility of judgment, general commission, the understanding and
knowledge of all tongues, power to confirm their doctrine by signs and
wonders, and to confer the miraculous gifts of the spirit upon other also, by
the imposition of their hands. In which things, when they had finished their
course, they left none to succeed them; yet out of their more large, ample,
and immediate commissions, they authorized others to preach the Gospel,
administer Sacraments, to bind and loose, and to perform other like pastoral
duties, sanctifying and ordayning them to this work, by the imposition of
hands. These they honored with the glorious title of Presbyters, that is,
fatherly guides of Gods Church and people; and knowing the weight of the burden
they laid on their shoulders, added unto them as assistantes, other of an
inferior degree and rank, whom they named Deacons or Ministers. Amongst
these fatherly guides of Gods Church and people, for the preventing of
dissension, the avoiding of confusion, and the more orderly managing of the
important affairs of Almighty God, they established a most excellent, divine,
and heavenly order, giving unto one amongst the Presbyters of each Church, an
eminent and fatherly power, so that the rest might do nothing without him:
whom for distinctions sake, and to express the honor of his degree and place,
before and above other, we name a Bishop. And farther, by a most wise
disposition provided, that amongst Bishops all should not challenge all
things unto themselves, but that there should be in several provinces,
several Bishops, who should be first and chief amongst the brethren: and
again constituted and placed certain other, in greater cities, who might take
care of more then the former. The former of these were named Metropolitanes,
the later were known by the name of Patriarchs, or chief Fathers, who also in
order and honor were one before and after another, By means of this order
established by the Apostles of Christ among the guides of Gods people, and
received and allowed by the first and Primitive Christians, unity was
preserved, the parts of the Church holden fast together, in a band of
concordant agreement; questions determined, doubts cleared, differences
composed, and causes advisedly and deliberately heard, with all indifferency
and equity. Fow how could there be any breach in the Christian Churches, when
none were ordained Presbyters in any Church, but by the Bishop, the rest of the
Presbyters imposing their hands on them, together with him? None admitted to
the degree and order of a Bishop, but by the Metropolitan, and other Bishops
of the Province, sufficiently approving that they did, to the people over which
they set him? None received as a Metropolitan, unless being ordained by the
Bishops of the Province, upon notice given of their orderly proceeding, and the
sincerity of his faith and profession, he were confirmed by the Patriarch? Nor
none taken for a Patriarch, though ordained by many neighbor Bishops, till
making known the soundness of his profession, and the lawfulness of his
election and ordination, to the rest of the Patriarchs, he were allowed and
received by them as one of their rank and order? Or what fear could there be
of any wrong, injustice, or sinister proceedings in the hearing of causes, and
determining of controversies, unless there were in a sort a general failing?
When if there grew a diffence between a Bishop and his Presbyters, or if
either Presbyter, Deacon, or inferior Cleargy-man, disliked the proceedings of
his Bishop, there lay an appeal to the Metropolitan, who had power to
re-examine the matter in a Synod, and to see they were not wronged? And if
either Clearke or Bishop had ought against the Metropolitan, it was lawful
for them to appeal to the Primate, or Patriarch, who in a greater and more
honorable Synod, was to hear the matter, and to make a final end? When if
any variance rose between any of the Patriarchs and their Bishops, or amongst
themselves, it was lawful for the Patriarchs that were above and before them,
in order and honor, to interpose themselves, and with their Synods to judge of
such differences; and in such cases as could not so be ended, or that co^cerned
the faith, and the state of the whole universal Church, there remained the
judgment and resolution of a general Council; wherein the Bishop of the first
See was to sit as President, and Moderatour; and the other Bishops of the
Christian world, as his fellow Judges, and in the same commission with him.
This order continued in the Church from the Apostles times, and wrought
excellent effects, till the Bishop of Constantinople first sought, and after
him the Bishop of Rome obtained, to be not only in order and honor before the
rest, as anciently he had been, but to have an absolute and universal
commanding power over all, that either by fraud, or violence, he could bring
into subjection. Whence followed horrible confusion in the Christian Church,
and almost the utter ruin and desolation of the same. For after that this
child of pride, had in this Lucifer-like sort advanced himself above his
brethren, he thrust his sickle into other men's haruests, he encroached upon
their bounds and limits; he pretended a right to confer all dignities, whether
elective or presentatiue, to receive appeals of all sorts of men, out of all
parts of the world; nay, without appeal or complaint, immediately to take
notice of all causes, in the Diocesses of all other Bishops: so overthrowing
their jurisdiction, and seizing it in his own hands. He exempted Presbyters
from the jurisdiction of their Bishops, Bishops of their Metropolitans, and
Metropolitanes of their Primates and Patriarchs; and leaving unto the rest
nothing but a naked and empty title, took upon him to determine all doubts and
questions of himself alone, as out of the infallibility of his judgment: to
excommunicate, degrade, and depose, and again, to absolve, reconcile, and
restore, and to hear and judge of all causes, as out of the fullness of his
power. Neither did he there stay, but having subjected unto him, as much as in
him lay, all the members of Christ's body, and trampled underneath his feet,
the honor and dignity of all his brethren and colleagues, he went forward, and
challenged a right to dispose of all the kingdoms of the world, as being Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings. To this height he raised himself by innumerable
sleights and cunning devices, taking the advantage of the ignorance,
superstition, negligence, and base disposition which he found to be in many of
the guides of the Church in those days, and by their help and concurrence,
prevailing against the rest that were of another spirit. Neither did he demean
himself any better after he had attained to this his desired greatness; for
such was his pride, insolency, and tyranny, and such, so many, and
unsupportable were the burdens he laid on the shoulders of them that were noe
way able to bear them, that the voices of complaint and murmuring were every
where heard, and the minds of all men filled with coffeehouse, and desire
of alteration, which after many longing desires of our ancestors, has been
effected in our time. God, at the last, hearing the cries of his people, and
stirring up the heroical spirits of his chosen servants, to work our
deliverance, to take the burdens from our shoulders, the yoke from our neck,
and to bring us out of that Babylon, wherein we were captives, and that
spiritual Egypt, wherein we were formerly holden in miserable bondage. But as
there were some of the children of the captivity, that after long continuance
abroad forgot Jerusalem, and preferred Babylon before Sion, never desiring to
return into their own country any more: And as many of the Israelites brought
out of the house of Pharoahs bondage by God himself, and conducted by Moses
and Aaron to take possession of Canaan, the land of promise, a land that flowed
with milk and honey, in their hearts returned back: so are there many that
would never be induced to come out of the spiritual Babylon: and other that
are easily persuaded to look back, and in their hearts to return into Egypt
again. For the winning and gaining of the former, and the staying of the
latter, I have indeauoured by the true description of them out of the
Scripture, and the authentical recordsof antiquity, to make it appear, how
far Canaan exceeds Egypt, and Sion Babylon, how different the government
of Christ is from that of Antichrist: how happy the people are that live under
the one, and how miserable their condition is that are subject to the other.

Beseeching God for his mercies sake, to enlighten them that sit in darkness,
to bring back them that are gone astray, to raise up them that are fallen, to
strengthen them that stand, to confirm them that are doubtful, to rebuke
Satan, to put an end to the manyfold unhappy contentions of these times, to
make up the breaches of Sion, to build the walls of Jerusalem, and to love it
still.

R. F.

THE FIFTH BOOK, OF THE DIVERSE DEGREES, ORDERS AND CALLINGS OF THOSE men to
whom the government of the Church is committed.
CHAP. 1.
Of the Primitive and first Church of God in the house of Adam the Father of
all the living, and the government of the same.

ALMIGHTY GOD, the fountain of all being, who to manifest the glory of his
power, and the riches of his goodness made all things of nothing, disposed and
sorted the things he made into three several ranks. For to some he gave
being without any apprehension or discerning of it. Others he made to feel,
and sensibly discern that particular good he was pleased to do unto them:
And to a third sort of a more eminent degree and quality, made after his own
image, he gave generality of knowledge of all things, and extent of desire
answerable thereunto; causing them without all restraint or limitation, to take
view of all the variety of things that are in the world, and never to rest
satisfied till they come to see, enjoy, and possess him that made them all.

These he separated from the rest of his creatures, causing them to approach
and draw near unto himself; and to compass about his sacred throne, and
called them forth to be a joyful company of blessed ones, praising and
worshipping him in the glorious Temple of the world; and to be unto him an holy
Church, in the midst whereof his greatness should be known, and his name
called upon. These are of twoe sorts: Angels, dwelling in heavenly palaces:
and Men, made out of the earth, dwelling in houses of clay, whose foundation is
in the dust. The Angels are immortal, immateriall, and spiritual substances,
made all at once: and immediately after their creation, so many as turned not
from God their Creator, corfirmed in grace, and perfectly established in the
full possession of their vttermest good, so that they need noe guide to lead
them to the attaining of the same: howsoever in the degrees of their natural
or supernatural perfections, and in the actions of their ministry wherein GOD
employeth them, they are more great and excellent one then another, and are not
without their order and government. But concerning men made out of the earth,
and compounded of body and spirit, it is far otherwise: For God did not
create them all at one time, but made only one man, and one woman immediately
with his own hands; appointing that the rest should descend and come of them
by natural generation. Whereupon we shall find, that as in the Creation the
tree was first, and then the seed, but in the natural propagation of things
the seed is first, and then the tree. So the first man whom God made out of the
earth, and the first woman whom he made of man, were perfect at the first, as
well in stature of body, as in qualities of the mind, (both because whatsoever
is immediately from God is perfect, as also for that the Prima omnia perfecta
sunt: caetera autem omnia, quae ex ipsis oriuntur, and post ipsa sequuntur,
nisi per inter valla temporum crescendo ad perfectionem venire non possunt.
Hugo citat. ab Alex. de Hales. part. 2. quaest. 89. memb. 2.
first things whence all other have their being, must be perfect) but
afterward the beginnings of all the sons of men are weak, and they grow by
degrees to perfection of body and mind, having need to receive nourishment,
support, guidance, and direction from them, from whom they receive their being.
So that nothing is more natural then for children to expect these things from
their parents, nor for parents then to nourish, guide, and direct their
children. This care pertains as well to the mother that bare them, and in
whose womb they were conceived; as to the father that begat them, and out of
whose loins they came. Yet because the man was not of the woman, but the woman
of the man: the man was not created for the woman, but the woman for the man:
the original disposition and sovereign direction of all does naturally rest
in the man, who is the glory of God, the woman's head, and every way fittest to
be chief commander in the whole Family and household. Hereupon Adam the
father of all the living, was appointed by that God that made him, to instruct,
guide, and direct those that should come of him, even in the state of natures
integrity, though without any forcing with terrors, or recalling with
punishments while there was yet no pronenesse to evil, nor difficulty to do
good. And when he had broken the Law of his Creator, was called to an account,
made know his sin, and recomforted with the promise, that the seed of the
woman should break the Serpents head: he was to teach his children the same
things, and sanctified to be both a King to rule in the little World of his own
Family: and a Priest, as well to manifest the will of God to them of the same,
as to present their desires, vows, and sacrifices unto him: then which course,
what could be devised more fitting? For when there were no more in the World
but the first man whom GOD made out of the earth, the first woman that was made
of man, and the children which GOD had given them, who could be fitter to rule
and direct, then the man for whose sake the woman was created, and out of whose
loins the children came?

CHAP. 2.
Of the dignity of the firstborn amongst the sons of Adam, and their Kingly
and Priestly direction of the rest.

AND seeing nothing is more natural, then that as the Father is to instruct,
direct, and set forward the children that GOD has given him in the way of
virtue and well-doing, so amongst the children the elder should help the
younger: the stronger, and more excellent the weaker, and more mean; none could
be fitter to assist him in the Kingly, and Priestly office, while he lived, and
to succeed him in the same when he died, then the firstborn, Genesis 49. 3.
the beginning of strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of
power. And hereupon we shall find, that from the beginning the first borne
excelled the rest in three things. For first he was Lord over his brethren,
according to that of Isaac, blessing Jacob the younger in steed of the elder,
and thereby preferring him to the dignity of the firstborn: Genesis 27. 29.
Be Lord over thy brethren, and let thy mothers children bow down unto thee.
Secondly, he had a double portion; and thirdly he was holy unto God, which
dignity as it belonged formerly even from the beginning to the firstborn, as
being most worthy and excellent: so was it confirmed Number. 3. 13.
when God striking all the first borne in Egypt, spared the first born of the
Israelites. This praeeminence of the first borne continued, the eldest ever
succeeding in the Kingly and Priestly office, unless for impiety, or cause
best known to God he were rejected by him, till the time that Israel came out
of Egypt, and the Church of God became national. For then according to the
tenor of Jacobs Genesis 49. and 49
blessing, these privileges were divided. Judah had the Scepter, Leui the
Priesthood, and Joseph the double portion, in that two of his Sons Ephraim
and Manasses became Patriarchs and Heads of tribes, and had equal inheritance
in the land of promise with the sons of Jacob. So that in the societies of
faithful and holy ones, from the first man that God made, till Aaron was
sanctified to be a Priest unto God in steed of the first borne, the eldest
always (unless for impiety, or other cause best known to God, he were
rejected by him) had the Kingly, and Priestly direction of the rest. So when
Cain the eldest Son of Adam, and first that was borne of a woman, to whom the
dignity of the first borne did pertain, was for his impiety rejected from that
honor, and Abel who by faith offered a better sacrifice then he, was slain
by him, God raised up Gen: 4. 25.
Seth, who being taught by Adam his father touching the Creation, the fall, the
punishments of sin, and the promised Savior, assisted him while he lived in
guiding the people and Church of God, and succeeded him in the same government
after his death. In like sort Chap: 5.
Enosh assisted and succeeded Seth, and dying left that honor to Kenan: Kenan
to Mahalaleel: Mahalaleel to Iered; Iered suruiuing Enoch his son, whom God
translated, left it to Methusalem, Methusalem to Lamech the father of Noe, in
whose time the children of God, that is, the posterity of Seth, marying with
the daughters of men, that is, such as came of wicked Cain, highly displeased
almighty God, who thereupon appointed Chap. 6: et 7.
him to be a preacher of repentance unto them; whom when they contemned and
despised, he brought in the flood, and destroyed both them, and all the
inhabitants of the world, Noe and his family only excepted. Noe governed the
Church before and after the flood, and left the same office and dignity to Sem
his eldest son, saying, Chap: 9. ver. 26. 27.
Blessed be the God of Sem, and let Canaan be his servant: The Lord persuade
Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Sem. Chap: 10. 11.
Sem begat Arphaxad: Arphaxad, Sale: Sale, Heber: Heber, Phaleg: Phaleg, Rehu:
Rehu, Serug: Serug, Nachor: Nachor, Their: Their, Abraham, and Abraham, Isaac.
All these, only Heber, and Isaac excepted, he suruiued: so that dying, he left
the right of his office and dignity to Isaac, Heber having corrupted his ways.
This Hieronym. in epist. ad Euagrium.
Sem the Jews think to have been Melchizedek that Gen: 14. 18.
met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings, that brought out bread
and wine, to refresh his wearied troops, and blessed him in the name of the
Lord, as being a Priest of the high God. Thus then Sem governed the Church in
his time, and dying, in part left his honor to Isaac, soiourning as a stranger
in Canaan: Isaac to Jacob: Jacob to Judah and his sons; who living in Egypt
in bondage with the rest of their brethren, could not freely exercise the
Kingly and Priestly office, nor perform the things pertaining thereunto. So
that none of these succeeded Sem in the fullness as well of Kingly as Priestly
power.

CHAP. 3.
Of the division of the preeminences of the first borne amongst the sons of
Jacob when they came out of Egypt, and the Church of God became National.

But when it pleased Almighty God, who chose unto himself the posterity of
Israel and sons of Jacob as his peculiar portion and inheritance, above all
the nations of the world, to bring them with a mighty hand, and out stretched
arm out of the land of Egypt and the house of bondage to the land which he
promised to their fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and to make of them a
mighty people; then the former kind of government, which was domestical, not
so well fitting a people as a household, he settled another; and in steed of the
first borne which formerly in each family and kindred was both a King and
Priest, he chose the tribe of Judah to sway the scepter, and to be a lawgiuer
to the rest of of his people: and the tribe of Numb: 3.
Leui to attend his Tabernacle and service: and out of all the families of that
tribe, took Exodus 28.
Aaron and his sons to serve in the Priests office, appointing the rest to
meaner services about the Sanctuary, or to be assistants to the Priests, and
rulers in the government of the people.

CHAP: 4.
Of the separation of Aaron and his sons from the rest of the sons of Leui,
to serve in the Priests office, and of the head or chief of that company.

THE Priests, the sons of Aaron, whom God separated from the rest of their
brethren the sons of Leui, were of two sorts. For there was an high Priest:
and there were others of an inferior condition. Sigonius de Rep. Hebraeor:
lib. 5. c. 2.
Touching the high Priest, four things are to observed. First, his
consecration. Secondly, the things that were required in him that was to be
consecrated to so sacred a function. Thirdly, his employment, and Fourthly, his
attire. The consecration of the high Priest was seven days in performing, in
this sort: 1. He that was to be consecrated, was brought before the Altar. 2.
Then he was washed with water, and clothed with those sacred garments which God
had prescribed; holy oil was poured on his head, sacrifice was offered on the
Altar for his sanctification, and his garments were sprinkled with the blood of
it. The things that were required in him that was to serve in the high Priests
office, were these. He might not be defective nor deformed in body; His wife
must be a virgin, not a widow, not one that had been divorced, nor that had
been infamous, but of good parentage, and of his own people. He might not
uncover his head, rent his garments, nor go in to mourn over any that was
dead, noe though it were his father or mother. His employment was to go daily
into the Sanctuary, to light the Lamps, to burn incense, and every week to
provide the shewbread or bread of proposition: on the feast days to offer
the peoples sacrifices together with the other Priests: and once in the year,
on the day of expiation, to enter into the holiest of all, to cleanse, and
hallow it from the sins of the people, and to make prayer for himself, and
them. The holy vestiments, in which he was to perform this service of God,
are discribed to have been a Breast Plate, an Ephod, a Robe, a broidered
Coat, a Mitre, and a Girdle. The Ephod was of gold, blue silk, purple,
skarlet, and fine twined linen of broidred work: In the shoulders of the
Ephod were two Onyx-stones, and upon them the names of the children of Israel
graven; six names upon the one stone, and six other names upon the other
stone according to their generations. These were stones of remembrance of the
children of Israel before the Lord. Of these Josephus citatus a Sigonio ibid.
Josephus writes, that they showed when God was present with his people, when
he accepted the Sacrifices they offered unto him, and was pleased with them,
and likewise when he was displeased with them and rejected them: in that when
God was pleased with his people and accepted their sacrifices, the stone which
was on the right shoulder shined in such sort, that it might be seen a far
off, whereas otherwise no such shining brightness appeared in it. The
Breast Plate of judgment was of broydered work, like the work of the ^phod:
of gold, blewe silk, purple and skarlet, and fine twined linen. It was set
full of places for stones, even four rows of stones. The stones that were set
in these rows were twelve, according to the number of the tribes of Israel,
and in them the names of the twelve tribes were graven. In this Breast Plate
likewise were put Vrim and Thummim which were upon the heart of the high
Priest, when he went in before the Lord. By these twelve stones that were in
the Breast Plate of the high Priest, God did show unto his people the success
of their battles when they intended to make war. For if he meant to prosper
their enterprise, these stones did so shine, that they were thereby well
assured God would go forth with their armies; and fight their battles for
them, otherwise they were discouraged from atte^pting any thing. The Arias Mo^
tanus in apparatu, and Sigonius de Repub. Heb. l. 5. c. 9.
Vrim and Thummim likewise some of the Jews think to have been two stones,
by which the high Priest understood what things were to come, and revealed the
same unto the people: For if nothing new and strange were to fall out, they
held their color: but if any great and extraordinary mutation were to follow,
the bright shinings of these stones did foreshew it. Rabbi Salom. citatus a
Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 3.
Others suppose that they were the Name of God, Jehovah in letters of gold, by
the shining brightness whereof they understood the answer of God when they
sought unto him, but Aug. quaest. ^17. in Exodus
Augustine is of opinion, that these very words were written in letters of
gold in the middle of the breast plate that did hang before the breast of the
high Priest.

CHAP. 5.
Of the Priests of the second rank or order.

TOuching the Priests of the inferior Rank, they had the same kind of
consecration which the high Priest had: in sacrificing they were like unto him,
and in the service of the Sanctuary, in burning incense, providing the
Shewbread, and preparing, and looking to the lamps and lights: neither was
there any other difference between him and them in the performance of these
things: but that he was chief, and they assistants unto him. The only thing
that was peculiar unto him, was the Exodus 28. 30.
consulting of God by Vrim and Thummim, and the Leuit. 16. 30.
entering into the Holiest to make an Atonement. Their vestiments were the same,
Sigon. de Rep. Heb. l. 5. c. 3. exHier. and Eucherio.
save that the high Priest only had the Breast Plate, and an Ephod of gold:
for the rest did also sometimes wear a linen Ephod. The things required in
them that were to serve in the Priestly office were these. They might not be
Levit. 21. 18.
deformed nor defective in body: they might Levit. 10. 9.
drink no wine nor strong drink, when they were to enter into the Sanctuary:
they Levit. 11. 1.
might not defile themselves by the dead, nor come near unto any that was
dead, except it were their father, or mother, son, or daughter, or sister
unmarried: they Ibid. verse. 5.
might not shave their heads, nor beards, nor cut their flesh: they might Ibid.
verse 7
marry no harlot, nor woman divorced: The Levit 8.
first that were consecrated Priests, were Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar
the sons of Aaron, 1 Chronicles. 24. verse. 2.
Nadab, and Abihu died before their father, and had no children: they both
perished, because they Levit. 10.
offered strange fire upon the Altar, so that Eleazar and Ithamar only
remained, of whom the whole number of Priests that were afterward, did come.
1 Chr. 14. 4.
From Eleazar in David's time were issued sixteen Families, and from Ithamar
eight. These David sorted into twenty four Classes or Courses, and named every
Classis or Course after the name of him who was then chief of each Family: and
for the ordering of them, and setting one before another, they cast lots. The
reason of the sorting of them into these ranks was, for that he would not
have all the Priests to attend every day, but that they should have some
intermission, and times of vacation, one Classis performing the service one
week, and another, another. Though, says Joseph. l. 2 contra Appionem citat.
a Sigon. ubi supra.
Josephus, there be twenty four Classes or Courses of Priests amongst us,
whereof every one has more then five thousand, yet they wait not all at once,
but on certain days appointed and assigned unto them, which being past,
others succeed, who are called into the Temple at Noone, and have the keys
thereof delivered unto them, and the sacred vessels by tale. In this sense it
is said in the book of Chronicles, that 2 Chr. 23. 8.
Iehoiada the Priest dismissed not the Courses, that is, sent not away the
Troops and Companies of Priests, that attended the service of the Temple, when
their time was expired, and according to order they should have departed, and
others succeeded them: for that he meant to make use of them in the deposing of
wicked Athaliah, and the establishing, and settling of the true and lawful King
in the Royal Throne of Judah. In these Courses they were wont to cast lotts
what kind of service every one should do in the week of his attendance, as
for example: Who should sacrifice, and who should burn Incense: whereupon it
is said in the Gospel of Luke, that Luke 1. 5.
in the time of Herod King of Iudaea, there was a certain priest named
Zacharias, of the course of Abiah; Ibid: ver. 8. and 9.
and it came to pass as he executed the Priests office before God, as his
course came in order, according to the custom of the Priests office, that his
lot was to burn incense when he went into the house and Temple of the Lord.
Sigon. de rep. Hebr. l. 5. c. 3.
Over every of these companies of Priests in their courses attending, there
were certain priests set, that were called (...), or Principes Sacerdotum,
that is chief Priests, or rulers of the Priests. Of these the Evangelist S.
Mark speaks when he says, Mark. 14. 53.
They brought Jesus to the High Priest, and the Chief Priests sought false
witness against him: that is, the Heads of the Companies of Priests, who came
to consult with the high priest about the putting of Jesus to death. For while
the policy appointed by almighty God continued, there was but one that
properly was named the high Priest.

CHAP. 6.
Of the Levites.

HAving spoken of Aaron and his sons, whom God chose out of all the families
of the tribe of Leui, it remains that we speak of the employment of the rest
of that tribe, called by the common name of Levites. Sigonius de rep. Hebraeor.
li. 5. c. 4. 5. 6, and 7.
These were sorted by David into four ranks: for some he appointed to be
ministers of the Priests and Temple, who were most specially named Levites:
some Singers: some Porters: and others Scribes and Judges. Touching the Levites
more specially so named, that attended the service of the Sanctuary, their
office was to carry the Tabernacle, and the Arc of the Covenant in the Remoues
of the people, till God fixed the same in one place; and then they were to take
care of it, and the sacred vessels that were in it appointed to be used about
the service of God. In later times also they flayed the Beasts appointed for
the Sacrifices. according to that in the second of Chronicles: 2 Chronicles. 35.
ver. 10. and 11.
The service was prepared, and the Priests stood in their places; also the
Levites in their orders according to the Kings commandment, and they slew the
Passover, and the Priests sprinkled the blood with their hands, and the
Levites flayed them. Of the singers we read in the first of Chronicles, how
they were appointed 1. Chron: 25. 1:
by David to sing prophesies with Harpes, with Viols, and with Cymbals. The 1.
Chron. 2 6.
Porters were appointed to see that no uncircumcised, polluted, or unclean
person should enter into the house of the Lord; and to guard the same that all
things therein might be in safety, as the sacred vessels, the treasure of the
house, and the treasure of the dedicated things. To these were added as
assistants the 1 Chronicles. 9. 2. Ez^a 2. 70.
Nethinims or Gibeonites, who served as Iosuah. 9. 23.
hewers of wood, and drawers of water: The Scribes were such as read, and
interpreted the Law of God in the Temple at Jerusalem, and in the Synagogues
that were in other parts of the land, and are also called Doctors of the Law,
that is, Interpreters of the Law of God.

CHAP. 7.
Of the Sects, and factions in Religion, found amongst the Jews in later times.

ANd here because we have made mention of such Levites as were Scribes, that
is, Doctors and Interpreters of the Law of God, it is not out of place to
speak of the doctrine of the Jews in later times, and the several sects into
which their teachers and guides were divided. Epiphanius shows that there
were Epiphan. contra haeres. lib. 1.
seven principal sects amongst them; the first whereof was that of the
Haeres. 15.
Scribes, who were Interpreters of the Law, but such as delivered many
traditions as from their Elders, that were not contained in the Law, and sought
to bring in a more exact kind of worship of God, then Moses and the Prophets
taught, consisting in many voluntary observations and customs devised by men.

The second, Haeres. 14.
Sadduces, which were of the race of the Samaritanes; these had their name from
one Sadoc a Priest; they denied the resurrection, and believed not that there
is any Angel or Spirit, and consequently overthrew all Religion.

The third sort were Haeres. 16.
Pharisees; these were the strictest of all other, and most esteemed: they
believed the resurrection of the dead, that there are Angels and Spirits, as
the Scribes also did, and that all shall come into judgment to receive
according to the things they do in this body, whether they be good or evil:
they much honored virginity and single life: they paid tithes of the smallest
things they possessed: they washed cups, platters, and all kind of vessels
they used: they fasted twice every week: they brought in the doctrine of
fatal necessity: and differed in their habit from other men.

The fourth sort were the Haeres 17.
Hemerobaptists, who did think that no man could be saved, if he were not
washed every day, that so he might be cleansed from the impuritie of sin;
but, as Epiphanius rightly notes in refutation of the error of these men, it
is not the whole flood Jordan wherein Christ was baptized, nor the sea, nor any
fountain abounding with water, that can wash away the impurity of sin by any
natural force thereof or voluntary use; but repentance, and the use of such
sacred ceremonies, and sacramental elements, as God appoynteth to signify,
express, and communicate unto us the virtue of Christ Jesus, and the
sanctifying grace of the Spirit of God.

Next unto the Hemerobaptists were the Haeres. 19.
Essenes. These withdrew themselves from the society of other men. They
despised marriage, and lived without the company of women, having no children of
their own, they adopted such as voluntarily came unto them, Plinius not. hist.
l. 5. c. 17.
Quos vita fessos (says Pliny) ad mores eorum fortunae fluctus agitat: Ita
per saeculorum millia (incredibile dictu) gens aeterna est, in qua nemo
nascitur; tam faecunda illis aliorum vitae poenitentia est. That is, Such as
wearied with the turmoils of this life, were by the experience of fortunes
uncertainties, forced to like their retired manner of living; so that for many
ages (which is a thing not credible) there has bin a neuer-failing nation, in
which no man is borne. So many does other men's dislike of their own manner of
living send unto them. These were something like the Monks and Religious men,
that are, and have been amongst Christians.

The sixth sort were the Epiphan li: 1. haeres. 18.
Nazaraei, who in all other things were Jews, but held it unlawful to kill
any living thing, or to eat the flesh of any thing wherein the Spirit of life
had been; they condemned the bloody sacrifices prescribed in Moses law, and
therefore could not be induced to think, that Moses was author of those
books that go under his name; yet did they honor Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and other holy men mentioned in them.

The seventh and last sort were the Haeres. 20.
Herodians, who were of the Jews Religion in all other things, but thought
Herod to be the Christ; because the scepter departed from Judah, and the
Lawgiver from between his feet, when Herod who was a stranger obtained the
title and power of a king, and ruled over the people of God.

These were the sects and Heresies, that prevayled in the Church of the Jews
before the coming of Christ, amongst whom the Pharisees and Sadduces were
chief; so that the whole state seemed to be divided into these two factions,
Sigon. de rep. Hebr. lib. 5. cap. 11. ex Iosepho.
the nobles and great ones enclining for the most part to the Sadduces, and the
common people to the Pharisees; whereupon we read in the acts of the
Apostles, that Paul standing before Ananias the high Priest, and the rest of
the chief Priests and Rulers of the people to be judged, knowing that the one
part of them were Sadduces, and the other part Pharisees, cried aloud; Act. 23.
6.
I am a Pharisee, and the son of a Pharisee, I am accused of the hope and
resurrection of the dead: and that upon the hearing of these words, there was a
dissension between the Pharisees and Sadduces, so that the whole multitude was
divided; that there was a great cry; and that the Scribes of the Pharisees part
arose up, and strove, saying, Ibid, ve^*
We find no evil in the man: But if a Spirit or an Angel has spoken unto
him, let us not fight against God.

CHAP. 8.
Of Prophets and Nazarites.

BEsides the Priests and Levites, whom God chose to attend his Service and
Sanctuary, rent and divided in latter times into the manifold factions and
Heresies aboue-mentioned, there were other who meddled not with the Ministry of
holy things, and yet were specially dedicated and sanctified unto God. These
were either such as dedicated their bodies and persons unto God, as the
Nazarites; or such as God raised up extraordinarily to fore-shew future things,
and to reform abuses and errors, as were the Prophets.

The vow of the Nazarits is described in the book of Numbers, where the Lord
God spoke unto Moses, saying, Numb. 6. 2.
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When a man or woman
does separate themselves to vow a vow of a Nazarite, to separate himself unto
the Lord, he shall abstain from wine and strong drink, no razorshall come
upon his head, but he shall let the locks of the hair of hishead to grow,
during the time that he separateth himself unto the Lord: He shall come at no
dead body, he shall not make himself unclean at the death of his father or
mother, brother or sister: for the consecration of the Lord is upon his head.

The Nazarites were of two sorts: for some did separate themselves unto the
Lord but for a time, and others perpetually. Nazarites of the former sort they
were, of who^ James, and the Elders do speak in the Acts, saying unto Paul,
Act. 21. 23.
We have four men which have made a vow: them take, and purify thy self
with them, and contribute with them, that they may shave their heads, and all
shall know that those things whereof they have been informed concerning thee,
are nothing, but that thou thy self also walk and keep the Law. Of the
latter sort the Scripture mentions only two: Sampson and Samuel. Concerning
Sampson we read, that the Angel of God appeared unto the wife of Manoah his
mother, and said unto her; Judges 13. 7.
Behold now thou art barren, and bear not, but thou shall conceive, and
bear a son; and now therefore beware that thou drink no wine nor strong
drink, neither eat any unclean thing. For lo thou shall conceive, and bear
a son, and no razor shall come on his head; For the Child shall be a
Nazarite unto God from his birth, and he shall begin to save Israel out of the
hands of the Philistines. And of Samuel, his mother said before he was borne: 1 Samuel 1. 11.
I will give him to the Lord all the days of his life, and no razor shall come
upon his head. To these Hier. Catal. Script. Eccles. in lacobo.
Hierome adds out of Egesippus, James the just, the brother of our Lord.

Prophets properly are such as foreknow and foretell things that are to come:
but because, as Greg. hom. l. sup. Ezekielem.
Gregory fitly notes, it is as hard to know the things that are past, whereof
there is no report, and the things that are done a far off, or in secret, or
that are but contrived, and resolved on in the purposes of the heart, as to
foresee what shall come to pass hereafter; the knowledge of all these things
pertains to prophetical grace and illumination; and it was no less a
prophetical spirit that directed Moses in writing the story of the Creation,
fall, and propagation of mankind, nor no less a Prophetical illumination that
made Elizeus know what was done in the King of Arams privy chamber, then it
was in Esaias and the rest, that enabled them to foretell and fore-shew the
things that were to come. And therefore the Divines make diverse sorts of
Prophets; some to whom principally things past were revealed, or hidden things
then being: and some to whom things that were after to come to pass, were more
specially manifested or made known: Hugo de S. Vict. Erudit. Theol de Sacr.
fidei lib. 1. part. 1 prolog. c. 17.
Some that were Prophets both in grace and mission, some in grace only: In
grace and mission, as they that were specially sent to foreshew the people of
God what was to come to pass, to tell them of their transgressions, and the
judgments that were to follow: In grace only, as were all such as were not
specially employed to this purpose, and yet had the knowledge of secret things,
as Daniel and some other.

CHAP. 9.
Of Assemblies upon extraordinary occasions.

THVS having spoken sufficiently of the persons that God sanctified to serve
him in the Temple, and to teach, direct, and instruct his people; as also of
such as voluntarily dedicated themselves unto him, or were extraordinarily
raised up by him: Let us see what the government of the Church, and people of
God was under them during the time of the law, until the coming of Christ.

The Scriptures show us, that God appointed for the government of his people,
extraordinary Assemblies; and set judgments: Whereunto the Prophet David
seems to allude, when he says, The Psalm. 1. verse. 5.
wicked shall not rise up in judgment, nor Sinners in the assembly of the
righteous. In assemblies were handled things concerning the state of the whole
commonwealth: In the set Courts, things concerning particular parts of it.
Assemblies were of two sorts: either of the whole people, or of the Elders and
Rulers only. Assemblies of the whole people were gathered together to hear the
commandments of God: to make public prayers unto him, or to perform and do
some extraordinary thing: as to appoint a King, a Judge, or a Prince, to
proclaim or wage war, or the like.

These Assemblies were either of the whole people of Israel, or only of the
whole people of one tribe or city. For the calling of these assemblies God
commanded Numb. 10* 2.
two trumpets of silver to be made and to be in the custody of Moses and his
successors: with this direction, that when they blowed with them both, all the
congregation should assemble unto them: but when they blowed but with one, the
Princes or Heads over the thousands of Israel only should come.

The set Courts and Tribunals were of two sorts, the one in the gates of every
City, called (...), Judgment; the other at Jerusalem, called (...) a
Council: whereunto Christ seems to have alluded, when he said, Math. 5. 22.
Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be guilty of judgment:
but whosoever says, Racha, shall be guilty of a Council: and he that says,
Thou fool, shall be worthy to be punished with Gehenna of fire, or the fiery
Gehenna. Thereby showing us, that one of these offenses and faults, is more
grievous and worthy of greater punishment then the other: for the Council or
Sanedrim did handle weightier causes, and might inflict more grievous
punishments, the^ the set Courts of Justice in the gates of every city. So that
this is it he meant to say. He that is angry with his brother unadvisedly shall
be guilty of judgment, that is, of some lighter punishment; and he that says,
Racha, shall be subject to the council, that is, punished more grievously: but
he that says, Thou fool, shall be punished with all extremity, answering in
proportion to the cruel and merciless burning of of men in the 2. Chron. 33.
verse. 6.
valley of Hinnon, or the fiery Gehenna.

S. Augustine in his first book Cap. 19. Apparet Augustinum iudicialis
rationis Hebraicae notionemnon habuisse. Sigonius de rep. Hebr. l b. 6. cap. 7.
De Sermon Domini in monte, does somewhat otherwise, but very excellently,
express the meaning of Christ's words in this sort. There are says he, degrees
of sin in this kind mentioned by Christ: itaque in primo vnum est, id est,
ira sola: in secundo, duo:: and ira, and vox quae iram significat: in tertio,
tria: and ira, and vox quae iram significat, and in voce ipsa certae
vituperationis expressio. Vide nunc etiam tres reatus, Iudicij, Concilij, and
Gehennae ignis. Nam in Iudicio adhuc defensioni datur locus: ad Concilium
pertinet sententiae prolatio, quando non jam cum reo agitur, vtrum damnandus
sit, sed inter se qui iudicant, conferunt, quo supplicio damnari oporteat, quem
constat esse damnandum. Gehenna vero ignis nec damnationem habet dubia^, sicut
Iudicium, nec damnati poenam sicut Conciliu^: in Gehenna quippe ignis certa est
and da^natio, and poena damnati. That is: In the first degree there is but one
thing, that is, anger only: In the 2d two: anger and a voice expressing anger:
In the third three: anger, the voice that gives signification of it, and in
the voice it self an expressing of some certain reproach. See now also three
guilts, of judgment, of Council, and the Gehenna of fire: For in Judgment
there is yet place left for defense; to Council pertains the pronouncing of
the sentence, when there is no more to be done with the party guilty, nor no
further doubt whether he be to be condemned or not, but they that judge take
counsel and confer amongst themselves, to what punishment they shall
condemn him, of whose condemnation they are already resolved: but in the
Gehenna of fire, there is neither doubtfulnesse of condemnation, as in
Judgment, nor of the punishment of the condemned, as in Council: For there
both the condemnation is certain, and the punishment also.

The Papists allege the words of Christ for proof of venial sins, because
only the last degree of unadvised and causeless anger, is pronounced worthy
to be punished with Gehenna of fire, or hell fire. Whence they think it may be
concluded, that other degrees of causeless anger, though sinful, yet do not
subject men to any punishment in hell, and consequently are by nature venial.
But if we understand that Christ alluded to the different courts of justice
amongst the Jews, their proceedings in the same, and the diversity of
punishments which they inflicted more or less grievous, as Sigonius in his
book Loco supra citato.
Derepub. Hebraeorum, and other excellently learned do; then by Gehenna of
fire, is not simply meant hell fire, which is the general punishment of damned
sinners: but the greatest extremity of punishment in hell, expressed by
comparison with the cruel torments, which they endured that were consumed in
fire in Gehenna, or the valley of Hinnon, far more intolerable then were the
punishments inflicted by the Judgment or Council, to which the lighter and
lesser punishments in hell, due to lesser and lighter sins, may be resembled.
And though we understand the words as Augustine does, yet is not their error
confirmed by this place: for as he fitly notes, whereas to kill is more
grievous then to wrong by contumelious and railing speeches, amongst the
Pharisees only killing was thought to make a man guilty of judgment; But
here anger, the least of all the sins mentioned by Christ, is by him
pronounced guilty of judgment; and whereas amongst them, the question of
murder was brought before the judgment seat of men, here all things are left
to the judgment of God, where the end of the condemned and guilty is hell
fire. And for farther clearing of this point he adds, that if any man shall
say, that murder, as more greiuous, is to be punished more grievously,
according to the rule of justice, then with hell fire, if railing speeches be
punishable with hell fire, he will force us to acknowledge diverse hells, or
kinds and degrees of punishments in hell. So far was Augustine from
imagining any such difference of sins, whereof some should be worthy to be
punished in hell, and some not, to be proved out of this place, as our
adversaries would enforce and urge.

CHAP. 10.
Of the s^t Courts amongst the Jews, their authority and continuance.

TOuching the Tribunals and judgments that were in every city, God said unto
Moses: Thou shall appoint thee Judges and Magistrates in all thy cities; a
Deuteronomy: ^6. ^8.
and again: They shall go up to the Judges that sit in the gates of the city.
But the Sanedrim or great Council of State, consisted of the King, the twelve
Princes of the people, the seaventy Elders, the high Priest, the chief
Priests, and the b Si gone. de rep: Hebr. l. 6: c. 7.
Scribes. And this Council was first in Siloh, afterward at Jerusalem; first
in the tribe of Ephraim, and after in the tribe of Judah: and after the rent of
the ten tribes, none but the elders of Judah, and Benjamin, and the Priests
and Levites entered into this Council.

This Council either the King or high Priest called, according as the matter
to be heard, touched Religion or the commonwealth: But after the return from
Babylon, the high Priest was always chief, and governed with the Elders and
chief Priests: For there were no more kings of Judah after that time, but the
kings of Persia, Egypt, and Syria had the command over Iudaea, and made the
Jews pay tribute unto them. Of this Council almighty God did speak when he
said: D^. 17. 8.
If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment between blood and
blood, between plea and plea, between plague and plague, in matters of
controversy within thy gates, then shall thou arise and go up to the place
which the Lord thy God shall choose; and thou shall come unto the Priests of the
Levites, and unto the Judge that shall be in those days, and ask, and they
shall show thee the sentence of judgment: and thou shall do according unto
that thing which they of that place which the Lord has chosen, show thee: and
thou shall observe to do according to all that they inform thee, according to
the Law which they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they
shall tell thee, shall thou do; thou shall not decline from the thing which
they shall show thee, neither to the right hand, nor to the left: And that man
that will do presumptuously not harkening to the Priest that stands before
the Lord thy God to minister there, or unto the Judge, that man shall die, and
thou shall take away evil from Israel.

This was the highest Court amongst the Jews, and from this there was no
appeal: and this Court some think to have enjoyed so great and ample
privileges, as that it could not err: and thereupon infer, that Popes in
their Consistories cannot err, to whom Christ has made as large promises of
assistance and direction, as ever he did to the high Priests and Rulers in the
time of Moses Law.

That the Priests and Rulers in the time of the Law could not err, they
endeavor to prove, because he was to answer it with hisbloud whosoever
disobeyed the sentence and decree of those Judges; and God required every man
without declining to the right hand or the left, to do that they commanded.

If it be objected that the words of Almighty God, requiring all men so
strictly to obey the sentence and decree of those Rulers, are not to be
understood concerning matters of faith, but Causes Civil and Criminal; and
that therefore this place makes not any proof of the infallibility of their
judgment in matters of faith; it will be answered, that there is no reason to
doubt of their judgment in matters of faith, of whose right judgment in matters
Civil and Criminal we are assured.

Surely, it is true, that if those Judges in the time of the Law, could not
err in matters Civil and Criminal; they were undoubtedly much more freed
from danger of erring in matters of faith: but it is one of the strangest
paradoxes, as I think, that ever yet was heard of, that the Priests and Judges
in the time of the Law were privileged from danger of erring in matters of
fact, and that they were so assisted in their proceedings, as that they could
not be misled by any passions or sinister affections, to pervert judgment
and do wrong. For besides that it is refuted by sundry instances, of sinister
and wicked judgments passed by those Judges, against the Servants and Prophets
of Almighty God, it makes the Ministry and government under the Law,
incomparably more glorious and excellent then the Ministry of the Gospel.
For it is by all confessed, that the Popes and Councels may err in things of
this nature. But that the Priests in the time of the Law did sometimes err in
judgment, condemning them who^ God would not have had condemned, appears
evidently by that we read in the book of the Prophesies of Jeremy, where
Ierem. 26. 8
when Jeremy had made an end of speaking all that the Lord commanded him to
speak, then the Priests and the Prophets, and al^ the people took him, and
said, Thou shall dye the death. Ibid. ver. 10*
And when the Princes of Judah heard of these things, they came up from the
Kings house into the house of the Lord, and sat down in the entry of the new
gate of the Lords House. Then spoke the Priests and the Prophets unto the
Princes and to all the people, saying, This man is worthy to dye, Ver. 16.
but the Princes said, This man is not worthy to dye: for he has spoken unto
us in the Name of the Lord our God. Here we see the Priests erred, and were
resisted by the Princes of the Land: but elsewhere we read, that Ierem. 37. 15.
the Princes also were angry with Jeremy, and smote him, and laid him in
prison in the house of Iehonathan the Scribe, and said unto the King: Ier. 38.
4.
We beseech thee, let this man be put to death, for he weakneth the hands of
the men of war that are in the City, and the hands of all the people. So that
both Priests and Princes, might, and did sometimes err in judgment. But some
man perhaps will say, that howsoever they might err in matters of fact, yet
they could not err in any matter of substance pertaining to the worship and
service of God. This also is clearly demonstrated to be false, and their
errors in things pertaining to the worship and service of God proved by sundry
examples.

In the second book of Kings we read, that 2. Kings 16. 3.
Ahaz king of Judah walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, made his sons
go through the fire, after the abominations of the heathen, and offered burnt
incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree. This
wicked Ahaz Ibid. ver. 10. 11.
sent from Damascus to Vrias the Priest, the pattern of the Altar he saw at
Damascus, and the fashion of it, and all the workmanship thereof; and Vrias
the Priest made an Altar, in all points like to that which King Ahaz sent from
Damascus. So did Vrias the Priest before King Ahaz came from Damascus; Ver. 15.
and the King commanded Vrias to offer sacrifice on the Altar, and Ver. 16.
Vrias did whatsoever the King commanded him. Yea we read of many Priests,
especially about the time of the Maccabees, that forsook the law of God, and
followed the abominations of the heathen Idolaters; and many Judges and Kings
likewise; so that, David, Hezekiah, and Josias only excepted, there was none of
the Kings that did not decline more or less to Idolatry.

Lyra in Deuteron, 17. and alij.
The meaning therefore of Almighty God according to the judgment of the best
Divines was not, that Priests and Judges in the the time of the law should be
obayed in all things without exception, but when they commanded and judged
according to the divine law and verity: and in the same sort must we
understand the words of Christ, when he says, The Scribes and Pharisees sit on
the Chair of Moses; and commands the people to observe and do whatsoever
they prescribe to be observed and done. For otherwise o Math. 23. 2.
Christ should be contrary to himself, who elsewhere wills men to Math. 16.
6.
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, (which S. Matthew interprets to be
their Ibid ver. 12.
doctrine) and teaches men by his own example to co^temn their traditions.
Yea, it is most r Math. 15.
certain, that the Pharisees erred dangerously and damnably in many things,
notwithstanding their sitting on Moses chair: and therefore Christ does
oftentimes sharply reprove them for mis-interpreting the law of God.

Some man perhaps will say: they taught less then is implied in the Law, in
that they condemned murder, adultery, and the like crimes, but not lust,
hatred and such other sinister affections of the heart: and that therefore
Christ did not reprove them as teaching any thing contrary to the Law, but as
teaching less then is contained in it, and coming short of it. This evasion
will not serve: for it appears evidently, that they did not only come short
of that the Law requires; but were also contrary unto it, and that Christ
taxes them for the same. Au^ust. cont. Faust. Manichaeum Lib. ^9. cap. 2^.
Quia non intelligebant, (says Saint Augustine,) homicidium nisi per
interemptionem corporis humani per quam vita priuaretur, aperuit Dominus omnem
iniquum motum ad nocendum fratri in homicidij genere deputari: vnde and
Johannes dicit, Qui odit fratrem suum, homicida est: and quoniam putabant
tantummodo corporalem cumfoemina illicitam commixtionem vocari moechiam,
demonstrauit Magister etiam talem concupiscentiam nihil esse aliud: That is,
they understood no other Kind of murder, but that which is the sundring of
soul and body, and the taking away of life, therefore our Lord showed, that
every unrighteous motion to hurt our brother is to be accounted murder, Whence
also S. John says, He that hates his brother, is a manslayer: and because
they thought the unlawful conjunction of man and woman only to be adultery,
our Master showed, that even the desire is no less. Now I think, that to
say, that is not murder nor adultery which Christ pronounces to be murder
and adultery, is not only to teach less then is in the Law, but to teach
contrary to it.

But to make this point more clear and evident, and that there may be noe
doubt, but that their doctrine was contrary to the Law, the Scripture
reports, nay our Savior Christ tells us in the Scripture (whose report we
may not doubt of) that they taught a man Math. (...). ^3.
to love his friend, and to hate his enemy: whereas by the Law of God we are
bound to love our enemies, to bless them that curse us, to do good to them
that hate us, and to pray for them that hurt us, and persecute us. It is true
indeed, that Aug. d^ Se^: Do^. in monte l^b. 1. c. 41.
S. Augustine not observing this gloss of hating our enemies, to be the lewd
tradition of the Pharisees, but thinking it to be written in the Law, does in
one place say, that that which is said in the Law, Thou shall hate thine enemy,
is not to be taken as the voice of him that commands and prescribes what the
just should do, but permits what the infirmity of the weak requires; and
in another place writing against the Manichees says, Contra Faustum
Manichaeum. li. 19. c. 24.
that that which is in the old Scripture, Hate thine enemy, and that which is
in the Gospel, Love your enemies, do agree together very well. For every
unrighteous man in quantum iniquus est, odio habendus est, and in quantum homo,
diligendus, in that he is unrighteous, is to be hated, and in that he is a man,
is to be loved. This saying he says the Pharisees did not rightly understand,
and that therefore Christ labored to teach and instruct them better, and to
let them know, that they were so to hate their enemies, that they should also
love them.

This which S. Augustine delivers is most Catholic and true: For we are to
hate the vices, and love the persons of our enemies; but neither is there any
mandate in the Scriptures that we should hate our enemies, neither had that
precept of the Pharisees that sense wherein S. Augustine co^ceiueth a man may
lawfully hate his enemies: but as himself confesses, they thought they were
so to hate their enemies, that they were not bound to love the^; against which
erroneous conceit Christ opposes himself, saying, But I say unto you, love
your enemies. Neither does he oppose an Evangelical counsel of greater
perfection then the Law requires, to that imperfect thing the Law prescribes,
as some men have ignorantly fancied; but the true meaning of the Law, to the
false construction of the same made by the Pharisees, as likewise he does in
all other his oppositions to that which had bin said to them of old time.

But let us let this pass, and come to the other errors of the Pharisees
taxed by our Savior Christ in such sort as no man can excuse them, Math. 15. 3.
Why do ye transgress, says he, the commandment of God by your traditions?
for God has commanded; saying, Honor thy Father, and thy Mother; and he that
curses Father or Mother, let him die the death: but ye say, Whosoever shall
say to Father or Mother, By the gift that is offered by me thou may have
profit, though he honor not his Father or Mother, shall be free: Thus have you
made the commandment of God of none effect, by your own tradition. Again,
they taught that it is Math. 23. 18.
nothing if a man swear by the Altar, but that he that swears by the gift or
offering that is on the Altar is a Debtor, that is, bound to do that he
swears. Many other like fond and wicked glosses of the Pharisees we read of,
whereby they made the co^mandeme^ts of God of none effect, whereupon our
Savior says: Math. 5. 20.
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Thus then I hope it
appears to all that are not wilfully blinded, that Christ meant not, when he
said, The Scribes and Pharisees sit on Moses chair, therefore whatsoever they
bid you, that observe and do, that they could speak nothing but truth, and
that whatsoever they said was to be received without any examination; but that
whatsoever things they spoke pertinentia ad Cathedram (as the author of the In
illum locum.
interlineall Gloss interprets the words) and whatsoever things they
delivered as sitting in Moses chair, that is, doing the duty of Teachers, they
should be listened unto, howsoever otherwise they were wicked, and godless men.

They that teach, judge, and rule the people of God, are described to perform
those things sitting, to put them in mind that they must do all things with
settled, composed, and well advised resolution, and not rashly, hastily, and
inconsiderately: whereupon Princes have their thrones, Judges their Tribunalls
and judgment seats, and Teachers their chaires. Hence Moses office of teaching
the people the laws of God and the performance of the same, is metaphorically
named Moses chair; and the succeeding of Moses in this office and duty of
delivering the laws of God to the people, and the performance of the same, is
rightly expressed by the sitting on the chair of Moses: and in this sense the
Scribes and Pharisees are rightly said to have sit on Moses chair, because
they succeeded him in the office and duty of teaching the people the laws of
God, and in the performance of the same duty in some part, though not wholly.
And therefore our Savior Christ requires all men, notwithstanding their
wicked conversation and manifold errors in matters of doctrine, to do
whatsoever they commanded while they sat on Moses chair, that is, performed
the duty belonging to Moses office and place.

It is strange that any man should seek to extend the words of Christ any
farther, as if they meant to clear the Scribes and Pharisees from all
possibility and danger of erring, in that they possessed the room of Moses,
and had the places of Teachers in the Church; when it is Bell. de auth. Council.
l. 2. c. 8.
confessed by the best learned of all sides, that the Priests of the Law had no
privilege of not erring in teaching the people of GOD after Christ appeared,
and began to teach in his own person, whatsoever they had before; and Idem de
Eccl. milit. l. 3. c. ^7
that this was foretold by Jeremy the Prophetwhen he said, Peribit lex a
Sacerdote, verbu^ a Propheta, consilium a Sapiente; The Law shall perish from
the Priest, the word from the Prophet, and counsel from the wise. But such is
the impudency of some Vt refert Bell. de author. council. l. 2, c. 8.
of the friends and lovers of the Church of Rome, that they fear not to defend
and clear the doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees from error, wherewith
Christ so often charge them, and to justify the proceedings of the high
Priest, and the rest of the Priests and Rulers assembled in Council against
Christ himself, affirming, that the sentence pronounced against him was true
and just: for that he was truly guilty of death, in that he had taken upon him
our sins to purge them in himself, and that it was indeed expedient that he
should dye for the people, according to the Ioh. 18. 14.
saying of Caiphas, who in so saying is said to have prophesied, as being the
high Priest that year. But Bellarmine ingenuously acknowledges the ouer-sight
of his friends and companions, and says, that howsoever those words of Caiphas
admit a good sense (though not intended by him) for he meant it was better that
Christ being but one should die, then that the whole people (whose destruction
he thought unavoidable, if Christ were suffered to live) should perish and come
to nothing: Yet there are other words of Caiphas, that in no sense are
justifiable, as when he said, Math. 26. 65
He has blasphemed, what need we any more witnesses? Touching his former
speech, it was the will of God, for the honor of the Priesthood, that he
should utter that he meant ill, in such words as might have a good sense,
though not meant nor intended by him, whereupon he is said to have prophesied:
but the latter words are words of cursed blasphemy, and without horrible
impiety cannot be excused in any sense. Therefore there are others, who
confess that Caiphas and his assistants erred when they condemned Christ, but
that it was but a matter of fact wherein they erred, in mistaking the quality
of Christ's Person, and in being misinformed of him, in which kind of things
Councels may err. This conceit the Cardinal likewise rejects and explodeth
as absurd: for that howsoever it was a question of fact, and concerning the
Person of him that stood to be judged, yet it inwrapped in it a most important
question concerning the Faith, to wit, whether JESUS the Son of Mary were the
true Messiah and Son of God: and therefore Caiphas with his whole Council
resolving that he was not, erred damnably in a matter of Faith, and
pertinaciously, in that they rejected him as a blasphemer of God, whom the
Angels from Heaven testified to be the Son of God: the Star designed to be
that light, that lightneth every one that comes into the World: the Sages
from a far adored, as being that King of the Jews, that is to sit upon the
Throne of David for ever, whose Dominion is from Sea to sea, and from the River
to the end of the Land: whom the seas and winds obeyed, and at whose rebuke
the Devils went out of those they had formerly possessed. But if this defense
of the hellish sentence of wicked Caiphas be too weak, as indeed it is, our
adversaries last refuge is, that this Council erred, because Caiphas and his
fellows proceeded in it tumultuously, and not in due sort: which is a most
silly shift. For how are Councels privileged from erring, which is the thing
these men seek so carefully to defend (though it be with excusing of the Fact
of those men who shall be found inexcusable in the day of Judgment) if Councels
may proceed tumultuously, and so define against the truth.

Thus we see that the great Council of state amongst the Jews, to which all
matters of difficulty were brought, and from which there was no appeal,
might and did err sometimes dangerously, and damnably. This Council continued
in some sort as well after the captivity of Babylon, and the return from the
same, as before: Sigon. de rep. Hebr. l. 7. c. 4
though with this difference, that vvheras before, the king had a principal
interest in the same, afterward the High Priest alvvayes was chief, there
being no more Kings of Judah, but the kings of Persia, Egypt, and Syria,
commanding over the Jews, and making them tributaries unto them. In this sort
were they governed, till some differences growing amongst them for the place of
the high Priest, they were by Antiochus Epiphanes king of Syria deprived both
of their liberty and exercise of religion, and brought into miserable bondage;
the indignity whereof the Assamonaei of the tribe of Leui could not endure, but
by force and policy in a sort freed the state of the Jews again, and took
unto themselves first the name of Princes, and then of Kings. In the book of
Maccabees we read, that Mattathias was constituted Priest, Prince, and Ruler,
and that many came down to him to seek judgment and justice. Judas
Maccabaeus succeeded Mattathias, and joined the dignity of the high Priest to
the princely power. Ionathas succeeded Macchabaeus, of whom we read, 1 Maccab,
9. 30.
Now this day do we choose thee to be unto us a Prince instead of Judas, and a
captain to fight our battles. Simon succeeded Ionathas, and in his time
Demetrius king of Syria and Antiochus his son remitted all tributes; so that
then the Jews recovered their ancient liberty in as ample manner as they had
formerly enjoyed it under their kings. John succeeded Simon, and Aristobulus
John, who put upon himself a Diadem, and assumed the name of a King. After
Aristobulus succeeded Alexander his brother, marrying Solina his wife.
Alexander being dead, Alexandra obtained the kingdom, and after her Hircanus,
whom Aristobulus his brother expulsed. Pompey took this Aristobulus prisoner,
subdued Iudaea, brought it into the form of a province, and appointed
Antipater Ascalonita to be Procurator of it; but not long after, Antigonus the
son of Aristobulus recovered the city of Jerusalem, and invaded the kingdom;
against whom the Romans set up Herod the son of Antipater and gave him the name
of a King.

Thus the direction and government of the Jews rested principally in the
Sanedrim, as well before as after their return from Babylon; and the Sanedrim,
which was the highest Court, and swayed all, consisted for the most part of men
taken out of the house of David, and therefore the Scepter did not depart from
Judah so long as that Court continued, and retained the authority belonging to
it; though there were no king of the posterity of David and tribe of Judah, but
the high Priests first, and then other of the tribe of Leui, assuming to
themselves Priestly, and Princely dignity, had the chiefest place and highest
room in this court of state. But when Herod swaied the Scepter, flue all those
that he found to be of the blood royal of Judah, and took away all power and
authority that the Sanedrim formerly had, then the Scepter departed from Judah,
and the Lawgiver from between his feet; so that then was the time for the
Shiloh to come.

CHAP. 11.
Of the manifestation of God in the flesh, the causes thereof, and the reason
why the second Person in the Trinity rather took flesh, then either of the
other.

GOd therefore in that fullness of time sent his Son in our flesh to sit upon
the throne of David, and to be both a King and Priest over his house for ever;
concerning whom, three things are to be considered. First, his humiliation,
abasing himself to take our nature, and become man. Secondly, the gifts and
graces he bestowed on the nature of man, when he assumed it into the unity of
his Person. Thirdly, the things he did and suffered in it for our good.

In the Incarnation of the Son of God, we consider first, the necessity, that
God should become man; secondly, the fitness and conuenience, that the second
Person rather then any other: Thirdly, the manner, how this strange thing was
wrought and brought to pass. Touching the necessity that God should become
man, there are two opinions in the Roman schools.

For some think, that though Adam had never sinned, yet it had been necessary
for the exaltation of humane nature, that God should have sent his Son to
become man; but others are of opinion, that had it not been for the delivering
of man out of sin and misery, the Son of God had never appeared in our
flesh. Bonauent. in 3 Sent. did: 1. quaest. 2.
Both these opinions, says Bonauentura, are Catholic, and defended by
Catholics: whereof the former seems more consonant to reason, but the later
to the piety of faith, because neither Scripture nor Fathers do ever mention
the Incarnation, but when they speak of the redemption of mankind: so that
seeing nothing is to be believed, but what is proved out of these, it sorteth
better with the nature of right belief, to think the Son of God had never
become the Son of man, if man had not sinned, then to think the contrary.
Aug. de verb. Apostoli. Sermon. 70. tractans illud Lucae, Venit filius hominis
saluum facere quod perie^at: and illud 1. ad Timoth: 1. Venit in hunc mundum
peccatores saluos facere.
Venit filius hominis, says Augustine, saluum facere quod perierat: Si homo
non perijsset, filius hominis non venisset: nulla causa fuit Christo veniendi,
nisi peccatores saluos facere. Toll morbos, toll vuluera; and nulla est
medicinae causa: that is, The Son of man came to save that which was lost; If
man had not perished, the son of man had not come, there was no other cause
of Christ's coming, but the salvation of sinners: Take away diseases, wounds
and hurts, and what need is there of the Physician or Surgeon? Wherefore
resolving with the Scriptures and Fathers, that there was no other cause of the
incarnation of the Son of God, but man's redemption, let us see whether so
great an abasing of the son of God, were necessary for the effecting hereof.

Surely there is no doubt, but that Almighty God, whose wisdom is
incomprehensible, and power infinite, could have effected this work by other
means, but not so well beseeming his truth and justice; whereupon the Divines
do show, that in many respects it was fit and necessary for this purpose, that
God should become man.

Thomas Sum. Theol part. 3. quaest. 1. art. 2.
First, ad fidem firmandam; to settle men in a certain and undoubted
persuasion of the truth of such things as are necessary to be believed: vt homo
fidentius ambularet ad veritatem, says August. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 11. cap. 2.
Augustine, ipsa veritas, Dei filius homine assumpto, constituit and fundauit
fidem: that is, That man might more assuredly, and without danger of erring,
approach unto the presence of sacred truth it self, the son of God, assuming
the nature of man, settled and founded the faith, and showed what things are to
be believed.

Secondly, ad rectam operationem, to direct men's actions; for whereas man, that
might be seen, might not safely be followed, and God, that was to be imitated
and followed could not be seen, it was necessary that God should become man,
that he, whom man was to follow, might show himself unto man, and be seen of
him.

Thirdly, ad ostendendam dignitatem humanae Naturae, to show the dignity and
excellency of humane nature, that no man should any more so much forget
himself, as to defile the same with finfull impurities. Aug. de ver. (...)
Religione c. 16.
Demonstrauit nobis Deus, says Augustine, quam excelsum locum inter creaturas
habeat humana natura, in hoc quod hominibus in vero homine apparuit; that is,
God showed us how high a place the nature of man has amongst his creatures, in
that he appeared unto men in the nature, and true being of a man. Leo Sermon. 1.
in na^u. Dom.
Agnosce (says Leo) O Christian dignitatem tuam, and diuinae consors factus
naturae noli in veterem vilitatem degeneri conuersatione redire: that is, Take
knowledge o Christian man of thine own worth and dignity: and being made
partaker of the divine nature return not to thy former baseness by an
unfitting kind of life and conversation. Lastly, it was necessary the Son of
God should become man, ad liberandum hominem a seruitute peccati, to deliver
man from the slavery and bondage of sin. For the performance whereof, two
things were to be done: For first, the justice of God displeased with sin
committed against him, was to be satisfied: and secondly the breach was to be
made up that was made upon the whole nature of man by the same: neither of
which things could possibly be perforned by man or Angel, or by any creature.
For touching the first, the wrath of God displeased with sin, and the
punishments which in justice he was to inflict upon sinners for the same, were
both infinite: because the offense was infinite, and therefore none but a
person of infinite worth, value, and virtue, was able to endure the one, and
satisfy the other.

If any man shall say, it was possible for a mere man stayed by divine power
and assistance, to feel smart and pain in proportion answering to the
pleasure of sin, which is but finite, and to endure for a time the loss of all
that infinite comfort and solace that is to be found in God, answering to that
aversion from God that is in sin, which is infinite, and so to satisfy his
justice; he considers not, that though such a man might satisfy for his own
sin, yet not for the sins of all other, who are in number infinite, unless
his own person were eminently as good as all theirs, and vertually infinite.
Secondly, that though he might satisfy for his own actual sin, yet he could
not for his original sin, which being the sin of nature, cannot be satisfied
for but by him, in whom the whole nature of man in some principal sort is
found. Thirdly, he considers not, that it is impossible that any sinner
should of himself ever cease from sinning; and that therefore, seeing so long
as sin remains, the guilt of punishment remains, he must be everlastingly
punished, if he suffer the punishment due to his everlasting sin: and
consequently, that he cannot so suffer the punishments due to his actual
sins, as having satisfied the wrath and justice of God to free himself from
the same If it be said, that by grace he may cease from sinning, and so suffer
the punishment due to sin so ceasing, and not eternal; it will be replied,
that God gives not his grace to any till his justice be first satisfied, and a
reconciliation procured: for he gives it to his friends, not to his enemies.

Touching the second thing that was to be done for man's deliverance, which
was the making up of the breach made upon the nature of man, and the freeing
him from the impuritie of inherent sin, that so the punishment due to sin
past being felt and suffered, he might be reconciled to God; it could not be
performed by any mere creature whatsoever. For as all fell in Adam, the root
and beginning of natural being, who received the treasures of righteousness
and holiness for himself, and those that by propagation were to come of him:
so their restoration could not be wrought, but by him that should be the
root, fountain, and beginning of supernatural and spiritual being, in whom
the whole nature of mankind should be found in a more eminent sort then it was
in Adam: as indeed it was in the second Adam, Ioh 1. 16.
of whose fullness we all receive, grace for grace. And this surely was the
reason, why it was no injustice in God to lay upon him the punishments due to
our sins, and why his sufferings do free us from the same. It is no way
just, that one man having no special communion with another, should suffer
punishment for another man's fault; but the whole nature of man being found in
him in a more eminent sort, then either in Adam, or any one of them that came
of him, and he having undertaken to free and deliver it, it was just and right
he should feel the miseries it was subject unto: and that being felt, and
sustained by him in such sort as was sufficient to satisfy divine justice,
they should not be imposed or laid on us.

Hereupon some have said, that Christ was made sin, not by acting or
co^tracting sin (for so to say were horrible blasphemy) but by taking on him
the guilt of all men's sins: which yet is wisely to be understood, lest we run
into error. For whereas the guilt of sin implies two things; a worthiness to
be punished, and a destination unto punishment; the former implies demerite
natural or personal in him that is so worthy to be punished, and this could
not be in Christ: the other, which is obligatio ad poenam, a being subject unto
punishment, may grow from some communion with him or them that are worthy to be
punished. And in this sense some say, Christ took the guilt of our sins, not by
acting or contracting sin, but by communion with sinners, though not in sin,
yet in that nature, which in them is sinful and guilty, as those good men that
are parts of a sinful City, are justly subject to the punishments due to that
City, not in that they have fellowship with it in evil, but in that they are
parts of it being evil: as the son of a traitor is justly subject, to the
grievous punishment of forfeiting the inheritance, that should have descended
upon him from his father, though he no way concurred with him in his treason,
in respect of his nearenesse and communion with him, of whom he is as it were a
part. Whereupon all Divines resolve, that men altogether innocent, yet living as
parts of the societies of wicked men, are justly subject to those temporal
punishments those societies are worthy of: and that the reason why one man
cannot be subject to those spiritual punishments which others deserve, is,
for that in respect of the spirit and inward man, they have no such derivation
from, dependence on, or communion with others, as in respect of the outward man
they have.

Wherefore to conclude this point, we may safely resolve, that no other could
satisfy divine justice, and suffer the punishments due to sin in such sort
as to free us from the same, but Christ the Son of God, in whom our nature by
personal union was found in an excellent sort; and that it was right and just,
that having taken our nature upon him, and undertaken to free and deliver the
same, he should suffer and endure whatsoever punishments it was subject unto.
For the illustration of this point the learned observe, that Cameracensis in
principio in 3. lib. sent.
when God created Adam, he gave him all excellent and precious virtues, as
Truth to instruct him, Justice to direct him, Mercy to preserve him, and Peace
to delight him with all pleasing correspondence; but that when he fell away,
and forgate all the good which God had done for him, these virtues left their
lower dwellings, and speedily returned back to him that gave them, making
report what was fallen out on earth, and earnestly moving the Almighty
concerning this his wretched and forlorn creature; yet in very different sort
and manner. For Justice pleaded for the condemnation of sinful man, and called
for the punishment he had worthily deserved; and Truth required the
performance of that which God had threatened; but Mercy entreated for miserable
man made out of the dust of the earth, seduced by Satan, and beguiled with the
shows of seeming good; and Peace no less carefully sought to pacify the
wrath of the displeased God, and to reconcile the Creature to the Creator. When
God had heard the contrary pleas and desires of these most excellent Orators,
and there was no other means to give them all satisfaction, it was resolved on
in the high Council of the blessed Trinity, that one of those sacred Persons
should become man, that by taking to him the nature of man he might partake in
his miseries, and be subject to his punishments, and by conjoyning his divine
nature and perfection with the same, might fill it with all grace and heavenly
excellency. Thus were the desires of these so contrary Petitioners satisfied:
for man was punished as Gods Justice urged; that was performed which God had
threatened, as Truth required: the offender was pitied, as Mercy entreated; and
God and man reconciled, as Peace desired; and so was fulfilled that of the
Psalmist: Psalm. 85. 10.
Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each
other.

Wherefore now let us proceed, to see which of the Persons of the blessed
Trinity was thought fittest to be sent into the world to perform this work.
Not the Father; for being of none, he could not be sent: Not the holy Ghost;
for though he proceed, yet he is not the first proceeding Person; and
therefore, whereas a double mission was necessary, the one to reconcile, the
other to give gifts to reconciled friends; the first proceeding Person was
fittest for the first mission, and the second for the second. Secondly, who was
fitter to be cast out into the Sea, to stay the tempest, then that Jonas for
whose sake it arose? Almighty God was displeased for the wrong offered to his
Son, in desiring to be like unto God, and to know all things in such sort as
is proper to the only begotten Son of the Father, therefore was he the
fittest to pacify all again. Thirdly, who was fitter to become the Son of
man, then he that was by nature the Son of God? Bernard de aduent. Domini,
Sermon. 1.
Patrem habuit in coelis, Matrem quaesiuit in terris: He had a Father in
heaven, he sought only a mother on earth. Who could be fitter to make us the
Sons of God by adoption and grace, then he that was the Son of God by
nature? who fitter to repair the Image of God decayed in us, then he that was
the brightness of glory, and the engraven form of his Fathers Person? Lastly,
who was fitter to be a Mediator, then the middle Person, who was in a sort a
Mediator in the state of creation, and before the fall?

Whereupon Hugo de Sancto victore brings in Almighty God speaking to the
Sons of men concerning Christ his Son in this sort: Hugo. erudit. Theol. de
Trinit, sum. per visib. agnition. lib. 7. c, 24.
Nolite putare, quod ipse tantum sit Mediator in reconciliatione hominum, quia
per ipsum etiam commendabilis and placita fit aspectui meo conditio omnium
creaturarum: that is, think not that he is a Mediator only in the
reconciliation of men, for by him the condition of all creatures is grateful
unto me, and pleasing in my sight. Magni consilii Angelus, says Hugo, nobis
mittitur, vt, qui conditis datus fuit ad gloriam, idem perditis veniat ad
medelam: that is, the Angel of the great Counsel is sent unto us, that he
who was given unto us, when we were made, to be the crown of our glory, and
Prince of our excellency, might relieve, help, and restore us when we were
lost.

Yet our adversaries take I know not what exceptions against Calvin for
saying, that Christ was a Mediator in the state of creation; but they should
know, that there is a Mediator of reconciliation of parties at variance, and a
Mediator of conjunction of them that are far asunder, and remote one from
another: and that in this later sort, between the Father, that no way
receives any thing from another, and the creatures, that so receive their
being from another, that they are made out of nothing, he may rightly be said
to mediate, that receives being from another, but the same that is in him from
whom he receives it. If any man shall say, that the holy Ghost also in this
sort comes between him, in whom the fullness of being is originally found,
and the creatures that are made of nothing, as well as the Son, and that
therefore in this sense, he also may be said to be a Mediator, it is easily
answered, that the Son only comes between the Father, in whom the
fullness of being is originally found, and the creatures made of nothing, as
he by whom all things were made; the holy Ghost, as he in whom all things do
consist and stand; and that therefore he has not the condition of a Mediator
being not considered as he by whom all things are bestowed upon us, but as that
gift in which all other things are given unto us: so that the Son only is
the Mediator, because by him, from the Father, in the holy Ghost, we receive
all that which we have and enjoy.

Neither needs there any Mediator to conjoyne him to us, and us to him: for
the medium conjoyneth both the extremes, first with it self, and then within
themselves, in that it has something of one of them, and something of another,
in something agreeing with, and in something differing from either of the
extremes: So the Son of God agrees with us, in that he receives the being
and Essence he has from another, in which respect he is distinguished, though
not divided from the Father, but in that the nature he receives from the
Father is not another, but the same which the Father has, he is unlike unto
us, but agrees with the Father. And here we may see the malice and ignorance
of Genebrard. l, 1 de Trinitate Lindanus in 2. Dialogo qui inscribitur
Dubitantius Petrus Canisius praefat. lib. de Sancto Iohanne Baptista. citat. a
Bellar.
them that charge Calvin with heresy, for affirming that Christ is (...), God
of himself, as if he denied the eternal generation of the Son of God, and
were contrary to the decree of the sacred Nicene Council, which defines that
he is Deus de Deo, Lumen de Lumine: for these men should know, that Christ may
be said to be from another in two sorts; either by production of Essence, or
by communication of Essence: the Nicene Council defined that Christ the Son
of God who is (...), that is, consubstantiall with the Father, is
notwithstanding God of God, that is, has his Essence and Deity communicated
unto him by eternal generation from the Father, even the same the Father had
originally in himself. All which Calvin most willingly acknowledges to be
true, and therefore denies not, but that it may be truly said according to
the sacred decree and definition of that worthy Council, that Christ the Son
of God is God of God, and light of light: but to imagine, as Valentinus
Gentilis, and other damnable heretics did, that he is from the Father by
production of Essence, whence it will follow, that he has not the same essence
with the Father, but another different from it, inferior to it, and dependant
on it, is impious and heretical: and in opposition to this impious conceit of
these Heretics, and in the sense intended by them, Calvin rightly denied
Christ to be God of God. For this their conceit was ever detested by all
Catholics, as wicked and blasphemous, yea so far are they from approving
any such impiety, that no axiom is more common in all their Schools, then
that Essentia nec generat, nec generatur, that is, the divine Essence neither
generateth, nor is generated: and surely, howsoever Book 3, Chap. 1.
Kellison in his Survey says the contrary, and opposes his affirmative
against the negative of all the most famous and renowned Schoolmen, yet I am
persuaded he did so rather out of ignorance, then any reason leading him so to
do, and do think it more then improper and hard to say, that the divine
Essence does either generate or is generated.

Thus then Christ is truly said by Calvin to be God of himself, by way of
opposition to that kind of being from another, which is by production of
Essence, and yet is rightly acknowledged by him with the Nicene Fathers to be
from another, to wit, the Father, and to be God of God, in that he receives
the eternal Essence by communication from him.

This Bellarm. de Christo lib. 2. c. 19.
Bellarmine saw, and acknowledged to be true, pronouncing that touching this
point Calvin erred not in judgment, and that his opinion is rather an error in
form of words, and expressing ill that he meant well, then in the thing it
self. That Calvin erred not in the thing it self he delivered, he proves at
large, specially out of the doctrine of Caluins followers: for Beza in axiom. de
trin. and in the 14 axiom, affirms, that the Son is from the Father by
ineffable communication of the whole divine Essence: and Josias Simlerus in his
epistle to the Polonians, defends the opinion of Calvine, and expresses his
own opinion and Calvin's in this sort: Non negamus filium habere essentiam a
patre, sed essentiam genitam negamus: that is, we do not deny the Son to have
received his Essence from the Father, but that his Essence is generated. This
doctrine of Simlerus, why it should not be Catholic, Bellarmine professes,
he cannot see: yet his fellows in all their Pamphlets traduce Calvin's
Autotheisme as an execrable heresy: and muster the Autotheani, as they call
them, amongst the damned Heretics of this time: which is not to be marvailed
at; for the manner of these men is, odiously to object things again and
again, that have been often cleared both by themselves and us, little
regarding whether it be true or false they say, so they may fasten some note
of disgrace upon them whose persons and professions they hate.

One memorable example of hellish impudency in this kind, worthy never to be
forgotten, but to be remembered and recorded to the shame and reproof of the
slaundering Sect of Papists, we have in Matthew Book 1. chapter 4 p. 47.
Kellison his late Survey of the new Religion: who, to prove that the
Protestants contemn the Fathers, affirms that Beza called Athanasius (that
worthy Champion of the Catholic faith) Sathanasius, and judged the Fathers of
the Nicene Council to have been blind Sophisters, ministers of the Beast,
and slaves of Antichrist: whereas Beza esteems of Athanasius as one of the
worthiest Divines that the World for many ages had, in whose lap and bosom our
wearied Mother the Church, in her greatest distresses, forsaken of her own
children, was forced to repose and lay her head in those restless and confused
turmoyles during the time of the Arrian heresy: For proof hereof see
Stapleton in his triplication against Whith^ker. page 210. and 211. And the
Author the treatise of of the grounds of the old religion. part. 1. c. (...).
9. page 102.
and professes, that he thinks the Sun in Heaven never beheld a more
sacred and divine assembly or meeting then that of the Nicene Fathers, since
the Apostles times: yea he pronounces, that there was never any found to
resist against the proceedings and decrees of that Council, but their woeful
and unhappy ends made it appear to all the World, they were fighters against
God: and condemns the Arrians as execrable miscreants, to the pit of hell,
for using those words wherewith this Surveyour charge him. Wherefore let the
Reader beware, how without due examination he give credit to the sinister
reports of these lewd companions, who have sold themselves not only to speak
lies, but to write them, and leave them upon record to all posterity.

But let us see whether Calvin have not erred at least in the form of words,
and ill expressed that he meant well, as Bellarmine charge him. Surely we
shall find, if we take a view of that which Calvin has written, that the
Cardinals reprehension of him in this behalf is most unjust: for Epiphanius a
worthy Bishop, and great Divine, writing against heresies, and therefore
endeavoring to be most exact in his forms of speech, calls the Son of God
Epiphanius contr^ Haeres. haeres. 69.
(...), as well as Calvin does. It is true, says Bellarmine, he does so: but
when he says, Christ is (...), he means only, that he is truly God:
whereas Calvin affirms, that he is so (...), that he is God of himself,
which is false: for neither the Father, nor the Son is God of himself, the
Son being of the Father, and the Father of none, because he receives being
from none: as if it were so strange a thing to say, God is of himself, or as
if it were all one for a thing to be of it self, and to be produced, or to
receive being of, or from it self, Scalig. exerc. 6 sect. 3.
Omne ens (says Scaliger) aut est a se, aut ab alio; that is, every thing that
has being, either is of it self, or of another. Scotus 1. sent. did. 2.
quaest. 2.
Cuius rationi (says Scotus) simpliciter repugnat esse ab alio, illud si
potest esse, potest esse a se; sed rationi primi effectiui repugnat esse ab
alio: ergo potest esse a se, ergo est a se, quia quod non est a se, non potest
esse a se: quia tunc non ens produceret aliquid ad esse, and idem causaret se,
and ita non erit incausabile omnino. That thing, with the nature and condition
whereof it cannot stand, to be of, or from another, if it may be at all, it may
be of it self: but it stands not with the nature and condition of the first
efficient cause, to be of or from another; therefore it may be, nay therefore
it is of it self; because that which is not of it self, cannot afterward be
of it self: For then a thing not being might cause a thing to be, yea the same
might be the cause of it self, and so the highest and first cause of all
things might have a cause giving being unto it, which is impossible. These men
feared not to speak, as Calvin speaks, and yet I think Bellarmine dares
not reprehend them also as he does Calvin; but if he do, I suppose the world
will think they knew how to speak as properly as he.

Thus then we see the Son of God is (...), that is, God of himself, and that
yet he received his essence from the Father but the same that was in the
Father, not another caused, made, or produced by him: and that so he was a
Mediator in the state of creation between God and his Creatures, in that he
was of a middle condition between him that no way was of any other, and those
things that by another were made and produced out of nothing, knitting and
joining them together in an indissoluble band: and that in this respect he was
fittest to become Man, and to be a Mediator of reconciliation, when between
God and his creatures there was not only a great distance as before, but a
great division, difference, and breach also.

CHAP. 12.
Of the manner of the union that is between the Person of the Son of God,
and our nature in Christ, and the similitudes brought to express the same.

WHerefore let us proceed to see how the natures of God and Man were united in
Christ, and what kind of union it was, that made God to become Man, and Man
God. For the clearing hereofthe Alex: de Ales Sum Theolog. part. 3, quaest. 7.
memb. 1. art. 1.
Divines do note, that there is Vnum per vnitate^, and Vnu^ per vnione^, that
is, that sometimes a thing is said to be one by unity or Onenes, and sometimes
by vnio^. Vnum per vnitate^ est illud in quo non est multitudo, quod scilicet
no^ est in multis, nec ex multis; that is, That thing is one by unity, wherein
there are not many things found, which neither consists in many things, nor
of many things: in which sort God only is most properly said to be One, in whom
there is neither diversity of natures, nor multiplicity of parts, nor
composition of perfection and imperfection, being and not being, as in all
creatures. One by union, is that, which either consists in many things, or of
many things: and is either in a sort only, or simply One. In a sort only a
thing consisting in or of many things, is said to be one three ways. First,
when neither the one of the things whereof it consists has denomination from
the other, nor the property of it, as when stones are laid together to make one
heap. 2ly When the one has the property of the other, but no denomination
from it, as is the union between the hand and those sweet spices it holds
in it. Thirdly, when the one has denomination from the other, but no property
of the other, as a man is said to be apparelled from his apparel, but noe
property thereof passes from it unto him, as the savor of the sweet spices
does into the hand. Union simply is of diverse sorts. First when one of the
things united is turned into the other: this falls out so often as there is
a repugnance between the things united, and one is predominant, and
prevailing, as when a drop of water is poured into a whole vessel of wine.
Secondly, when both the things united are changed in nature and essence; and
that comes to pass so often as the the things united have a repugnance
between themselves, and yet no prevailing of one over the other: In this sort
the elements are united to make mixed or compound bodies. Thirdly, when there is
no transmutation of the things united, but the constitution of a third nature
out of them, because they have no repugnance, but mutual dependence. Of this
sort is the union of the soul and body. Fourthly when there is neither
transmutation of the natures united, nor constitution of a third out of them,
but only the founding, settling, and staying of the one of the things united in
the other, and the drawing of it into the unity of the personal being or
subsistence of the other: this comes to pass, when there is neither
repugnance nor mutual dependence of one of the things united upon the other,
but a dependence of another kind; so the branch of a tree being put upon the
stock of another tree, is drawn into the unity of the subsistence of that
tree into which it is put; and whereas if it had been set in the ground, it
would have grown as a separate tree in it self, now it grows ^n the tree
into which it is grafted, and pertayneth to the unity of it. Here is neither
mixture of the natures of these trees, nor constitution of a third out of them,
but only the drawing of one of them into the unity of the subsistence of the
other: so that here is not Compositio huius ex his, but Huius ad hoc, that is,
not a composition Dutand. in 3. Sentent. did. 6. quaest. 3.
of a third thing out of the things united, but an adjoining of one of the
things united to the other. And this kind of union does of all other most
perfectly resemble the personal union of the natures of God and man in Christ;
wherein the nature of man, that would have been a person in it self, if it
had been left to it self, is drawn into the unity of the divine person, and
subsisteth in it, being prevented from subsisting in it self by this personal
union and assumption.

This that we may the better conceive, we must consider what the difference is
between nature and person, and what makes an individual nature to be a
person. Some think that nature and person differ, as that Quod est, and Quo
est, that is, as the thing that is, and that whereby it is. Other, that the
condition of personal being, adds to an individual nature a negation of
dependence or being sustained by another: but to leave all uncertainty of
opinions, to be this or that, is individual; to be this or that in and for
it self, is personal being; to be this or that in and for another, is to
pertain to the person or subsistence of another: so that every thing that is
in or for it self, is a subsistence or thing subsisting, and every such
rational individual nature is a person. Amongst those created things which
naturally are apt to make a subsistence, or to subsist in and for themselves,
there is very great difference: for some naturally may become parts of another
more entire thing of the same kind, as we see in all those things wherein
every part has the same nature and name that the whole has, as every drop
of water is water, and, being left to it self, is a subsistence in it self,
and has that being, quality, and nature that is in it, in and for it self;
but being joined to a greater quantity of water, it has now no being, quality
or operation, but in and for that greater quantity of water into which it is
powered. Other things there be, that cannot naturally or by the working of
natural causes, put themselves into the unity of any other thing, but by the
help of some foreign cause, they may be made to pertain to the unity of
another thing different in nature and kind: So the branch of a tree of one
kind, which put into the ground would be an entire distinct tree in it self,
growing, moving, and bearing fruit in and for it self, may by the hand of man
be put into the unity of the subsistence of a tree of another kind and sort,
and so grow, move, and bear fruit, not distinctly in and for it self, but
jointly in and for that tree into which it is implanted. A third sort of things
there are, which being left to themselves become subsistences; and cannot by
force of natural causes, nor the help of any foreign thing, ever become
parts of any other created thing, or pertain to the unity of the subsistence
of any such thing: such is the nature of all living things; and such is the
nature of man, which cannot be brought by force of any cause to pertain to the
unity of any created subsistence; because it cannot have such dependence on any
created thing as is required to make it pertain to the subsistence thereof;
yet by divine and supernatural working, it may be drawn into the unity of
the subsistence of any of the Persons of the blessed Trinity, wherein the
fullness of all being, and the perfection of all created things is in a more
eminent sort then in themselves. For though all created things have their own
being, yet seeing God is nearer to them then they are to themselves, and they
are in a better sort in him then in themselves, there is no question, but that
they may be prevented, and stayed, from being in and for themselves, and caused
to be in and for one of the divine Persons of the blessed Trinity. So that as
one drop of water, that formerly subsisted in it self, powered into a vessel
containing a greater quantity of water, by continuitie becomes one in
subsistence with that greater quantity of water: and as a branch of a tree,
which being set in the ground, and left to itself, would be an entire and
independent tree, becomes one in subsistence with that tree into which it is
graffed; they both lose their own bounds, within which contained, they were
distinctly severed from other things, and the relation of being total things;
so the individual nature of man assumed into the unity of one of the Persons
of the blessed Trinity, loses that kind of being, that naturally left to it
self, it would have had, which is, to be in and for it self, and not to
depend of any other, and gets a new relation of dependence and being in
another. And as it is continuitie that makes the former things one with them
to which they are joined: so here a kind of spiritual contact between the
Divine Person, and the nature of man, makes GOD to be Man. For as situation
and position is in things corporal, so is order and dependence in things
spiritual.

There are many similitudes brought by Divines, to express this union of the
Natures of God, and Man, in the same Christ, as of the soul and body; of a
flaming and fiery sword; of one man having two accidental forms: and lastly,
of a tree, and a branch or bough that is graffed into it. The similitude of
the soul and body making but one man, is very apt, and used by the Athanasius
in Symbolo.
Ancient, yet is it defective and imperfect: first, for that the soul and body
being imperfect natures, concur to make one full and perfect nature of a man:
secondly, for that the one of them is not drawn into the unity of the
subsistence of the other: but both depend of a third subsistence: which is,
that of the whole: whereas in Christ, both natures are perfect, so that they
cannot concur to make a third nature or subsistence; but the Eternal Word
subsisting perfectly in it self, draws unto it, and personally sustaineth in
it, the nature of man, which has no subsistence of it own, but that of the
Son of God communicated unto it. Touching the similitude Basil. in orat. Sanct.
nativit. and Damas. l. 3 de orthod. fid. c. 11.
of a fiery and flaming sword, it most lively expresses the union of the two
Natures in Christ, in that the substances of fire, and of the sword, are so
nearely co^joyned, that the operations of the^ for the most part concur, and
there is in a sort, a communication of properties from the one of them to the
other. For a fiery sword in cutting and dividing, wastes and burns; and in
wasting and burning, cutteth and divides; and we may rightly say of this whole
thing wherein the nature of the fire, and the nature of the Steel, or Iron
(whereof the sword is made) do concur and meet, that it is fire, and that
it is steel, or Iron: that this fiery thing is a sharp piercing sword, and
that this sharp piercing sword is a fiery and devouring thing. But this
similitude is defective, because the nature of Iron is not drawn into the
unity of the subsistence of fire, nor the fire of Iron, so that we cannot say,
this fire is steel or Iron, or this steel or Iron is fire. The third
similitude of one man having two qualities, or accidental forms, (as the
skill of Physic and Law) has many things in it most aptly expressing the
personal union of the two Natures of God and Man in Christ. For first, in such
a man there is but one person: and yet there are two natures concurring and
meeting in the same: the qualities are different, and the things had, not the
same: But he that has and possesses them, is the same. Secondly, the person
being but one, is denominated from either, or both of these different forms,
qualities, or accidental natures, and does the works of them both: and there
is a communication of properties consequent upon the concurring of two such
forms in one man. For we may rightly say of such a one: This Physician is a
Lawyer; and, this Lawyer is a Physician. This Lawyer is happy in curing
diseases: and, this Physician is careful in following his Clients causes.
Scotus in 3. sent. d. 1. q. 1.
Scotus especially approves the similitude of the subject, and accident; first
taking away that which is of imperfection in the subject, as that it is
potentiall in respect of the accident to be informed of it, and in a sort
perfected by it: Secondly, that which is of imperfection in the accident, as
that it must be inherent: for otherwise the Durand. in 3. sent. d. 6. q. 4.
nature of man is joined to the Person of the Son of God per modum accidentis,
for that advenit enti in actu completo, that is, it comes to a thing already
complete and perfect in it self. In which sort, one thing may be added and
come to another, either so, as not to pertain to the same subsistence, as the
garments that one puts on; or so, as to pertain to the same subsistence,
but by inherence; or thirdly, so, as to pertain to the same subsistence,
without the inherence of the one in the other, by a kind of inexistence, as the
branch is in the tree into which it is graffed: which is the Alex. de Ales.
Sum. Theolog. part 3. quaest. 7. Memb. 1. art. 1.
fourth similitude, and of all other most perfect. For there are but two things
wherein it fails and comes too short: whereof the first is, for that the
branch has first a separate subsistence in it self, and after loses it, and
then is drawn into the unity of the subsistence of that tree into which it is
implanted: the second, for that it has no root of it own, and so wants
one part pertaining to the integrity of the nature of each tree. But if a
branch of one tree should by divine power be created and made in the stock of
another, this comparison would fail but only in one circumstance, and that
not very important; seeing, though the humane nature want noe part pertaining
to the integrity and perfection of it, (as the implanted branch does of that
pertains to the integrity of the nature of a tree, in that it has no root
of it own) yet the humane nature in Christ, has no subsistence of it own,
but that of the Son of God communicated unto it; and therefore in that
respect it is, in some sort, like to the branch that has noe root of it own,
but that of the tree, into which it is implanted, communicated unto it. This
comparison is used by Alexander of Hales, and diverse other of the Schoolmen,
and, in my opinion, is the aptest and fullest of all other. For as between the
tree and the branch there is a composition, not Huius ex his, but huius ad hoc,
that is, not making a tree of a compound or middle nature, and quality, but
causing the branch, though retaining it own nature, and bearing it own
fruit, to pertain to the unity of the tree into which it is implanted, and to
bear fruit in and for it, and not for it self: so the Person of Christ is
said to be compounded of the nature of God and Man, not as if there were in
him a mixed nature arising out of these, but as having the one of these added
unto the other in the unity of the same person. And as this tree is one, and
yet has two different natures in it, and bears two kinds of fruit: so
Christ is one, and yet has two different natures, and in them performs the
distinct actions pertaining to either of them. Lastly as a man may truly say,
after such implanting, this Vine is an Olive tree, and this Olive tree is a
Vine; and consequently, this Vine bears Olives, and this Olive tree bears
Grapes: so a man may say, this Son of Mary is the Son of God: and on the
other side, this Son of God, and first borne of every creature, is the Son
of Mary, borne in time: the Son of God, and Lord of life was crucified, and
the Son of Mary laid the foundations of the earth, and stretched out the
Heavens like a curtain.

CHAP. 13.
Of the Communication of the properties of either nature in Christ, consequent
upon the union of them in his Person, and the two first kinds thereof.

Having spoken of the assuming of our nature by the Son of God into the unity
of his divine Person, it remains, that we speak of the consequents of this
union, and the gifts and graces bestowed upon the nature of Man when it was
assumed. The first and principal consequent of the personal union of the
natures of God and Man in Christ, is, the Communication of their properties: of
which there are three kinds or degrees. The first is, when the properties of
either nature considered singly and apart, as the properties of this or that
nature, are attributed to the person from whichsoeuer of the natures it be
denominated. The second is, when the different actions of two natures in Christ
concur in the same works and things done. The third, when the divine
attributes are communicated unto the humane nature, and bestowed upon it.
Usually in the Schools, only the first degree or kind of communication, is
named the communication of properties. Which that we may the better
understand, we must observe, that there are abstractiue and concretiue words:
the former whereof do precisely note the form or nature of each thing, the
latter imply also the person that has the same nature or form; as, Humanitas
and Homo, Sanctitas, and Sanctus. Manhood and Man: Holiness and Holy. 2ly We
must observe that abstractiue words, noting precisely the distinct natures,
cannot be affirmed one of the other, nor the properties of one nature
attributed to the other abstractiuely expressed. For neither can we truly say,
that Deity is Humanity, or Humanity, Deity; nor that the Deity suffered, or the
Humanity created the world; but we may truly say God is Man, and Man is God:
God died upon the Cross, and Mary's babe made the world; Because the person
which these concretiue words imply, is one: and all actions, passions, and
qualities, agree really to the Person, though in, and in respect sometimes of
one nature, and sometimes of another. When we say, God is Man, and Man is God,
we note the conjunction that is between the natures meeting in one person: and
therefore this mutual and conuersiue predication cannot properly be named
communication of properties; but the communication of properties is, when the
properties of one nature are attributed to the Person, whether denominated from
the other, as some restrain it, or from the same also, as others enlarge it.
This communication of properties is of diverse sorts: first when the properties
of the divine nature are attributed to the whole Person of Christ subsisting in
two natures, but denominated from the divine nature, as when it is said: John
5. 19.
Those things which the Father does, the Son does also. Secondly, when the
properties of the humane nature are attributed to the person denominated from
the divine nature, as when it is said, 1 Cor: 2. 8.
They crucified the Lord of glory. Acts. 3. 15.
They killed the Lord of life. Thirdly, when the properties of the divine
nature are attributed to the person denominated from the nature of man, as when
it is said: John 3. 13.
No man ascends into Heaven, but the Son of man that came down from Heaven,
even that Son of man that is in Heaven. 4ly, When those things that agree to
both natures are attributed to the person denominated from one of them, as when
the Apostle says: 1 Timothy: 2. 5.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, which is the man
Christ Jesus. Fifthly, when the properties of one nature are attributed to the
person, neither denominated precisely from the one nature, nor from the other,
but noted by a word indifferently expressing both; as when we say, Christ was
borne of Mary. If any man list to strive about words not admitting any
communication of properties, but when the properties of one nature, are
attributed to the person denominated from the other, as when we say, the Son
of God died on the Cross, the Son of Man made the world: besides that he is
contrary to the ordinary opinion, he seems not to consider, that it is a
person consisting in two natures that is noted, by what appellation soever we
express the same; and that therefore the attributing of the properties of any
one of the natures unto it, may rightly be named a communication of properties,
as being the attributing of the properties of this or that nature to a person
subsisting in both, though denominated from one. For the better understanding
of that has bin said touching this first kind of communication of properties,
and the diverse sorts thereof, there are certain observations necessary, which
I will here add. The first is, that the communication of properties wherein
the properties of the one nature, are affirmed of the person denominated of the
other, is real, and not verbal only. The second, that the properties of the
humane nature are not really communicated to the divine nature. The third is,
that the properties of the divine nature, are in a sort really communicated to
the humane nature, whereof we shall see more in the third kind of
communication of properties. The fourth observation is, that in the sacred and
blessed Trinity, there is Alius and Alius but not Aliud and Aliud, diversity of
persons, but not of being and nature: but that in Christ there is aliud and
aliud, and not alius and alius, that is, diversity of natures, but so that he
that has them is the same: whence it comes that the properties of either
nature may be affirmed of the person, from which soever of them it be
denominated: yet so that more fully to express our meaning, it is necessary
sometimes to add for distinction sake that they are verified (...) secundum
aliud; that is, according unto the other nature, and not according unto that
whence the person is denominated. This explication, or limitatio^ is the^
specially to be added, when such properties of one nature, are attributed to
the person denominated from the other, as seem to exclude the properties of
the other: so when we say, Christ the Son of God, is a creature, we must add,
that we neither scandalize them that hear us, nor give any occasion of
error, that he is a creature in that he is man. Now it follows that we
speak of the second kind or degree of communication of properties, which is
in that the actions of Christ are (...), Deiuiriles, Divinely-humane, and
Humanely-diuine, and each Nature so works it own work, according to the
natural property thereof, that it has a kind of communion with the other.
But lest we fall into error touching this point, we must observe, that the
actions of Christ may be said to be Theandricall, that is, Diuinely-humane,
three ways. First so, as if there were one action of both Natures, and so we
must not understand the actions of Christ to be Diuinely-humane, for this is to
confound the Natures; whereas we must undoubtedly believe, that Epist.
Agathonis recitata and approbata in 6. Synodo. act. 4.
Omnia in Christo sunt duplicia, naturae, proprietates, voluntates, and
operationes, sola excepta subsistentia, quae est una: that is, that all things
in Christ are twofold, or double, as his Natures, properties, wills, and
actions: his subsistence only or Person excepted, which is but one. Secondly,
the actions of Christ may be said to be Theandricall, that is, Diuinely-humane,
for that both the actions of Deity, and Humanity, though distinct, yet
concur in one work: to which purpose Sophronius in that notable Epistle of
his, which we read in the ^6t general Council, does distinguish g Action 11.
3 kinds of the works of Christ, making the first merely divine, as to create
all things: the second merely humane, as to eat, drink, and sleep: the third,
partly divine, and partly humane, as to walk upon the waters: in which work,
vvalking was so humane, that the giving of firmnes and soliditie to the
waters to bear the weight of his Body, was an action of Deity. Thirdly,
the actions of Christ may be said to be Theandrical, that is, Diuinely-humane,
in respect of the Person that produces and brings the^ forth, which is
(...), God-man. In either of these two latter senses, the actions of Christ may
rightly be understood to be Theandricall: and that of Leo is most true
concerning Christ. Leo ep. 10. c. 4.
In Christo utraque forma operatur cum alterius co^munione quod propriu^ est:
that is, in Christ both natures do work that which is proper unto them, with a
kind of communion the one has with the other: for this saying is true, first
in respect of the Person, and the communion which either nature has with other
therein. Secondly, in respect of the work and effect, whereunto by their
several proper actions they co^curre, though in different sort, as in healing
of the sick, not only the force of Deity appeared, and showed it self, but the
humane nature also did co^curre, in respect of the body, in that he touched
those that were to be healed, laid his hands upon the^, and spoke unto the^: in
respect of the soul, in that he desired, applauded, and rejoiced in that, which
by divine power he brought to pass: thirdly, in that the actions of humane
nature in Christ have in them a greater perfection then can be found in the
actions of any mere man, from the assistance of the Deity, that dwells
bodily in him.

CHAP. 14.
Of the third kind of communication of properties, and the first degree thereof.

NOw let us come to the third kind of co^municatio^ of properties, which is
that whereby divine and precious things are really bestowed on the nature of
man. The things which are thus communicated and bestowed, are of 2 sorts. The
first finite, and created: as qualities or habites, formally, habitually, and
subjectiuely inherent in the humane nature: the 2^, the essential attributes
of the divinity it self, communicated to the humane nature, not formally by
physical effusion, or essential confusion, but by dispensatio^ of personal
vnio^. Touching the things of the first sort, there is no question but that
they were bestovved upon the nature of man, in all perfection, when it was
united to the Person of the Son of God: so that in it was found the fullness
both of grace and virtue, according to that of S. John, Ioh. 1. 14.
The word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us. and we saw the glory of it, as
the glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth. Thom. Sum.
Thcol. part. 3. q. 7. art. 9.
The fulness of grace (as the Schoolmen excellently note) is of two sorts;
first in respect of grace it self: and secondly, in respect of him that has
it: The fullness of grace in respect of grace it self, is then, when one
attaineth to the highest and uttermost of grace, both quoad essentiam, and
virtutem, intensiue, and extensiue: in the Essence and virtue of it,
intensiuely, and extensiuely, that is, when he has it as far forth as it
may be had, and unto all effects and purposes whereunto grace does or can
extend it self; as he is said, to have life perfectly, or the fullness of
life, that has it not only in the essence, but according to all the
operations and acts of life, sensible, rational, intellectual, spiritual,
and natural; in which sort, man only has the perfection and fullness of life
in him, and no other thing of inferior condition. This kind of fullness of
grace is proper to Christ only, Ioh. 1. 16.
Of whose fullness we all receive. The fullness of grace in respect of the
subject or him that has it, is then when one has grace fully and perfectly,
according to his estate and condition, both intensiuely to the uttermost bound
that God has prefixed to them of such a condition; and extensiuely in the
virtue of it, in that it extends to the doing and performing of all those
things that may any way pertain to the condition, office, or estate of such as
are of his place and Rank. In this sort Stephen is said to Acts. 7. 55.
have been full of the holy Ghost, who is the fountain of grace; and Marie
the blessed Virgin, the mother of our Lord, is by the Angel, pronounced:
Luke, 1. 28.
Blessed amongst women, and full of grace: for that she had grace in respect
of the Essence of it, intensiuely, in as perfect sort as any mortal creature
might have it, and in respect of the virtue of it, extending to all things
that might any way pertain to her that was chosen to be the sacred vessel of
the incarnation of the Son of God: So that there was never any but Christ,
whose graces were no way stinted, and to whom the spirit was not given in
measure, that was absolutely full of grace; which fullness of grace in Christ,
the Divines do declare and clear unto us, wherein it consisted, by
distinguishing a double grace in Christ, the one of union, the other of
unction, or habitual; and do teach, that the grace of union, in respect of
the thing given, which is the personal subsistence of the Son of God,
bestowed on the nature of man formed in Mary's womb (whence that which was
borne of her, was the Son of God) is infinite, howsoever the relation of
dependence found in the humane nature, whereby it is united to the person of
the Son of God, is a finite, and created thing. Likewise touching the grace
of unction, they teach, that it is in a sort infinite also: for that howsoever
it be but a finite, and created thing, yet in the nature of grace it has no
limitation, no bounds, no stint, but includes in it self whatsoever any way
pertayneth to grace, or comes within the compass of it. The reason of this
illimited donation of grace, thus without all stint bestowed on the nature of
man in Christ, was, for that it was given unto it, as to the universal cause,
whence it was to be derived unto others. From the fullness of grace in Christ,
let us proceed to speak of the perfection of his virtues also. Alex. de Ales.
part. 3. qu: 61. memb. 2. art. 4.
Virtue differs from grace, as the beam of light from light: for as light
indifferently scatters it self into the whole air, and all those things upon
which it may come, but the beam is the same light as it is directed, specially
to some one place or thing: so grace replenisheth, fills, and perfecteth the
whole soul, and spirit of man; but virtue more specially this or that faculty
or power of the soul, to this or that purpose or effect. In respect of both
these the soul of Christ was perfect, being full of virtue as well as grace;
whereupon the Prophet Esaias says: Esaias, 15. 1.
The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon the flower of Ishai, the Spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and strength, the Spirit of
knowledge and of the fear of the Lord. Wisdom is in respect of things
divine: understanding of the first principles; science of conclusions; counsel
of things to be done: fear makes men decline from that which is ill, and
strength confirms them to overcome the difficulties wherewith weldoing is
beset. So that seeing the spirit, that is the giver of all these virtues
(within the compass whereof all virtue is confined) is promised to rest on our
Savior Christ, we may undoubtedly resolve, that there is no virtue pertaining
to man ( Paludanus in 3 Sentent. did. 14. qu. 2.
neither including in it imperfection, as Faith, and Hope, nor presupposing
imperfection in him that has it, as Repentance, which presupposes the
penitent to be a sinner) but it was found in Christ's humane nature, and
reasonable soul, and that even from the very moment of his incarnation. How is
it then, will some man say, that the Scripture pronounces, that he Luke 2. 25.
increased in the perfections of the mind, to wit, both in grace and wisdom,
as he grew in stature of body. And here that question is usually proposed and
handled, whether Christ did truly and indeed profit, and grow in knowledge,
as not knowing all things at the first, as he grew in stature of body from
weak beginnings; or only in the farther manifestation of that knowledge he
had in like degree of perfection from the beginning. For the clearing whereof,
we must note, that there were in Christ two kinds of knowledge: the one
divine, and increate: the other humane and created. Touching the first, there
is no doubt but that being the eternal Wisdom of the Father, by whom all
things were made, he knew eternally all things that afterward should come to
pass; and therefore the Arrians impiously abused those places of Scripture
which they brought to prove, that Christ grew in knowledge, and learned
something in process of time, which he knew not before; in that they
understood them of his divine knowledge which he had in that he was God: and
thereby went about to prove, that he was not truly and properly God, nor
consubstantiall with the Father, but so only, and in such a sense, as that
wherein the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 8. 5.
There are many Lords, and many Gods. The later kind of knowledge found in
Christ, which is humane, the Schoolmen divide into two kinds; the one, in
verbo, the other in genere proprio, that is, the one in the eternal Word,
wherein he sees all things; the other, that whereby he sees things in
themselves: for he has an immediate and clear vision of the Godhead, and in
it of all things, and he has also the knowledge and sight of things in
themselves. Durand. in 3. Sentent. did. 14. qu. 2.
By vertve of the first of these two kinds of humane knowledge, the soul of
Christ beholding the divine Essence, in it sees all things in respect of that
they are, and takes a perfect view of the Essence and nature of every thing
that is, may be, or is possible to be, as in that sampler, according to which
God works all things: but the actual being of things it cannot know by the
vision and sight of Gods Essence, but merely by his voluntary revelation, and
manifestation of the same; seeing though the Essence of God be naturally a
sampler of all things that are or may be, according to which all things are
wrought, yet he produces things voluntarily, and according to the good
pleasure of his will, and not naturally and necessarily: so that that kind of
knowledge, which consists in the vision of God, is more perfect then any
other, and only makes men happy, because it is in respect of the best and
most noble object. Yet Ibid. quaest: 3.
the other kind of knowledge, that makes us take a view of things in
themselves, is more perfect, in that it makes known unto us the actual being
of things, and particular facts, which that happy kind of knowledge of things
seen in the glass of the divine Essence does not.

These things thus distinguished, it is easy to conceive how, and in what sort
Christ grew and increased in grace and wisdom, and how he was full of the
same from the moment of his incarnation, so that nothing could be afterward
added unto him. For, concerning his divine knowledge, the perfection of it was
such, and so infinite from all eternity, that it is impious once to think
that he grew and increased in the same.

Vide apud Scotum li. 3. d. 14. q^. opinionem Henrici quol. 5. q. 14. etc.
Touching the humane knowledge he had of things seen in the eternal word, and
in the clear glass of the divine Essence, it is most probably thought by some
of excellent learning, that though the soul of Crist had at the first, and
brought with it into the world a potentiall hability and aptness to see all
things in God, so soon as it should convert it self to a distinct view of
them: that yet it did not actually see all things in the Essence of God at once
from the beginning, but afterward in process of time: and for the Ibid.
quaest. 4.
other kind of knowledge and apprehension of things, which he had as beholding
them in themselves, they think it was perfect in habit from the first moment
of his incarnation, but not in actual apprehension, wherein he did truly
increase and and grow: as also in experimental knowledge. For the humane
knowledge that was in Christ, was by conversion to those Phantasmata and
sensible representations of things, that from without are by the senses
presented unto the Soul: and was discursiue, though not proceeding from things
known, to find out things altogether unknown, yet from things actually known,
to such as he knew but habitually only, and not actually before. That the
humane knowledge Christ had of things in themselves, was discursiue, and by
conversion to the sensible representations of them from without, it is evident,
in that all perfectio^s are received according to the condition and capacity
of the receiver. Now the condition of the Soul of man in the state of this
life is, to know nothing but by conversion to the sensible appearances of the
same, and that not only in respect of things natural, but mystical also and
supernatural; Dionys. eitat. ab eodem, Dutand. (...). q. 3.
Quia impossible est (says Dionysius Areopagita) nobis aliter superlucere
radium diuinum, nisi sacroru^ velaminu^ varietate circumuelatu^: that is,
because it is impossible the beam of divine light should shine on us, unless
it be veiled on every side with the variety of sacred vailes.

Thus then we see, how it may be truly said, that Christ grew in wisdom and
knowledge, as he did in stature of body, non quoad habitus essentiam and
extensionem, sed quoad actualem cognitionem and experimentum: that is, not in
respect of the essence or extension of the habit, but of actual knowledge and
experience. That which Thomas and others have, that Christ knew all things at
first by an infused knowledge, and afterward attained another kind of
knowledge of the same things, which they named acquisite, is not so fit: for
two forms or qualities of one kind cannot be in the same subject. Now as the
sight which is in men naturally, and that which once lost is restored again by
miracle, is of the same nature, and condition: so is that knowledge of things
that is by infusion, and that which is acquisite: howsoever these men seem to
make them of two kinds. Wherefore passing by this conceit as not probable, to
conclude this point, Alex. de Ales part. 2. quaest. 89 memb. 2.
even as touching the condition of children, which should have been borne in
the state of innocence, there are diverse opinions, some thinking they should
have had the use of reason, and perfection of knowledge at the very first, so
that they should have grown and increased afterward only in experime^tal
knowledge: others, that they should have had no use of reason at the first: and
a third sort, that so soon as they had bin borne, they should have had the use
of reason, so far forth as to discern outward things good or evil (seeing
even the little lambs by natures instinct, do know the Wolf, and fly from
him, and seek the dugges of their dammes) but not to discern things
concerning moral virtue, and the worship of God. So likewise, some think that
the Babe JESUS, even in his humane soul, had the actual knowledge of all
things even from the beginning, and that he grew only in experimental
knowledge: but there are other of as good judgment, and as great learning, who
think, that howsoever he had the habit of al knowledge from the beginning, and
brought it with him out of the womb, yet not the act and use of it: and this is
all that either Luther or Calvine say: and yet we know how clamorously some
inveigh against them, as if they had broached some damnable heresy. But some
man will say, if we grant that Christ in his Humane Soul knew not all things
from the beginning, but in process of time learned that which before he
actually knew not, we fasten on him the disgraceful note of ignorance, and
consequently bring him within the confines and compass of sin. Hereunto Hugo
de S. Vict. answers, and shows the folly of this silly objection,
peremptorily resolving, that Hugo de S. Victore de Sac. fid. l. 1. part. 6. c.
26.
non omnis qui aliquid nescit, aut minus perfect scit, statim ignorantiam
habere, seu in ignorantia esse dicendus est; quia ignorantia non dicitur, nisi
tunc solum, cum id quod ignorari non debuisset, nescitur: that is, we must not
say, that every one that knows not a thing, or does less perfectly know it,
is ignorant, or in ignorance; because ignorance is only the not knowing of such
things as should have been known Neither is there any distinction more
triuiall or ordinary in the Schools then that of nescience, and ignorance: and
therefore howsoever some in the heat of their distempered passions, lay a heavy
imputation of horrible impiety upon Luther, Calvin, and others, for that they
say, there were some things which Christ in his humane soul did not actually
know from the beginning: yet Maldonatus, a man as ill conceited of them as any
other, Maldon. in 2. Luc. ver. 40.
confesses, that though some say Christ profited in wisdom and knowledge, not
in his own person, but in his mystical body, which is the Church: others,
that his growing and increasing was only in the manifestation of that, which
in all perfection was found in him from the beginning: or in experimental
knowledge of those things which in general contemplation he knew before: yet
many of the ancient Fathers, answering the objections of the Arrians, and other
like heretics, and rejecting as impious their conceit, who thought Christ was
absolutely ignorant of any thing, denied not but that there were some things
which Christ in his humane nature did not actually always know. This (says
Maldonat.) I suppose Luther, Calvin, and the rest knew not; for had they known,
that the Fathers taught, that Christ did truly grow in humane knowledge and
wisdom, and that he knew not all things actually from the beginning, to be
contrary to the Fathers, they would have been of another mind. How charitable
this his surmise and conjecture is, let the Reader judge. Howsoever, we have
his clear confession, that many of the Fathers were of opinion, that Christ in
his humane nature did not always actually know all things. Yea, upon the 24 of
Matthew he testifies, that Idem in 24. Matthew. ver. 36.
many of them said plainly, that Christ as man knew not the day appointed for
the general judgment of the quick and dead, when he said, That day and hour
knows no man, no not the Angels, nor the Son himself, but the Father only.
It is true indeed, that he goes about, notwithstanding this his clear
confession of the truth, to construe the words of some of the Fathers in such
sort, as if they had not meant simply, that Christ in his humane soul knew not
that hour and time, but only that he knew it not by force of his humane
nature; but this commentary (I fear) will not agree with their texts. For
Origin in his third tract upon Matthew says, that Christ knew not the time and
day of judgment, when he said, Of that day and hour knows no man, no not
the Son; but that afterward he knew it, when he was risen, and appointed of
his Father, King and Judge; which words of his admit no such gloss.
Wherefore Iansenius says, there are Iansenius comm. in Evang. concord. cap.
123.
two principal interpretations of those words of Christ, when he says, Of
that day and hour knows no man, no not the Son; the one, that he said he
knew it not, because he knew it not to reveal it, and because his body the
Church knew it not; the other, that he knew it not, as man; and this
interpretation he shows to be likewise twofold: For, says he, if we
follow the common opinion, that Christ had the perfect knowledge of all things
in his humane soul at the first, then we must understand that Christ said, he
knew not the day of judgment, because he knew it not by natural and
acquisite knowledge, but by virtue of that knowledge, that was infused into
him: but if we follow the other opinion, that Christ had not perfect knowledge
of all things in his humane soul at the first, but grew in it, then, as Origin
among other senses delivers, the meaning of the words is, that he knew it
not, till after his resurrection.

And surely Cyrill. lib. 9. thesauri cap. 4. cirat. a Iansenio, ibid.
Cyrill a worthy Bishop, and one that had many conflicts with the Nestorian
heretics, who divided the person of Christ, fears not directly to say, that
Christ as man knew not the day appointed for the general judgment, when he
used the words before mentioned. Neither is this the heresy of the Agnoetae,
as some ignorantly affirm: for their error was, that the Deity of Christ was
ignorant of some thing, or that Christ in his humane nature was properly
ignorant, that is, knew not such things, and at such time, as he should have
known; and that he is still ignorant of sundry things in the state of his
glorification, as it appears by that Gregor. lib. 8. epist. 42. Nice. phor.
lib. 18. c. 50. de Agnoetis
Epistle of Gregory, in which one of them alleges, that as Christ took our
nature, so he took our ignorance, to free us from the same: and therefore
Maldonatus upon the 24. of Matthew says; that the Themistians, called also
Agnoetae, were accounted heretics, not for saying Christ knew not the day of
judgment, as Damascene de haeresibus testifies; but that, as may be gathered
out of the same Damascene, they simply, without all distinction of the divine
or humane nature, said, Christ was ignorant thereof, because they thought the
Divinity was turned into the Humanity.

CHAP. 15.
Of the third kind of Communication of properties, and the second degree
thereof.

THus having spoken of those finite and created things, that were bestowed on
the nature of man, when it was assumed into the unity of the divine person,
let us come to those things that are infinite. Where first, we are certainly
to resolve, that as the nature of man was truly given and communicated to the
Person of the Son of God, so that he is indeed and really Man; so the
Persont of the Son of God was as truly communicated to the nature of man,
that it migh subsist in it, and that that which was fashioned in the womb of
the blessed virgin, and borne of her, might not only be holy, but the holiest
of all, even the Son of God. Secondly, that in this sense, the fullness of
all perfection, and all the properties of the divine Essence, are communicated
to the nature of man in the Person of the Son. For as the Father communicated
his Essence to the Son by eternal generation, who therefore is the second
Person in Trinity, and God of God; so in the Person of the Son, he really
communicated the same to the nature of man formed in Mary's womb, in such
sort, that that Man, that was borne of her, is truly God. And in this sense
the Germane Divines affirm, that there is a real Communication of the divine
properties to the nature of man, in the personal union of the natures of God
and Man in Christ; not by physical communication, or effusion, as if the like
and equal properties to those that are in God; were put inherently into the
nature of man, in such sort, as the heat transfused from the fire into the
water is inherent in it, (whence would follow a confusion, conversion, and
equalling of the natures, and natural properties) but personal, in the Person
of the Son of God. For as the Person of the Son of God, in whom the nature and
Essence of God is found, is so communicated to the nature of Man, that the Man
Christ is not only in phrase of speech named God, but is indeed, and really
God: so he is as really omnipotent, having all power both in heaven and in
earth. Luther. de verb. nouiss. Dauidis, tom. 3. fol. 9^.
There is one Christ (says Luther) who is both the Son of God, and of the
Virgin. By the right of his first birth, not in time, but from all eternity he
received all power, that is, the Deity it self, which the Father communicated
to him eternally: but touching the other nature of Christ, which began in time,
even so also the eternal power of God was given unto him; so that the Son of
the Virgin is truly and really eternal God, having eternal power, according
to that in the last of Matthew, Matthew. 28. 18.
All power is given unto me both in heaven, and in earth. And of this power, a
little after he brings in Christ speaking in this sort; Although this power
was mine eternally, before I assumed the nature of man, notwithstanding after I
began to be man, even according to the nature of man, I received the same power
in time, though I showed it not during the time of my infirmity, and cross.
Bonauent. in 3. Sentent. did. 22. quaest. 2.
Bonauentura says the very same in effect that Luther does: when it is said,
says he, speaking of the Man Christ, This Man is every where, this may either
note out the Person of Christ, or the singular and individual nature of a man:
if the Person of Christ, there is no doubt but the proposition is true: if the
individual nature of a Man, yet still it is true, not by propriety of nature,
but by communication of properties; because that which agrees to the Son of
God by nature, agrees unto this Man by grace. Cardinal Camerac. lib. 3.
quaest. 1 in Sententias.
Cameracensis agrees with Bonauentura, affirming, that the divine attributes
and properties are more really communicated to the Man Christ, then the humane
are to the Son of God: and that therefore a man may most truly and properly
say, speaking of the Man Christ, This Man is immortal, almighty, and of
infinite power, and majesty; because he is properly the divine Person, and so
consequently, truly and really immortal, and omnipotent. Yea Bellarm. de
Incarnatione, lib. 3. cap. 16.
Bellarmine, though he impugn the errors of the Lutherans, (as he calls
them) with all bitterness, yet confesses all that hitherto has been said to
be most true. I say, says he, as before, that the glory of God the Father was
given to the humanity of Christ, non in ipsa, not to be formally or
subiectiuely inherent in it, but in the divine Person; that is, that by grace
of union the humane nature of Christ obtained to be in such sort the nature of
the Son of God, that the Man Christ should be truly and really in the glory
of God the Father, filling both heaven and earth. Again he says, those
places, Matthew: 11. 27.
All things are given me of my Father; and Matthew. 23. 18.
All power is given me both in heaven and earth, may be understood, first, of
divine power which the Son of God received of the Father by eternal
generation; and secondly, of divine power which the nature of Man received by
personal union: and in another place speaking of sundry things proper to God,
he says, Ibid. cap. 25.
All those things may be said to be communicated and given to the humane
nature, not formally in it self, but in the Person of the Son of God by the
grace of union.

The Divines distinguish the properties of God, and make them to be of two
sorts; communicable, and incommunicable: Communicable properties they define to
be those perfections, that are called perfectiones simpliciter, which are found
without mixture of imperfection in God, and in a more imperfect sort in the
creatures. These they name perfectiones simpliciter, that is, simply and
absolutely perfections, because it is better for any thing to have them, then
not to have them: and because those things are better that have them, then
those that have them not: as likewise, for that they imply in them no
imperfection, though they be mingled with imperfection and defect in the
creatures. Of this sort is life, which it is betrer to have, then not to have;
and it includes in it no imperfection, though it be accompanied with defect
and imperfection in many of the things wherein it is found: for that life that
is in trees, is an imperfect life, and the life of men, who in truth then begin
to die, when they begin to live, is imperfect; yea, the life of Angels is
imperfect, because if they be not continually sustained, they return to that
nothing out of which they were made. Of the same kind, are Truth, Goodness,
Justice, Mercy, Wisdom, Knowledge, and Understanding. And therefore all these
separated from that imperfection that cleaves unto them elsewhere, are found
in God, and may truly be attributed unto him. Incommunicable properties are
nothing else but the negation and removing of all that imperfection that is in
the Creatures, of which sort are Immortality, Eternity, Immensitie, Infinity,
and the like, all importing a negation of imperfection. The former of these two
sorts of divine properties which are named Communicable, are communicated to
mere creatures in some degree and sort, though in highest degree they are no
where found but in God, and with the addition of words expressing such
eminency, they may be attributed to none but to God: for he only is
Almighty, most wise, most just, and most merciful. But both these with
addition of highest degree, and the other, which are named Incommunicable, are
by all Divines confessed, to be in such sort communicated in the Person of the
Son of GOD to the nature of man assumed into the unity of the same, that the
Man CHRIST, and the Son of Mary, is not in title only, but really, and indeed
most wise, most just, omnipotent, incomprehensible, eternal, and infinite.

And this is all, as I think, that the Divines of Germany, the followers of
Luther mean, when they speak of the real communication of divine properties
to the humane nature in Christ. If any man say, that they may justly be
thought to proceed farther, and to understand some other communication of
properties, then that by us expressed, in that they do not only say
concretiuely, that the Man Christ is omni-present, but the Humanity also: It
may be answered, that when we speak of the Humanity of Christ, sometimes we
understand only that humane created essence of a man that was in him,
sometimes all that, that is employed in the being of a Man, as well subsistence
as essence. In the former sort, it is absurd and impious to think, that the
Humanity of Christ, that is, the created Essence of a Man in him, is
omnipotent, omni-present, or infinite; neither do they so think; but they
affirm, that the subsistence of the Man Christ employed in his being a Man, is
infinite, and omni-present, as being the subsistence of the Son of GOD
communicated to the nature of Man, in stead of that finite subsistence, which,
left to it self, it would have had of it own.

Much contention there has been between them and other, touching the
vbiquitary presence of the humanity of Christ; but I verily think, it has
been in a great part upon mistaking, and because they understood not one
another. For the followers of Luther confess, that the Body of Christ is only
in one place locally, and do not think it to be euery-where in Extent of
Essence diffused into all places, but say only, that it is euery-where in the
infiniteness of the subsistence of the Son of God communicated to it. Zanchius
in iudic, de dissidio coenae Domin. in fine Miscellan.
If we ask them (says Zanchius) whether Christ's Body be euery-where, they
answer, that locally it is but in one place, but that personally it is
euery-where: If they mean, says he, that in respect of the being of Essence
it is finite, and confined to one certain place, but that the being of
subsistence which it has is infinite, and contained within the straites of no
one place, they say the truth, and contradict not them whom they seem to do.
Now that this is their meaning, which this worthy learned Divine acknowledges
to be true and Catholic, and not contradicted by them that seem to be
their opposites, they constantly profess: and therefore I am persuaded, that
howsoever some of them have used harsh, doubtful, dangerous, and unfitting
forms of speech, yet they differ not in meaning and judgment from the
Orthodoxe, and right believers. For they do not imagine, if we may believe
their most constant protestations, any essential or natural communication of
divine properties, but personal only, in that the Person of the son of God
is really communicated to the nature of man, in which Person they are. Neither
do they define the personal vnio^ by the communication of properties, but say
only, that it is implied in it: and touching the cooperation of the two
natures of God and Man in Christ, they teach noe other, but that which we
described, when we spoke of the Theandricall actions of Christ. The infinite
objections that are made on either side, to the multiplying of needles, and
fruitless contentions, may easily be cleared, and the seeming contradictions
reconciled by the right understanding of the point, about which the difference
has grown.

CHAP. 16.
Of the work of Mediation performed by Christ in our nature.

THus having spoken of the abasing of the Son of God to take our nature, and
of the gifts and graces he bestowed on it, when he assumed it into the unity of
his Person; it remains, that we speak of the things he did and suffered for
us in the same. The thing in general which he did for us in our nature thus
assumed, was, the mediating between God and us, that he might reconcile us
unto God. For the better understanding whereof we must observe, what it is to
mediate, and the diverse kinds of mediation. Mediation is by all said then to
be performed, when one interposeth himself between such as are at variance,
to reconcile them, or at least, between such as have no friendly intercourse,
to join them in a league of friendship and amity, The mediation that is
between them at variance, (the end whereof is reconciliation) is performed
four ways. First by discerning and judging the matters of quarrel and
dislike, that divide and estrange them one from another. Secondly, by reporting
from one of the parties to the other, the conditions upon which either of them
may come to an agreement with the other; in which sense Moses says unto the
children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 5. 5.
I was a mediator at that time between God and you; and the Apostle says in
the Epistle to the Galathians, Gal. 3. 19.
The Law was given by Angels in the hand of a mediator. Thirdly by entreating
one party for another: and fourthly by satisfying one party for the wrongs done
by the other. All these ways Christ may be said to have bin a Mediator
between God and us. For first, he interposed himself as an Arbitrator between
God and us, so ordering the matters of difference between us, that God should
accept our repentance, faith, and purpose of amendment: and that we should not
only repent us of the evils past, and prostrate at the feet of his Majesty,
entreat for mercy; but make a Covenant also with our selves, and bind our
selves by a solemn vow, never to cast his laws behind our back any more.
Secondly he put himself between God and us, by reporting Gods pleasure unto
us, and what he requires of us, and by reporting unto God our submissiue
yielding of our selves to do that he requires. Thirdly, he performed the
work of a Mediator, by entreating the one party to be reconciled to the other,
in that Romans 8. 34.
He makath request for us, as it is in the Epistle to the Romans, and 1. John
2. 1.
is our Advocate, as it is in the Epistle of S. John. Lastly, he mediated by
satisfying one party for the wrongs done by the other: and this kind of
mediation was proper to Christ alone, according to that of the Apostle, He was
made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. 2
Cor. (...). 21.
These being the diverse kinds wherein Christ mediateth between God and us,
for the better understanding of the nature and force of his mediation, two
things are to be observed: First, what the nature of Medium, that is, a mean
between two extremes is; and secondly, how, and according to which nature
Christ was a Mediator between God and us.

A medium or mean between two extrreames, is of three sorts: The first, when
two extremes or contraries concur and meet in a third nature, arising and
growing out of the mixture of them both; as white and black, being contrary
colors, do meet and concur in the middle colors, and in this sort there can
be no mean between God and us. The second, when some qualities or properties
of either of the extremes or opposites are found in a third thing; and so
Christ, as Man, was a mean between God and Men: For in his humane nature was
found righteousness, wherein he was like to God; and misery, wherein he was
like to me^. To which purpose that is, that S. Aug. has when he says, August.
in P. 39.
Christus est Mediator inter Deum and homines. Quid est Deus? Pater, Filius,
and Spiritus Sanctus. Quid sunt homines? Peccatores, impii, mortales. Inter
illam Trinitatem, and hominum infirmitatem, and iniquitatem, Mediator factus
est homo non iniquus, sed tamen infirmus: vt, ex eo quod non iniquus, iungeret
te Deo, in eo quod infirmus, propinquaret tibi; that is, Christ is a Mediator
between God and Men, What is God, but the Father, Son, and holy Ghost? What
are Men, but sinners, wicked ones, and subject unto death? Between that
Trinity therefore, and the infirmity, and iniquity of men, that Man became a
Mediator, that was not sinful, but infirm; that, in that he was not sinful,
he might join thee to God; and in that he was infirm, he might draw near
unto thee. The third, when both extremes concur and meet in the same person;
and in this sort Christ is most properly a mean, or of a middle condition
between God and us, in that both the natures of God and man do concur, and
are conjoined in his Person. And to this purpose excellent is that of Hugo de
S. Victore. Hugo erudit. Theol. de Sacramentis fidei, lib. 2 part. 1. cap: 12.
The Apostle (says he) says, A Mediator is not a Mediator of one. Duo enim
erant Deus and Homo; Diuersi, and Aduersi: Deus erat iustus, Homo iniustus; in
hoc nota aduersos: Homo erat miser, Deus beatus; in hoc nota diuersos. Sic
igitur Homo and aduersus Deo erat, per iniquitatem; and diuersus a Deo, per
miseriam: That is, For God and man were two; diverse and different; adverse and
contrary one to the other. God was just, man unjust; in this observe their
contrariety: Man was miserable, God blessed; in this note their diversity and
difference: So therefore man was both adverse, and contrary unto God, in
respect of iniquity; and diverse and different from God, in respect of misery.
And therefore in this behalf needed a Mediator unto God, that he might be
reconciled, and brought back unto him; but the dispatch of this business of
reconciling them that were so greatly at variance, no man could conveniently
and fitly undertake, who was not nearely conjoined by the bands of friendly
Society, and peaceable agreement with both the parties. For this cause
therefore the Son of God became Man, that he might be a Mediator of
reconciliation, and peace between man and God. Suscepit humanitatem, per quam
hominibus appropinquaret; and retinuit Diuinitatem, per quam a Deo non
recederet: factus homo, sustinuit poenam, vt demonstraret affectum: seruauit
iustitiam, vt conferret remedium: that is, he took unto him the nature of a
Man, that therein he might draw near unto men, and retained the nature of God,
that so he might not depart from God: Being made Man, he suffered punishment,
to show his affection: but kept himself just, and unworthy of punishment, that
he might help and relieve others. Again, the same Hugo proceeds and goes
forward, excellently expressing the concurrence of the natures of God and man
in the unity of Christ's person, in this sort: Verbum quod cum Patre Deo vnum
erat per ineffabilem vnitatem, cum homine assumpto vnum factum est per
admirabilem vnionem: Vnitas in natura, Vnio in persona: Cum Patre Deo vnum in
natura, non in Persona: Cum homine assumpto vnum in persona, non in natura.
Assumpsit ex nobis nostram naturam, vt eam sibi sociaret per vnionem in
persona, quae sociata non erat per vnitatem in natura: vt per id quod de nostro
vnum secum fecerat, nos sibi vniret, vt cum ipso vnum essemus, per id quod
nostrum sibi vnitum erat; and per ipsum vnum essemu^ cum patre, qui cum ipsa
vnum erat. That is, The Word which was one with God the Father by ineffable
unity, became one with man assumed by admirable union. The unity was in nature:
the union in Person. With God the Father it was one in Nature, not in Person,
with man assumed it was one in Person, not in nature. It took of us our nature
to join it to it self by union in Person, which had no society with it by
unity of nature, that by that, which taken from us, it made one with it self,
it might unite us to it self, that we might be one with it, by that of ours
which was united to it: and by it we might be one with the Father, who is one
with it.

Thus having showed in what sort Christ is a mean between the two extremes
God and Man, it remains that we seek out, how, and according to which nature
he is a Mediator. That he is a Mediator according to the concurrence of both
Natures in the unity of his Person, it is confessed by all, for if he were not
both God and Man, he could not mediate between God and Men. But whether he
be a Mediator according to both Natures concurring in the work of Mediation,
there be some that make question. For the clearing whereof, the Divines
distinguish the works of Mediation, making them to be of two sorts: Of
Ministry, and of Authority. Of Ministry, as to pray, to pay the price of
Redemption, and by dying to satisfy for sin. Of Authority, as to pass all
good unto us from the Father in the Holy Ghost. Touching the works of
Ministry, it is agreed on by all, that the Person of the Son of God performed
them in the nature of Man: for we must distinguish Principium quod, and
Principium quo; that is, the Person which does and suffers, and that wherein
it does and suffers such things as are necessary to procure our
reconciliation with God. It was the Son of God, and Lord of Life, that died for
us on the Cross, but it was the nature of Man, not of God, wherein he died:
and it was the nature of God, and infinite excellency of the same, whence the
price, value, and worth of his passion grew. The works of Authority and Power,
as to give life, to give the Spirit, to raise the dead, to make the blind see,
and the dumb to speak, were all performed by the Divine Nature; yet not
without an isntrumental concurrence of the Nature of Man, in sort as has
been before expressed, when I showed how the Actions of Christ were
diuinely-humane. If it be alleged, that Opera Trinitatis ad extra are
indivisa, that is, that there is nothing that one of the Persons of the Blessed
Trinity does toward the Creatures, but they all do it, and consequently, that
those things which Christ did in his Divine Nature, pertained not to the office
of a Mediator, being common to all the Persons: we answer, that as the Persons
of the Blessed Trinity, though they be one and the same God, yet differ (...)
in subsistence, and the manner of having and possessing the Deity, and Divine
Nature; so though their action be the same, and the work done by them, yet
they differ (...), in the manner of doing it: for the Father does all things
authoritatiue, and the Son subauthoritatiue, as the Schoolmen speak; that is,
the Father, as he from whom, and of whom all things are; the Son, as he by whom
all things are, not as if he were an instrument, but as Principium a
Principio, that is, a cause and beginning of things, that has received the
Essence it has, and power of working from another, though the very same that
is in the other. And in this sort to quicken, give life, and to impart the
spirit of sanctification to whom he pleases, especially with a kind of
concurring of the humane nature, meriting, desiring, and instrumentally
assisting, is proper to the Son of God manifested in our flesh, and not common
to the whole Trinity; and therefore, notwithstanding the objection taken from
the unity of the Works of the Divine Persons, may be a work of mediation.
Bellarmine the Jesuit brings many reasons to prove, that Christ is not a
Mediator according to both Natures: but that which above all other he most
urges, is this, Bellarm de Christo Mediatore l. 5. c. 5
If Christ, says he, be a Mediator according to both Natures, then either
according to both jointly, or severally; not severally, because not according
to his Divine Nature severally considered, being the party offended. Not
according to both jointly, because though in that sort he differ from the
Father and the Holy Ghost, neither of which is both God and Man; and from the
sons of men, who are merely men; yet he differs not from the Son of God,
(who was to be pacified by the Mediator, as well as the Father, and the Holy
Ghost) neither in nature, nor in person. This surely is is a silly kind of
reasoning: for it is not necessary that a thing should differ from both the
extremes according to all that in respect whereof it is of a middle condition,
but it is sufficient, if it differ in some thing from one, and in some thing
from another. The middle color differs from the extremes, not in the whole
nature of it, but from white, in that it has of blackness, and from black,
in that it has of whiteness: but it is medium, in that it has something of
either of them. So the Son of God incarnate differs not only from the
Father and the holy Ghost, but from himself as God, in that he is Man: and
from Men, and himself as man, in that he is GOD: and therefore may mediate
not only between the Father and us men, but also between himself as God,
and us miserable, and sinful men. Wherefore to conclude this point we say,
that some of the works of Christ the mediator, were the works of his
Humanity in respect of the thing done, and had their efficacy, dignity and
value from his Divinity, in that they were the works of him that had the
Divinity dwelling bodily in him: and some the works of his Divinity, the
humane nature concurring only instrumentally, as the giving sight to the
blind, raising the dead, remitting of sins, and the like. Neither do we
imagine one action of both natures, nor say that Christ died, offered himself
on the Altar of the Cross, or paid for us in his Divinity, as some
slanderously report of us: and therefore all the objections that are mustered
against us, proceeding from the voluntary mistaking of our sense and meaning
(which some will not conceive, that they may have something to say against us)
are all easily cleared and answered by this explication of the same.

By that which has been said touching Christ's being a Mediator according to
both natures, we may easily understand, how, and according to what nature he
is Head of the Church. In a natural Head Bonauent: in (...). Sentent. did.
13. quaest: 1.
Bonauentura observes three things: the first, that it is Conform caeteris
membris: the second, that it is Principium membrorum: and the third, that it is
Influxiuum sensus and motus: that is, first, that it has conformity of nature
with the rest of the members of the body. Secondly, that it is the first,
chiefest, and in a sort the beginning of all the members: and thirdly, that
from it influence of sense and motion does proceed: and he shows the same
to be found in Christ, the mystical head of the Church. For first, he has
conformity of nature with them that are members of his body the Church, in
that he is Man: Whereupon S. Augustine, says, Aug. tract. So. in cap. 15. Joan:
Vnius naturae sunt vitis and palmites: the vine and the branches are of the
same nature. And secondly, as the natural head is the chiefest and most
principal of all the members, so is Christ more excellent then they that are
Christ's. Idem in Psalm. 39.
Omnia membra faciunt vnum corpus, says, S. Augustine, multum tamen interest
inter caput and caetera membra: Etenim in caeteris membris non sentis nisi
tactu, tangendo sentis in caeteris membris: in capite autem and vides, and
audis, and olfacis, and gustas, and tangis. All the members make one body, yet
is there great difference between the head, and the rest of the members: for in
the rest a man has no sense, but that of feeling, in the rest he discerns by
feeling: but in the Head heseeth, and hears, and smells, and tastes, and
feels. So in the members of Christ's mystical body, which is the Church,
there are found diversities of gifts, operations, and administrations: and to
one is given the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, to another
faith, to another the gift of healing, to another the operation of great
works, and to another prophecy: but to the man Christ, the spirit was given
without stint or measure, and in him was found the fullness of all grace. The
third property of a natural Head, which is the iufluence of Sen^e and Motion,
agrees unto Christ in respect of his humanity and divinity both. For he
gives influence of divine sense and motion two ways: per modum praeparantis:
and per modum impertientis, that is, by preparing and making men fit to
receive grace, and by imparting it to them that are fitted and prepared. He
prepares and fitteth men to the receipt of Grace by the acts of his humanity,
in which he suffered death, dying satisfied Gods wrath, removed all matter of
dislike, meritted the favor and acceptance of God, and so made men fit to
receive the grace of God, and to enjoy his favor: He imparteth and conferreth
grace, by the operation and working of his divine nature, it being the proper
work of God to inlighten the understandings of men, and to soften their
hearts. So that, to conclude this point, we may resolve, that the grace, in
respect whereof Christ is Head of the Church, is of two sorts: the one created,
and habitual: the other increate, and of Union. In respect of the one he
gives grace effectiue, by way of efficiencie: in respect of the other,
dispositiue, by way of disposition, fitting us, that an impression of grace may
be made in us.

CHAP. 17.
Of the things which Christ suffered for us, to procure our reconciliation with
God.

Having showed how Christ as a Mediator interposed himself between God and us
when we were his enemies, and how he is the Head of that blessed company of
them that believing in him look for salvation; let us see and consider, first,
what he suffered for us, to reconcile us unto God: secondly, what he did for
us; thirdly, what the benefits are that he bestows on us; and fourthly to
whom he committed the dispensation of the rich treasures of his graces, the
word of reconciliation, and the guiding and governing of the people which he
purchased as a peculiar inheritance to himself.

Touching the first, to wit the sufferings of Christ, he was by them to
satisfy the justice of God his Father displeased with us for sin: that so
we might be reconciled unto him. Wherefore, that we may the better conceive
what was necessary to be done or suffered to satisfy the justice of God, we
must consider sin in the nature of a wrong, and in the nature of sin. In the
nature of a wrong; and so two things were required for the pacifying of Gods
wrath; for first, he that has done wrong, must restore that he unjustly took
away from him whom he wronged; and secondly, he must do something in
recompense of the wrong he did: as, if he took away another man's good name,
by false and lying reports, he must not only restore it to him again by
acknowledging that the things were untrue, which in defamation of him he had
spoken, but he must also take all occasions to raise continue, and increase a
good opinion of him. If sin be considered in the nature of sin it implies
in it two things: debitum poenae, and debitum neglectae obedientiae, that is, a
debt of punishment, and a debt of obedience then neglected, when it should have
been performed: and therefore in the satisfaction that is to reconcile us to
God displeased with us for sin as sin, two things must be employed: for
first, the punishment must be sustained that sin deserved: and secondly, that
obedience must be performed, that should have been yielded whilst sin was
committed, but was neglected. For if only the punishment be sustained we may
escape the condemnation of death, but we cannot inherit eternal life, unless
the righteousness and obedience which Gods law requires be found in us also:
Now the law of God requires obedience, not only in the present time, and time
to come, but from the beginning of our life to the end of the same, if we
desire to inherit the promised blessedness. And though the performance of that
obedience that was neglected may seem to be in the nature of merit rather then
satisfaction: yet in that it is not simply the meriting and procuring of favor
and acceptance, but the recovering of lost friendship, and the regaining of
renewed love, it is rightly esteemed to pertain unto satisfaction. Touching
sin considered in the nature of an offense and wrong, and the things required
to pacify Gods wrath in that respect, there is no question, but that the
sinner himself that wronged God in sinning, must, by sorrow of heart,
disliking and detesting, and by confession of mouth, condemning former evils,
restore that glory to God he took from him: and seek and take all occasions
the weakness of his means will afford, to glorify God as much as he
dishonored him before: and God accepts weak endeavors as sufficient in
this kind, CHRIST having perfectly satisfied for us: as a public person may
accept of a mean and weak satisfaction for the wrong done to him, but must
inflict punishment answerable to the fault, to satisfy public justice
offended by that wrong. Wherefore, passing from this kind of satisfaction, let
us speak of that other that God requires, standing in the suffering of
punishments due to sin. Some define this kind of satisfaction to be the
suffering of the punishments that God inflicteth, or wherewith a man
voluntarily punishes himself: but this is not a good definition. For as a
thief or murderer may not lay violent hands on himself, and be his own
executioner when he has offended, to satisfy public Justice, but must
submit himself to that which authority will lay on him: so it is so far from
being any satisfaction to Gods Justice, for a man, when he has sinned, to
become his own executioner, and to punish himself for his sin, to satisfy the
Justice of God, that it highly displeases God. It is true indeed, that we may
lawfully afflict our selves, not to satisfy Gods Justice, but to purge out the
dross of that sinful impuritie that cleaves to us, and to cure the wounds of
our souls, as we may afflict our selves by fasting, watching, and abstaining
from many things otherwise lawful, for the freeing of our selves from the
remains of our former excessive and immoderate delight in eating, drinking,
surfeiting, and riot, and other abuses of the good creatures of God. So that we
must not define satisfaction, to be the suffering of those punishments, that
God inflicteth, or wherewith the sinner punishes himself; for it is only the
sustaining of those that God in Justice does inflict. And in this sort Christ
satisfied his Fathers wrath, not by punishing himself, but by being obedient to
his Father even unto the death. Wherefore let us proceed more particularly, to
consider the satisfactory sufferings of Christ, and see first, what punishments
Christ suffered to pacify his Fathers wrath: and secondly, what the manner of
his passion was.

Touching the punishments that Christ suffered, they were not ordinary, but
beyond measure, grievous, bitter, and insupportable: yea, such as would have
made any mere creature to sink down under the burden of the^ to the bottom
of Hell: For he suffered grievous things from all the things in Heaven, Earth,
and Hell; and in all that any way pertained to him. He suffered at the hands of
God his Father, and of Men; of Jews, of Gentiles, of enemies insulting, of
friends forsaking, of the Prince of darkness, and all his cruel and merciless
instruments; of the elements of the world, the Sun denying to give him light,
the air breath, and the earth supportance. He suffered in all that pertained
to him: In his name, being condemned as a blasphemer, as an enemy to Moses, the
Law, the Temple, and worship of God; to his own Nation, to Caesar, and the
Romans: a glutton, a companion with Publicans, and sinners, a Samaritan, one
that had a Devil, and did all his miracles by the power of Beelzebub. In the
things he possessed, when they stripped him out of his garments, and cast lots
on his seamelesse coat. In his friends greatly distressed and discomforted
with the sight of those things that fell out unto him, according to that which
was prophesied before: Mark. 14. 27.
The Shepherd shall be smitten, and the sheep shall be scattered. In his body,
when his hands and feet were nailed, his sides goared, his head pierced with
the crown of thorns, his cheeks swollen with buffering, his face defiled with
spitting upon, his eyes offended with beholding the scornful behavior of his
proud insulting enemies, his ears with hearing the words of their execrable
blasphemy, his taste with the myrrh and gall that they gave him in his drink,
his smell with the stinch and horror of the place wherein he was crucified,
being a place of dead men's skuls. Lastly, in his soul distressed with fears,
and compassed about with sorrows besetting him on every side, and that even
unto death: In so woeful sort did he take on him our defects, and suffer our
punishments.

But, because we may as well enlarge and amplify Christ's passions and
sufferings too much, as extenuate them too much, let us see, if it be
possible, the uttermost extent of that he suffered. For the clearing hereof
Bonav. in 3. Sent. did. 15. quaest. 2.
some say, that he suffered all those punishments that were beseeming him, or
behoofefull for us: that he suffered all those punishments, that neither
prejudice the plenitude of sanctity, nor science. But, that we may the better
inform our selves touching this point, we must observe, that the punishments
of sin are of three sorts: First, Culpa: Secondly, ex culpa, and ad culpam.
Thirdly, ex culpa, sed nec culpa, nec ad culpam: that is, First, sin.
Secondly, something proceeding from sin, and inducing to sin. Thirdly, things
proceeding from sin, that neither are sins, nor incline and induce to sin.
Examples of the first, are Envy, afflicting the mind of the proud man;
grievous disorders, accompanying the drunkard, and a reprobate sense, following
the contempt of Gods worship and service. The punishments of this second sort
are sins, though the Schoolmen do not esteem them to be so.
Of the second, natural concupiscence, pronenesse to evil, difficulty to do
good, contrariety in the faculties of the soul, and repugnance and resistance
of the meaner against the better. Examples of the third, which are things
proceeding from sin, but neither sins, nor inclinations to sin, are hunger,
thirst, weakness, nakedness, and death it self. The punishments of this
last sort only Christ suffered, and neither of the former two: for neither was
there sin in him, nor any thing inclining him to evil, or discouraging him
from good. The punishments of this kind are of two sorts: Natural, and
Personal. Natural, are such as follow the whole nature of man, as hunger,
thirst, labor, weariness, and death it self. Personal, are such as grow out
of some imperfection and defect in the virtue and faculty forming the body,
disorder in diet, or some violence offered; and these are found but in some
particular men, and not in all men generally, as Leprosies, Agues, Gowts, and
the like, All those punishments, that are punishments only, that are from
without, and that are common to the whole nature of Men, Christ suffered, that
came to be a Redeemer of all without respect of persons: but such as flow from
sin dwelling within, or proceed from particular causes, or are proper to some,
and not common to all, he suffered not.

The punishments that are punishments only, and not sin, and are common to
the whole nature of man, are likewise of two sorts: for either they are
suffered for sin imputed, or sin inherent. For one may be punished either
for his own fault, or the fault of another in some sort imputed to him. When a
man is punished for his own fault, he has remorse of conscience, blaming and
condemning him as having brought such evils upon himself, by his own folly.
But when a man is punished for another man's fault, whereof he has been no
cause, by example, persuasion, help, or consent, he can have no remorse of
conscience. Now our Savior Christ, suffered the punishments of the sins of
other men, not his own, and therefore he was free from remorse of conscience,
though it be generally found in all men, and be neither sin, nor inducement
to sin.

Lastly, the punishments that are punishments only, and not sin, that are
common to the whole nature of Man, and suffered not for the faults of him that
suffers them, but for the sins of other, are of two sorts: for either they
are the punishments of sin eternally remaining in stain and guilt; or broken
off, ceasing, and repented of.

The punishments of sin eternally remaining, must according to the rules of
divine justice, be eternal, and consequently joined with desperation, which
always is found, where there is an impossibility of any better estate for
ever. But it Picus Mirandula, in Apologia quaest. 2. and Scotus in 4. Sentent.
did. 46. q. 4. in resp. ad argumenta principalia.
is no way necessary, neither does the justice of God require, that the
punishments of sin repented of, ceasing, and forsaken, should be
everlasting, or joined with despair. For, as the Divines do note, that there
are three things to be considered in sin; The auersion from an infinite,
and incommutable good: the inordinate conversion to a finite good; and the
continuing in the same, or ceasing from it: so to these several things in
sin, there are three several things answearing in the punishment of it. For
to the auersion, which is obiectiuely infinite, there answers poena damni;
the loss of God, which is an infinite loss. To the inordinate conversion of
the sinner to things transitory, there answers poena sensus, a sensible
smart and grief intensiuely finite, as the pleasure the sinner takes in the
transitory things, he inordinately loves, is finite. To the eternity of sin
remaining everlastingly in stain and guilt or the continuance of it but for a
time, answers the eternity of punishment, or the suffering of the same but
for a time.

It is true, that every sinner sins in suo aeterno, as Saint Gregor.
exposit. moral. l. 34. c. 10. in 41. Caput Job. in illa verba, Aestimabit
Abyssum, etc.
Gregory speaks, in that he would sin ever if he might live ever; and
that every sinner casts himself, by sinning, into an impossibility of ever
ceasing to sin of himself: as a man that casts himself into a deep pit,
can never of himself rise out of it again: And therefore naturally eternity
of punishment is due to sin: but, if by force of Divine operation, men be
framed to cease from sin, and to turn from it unto God, the Justice of God
requires not eternity of punishment, but only extr^mitie answerable to the
grieuousnesse of sin. Wherefore seeing our Savior Christ suffered only for
those sins which he meant to break off by framing the sinners to repentance,
it was no way necessary for the satisfying of divine Justice, that he should
endure eternal punishment.

If it be said, that all do not repent, nor cease from doing ill, we easily
grant it: but it is likewise to be known, that the satisfaction of Christ is
not appliable to all sinners, not through any defect in it self, but through
the incapacity of them to whom it should be applied. So that as Christ dyed,
and satisfied Gods wrath sufficiently for all, but effectually only for the
elect and chosen: so likewise he gives grace to cease from sin, if the
fault were not in themselves, sufficiently to all. But to the elect and chosen,
whom he foreknew before the world was made, he gives grace effectually, that
his passion may be applied unto them, and they really and indeed made
partakers of it.

They seem therefore to be deceived, who think, that the excellency of the
person of Christ, dispensed with the eternity of punishment, which otherwise to
satisfy divine justice, he was to have suffered; and thereupon infer, that
it might also dispense with the grieuousnesse and extremity of punishment, that
otherwise he was to have endured. For the worth and excellency of his person,
was neither to dispense with the time, nor grieuousnesse of his punishments,
but to make the passion of one available for many. Otherwise, if it might have
dispensed with one degree of extremity of punishment due to sin, it might
also have dispensed with two, and consequently with all, as Scotus aptly
notes, though to another purpose. Scotus in 4. senten. did. 46. qu. 4. de
art. 4.


These things being thus distinguished, it is easy to answer that question
that has troubled many: Whether Christ suffered all the punishments of sin
or not. For we may safely pronounce, as I think, that Christ suffered the
whole general punishment of sin, that only excepted which is sin, or
consequent upon the inherence, and eternity of sin that is punished, as
remorse of conscience and desperation. If any man shall go further, and ask,
whether to satisfy Gods justice, Christ suffered the pains of hell or not: it
will be answered, that he suffered not the pains of hell in specie or loco,
that is, either in kind or place; but some think that he suffered pains and
punishments conformable and answerable to them in extremity, that only
excepted which is sin, or consequent upon the inherence, and eternity of the
sin of such as are punished in hell.

Concerning poena sensus, that is, sensible smart and grief, Cardinal Cusanus
Excitationum lib. 10. p. 659.
Cusanus (a famous learned man) is claerely of opinion, that Christ suffered
extremity of such pain, answerable to that sensible smart and grief that is
endured in hell: but the doubt is principally of the other kind of punishment,
named Poena damni, which is the loss of God. For the clearing of which point,
Scotus in 4. sent: did. 46. q. 4.
Scotus aptly observes diverse things. For first, he shows that punishment is
the discernable want of some fitting good in an intellectual nature, and the
presence of some evil in the same. Secondly, that the good that is in an
intellectual nature is of two sorts; the one of virtue, the other of sweet,
joyful and pleasing delight: and that, though both these concur sometimes,
as in the fruition of God in heaven, wherein the perfection of virtue, and the
fulness of joy and delight do meet together: yea, that though every thing
that is virtuous, be delightful, yet it is not so much the height of virtue as
of delight, that is to be judged happiness. Thirdly, he infers from hence,
that there are two kinds of punishment consisting in the loss of God: whereof
the one is, the want of that virtue whereby the soul is to be joined and knit
unto God; the other, the want of that delight and pleasure that is to be found
in God. That the former is an evil of unrighteousness and sin, and may be
called an obstinacy in sin, and is nothing else but sin not remitted nor
removed, Poena derelicta non inflicta, that is, no new evil brought in upon
the sinner, but that left in him that he wrought in himself. The other is
more properly named Poena damni, or Damnum, that is, the punishment of loss,
or a loss and damage. It were impious to think, that Christ suffered the
former kind; but that he suffered this latter kind of punishment of loss
and damage, many great Divines are of opinion. For though as he was joined to
God affectione iustitiae, that is, by the affection of virtue or justice, he
could not be divided or separated from him, no not for a moment, because he
could not but love him, fear him, trust in him, and give him the praise and
glory that belongs to him; yet, as he was to be joined to him, affectione
commodi, that is, by that affection that seeks pleasing content in enjoying
those ineffable delights and pleasures that are found in him, he might be,
and was for a time divided from him. For as very great and grave Divines do
think, he was destitutus omni solatio, that is, destitute and void of all that
solace he was wont to find in God, in that fearful hour of darkness, and of
his doleful passion. Canus Loc. Theol. l. 12. c. 13.
As says Melchior Canus, Christ in the time of his life, miraculously
restrained, and kept within the closet of his secret Spirit, the happiness that
he enjoyed in seeing God, that it should not spread farther, and communicate it
self to the inferior faculties of his Soul, or impart the brightness of it to
the body: so in the hour of his passion, his very Spirit was withheld from
any pleasure it might take in so pleasing an object, as is the Essence,
Majesty, and glory of God, which even then he clearly beheld. So that Christ
never wanted the vision of that object, which naturally makes all them happy
that behold it, and fills them with such joy, as no heart of mortal man can
conceive, or tongue express.

But as it was strange, and yet most true, in the time of his life, that his
Soul enjoyed Heauen-happines, and that yet neither the inferior faculties
thereof were admitted into any fellowship of the same, nor his Body glorified,
but subject to misery and passion; so it fell out by the special dispensation
of Almighty God, in the time of his death, and in that fearful hour of
darkness, that his Soul seeing God, the pleasure and delight that naturally
comes from so pleasing an object, stayed, withheld, and communicated not it
self unto it: as a man in great distress takes no pleasure in those things
that otherwise exceedingly affect him. This his conceit, he says, he
communicated to very great and worthy Divines, while he was yet but a young
man, and that they were so far from disliking it, that they approved it
exceedingly. But some man will say, it is not possible in this life to feel
extremity of pains, answereable to the pains of hell, more then on earth to
enjoy the happiness of Heaven: and that therefore it is absurd to grant, that
Christ in the days of his flesh suffered in this World extremity of pain
answerable to the pains of hell. Hereunto it is answered, that in ordinary
course, it is impossible for any man living in this World, either to enjoy the
happiness of Heaven, or feel the pains of Hell: but that, as Christ was at the
same time, both Viator and Comprehensor, that is, a manlike unto us that
journey here in this World toward Heauen-happines, and yet happy with that
happiness that ordinarily is found no where but in Heaven: so he might suffer
that extremity of pain, and have that apprehension of afflictiue evils, that
ordinarily is no where to be found in this World, even while he lived here on
earth. Luther cons. pro laborant. c. 1. de spectro primo. tom. 2.
Luther says truly, that if a man could perfectly see his own evils, the
sight thereof would be a perfect hell unto him: now it is certain that Christ
saw all the evils of punishment before expressed, to which he voluntarily
subjected himself, to satisfy divine Justice coming fierce and violently
upon him, with as clear a sight, and as perfect an apprehension of them, as is
to be had in the other World.

CHAP. 18.
Of the nature and quality of the passion and suffering of Christ.

HItherto we have spoken of the punishments that Christ sustained and suffered
to satisfy the justice, and pacify the wrath of his Father. Now it remains,
that we come to take a view of the nature and quality of his passion and
suffering, consisting partly in his fear and agony before, and pardy in his
bitter sorrow and distress in the very act of that doleful tragedy. Touching
the first, the Scripture testifies, that he Mark. 14. 33. Mat. 26. 37.
feared exceedingly, and desired Mat. 26. 39.
the cup might pass from him. Touching the second, that he Matthew. 26. 38.
was beset with sorrows even unto the death; and that in his extremity he
cried aloud; Matthew. 27. 46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? But touching both these passions of
fear, and sorrow, it is noted, Bonauent. in 3. Sent. did. 16. qu. 2.
that, whereas there are three kinds of faults found in the passions of men's
minds, the first, that they arise before reason be consulted, or give
direction; the second, that they proceed farther then they should, and stay not
when they are required; and the third, that they transport reason and judgment
it self: Christ had these passions, but in a sort free from all these evils:
For neither did they arise in him before reason gave direction; whereupon he is
said to have Ioh. 11. 33.
troubled or moved himself in the case of Lazarus, for whom he greatly
sorrowed; neither did they proceed any farther, if once reason and judgment
commanded a stay, and retrait, whereupon they are called Hieronym. in 26.
Matthaei.
Propassions rather then Passions; not because, (as Survey. Book 3. Chap. 10
page: 177.
Kellison ignorantly supposes) reason preuenteth them, and causes them to
arise, though it be true it does so; but because they are but forerunners to
passions at liberty, and beginnings of passions to be stayed at pleasure,
rather then full and perfect passions; and therefore much less had they any
power to transport judgment and reason it self. From these general
considerations of the passions of Christ, let us proceed to take a more
particular view of the chief particulars of his passions, to wit, Fear, and
Sorrow.

Fear is described to be a retiring, or flying back from a thing, if it be
good, because it is too high and excellent above the reach, and without the
extent of our condition and power; if it be evil, because it is hard to be
escaped. So that the proper and adequate object of fear, is not, as some
suppose, future evil, but difficulty, greatness, and excellency: which found
in things good, makes us know we cannot at all attain them, or at least that
we cannot attain them but with too great difficulty and labor; in evil,
that they will not easily be over mastered or escaped.

The difficulty, greatness, and excellency, found in things that are good,
causes fear of reverence, which makes us step back, and not to meddle at
all with things that are too high and excellent for us, nor with things hard,
without good advice: and causes us to give place to those of better condition,
and to acknowledge and profess by all significations of body and mind, the
distance, and disproportion that we know to be between them and us, together
with our dependence of them, or subjection to them. This kind of fear causes
and produces all acts of Reverence and Adoration. It is found in the Angels,
and spirits of just and perfect men, and is more excellent then any other
virtue.

The greatness that is found in things that are evil, causes a fear
declining them as evil, which is of diverse sorts: For first, there is an
Humane fear, which makes men more decline the loss of their lives and good
estates, then the loss of the favor of God. Secondly, there is a Mundane
fear, that causes them to decline the disfavor of the world, more then the
displeasure of Almighty God: and these two kinds of fear drive men from God;
but there are other kinds which drive them unto God. The first whereof is a
Servile fear, that makes men leave the act of sin, both inward and outward,
to avoid punishment, though they retain the love and liking of it. The second
is an Initiall fear, that makes them cast from them, the very desire of
sinning, not out of the love of God, which they have not yet attained unto, but
out of the consideration of the woeful consequence of it: and thirdly, there is
a Filial fear, proceeding from the love of God, causing us to decline the
offending of him whom we so dearly love, and of whom we are so dearly loved,
more then any evil whatsoever.

The former kinds of fear that drive men from God, could not be found in
Christ, who was not only nearely joined unto God, but God himself blessed for
evermore: for neither did he prize life, nor the favor of the world that knew
him not, at any higher rate then was fit. Of the later sorts of fear, neither
Servile nor Initiall, were in him that was free from all sin; and touching
Filial fear, being well assured of his own power, in respect whereof it was
impossible for him to be drawn to the committing of any evil; though he had
that part of it, which stands in declining the offense of GOD more then any
evil in the world, yet not that other, that proceeds from the consideration
of the danger of being drawn thereunto: so that he could not fear lest he
should fall into sin. Besides all these kinds of fear, whereof some drive
men from God, and some bring them to God, there is another which is the ground
of them all, named Natural fear, which is the declining of any thing that is
hurtful, or contrary to the desired good of him that fears: This Natural
fear, as also the fear of Reverence, and that part of Filial fear, that is
the declining of sin, and the displeasing of God, was found in Christ, as all
other sinlesse and harmless affections were. For in the nature of man, he
reverenced and adored the Majesty of God his Father; and with a Natural fear,
declined death, and the bitterness of that cup he was to drink of, and with
a Filial fear declined the offending of God his Father, more then hell it
self.

But (passing by the fear of Reverence, and that part of Filial fear that
was found in Christ, concerning which there is no question among the Divines)
that we may the better discern, both what his Natural fear was, and in
respect whereof; we must note, that Caietan: in 3. part. Summae qu. 15. art. 7.
fear is, first, in respect of things which cannot be avoided, neither by
resistance and encounter, nor by flying from them: which things though they may
seem rather to make an impression of sorrow then fear, because in respect of
their certainty they are rather apprehended as present, then future; yet for
that we know not experimentally, how we shall be afflicted with them, and in
what sort we shall sustain and bear them, we may rightly be said to fear
them. Secondly, in respect of such things, as may be escaped or overcome with a
kind of uncertainty of event, and danger of the issue. Thirdly, in respect of
such as may be escaped or overcome without any uncertainty of the event or
issue, though not without great conflict and labor.

These kinds of Natural fear thus distinguished, it is easy to see what
Christ feared, and in what sort. For first he feared death, and the stroke of
the justice of God his Father, sitting on the Tribunal or Judgment seat, to
punish the sins of men, for whom he stood forth to answer that day: and
secondly, he feared everlasting destruction. The former of these he feared,
as things impossible to be escaped, in respect of the resolution and purpose of
God his Father, that by his satisfactory death and suffering, and no other way,
man should be delivered, The later he feared, that is, declined as a thing he
knew he should escape without all doubt or uncertainty of event, though not
without conflicting with the temptations of Satan, and the enduring of many
bitter and grievous things: for it was no otherwise possible for him, having
put himself into the communion of our nature, to escape the swallowing up of
that gulf into which wicked sinners sink down, but by resisting the
temptations of sin, that it might not enter into him, by breaking off the
same in others, and by suffering whatsoever it had deserved. But some man will
say, Annotat. in 5. ad Hebraeos. ver. 7.
Beza teaches that Christus veritus est succumbere, and absorberi a morte;
that is, that Christ feared to sink down, and to be swallowed up of death;
and consequently, that he feared everlasting destruction, with an uncertainty
of his escape from the same.

It is true that Beza says, that Christ feared to sink down, and to be
swallowed up of death; yet does not that follow, which is alleged as a
consequent of his saying, nor any thing contrary to that has been said of us.
For whereas there is a double Bonav. in 3 sent. did. 16. q. 2. Scotus in 3.
did. 15. q. unica
apprehension of reason in Christ, the one named Superior, that looks into
things with all circumstances: the other Inferior, that presents to the
mind of man some circumstances, and not all; Beza teaches, that Christ feared
to sink down, and to be swallowed up of death, that is, that he so declined
the swallowing gulf of death, out of which he saw no escape within the view of
Inferior reason, presenting unto him this hideous and destroying evil, in it
own nature endless, without showing the issue out of the same; that yet
notwithstanding simply he feared it not, Superior reason clearly showing him
the issue out of it. This will not seem strange unto us, if we consider, that in
Christ every faculty, power, and part was suffered, notwithstanding the
perfection found in some other, to do that which properly pertained to it; and
from hence it is easy to discern, how it came to pass, that Christ should
desire and pray for that which he knew should never be granted, as namely, that
the Math. 26. 39
cup of death might pass from him. For the sense of nature, and Inferior
reason presented death, and the ignominy of the Cross unto him, as they are
in themselves evil, without the consideration of any good to follow, and so
caused a desire to decline them, expressed in the prayer he made: But Superior
reason considering them with all circumstances, and knowing Gods resolution to
be such, that the World should thereby be saved, and by no other means,
persuaded to a willing acceptance of them. Between these desires and
resolutions, there was a diversity, but no contrariety; a subordination, but no
repugnance or resistance. There was no contrariety, because they were not in
respect of the same circumstances: for Death, as Death, is to be avoided;
neither did Superior reason ever dislike this judgment of the Inferior
Faculties, but showed farther and higher considerations, wherein it was to be
accepted and embraced. There was no repugnance or resistance, because the one
yielded to the other. For even as a man that is sick, considering the potion
prescribed to him by the Physician, to be bitter and unpleasant, declineth it
while he stays within the bounds and confines of that consideration, but when
casting his eyes farther, he is showed by the Physician, the happy operation of
good that is in it, he willingly accepts it, in that it is beneficial and
good: So Christ considering death as in it self evil, and contrary to nature,
while he stayed within the bounds and confines of that consideration, shunned
and declined it: and yet, as the means of man's salvation, joyfully embraced
it, accepting that he refused, and refusing that he accepted. Hugo de S.
Victore de Sac. fid. l. 1. part. 4. c. 19.
There is a thing (says Hugo de Sancto Victore) that is Bonum in se, good in
it self, and the good of every other thing. There is a thing good in it self,
and yet good but to certain purposes only. And there is a thing evil in it
self, and yet good to some purposes. The two former sorts of things may be
desired simply and absolutely: the third cannot but only respectively to
certain ends: and of this kind was the death of the Cross, with all the
woeful tormentings concurring with the same, which simply Christ shunned and
declined, but respectively to the ends above specified, willingly embraced. The
Papists Bellarm. l. 4. de anim. Christi c. 8.
impute I know not what impiety to Calvin, for that he says, Christ corrected
the desire and wish that suddenly came from him. But they might easily
understand if they pleased, that he is far from thinking that any desire, or
expressing of desire, was sudden in Christ, as rising in him without consent of
reason, or that he was inconsiderate in any thing he did or spoke: but his
meaning is, that some desires which he expressed, proceeded from Inferior
reason, that considers not all circumstances: and that he corrected, and
revoked the same, not as evil, but as not proceeding from the full and perfect
consideration of all things fit to be thought upon, before a full resolution be
passed.

Thus having spoken of Christ's fear and agony before his passion, it remains
that we proceed to speak of the sorrows that afflicted and distressed him in
his passion. These sorrows were such and so great, that being beset and
compassed about with them on every side, he professed Math. 26. 38.
his soul was heavy even unto the death: Yea. such was the bitterness of his
Soul, that pressed with the weight and burden of grievous and insupportable
evils, he was forced to cry out aloud, Matthew. 27. 46
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? These words of sorrowful passion,
the Papists say, Calvin thought to be words of despair, and that Christ
despaired when he uttered them. Surely this shameless slander shows, that
they that thus speak they care not what, are desperately malicious, and
maintain a desperate cause that cannot be vpholden, but by falsehood, and
lying. But Calvin is far from any such execrable and hellish blasphemy. For
having by occasion of these words, amplified the sorrows and distresses of
Christ in the time of his passion, Comment: in 27. Matthaei.
he says there were some that charged him that he said, these words were
words of desperation, and that Christ despaired when he uttered them: but he
accurseth such hellish blasphemy, and pronounces that howsoever the flesh
apprehended destroying evils, and inferior reason showed no issue out of the
same: yet there was ever a most sure resolved persuasion resting in his heart,
that he should undoubtedly prevail against them, and overcome them.

wherefore passing over this wicked calumniation of our adversaries, let us see
in what sense Christ the Son of God complained of dereliction, and cried
aloud unto his Father, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? For the
clearing hereof the Divines do note, that there are six kinds of dereliction
or forsaking, whereof Christ may be thought to have complained. The first
whereof, is by disunion of Person; the second, by loss of Grace; the third, by
diminution or weakening of grace; the fourth, by want of assurance of future
deliverance, and present support; the fifth, by denial of protection; the sixth
by withdrawing of solace, and destituting the forsaken of all comfort. It is
impious once to think, that Christ was forsaken any of the four first ways.
For the unity of his person was never dissolved, his graces were never either
taken away or diminished; neither was it possible he should want assurance of
future deliverance and present support, that was eternal God, and Lord of
life. But the two last ways he may rightly be said to have been forsaken; in
that his Father denied to protect and keep him out of the hands of his cruel,
bloody, and merciless enemies, no way restrayning them, but suffering them to
do the uttermost of that their wicked hearts could imagine, and left him to
endure the extremity of their fury and malice: and, that nothing might be
wanting to make his sorrows beyond measure sorrowful, withdrew from him that
solace he was wont to find in God: and removed far from him all things, that
might any way lessen and assuage the extremity of his pain. So that Christ
might rightly complain that he was forsaken, though he were far from
despair, and words of despair.

CHAP. 19.
Of the descending of Christ into Hell.

WITH the sufferings of Christ, his Descension into Hell is connexed, both in
the order of things, and in the Articles of the creed, and therefore it
remains, that in the next place, we speak of that. De anima Christi, l. 4.
c. 6.
Bellarmine observes, that the Article of Christ's descending into Hell, was
not in the Creed with all Churches from the beginning: for that Irenoens,
Origin, and Tertullian have it not: and Augustine in his book de Fide and
Symbolo, and in his four books de Symbolo ad Catechumenos, mentions it not,
expounding the Creed five times: though Epst. 99.
elsewhere he say, that none but an Infidel will deny the descension of Christ
into Hell. Ruffinus expounds it amongst the articles of the Creed, but
notes, that it is not in the Symbol of the Roman Church, nor those of the
East. The Nicene Creed has it not, but that of Athanasius has, and other of
the Fathers read it also. And at this day it is received in all the Churches
of the world without contradiction: though there be some question touching the
meaning of it.

De anima Christi, lib. 4. c. 7. 8. and 9.
Bellarmine reckons three opinions of Protestants, differently understanding
the same: whereof the first is, that to desce^d into hell, is to be utterly
annihilated, and brought to nothing: the second, that it is to suffer the
pains of hell: and the third that it is nothing else but his burial. Of these
three opinions imputed by Bellarmine to the Protestants, the first is nothing
but his own fancy, never dreamed of by any Protestant. For who ever,
professing himself a Christian, thought, that to go down into hell, is to be
utterly extinct, and to be no more? But (says he) Comment. in 2. Actorum.
Brentius brings in Christ speaking in this sort: I will descend into hell, I
will feel the pains of hell, and seem utterly to perish: therefore he is of
that opinion, whatsoever others are. A strange thing it is, that men of
learning, and judgment, should so forget themselves, as this Cardinal often
does, saying he knows not what. For does he utterly cease to be, that
feels the pains of Hell? or do not the wicked perish, and is not their
estate in holy Scripture described to be everlasting perdition? he knows
right well it is: and yet, I think, dares not from thence infer, that they
are utterly extinct, and have no more being: if he do, we will not fear to
brand him with the mark of impiety, and intolerable ignorance; for the wicked
are said utterly to perish, not by losing all being, but all good, desirable,
and happy being. If Brentius escape his hands, he has good hope to convince
Calvin of this error, and so still to lay upon us the heavy imputation of so
damnable impiety. Calvin has written a Book called Psychopanychia, the drift
whereof is, to prove, that the souls and spirits of men, sleep not after
death, but live, either in pain, or rest; out of this book the Cardinal
presumes, that he shall be able to prove, that the souls and spirits of
wicked men are utterly extinct, and have no more being. An ill chosen book,
in my opinion, for such a purpose, the whole drift thereof being to demonstrate
the contrary of that he undertakes to prove out of it. Yet let us see how he
goes about to convince the Author of this book of that error, which
throughout the same he labors to confute. His first demonstration is this.
Calvin proves at large in that book, that the wicked do live for ever,
though in pain and torment; therefore he thinks that to go down into hell,
is to be utterly extinct, and to have no more being. Astrange illation, and
such as perhaps will not satisfy all: therefore let us hear another, for he
has store of proofs. Calvin in the same book, labors to prove, that the
Spirits of just men are not extinguished, but that they live and remain for
ever, because that Christ's soul was not extinguished in his death, but
remained still, and lived after death. That Christ's soul was not extinguished
in his death, he strongly demonstrateth, because it was so commended into the
hands of his Father, that it could not perish so as the wicked do, who are
swallowed up of hell and destruction, and yet still remain and live for ever.
If this demonstration satisfy us not, what will? Christ's soul was so kept by
GOD the Father, to whom it was commended, that it could not perish at all, no
not so as the wicked do, who yet are not extinct, but live for ever in bitter
sense of woe and misery, much less be extinct, and utterly cease to be:
therefore Christ's descension into hell, was an utter extinction. These must be
the Cardinals proofs, if he will bring any out of that book to convince
Calvin of that error, wherewith he charge him. But he knows right well,
that neither these, nor any other that he does or can produce out of the same,
conclude any such thing as he intends; and therefore let the Reader know that
the Cardinal never persuaded himself, that either Brentius, or Calvin, or
any other Protestant was of that opinion, with which he charge them; but that
he sought only to abuse his Reader: and therefore that which in vile hypocrisy
he says of Calvin and Brentius, that De anim^ Christi l. 4. c. 7.
they bring in Atheism, by these their impious and damnable assertions, may be
verified of himself, and other his consorts, who by their shameless lying,
and hellish slaundering, wrong both God and men, and bring all Religion into
horrible contempt. Wherefore leaving these Hellish and Devilish slaunderers to
Gods most righteous and fearful Judgments; touching the descending of Christ
into hell, it is true that Saint Epist. 99.
Augustine says, None but an Infidel will deny it: for it is one of the
Articles of our Christian Faith. But how we are to understand this his
descending, it is not so certain.

Whereupon we shall find that there are presently three opinions in the
Church concerning the same. For some understand by the name of Hell, the place
of dead bodies, and the dominion of death holding soul and body asunder, and
turning the body forsaken of the soul into rottenness, and corruption. These
do so interpret this Article, as that they understand nothing else by Christ's
descending into Hell, but his going down into the chambers of death, and his
three days continuance in the places of darkness under the dominion thereof.
Others understand by the name of Hell, the pains of Hell, and think, that
Christ's descending into Hell, was nothing else but the suffering of hellish
pains in his Soul, in the time of his Agony in the Garden, and in the hour
of his death upon the Cross. A third sort there are, that understand by the
name of Hell, into which (in this Article) Christ is said to have descended,
the receptacles and places appointed for the souls of men after this life
sequestered from the presence of God, and not admitted into Heaven. These places
the Romanists imagine to be four. Of which, the first is, the Hell of the
damned, wherein wicked Cast-awayes, and impenitent sinners are punished, not
only with the loss of the sight of God, but with sense also of smart and
misery, and that for ever. The second, is by them named Limbus puerorum, where
Infants dying unbaptized, and in the state of original sin, are supposed to be
holden for ever exiled from the presence of God, and his holy ones, yet without
all sensible smart or pain. The third (they imagine) is Purgatory, where they
think the souls of good, but yet imperfect men, are punished till they have
satisfied the wrath of God for sins committed in the time of their life, but
not sufficiently repented of, nor satisfied for while they lived. The fourth
place imagined by the^, is Limbus patrum, wherein the souls of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the just, were holden till the coming of Christ,
and kept from the sight and presence of God, yet without all sensible smart or
grief. These being the different mansions of that place, wherein the souls of
men are sequestered from the presence of God, comprehended all in a sort, under
the name of Hell, as our Adversaries fancy: the ordinary opinion of the
Schoolmen heretofore was, Thom. Summae part. 3. q. 52. art. 2.
that Christ's Soul went locally only into Limbus Patrum, and not into any of
the other man^ons of Hell, neither Limbus puerorum, Purgatory, nor the lowest
Hell: but that he descended into these places vertually only, in that he made
it appear to all that were in them, that the work of Redemption was now
wrought, by force whereof, they in Purgatory, after full satisfaction should be
received into Heaven: the rest, as well in Limbus puerorum. as in the lowest
Hell, being excluded from all hope of bettering their estate, and left in
endless misery with the Devil and his Angels. But De anima Christi l. 4. c. 15
Bellarmine thinks, he went personally, and locally into the place of the
damned, even into the lowest Hell. These being the diverse and different
opinions of men, touching the meaning of the Article of Christ's descending into
Hell, let us see what is to be resolved touching the same.

It is true, according to the first and second opinion imputed by Bellarmine
unto the Protestants, that Christ dying, after a sort suffered the pains of
Hell, and being dead, was under the dominion of death three days: yet neither
of these interpretations seems fitly to agree to the Article of our Faith:
for that the hellish and bitter sufferings of Christ are sufficiently
expressed, in that he is said to have suffered under Pontius Pilate, to have
been crucified, and to have dyed; and his being under the dominion of death,
in that he is said to have been buried. Wherefore the third opinion, which is,
that he descended into the places of souls sequestered, and shut out from the
presence of God, seems more truly to express the meaning of this Article,
not understanding that he went into Purgatory, Limbus puerorum, or Limbus
patrum, but that he descended into the lowest Hell. For the three former
imagined places are no where, and so no part of Hell into which Christ
descended.

Of Purgatory, we find nothing in the Scriptures, or in the writings of the
most ancient Fathers, as I have Book 3. c. 17.
elsewhere showed. Of Limbus puerorum, we read in Augustine, but confuted and
rejected by him, as an erroneous conceit of the Pelagians, who imagined a
third place between Heaven and Hell, and a third or middle estate k August. in
Hypognosticon resp. 5. l. (...). de peccator. merit. and remis. c. 28. and
sermon. 14. de verb. Apost.
between heaven happiness, and the miseries of the lowest Hell, wherein men
dying in the state of Nature only, shall continue for ever deprived of the
happiness of seeing God, but no way subjected to sensible smart and grief. Of
this it is, that S. Augustine says, he has heard of the right hand, and the
left; of Come ye blessed, and Go ye cursed; of Sheep and Goats; of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and Hell where the Devil and his Angels are everlastingly
punished: But of a third estate, of a third sort of men, or of a third place,
he has never heard or read, and therefore is verily persuaded there is no
such.

Touching Limbus patrum, it is true, that some amongst the Ancient seem to
speak of some such thing: but we cannot persuade our selves that there is any
such place, nor that Christ is to be understood to have descended thither,
when in the Article of the Creed, he is said to have descended into hell.
First, because, as Epist. 99.
S. Augustine fitly notes, we do not find in the Scripture, that the word Hell
is ever used to express any other place, but a place of woe and misery: and
therefore so direful a word, used only to note unto us the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone, cannot signify that place where the souls of the
just did rest till the coming of Christ, named in the parable or history of
the rich man and Lazarus, Abraham's bosom. Neither did Augustine ever learn
any other lesson afterward, as Andrad: defens. fidei Trid: li. 2. fol. 175.
some untruly report that he did. Secondly, because we cannot conceive what
Christ did benefit the spirits of the just, Abiding in Abraham's bosom, when
he went down into hell: A quibus (as Saint Vbi supra.
Augustine rightly notes) secundum beatificam Diuinitatis praesentiam,
nunqua^ecessit, sed quemadmodum apud Tartara semper fuit judicante potentia,
ita in paradiso, and sinu Abrahae beatificante sapientia; that is, from whom
according to that presence of his Deity that makes all them happy that enjoy
it, he never departed, but as he was ever present in hell by his power,
judging and fastening condemnation to the woeful inhabitants of that place of
utter darkness; so he was allwaies in paradise, and in the bosom of Abraham,
as that wisdom of God that fills al with blessedness, where it vouchsafes to
manifest it self. Christ therefore descended into Hell, according to the
Article of the Creed; into the place of souls sequestered from the presence of
God, into the place of da^ ned souls even into the lowest hell: for there are
no souls or spirits of men sequestered from the presence of God, after the
separation from the body, but the souls of wicked Cast-awayes: nor other place
of souls so sequestered, but the prison of the lowest hell.

The end of Christ's, going and descending into the hell of the damned, was not
as Stromat. li. 6.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and ^ome other did think, to preach unto the damned
spirits, and to deliver from thence such as should there believe in him, either
all or any. For we must constantly resolve, that none were delivered out of
hell by Christ's descending, nor none there converted by his preaching, but that
his descending was only to fasten condemnation to the Devil and his Angels,
to triumph over the principalities of darkness, to secure us from being
surprised by them, and to prevent our coming thither, not to fetch back any
that were there already. The places that are brought to prove that Christ
preached in Hell, and sought the deliverance either of all, or at the least of
some of them he found there, are specially two. The first is that of the
Apostle S. Peter: where he says: 1. Pet. 4. 6:
The Gospel was preached to the dead, that they might be judged according to
men in the flesh, but live according to God in the Spirit. Here we see the
Apostle speaks of preaching unto the dead; but he is to be understood to
speak of preaching to the dead, Andrad. defens. ^d. Trident. l. 2. p. 173.
that is, to such as were dead when he wrote, but not when the Gospel was
preached unto them: as we say Christ shall judge the quick and dead, not as
if any should be judged being dead, but because many of them that shall be
judged, are then dead when we speak of them, though they shall not be, when
they shall come into judgment: Or otherwise, that he speaks of such as were
dead in sin, as some enterpret his words. The second place is that of the
same Apostle, where he says, that 1. Pet. 3. 19. 20.
Christ in spirit went, and preached to the spirits in prison, sometimes r Lyra
and Glossa ordinaria in hunc locum.
disobedient in the days of Noe. But as Saint Epist. 99.
Augustine fitly notes, this preaching of Christ in spirit mentioned by the
Apostle, was not after his death in his humane Soul, but in the days of Noe
in his eternal Spirit, and Deity. And as Defens. fid. Trident. li. 2. p. 172.
Andradius rightly observes, they that he preached unto, are named spirits in
prison, because they were spirits in prison, when Peter wrote of them, not when
Christ preached to them: though, if they should be understood to be named
Spirits in prison, as being such when Christ preached unto them, yet we might
rightly conceive as Saint Augustine does, that he preached to the Souls and
Spirits of Men shut up in the prison house of their sinful bodies, and the
dark dungeons of ignorance, and sin, and not in the prison of hell.

Thus then our Divines deny the descending of Christ into Purgatory, Limbus
puerorum, and Limbus patrum, persuading themselves that there are no such
places. But his descending into the Hell of the damned they all acknowledge,
though not to deliver men thence, yet to fasten condemnation to them that are
there, to bind Satan the Prince of darkness, that he may not prevail
against them that believe in Christ: and to keep them from sinking down into
that devouring pi^ into which he went, and out of which he so triumphantly
returned. Only this difference may seem to be amongst them, that some of them
think he went personally and locally, others only vertually, in power and
operation: Which diversity of opinions is likewise amongst the Papists;
Bellarmine, and some other in our time teaching, that he went locally into the
lowest Hell: and the Schoolmen, that he went not locally into the lowest
Hell, but vertually only in the manifestation of his virtue, and power, and
into Limbus Patrum locally and personally: so that all the controversy
between them and us, stands in two points: The descending of Christ into
Limbus Patrum, and the suffering of Hellish pains. For whereas Cardinal De
anima Christi l. 4. cap. 10.
Bellarmine labors to prove a local Hell he busieth himself in vain, no
man denying it: But, says he, Beza, and others do say, the words used in the
Hebrew and Greek Sheol, and (...), do always signify the Grave in holy
Scripture, and not Hell, whence it may seem to follow, that there is no other
Hell then the Grave: and so consequently, noe local Hell for damned souls.
Surely this is a most unjust, and untrue imputation. For Beza, and the other
learned Divines he speaks of, do not affirm, that Sheol and (...), do
precisely and always in holy Scripture signify the grave, but as De arcano
sermon c. 21.
Arias Montanus, Defens. fidei Trident. l. (...). fol. 174.
Andradius, and sundry other excellently learned amongst our adversaries do,
that Sheol, which the Septuagint translate (...), does not precisely, and
immediately signify the place of damned souls, but in an indifferency, and
generality of signification, notes out unto us the receptacles of the dead:
And that, seeing there are two parts that are sundered one from another in them
that are dead, there are likewise two kinds of receptacles of death, or
dwelling places for them on whom death has her full force: the one provided
for their bodies putrefying, and rotting, and the other for their souls
tormented everlastingly. So that, when these words, thus indifferently
signifying either of these receptacles of death, do note out unto us the one,
or the other of these two places, either the grave for the body, or hell for
the soul: cannot be gathered out of the words themselves, but the
circumstances of those places of Scripture where they are used. In like sort
they say, that the word Nephesh translated (...) and anima, does not always
signify the spiritual substance of man that is immortal, but the whole
person, the life, yea, and some times that which has been alive, though now
dead, even a dead carcass: according as we read in Leuiticus, where God
pronounces, that whosoever touches Leuit. 21. 2. Numb. 19. 11.
Nephesh, that is, a dead corpse, shall be unclean. And in this sense it is,
that Version. Interlinear. in Bibi^lijs Regijs.
Arias Montanus translateth not that place in the Psalm. 16. 11.
Psalm, Non derelinques animam meam in inferno, that is, Thou shall not leave
my soul in Hell, but, Non derelinques animam meam in sepulchro, that is, Thou
shall not leave my Soul, Life, or Person, or that Body that sometimes was
alive, in the Grave. For it it cannot be understood, that the reasonable soul,
or immortal Spirit of Christ, was ever in the grave, either to be delivered
thence, or left there. If it be said, that the Greek and Latin words used by
the Translators, signify more precisely hell, and the reasonable Soul or
Spirit, then those Hebrew words Sheol and Nephesh do: we answer, that
whatsoever their use and signification be in profane Authors, yet they must be
enlarged in the Scriptures, to signify all that which the Hebrew words do,
that so the translation may be true and full. De anima Christi, l. 4. cap. 10.
Bellarmine, to confute this explication; and construction of the Hebrew words
made by Beza, and the rest, urges that the Septuagint never translateth Sheol
by (...), which properly signifies the grave, but by (...) and that therefore
Sheol does not properly signify the Grave. Hereunto we answer, that the word
of it self being indifferent to signify any receptacles of the dead, whether
of their bodies or souls, must not be translated by a word precisely noting
the grave, as (...) does: and that therefore it is not to be marvailed at, that
the Septuagint never translate the Hebrew word by this Greek word of a
narrower compass, and straiter signification. Secondly we say, that seeing
Sheol, when (by the circumstances of the places where it is used) it is
restrained to signify only the place of dead bodies, yet does not precisely
note that fitting receptacle provided for them to be laid in, as in their beds
of rest, by the living, as (...) does, but any other receptacle what^er, even
of such as want that honorable kind of burial, whether they be devoured by
wild beasts, swallowed up of the Sea, or received into any other place of stay
and abode, till the time of the general resurrection, the Translators used not
the word (...), of too narrow compass and straight signification, but the word
(...) enlarged by them to express all that the Hebrew word imports: and in
this sense Genesis 37. 35.
Jacob said, he would go down mourning into Sheol, or (...) to his son, not
into a place of souls sequestered from God, or into hell, sor he never thought
his son to be gone thither, nor into the grave properly so named, for he
thought his son had bin devoured of a wild beast; but into the receptacles of
the dead, and into the chambers of death, wherein there are many, and very
different mansions. The words of this holy Patriarch, professing that he would
go down mourning to his son into Sheol, or (...), and not observing of this
generality of signification of the word Sheol, but restraining it to note only
the receptacles of the damned spirits, gave occasion to some for to think, that
the souls of the Just were in some part of Hell, or at least in some invisible
place far from Heaven, and within the confines of Hell, till the resurrection
of Christ, if not till the general resurrection, and his teturne, to judge
both the quick and dead, as Cont. haeres. l. 5^. in fine.
Irenaeus, De anim. c. 32
Tertullian, and others imagined. But howsoever the Greek or Latin words may
seem to be restrained, to note only the places of damned spirits, yet it is
plain and evident, that the Hebrew word Sheol signifies any devouring gulf
or pit, swallowing up the dead, in that Number. 16. 33
Kore, Dathan, and A^iram, with their wives, children, cattle, tents, and all
that ever they had, went down into Sheol, which cannot be understood to be
precisely the place of the damned spirits, unless we will imagine, that
sheep, oxen, and tents may find any place amongst the damned spirits.

The reason why our Divines do so much urge the generality of the
signification of this word, and will not suffer it to be restrained to signify
only the place of damned spirits, is, because the propriety of the word
admits no restraint, and there are many things in Scripture said to go down
into Sheol, or to be in Sheol, that cannot be understood to have gone into
Hell, or to be in Hell; and not for that they deny Christ's descending into the
Hell of the damned: for there is no Protestant but confe^seth that Christ did
virtually descend into Hell, and many think he descended locally, and
personally; which difference of opinions is also amongst the Papists. For In 3
sent. did. 22. q. 3.
Durandus thinks that Christ descended into no part of hell personally, or
locally, but virtually only. Thom. Summae 3. part. (...). 52. art. 2.
The rest of the Schoolmen for the most part suppose, that he descended
locally into that part of Hell which they call Limbus Patrum, but into the Hell
of the damned, and the other infernal Mansions vertually only. But De anima
Christi l. 4. c. 16
Bellarmine thinks he went locally into the lowest Hell, or Hell of the
damned, moved so to think, as he says, by the authority of the Fathers,
that seem to have been of that opinion. So that, as I said before, the only
difference between the Romanistes, and our Divines about the descending of
CHRIST into Hell, is, touching the suffering of Hellish pains, (whereof I have
spoken at large before, clearing the opinions of our Divines in such sort, as I
think our Adversaries will not much resist against the same so understood, as
I have showed they must be) and touching Limbus Patrum. Wherefore let us
proceed to take a view of the proofs they bring for confirmation of their
Limbus.

The first place that Bellarmine brings for confirmation thereof, is that in
Genesis, where Jacob says, Genesis 37. 35.
I will descend or go down mourning to my Son into Sheol. See, says De
anima Christi l. 4. c. 11
Bellarmine, Jacob was a godly man, and so was Joseph, and yet neither of them
went up into Heaven, but both descended into Hell. That they descended into
Sheol, that is, into the chambers of death, and receptacles of dead bodies, we
make no question; but that they went into the Hell of the damned, or into any
region of darkness near unto it, cannot be proved; howsoever some amongst
the Ancient, deceived by the Greek and Latin words (...) and Infernus, used
by the Translatours to express the force of the Hebrew word Sheol, have so
thought. The second proof that he brings is this. Abraham in the Gospel
tells the rich man in Hell, that between thee^ there is Luke 16. 26.
(...), which signifies such a saeparation as is by the renting of the earth,
and dividing of one part thereof from another; therefore there is no solid
thing between them, and consequently, they were all in the same devouring
gulf or pit. But this surely is a strange kind of proof: for his own
friends, and followers understand by this (...), the immovable decree of God,
who will never suffer the one to pass to the other, and not literally such a
void, empty, and gaping distance, as the word does properly signify. Yea In
eum locum
Maldonatus is so far from being persuaded by the bare signification of this
one word, that Abraham and Lazarus were in the same devouring gulf with the
rich man, that he says, the place Abraham speaks of, between which and Hell
there is so great a distance, is heaven. Whereunto Augustine seems in part to
consent, who Epist. 99.
pronounces that he could never find, that Abraham's bosom, wherein Lazarus
rested, was any part of hell. Wherefore it is absurd to imagine upon the bare
and only signification of the word (...), that Abraham, and the rich man in
Hell, were in the same pit, divided only by an empty gulf between them; seeing
Tertullian a very ancient writer, that knew the force of this word, as well as
Bellarmine, affirms, notwithstanding any thing that may be inferred from
thence, r Aduersus Marcionem, l. 4
that Abraham's bosom is on high, far above those infernal dwellings of the
damned. Whereunto that in the Proverbs agrees, Pro. 15. 24.
The way of life is on high to the prudent, to avoid from Hell beneath.

The next place that the Jesuit brings to prove Limbus, is that of 1 Samuel 28.
Samuel, who^ the Pythonisse raised, when Saul consulted her, being destitute
of other means of direction. But this place of all other makes least to the
purpose, it being very doubtful, whether it were true Samuel that appeared, or
Satan taking unto him a body, and coming forth in the likeness of Samuel.
But let us suppose it was true Samuel: could not his Soul return from some
other place as well as out of Limbus? No doubt it might: and that which
Bellarmine has, that the Soul of Samuel appearing unto Saul, seemed to come
out of the earth, and consequently out of Limbus, is a very silly conceit; for
what eye could see and discern Samuels Soul? But, says he, Samuel appearing
told Saul a wicked and godless man, that he should be with him very shortly:
therefore he was in some region of Hell, and not in Heaven, seeing this wicked
King could not go to him into heaven. We need not seek far for answer to
this objection; for the ordinary In hunc locum.
Gloss does excellently answer it. saying, that if these were not the words
of a lying Spirit, they may be understood in respect of the common condition of
death, not in respect of the same place, there being so great a distance
between them, and so surely settled and established.

Touching this appearing Samuel, I find great difference of opinions amongst
Divines: some thinking it was true Samuel the Man of God; others, a lying
Spirit in his likeness. Lyra in his annotations upon the 1. of Kings, Chapter
28, puts down the reasons brought on both sides; and first, that it was the
true Samuel, he shows that these reasons are commonly brought. First,
because the Scripture speaks of him, as of his very person, not of any
counterfeit likeness of him, calling him not once, but often, by the name of
Samuel. Secondly, for that it had bin a great dishonor and irreuerence offered
to Samuel, if so often the Devil should have been called by his name in holy
Scripture. Lastly, for that it is said in Ecclesiasticus, in the praise of
Samuel the Prophet of God, that Ecclus. 46. 20.
he prophesied after his death, that he afterward slept again, and that he
made known to King Saul his end, and the overthrow of his armies, which
prediction is not to be imputed to a lying Spirit, seeing he so certainly
foretold what was to come to pass. On the other side, he produces these
proofs. First the Gloss upon the 29 of Esaias says, the Pythonisse did not
raise Samuel, but euocated and called out the Devil in his likeness.
Secondly, it is not likely, that God, who would not answer Saul by living
Prophets, would send any from the dead to advise or direct him. Thirdly, he
that appeared unto Saul said unto him, To morrow thou shall be with me; but
Saul as a wicked man was to be in Hell the place of torments: therefore he that
appeared was so. Fourthly he that appeared suffered Saul to worship him, which
true Samuel would not have done, seeing God only is to be worshipped. Fifthly,
if it were true Samuel that appeared; either he was raised by divine power, or
by the power of magical incantations: if by divine power, God should very much
have favored magical arts, if at the invocation of this Pythonisse he had
wrought such a miracle: if by the power of Magic, then was he raised by the
Devil: and that either with his consent, and then he had done evil, which he
could not do: or without his consent, which could not be, seeing the Devil
has no power to force the Saints of God after their death, and departure
hence. Lastly, he alleges the authority of Ad Simplicianum.
Augustine, who bringing the reasons on both sides, in the end inclines rather
to this later opinion: and that in the Part. 2. causa, 26. quaest. 5. ca. Nec
mirum.
Decrees, Cap. Nec mirum etc. adding that if that decree taken out of Augustine
be the decree of the Church, noe man may think otherwise: but if it be not
(as he thinks it is not, because Augustine, out of whom it was taken,
disputes the matter doubtfully, and many of the Divines since the compiling of
that decree, are of another opinion, which they ought not to be, if it were the
decree of the Church) he rather thinks it was true Samuel that appeared, then
any counterfeit in his likeness. If any man desire to see the different
opinions of the Fathers touching this point, let him read Tertullian in his
book de Anima, the 33, Chapter, and the annotations upon the same place of
Tertullian. But howsoever, whether it were true Samuel that appeared unto Saul,
or a counterfeit in his likeness, I hope it is clear and evident out of that
which has been said, that this apparition no way proves the imagined Limbus
of the Papists.

There remain yet two other places of Scripture to be examined, that are
brought for confirmation of the same, but yealding as little proof as this. The
one is in the prophesies of Zachary, the other in the Epistle of S. Peter. The
words in the former place according to the Vulgar translation are these: Zach.
9. 11.
Thou in the blood of thy testament, have delivered thy prisoners out of the
Lake wherein there is no water. But in the Original the words are otherwise,
and In versione interlineari,
Arias Montanus translateth the place otherwise in this sort, And thou, to wit,
Jerusalem, in the blood of thy testament, that is, sprinkled with the blood ^f
thy testament, rejoice and be glad; I have dismissed thy prisoners, out of the
lake wherein there is no water. So that these words, Thou in the blood of thy
testament, are not appliable unto Christ, but to Jerusalem; and the other
touching the dismissing of the prisoners out of the lake wherein is no water,
unto God the Father, who speaks in this place to Jerusalem, concerning
Christ her King, and comforts her, saying: Rejoice, o Daughter of Sion: be
glad, o Daughter of Jerusalem; for behold, thy King comes unto thee meek,
and riding on an Ass used to the yoke, and the fool of an Ass. I will destroy
the Chariot from Ephraim, and the Horse from Jerusalem: He shall destroy the
bows of the fighters, and the multitude, and publish peace to the nations. He
shall rule from Sea to Sea, and from the river to the end of the Land; And
thou, to wit, Jerusalem, in the blood of thy testament, that is, sprinkled
with the blood of thy testament, rejoice and be glad. I have dismissed thy
Prisoners out of the lake wherein there is no water. Thus we see this place
according to the Original verity and the translation of Arias Montanus, makes
nothing for the confirmation of that, for proof whereof it is brought. Yea,
though we should follow the Vulgar Translation, and take the words to be spoken
by Almighty God to Christ his Son, yet could not our adversaries prove Limbus
out of this place. For the Author of the Gloss, and many other, following the
Vulgar Translation, understand these words of the deliverance of the people of
God, out of the captivity of Babylon, which was as a deep pit, having in it no
water but mire, wherein their feet stuck fast. And In eum locum.
Hierome himself, though he understand the words of Christ's descending into
hell, yet mentions the other interpretation also in the same place, not much
disliking it. Neither does his interpretation of Christ's descending into Hell
prove Limbus. For he speaks of the prison of Hell, where is no mercy, and
calls it a cruel, or fearful Hell; and not of Limbus patrum, or Abraham's
bosom. Bellarmine cunningly after his manner, to discredit our interpretation
of deliverance out of Babylonicall captivity, makes, as if Calvin only had
expounded the words of the holy Prophet in that sort; whereas yet many
excellent Divines, long before Calvin was borne, interpreted them in the very
same sort, as we do. But if the challenge of novelty fail, he betaketh
himself to another of absurdity, and improbabilitie, pronouncing that our
Interpretation has no probability: first, because in the words immediately
going before, there is a prophecy concerning Christ, uttered unto Jerusalem
in these words: Rejoice O daughter of Sion, for behold thy King comes, etc.
Which the Evangelists expound of Christ's coming into Jerusalem: and then
secondly, an Apostrophe to Christ in the words questioned. But first herein he
is deceived: for the speech of Almighty God to his Church, begun in the former
words, is still continued in these, showing what favors for Christ's fake he
had, and still meant to bestow on her: whereas according to the Translation
they follow, there is first a speech directed to the Church concerning Christ,
then an Apostrophe to Christ, and then thirdly, a return unto the Church
again. Secondly, if that were granted, which he urges touching the supposed
Apostrophe, it would not prove that there is no probability in our
Interpretation. For this consequence will never be made good in the Schools:
Christ is prophesied of in the words immediately going before, and in these
words God speaks unto him by way of Apostrophe; therefore they cannot be
understood of deliverance out of Babylonicall captivity; seeing it is
certain, that Christ delivered the Israelites out of all the miseries, out of
which they escaped. But, says Bellarmine, if we admit this Interpretation, in
what blood of the covenant may we understand the Jews to have been delivered
out of Babylonicall captivity? Surely, this question is soon answered. For
their deliverance out of the hands of their enemies, and all other benefits,
were bestowed on them by virtue of the covenant between God and them, which
was to be established in the blood of Christ; in figure whereof, all holy
things among the Jews were sprinkled with blood, as the Book of the Covenant,
the Altar, the Sanctuary, and People.

Wherefore seeing this place makes nothing for the confirmation of the Popish
error, touching Limbus, let us come to the last place brought for proof
thereof, which is that of S. Peter concerning 1 Pet. 1. ^9. 20.
Christ's going in spirit, and preaching to the spirits in prison: and see,
whether from thence it may be proved any better. Epist. 99.
S. Augustine understands the words of the Apostle, as I noted before, of
Christ's preaching in the days of Noe, in his eternal Spirit of Deity, and not
of preaching in Hell, in his humane Soul after death: but this interpretation
of S. Augustine, first Bellarmine rejects as contrary to the Fathers: and
secondly, endeavors to improve it by weakening the reasons brought to
confirm it, and by opposing certain reasons against it. The first of the
Fathers that he alleges, is Stromat. l. 6.
Clemens Alexandrinus, who indeed understands the words of S. Peter, not as
S. Augustine does, but of Christ preaching in Hell after his death in his
humane Soul; but, not conceiving to what purpose preaching should serve in
Hell, if there were not intended a conversion and saving of some there, he
runs into a most gross and dangerous error, condemned and rejected as well
by Bellarm. and his companions, as by us: so that his authority, as contrary to
Augustines interpretation, needed not to have been alleged, nor would not
have been, if Bellarmine had meant sincerely. For Clemens Alexandrinus
affirms, as he well knows, that so many Infidels as believed in Christ,
and listened to the words of his preaching when he came into Hell, were
delivered thence, and made partakers of everlasting salvation: against which
error, himself being Judge, Saint Augustine not without good cause disputes
in his Epistle to Euodius. The second ancient Writer that he produces for
proof of Christ's preaching in Hell after his death, is Ep. ad Epictetum.
Athanasius, who indeed does expound the words of Peter, of Christ's going in
Soul to preach in Hell after his death; but no way expresses in what sort, to
whom, to what purpose, or with what success he preached. Haeresi. 77.
Epiphanius, whom he produces in the third place, does not so interpret the
words of Peter himself; but only upon another occasion cites the epistle of
Athanasius to Epictetus, wherein he does so interpret them. So that the
authority of Epiphanius might have been spared. Ruffinus in his explication of
the Creed, interprets the words of Peter, as Athanasius does. Lib de recta
fide ad The^dosium. and lib 12. in Ioannem cap. 36.
Cyrill in the place cited by Bellarmine, speaks of Christ's preaching to the
spirits in Hell, but says nothing in particular of this place of Peter. In
cap. 10. ad Romanos.
S. Ambrose does not speak of this place, but that other of preaching the
Gospel to the dead. So that there are no more Ancient writers cited by
Bellarmine, that do precisely interpret this place of Peter of Christ's
preaching in Hell in his humane soul after death, but only Clemens,
Athanasius, Ruffinus, and Oecumenius. On the other side we have S. Augustine,
Beda, the authors of the Ordinary and Interlincall Glosses, Lyra, Hugo
Cardinalis, and other, interpreting the words as we do: so that our
Adversaries have no great advantage in respect of the number of Interpreters:
and yet if they had, it would not help them for confirmation of their supposed
Limbus, seeing some of the Fathers cited by him, as namely Clemens Alexandrinus,
speak directly of preaching in the lowest Hell, for the conversion of
Infidels; which they dislike as much as we. Wherefore let us proceed to
examine the reasons that are brought either of the one side, or the other, to
confirm their several interpretations of these words; and let us see how
Bellarmine weakneth the reasons brought by S. Augustine, and improueth his
interpretation by reasons brought against it. The first reason whereby S.
Augustine confirms his interpretation, is, for that mortification in the
flesh, and vivification in the Spirit mentioned by the Apostle, cannot be
understood of the body and Soul, of Christ, as they that follow the other
interpretation do understand them, seeing Christ never dying in soul, could
not be said to be quickened in it. Besides that, the very phrase of the
Scripture opposing flesh and Spirit in Christ, does ever import the infirmity
of his humane nature, and the power of his Deity: and in other men, that part
that is renewed by the sanctification of the Spirit, and that which is not yet
so renewed. Against the former part of this reason of S. Augustine, Bellarmine
opposes himself, saying that it is not good: seeing a thing may be said to be
quickened that was never dead, if it be preserved from dying, and kept alive.
But he should know, that only those things may be said to be quickened, in
that they were preserved from dying, which otherwise, if they had not been so
preserved, might have been killed, or dyed of themselves. Which cannot be
verified of the Soul of Christ, that could neither die of it self, nor be
killed by any other; and therefore the Soul of Christ cannot be said to be
quickened in this sense. The place in the seventh of the Acts, brought by
Bellarmine to prove, that those things may be said to be quickened that were
never dead, besides that it is nothing to the purpose, is strangely wrested.
For S. Stephen in that place speaks nothing of vivification or quickening in
that sense we now speak of it, but of multiplying, and increasing; saying,
that Act. 7. 18.
After the death of Joseph, there rose up another King in Egypt, that knew not
Joseph, who evil entreated our Fathers, and made them cast out their infants,
and newborn children, (...); that is, that they should not increase, and
multiply: and therefore Bellarmine should not in reason so have pressed the
Latin word of vivification used by the Vulgar translatour, seeing the
Original imports no such thing as he endeavors to prove. But to take away
all doubt touch^ng the words of Peter; there is a decree of the Sess. 4.
Decret. de editione and vsu sacrorum Libr^rum.
Tridentine Council, that the Romanists in all their disputations, readings,
and sermons, shall use the Vulgar translation, and no way dare to refuse the
authority of it under any pretense whatsoever. Now in the ordinary readings of
the Vulgar Translation, the words of the Apostle do lie in this sort; Christ
dyed for sinners, the just for the unjust, that he might offer us to God;
mortified in the flesh, but quickened in the Spirit, in which Spirit he went
and preached, etc. So that according to this reading, the Apostle speaks not
of Christ's quickening but of our quickening in the Spirit, which cannot be
understood of the humane Soul of Christ, but of the Spirit of sanctification:
whence it follows, that Christ going to preach in that Spirit, by the force
whereof we are quickened, and made alive from the death of sin, went in his
eternal spirit of Deity, and not in his humane Soul. But, says Bellarmine,
it cannot be said properly, but Metaphorically only, that Christ did go in
his eternal Spirit of Deity to preach to the old world. Suppose it to be so:
Is it so strange a thing, that such local motions should be Metaphorically
attributed unto God, that we should thereupon deny the going of Christ to
preach, to have been in his eternal Spirit of Deity? Do we not often read
in Scripture of Gods coming down to see what things are done on earth? But
it is hard to understand by Spirits in prison, the souls of men shut up in the
prisons of their bodies, and in the dark dungeons of ignorance and impiety, as
Augustine does, and therefore we must not follow his interpretation. Surely, it
is true that it is something hard to understand these words of the Apostle, as
S. Augustine does, and therefore we rather follow the interpretation of Defens.
fidei Trident. lib. 2. fol. 172.
Andradius before mentioned, who expounds the words of the Apostle so as
Augustine does, save that he thinks that they to whom Christ preached in his
eternal Spirit in the days of Noe, are named spirits in prison, not for that
they were so when he preached to them, but when Peter wrote of them. Thus we
see, the Cardinal has not yet greatly weakened any of Augustines reasons. One
reason more S. Augustine has, so forcible and strong, to confirm the
interpretation he follows, that I think the Jesuit will hardly be able to
say much against it: If the Apostle (says S. Augustine) had meant to describe
the descending of Christ in his humane soul to deliver the Patriarchs, he
would not have expressed his meaning by saying, He went and preached to the
spirits in prison sometimes disobedient in the days of Noe. For, to say, a^
Bellarmine does, that Christ went and preached only to the good spirits in
Limbus, but that the Apostle describing the same, names the disobedient in the
days of Noe, lest it might be thought that they all perished, is frivolous;
seeing there was no reason, why the Apostle in describing the descending of
Christ into Limbus, should be so careful to let all men know, that they did
not all perish that contemned the preaching of Noe: and besides, if the Apostle
had meant any such thing, he would have added, that howsoever these men were
disobedient for a time, yet they did afterward repent, obeying the voice of
God speaking by the mouth of Noe. If any man shall ask, as Bellarmine does,
why Peter should mention Christ's preaching in his eternal Spirit to them in
the days of Noe, more then to them in the days of Abraham, or Moses: the
answer is easy: for therefore does he mention them, rather then any other,
because they that lived before the flood, were men of another world, and are
named the old world, and it was the greatest mutation of the world that ever
was before or since, that followed upon the refusal of Christ's preaching by
the mouth of Noe, who was the same then, that he is now: the same yesterday,
and to day, and for ever.

That which the Cardinal has in the conclusion, that the Fathers generally
believed that Christ descended into Hell, we think to be most true: but that
the souls of all the just were in Hell, till the resurrection of Christ, and
then delivered thence, is not the opinion of the Fathers. For Loco citato.
Augustine clearly denies that the spirits of the just, dying before Christ,
were in Hell, till the coming of Christ; and touching the rest of them, some
thought, that the Spirits of the just are and shall be in a place of
sequestration, separate from the presence of God, till the general
resurrection: so that according to their opinion, Christ by descending into
Hell did not deliver them from thence: of which opinion we find Irenaeus,
Tertullian, and some others to have been. Some there were that thought, that
Christ delivered out of the lowest Hell, such as believed in him when he came
thither: and some, that he went not to Hell to deliver any from thence, but to
preserve and keep such from going thither, as otherwise should have gone
thither, if by virtue of his descending they had not been preserved from
falling into that hideous and devouring gulf. So that, though it were ever
most certainly resolved, that Christ descended into Hell, to triumph over the
prince of darkness, to fasten condemnation to the Devil and his Angels, and
to preserve all believers, and faithful ones, from falling into the pit of
destruction; yet, as it appears by Augustines Epistle to Euodius; there was
no certain resolution amongst the Ancient, whether Christ delivered any, or
all: or whom he delivered, if any, when he went into Hell.

CHAP. 20.
Of the Merit of Christ: of his not meriting for himself, and his meriting
for us.

Having spoken sufficiently of the sufferings of Christ, and his descending
into Hell, it remains that in the next place we come to speak of his
merit; where we must observe three things. First, whether he might or did
merit. Secondly, whether he merited for himself. Thirdly, how, and in what
sort he merited for us.

The first of these questions is moved, because Christ being in termino, and
comprehensor, that is, in possession of all desired blessedness, and seeing God
face to face, even while he lived here, may seem to have been extra statum
merendi, that is, in such a state and condition, wherein there is no place for
merit, and so not to have merited: to merit being proper to them, that are
viatores, that is, men journeying toward the possession of Heauen-happines
not yet attained. Wherefore, for the clearing of this point the Divines do
note, Scotus in (...) Sent. did. 18. quaest. unica.
that Christ in his humane nature, in the days of his flesh, was both Viator,
and Comprehensor; in termino, and extra terminum: that is, both a man
journeying toward heauen-happinesse, and one that had already attained it,
being already come to the uttermost bound of all his desires, and yet in a sort
not being come unto it, because, howsoever he was perfectly joined with God
affectione iustitiae, that is, with that affection that yields unto God the
praise, honor, and love that is due unto him, and saw him face to face with
clear and perfect vision: yet he was not so fully joined to him, as he is to
be enjoyed affectione commodi, that is, with that affection that seeks after
pleasing delight: but that he suffered many bitter, grievous, and unpleasant
things, fasting, watching, weeping and wearying himself, in all which respects
being extra terminu^, that is, not yet come to the uttermost extent and bound
of that is desired, he was in state of meriting. But, because the enduring of
these bitter, grievous, and afflictiue evils, may seem rather to pertain to the
nature of satisfaction, then merit, therefore they add, that howsoever in
respect of the perfection of his Divine and Heavenly virtues, he were in
termino, that is, come to the uttermost bound and extent thereof, yet in the
expressing of the actions of the^, he fitted himself to the condition of men
here below, as appeared in the actions of his love and obedience, in that he
gave himself for the pacifying of his Fathers wrath, the satisfying of his
Justice, and the promeriting of our good: and besides, he had the actions of
many virtues that are proper to the conversation of this world: and whereof
there is no use in Heaven, or in Heauen-happinesse, but in the way and journey
toward Heaven: as Temperance, Sobriety, Fortitude, Patience, and the
Observation of the ceremonial and judicial Law: in which respect he may very
properly be said, to have been in a state of meriting, and to have merited.

Wherefore presupposing that Christ might and did merit, let us see whether
he merited any thing for himself. The Bellarm. de Christo Mediatore l. 5. c. 9
Papists impute, I know not what impiety to Calvin, because he says, Christ
merited not for himself, but for us only, and urge against him that saying of
the Apostle, when he says, that Philip. 2. 8.
Christ humbled himself, and was made obedient unto death, even the death of
the Cross, and that therefore God exalted him, and gave him a name above every
name. Wherefore let us take a view of that they teach touching this point, that
so we may the better discern whether Calvin be justly blamed by them, or
not. The Schoolmen generally agree, that Christ neither did, nor could merit
the grace of personal union, the habitual perfections of his humane Soul, or
the vision of God, because he possessed all these from the beginning, and it
would have been a matter of more imperfection to have wanted any of them at
the first, then of perfection to have gotten them by merit afterward: Yet the
Lib. 3. did. 18.
Master of Sentences, and others resolve, that he did procure unto himself by
his merit, the impassibility and glorification of his Body. But Scotus in 3
did. 18.
Scotus very acutely and wittily objecteth against them that so think, that
Christ cannot be said to have merited the impassibility and glorification of
his body, because they would have been found in it, from the very first
instant of the union, of the Natures of God and Man in him, by virtue of that
union, before any act of his, had not the natural consequence and flowing of
them from that union, been stayed and hindered by special dispensation, for
the working of our salvation: and therefore he says, that if we will defend
the Ma: ster of Sentences from error in this point, we must so construe his
words, as that Christ did not directly merit glorification and impassibility,
but only the removing of that miraculous stay of the natural redundance of
glory from his Soul, filled with the happy vision of his Deity, into his
body. But surely this favorable construction will not help the matter, for
seeing the miraculous stay of the redundance of glory from the Soul of Christ
into his body, was of it self to cease, when that should be performed, for the
effecting whereof such stay was made, he could no more merit such remove of
stay then the glory it self, that in respect of the grace of personal union,
would as naturally have been communiated to his body, as it was in his Soul,
had not God for special purpose stayed and hindered such redundance. So that
we shall find, that how soever the Papists do press certain testimonies of
Scripture, as if they would prove out of them, that Christ meritted the name
above all names, and the fulness of all power both in heaven and in earth,
which he could no more merit then to be God; yet in the end they are forced to
confess, (so great is the truth which will ever prevail) that he neither
meritted the personal union of his two natures, the perfection of his
habitual graces, the vision of God, nor the glorification of his body, but
only the removing of that stay and impediment that hindered the flowing of
Glory from his soul into his body: and finding, that this stay or hinderance
was to cease of it self, so soon as the work of our Rede^ptio^ should be
wrought, and consequently, that he could not merit it, they fly for help to a
distinction of merits, which they make to be of 3 sorts. For Bonauent. in Sent.
lib. 3. did. 18. q. 2.
there is, as they say, one kind of merit, that makes a thing due which was
not due before; another, that makes a thing more due the^ it was before; and a
3d that makes a thing more ways due the^ at first it was. The 2 first kinds
of merit, they confess, did not agree to Christ, there being nothing that was
not due unto him in as high degree in the beginning, as ever it was afterward.
But they say that he merited in the 3d sort or kind, in that he made those
things that were due unto him as consequents of the personal union of his 2
natures, to be due unto him as a reward of his passion. This truly is a very
silly evasio^; seeing that cannot be a reward of a man's labors, that was due to
him in as high degree before, as after his work is don. He that labouteth in
the field or vineyard of another man, and she that nourishes a child that is
not her own, travail both in hope of reward, but that reward must of
necessity be some thing that was not due to them before such travail; yea, he
that dresseth his own vine, and she that nourishes her own children, look
to the recompense of reward; but that reward is no other thing, but the
prosperity and increase of their fields and vineyards, and the grouth of their
children, like the Olive branches round about their their table; which, without
such pains and travail, they could not look for. In like sort, a Man may say
to his child; this land shall be the reward of thy dutiful behavior; if he
have power to put it from him, if his behavior be not dutiefull: but if he
have not, it is ridiculous to promise it as a reward, seeing a reward is ever
some good to be gained by our well doing or patient suffering, counteruailing
the difficulty in doing, and bitterness in suffering. It is therefore most
absurd, that any thing which is a man's own, in as ample sort before he begin
his work as after he has done it, should be the reward of his work. But some
man perhaps will say, that a thing that was due in respect of the habit resting
in the mind, may become due in respect of the Act done: and consequently, that
that which was due one way, may become more ways due. Surely we make no
question but it may, because it was due to the Habit as to the Root of such
action, when occasion should be offered, and opportunity serve, and not
otherwise. But seeing in Christ, the glorification and impassibility of his
body was due unto him as a consequent of personal union, and not of any
habitual quality, or habit inclining and fitting unto action, therefore that
could not become due to any action of Christ, that was due unto him in respect
of some former thing, as that may be due to the action of a Man, that was
formerly due to the habit that is the root of such action.

The places of Scripture that are brought to prove that Christ merited for
himself, are specially two: for though there be a third, as pregnant as any of
the other, in the first to the Hebrews, where it is said of Christ Heb. 1. 9.
Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity: therefore God, even thy
God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy f^llowes: yet do
they not much stand upon it, because, if it prove any thing, it proves that
Christ merited the grace of unction, which they deny, who teach that Christ
merited for himself. The first of the two places alleged to prove that Christ
merited for himself, is in the second to the Hebrews: where the Apostle
says, We see Jesus for the passion of death, crowned with glory and honor.
But the h Heb. 2. 9.
words, as some think, are not so to be read, but to be placed in this sort:
We see Jesus, who was for a little while made lower then the Angels, for the
passion of death, that is, that he might suffer death, crowned with glory and
honor; so expressing the final cause of his humiliation, and not the
meritorious cause of his exaltation. This conjecture is made exceeding probable
by those words added by the Apostle, that he might taste of death: which
otherwise have no coherence with any part of his speech. The second place that
they bring, is that of the second to the Philippians: The words are these:
Philip: 2. 8. 9.
Christ humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of
the cross: Wherefore God has also highly exalted him, and given him a name
above every name, etc. This place, as Hugo de S. Victore de Sacram. fidei, lib.
2. part. 1. c. 6.
Hugo de Sancto Victore has fitly noted, imports, that the humiliation of
the Son of God becoming Man, was the cause of the exaltation of the nature of
Man, for when he personally assumed the nature of Man, and became Man, Man
became God almighty, having all power, and a name above all names: according to
that of Leo, Leo Sermon. 12.
Diuinae maiestat is exinanitio, seruilis formae in summa prouectio est; that
is, The abasing of the Divine Majesty, and Person of the Son of God, is the
high advancing and exaltation of the form of a Servant: and therefore he
adds, that Ex quo Deus coepit esse homo, and homo coepit esse Deus; Deus
coepit esse homo subiectus, and homo coepit esse Deus perfectus. Si Deus
humiliatus est quantum potuit in homine, homo sublimatus non est quantum potuit
in Deo? that is, When God began to be Man, and Man began to be God; God began
to be a Man in subjection and humility, and Man to be God in the height of
perfection: For if God were humbled, as much as he might be, in that he became
man; was not Man exalted, as much as he might be, in that he became God? God
was humbled, when first he became Man, In quantum homo, dignitate, in quantum
bonus, voluntate: that is, in that a Man, in condition and state, in that a
good man, in will and mind: but manifested the same more specially in his
passion: Likewise the Man Christ was exalted, when he was borne the Son of
God, but manifested the same more specially after his resurrection then before.
For we must not think, that the Man Christ, did then first receive, the full,
and perfect power of Deity, when he said, Mat. 28. 18.
All power is given me in heaven and in earth: seeing before the uttering of
those words, he commanded the Devils, had the Angels to do him service, and
made the very elements of the world to bow and bend at his pleasure. Wherefore
this place is unadvisedly brought by our Adversaries, to prove that Christ
merited for himself, it being most clear and evident, that the name above all
names mentioned in this place, which is the name of God Almighty, was given to
the Son of God donatione naturali, that is, by natural communication, when
he was begotten of his Father before all eternity, and to the Man Christ
donatione gratuita, that is, by free gift, when God was made man, and Man
became God, as the ordinary Gloss upon these words fitly observes: and so
could no more be merited by the passion of Christ, then it was possible for
him to do any thing whereby to merit to be God. And hereupon Calvin. instit
l. 2. c. 17.
Calvin rightly asks (which all the Papists in the world are not able to
answer) Quibus meritis assequi potuit homo ut iudex esset mundi, caput
Angelorum, atque ut potiretur summo Dei imperio? that is, by what merits could
man attain to be Judge of the world, Head of Angels, and to have the highest
authority and power of God? But some man will say, that Christ pronounces, it
was o Luke 24. 26.
necessary that he should suffer, and so enter into his glory; and that
therefore it seems, he could not have entered into it, unless he had
suffered. Quomodo ergo suam (says Hugo) si oportuit? and quomodo oportuit, si
suam? Si gloria eius fuit, quomodo vt ad illam intraret, pati oportuit? Sed
suam propter se; oportuit propter nos: that is, How then was it his glory, if
he could not enter into it, unless he suffered? and how was it necessary that
he should suffer to enter into it, if it were his? Surely it was his in
respect of himself; and it was necessary he should enter into it by suffering,
only in respect of us. For Christ truly if he had pleased, might have entered
into his glory some other way, and have received it in what sort he would, even
as he needed never to have wanted it, unless he had pleased: but he would for
our sakes by punishment enter into his glory, that dying he might take away the
fear of death, and rising again he might restore unto us the hope of
glorification: he would not go any other way, because we could not go any
other way: we would, but could not; he could, but would not. Quia sialiter
iuisset, pervenisset, sed non subvenisset: that is, because if he had gone any
other way, he might have entered in himself, but could not have brought us in
with him.

There is nothing therefore that Christ gained to himself by his passion, but
that he was made an example of suffering to all that believe in him, and a
cause of glorification to all them that suffer with him, that they may be
glorified with him: but what did this profit him? He went before, and we all
follow him: whose good is this? I find men out of the way, I go before them
to show them the way, and all follow me; what does it profit me? I knew the
way, and could have gone it by my self alone: Sed non esset causa pergendi,
nisi compassio esset subveniendi: that is, but there were no cause of my going,
if the compassionate consideration of such as know not the way, did not move me
by going before them to be a guide unto the^. Thus then we say, that Christ
merited nothing for himself, not because we would detract any thing from him,
for he did things worthy of most ample rewards, if there had been any thing
he had not already, that might have been given and added to him, or that he
had not already a just claim unto: but because we admire his perfection, which
was so great from the beginning, that nothing could be after added unto it: and
praise his goodness that came into this world for our sakes only, and not for
his own good. Wherefore let us proceed to see how, and in what sort he merited
for us.

In the merit of Christ, 2 things are to be considered. The worth of those
actions and works of virtue which he performed: and the dignity of his Divine
and Infinite Person performing them. Touching the former, though the actions of
the best men that ever were, done in the state of grace, and proceeding from
the working of Gods Spirit, be not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed,
yet we constantly affirm and teach, that the actions of Christ, done in his
humane nature, were worthy of that glory: and therefore dare not deny, that
Christ merited for us ex condigno, as some of the Schoolmen do. But for the
better clearing of this point, touching the merit of Christ, we must observe,
that to merit, simply, absolutely, and properly so named, four things
concur. For first, he that will merit or deserve any thing at another man's
hand, must do something that the other had no former claim unto. Secondly, he
must do something that may be beneficial and good unto him, of whom he
desires to deserve something. Thirdly, he must do something that may be
beneficial in as high a degree unto him, as he looks to be benefited by him
again. And fourthly, he must not hurt and wrong him as much one way, as he
benefiteth him another: for if he do so, he loses all merit of reward.

These being the things required to the nature of Merit, strictly so named, no
creature can in this sort merit any thing at Gods hand, seeing there is nothing
that any creature can do which God may not justly claim and challenge as due,
in respect of good already done to it; or whereby it may any way benefit or
profit him according to that in Job, that Job. 35. 7.
Our righteousness reaches not unto God: Yet such is the goodness of
Almighty God toward his poor creatures, that, as if he had no claim to
their well doings, in respect of benefits already bestowed on them, and, as if
they were as good and beneficial to him, as they are good in them selves
seeking in all his works to communicate, and not to receive any good, in the
day he made them, he couenanted with them to give them rewards answerable to
the worth of their actions: which gracious condescending of Almighty God to the
condition of his creatures presupposed, Adam in the state of his innocence,
and before he fell, might have meritted and deserved good at Gods hands: but
the best men in the world since his fall, are excluded from all possibility of
meriting any thing, especially heauen-happinesse, properly of him: first,
because they have lost all that power of well doing, which originally in the
state of their creation they had, and can perform nothing that is good,
unless it be given unto them by a new free gift, for which they shall rather
be indebted to God, then any way bind him unto them. Secondly, because they
offend him as much one way, as they please him another. And thirdly, because
there is no equality between the good actions of virtue which they perform
and do, and the rewards that are laid up in heaven, neither in total,
perpetual, and constant doing of that they do, nor in the manner quality and
measure thereof, the height of heauen-happinesse incomparably exceeding all
other knowledge and desire, according to that of the Apostle: The eye has not
seen, the ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of Man,
what things God has prepared for them that love him. But none of q 1 Cor. 2. 9.
these things exclude Christ from meriting in the nature of Man, which he
assumed: for he brought the fullness of grace with himinto the world, and it
was Natural unto him: He no way offended or displeased God his Father: and
there was a perfect equality between his actions and the rewards of Heaven, in
that he loved God with that kind, degree, and measure of love, wherewith men
love him in heaven; ardently, without defect; entirely, and totally without
distraction; perpetually without intermission; and constantly, without
possibility of ever ceasing so to do.

Wherefore let us pass from the worth and value of those works of virtue that
Christ performed, to the consideration of the dignity of his divine, and
infinite Person performing them. Which dignity and infinity of the Person of
Christ, to which nothing could be added, made the things he did to promerite,
and to procure good to others, and to infinite other. Paludanus in 3 sent.
did. 18.
Christus (says a learned Schoole-man) meruit omnibus quantum fuit ex
sufficientia sui, pro eo quod in ipso fuit gratia: non sicut in singulari
homine, sed sicut in capite totius Ecclesiae; propter quod fructus passionis
eius redundare potuit in omnia Ecclesiae membra: and quia, vt dicit Damascenus,
ratione vnitatis Diuinitatis cum humanitate, Christus operatur ea quae sunt
hominis, supra homine^, operatio eius extendebat se ad totam naturam, quod non
potest operatio puri hominis. Huius diuersitatis ratio reducenda est non in
habitualem aliquam gratiam creatam sed increatam; quod pro multis sufficit
finita gratia, haec sufficientia est ex gratia infinita and increata; That is,
Christ merited for all sufficiently on his part, in that grace was found in
him, not as in a particular man, but as in the Head of the whole Church: for
which cause the fruit of his passion might redound to all the members of the
same Church: and because, (as Damascene says) by reason of the union of the
natures of God and Man in his Person, he does the works of a man in a more
excellent sort, then any mere man can do, the benefit and force of his
working and operation, extended to the whole nature of Man, which the action of
a mere man cannot do. The reason of which difference is not to be attributed
to any habitual, created grace, but to that which is increate: for that the
finite grace that is in Christ, (that is, his virtue, and work of virtue) is
availeable for the good of many, it is from his infinite, and increate Grace.

CHAP. 21.
Of the benefits which we receive from Christ.

Having spoken of the Satisfaction, and Merit of Christ, it remains that we
speak of the benefits which we receive from him: which are all most fully
expressed by the name of redemption, which is the freeing of us from that
miserable bondage and captivity, wherein we were formerly holden by reason of
Adams sin. This bondage was twofold; first in respect of sin: and secondly in
respect of punishment. In respect of sin, we were bondmen to Satan, whose
will we did, according to that of the Apostle, His servants ye are, to whom ye
obey. In respect of punishment, we were become bondmen to Almighty God the
righteous Judge of a Romans 6. 16.
the world, who uses Satan as an instrument of his wrath, and an Executioner
of his dreadful Judgments, against such as do offend him and provoke him to
wrath. These being the kinds of captivity and bondage wherein we were holden,
it will not be hard to see how we are freed and redeemed from the same. There
is no redemption, as the Divines do note, but either by exchange of prisoners,
by force and strong hand, or by paying of a price. Redemption by exchange of
prisoners is then, when we set free those whom we hold as captives taken from
our Enemies, that they may make free such as they hold of ours: and this kind
of redemption has no place in the deliverance of sinful men from sin and
misery: but their deliverance is only wrought by strong hand, and paying of a
price. For Christ redeemed us from the bondage of sin, in that by the force,
and working of his grace, making us dislike it, hate it, repent of it, and
leave it, he violently took us out of Satan's hands, who tyrannically, and
unjustly, had taken possession of us: but from the bondage of punishment in
respect whereof we were become Bondmen to Almighty God, he redeemed us not by
force and strong hand, but by paying a price, satisfying his justice, and
suffering what our sins had deserved, that so being pacified toward us, he
migh cease to punishvs, and discharge Satan, who was but the Executioner of
his wrath, from afflicting us any longer.

In this sort do we conceive of the work of our redemption, wrought for us by
Christ; and therefore it is absurdly and untruly said by Survey. books 3.
chap. 2.
Matthew Kellison, in his late published Survey of the supposed new religion,
that we make Christ an absurd Redeemer, for we speak no otherwise of Christ
the Redeemer, then we have learned in the Church and House of God. But for the
satisfaction of the Reader, let us see how he goes about to convince us of
such absurdity as he charge us with. The Protestants, says he, do teach
(the^ which nothing can be more absurd) that Christ's passion was our Justice,
Merit, Satisfaction, that there is no Justice but Christ's, no good works but
his works, no merit but his merit, no satisfaction but his satisfaction; that
there is noe justice or sanctity inherent in man, nor none necessary; that no
Laws can bind us, because Christ's death was the ransom that freed us from all
Laws, Divine and Humane. that no sins nor evil works can hurt us, because
Christ's Justice being ours, no sins can make us sinners: that no Hell or
Judgment remains for us whatsoever we do, because Christ's Justice being
ours, sins can neither be imputed to us in this life, nor punished in the next,
and that herein consists Christian liberty. A more shameless slanderer, and
trifling smatterer, I think was never heard of. For some of these assertions
are undoubted truths, against which no man may oppose himself, unless he will
be branded with the mark of impiety and blasphemy: as that Christ's passion is
our justice, merit, and satisfaction: that there is no merit properly so
named, but Christ's merit; no propitiatory, and expiatory satisfaction but
Christ's satisfaction: and the other are nothing else but shameless and hellish
slanders, and mere devices, and fancies of his idle brain, without all
ground of truth as that there is no justice nor sanctity inherent in Man, nor
none necessary: that good works are not necessary: that noe laws can bind
us: that noe sins nor evil works can hurt us: and that no hell nor
judgment remains for us whatsoever we do. For we most constantly affirm
and teach, that there is both justice and sanctity inherent in Man, though not
so perfect, as that he may safely trust unto it, and desire to be judged
according to the perfection of it in the day of Trial. Likewise we teach,
that good works are in such sort necessary to salvation, that without
Holiness, and a desire at the least to perform the works of sanctification,
no man shall ever see God. Neither do we say, that no Laws can bind us, as
he slanderously misreporteth us, but we constantly teach, that not to do the
things contained and prescribed in the Law of God, is damnable and damning
sin, if God upon our repentance forgive it not. And therefore L. 4. de
Iustif, c. 5.
Bellarmine, though he wrongeth us in like sort, as Kellison does, yet in the
end like an honest man, he confesses ingenuously that he does wrong us, and
shows at large, that Luther in his book de votis Monasticis, defines the
liberty of a Christian to consist, not in being freed from the duty of doing
the things prescribed in the Law of God, as if at his pleasure he might do
them, or leave them undone; but in that there are no works forbidden in the
Law, that may stand with Faith, so evil, that they can condemn us, nor none
there prescribed, performed by us, so good as to clear, defend, and justify
us; So making us free non ab operibus faciendis, sed defendentibus and
accusantibus: that is, not from the necessity of doing the things that are
commanded as good, but from seeking justification in works, or fearing
condemnation for such evil works as we consent not fully unto, but dislike,
resist against, and seek remission of. Whereunto Calvin agrees, teaching that
Christian liberty freeth not from the duty of doing the things which the Law
requires, but from doing them so, as to have them examined and tried strictly
according to the Law and rule of Justice: God in mercy accepting our works
though imperfect, if they proceed from a good conscience, and faith unfeigned.
But, says Book 3. chap. 5.
Kellison, the Protestants teach, that Christ came to be a Redeemer only, not
a Lawgiver: and therefore it seems they think men free from the duty of
following the prescription of any Law. This surely is a very bad and weak
inference. Christian men have nothing to do with Moses and his Law, and may at
their pleasure either break it or keep it, because Christ came to be a
Redeemer, and not a Lawgiver. For though it be true that Christ came not to
give a new, or more perfect Law of moral duties, or to urge it more strictly
then Moses did, as some imagine, in which sense our Divines rightly deny him to
have come as a Lawgiver, yet he came to fulfill the Law formerly given by the
Ministry of Moses: which thing he performed: first, by clearing the meaning
of it, and making it to be rightly understood, where it was mistaken. Secondly,
by meriting remission of the precedent breaches and transgressions of it. And
thirdly, by giving grace that men may in some sort do the things it requires.
Wherefore if any man ask of us, whether it may be truly said, that Christ was
a Lawgiver to his Church, we answer, that our Divines did never simply deny
Christ to be a Lawgiver, but only in sort before expressed. For they
confess, that he may truly be so named; first, because he writes those Laws
in our hearts, which Moses delivered written in Tables of stone; and secondly,
because he gave certain positive Laws to Christian men, touching Sacraments,
Ministry, and outward means of salvation, that were not of force before.
Wherefore to conclude this point, we do not think (as Kellison slanderously
against his own conscience reports of us) that no sins can hurt us, that no
Hell nor Judgment remains for us whatsoever we do: but we constantly
teach, that they who commit sin with full consent, and persist therein, shall
undoubtedly perish everlastingly. So that this is all that we say, that no
sins, how grievous soever, resisted, disliked, repented of, and forsaken, can
hurt us, and that no Hell, nor Judgment remains for them, whom the working
of divine grace freeth from the dominion of sin, and the satisfaction of Christ
from the condemnation of it: Against which doctrine, or any part of it, neither
Kellison, nor any Papist in the world, is able to take any just exception.

CHAP. 22.
Of the Ministry of them to whom Christ committed the publishing of the
reconciliation between God and Men, procured by him.

THus have we seen, first, the excellency of Christ our Savior, whom God
sent into the world, in the fullness of time, to be the great Shepherd of
his Sheep, the guide of his people, the light of the Gentiles, the glory of
Israel, and a King to fit upon the throne of David for ever, having all power
both in Heaven and in Earth. Secondly, what great things he did and suffered
for us, to reconcile us unto God. Thirdly, what the benefits are which he
procured for us and bestowed on us. Now it remains that we see to whom he
committed the publishing of the joyful reconciliation between God and Man,
the conversion of the world unto himself, and the government of such as should
by believing, become his people, when having finished the great work he came
to perform, he was to return back to that God his Father that sent him. The
Apostle Saint Paul tells us, that Coloss. 2. 15.
Christ having triumphed over principalities and powers, and made a show of
them openly Or in himself.
upon his Cross, led captivity captive, and gave gifts, unto men: Ephesians. 4.
8. etc.
that he gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the gathering together of the Saints, the work of
the Ministry, and the edifying of the body of Christ, until we all meet in
the unity of Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God into a perfect Man, even
into the measure of the Age of the fullness of Christ. Amongstall those
Messengers of glad tidings, and Ministers of Christ, appointed by him for the
gathering together of the Saints, the Apostles were chief, and principal;
Evangelists were assistants, which they used for the better settling and
perfecting of things happily begun by them, and the writing of the
Evangelical histories, concerning Christ: The Prophets were such as foretold
future things, that knew all secrets, and opened the hidden mysteries of God,
speaking to the consciences of Men in a strange and admirable manner; so that,
as the Apostle tells us, 1. Cor. 14. 25.
They that heard them prostrated themselves at their feet acknowledging that
God was in them. These were temporary, and to continue but for a time. In the
Apostles, two sorts of things are to be considered, and distinguished by us:
first, such as were proper to them, as fitting to those first beginnings of
Christianity; and secondly, such as are of perpetual use and necessity, and so
to be passed over to other, and continued to the end of the world.

The Divines do note, that there were four things proper and peculiar to the
Apostles, and not communicable to any other of the Ministers of Christ,
appointed by him for the gathering together of his Saints. The first was,
Immediate vocation; the second, Infallibility of Judgment: the 3d, generality
of Commission, to do all things pertaining to the ministry of Salvation, in
all places, and toward all Persons: the fourth, the speaking in all the
tongues and languages of the world, the knowledge of all secrets, and power to
confirm their Doctrine by signs and miracles, and by the imposition of their
hands to give the like miraculous gifts of the Spirit to others. These jointly
were not communicable to any other in those times, neither Evangelists, nor
Prophets, as either not being called immediately, but appointed by the Apostles;
or not infallibly led into all truth: General commission they had not, but
were taken into the fellowship of the Apostles labors; to assist their
presence, and supply their absence, to build upon their foundation, and to
perfect that they began. Lastly, though the having of miraculous gifts, and
the power of working miracles simply, were not proper to the Apostles, yet the
having of them in such sort, as by the imposition of their hands to give the
Spirit, enabling to work miracles, and to do miraculous things, was peculiar
and proper to them; and therefore we read, that Acts. 8. 1^.
Philip baptized, but that the ver. 17.
Apostles went to confirm them by imposition of hands that were baptized by
him, that so they might receive the miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost. And as
these things were reserved as proper and peculiar unto the Apostles, and not
communicated to any other in their time, so are they not passed over to their
after-commers by succession: but in steed of immediate calling we have now
succession; in steed of infallibility of judgment, the direction of their
writings, guiding us to the finding out of the truth: in steed of General
commission particular Assignation of several Churches to rule, and parts of
Christ's flock to feed: in steed of miraculous gifts, and the Apostles power to
confer them, a settled course of Schools and Universities fitting men for the
work of the Ministry: instead of their Miracles wherewith they confirmed
their doctrine, the Faith already received, and by so many generations
recommended unto us, as confirmed by the Apostles Miracles at the first.
Neither was it fit, as Aug. de vtilitate credendi, cap. 16.
Saint Augustine notes, that these miraculous courses should still have
continued. For even as a man that never had seen the seed cast into the
earth, and there rotting; and the trees dead in Winter, after reviving, and
flourishing again in their appointed time, would wonder no less at it, then
if he should see a blind man receive sight, or a dead man life: but now that
these things are ordinary, we little esteem them: so if those miraculous
things appearing in the Apostles, and first Ministers of Christ which with
their newness and strangeness moved much at the first, should have been
continued still, they would have grown into contempt, and not have been
regarded at all.

All that which has been said touching the dignity Apostolical, and the
things properly pertaining to it, is so clear and evident, that wise and
judicious men, make no question of any part thereof. Yet are there some that
seem to doubt, whether the Apostles generally had immediate calling, or
universality of commission, supposing that Peter only was immediately designed
by Christ, and the rest by him: that he only had an illimited commission,
without all restraint, and the rest an inferior commission to that of Peter,
bounded and stinted.

Touching the first of these doubts, Bell. de Pont. lib 4 c. 22.
Bellarmine (whose manner it is not to conceal the divisions and differences
that are or have been amongst the Friends and Lovers of the Church of Rome,
but to write them in the forehead of every controversy) shows, that there
are three opinions amongst the Divines of the Romish Church touching this
point. The first that as well the Apostles, as succeeding Bishops received
their power, and and jurisdiction from Peter, and his supposed successor the
Bishop of Rome. The second, that both Apostles and Bishops received their
Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction immediately from Christ, and not from
Peter nor his Successors. The third, that Bishops receive their jurisdiction
from the Pope, but that the Apostles received all their power and jurisdiction
immediately from CHRIST, and not from Peter. The Second of these opinions is
wholly true, and I will in due place confirm the same. The third, in part
true, and in part false, which Bellarmine follows: and the first wholly
false, which he largely and substantially confuteth; proving first, Ibid. cap.
23.
that the Apostles received all their jurisdiction and power immediately from
Christ, and not from Peter, as well out of the words of our Savior, when he
says: As my Father sent me, so send I you: as out of the election of h John
20. 21.
Acts 1. 16.
Matthias, who was not chosen by Peter, or the other Apostles, but designed
immediately by God himself, showing by direction of the Lot falling on
Matthias, that it was he whom he would have to succeed into the void room of
Judas the Traitor: adding, that the Apostles gave him no authority; and that
Paul professes the same touching himself, Gal. 1. and 2.
protesting that he received all his power and Jurisdiction immediately from
Christ, and thereby proving himself to be an Apostle. Secondly, he proves
that the fulness of all Ecclesiastical power, was committed to all the
Apostles, in as large and ample sort as to Peter, by the testimonies of
Chrysostom and Theophylact: and that Christ by those words, As my Father sent
me, so send I you, made all the Apostles his Vicars or Vicegerents, yea, gave
them his own office and authority; and out of Cyrill, that by these words he
made them Apostles and Doctors of the whole world: and that to let them know,
that in Apostolic power he gave them all Ecclesiastical power, he said unto
them, As my Father sent me, so send I you: it being certain that the Father
sent the Son with all fullness of power. Farther he adds out of Cypr. de
(...). Eccl.
Cyprian, that the same fullness of power was given unto the rest of the
Apostles by those words, As my Father sent me, so send I you, that was promised
to Peter by those, I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
performed by those other, Feed my Sheep, feed my Lambs. Now, says he, it is
certain that by those words; I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and by those other, Feed my sheep etc. is understood all fullness of
Jurisdiction both inward and outward: therefore the fullness of Ecclesiastical
power and Jurisdiction was given to every one of the Apostles. Thus then the
Cardinal confesses, first that all the Apostles were immediately taught of
God, without learning any thing of Peter, or needing in any thing to be
confirmed by him. Secondly, that their commission was general; so that there
was not any act of Ecclesiastical Ministry to which their commission did not
extend, nor any places in which, nor persons toward whom, they might not
perform the acts of their Ministry. Thirdly, that they received all this
authority and power immediately from Christ, and not from Peter, and that
therefore they could neither be limited, nor wholly restrained by him in the
use and exercise of the same. Thus does he overthrow the whole frame and
fabrique of their building, who ground the pretended supremacy of the Pope upon
Christ's words spoken to Peter. For to what purpose do they urge, that to Peter
only Christ said, Feed my Sheep, etc? that to him only he gave the keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, and upon him only promised to build his Church? seeing
they are forced to confess, that the commission of feeding Christ's sheep, was
given in as ample sort to the rest as to Peter, that they all received the
whole power of the keys; that the Church was builded upon the rest as well as
upon Peter, and equally founded upon them all.

If the Cardinal shall shrink from this his confession, we can easily force
him to it again, and make him acknowledge that whatsoever Christ promised,
intended, or performed by any of his speeches directed unto Peter, he performed
to all. Christ said specially to Peter, Feed my sheep: yet had the rest (our
Adversaries being Judges) the same commission. He promised to him the keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven; so that what he should bind on Earth should be bound
in Heaven: he named him Peter, and promised upon that Rock to build his
Church: yet all received the same keys as well as he, the same power of
binding and loosing: and the Church was equally builded on them all. These
things I will particularly confirm and prove; and first, that all the Apostles
had the same commission of feeding the flock of Christ that Peter had, it is
evident. For whereas there are but four kinds of feeding; Ockam dial. l. 5. 1
part. c. 15. and l. 4. 1. tract. 3. partis. c. 10.
Vita exemplari, subsidio corporali, doctrina salutari, and disciplina
regulari; that is, By exemplary conversation, by ministering things necessary
for the entertainment of this present life, by wholesome doctrine, and by
regular discipline and government; all these ways, the rest of the Apostles,
stood bound to feed the flock of Christ, as well as Peter. For they were all
the Matthew. 5. 14.
Lights of the world, and their Verse 16.
Light was so to shine before men, that they seeing their good works, might
glorify their Father in Heaven: they were all to take care of the poor and
needy; they had all power to preach and minister Sacraments by Christ's own
warrant, saying unto them all, Matthew. 18. 19.
Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost: and to govern and guide the Church and people of
God, as well as Peter: Christ sending them as his Father sent him, and assuring
them that whose sins they remit, they are remitted, and whose sins they
retain, they are retained. Neither can this be doubted of, seeing Bellarmine
himself confesses in the place before alleged, that in the Apostolic
power, all power and Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, as well inward as outward,
was contained: so that, that which Bellarmine and other Papists insist upon,
Bellarm. de Pont. l. 1. c. 14.
that Christ commended all his Sheep unto Peter's care and charge, in that he
said unto him, Feed my sheep, without any limitation or distinction, as if in
this respect they would show us some singular thing in Peter's feeding of the
flock of Christ, not found in others, is too silly, For who knows not, that
every Apostle had general commission, and that howsoever for the better
dispatch of the work they had in hand, they divided amongst them the several
provinces of the world; yet this was, as Bellar^ himself confesses, Ibid.
cap. 16.
Prouinciarum, non iurisdictionis diuisio; that is, a division of provinces,
not of Jurisdiction: for there was not any of them, but had power to preach,
minister Sacraments, and exercise discipline wheresoever they would, one of
them no way hindering the employment of another, but all with joint care
seeking to set forward the work, they had in hand. Yea this is so clear, that
the Cardinal ingenuously confesses it to be so, saying in express words,
that Ibid. cap. 11.
the rest of the Apostles were heads, Rulers, and Pastors of the universal
Church.

Touching the power of the Keys promised to Peter, and the power of binding
and loosing, it will easily appear, that no singular thing was either promised
or given unto him, but that which was common to him with the rest. In addit. ad
3. part. Summae. quaest. 17. art. 1.
Thomas Aquinis fitly observes, that in corporal things the Key is an
instrument that opens the door, and gives entrance to him that formerly was
excluded: Now the door of the kingdom of heaven is shut against us by sin,
both in respect of the stain of it, and the guilt of punishment: whence it
comes, as he aptly notes, that the power, by which this stop and
impediment is taken away, is named the Key. This power is in the divine Trinity
principally, and by way of authority, in that God only takes away sin,
dimittendo, quae facta sunt; adiuvando, ne fiant; and perducendo ad vitam, vbi
omnino fieri non possunt; that is, By forgiving the sin that is past: by
helping the sinner, that he does not the like again; and by bringing him to
that life, where he can sin no more. And therefore the blessed Trinity is
said to have the Key of Authority. Christ had power to remove this stop and
hinderance by the merit of his passion, by instituting Sacraments, and making
them effectual instruments of the communication of his grace, for the taking
away of sin, and therefore he is said to have the Key of Excellency. In men
there is a ministerial Power to remove the impediment of sin, that hinders
from entering into Heaven, and therefore they are rightly said to have a key of
Ministry, which is twofold; of Science, and of Jurisdiction: Of Science,
remouendo ignorantiam, and inducendo ad conuersionem; that is, by removing the
blindness of heart that is found in men, and inducing them to convert and
turn to God: Of Jurisdiction, in receiving men into the society of holy ones,
and in admitting those that they think meet and worthy to the participation
of the holy Sacraments, in which the efficacy of Christ's passion communicates
it self; as also in reiect^ng the unholy and unclean. The Jurisdiction of the
Church is rightly signified Metaphorically by the name of a Key, because the
chief command in a house or City, is in him to whom the keys of that house
or City are committed; and he that has the keys, has thereby power to
admit and receive into the house or City whom he will, and to exclude and shut
out who^ he pleases. And therefore when Princes enter into their Cities and
Towns, the Citizens are wont to offer unto the^ the keys thereof, thereby
acknowledging that the chief power and command of those places does rest in
them. Whereupon when the Lord promised to Eliacim, son of Hilkiah, servant of
King Hezekiah, chief authority in the Kings Court, and in the City of
Jerusalem, he said by his Prophet; Esaias. 22. 22.
I will give the keye of the house of David upon his shoulders. He shall open
and no man shall shut: he shall shut, and no man shall open. In which sense
also it is said in the Revelation of Christ: that Revel. 3. 7.
He has the key of David, that he opens and no man shuts, that he
shuts and no man opens; that is, has all fullness of power in his Fathers
house and kingdom. Thus then the key of Ministry being only the power of
teaching, instructing, admonishing, comforting, governing, and yielding
sacramental assurances of Gods mercy and grace, by dispensing the Sacraments
Christ has instituted; and this power being the same in Peter, and the rest;
it is clear that the keys of the kingdom of Heaven were equally committed
unto them all.

The force of these keys is not only expressed by the acts of opening and
shutting, but of binding and loosing also, thereby to show, that they are no
material keys, but Metaphorically understood, and spiritual; and that heaven
is then opened unto men that they may enter into it, when they are loosed from
their sins that hindered them from entering in thither: and hereupon it is, that
Christ having promised the keys of the kingdom of heaven to blessed Peter,
tells him likewise, that what he shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven, and what he shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. The bonds
wherewith men are bound on earth, are of four sorts. First of Laws, obliging,
and tying them to the performance of certain duties. Secondly, of sins.
Thirdly of punishments to be inflicted by Almighty God; and Fourthly, of
punishments to be inflicted by men. The bond of Laws is of two sorts. For
there are divine laws, and there are humane Laws. God binds men to the
doing of what he pleases; and Men that are in authority, either Civil or
Ecclesiastical, to such things as they think fit. Touching these bonds, none
have power to loose, but they that have power to bind: so that what God by
precept binds us to do, none but God can free us from the necessity and duty
of doing it: and what the Church or Magistrate bind us to, no inferior power
can loose us or free us from. Loosing in this sense opposed to binding by law
and precept, is in two sorts; By Reuocation, and by Dispensation. Reuocation,
is an absolute Abrogation of a Law in respect of all places, times, persons,
and conditions, and that either by express and direct Repeal, or by general
neglect, and long continued disuse. Dispensation is in respect of certain
persons, times, places and conditions of Men and things: so that a
dispensation permitting the Law to retain her wonted authority, only freeth
some particular person or persons, at some times, in some places, and in some
condition of things, from the necessity of doing, or leaving undone that,
which, unless it be in consideration of such particular circumstances, the
Lawgiver meant should be observed, but in such cases not so.

Here the question is moved by occasion of that kind of loosing, which is by
reuersing Laws formerly in force, whether God the giver of the moral Law, may
revoke the same, and dispense with men for the not doing of things there
prescribed, of the doing of things there forbidden. The answer is, Paludanus
in Sent. lib. 3. did. 40. quaest. 2. and 3.
that these Laws are imposed upon men by the very condition of their nature
and creation: as the very condition and nature of a man, created by GOD,
requires that he should honor, love, fear, and reverence him that made him:
and therefore touching the precepts of the first Table (that concerning the
Sabbath excepted) it is clear and evident, that they cannot be altered, nor
Man by God himself discharged from the duty of honoring, loving, and fearing
God so long as he has any being. Touching the precepts of the second Table,
it is resolved, that GOD cannot dispense with man, or give him leave to do the
things therein forbidden, as to steal, murder, or lie. For all these imply,
and involue in them that which is simply evil, and to be disliked: but by
some alteration in the doer, or matter of action, he may make that not to be
evil, that otherwise would be evil: and consequently not forbidden; as
namely, that to be no theft, or murder, which otherwise would be: as when he
commanded the Israelites to spoil the Egyptians, they did not commit the act
of robbery: for robbery is the taking away of a thing from the owner against
his will: but these things which the Israelites took away, were the
Egyptians no longer, after God the supreme Lord, had spoiled them of the title
they had thereunto, and assigned the same to the Israelites. So likewise for
one man to take away the life of another, having no authority so to do, is
murder, and no man can be dispensed with lawfully to do any such act; but for
a Magistrate to take away the life of an offender, is a lawful act, and no act
of murder; and so, if Abraham had slain his son Isaac, it had not been
murder, being authorized so to do by God, who has supreme authority in the
world, and may justly, as a Judge, for sin found in men, take away the lives
of whom he pleases, and as supreme and absolute Lord, bring all to nothing
that for his wills sake he made of nothing, though there were no sin nor
fault at all. But touching Ceremonial, Judicial, and Positive Laws of God
concerning Sacraments and observations of what kind soever, seeing they are
imposed after and upon the being of nature, we think that God may alter them
at his pleasure, so that at one time it may be lawful to do that was
forbidden at another. The Governors that God has set over his Church and
people by commission from him, may interpret what is doubtful in these Laws
of God, or in those of the other sort: but yet according to the Law: but they
may not abrogate or dispense with any Law of God, either natural and moral,
or positive established concerning the use of Sacraments, and things pertaining
to Gods worship and service. But concerning those Laws that were made by the
Apostles and Primitive Fathers; touching matters of outward observation, the
succeeding Guides of the Church may either dispense with them, or reverse them
upon the due consideration of the difference of times, Men, and things. And so
we see to whom it pertains to bind men with their laws, and to loose them
from the bonds thereof.

The bond of sin, which is the second kind of those bonds I mentioned, is
twofold; for there is Vinculum captivitatis, and Vinculum servitutis: that is,
a man that is a sinner, z Rich. de S. Vict. tract. de potest. ligandi and
soluendi c. 2
is so bound, that he can neither return to do good, nor leave off to do
evil: for sin holds him in a bond of captivity, that he shall not
return to do good: and with a bond of servitude, that he shall not cease to
do evil. And though God has so ordered the nature of Man, that he who will
do evil, shall thus be entangled: yet it is man that thus entangleth,
wrappeth, and binds himself, and not God. But for the bond of eternal
condemnation, and the punishments following evil doers, which is the third
kind of those bonds wherewith I showed that men are tied and bound, it is of
GOD. From these bonds of sin, and punishment inflicted by GOD, none but he
alone can free men by his favor, and the work of his grace, as the supreme
and highest cause, none but Christ by Merit and Satisfaction. The Ministers of
the Church, by the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, may convert Men to God
instrumentally, making them partakers of his graces, and bringing the^ into
such an estate, wherein they shall be sure for Christ's sake to find mercy
with GOD, for the remission and taking away of their sins. They may pray for
them, and out of the knowledge of their estate, assure them of remission: But
other power to unloose and untie these direful and horrible bonds of sin and
punishment, they have none: only the punishments which they have power to
inflict, they have authority to diminish, lessen, or take away: so that whom
they bind with the bonds of Ecclesiastical censures, and punishments, those by
the same authority they may unloose. For as the Guides of Gods Church may
prescribe, enjoyne, and impose certain actions of Mortification, and
penitential conversion unto GOD: so when they see cause, they may release from
the same: as by excommunication they may restrain from use of Sacraments,
society of Believers, and benefit of the Churches prayers: so by Absolution
they may free from all these bonds again. Neither is this kind of binding and
loosing lightly to be esteemed of, or little regarded: for he that for his
contempt and disobedience, is debarred from the vfe of the Sacraments, from
enjoying the society of the believers, and partaking in the benefit of the
Churches prayers, is undoubtedly excluded from all access to the Throne of
grace in Heaven, and all acceptance there: and so consequently no less bound
in Heaven, then in Earth: and he that is unloosed from these bonds on Earth, is
unloosed and set free in Heaven, that without all restraint, he may Heb. 4. 16.
go boldly to the Throne of Grace, to seek help in the time of need.

Thus we see the diverse kinds of binding and loosing, and that the Guides of
Gods Church have power and authority by Laws and precepts, censures, and
punishments, to bind those that are committed to their care and trust, and
when they see cause, by reuersing such Laws and precepts, wholly or in part,
and by diminishing, releasing, and taking away such censures, and punishments,
to vnty them, and set them free again. The bond of Divine Laws, they may no
otherwise meddle with, then by letting them know who are so bound, how
straightly they are tied. The bonds of sin, and punishments by Divine Justice
to be inflicted, they have no power and authority to unloose, but they
concur as helpers to the unloosing of them by the Ministry of the Word,
vvinning and persuading men to convert unto God, to cast their sins from
them, and by the Sacraments instrumentally communicating unto them; the grace
of repentant conversion, and the assurance of remission and pardon.

In all these kinds of binding and loosing, the Apostles were equal: seeing
(our Adversaries themselves confessing) they had the same power of Order and
jurisdiction in like extent, within the compass whereof all these kinds of
binding and loosing are confined. Wherefore let us proceed to speak of the
power of remitting and retaining sins, given to the Apostles by Christ our
Savior. To remit sin, properly is nothing else but to resolve not to punish
sin, and therefore he only may properly be said to remit sin, that has
power to punish it. Now as sin is committed against the prescript of God, our
Conscience, and Men in authority: so GOD, the conscience of the Sinner, and
the Magistrate, and Minister, have power to punish sin: GOD, with punishments
temporal and eternal, of this life and that which is to come: the Conscience,
with remorse: the Magistrate, with death, banishment, Confiscation of goods,
imprisonment, and the like: and the guides of the Church, with suspension,
excommunication, degradation, and such other censures. Hence it follows, that
GOD only is said properly to remitte the punishments that his justice does
inflict: that the conscience only upon repentance, can take away that bitter
and aflictiue punishment of remorse, wherewith she is wont to torment and
disquiet the mind of the offendour: and that the Magistrate and Minister only
have power to take away those punishments that in their several courses, they
may and do inflict. Notwithstanding, the Minister by the Word, persuading men
to repentance, procuring remission, and out of his prudent observation of the
parties conversion unto GOD, assuring him that it will go well with him, as
also by the Sacrament instrumentally communicating to him as well the grace of
repentant conversion, as of free remission (that so he may hear the very
sound and voice of GOD in mercy, saying to the heart and spirit of the
repentant Sinner, I am thy Salvation) may be said in a sort to remitte sin,
even in that it is an offense against GOD, not by way of authority and power,
but by winning and persuading the sinner to that conversion which obtains
remission from GOD, and by the Sacrament instrumentally making him partaker as
well of the grace of remission of sin from GOD, as of conversion from sin
to GOD. There are but four things in the hand of the Minister, the Word,
Prayer, Sacraments, and Discipline. By the word of Doctrine he frames,
wins, and persuades the sinner to repentant, conversion, seeking, and
procuring remission from God. By Prayer, he seeks and obtains it for the
sinner. By Sacraments, he instrumentally makes him partaker as well of the
grace of remission as conversion: And by the power of Discipline, he does by
way of authority punish evil doings, and remit or diminish the punishments he
inflicteth, according as the condition of the party may seem to require. By
that which has been said, it appears that to bind and loose, to remit and
to retain sins, are equivalent and the same: save that to bind and loose, is
of more ample and large extent, in that it implies in it the binding by
precepts and laws, and the loosing which is by reversing or dispensing with
the same. And therefore having showed that the Apostles were equal in the
power ofbinding and loosing, we need ad no farther proof that they were equal
in power of remitting and retaining sins.

Wherefore let us proceed to the promise of Christ made to Peter, that upon
the Rock mentioned by him, he would build his Church, and let us see, whether
any peculiar thing were promised unto Peter in that behalf. The Church of God,
we know, is compared in Scripture to a City, an House, and a Temple; and
therefore the beginning, proceeding, and increasing of the same, is rightly
compared to building. Now in building there must be a foundation upon which all
may rest, and stay, that is put into the same building: and the foundation must
be sure, firm, and immovable; for otherwise it wall fail, and so alll other
parts of the building, wanting their stay, will fall to the ground. Now nothing
is so firm, sure and immovable, as a Rock, and consequently no building so
strong as that which is raised upon a rockie foundation: whereupon our Savior
shows Matthew. 7. 24. etc.
that a House builded on the sand is easily ruinated, and soon shaken to
pieces, but that an House builded upon a rock stands firm, notwithstanding
the fury and violence of the floods, winds, and tempests: and compares a Man
rightly grounded, and established in his persuasion and resolution, to an house
so built. By a Rock therefore in this place is meant a sure foundation, that
will not fail, nor be moved or shaken, how great a weight soever be laid upon
it. In a foundation there are three things required. The first is, that it be
the first thing in the building: the second, that it bear up all the other
parts of the building; and the third, that it be firm and immovable. For as
Christ says; Matthew. 6. 33.
If the eye that is the light of the body, be darkness, how great is that
Darkness? So, if that which is to support and bear up all, do fail and
shrink, all must needs be shaken, and fall a sunder. These being the things
required in a foundation; simply, and absolutely, in respect of all times,
persons, and things, Christ only is that foundation, upon which the spiritual
building of the Church is raised, because he only is that beginning whence all
spiritual good originally flows, and comes, upon whom all the persuasion
of the truth of things revealed staieth it self, as being the Angel of the
great Covenant, and that eternal Word, that was with God in the beginning,
upon whom all our hope, confidence, and expectation of any good groundeth it
self: all the promises of God being in him 2 Cor. 1. 20.
yea and Amen. And in this sense the Apostle Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 3. 11.
Other Foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ. And Aug. tractat. vlt. in Ioannem. Se^m. 13. de verb. Dom. Retract. l.
1. ca. 21.
S. Augustine, and other of the Fathers understand by that rock upon which our
Savior promised Peter to build his Church, the rock that Peter confessed,
which rock was Christ, upon which foundation even Peter himself was builded,
for that other Foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, which is
Jesus Christ. But in respect of some particular times, persons, and things, and
in some particular and special considerations, there are other things that may
rightly be named foundations also, in respect of the spiritual building of
the Church. So in respect of the frame and fabrique of virtue and weldoing
raised in this building, the first virtue, namely Faith, upon which all other
virtues do stay themselves, and from which they take the first direction that
any virtue can give, is rightly named a foundation. In respect of the form of
Christian doctrine, the first principles of heavenly knowledge are rightly
named a foundation, Hebr. 6. 1.
Not laying again, says the Apostle, the foundation of faith, and of
repentance from dead works, of the doctrine of Baptismes, and of the
imposition of hands, of the resurrection of the dead, and ofeternall judgment,
let us be led forward unto perfection. These first principles of heavenly
knowledge are named a foundation, because they are the first things that are
known, before which nothing can be known; and because upon the knowledge of
these things, all other parts of heavenly knowledge do depend. In respect of
the confession of the true faith concerning Christ, the first clear, express,
and perfect form of confession that ever was made concerning the same, may
rightly be named a foundation, and in this sense Peter's faith and confession is
by diverse of the Leo in annivers. assumpt. Sermon. 2.
Fathers named the Churches foundation. But they understand not by the faith
and confession of Peter, either the virtue and quality of faith abiding in his
heart and mind, or the outward act of confessing, but the form of confession
made by him when he said Matthew. 16. 16.
Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God: upon which form, as being
the rule of all right believing, the Church of God is builded. In respect of
the supernatural knowledge of God in Christ, the first and immediate
revelation made to the Apostles from whom all other were to learn, and by
whose Ministry, accompanied with all things that might win credit, they
were to be gained unto God, may very rightly and justly be named a foundation,
upon which the faith of all after-commers is to stay it self, and from which
in all doubts they must seek resolution. And in this sort De Pon. Romans l. 1.
c. 11.
Bellarmine says truly, that the Apostles may be named Foundations of the
Church: according to that description, in the Revelation of Saint John, of the
wall of the city of God, that had Revel. 21. 14.
12. foundation-stones upon which it was raised, and in them written the names
of the Lambs twelve Apostles; and that of S. Paul, that Ephesians. 2. 20.
we are builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Jesus
being the Head cornerstone: And this in three respects. First, because the
Apostles were the first that founded Churches, and converted unbelievers to the
faith. Secondly, because their doctrine, which they received immediately from
God by most undoubted revelation, without mixture of error, or danger of being
deceived is the rule of the faith of all aftercommers, and that sure,
immovable, and rockie foundation, upon which the persuasion of all succeeding
generations, and posterities, may and does, most securely stay and ground it
self. Thirdly, because they were Heads, Guides, and Pastors of the whole
universal Church, having not only supreme, but prime and original government
of the same, out of whose most large and ample commission, all Ecclesiastical
power and authority of after-commers, was in an inferior degree and sort to
be derived, and taken. In all these respects, all the Apostles were that
strong rock, and those strong rockie foundation-stones on which the Church is
builded, though in a peculiar sense Christ alone be the Rock: and in all
these respects, as S. Hierome says, Hier. l. (...). contra Iovinian.
Super omnes ex aequo Ecclesiae fortitudo solidatur: that is, the strength and
firmness of the Church does equally and indifferently stay it self upon them
all: and consequently no more upon Peter then any of the rest. Hitherto we
find nothing peculiar to Peter, and not common to all the Apostles: so that
all the allegations of our Adversaries touching the feeding of the Sheep of
Christ committed to Peter, the power of the keys, of binding and loosing, of
remitting and retaining sins, and the promise that on him as on a rockie
foundation-stone elect and precious, Christ would build his Church, are to no
purpose, seeing they are forced to confess, that all these things were
likewise either by direct Cusanus de Concord. Cathol. l. 2. c. 13
words, or by intendment bestowed on all the rest. Wherefore let us see how
notwithstanding this their confession they can make good, that there was a
primacie of power in Peter, and how they go about to confirm the same.

CHAP. 23.
Of the primacie of power imagined by our Adversaries to have been in Peter,
and their defense of the same.

FOr the avoiding of the clear evidence of the truth of all that which has
been said, touching the equality of the Apostles of Christ amongst themselves
(which our Adversaries cannot but see, and acknowledge) they have two shifts;
The first, Stapleton relect. controv. 3. q. 1. art. 1.
that the Apostles were equal toward the people, but not amongst themselves.
The second, Caietan. opusc. tom. 1. tract. 1. c. 3.
that they were equal in the Apostolic power, but that Peter had that
amplitude of power (which the rest had as Apostles by special favor, and
only in and for their own persons) as an ordinary Pastor, and in such sort
that he might leave the same to his Successors. These their silly shifts and
evasions we will examine, that so the truth of that which has bin said, be
more fully cleared, and that all men may see and perceive; that nothing can be
substa^tially objected against it, nor no evasio^ found to avoid it.

Touching the first thing that they say, it is an Axiom, as I think, that may
not be doubted of, that whatsoever things are equal in respect of a third
thing, are in the same sort, and fo far for equal amongst themselves. So
that if the Apostles were equal in the respect they had to the people, and as
governors of the same, they were so far forth, and in that respect equal
amongst themselves. But they will say perhaps, that the Apostles were indeed
equal amongst themselves in the power and office of teaching, directing,
guiding, and governing the Christian World, but that yet amongst themselves
there was an inequality, and one was superior, and had power over the rest, not
in respect of the acts of their office of teaching and governing the world, but
in respect of their personal actions. This surely is one of the strangest
paradoxes that ever was heard of. For who can imagine, that God would trust the
Apostles, with the managing of the weightiest affairs of his Church, and the
government of the whole world, without being any way accountant in respect
thereof, unto any one amongst the^ as superior, and that he would appoint an
head and chief, and subject them to his censure in their personal actions? Nay
this is impossible, and cannot be. For if in their office of teaching, and
governing the rest of the Church they were equal, and could not therein be
limited or restrained one by another, then was there none amongst them that
could put any of the rest from his office, dignity, and employment.

Now it is most clear and certain, that he who has not power to suspend
another from the execution of his office in the Church, has no power to
suspend him from the Sacraments, or to excommunicate him whatsoever his
personal misdemeanors be. For as to be a Minister of the Church, presupposes
to be a member of it: so to be put from being a member of the Church,
implies and presupposes a putting from all office and dignity in the Church:
so that there neither was, nor could be any amongst the Apostles, that had
power to put any of the rest out of the Church, or to suspend them from the use
of the Sacraments, seeing there was none found amongst them that had authority
to limit, restrain, or debar any of the rest from the execution of his
office: and therefore all that any one of them could do in respect of another,
was but to admonish him, and upon his rejecting of such admonitions to refuse
to communicate with him; which thing any one may do in an absolute equality,
as well as when one is superior to another; as we see by the example of Paul
Galat. 2. 11.
reproving Peter, and resisting him to his face, and likewise by that of Paul
and Barnabas Act. 15. ^9.
parting the one from the other upon such dislikes and differences as grew
between them.

Wherefore I suppose our Adversaries will not much insist upon this their first
shift and evasion. Let us see therefore if their second be any better. It is
true (say they) that all power Ecclesiastical, and all degrees of the same are
included and employed in the Apostolic office and dignity; that the Apostles,
as Apostles were all equal; and consequently, that there was no one amongst
the Apostles, but in his time had as much to do in governing of the Church as
Peter, without receiving any thing from him, or being any way subject to his
control, and to be restrained, limited, or directed by him: But this
amplitude of power whicch all the Apostles had in common, the rest had only
for themselves, and as a personal privilege that was to end with them, but
Peter had the same in such sort, that he might leave it to to his Successors.
So that that power which in the rest was Apostolic and temporary, and to end
with them, was ordinary, Pastoral, and perpetual in Peter, and to be derived
from him to his Successors and after-commers. Surely this second evasion will
be found much worse then the first: for it is absurd to say, that Peter left
all the dignity and Ecclesiastical power he had in common with the rest of the
Apostles, to his successors: for then all Popes should be immediately chosen
by God, not by the Cardinals; then should they all be consecrated and ordained
immediately by Christ, not by Bishops: then should they all see Christ in the
flesh: then should they all have power to write books of Canonical Scripture,
and be free from danger of erring whenever they either preach or write: for
so the Apostles were: yea then should they confirm their doctrine by miracles,
and give the Holy Ghost by imposition of their Hands. Whereas yet noe Pope
dares challenge any one of these preeminences. If they say, that all the
dignity and power that was in the Apostles was not ordinary, Pastoral, and
perpetual in Peter, and so to be passed over to his Successors, but some
part of it only, it is just nothing they say. For then this is all that they
affirm, that some part of that dignity and power that was in Peter, is in
Peter's Successors, and so there is in the silliest Priest in the world.

But they will say, immediate vocation, the seeing of Christ in the flesh,
infallibility of judgment, power to write Canonical books of Scripture, and
the confirmation of doctrine by miracles, together with the giving of the holy
Ghost by imposition of hands, were fitting to the first beginnings of
Christianity, and not of perpetual necessity and use, and therefore to cease
after things were established; but that universality of jurisdiction, and a
kind of infallibility of judgment, are perpetually necessary, and therefore
these were to pass from Peter to others, though the rest of the Apostolic
preeminences were not. Thus then first they amplify the excellent dignities of
Peter, as if the rest had not had the like; but being convinced, that he had
nothing the rest had not, they make show as if they would prove, that the
Apostle S. Peter had all those things in such sort that he might leave them to
his Successors, which the rest had as personal priuilidges only; because he
is described to be a Pastor of the Church, in that CHRIST says unto him, I^h.
21. 16.
Feed my sheep, and the office of a Pastor is of perpetual necessity. But
being urged, that there are many excellent dignities found in Peter and the
rest, that are not communicable to any other, as immediate vocation, seeing of
CHRIST in the flesh, absolute infallibility in word and writing, speaking in
diverse tongues, power to do miracles, and power to give the visible gifts of
the holy Ghost by the imposition of hands, they confess, that precisely Peter's
being a Pastor of the Christian Church, will not prove, that any dignity of
his mentioned in the Scripture is perpetual, pastoral, and to continue for
ever, unless the necessity of the perpetuity of it be made to appear
otherwise. Whence it will follow, that they cannot prove that any special
preeminences in Peter which he had in common with the rest, as namely,
infallibility of judgment, and universality of Jurisdiction, were Pastoral and
perpetual in him, and to be passed from him to his after-commers, and thereby
entitle the Pope unto them. For PETER'S being a Pastor, which is the only thing
they can allege to prove, that what he had was pastoral and perpetual,
proves it not: and the proof of the necessity of the continuance of any
preeminence found in Peter and the rest of the Apostles, shows that such a
preeminence must continue, but not in what person or persons it must continue.

But let us see whether infallibility of judgment, and universality of
Jurisdiction be amongst the things that were proper to the beginnings of
Christianity, or amongst those that are perpetually necessary. Surely; touching
the first, De Pont: To. lib. 2. cap. 12.
Bellarmine seems to confess, that the being taught immediately of GOD, and
the being absolutely free from error, so that their writings and sayings were
Canonical, were temporary in the Apostles, as necessary only in those first
beginnings of Christianity; and whether he confess it or not, it is most
undoubtedly true, that that absolute infallibility that was in Peter, for whose
faith Christ prayed that it might not fail, was temporary, and not to be
communicated to any after-commers: for he was so lead into all truth, that
he could not err in any of his writings and preachings; whereas all confess,
that even Popes may err in both these, and that they are free from error
only when they determine those things, wherein the whole Church seeks their
resolution. Touching the second which is universality of jurisdiction, the same
Cardinal has these words. De Pont. To. lib. 1. c. 9.
Fuit in illis Ecclesiae primordijs necessarium ad fidem in toto orb terrarum
disseminandam, vt primis praedicatoribus and Ecclesiarum fundatoribus summa
potestas and libertas concederetur: That is, in those first beginnings of the
Church it was necessary, for the quick dispersing of the Faith throughout the
whole world, that the first Preachers, and founders of Churches, should have a
most ample power, and free commission, without that streightning and limitation
of the same that is in their after-commers, that so every one of them might
truly use those words of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 11. 28.
Instantia mea quotidiana sollicitudo omnium Ecclesiarum, that is, my daily
instance is the carfulness of all Churches: or as some other translate it: I
am cumbred daily, and have the care of all Churches. And therefore howsoever
the Apostles divided amongst themselves the several parts of the world, to
which each one of them should more specially preach the word of the Lord; yet
did they not shut up and enclose their cares within the bounds and compass of
any one province, but every one of them. did so take care of the whole Church,
as if that care had pertained unto him alone. Thus far Bellarmine, clearly
confessing, that the illimited commission of the Apostles was fitted to those
first beginnings of Christianity, and the condition of those first times: so
that the same reason that excludes the other dignities and preeminencies of
the Apostles, as namely their being fitted to the first beginnings, excludes
both these from being perpetual likewise.

But let us let this advantage go, and take a view of those proofs which they
bring of the power of Peter's Successors above other Bishops, whereas Peter
himself had noe power more then any of the rest. It is true (say they) that
Peter had noe power which the rest had not, but he had that amplitude of
Ecclesiastical power as an ordinary Pastor, which they had only as Apostles
and Delegates by special favor, and personal privilege. Against this
distinction few of our Divines say any thing, many of them confessing they
understand it not; so deep is the learning of our Adversaries, that every Man
cannot be so happy as to understand what they write. Which is the less to be
marvailed at, seeing many of them scarce understand themselves, and yet
contemn us, as if we were silly idiots. But if without offense we may
conjecture what the meaning of this their riddle is, surely under correction I
think this it is. The rest of the Apostles had as great authority and power,
and as large a commission as Peter had: but they had it only for term of
life, and could leave none to succeed them in the same. He had it for himself,
and such as he would leave it unto. Besides, he was first invested with all
the plenitude of Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction, so that none could
have any thing to do in this business, but such as should receive commission
from him, save only that Christ reserved power to himself, to give commission
to such as by special favor he should be pleased to honor, as were the
Apostles separated to the work of the Ministry by his own immediate
designement, without receiving any thing from Peter: but afterward all were
either to receive of him, or of them to whom he should leave his office and
charge. This their conceit they illustrate by a similitude. A Bishop, say
they, has authority to preach in his Diocese, as Pastor of the place, and
whosoever succeeds him in his Bishoplie office, succeeds him in the same
power likewise. A Friar by special favor from the Pope, may preach in the
same Diocese wheresoever the Bishop may, and cannot be silenced or restrained
by him, because he received nothing from him, but his superior the Pope; but
another desiring to succeed the Friar, not so favored and privileged by the
Pope, must fetch his commission and allowance from the Bishop, and be subject
to him in the performance and execution thereof. So here Peter was first
constituted Pastor of all the World; the Apostles were by special favor
authorized immediately by Christ to preach in Peter's charge, and to govern the
Church whereof he was Bishop, as well as he; but yet so, that all they that
were to follow after, were to derive their commission from Peter or his
Successor, if they would meddle in the Church which was his charge. Many
things are said by Caietan, Bellarmine, Stapleton, and others to this purpose;
but this is the substance of all: Wherefore let us see how they prove that they
say.

Touching the first of these two points, thus they prove it. Peter was a
Pastor, and had that amplitude of illimited commission before described, as a
Pastor: but the office of a Pastor is of perpetual necessity and use: and
therefore this his illimited power and commission was to be perpetually
continued. That Peter was a Pastor they prove, because Christ said unto him
expressly, Feed my Sheep, Feed my Lambs. This is the frame of their whole
building, which may very easily be thrown to the ground, if any man will put
his hand unto it. First, because it is certain the other Apostles were
Pastors also: so that if Peter's being a Pastor prove the necessity of the
continuance of those ample preheminences he had, and that he might leave them
to whom he pleased, it would follow, that the rest of the Apostles also had
their preheminences, which were equal with those of Peter, not as things
temporary, but perpetual, and such as they might leave to whom they pleased.
That the other Apostles were Pastors, Ockam. Dial. l. 4. primi tract. 3.
partis c. 3.
first the Hymn of the Church wherein they are expressly said to have bin
constituted Pastors by Christ, proves. Secondly, the confession of Bellarm.
de Pont. l. 4 c. 23
Bellarmine, acknowledging that what was given to Peter by those words, Feed
my sheep, was given unto all by those other words, As my Father sent me, so
send I you, confirms the same. And thirdly, the enumeration of the several
kinds of feeding, every of which the Divines do show to agree to the rest, as
well as to Peter, demonstrateth that they were all Pastors. Secondly, whereas
they say, that the office of a Pastor is a thing of perpetual use and
necessity, and consequently perpetual, and that the amplitude of power which
was in Peter agreed unto him in that he was a Pastor, and as a Pastor, they
bewray notable ignorance and folly. For it is true indeed that the office of a
Pastor is of perpetual use and necessity, and so to continue for ever: but
the amplitude of power and jurisdiction, and the great preeminences, that were
in Peter, did not agree unto him as to a Pastor, or in that he was a Pastor:
For if they had, then must they agree to every Pastor, and so every Bishop must
have the same, and not the Pope only. For as whatsoever agrees to a man in
that he is a man, agrees to every man; so whatsoever agrees to a Pastor in
that he is a Pastor, agrees to every one that is a Pastor. If they shall say,
that the great and ample preeminences that were in Peter, did not agree unto
him as a Pastor, but in some other respect; then his being a Pastor, which is
an office of perpetual necessity, use, and continuance, will not prove the
same perpetual, no more then other things which this Pastor had in that he
was an Apostle. If they shall say, these things agreed unto him, not in that he
was a Pastor, but in that he was such a Pastor as was to feed the flock of
Christ and people of God, by delivering unto them the doctrine of truth without
all mixture of any the least error, to confirm the same by miracles
following, and to give the visible gifts of the holy Spirit by the only
imposition of his hands; it is true that they say; but such a Pastor they
confess is necessary only in the beginnings of the Christian Church, and not
afterward; and therefore from hence it cannot be concluded that the ample
preeminences, that were in Peter, as his infallibility of judgment, and
illimited Commission, were to be passed over from him to his Successors, and
after-commers. Their second conceit is more fond then the first: For if Peter
were by Christ constituted sole supreme Pastor and Bishop of the whole
universal world, and yet his meaning was, that others should likewise receive
immediately from himself power to do as much in the governing of the Church as
Peter; he meant to give him something, and presently to take it from him
again. For as if the Pope shall make a man Bishop of such a city, or
country, and thereby give unto him that supreme direction that nothing shall
be done within that compass without his authority and consent; and shall
presently send another with full authority to do any thing that the former may
do, and no way to be subject to his control or restraint in the performance
thereof, or accomptant for it; he reuoketh, and makes void his first grant:
so here, if Christ make Peter supreme Bishop, and Pastor of the whole
Christian world, and presently constitute eleven other Apostles with power and
commission to do any thing that Peter may do in all parts of the world, and
toward all persons (which as they have not from him so he cannot take it from
them, or limit them in the use of it) he absolutely voideth his first grant
made to Peter.

But they will say perhaps, that Christ meant little favor to Peter more then
to one of the rest of the Apostles, but that all his care was for the good of
the Pope, whom he meant to make a great man in the world: and that therefore
he constituted the other Apostles immediately as well as Peter, put them into
equal commission with him, and would not have them beholding to him for any
honor or power they had, but appointed that all other Bishops should receive
their mission, calling, commission, and authority from Peter during the short
time of his life, and after his departure in all succeeding ages to the end of
the world, from his Successors the Bishops of Rome. This truly is well said
in favor of the Pope, if it were as truly said as it is kindly meant; but we
shall find, that there is no truth in that they say: For it is clear and
evident, that each Apostle by his commission he had from Christ without being
any way beholding to Peter for it, had authority to preach the Gospel to such
as never heard of it before, to plant Churches, and ordain and constitute in
them Pastors and Bishops, and out of his more large and ample commission to
make other, though somewhat more restrained and limited; whence it will follow
that they whom any of the other Apostles ordained and constituted Pastors and
Bishops which were innumerable in all parts of the world, received nothing
from Peter nor his pretended Successor. Now they whom the Apostles thus
constituted, and ordained, might constitute and ordain other by virtue of
their office and calling they had from the Apostles, and those other, other
again to succeed them, so that none of these to the end of the world, one
succeeding another, should ever receive any thing from Peter or his pretended
Successor, And therefore it is absurd that De Pont. To: lib. 4. c. 23. 24. and
25.
Bellarmine says, that the Apostles received all their jurisdiction
immediately from Christ, and that yet notwithstanding all Bishops receive the
same from the Pope. And those Papists are better advised that say, that the
Bishops of other Churches receive not their jurisdiction from the Pope, but
from Christ by those Apostles that constituted their Churches, and planted
their predecessors in the same, setting them the bounds of their Bishop-like
charge: whence it will follow (as Bellarmine wisely foresaw, and therefore
declined this opinion) that the Pope cannot either take away or diminish their
authority unless any man can show where Christ gave him power to limite,
restrain, or take away that power from men, which they have from himself by
the hands of the other Apostles, and their after-commers, without being any way
beholding to Peter for the same.

Wherefore they have yet one more strange conceit behind to help the matter,
then any of those we have hitherto heard; which is, that Peter being not only
an Apostle, but supreme Pastor and Bishop of the whole world constituted by
Christ, made the other Apostles Bishops and Pastors; and that they ordained
Bishops not by virtue of their Apostolic power (which they received
immediately from Christ without being beholding to Peter for it, or inferior
to him in it) but by virtue of their Bishoply authority and offi^ce which they
received from Peter. De Pont. Romans l. 1. c. 23.
Alioqui enim, says Bellarmine, cum omnes Apostoli plurimos Episcopos in
varijs locis constituerint, si Apostoli ipsi non sint facti Episcopi a Petro,
certe maxima pars Episcoporum, nondeducit originem suam a Petro; that is, For
otherwise, seeing all the Apostles constituted exceeding many Bishops in
diverse places, if the Apostles themselves were not made Bishops by Peter,
certainly the greatest part of Bishops will not fetch their original from
Peter. This his fancy of Peter's making the other Apostles Bishops,
immediately after as his manner is, like an honest man he contradicts,
confessing, that the Apostles were all Bishops, and the first Bishops of the
Church in that they were Apostles, without any such ordination. Ibidem.
Omnes Apostoli, says he, fuerunt Episcopi, imo etiam primi Episcopi
Ecclesiae, tametsi non sunt ordinati: that is, All the Apostles were Bishops,
nay, which more is, the first Bishops of the Church, without any other or new
ordination besides their Apostolic mission and calling. And Lib. 4. cap. 23.
in another place he pronou^ceth pere^ptorily, that by virtue of these words.
John 2^. 21.
As my Father sent me so se^d I you, the Apostles were made Vicars of Christ,
nay that they received the very offi^ce, and authority of Christ, and that in
the Apostolic power all Ecclesiastical power is contained: and though in the
former place he said expressly, Non eo ipso quod aliquis est Apostolus, est
Episcopus; that is, A man is not therefore a Bishop, because an Apostle: for
the twelve were Apostles before they were either Bishops or Priests: yet in the
later place he says, it is not to be maruailed at, that they were Apostles
before the passi^on of Christ, and yet neither Priests nor Bishops: for that
the Lord at diverse times gave the Apostles diverse kinds and degrees of
power: but especially in the twentieth of John, perfected that he began
before his passi^on. So that an Apostle perfectly constituted and authorized,
has both Priestlie and Episcopal dignitic and power, though in the beginning,
when the Apostles were rather designed then fully constituted, not having
received their full Commissi^on, they were neither Priests nor Bishops. But
to leave BELLARMINE lost in these mazes, it is most easy demonstratiuely to
prove, that the Apostles in that they were Apostles perfectly and fully
constituted, had both Priestlie and Bishoply dignity and power in most eminent
sort. For did not CHRIST give the Apostles power to do any Ecclesiastical act
that a Bishop can do? Did he not give them power to preach and baptize,
when he said unto them, Math. 28. 19.
Go teach all nations Baptizing them, etc: to minister the holy Eucharist,
when he said, Luke 22. 19.
Do this as est as ye shall do it in remembrance of me? Did he not give
them the power of the Keys, of binding and loosing, of remitting and retaining
sins, and consequently all that comes within the compass of
Ecclesiastical office and Ministry? doubtless he did: Neither is there any
that dares to deny any part of that which has been said. And therefore it
is an idle fancy that Peter made the rest of his fellows Bishops, the
Apostolic power implying in it eminently Episcopal, as the greater the
lesser.

But they will say, Peter made James the lesser Bishop of Jerusalem. Indeed
Baron. annal. an. Christi 34. 291. Chrysostom. in Joan. homil. 87.
Baronius falsifieth Chrysostom, and makes him say, that the Doctor of the
world made James Bishop of Jerusalem, whereas he says no such thing; but
asking the question why Peter, whom Christ so much favored, was not preferred
to be Bishop of Jerusalem, answers, that Christ made him Doctor of the
world, which was a greater honor then to have been fastened to the Church of
Jerusalem, and to have been set in the Episcopal Throne there. But it is
clear by the testimonies of Antiquity, that Peter, James the greater, and
John, ordained James Bishop of Jerusalem. So says Anacletus in his second
Epistie, if any credit be to be given unto it, where he has these words: A
Bishop must be ordained of three Bishops, as Peter, James the greater, and
John, ordained James the lesser Bishop of Jerusalem. Clem. Alex. apud Eusebius.
l. 2. c. 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus also, as we read in Eusebius, says the very same; and
Hier. de viris illustr. in Jacob.
Hierome de viris illustribus, attributes the ordaining of James not to Peter
alone, but to the Apostles. His words are, Iacobus, statim post passionem
Domini ab Apostolis Hierosolymorum Episcopus ordinatur: that is, James
presently after the passion of the Lord, is ordained Bishop of Jerusalem by
the Apostles. If any man ask how the Apostles did ordain or make James being
an Apostle, a Bishop, if the Apostolic office imply in it the office and
dignity of a Bishop, as the greater the lesser: we answer, that a Bishop
differing from an Apostle, as in other things, so in this, that he is fixed to
some certain place whereof specially he takes the care, whereas the care and
employment of an Apostle is more at large: When the Apostles after the
conversion of Nations and people began to retire themselves to certain places
there to rest, and specially to take care thereof, they were in that respect
rather Bishops then Apostles; and in this sort James the lesser being appointed
by the Apostles, to make his principal abode at Jerusalem a chief city of
the world, whence the faith spread it self into all other parts, and more
specially to take care thereof, is rightly said to have been constituted
Bishop of that place by them, not as if they had given him any new power and
authority, that he had not before, or not in so perfect sort, but that they
limited, and restrained him more specially to one certain place where he
should use the same.

The place in the Act. 13. 2. 3.
Acts makes nothing for the confirmation of the Popish error: for Paul and
Barnabas formerly designed by Christ to be Apostles, were again by the
ministry of Prophets revealing the will and pleasure of Almighty GOD,
separated more specially to be Apostles of the Gentiles, and put forth into
that employment with fasting, prayer, and imposition of hands: not thereby
receiving any new power, but a special limitation and assignation of those
parts of the world, wherein principally they should be employed. Besides, these
were not Apostles but Prophets, such as Agabus was, that are mentioned in this
place, inferior in degree to Apostles, and such as might not make an Apostle
to be a Bishop, but did only signify and reveal what the will of God was,
and whither he meant to send these worthy Apostles, and so with prayer and
fasting commended them to the grace of God; and therefore this place makes
nothing for proof of Peter's ordaining and appointing the rest of the Apostles
to be Bishops.

CHAP. 24.
Of the preeminence that Peter had amongst the Apostles, and the reason why
Christ directed his speeches specially to him.

THAT there was no more power and authority in Peter then in any of the rest,
I hope it appears by that which has been said: and therefore it remains
that now we examine, what was the reason why so many things were specially
spoken to him, why so many ways he may seem to have been preferred before
the rest, and what in truth and in deed his preeminence, and primacie was.
Touching the speeches of Christ for the most part specially directed to Peter,
it is most certain by that which has been said, that they did give no
singular and special power to Peter that was not given to every of the rest.

And therefore Ockam. Dialo. l. 4. primi tractat. 3. part. cap: 3.
the Divines do observe the difference of the speeches of Christ, and note
that Christ sometimes directed his speech to particular men precisely in their
own persons, as in the remission of sins, healing the sick, and raising the
dead: sometimes in the person of all, or many others, as when he says, Ioh. 5.
14.
Go and sin no more, which he is intended to have done so often as there is
the same reason of speaking a thing to one and to others; as when a man is
induced to do or not to do a thing, to believe or not to believe a thing,
which other in like sort are bound to do or not to do, to believe or not to
believe as well as he. So it being as necessary for one to watch as another,
Christ says, Mark. 13. 37.
That I say unto you I say unto all, Watch. And so here, seeing it is confessed
and proved by our Adversaries themselves, that there was nothing promised or
performed to Peter that was not in like sort intended unto, and bestowed on
every of the rest, it must be granted, that what he spoke to him, he meant to
all, and would have his words so understood and taken. Ockam. vbi supra.
The reason why more specially, notwithstanding this his general intendment,
he directed his speech to Peter, then to any of the rest, was either because he
was more ancient, and more ardent in charity then the rest, thereby to
signify what manner of men they should be that should be chosen Pastors of
the Church, namely men of ripe age and confirmed judgment, and full of
charity: or lest he might seem to be despised for his denial of Christ,
which the Gloss seems to import when it says, Trinae negationi redditur
trina confessio, ne minus amori lingua seruiat, quam timori; that is, Therefore
he was induced by Christ thrice solemnly to protest and profess his love unto
him, as he had thrice denied him, that his tongue might show it self no less
serviceable unto love that rested in him, then it had done unto fear: or else
because he first confessed Christ to be the Son of the living God
consubstantiall with his Father, because he was much conversant with Christ,
and acquainted with his secrets and counsels; or lastly, because Christ meant
there should be a certain order amongst the guides of his Church, and some to
whom the rest in all places should resort in all matters of importance, as to
such as are more honorable then other of the same rank and degree who are
first to be consulted, from whom all actions must take their beginning,
therefore he so specially spoke to Peter, whom he meant in this sort to set
before the rest. Thus then, there is a primacie of power when one has power to
do that act of ministry another has not, or not without his consent; and
when one may by himself limite, restrain, or hinder another in the
performance of the acts of ministry; and such primacie we have showed not to
have been in Peter. But there is another of order and honor, which he had,
whereby he had the first place, the first and best employment, the calling
together of the rest in cases where a concurrence of many was required (as for
the better sorting out of the work they had in hand, the joint decreeing of
things to be every where alike believed, and practiced) and in these assemblies
thus called, the sitting and speaking first, the moderation and direction of
each man's speaking, and the publishing and pronouncing of the conclusion agreed
upon, if so he pleased. In this sense Cyprian says, Cyprian de vnitate
Ecclesiae.
Erant vtique and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit and Petrus, pari consortio
praediti and honoris and potestatis, fed exordium ab vnitate proficiscitur;
that is, The other Apostles doubtless were that which Peter was, having the
same fellowship both of power and honor, but the beginning proceeds from
unity, that the Church may be showed to be one. And in the same sense Hierome
says against Iouinian, Hieron. lib. 1. contra Iouinian.
Thou will say, the Church is founded upon Peter: it is true it is so, and yet
in another place the same frame of the Church is raised upon all the Apostles:
and all receive the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the firmness of the
Church stays it self equally upon them all: but therefore does Christ more
specially promise to build his Church upon Peter, that he being constituted
and appointed head and chief amongst them, all occasion of Schism might be
taken away. To the same purpose it is that Leo writes to Anastasius, where he
says, Leo epist. 84.
Inter beatissimos Apostolos in similitudine honor is fuit quaedam discretio
potestatis, and cum omnium par esset electio, vni tamen datum est, vt caeteris
preemineret; that is, Amongst the most blessed Apostles like in honor, there
was a certain difference of power; and when all were equally elected, yet it
was given to one to have a preeminence amongst the rest. In which saying of
Leo, that it be not contrary to that of Cyprian, who says, that the Apostles
were companions, and consorts equal both in honor and power, we must not
understand that one Apostle had more power then another, or that power another
had not; but that in the same power one was so before the rest, that he was
the party to whom they were to resort, and without consulting whom first and
before all other, they might attempt nothing generally concerning the state of
the whole Church, by virtue of this power. In which sense he says in another
place: Leo ep. 89.
Petro praecaeteris soluendi and ligandi tradita est potestas; that is, The
power of binding and loosing was so given to Peter, that therein he was before
the rest; and again, Leo in annivers. assumpt. Sermon. 3.
Siquid cum eo commune caeteris Christus voluit esse principibus, nunquam nisi
per ipsum Petrum dedit quicquidaliis non negavit: that is, If Christ would have
any thing to be common to the rest of the Princes, that is, Apostles, with
Peter, he never gave that which he vouchsafed unto them any otherwise then as
by Peter; which words must not so be understood, as if Peter had first
received the fullness of power, and others from him; for all the Apostles
received their power and commission immediately from Christ and not from Peter,
as I have largely proved, and all confess; but that what he gave to others,
it did so pass unto them, as that in the first place it was given to Peter,
and he thereby set in order and honor before the rest put in the same
commission with him; so that Peter received not a different or more large
commission from Christ then the other Apostles, but only a kind of honorable
precedence, preeminence, and priority, such as the Duke of Venice has amongst
the great Lords of that state, to whom all Embassies and messages are directed
from foreign Princes, and in whose name all letters, warrants, and mandates
are sent out, as representing the whole State: yet can he do nothing without
the rest, nor cross the consenting resolution of those noble Senators.

And in this sense it is that Aug. tractat. vlt. in Ioannem.
Augustine says of Peter, that he was by nature one particular man, by grace a
christian man, by more ample and abundant grace a chief Apostle; but that when
he received the Keys, he represented the whole universal Church, not as a
legate that represents the person of his Prince, and receives honors,
dignities and titles for him and not for himself, but as chief of the company
of the Apostles receiving for himself in the first place, that which in him
and together with him was intended to them all. Leo epist. 84.
This primacie of honor and order found in blessed Peter; who is thereupon
named by the Fathers Prince and head of the Apostles, is the original of all
that superiority that Metropolitanes have over the Bishops of their provinces;
and Primates and Patriarchs over Metropolitanes, and in a word of all that
order that is in the Church, and amongst her guides, whereby unity is
preserved.

CHAP. 25.
Of the distinction of them to whom the Apostles dying left the managing of
Church affairs: and particularly of them that are to perform the meaner
services in the Church.

Having spoken of the Apostles power and office, and the largeness of that
commission, it remains that we come to speak of them to whom they
recommended the managing of Church affairs, and the ministry of holy things
when they left the world. They to whom they recommended the care of these
things, when having finished their course, they were called hence to receive
the Crown laid up for them in Heaven, were of two sorts: first such as they
trusted with the ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and government of Gods
people; and secondly, such other as they appointed to be assistant to them, and
to perform the meaner services, though necessary also.

The former sort are all comprehended under one common name of Presbyters, that
is, fatherly guides of Gods Church and people; the latter are Deacons, and such
other inferior Ministers, as attend the necessities of the Saints, and assist
the principal Guides of the Church. In the ordination of a Presbyter, says In
4. sent. did. 24 qu. 2.
Durandus, there is a certain power conferred on him, and assigning of him to
an employment, whereby after his ordination he may do something which he
could not have done before, etiam quoad genus facti, no not in the kind and
nature of the thing it self; as he that is ordained a Presbyter, may
consecrate the Lords Body, and absolve in the Court of Penitencie; neither of
which things without such ordination can be done: but to them that are in the
inferior orders there is no power given, neither have they any assignement to
do any thing which they could not do before, and without such ordination, but
to do such things as they could not lawfully do; nay in many of them there is
no designement of them that are so ordained to the performance of any thing,
but that which according to the use of the universal Church, men without such
ordination may lawfully do. So that the ordination of men to the performance
of such things, and the execution of such offices, seems to have proceeded
from the institution of the Church, for the greater solemnity of Divine
worship and service: and therefore such inferior orders are neither simply
orders (order being a sacred sign or character, by virtue whereof a power is
given to the ordained, not only to do that he could not otherwise lawfully
do, but to do that which otherwise he could not do at all) neither are they
Sacraments, but Sacramental solemnities only, seeing the Church can institute
no Sacraments. Hitherto Durandus. These being the sorts of them to whom the
Apostles recommended the managing of Church affairs, and this the difference
of their orders, I will first speak of the diverse orders and degrees of them
that perform the meaner services in the Church, and then come to speak of
them that have the government of the Church.

Lib. 4. c 24
The Master of Sentences says, that the order of Subdeacons, and other minor
orders below the degree of Deacons, as Acoluthes, Exorcists, Lectors, and
Ostiaries, were brought in by the Church, and that they were not in the
Apostles times; and Addit. ad 3. part. Summae. q. 37. art. 2.
Thomas Aquinas, and other, are of the same mind. Notwithstanding there is no
question but these minor orders and degrees were very ancient. For Cyp. l. 2.
ep. 10
Cyprian makes mention of one Mettius a Subdeacon, and Nicephorus an Acoluthe.
In another place he writes, that he had ordained Idem l. 2. ep. 5. and l. 4.
ep. 5.
Aurelius and Celerinus Lectors: and in a third place he mentions Lib. 5.
ep. ^4
Exorcists and Lectors. Cornelius Bishop of Rome in his Epistle recorded by
Eus. hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 42.
Eusebius, describing the Clergy of the Roman Church in his time, shows
that there were in the same 46 Presbyters, 7 Deacons* 7 Subdeaco^s, 42
Acoluthes, 52 Exorcists, Lectors, and Ostiaries, Widows with distressed
people, more then 1500. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Antiochians, omitting
Acoluthes, reckons the rest, as Subdeacons, Lectors, Ostiaries, and
Exorcists, adding to them Cantores, and Laborantes, or Copiatae, whose
employment was to bury the dead; of whom also Epiphan. in epitome doctr.
Catholicae.
Epiphanius speaks. Whereupon Bishop Lindan. Panopl. l. 4. c. 77.
Lindan says, that howsoever in these times they make or account but seven
orders, yet in the Primitive Church there were more now scarce known. But let
us see what the office, employment and manner of the admission of these men was
in former times. Touching Ostiaries, the Council of Carthage ordayneth thus:
Council. Car. thag. 4.
Let the Ostiary after he has been instructed by the Archdeacon how to
behave himself in the house of God, at the suggestion of the Archdeacon be
ordained, and let the Bishop take the Keys from the Altar, and give them to
him saying: So demean thy self as being to give an account to God for the
things that these Keys lock up.

The Lectors were to read in the Church whatsoever was to be read out of the
old or new Testament; whereupon Cyprian having ordained Aurelius the
confessor, a Lector, gives a reason why he had so done: Cyprian. lib. 2.
Epist. 5.
Quia nihil magis congruit voci, quae Dominum gloriosa praedicatione confessa
est, quam celebrandis diuinis Lectionibus personare: that is, Because nothing
does more fit or better beseem the voice that by a glorious public
testimony has confessed the Lord, then to give a sound in the Church, in
reading the divine Scriptures of the Lord.

The Exorcists were such as took care of the Energumenes, or men vexed with
the Devil, who in ancient times came to the Churches in great companies, and
were there provided for, and kept under rules and disciplinary government.
These Exorcists received of the hands of the Bishop the book wherein the
Exorcismes were written, which they were to commit to memory, that so by
earnest invocation of the name of CHRIST, who is to return to judge the quick
and the dead, and to judge the world in fire, they might obtain of him the
repressing of Satan's furies, and the ease, and deliverance of such as were
disquieted and vexed by him. These had power to impose hands on them that were
disquieted with Devils, whether baptized or not; and in solemn manner to
commend them unto God, who only has power to rebuke Satan.

Acoluthes were so named, for that they were to follow and attend the Bishop
whithersoeuer he went, that so they might not only be witnesses of his
blameless conversation, but do unto him such service as he should require and
stand in need of; whereupon in later times, for that they were to go before the
Bishop in the Churches, bearing wax lights in the night watches, and other
meetings for divine service in the night time, they were named Ceroferarij,
that is, Taper-bearers. Subdeacons were to assist the Deacons in all things
pertaining to them. The order of Subdeacons in ancient time was not accounted a
sacred order, Council. Laod. can. 21. Decret. part. 1. did. 23. c. 26 and did.
60. cap. 4.
so that they might not touch the sacred vessels, nor none might be chosen a
Bishop out of their rank: but the later Bishops of Rome decreed, that the
order of Subdeacons should be reputed a sacred order.

These were the inferior orders of ministry in the Church in ancient times,
to which were added Council. Carthag. 4. can. 12.
Widows, or holy women, which being aged and destitute of friends, were
maintained by the Church; and being of good report, were chosen and appointed
to minister to the women that were baptized, to teach and direct them how to
answer the Baptizer, and how to live afterward, as also to take care of them
that were sick.

All these, as well Ostiaries, Lectors, Exorcists, and Acoluthes, as
Subdeacons, in ancient times served for a certain space in these degrees: and
therefore the solemn designing of them thereunto was not to be disliked; but
now, when they execute the office of Ostiaries, who are no Ostiaries: of
Lectors, who are no Lectors: of Psalmists, who are worthy to be driven not
only out of the Quire, but out of the Church also, as Bishop Lindan.
Panopliae. lib. 4. c. 78. and 79.
Lindan rightly notes: when none of these perform the duties their names
import, and every man almost is made a Presbyter the first day, as if none
might be made the next, it is but for show and fashion only that men are
ordained to the performance of these offices, and in truth and in deed,
nothing else but a mere mockery, as the same Bishop Lindan ingenuously
confesses. With whom Duarenus agrees: His words are: Duaren. de sacr. Eccles.
minist. and Benef. lib. 1. cap. 16.
Hodie nec Diaconis nec alijs inferioribus Clericis vllus locus est in
Ecclesia, vllumue ministerium aut munus quod exequantur; sed quia priscis
canonibus statutum est vt nemo Presbyter ordinetur, ^isi per omnes gradus
inferiores ascenderit, ideo dicis causa, vt ita dicam, gradatim ordinari
solent, idque certo quodam solenniqueritu, vt ad honorem Presbyterij aut
quemuis ali^ sublimiorem capessendum idonei reddantur, potest que dici
imaginaria haec ordinatio: that is, At this day neither is there any place for
Deacons, nor other inferior Clergimen in the Church, nor any ministry or
function for them to execute; but because it is ordained in the ancient Canons,
that no man be ordained a Presbyter, unless he ascend and climb up by all
inferior degrees: therefore for names sake they are wont to be ordained to
every of these degrees in order, and that with a certain solemn rite, that
they may be made capable of Priestly honor, or any other higher dignity. And
this ordination may rightly be termed an Imaginary ordination, or in
imagination only. And therefore our Adversaries cannot justly blame us, who
omitting the other inferior ordinations, give no lower order then that of a
Deacon.

All these both Ostiaries, Lectors, Acoluthes and Subdeacons, in former times,
were sanctified and set apart to serve God in these meaner employments, that
they might be trained up thereby to perform the duties of higher orders. For
in those times, men were not promoted to the highest rooms but by degrees,
being found to have demeaned themselves well in the lower: and therefore they
were under a stricter kind of government then they of the Laity: and both in
their conversation, habit, and all things beseeming modesty and gravity, they
were more precisely tied to the keeping of order then other men. Council.
Carthag. 4. can. 44.
Hereupon they were not suffered to wear their hair long like wantons,
uncivil men, or men of war; but were commanded to polle their whole heads,
leaving only a circular crown in the lower parts thereof.

And here truly we cannot but condemn the absurd custom of the Roman Church,
violating old Canons, degenerating from ancient use, and exposing her Priests
and Levites to the scorn and contempt of the world by those triobolar shaven
crowns, which daily she sets before our eyes. For first, whereas the
Council. Toletan. 4. can. 40.
Council of Toledo in Spain provides, that all Clergy men, Lectors,
Deacons, and Priests, polling the whole head above, shall leave only a
circular crown below, and not as the Lectors hitherto had done in the parts of
Galicia (who wearing their hair long as Laymen, were polled in a little round
compass in the tops of their heads only) for that this had been the custom
of certain Heretics in Spain, the Church of Rome abandoneth the form of
polling prescribed by the Council, and allows the observation of those
ancient Heretics the Council condemned. Here we see, says Bishop Panoplia,
li: 4. cap. 77.
Lindan, whence these triobolar crowns in the tops of clergy men's heads did
come, namely from certain ancient Heretics in Spain. But these lesser
things might easily be reformed, if the unspeakable scandals, shames, and
dishonours of the Church, were first removed and taken away. This is the
censure of that learned Bishop. Secondly, whereas rasure was not used in
ancient times, but condemned by the Fathers, as most unseemly; they of the
Church of Rome have left tonsure, and brought in rasure in steed thereof. That
rasure was not used in ancient times, it appears by Lib. 1. Paedagog. cap 11.
Clemens Alexandrinus, where he says, that the hairs are to be cut off not
with the rasoure, but with the Barbours sheares; and by Lib: 2. contra
Parmenian.
Optatus Bishop of Mileuis, where he reprehendeth the Donatists that took
certain Catholic Priests, and by force did shave their heads. Show us (says
he) where you are commanded to shave the heads of Priests, when as on the
contrary side, there are so many examples proposed that it ought not so to be
done. With Clemens Alexandrinus, and Optatus, Hierome agrees, who upon the 44.
of Ezekiel says in express words, that Priests must neither nourish their
hair, nor be shaued, but so polled, that their skin may still remain hid
and covered; and Bell: lib. 2. de Monach. c. 40.
Bellarmine himself confesses, that Dionysius, Epiphanius, Hierome,
Athanafius, Palladius, Augustine, Isidore, Bid, and the Councels of Carthage
and Toledo, do speak of tonsure only, and never mention rasure, and that the
Epistle of Anicetus the Pope alleged for rasure, is not indubitate. What then
will the Cardinal bring for defense of the contrary custom now prevayling in
the Church of Rome? and what will he answer to these authorities of the
ancient? We reprehend not, says he, the customs of those times, neither do
they of those times condemn our observation. For howsoever tonsure, and not
rasure, was anciently used, yet were not they of the Clergy forbidden to use
rasure, or to shave their heads. A strange answer of so great a Rabbi, and
contrary to that he knows to be undoubtedly true. For Optatus directly
condemns rasure, as we have heard; and Hierome writing upon the 44 of
Ezekiel, has these words: Quod autem sequitur, Caput autem suu^ non radent,
neque comam nutrient, sed tondentes attondebunt capita sua, perspicue
demonstratur, nec rasis capitibus, sicut Sacerdotes cultoresque Isidis atque
Serapis nos esse debere; nec rursum comam dimittere, quod proprie luxuriosorum
est barbarorumque and militantium, etc. That is, that which follows, They
shall not shave their heads, nor let their hair grow long, but polling they
shall polle their heads, does clearly demonstrate, that we should neither
shave our heads like the Priests and worshippers of Isis and Serapis, nor on
the other side let our hair grow long, as wantons, barbarous men, and
Soldiers are wont to do: that that which is fitting, honest, and seemly, may
appear in the faces of the Priests. The Septnagint read the words of the
Prophet somewhat otherwise in this sort: They shall not shave their heads, nor
cut their hair too near, sed operientes operient capitasua: that is, but
hiding they shall hide their heads: whereby we learn, that we must neither
make our selves bald by shauing, nor cut the hair of our heads so near as if
we were shaven, but let our hair grow so that the skin may be hid and
covered. These are the words of Hierome, whereby it appears, that the absurd
and ridiculous ceremony of the Romanists, in shauing the heads of those of
their Clergy, is condemned by the Fathers, and that Bellarmine speaks
against his own conscience, when he says the contrary. Wherefore ceasing any
longer to insist upon the refutation of the absurdity of so ridiculous a
ceromonie, and leaving those inferior orders and degrees of Ministry in the
Church of God, wherein men in ancient times were trained up under the rules of
strict and severe government and discipline, and fitted for higher and greater
employments, let us come to the office of the Deacons.

The office of Bishops and Presbyters, was from Christ's own immediate
institution: but the institution of Deacons was from the Apostles, as Cyprian.
l. 3. cp. 3.
Cyprian delivers. These the Bishop alone may ordain, neither is it
necessary that other impose their hands with him, as in the ordination of
Presbyters, seeing they are consecrated only to be assistants to the Bishop
and Presbyters, and not admitted into the fellowship of the same power and
order with them.

The Deacons according to the intendment of their first institution, were to
take care of the poor, and the treasure of the Church, and thereupon
Chrysostom, and after him the Fathers of the Canone 16.
sixth general Council, do think they were not the same we now have; ours
being busied in other affairs of the Church. But I am of opinion that they
were the same: and that (the end of their first institution being principally
to ease the Apostles of the care of providing for the poor, and to take the
charge of the Church-treasure) when the treasure of the Church increasing was
committed to certain Stewards, and the poor otherwise provided for, they were
more specially used for the assisting of the Bishop and Presbyters in things
pertaining to Gods service and worship. Whereupon we shall find in some cases
they might baptize, reconcile penitents, preach, and do sundry other things
pertaining to the office of the Bishop and Presbyters. That in some cases they
might baptize, u Tertullian witnesses. That they might reconcile penitents,
we have the authority of x Tertul. lib. de Baptimo.
Saint Cyp. l. 3. cp. 17
Cyprian. That they might preach, we have the testimony of Saint z Gregory.
And that they assisted the Bishops and Presbyters in ministering the Sacrament
of the x Greg. ep. l. 4. c. 88.
Lords body and blood, and ministered the cup, it appears by Cypr. Sermon. 6 de
Lapsis.
Cyprian. And hereupon Hierome amplifieth the dignity of them exceedingly,
showing that for avoiding presumption, the Presbyters may not take the cup of
the Lord from the holy Table, unless it be delivered unto them by the Deacons.
These are they, says he, of whom we read in the Revelation, Hier. tom. 4: de
septem ordinib. Ecclesiae.
Septem Angeli Ecclesiarum, hi sunt septem candelabra aurea, hi sunt voces
tonitruorum, virtutum operatione praeclari, humilitate praediti, quieti,
Euangelizantes pacem, annunciantes bona, dissentiones, and rixas and scandala
resecare docentes, soli Deo colloquentes in templo, nihil penitus de mundo
cogitantes, dicentes Patri and Matri, non noui vos, filios suos non
agnoscentes. Sine his Sacerdos nomen non habet, ortum non habet, officium non
habet: that is, These are the seven Angels of the Churches; these are the
seven golden Candlestickes; these are the voices of the thunders; these are
renowned for the operation of virtues, humble, quiet, preaching peace,
publishing good things, teaching how to cut away dissentions, brawles and
scandals, communing with God alone in his holy temple, having no thought of the
world, saying to Father and Mother, I know you not, and not acknowledging their
own sons; without these the priest has not the name, not the beginning, not
the office of a Priest. And a little after he adds, Sacerdotibus etiam propter
praesumptionem non licet de mensa Domini calicem tollere, nisi eis traditus
fuerit a Diaconis: Leuitae componunt mensam Domini: Leuitae Sacerdotibus cum
Sacramenta benedicunt, assistunt: Leuitae ante Sacerdotes orant, vt aures
habeamus ad Dominum Diaconus acclamat: that is, Even the Priests themselves for
the avoiding of presumption must not take the holy cup from off the Table of
the Lord, unless it be delivered to them by the Deacons. The Deacons or
Levites prepare the Table of the Lord, and make all things ready on the same.
The Levites assist the Priests when they bless and sanctify the sacramental
elements. The Levites pray before the Priests. The Deacon cries out aloud unto
us to open our ears, and to listen and hear what the Lord will speak unto
us. Great and glorious are these dignities of the Deacons; yet the council of
Carthage makes them Council. Ca^th 4. can. 37. and 39.
Ministers not of the Bishop alone but of the Presbyters also: so that they
might not sit in the presence of the Bishop or Presbyters. And when some went
about to prefer them before Presbyters, Hierome with great violence opposed
himself against the same, saying. Hieron. ad Euagrium.
Quid patitur mensarum and viduarum minister, vt supra eos se tumidus efferat,
ad quorum preces Christi corpus sanguisque conficitur? that is, What passion is
this, that thus transporteth the Minister of the Tables and Widows, that
swelling in pride he should lift up himself above them, at whose prayers the
body and blood of Christ is consecrated? And obiecting to himself the custom
of the Roman Church, where a Presbyter is ordained upon the testimony of a
Deacon, he passionately breaks into these words: Quid mihi profers vnius
vrbis consuetudinem? Diaconos paucitas honorabiles, Presbyteros turba
contemptibiles facit. Caeterum etiam in Ecclesia Romae Presbyteri sedent, and
stant Diaconi, licet paulatim increbresentibus vitijs, inter Presbyteros,
absente Episcopo, sedere Diaconum viderim: that is, why do thou urge me with
the custom of one City? the fewness of Deacons makes them honorable, and
the number of Presbyters make the^ to be less esteemed. Yet eue^ in the Church
of Rome Presbyters do sit, and Deacons stand; although things (growing worse
and worse by degrees, and many things growing out of order) I have seen a
Deacon in the absence of the Bishop, sit amongst the Presbyters.

Out of the society and company of the Deacons in each Church, there was one
chosen who not only was to perform the things pertaining to the Deacons
office, but also to prescribe unto others what they should do. The institution
of these is not new but very ancient, as it appears by Hier: ad Rusticum
monachum.
Hierome, who urging the necessity of order and government, shows that the
heardes of cattle have their leaders which they follow; that Bees have their
King; that the Cranes fly after one that leads them the way; that there is
one Emperor, and one Judge of each province; that Rome could not have two
brethren to reign in her as Kings, but was dedicated in parricide: that ^sau
and Jacob were at war in the womb of Rebeccah: that every Church has her
Bishop: every company of Presbyters and Deacons, their Arch-presbyter, and
Archdeacon.

This makes nothing aga^st them who wi^h us are named Archdeacons, and under
that name exercise Jurisdiction. For by the Canons of our Church they are
Presbyters chosen to assist the Bishop in his government, and not mere Deac^s
as sometimes they were.
These chief Deacons, or Archdeacons were in process of time
(notwithstanding all Canons to the contrary, and the violent opposition of
Hierome and other Worthies of those times) lifted up not only above the
Presbyters, but the Arch-presbyters also. The reason of which their advancement
was, first because the number of Presbyters made them little esteemed, and the
paucity and fewness of Deacons made them honorable, as I noted before out of
Hierome. Secondly, because they were busied about money-matters, and had the
charge of the treasure of the Church, which kind of employments are usually
much set by. Thirdly, because being Ministers unto the Bishop, they were used
by him for the viewing of such parts of his Diocese, as he could not
conveniently come unto himself, the dispatch of things for him, and in the
end for the reformation of the lesser and smaller faults which upon such view
they should find. Whereupon at the last they obtained a kind of jurisdiction
and power of correction by prescriptio^ and custom, whereof I shall have
occasion to speak more hereafter. Thus have we spoken of the inferior degrees
of Ministry, by which men were wont to ascend to the higher, being trained up
for a certain space in the lower, that they might thereby be fitted for the
higher, according to that of Hierome touching Nepotian, Hieron. in Epitaph:
Nepotiani ad Heliodorum.
Fit Clericus, and per solitos gradus Presbyter ordinatur; that is, He is made
a Clergie-man, and passing through the ordinary degrees he is ordained a
Presbyter.

CHAP. 26.
Of the orders, and degrees of them that are trusted with the Ministry of the
Word and Sacraments, and the government of Gods people: and particularly, of
Lay Elders, falsely by some supposed to be Governors of the Church.

NOW it remains that we speak of them that are trusted with the ministry of
the Word and Sacraments, and the government of Gods people, comprehended under
one common name of Presbyters, that is, Fatherly Guides of Gods Church and
people. Touching these Presbyters, or fatherly Guides of Gods Church, some in
our time have a new and strange conceit, making them to be of two sorts:
whereof some have charge of government only, and some together therewith the
ministry of the Word and Sacraments; the one sort Laymen, and the other
Clergymen; the one sort governing only, and the other sort preaching,
teaching, ministering Sacraments, and governing also.

Touching these newly supposed governing Elders, that are not Mininisters of
the Word and Sacraments, I will first set down the reasons that move us to
think there never were any such in the Church: and secondly I will show the
weakness of their reasons that are induced to think there were.

The first reason that moves us to think, there never were any such, is,
because Bishops, Presbyters, that preach and minister Sacraments, and Deacons
that assist them, howsoever they much degenerated in later times, yet all still
remained in all Christian Churches throughout the world (though in many things
exceedingly different, as Greek, Latin, Ethiopian and Armenian) in their
names and offices also in some sort: But of these Lay Elders, there are noe
footsteps to be found in any Christian Church in the world, nor were not for
many hundred years, whereas there would have been some remains of these, as
well as of the other, had they ever had any institution from Christ and his
Apostles, as the other had.

Our second reason is, for that S. Paul prescribing Timothy how he should
establish a 1. Tim. 3.
the Church and appoint her Pastors, and showing who should be Bishops and
Ministers, who Deacons, yea who Widows, passes immediately from describing
the quality of such as were to be Bishops and Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments, to the Deacons, omitting these Lay Elders that are supposed to lie
in the midst between them, no way describing unto us of what quality they must
be, which in reason he neither might nor would have omitted, if there had
been any such.

Our third reason is, for that neither Scripture, nor practice of the Church,
bounding the government of such Governors, nor giving any direction how far
they may go in the same, and where they must stay, lest they meddle with that
they have nothing to do with, men should be left to a most dangerous
uncertainty in an office and employment of so great consequence, either of not
doing that their office and place requires, or presuming beyond that they
should: which is not to be conceived, seeing Christ our gracious Savior by
himself or his Apostles, left certain direction for far lesser things then
these men's government is supposed to be. That the government of these supposed
Lay Elders is not bounded in the Scripture, or Fathers, it is most evident,
neither can any man living show us any such bounding of the same in either of
them. The government of the Church is in respect of two sorts of men; the
Clergy, and the Laytie: Touching the former, they are to be tried and
approved for their life and learning, they are to be ordained with solemn
imposition of hands, and if they deserve it, they are to be suspended from the
execution of their office, or utterly deprived, and degraded. Shall Lay Elders
have as much to do in all these actions, as they to whom the Ministry of the
Word and Sacraments is committed? are they competent Judges of men's learning
and aptness to teach, that neither are Teachers nor learned? Can they give the
sacred power of holy ministry to others, that have it not themselves? Or is it
not a certain Axiom on the contrary side, that the lesser is blessed of the
greater? Surely they that in England sought to bring in the government of the
Church by Lay Elders, were of opinion, that they ought to have interest in all
these things, as well as the Pastors of the Church. And indeed admit them to
the government of the Church by force of certain doubtful words of Scripture,
mentioning government without any distinction or limitation; and there is no
reason to straighten them, but that they should have their sway in all parts of
it. But they of Geneva, France, and other parts, exclude these Elders from
intermedling in ordination, and leave the power to try, examine, approve, and
ordain, to the Pastors only. Likewise, as I think, they refer the
deciding See Bezaes Epistles, and Caluins Institut. l. 4. c. 3. sect. 16.
of doubts in matters of Faith and Religion to the Pastors only, and not to
the suffrages of Laymen by multitude of voices ouer-ruling them. Touching the
other sort of them of whom the Church consists, which are Laymen, who are to
be admonished, corrected, put from the Sacraments, yea from the communion of
the Church for impiety, disobedience, and wickedness, and upon repentance and
submission to be received again; does not the ordering of these men in this
sort come within the compass of the power of the Keys, and of binding and
loosing? Did Christ leave these to his Apostles as special favors, and are
they now transferred from their Successors, the Bishops and Pastors of the
Church to Laymen, that have neither part nor fellowship in the work of the
Ministry? Has GOD committed the dispensation of his Sacraments to the
Pastors of the Church? Is it on the peril of their souls, that they duly
give them, or with-holde them as cause shall require? And shall there be in
others that are not trusted with them, as great a power to direct the use of
this Ministerial authority as in them? nay greater, the other being more in
number, and their voices more to carry any thing that shall be brought into
deliberation? Besides all this which has been said, there are many more
doubts touching the authority of these men, wherein I fear there will be none
found amongst the friends and favorers of these Lay Elders that will be able
to give us any satisfaction. For first, I would gladly know, whether these
ruling Elders must be in every Congregation with power of ordination, and
deprivation, suspension, excommunication, and absolution? or whether this power
be only in the Ministers and Elders of diverse Churches concurring? Surely in
Geneva there are Elders in the Congregations that are abroad in agro, that is,
in the Country, but these have no power of excommunication, much less of
ordination or deprivation: They may only complain to the Consistory of the
City. Nay they that are in the Congregations within the City, have no
separate power with their own Ministers, but a joint proceeding with the rest
of the Ministers and Elders of the other Churches and Congregations; all which
concurring make but one Consistory. Secondly, let them tell us, whether these
offices be perpetual, as the offices of Bishops and Pastors; or annual, and
but for a certain time.

But to leave them in these uncertainties, the fourth reason that moves us to
reject the conceit of these Lay Elders, is, because the founders of this new
government, fetch the pattern of it from the Sanedrim of the Jews, the
platform whereof they suppose Christ meant to bring into his Church when he
said, Mat. 18. 17.
Tell the Church. Whereas it is most clear, that that Court was as a civil
court, and had power to banish, to imprison, yea and to take away life, till by
the Romans the Jews were restrained: which made them say in the case of
Christ, that Ioh. 18. 31.
it was not lawful for them to put any man to death.

Our fifth and last reason is, for that all Fathers and Councels mentioning
elders or Presbyters, place them between Bishops and Deacons, and make them to
be Cleargy-men: and that in the Acts, where the Apostles are said to have
constituted Elders in every Church, Pastors and Ministers are meant, and not
Laymen, is strongly confirmed by that in the twentieth of Acts, where the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus conuented before Paul are commanded to feed
the flock of Christ, over which they were appointed overseers; whence it
follows ineuitably, that they were pastors.

The places of Scripture brought to prove this kind of government by
Lay Elders are specially three. The first is that to Timothy, 1. Tim. 5. 17.
Let the Elders that rule well, be esteemed worthy of double honor,
especially they that labor in the word and doctrine. The second is that in the
Epistle to the Romans: Romans ^2. 8.
He that rules, let him do it with diligence. The third is that to the
Corinthians, where 1. Cor. 12. 28.
Governors, or Governments are mentioned. The two later allegations are too
too weak to prove the thing in question. For will any man that knows what it
is to reason, reason a genere ad speciem affirmative, that is, from the
general to the particular and special affirmatively? Or will ever any man of
common sense be persuaded that this consequence is good; There were governors
in the Primitive Church mentioned by the Apostles, and required by them to rule
with diligence; therefore they were Lay-gouernours? Surely I think not.
Wherefore let us see if the first place alleged by them yield any better
proof. Touching this place, some interpret it in this sort. The Guides of the
Church are worthy of double honor, both in respect of governing and teaching,
but specially for their pains in teaching; so noting two parts or duties of
Presbyteriall offices, not two sorts of Presbyters. Some in this sort: Amongst
the Elders and Guides of Gods Church and people, some labored principally in
governing and ministering the Sacraments, some in preaching, and teaching: So
Paul shows, that he preached and 1. Cor. 15. 10.
labored more then all the Apostles, but 1. Cor. 1. 14.
baptized few or none, leaving that to be performed by others; and when Paul
and Barnabas were companions, and their travels were equal, yet Acts 14. 12.
Paul is noted to have been the chief speaker: so that though both were
worthy of double honor, yet Paul especially. Some interpret the words in this
sort. There were some that remained in some certain places, for the guiding
and governing of such as were already won by the preaching of the Gospel;
other that travayled with great labor and pains from place to place, to
spread the knowledge of God into all parts, and to preach Christ crucified to
such as had never heard of him before. Both these were worthy of double honor,
but the later that builded not upon another man's foundation, more especially
then the former that did but keep that which others had gotten, and govern
those that others had gained. Thus we see that these words may have a very
good and true sense, without pressing of them to confirm the late conceit of
some few men touching Lay Elders. Which construction we have no reason to
admit, seeing the circumstances of the place do not enforce it, nor no
Ecclesiastical writer did ever so interpret the words before our age. So that
to conclude this point, the name of Presbyter, (one place only in the first of
Timothy and the fifth excepted, where it is a name of age and not of office) in
the writings of the Apostles does ever note out unto us a Minister of the Word
and Sacraments. The reason why the Apostles chose this word rather then the
name of Sacerdos, which we commonly translate Priest (though the English word
Priest come of Presbyter) was, lest there should be a confusion of the
Ministers of the old Testament, who were to offer sacrifices unto God, figuring
the coming of Christ, with those of the new: and to show that none should be
appointed Ministers, but men of ripe age and confirmed judgment. But some man
will say: the ancient Writers mention Seniours, without whose advice nothing
was done; an Ecclesiastical Senate and a Presbytery, or company of Presbyters,
which governed the Church together with the Bishop: therefore the matter is not
so clear against Lay Elders, as some would make it.

We deny not but that there were Presbyters in the primitive Church
constituted and ordained by the Apostles and their Successors, not only to
preach and minister Sacraments, but to govern, direct, and guide the people of
God also; but that they were Laymen it cannot be proved. The Bishops in the
greater Churches, and in the Cities had a great number of Clergymen serving
in diverse sorts, as it appears by Cyprian, and the whole Ecclesiastical
history; but out of the whole Clergy at large, the Presbytery or company of
Presbyters was called forth to the weightiest deliberations, and to assist the
Bishop for the preservation of discipline; Cyprian. li. 4. epist. 10.
Admonitos nos and instructos sciatis dignatione diuina, says Cyprian, vt
Numidicus Presbyter ascribatur Presbyterorum Carthaginensium numero, and
nobiscum sedeat in Clero: that is, Know ye, that we have been admonished and
directed by God himself, to choose Numidicus, and to make him one of the
company of the Presbyters of Carthage, that he may sit together with us as a
Clergyman: by which words it appears, that there was in Cyprians time a
College of Presbyters or Elders in the Church of Carthage, which sat together
with the Bishop for the hearing and determining of the causes of the Church;
but that these Elders were Clergymen, and not such Lay-seniours as some would
have. Apud Cypr. l. b. 3. epist. 11.
Cornelius Bishop of Rome, writing to Cyprian, se totum Presbyterium
contraxisse, that is, that he drew together the whole Presbytery, or company
of Presbyters, for the reconciling of certain Schismatiques to the Church, and
that he called together five Bishops also, and by common consent ended the
whole matter. Of this Senate and company of Presbyters, Tertullian speaks in
his Apology, when he says: Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 39.
with us the most approved Seniours do sit as praesidents to censure
offenders, and to exercise discipline. And of these likewise is it that
Hierome says, writing upon Esaias: Hieron. in 3. Esaiae.
We also in the Church have our Senate, the company of Presbyters: And upon
Titus: In 1. ad Ti tum.
The Churches were governed by the common advice and council of the
Presbyters. For to put it out of doubt that he means not Lay Elders, he
says in the same place. Idem est ergo Presbyter qui Episcopus: that is,
Therefore a Presbyter and Bishop are all one.

There is only one place in Ambrose that has some show of proof for
Lay Elders. His words are; Ambros. com. in 1. ad Tim 5.
The Jewish Synogogue, and after the Church, had Seniours or Elders, without
whose council nothing was done in the Church; which, by what negligence it
grew out I know not, unless it were by the sloth or pride of the Teachers,
whilst they alone would seem to be something. Here is mention of Elders,
without whose advice nothing was done; but it is not said, they were Laymen.
But some man perhaps will reply, that the Elders which Ambrose speaks of,
ceased before his time, which cannot be understood of Clergymen, therefore
they were Laymen. To this we say, that Ambrose does not say, the elders
without whose council nothing was to be done, ceased before his time, and were
no more, but that the aduising and consulting with them ceased, whilst some
would do all themselves. If it be said, that they who thus assumed more then
was fit, and excluded those Seniours without whose council anciently nothing
was done, are not said to have bin Bishops, but Doctors, and that therefore
Ambrose speaks, not of Bishops excluding other Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments from their consultations, but of Clergymen refusing the advice of
Lay Seniours; we answer, that Ambrose by the name of Teachers, whose sloth or
pride he condemns in this place, might fitly understand the Bishops, seeing
none but bishops have power to preach in their own right, and other but only
by permission from them. Hereupon it is, that Possidonius in Cap. 5.
the life of Augustine says, that Valerius Bishop of Hippo, gave S. Augustine
his Presbyter leave to preach, because being a Grecian, he could not very well
express himself in Latin. In the Canone 4.
Council of Vase leave is given by the Council of Bishops to Presbyters for
to preach. But because this question touching Lay Elders is excellently handled
by sundry of our Divines, I will not trouble the Reader with any farther
discourse of this matter.

CHAP. 27.
Of the distinction of the Power of Order and Jurisdiction, and the
pre-eminence of one amongst the Presbyters of each Church, who is named a
Bishop.

CEasing to speak of supposed Lay Elders, which the Church of God knows not,
let us come to the other that were appointed to teach and govern the people of
GOD. Where first we are to speak of the diverse degrees of honor and
pre-eminence found amongst them. Secondly, of their calling and appointing to
the same. And thirdly, of their maintenance. For the clearing of the former of
these three things, the Schoolmen note, that there is a two-folde power found
in the Ministers of the Church of GOD, the one of Order, the other of
Jurisdiction. The power of Order is that, whereby they are sanctified and
enabled to the performance of such sacred acts as other men neither may nor can
do, as is the preaching of the Word, and ministration of the holy Sacraments.
This power is to be exercised orderly, and the acts of it to be performed in
such sort that one disturb not another. Whereupon the Apostles, the first
Ministers of CHRIST JESUS, though equal in the power of Order and
Jurisdiction, yet for the better and more orderly dispatch of the great work
of converting the world, which they had in hand, and that they might not hinder
one another, divided amongst themselves the parts and Provinces of the World;
but when for the assisting of them while they lived, and succeeding them dying,
they were to pass over part of their power to other, they so gave authority
to such as they made choice of for this work, to preach, baptize, and do
other acts of sacred Ministry (which are to be performed by virtue of the
power of order) that before they invested them with this power, they divided
the parts of the world converted to Christianity into several Churches, and
when they ordained them, assigned each of them to that particular Church
wherein he should preach and minister Sacraments. So that these successors of
the Apostles had not an illimited commission, but were confined within certain
bounds; that they were not to preach, nor minister Sacraments, but only within
the limits and compass of those places which were assigned unto them, unless
it were with the consent, desire, and liking of other, willing to draw them at
sometimes for special causes, to perform such sacred acts, within the limits
and bounds of their charge.

This assigning of men having the power of order the persons to whom they were
to minister holy things, and of whom they were to take the care, and the
subjecting of such persons unto the^, gave them the power of jurisdiction which
they had not before. And thus was the use of the power of order which is not
included within any certain bounds, limited in those the Apostles ordained, and
their power of Jurisdiction included within certain bounds: so that the one of
these kinds of power they have not at all without the exte^t of their own
limits, nor the lawful use of the other. Hence is that resolution of the
Divines, that if a Bishop adventure to do any act of Jurisdiction out of his
own Diocese, as to excommunicate, absolve, or the like, all such acts are
utterly void, and of no force; but if he shall do any act of the power of
order in another man's charge, as preach, or minister Sacraments, though he
cannot be excused as not offending, if he do these things without his consent,
yet are the Sacraments thus ministered truly Sacraments and of force.

When the Apostles first founded Churches, and assigned to such as they
ordained to the work of the ministry the several parts of the flock of
Christ, and people of GOD, of which they appointed them to take care and
charge, they so sorted and divided out particular Churches, that a City, and
the places near adjoining made but one Church: Whereupon we shall find in
the holy Scriptures, that to ordain Presbyters Acts, 14. 23.
(...), and Titus. 1. 5.
(...), that is in every Church, and in every City, are all one. Now because
Churches of so large extent required many Ministers of the Word and Sacraments,
and yet of one Church there must be but one Pastor; the Apostles in settling
the state of these Churches, did so constitute in them many Presbyters with
power to teach, instruct, and direct the people of God, that yet they appointed
one only to be chief Pastor of the place, ordaining that the rest should be
but his assistants, not presuming to do any thing without him; so that though
they were all equal in the power of order, yet were the rest inferior unto him
in the government of that Church whereof he was Pastor, and they but his
assistants only. As another of my rank cannot have that Jurisdiction within
my Church as I have, but if he will have any thing to do there, he must be
inferior in degree unto me. So we read in the Revelation of Saint John, of
the Revel. 2. 1.
Angel of the Church of Ephesus, to whom the Spirit of God directs letters
from heaven, as to the Pastor of that Church. It is not to be doubted but that
there were many Presbyters, that is, Ministers of the Word and Sacraments in so
large a Church as that of Ephesus was; nay we read expressly in the Acts,
that there were many in that Church, Acts 20. 28.
that fed the flock of Christ, and consequently were admitted into some part
of pastoral office and employment; yet was there one amongst the rest to whom
only the Lord did write from heaven, to whom an eminent power was given, who
was trusted with the government of that Church and people in more special sort
then any of the rest, and therefore challenged by name by Almighty God for the
things there found to be amiss, the rest being passed over in silence. The
like we read of the rest of the seven Revel. 1. 20.
Churches of Asia, compared to seven golden candlestickes, in the midst whereof
the Son of God did walk, having in his hand seven stars, interpreted to
have been the seven Angels of those seven Churches. Neither was this orderly
superiority of one amongst the Presbyters of the Church, found only in the
seven Churches of Asia, but in other Churches also. For Saint Hierony. ad
Euagrium.
Hierome testifies, that in the Church of Alexandria, from the time of Mark
the Evangelist, there was ever one whom the Presbyters of that Church chose out
of themselves to be over the rest. Neither was this proper to the Church of
Alexandria, but we can show the successions of Bishops in all the famous
Churches of the world, even from the Apostles times: and therefore all admit
and allow a kind of preeminence of one above the rest in each Church. Cyprian.
li. 1. Epist. 3.
Heresies have sprung, says Cyprian, and schisms risen from no other
fountain then this, that Gods Priest is not obeyed, nor one Priest in the
Church acknowledged for the time to be Judge in Christ's steed. Hierony.
aduersus Luciferian.
If one, says Hierome, in each Church be not above and before the rest of the
Presbyters, there will be as many Schisms as Priests; and the Beza. in resp.
ad tract. de minist. Evang. gradib.
best learned in our age that affect presbyteriall government, ingenuously
confess it to be an essential, and perpetual part of Gods ordinance, for
each presbytery to have a chief amongst them, the necessity whereof, we may
learn from all Societies, both of men endued with reason, and of other things
also to which God has denied the light of understanding. Hier. ad Rusticum
monachum.
The dumb beasts, says Hierome, and wild Herds have their leaders which
they follow; the Bees have their King; the Cranes fly after one in order like
an Alphabet of letters: there is but one Emperor, one Judge of a Province;
Rome newly built could not endure two brethren to be Kings together; and
therefore was dedicated in parricide; Esau and Jacob were at war in the womb
of Rebeccah: every Church has her own Bishop, her own Arch-presbyter, her
own chief Deacon, and all Ecclesiastical order consists herein, that some
do rule and direct the rest. In a ship there is but one that directs the
helm. In a house or family there is but one master. And to conclude, in an
army, if it be never so great, yet the direction of one General is expected.

Thus then all confess, that there always has been, and must be in each
Church, a preeminence of one above the rest of the Presbyters of the same; but
some think this preeminence should be only a priority of order, in sitting
before, in propounding things to be thought of, and in moderating the whole
action of deliberation, and that all things should be swayed by voices, the
President or Bishop having no voice negative or affirmative, but as the mayor
part shall direct him. Likewise this presidencie they think should be but
annual, or to end with the action about which they meet, whether it be to
determine a doubt, to ordain a Minister, or to do any other such like thing.

This new conceit we cannot approve of, because we find no pattern of any
such Bishop or President in all antiquity. But the Fathers describe unto us
such a Bishop, as has eminent and peerless power, without whose consent the
Presbyters can do nothing. Cyprian. li: 1. epist. 3.
Hence have heresies sprung and schisms arisen, says Cyprian, because one
Priest in the Church is not acknowledged for the time to be Judge in Christ's
steed, to whom if all the brethren would be subject according to the divine
directions, no man would, after the divine judgments, after the suffrages of
the people, after the consent of other Bishops, make himself Judge, not of the
Bishop, but of God. Ignat. ad Magnesian. Epist. 3.
Let the Presbyter, says Ignatius, do nothing without the Bishop; Hier.
aduersus Luciferianos.
The Bishop (says Hierome) must have an eminent and peerless power, or else
there will be as many schisms in the Church, as there are Priests. And Tertul.
de Baptismo.
Tertullian shows, that without the Bishops leave and consent, no Presbyter
may baptize, minister any Sacrament, or do any ministerial act. So that it is
most clear and evident, that the Bishop in each Church is above and before the
rest of the Presbyters of the same, not in order only, but in degree also and
power of Jurisdiction.

Yet on the other side, we make not the power of Bishops to be Princely, as
Bellarmine does, but Fatherly: so that as the Presbyters may do nothing
without the Bishop, so he may do nothing in matters of greatest moment and
consequence without their presence and advice. Whereupon the Council of
Carthage Council. Carthag. 4. can. 23.
voideth all sentences of Bishops which the presence of their Clergy
confirms not; and even unto this day they have no power to alienate lands,
and to do some such like things without the concurrence and consent of the
Presbyters of the Cathedral, and great Church.

It is therefore most false that Bellar: li: 1. de Clericis, ca. 14.
Bellarmine has, that Presbyters have no power of Jurisdiction, and the proof
he brings of this his assertion most weak, when he alleges, that all
Councels both general and provincial wherein Jurisdiction is most properly
exercised, were celebrated and holden by Bishops, as if Presbyters had had
nothing to do therein. For it is most clear and evident, that in all
provincial Synodes Presbyters did sit, give voice, and subscribe as well as
Bishops. And howsoever in general councels none did give voice but Bishops
alone, yet those Bishops that were present, bringing the resolution and
consent, of the provincial Synodes of those Churches from whence they came, in
which Synodes Presbyters had their voices, they had a kind of consent to the
decrees of general Counsels also: and nothing was passed in them without
their concurrence. Thus were things moderated in the primitive ages of the
Church; and though Bishops had power over Presbyters, yet was it so limited,
that there was nothing bitter or grievous in it, nothing but that which was
full of sweetness, and content. For if any difference grew between the Bishop
and his Presbyters; the Presbyters might not judge their Bishop, whom they were
to acknowledge to be a Judge in Christ's stead, but an appeal lay unto a
provincial Synod, to which not only the Bishops of the provinces were to
come, but a certain number of Presbyters also out of each Church, to sit as
Judges of such differences. Neither might the Bishop of himself alone deprive,
degrade, or put from their office and dignity the Presbyters and Deacons of his
Church; but Council. Carthag. 3. can. 8.
if there were any matter concerning a Presbyter, he was to join unto him five
other Bishops of the province; and if any matter concerning a Deacon, two other
Bishops, before he might proceed to give sentence against Presbyter or Deacon.
The causes of other inferior Cleargie-men the Bishop might hear and determine
himself alone, without the concurrence, and presence of other Bishops, but not
without the concurrence of his own Clergy, without whose presence no
sentence of the Bishop was of force, but judged and pronounced void by the
canon.

Touching the pre-eminence of Bishops above Presbyters there is some difference
among the Schoole-Diuines: For the best learned amongst them are of opinion,
that Bishops are not greater then Presbyters in the power of consecration or
order, but only in the exercise of it, and in the power of Jurisdiction, seeing
Presbyters may preach, and minister the greatest of all Sacraments, by virtue
of their consecration and order, as well as Bishops. Touching the power of
consecration or order, says Durandus in 4. Sent did. 24. q. 5.
Durandus, it is much doubted of among Divines, whether any be greater therein
then an ordinary Presbyter: For Hierome seems to have been of opinion, that
the highest power of consecration or order is the power of a Priest or elder;
so that every Priest in respect of his priestly power, may minister all
Sacraments, confirm the baptized, give all orders, all blessings and
consecrations; but that for the avoiding of the peril of schism, it was
ordained that one should be chosen, who should be named a Bishop, to whom the
rest should obey, and to whom it was reserved to give orders, and to do some
such other things, as none but Bishops do. And afterward he says, that
Hierome is clearly of this opinion; not making the distinction of Bishops from
Presbyters, a mere humane invention, or a thing not necessary, as Aerius did;
but thinking that amongst them who are equal in the power of order, and
equally enabled to do any sacred act, the Apostles (for the avoiding of
schism and confusion, and the preservation of unity, peace, and order)
ordained that in each Church one should beebefore and above the rest, without
whom the rest should do nothing, and to whom some things should be peculiarly
reserved, as the dedicating of Churches, reconciling of penitents, confirming
of the baptized, and the ordination of such as are to serve in the work of the
Ministry: Of which the three former were reserved to the Bishop alone, Potius
ad honorem Sacerdotii, quam ad legis necessitatem; that is, rather to honor
his priestly and Bishoply place, then for that these things at all may not be
done by any other. And therefore we read, that at some times, and in some
cases of necessity Ambros. in 4. ad Ephesians.
Presbyters did reconcile penitents, and by imposition of hands confirm the
baptized. But the ordaining of men to serve in the work of the Ministry, is
more properly reserved to them. For seeing none are to be ordained at random,
but to serve in some Church, and none have Churches but Bishops, all other
being but assistants to them in their Churches: none may ordain but they
only, unless it be in cases of extreme necessity, as when all Bishops are
extinguished by death, or fallen into heresy, obstinately refuse to ordain
men to preach the Gospel of Christ sincerely. And then as the care and charge
of the Church is devolued to the Presbyters remaining Catholic; so likewise
the ordaining of men to assist them, and succeed them in the work of the
Ministry. But hereof I have spoken at large elsewhere. Wherefore to conclude
this point, we see that the best learned amongst the Schoolmen are of opinion,
that Bishops are no greater then presbyters in the power of consecration or
order, but only in the exercise of it, and in the power of Jurisdiction, with
whom Relect. contio. 2. q. 3. art. 3.
Stapleton seems to agree, saying expressly, that Quoad ordinem
Sacerdotalem, and ea quae sunt ordinis; that is, In respect of Sacerdotall
order, and the things that pertain to order, they are equal, and that
therefore in all administration of Sacraments which depend of order, they are
all equal potestate, though not exercitio; that is, in power, though not in
the execution of things to be done by virtue of that power: whence it will
follow, that ordination being a kind of Sacrament, and so depending of the
power of order, in the judgment of our Adversaries might be ministered by
presbyters, but that for the avoiding of such horrible confusions, scandals,
and schisms, as would follow upon such promiscuous ordinations, they are
restrained by the decree of the Apostles; and none permitted to do any such
thing, except it be in case of extreme necessity, but Bishops, who have the
power of order in common together with presbyters, but yet so, as that they
excel them in the execution of things to be done by virtue of that power, and
in the power of Jurisdiction also.

But Lib. 1. de Clericis, cap. 14.
Bellarmine says, the Catholic Church acknowledges, and teaches, that the
degree of Bishops is greater then that of Presbyters by Gods Law, as well in
the power of order as jurisdiction: and adds, that the Schoolmen upon the
fourth of the Sentences defend the same, and Thomas in his Sum; which yet De
Sacram. Ord. l. 1. c. 5.
elsewhere he confesses to be untrue. This his opinion he endeavors to
confirm, because none but Bishops do ordain; and if they do, their
ordinations are judged void: which they could not be by the Churches
prohibition, or decree of the Apostles, if they were equal in the power of
order to Bishops. Hereunto I have answered Book 3. Chap. 39.
elsewhere showing that ordinations at large, or sine titulo, and ordinations
in another man's charge by bishops, who by the character of their order may
ordain, are likewise pronounced to be void by the ancient canons: and that
therefore the prohibition of the Church and decree of the Apostles for the
avoiding of confusion and schism, reserving the honor of ordaining to Bishops
only (unless it were in the case of extreme necessity) might make the
ordinations of all other to be void, though equal with them in the power of
order.

CHAP. 28.
Of the division of the lesser Titles, and smaller Congregations or Churches,
out of those Churches of so large extent, founded and constituted by the
Apostles.

HItherto we have seen how the Apostles dividing the Churches in such sort
that a whole city and the places adjoining made but one Church, set over the
same one Bishop, as Pastor of the place, and diverse Presbyters, as assistants
unto him. But in process of time, we shall find certain portions of these
greater flocks of Christ, and Churches of God, to have been divided out and
distinctly assigned to several Presbyters, that were to take the care and
charge thereof, yet with limitations and reseruations of sundry preeminences to
the Bishop, as remaining still Pastor of those smaller particular
congregations, though in a sort divided and distinguished from that greater
Church, wherein especially he made his abode. Two words we find in Antiquie
used to express the flocks of Christ, and Churches of a See D. Bilson perpet.
govern. Chap: 11. Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 4. 5. 15. 19. and 23.
God thus divided for more conuenience, and yet still depending on that care of
one Pastor or Bishop, (...) and (...), that is, parish and Diocese: The former
contained the citizens, and all such borderers, as dwelt near and repaired to
any chief church or city, though now we use the word Parish to signify
another thing: namely, some particular, smaller and less congregation, divided
out from the Mother Church: the later which is Diocese, both then and now,
imports the villages and Churches dispersed in diverse places, under the
regiment of one Bishop.

The first that began thus to divide out smaller Churches and congregations out
of those great ones first founded, and to assign Presbyters distinctly to take
care of the^, was Platina de vitis Pont. in Euaristo.
Euaristus Bishop of Rome, whose example others did follow in all parts of the
world. These parts of Gods Church thus divided, and assigned to the care of
several Presbyters, were called Tituli, that is, Titles, because God was
entitled unto them, and did specially claim them as the lot of his
inheritance. These Titles, or smaller Churches and congregations were of
diverse sorts: for some were more principal, wherein Baptism might be
administered, and the like things performed, which were thereupon named
Baptismall Churches: and in respect of meaner in time growing out of them and
depending of them, Mother Churches also: Other there were not having so great
liberties. Onuphr. in libello de statio, vrbis Romae.
To such of these Churches as he pleased, the Bishop himself went and preached
one day in one of them, and another in another, carrying great companies with
him, and drawing great multitudes to him, which solemn asse^blies and meetings
were named stations, from their standing at prayers used in those times: and
were like the mighty armies of God keeping their watches, and standing ready to
encounter their furious and dangerous enemies. In this sort Gregory the Great
went and preached in such Churches in Rome, as he thought fit, whose Homilies
and Sermons then preached are yet extant, with the names of the particular
churches or places where they were preached, which were thereupon named
churches of station; though now in another sense they call those churches of
station, whither men out of devotion resorting to visit Relics and
Monuments, are made partakers of ample Indulgences and pardons, for days,
years, nay hundreds, and thousands of years. In those times when the ancient
Bishops of Rome were wont to go to the churches of station, because all
churches had not their Quire and Ministers fit to perform the service of God
with that solemnity that was wished, there were some specially appointed for
this purpose, that they might attend the Bishop, and go with him in the
days of station, that so nothing might be wanting to all joyful solemnity
and divine exultation.

Bell: de Clericis li: 1. cap. 16.
Those principal titles or parish churches, as now we use to speak, that
enjoyed the greatest liberties and privileges, were called Cardinal Titles,
or churches; and those Presbyters that attended the service of God in those
principal or Cardinal churches, were called Cardinal Presbyters; and in
process of time some amongst the Deacons also, Cardinal Deacons; and amongst
the Bishops of Italy, certain Bishops were named Cardinal Bishops. Neither
were these Cardinal Presbyters only in the church of Rome, but in other
churches also, as De Sacris. E^cles. minist. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Duarenus shows; whence it is that we read in the council of Canone 54.
Melden, that the Bishop must canonically order the Cardinal Titles in the
cities or suburbs; and that we read in In vita Greg: lib: 3 cap: 1^.
Ioannes Diaconus, that Gregory called back the Cardinals violently ordained
in the parishes abroad, into their ancient title again. Onuphr. lib. de
Episc. tit. and Diaconijs Cardinal.
Onuphrius a great Antiquary, gives another reason of the name of Cardinal,
supposing that they were called Cardinal priests and deacons in each church,
which were over all the other priests and deacons of the same; for that they
were chief priests and deacons, and of more principal esteem then the rest.
But this conceit of his, Bella. vbi supra.
Bellarmine refuteth, for that there were sometimes many Cardinals in the same
title, as appears by Saint Gregory in his Epistles. So that it seems more
probable, that Cardinals are so named from the titles and churches which are
Cardinal and chief churches, enjoying greater liberties and privileges then
others, then for that they are Cardinal or chief amongst the Priests of those
their churches and titles.

But whatsoever was the reason that they were named Cardinals, which perhaps
cannot now certainly be known; it is strange to see from how mean
beginnings they have grown so great in state and dignity, as therein to match
and equal the greatest Princes of the world. That at first they were but
parish priests of Rome (besides that it is confessed by all) it is most
evident, for that yet still in this their greatness, they are styled but
Cardinal priests of such a title or parish church in Rome; and that for a long
time there was no more respect had to one Presbyter then another, but all
equally interessed in the government of the church, were indifferently called
to the election of the Bishop, and his consultations, it is most clear and
evident. Whereupon Cyprian lib. 3. Ep. 5. and 2^.
Cyprian writing to the clergy of Rome, writes not to the Cardinals only,
but to all the priests and deacons of the church of Rome. In the time of
Gregory the Great, it may seem that all the Presbyters were not called to the
consultations of the Bishop, but Cardinal Presbyters only: For Greg. lib. 4.
Registri. cap. 88.
only four and thirty were present at the Synod holden by him, and mentioned
in his epistles; whereas no doubt in his time there were many more Presbyters
of that great and large church, seeing there were six and forty in the days
of Cornelius in the time of persecution, when the greatest part of the city
remained yet still in infidelity, and heathenish superstition. But whether all
the Presbyters of the church of Rome, or only some certain were called to the
consultations of the Bishop in Gregory's time, it is certain that all the
clergy had interest in the choice, and election of the Bishop. But afterward
in process of time, the Cardinals only had interest in the election of their
Bishop, and they and no other were admitted to sit in council with the Bishop,
all other Presbyters being excluded. By which means the dignity of these
Cardinals was greatly increased. So that whereas before all Bishops were
preferred before those Cardinals that were not Bishops, and to be a Cardinal
was but a step to the degree of a Bishop, as Onuphrius in his book of
Cardinals shows, and as is collected out of the first book and seventh
Chapter of the life of Gregory: afterward, this order was changed, and the
dignity of a Bishop was made but a step to the degree and honor of a
Cardinal. Neither did they only exclude the rest of the Clergy of the Church
of Rome from the election of their Bishop, and from sitting in Council with
him: but whereas from the year three hundredth, to the year eight hundredth
after Christ, for the determining of all weighty matters concerning the
Church, the Bishops of Italy were convocated to National Synodes, as it
appears by the Tomes of the Councels, they excluded them also: so that the
managing of the weighty affairs of the Church, was wholly referred to these
Cardinals, the other being no longer called according to the old manner,
though yet still they take an oath yearly to visit the Apostolical
thresholds, and to present themselves unto the Roman Bishop their
Metropolitan, as they were wont to do, when being called by him to National
Synodes, they were bound to make their repair to Rome. Of this change De
concord. cathol. l. 2. c. 18. citat. d. 93. c. 4.
Cardinal Cusanus speaks, showing that in his opinion the first step to
the due reformation of the Church, were the choosing of these Cardinals out of
those several Churches which were heretofore interessed in the deliberations
of the Roman Bishop, and the making of them to be but agents and procurators
for them, and in their names, till such time as the Bishops might be convocated
again to National Synods, as in former times they were wont to be. From
hence, says De sacris Eccles. ministeriis l. 1. c. 13.
Duarenus, we may easily gather the same that the Interpreter of the decrees
somewhere writes, that howsoever in time, and by spoiling other of their
right, the Cardinals of the Church of Rome are grown exceeding great, yet in
truth and indeed, every Bishop of what city soever, is of greater dignity
then any Cardinal, Priest, or Deacon of the Romish Church: which thing, says
Duarenus, if any man should doubt of, might easily be confirmed by the
authority of Saint Augustine, in a certain Epistle to Saint Hierome Priest of
the Roman Church, where he says expressly: Quanquam secundum vocabula, quae
vsus obtinuit, Episcopatus sit Presbyterio mayor; Augustinus tamen Hieronymo
minor est: that is, Although according to the titles which now are in use, it
is a more honorable thing to be a Bishop, then a Presbyter, yet Augustine is
less then Hierome. His meaning is, in merit, and personal worth: for
otherwise, that there is no other reason of Priests, and Deacons of the Church
of Rome, then of any other city, in respect whereof Hierome as Priest of Rome,
might be greater then Augustine being Bishop of little Hippo in Africa, Hierome
himself demonstrateth at large in his Epistle to Euagrius. But this proof of
Duarenus perhaps will be found too weak, because it is greatly doubted by some
of excellent learning, whether Hierome were a Priest of the Church of Rome, or
not. Surely in his Epist. 61. ad Pammachium, de erroribus Ioannis Hierosolym it.
Epistle against John of Jerusalem, he terms himself a Priest of the Church
of Antioche, and not of Rome: So that it may be probably thought, that
howsoever for a time he were in Rome, and did Hier. ep. ad Gerontiam de
Monogamia.
help Damasus the Bishop in certain writings, matters of learning, and
resolution of doubts, yet he never had any title or charge in the Roman
Church. De Clericis l. 1. c. 16.
Bellarmine takes great exception to Calvin, for saying that Hierome was
Priest of the Romish Church, which if he had been well advised, he should not
have done (howsoever perhaps Calvin were deceived in that point) not only
because many of his own friends have erred with Calvin in this point, if it
be an error, but because they have for a long time in their Churches, and all
other places, painted him in his scarlet robes, and Innocent. 4. in Concilio
Lugduni habito plures Cardinales creavit. Primu^que fuit qui Cardinalitiam
dignitatem rubeo pileo adauxit, ea intention vt admonerentur, test Martino
Polono, se semper paratos esse debere sanguinem pro Christiana religione
profundere, praesertim eo tempore quo Romana Ecclesia a Frederico secundo
quondam Imperatore vehementer oppugnabatur. Bin. Conc. tom. 3. part. 2. page
148^. in vita Innocentii 4.
red hat, like a Cardinal. And howsoever Bellarmine perhaps will not be much
moved with these paintings, yet Campian a great champion of the Roman Church,
brings the painted glass windows of their Churches as pregnant witnesses
against us, which we may not except against; and testes fenestrae are not the
meanest of those witnesses, which in his Omne genus testium (wherein he makes
a search in heaven, and raketh hell, to see who will speak for him, and depose
against us) he produces and brings to the bar. But to leave this proof of
the dignity of Bishops brought by Duarenus as uncertain, it is most certain,
which the same Duarenus has, that Cardinals of the Church of Rome in ancient
time, were not matchable in honor and dignity with the meanest Bishop in the
world; that they were but parish Priests and deacons of the Church of Rome, and
bound by all canons to be resident in their parishes and titles, as all other
Priests, and Deacons are; and that they can noe way justify their possessing
of Bishoprics, being noe Bishops, but Presbyters, and Deacons only. What
havoc and spoil these parish Priests have made throughout the whole
Christian world, since they came to that greatness they are at now, by seazing
into their hands the richest Abbeys, Bishoprics, and Arch-bishoprickes by
virtue of the Popes provisions, not contenting themselves with one or two, but
getting to themselves so great a number of the greatest dignities and
Church-liuings, as is incredible, Nicholas Clemangis de corrupto Ecclesiae
statu.
all stories report, and the woeful experience of all Christendom, does
sufficiently testify. If any man desire to see how the Pope as a wild Boar
has laid wast the Vineyard of the Lord in former times, spoiling the Church
and people of God for the enriching of these his Cardinals, that so they might
be equal in state and magnificence to the Princes and Potentates of the world,
let him read that which Confer. with Heart, Chap: 7. division 6. page 384. 385.
etc.
Doctor Reynolds in his most learned and worthy Conference, has collected and
gathered out of most authentical records, touching these Romish practices, to
the everlasting shame and ignominy of the Court Rome; which long since for the
intolerable and infatiable covetousness thereof, Math. Parisien. in Henrico
3. p. 848.
Grostead the renowned Bishop of Lincoln fitly compared unto that Behemoth,
that thinks he can drink up the whole river of Jordan and says, that among
other the praises of the Romish Court, these two are not the least, that Eius
auaritiae totus non sufficit orbis, Eius luxuriae meretrix non sufficit omnis:
that is, That the Courtiers of the Court of Rome are so insatiable in
covetousness, that a whole world of wealth is not sufficient to satisfy their
greedy desires; and so impure in their filthy lusts that all the stews in the
world are not able to give them content.

CHAP. 29.
Of Chorepiscopi, or Rural Bishops, forbidden by old Canons to encroach upon
the Episcopal office, and of the institution and necessary use of
Arch-presbyters, or Deanes.

FOR the more easy governing of their Churches, in number many, and in place
far distant one from another, some of the Bishops in ancient times
communicated part of their authority to some principal men, which in places
far remote from them supplied their absence, and performed some things
pertaining to them. These were called Chorepiscopi, either for that they were
(...); that is, rural Bishops; or else for that they were in steed of the
Bishops, and in many things supplied their places, and did their duties. The
first institution of these as it appears by the Council of Canone. 13.
Neocaesarea, and Damas. Epist. 5.
Damasus in his Epistle written concerning these Rural Bishops, was specially
that they might be assistant to the Bishop in receiving such contributions,
oblations, and set rents, as were for the maintenance of the Bishop, and his
Clergy, the relief of the poor and needy, and the entertainment of
strangers; as also in taking care of the poor, and providing for them out of
the common treasury, the Bishop himself being far off. Afterward in
process of time there were some Bishops, that put over unto these the care,
execution, and performance of such things as properly pertained to themselves,
that they might take their ease, and attend their own private affairs; like
harlots, that put out their children to be noursed by others, that themselves
in the mean while may satisfy their lusts, as a great Damasus ibid.
Bishop, not without some bitterness, speaks: whence it came that these
Chorepiscopi waxed proud, and insolent, and in the end being but Presbyters,
presumed to ordain Priests and Deacons, and to do such things, as none but
Bishops ought to do: whereupon they were controlled by the learned Bishops
that lived in those times, and the councels holden by them. Damasus so far
disliketh their presumption in ordaining Prests and Deacons, that he will not
have them to ordain subdeacons or inferior clearkes. The Councels of Canone
12.
Ancyra, and Hispalens. 2. Canone. 7.
Hispalis, Epist. 86. and 88.
Leo the great, and In epist. ad Episcop. Germaniae and Galliae.
John the third, forbid them the ordaining of Priests and Deacons, mentioning
not the other inferior clerks. The Council of Canone 10.
Antioche says, the rural Bishops that have received imposition of hands of
Bishops and have been ordained as Bishops, may ordain Subdeacons, and other
inferior clerks; but Priests or Deacons without the Bishop of the city, or
as some read it, without the priuity of the Bishop of the city, they may
not: thereby insinuating that with his consent they may. Out of which Council
De Clericis. li. 1. c. 14.
Bellarmine collecteth two things: The first that in the Primitive Church there
were two sorts of Chorepiscopi or rural Bishops, whereof the former had
Episcopal ordination, that is, were ordained of three Bishops like the
Suffragan Bishops of our time: the later were but Presbyters: The second, that
the Council appointing the rural Bishop to be ordained by the Bishop of the
City, meant to forbid that there should be any more such rural Bishops as
have Episcopal ordination, whereunto the concurrence of three Bishops at the
least is required: and thereupon he thinks, the Council of Antioche
permitting rural Bishops to ordain Subdeacons, and the Decretall of Damasus
forbidding them so to do, may be reconciled; for that the Council permitting
the ordination of Subdeacons to rural Bishops speaks of such as were
ordained of three Bishops: and the Decretall of Damasus forbidding them to
meddle in such ordination, of such as were but mere Presbyters. But whosoever
shall take a view of the Decretall epistle of Damasus, shall find that he
condemns the intermedling of any rural Bishops whatsoever in ordination, and
shuts them out of the k Epist. supra citat.
Church, as men that neither have nor can have any place in the same. What is
Chorepiscopus, says Damasus, but a country Bishop? and if he be a country
Bishop, what does he in the city? the Canon altogether forbidding, that there
should be two Bishops in one city. If he be not in the city, but in some
country village, and in such place where there never was any Bishop before
(the canon forbidding Bishops to be ordained in mean cities, villages or
forts, or in any place whatsoever were bishops have not bin placed in former
times, least the authority, and name of Bishops grow into contempt) what I pray
you shall he be? For behold, neither does the place agree with his ordination,
nor his ordination with the place: because, if such rural Bishops have received
the imposition of the hands of many Bishops, and have bin ordained as Bs, they
should not have bin consecrated in a country village, such as the Greek word
(...) imports, the canon forbidding Bishops to be placed in villages, small
forts, or little cities. Give me therefore a reason, says he, I pray you, of
the constituting of these men: or if you cannot, as I know you cannot, lay your
hand on your mouth, and assure your selves, that they have no place nor
authority in the Church of God, diverse things making void their ordination, and
whatsoever thing they attempt to do by virtue of such ordination: Whereof the
first is, for that they are wont to be ordained by one Bishop, wherein their
ordination is against the canons concerning Bishops, which will have Bishops
ordained by the imposition of the hands of 3 Bishops at the least. The 2^, for
that if they be ordained by many bishops, yet they are placed in some village,
little fort, or small city: or at least in some such place where lawfully Bishops
may not be ordained, or formerly have not bin, and where the authority, and
name of a Bishop will grow into contempt: or if they be placed in a city, they
are placed there with another Bishop, whereas the canons permit not 2 Bishops
in one city. The third is, for that if they have bin ordained at large, and
neither placed in city, nor country village, as it has bin reported unto us of
some, their ordination is void, because the canons do void all ordinaons at
large: so that which way soever we turn us, we shall find that these men
neither have, nor can have any Episcopal authority or place. This is the
resolution of this great Roman Bishop, who wholly rejects this kind of
rural Bishops, and will not have them at all to intermeddle in any thing
peculiarly pertaining to the Episcopal office. But some man will say, May not
a Bishop when he is grown aged, infirm, and unable to sustain and bear the
weight of that great office, have a Coadiutor or assistant? Surely there is no
doubt but that he may have one joined unto him to bear part of his burden;
but that that other should have Episcopal ordination, the Canons permit not:
whereupon S. Augustine now aged, and distracted with multiplicitie of manifold
businesses concerning the state of the whole Church, desirous with the consent
of his Clergy and people, to have Eradius a Presbyter of his Church joined
unto him as a Coadiutor while he lived, and designed to succeed him after his
death, would by no means have him ordained a Bishop, but to continue a
Presbyter still, though himself had been ordained a Bishop, while Valerius
yet lived. His words are these, Aug. ep. 110.
Adhuc in corpore po sito beatae memoriae Patre and Episcopo meo Valerio,
Episcopus ordinatus sum, and sedi cum illo: quod Concilio Niceno prohibitum
fuisse nesciebam, nec ipse sciebat. Quod ergo reprehensum est in me, nolo
reprehendi in filio meo: erit Presbyter, ut est; quando Deus voluerit, futurus
Episcopus. Obsecro vos, and obstringo per Christum, ut huic Iuveni, huic
Presbytero Eradio, quem hodie in Christi nomine designo Episcopum successorem
mihi, patiamini refundere onera occupationum mearum, etc. that is, While my
Father and Bishop Valerius yet lived, I was ordained a Bishop, and sat
together with him, which I knew not to have bin forbidden in the Nicene
Council, neither did he know it. What therefore was disliked in me, I will not
have to be blamed in my son, he shall continue a Presbyter as he is, and
when God will he shall be a Bishop. I beseech you, and earnestly entreat you
for Christ's sake, that you will give me leave, in some sort to ease my self,
and to cast the burden of my employments upon the shoulders of this young man,
this Presbyter Eradius, whom this day in the name of Christ, I appoint and
design the Bishop that shall succeed me. My counsel shall not be wanting
to him, neither will I fail to supply what shall be any way defective or
wanting in him. Thus we see, a Coadiutor was allowed, but yet such a one as
should be but a Presbyter: and therefore long after the time of Augustine, when
Naucler. vol. 2. gener. ^6 p. 667. Decreti part. 2 causa 7. q. 1. c. Petiisti.
Zacharias Bishop of Rome associated another Bishop, as a Coadiutor to
Bonifacius the Bishop of Mentz, he confessed it to be a thing that was
forbidden, and worthy reprehension: but that upon his importunity, of special
favor, he had yielded so much unto him, that he might have such a Coadiutor,
whom with the advice of his brethren he might appoint to succeed him when he
should die. But notwithstanding the Canons forbidding any such thing to be
done, and the dislike of many the greatest Bishops of the world, yet in the
later ages of the Church, the Bishops giving themselves to ease, or attending
secular businesses, and greatly neglecting their Episcopal function, again
reduced into the Church these rural Bishops, whom they named Suffraganes. To
these they committed the doing of such things as are most proper unto Bishops,
as ordination and confirmation, but kept the power of Jurisdiction to
themselves, or gave it to some other, and not to these: contrary to the example
of S. Augustine, that put over to Eradius the hearing of causes, and the
performing of things pertaining to Jurisdiction, himself only directing and
ouerseeing him, but held still himself that which is most properly Episcopal.
Such Bishops Loc. Theol. l. 5. c. 2. The Bishops he speaks of, he calls
annular Bishops, happily for that whereas full Bishops had both staff and ri^g,
expressing their Jurisdiction as well as their espousing to the Church, these
had the ring only.
Melchior Canus entreating of Councels, and the persons whereof Councels
consist, says, are so far from having any place or voice in the Councels,
that they neither have, nor ought to have any place in the Church at all.

But whatsoever we think of these, the Bishops in former times for the better
governing of their Churches, chose out certain of their Presbyters to assist
them in the supervision and direction of the rest, whom they first named
Arch-presbyters, and afterward Deanes. The name of Decanus or Deane being
first used, to note out such a Prefect or Governor of Monks, as had the rule
of ten Monks living together in common: And in this sense the name of a
Deane is found in Aug. de morib. Eccl. cath. (...)
S. Augustine. The Arch-presbyters, which Bishops anciently appointed to assist
them, were of 2 sorts, Duarenus de sacr. Eccl. minist. l. 1. c. 8.
Vrba^i and Vicani, that is, such as lived in the great Church in the City, and
such as lived abroad in the country, and were thereupon named Rural
Arch-presbyters, or Rural Deanes. Touching the former, who lived in the great
church in the city, because the Bishop alone either in respect of absence, or
employments, could not execute all things that pertained to the service
belonging to his place, nor give particular direction to every other what he
should do, they were chosen out of the whole number of Presbyters, partly to
execute and perform what the Bishop in his own person should have done, and
partly to prescribe to others what they should do. The Rural Arch-presbyters
had the oversight and direction of the Presbyters, that were placed in the
lesser Titles, or meaner churches, abroad in the country. Concerning these we
find it thus decreed, Decret. Greg. 9. ex Synod. habit. Rauennae. l. 1. Tit.
25.
Vt singulae plebes Archipresbyterum habeant, qui non solum imperiti vulgi
sollicitudinem gerat, sed etiam Presbyterorum qui per minores Titulos habitant,
vitam iugi circumspectione custodiat, qua quisque industria diuinum opus
exerceat, Episcopo enunciet; nec contendat Episcopus non egere plebem
Archipresbytero, quasi ipse eam gubernare valeat; quia etsi valde idoneus sit,
decet tamen vt sua onera partiatur, vt sicut ipse matrici Ecclesiae praeest,
ita Archipresbyteri praesint plebibus, vt in nullo titubet Ecclesiastica
sollicitudo; cunctatamen referant ad Episcopum, nec aliquid contra eius
decretum ordinare praesumant; that is. That each division of the people of God
in their several limits have their Arch-presbyter, who may not only take care
of the rude and ignorant multitude, but may also with continual circumspection
observe and look unto the life and conversation of the Presbyters, which dwell
in the lesser Titles, and show unto the Bishop with what diligence each of them
performs the work of God. Neither let the Bishop contend and say, that the
people committed to his charge need no Arch-presbyter, as if he himself were
able sufficiently to govern the same, because, though he be exceeding worthy,
yet it is fit he should divide his burdens, that as he is over the Mother
church, so the Arch-presbyters may be over the people abroad, that the
Ecclesiastical care stagger not, or be not two weak in any thing. Yet
notwithstanding let them refer all things to the Bishop, neit^r let them
presume to order any thing against his liking and decree. These rural
Arch-presbyters were to be chosen by the clergy, and confirmed by the Bishop,
and being so placed, might not be removed without the consent of the clergy.
Council. Turonens. 2. Canone 7.
Archipresbyterum, says the second Council of Turone, sine omnium
Presbyterorum consensu de loco deiicere Episcopus non praesumat: quem autem
negligentia eijcit, cum omnium Presbyterorum consilio refutetur: that is, Let
not the Bishop presume to remove or put an Arch-presbyter from his place,
without the consent of all the Presbyters: but when the negligence of any one
of these makes him worthy to be eiected and put out, let him be rejected with
the counsel and advice of all the Presbyters. Touching the power and authority
of these Arch-presbyters; first they were to admonish such as they saw to live
scandalously, or any way to offend, as well Laymen as clergymen; and the
Council of Canone 44.
Antisiodorum decrees, that if any lay or secular man shall contemn and
despise the information and admonition of the Arch-presbyter, he shall be kept
from entering or setting his feet within the thresholds of the holy church,
till he shall submit himself to the wholesome information and admonition:
Secondly, Synod. Aug.
they were twice in the year to visit all the churches within the limits
subject to them, to see what was there amiss, defective, or weak, that so
they might either reform, supply, or strengthen and confirm the same:
Thirdly, they were to receive warrants from the Bishop or his substitute, and
by virtue thereof to cite all such to make their appearance before the chief u
Linwood. lib. 2. de Iudicijs, fol. 45.
Pastor or Bishop, as were upon any occasion to be conuented before him: and
this their citation of such parties to be conuented, under the seal of their
office they were to certify the Bishop of. Fourthly, Idem, li: 1. de
Costitutionib.
they were to hold Chapiters in a set course four times in the year, and at
other times as often as urgent occasions should require; and all Synod.
Trebi^ens. de Decanis Christianitatis.
parish Ministers within a year after their being possessed of their livings
were to swear to the Deane, and so to be admitted as brethren to sit in
Chapter with him, and to be bound to come to the yearly Chapiters, and
otherwise also when as upon urgent cause the Deane should call a Chapter; and
to bear part of the charge. This oath which the Ministers were to take before
they were admitted to sit in Chapter, was not simple, but with this
limitation, Saluis juribus Capituli; that is, No way to prejudice the rights of
the Chapter. In these Chapiters the Arch-presbyters, were to publish the
decrees of provincial, and Episcopal Synodes, excluding Laymen at such times
as they published things precisely concerning the Clergy, which otherwise
might be present at the publication of things generally concerning all.
Neither were they only to publish such decrees in their Chapter, but to urge
the execution of the same, to take notice of all places of ministry void, upon
what occasion, and by whose fault they continued void; of all intrusion into
places of ministry, and of the inuestiture of all such as newly entered into
the charge of ministry, and the authority by which substitutes supply the
places of other men. And besides they were to admonish such as either by their
visitation or other information they found to be faulty: And if by other good
means they could not win them to Statu Synoda. Episc. Hildemens.
suspend Laymen from the Sacraments, and Clergymen from the execution of
their offices, but farther they might not go. But in case of obstinate
continuance of disordred persons in their misdemeanors notwithstanding these
proceedings, they were to complain to the Bishop if the matter required have,
or otherwise to the next Episcopal Synod. For the Bishop in each diocese
having certain thus appointed to assist and help him in the superuision of
the rest, as well of the Clergy as the people, was once in the year to hold a
Synod with the chief of his Prelates, Deanes rural, and other worthy men.
Decret. part. 1. did. 18. cap. Annis. Conc. Tarrac.. can. 8.
Annis singulis (says Gratian) Episcopus in sua Diocesi Synodum faciat de suis
Clericis and Abbatibus, and (...) alteros Clericos, and Monachos; that is, Let
the Bishop every year hold a Synod in his Diocese of his Clerks and Abbots:
and let him therein discuss and examine the learning, conversation, and
behavior of other Clerks and Monks. The Synod of Colei^e under Adolphus
confirmed by Charles the fifth, appointed this Diocesane Synod to be holden
twice every year, according to the old manner and custom. And the Synod of
Coleine under Hermannus ordains, that the Bishop or his Official general
with the Prelate^ of the Metroropoliticall, Cathedral, and Collegiate
Churches, especially the Archdeacons, and Deanes rural, who in some part are
taken into the fellowship of the Bishops cares, shall enquire into things out
of order; and what he shall find by their judgment to need reformation, he
shall with their advice amend and reform. The like does Reformat: Cle^
Germaniae per Laur: Legate. Clem: 7. apud Iouerium. Class 2. sect. 3.
Laurentius the Popes Legate decree and ordain. Yea the Council of Ses. 24.
cap. 2.
T^ confirms the same also; and the Council of Coleine under Adolphus takes
order, that Deanes of colleges coming to the Episcopal Synod in the name of
their colleges, and rural Deanes in the name of the parish ministers within
their diuisio^s, shall have their charges borne by such their colleges and
ministers, according to the number of days the Synod endures, seeing they go
on warfare for God. The form of holding a Diocesane Synod Iouerius out of
Burchardus describes in this sort. Iouer. Clas. 2. sect. 2.
At a convenient hour when it seems good to the B: or his vicegerent, all
other doors being locked, let the Ostiaries stand at that, by which the
Presbyters are to enter, and coming together let the^ go in and sit according
to their ordinatio^: after these the approved Deacons which order shall require
to be present; let some laymen also of good conversation be brought in, and
then let the Bishop or his substitute enter: who entering into the Synod, is
first to salute the clergy and people: and then turning toward the East to
say a certain prayer: and the Deacons to read the Gospel, When it was late the
first day of the (...), and the doors were shut, etc: after which reading and
prayers all are to go out save the Presbyters and clerks only: and after
departure of the rest, another prayer being made the Bishop shall will the
Presbyters to propose their doubts, and either to learn or teach, and to make
known their complaints, that so they may receive satisfaction. This is all that
is done the first day. The second day, if the clergy have no matter of
complaint or doubt, let the Laity be let in to propose their doubts, and make
known their grieuances, or otherwise let their coming in be deferred till
some other day. Besides this Synod, which every Bishop was to hold once
every year, he was to go from Church to Church, and see all the Churches in
his Diocese. The second council of Canone 1.
Bracar appoints, that the Bishop shall go through all his Churches enforming
both Presbyters and people: and the third council of Canone 17.
Arles prescri^th, that he shall enquire and take notice of the wrongs offered
to those of mean and poor estate, by them that are great and in authority,
and first seek to reform such evils by Episcopal admonition and counsel;
but if he cannot so prevail, he shall acquaint the King with it. The Bishop,
says the fourth Council of Canone ^5.
Toledo, must go every year through his Diocese, and see all his Churches and
parishes, that he may enquire what reparations the churches do need, and what
other things be amiss. But if he be either detained by sickness, or so
entangled with business that he cannot go, let him send some approved
presbyters or Deacons, which may not only consider of the ruins of each
church, and the needful reparations thereof, but enquire also into the life
and conversation of the clergy, and ministers. According to the decree and
direction of this Council, we shall find that Bishops hindered by other
employments, sickness, weakness, or age, so that they could not go in person to
visit their churches, sent some of their chief Presbyters or Deacons, but
especially the chief Deacons, to perform the work of visitation for them,
because they being the chief among the Deacons, which are but church-seruants,
were more attendant about them for dispatch of all public businesses, then
presbyters. These chief Deacons, or Archdeacons at first, they sent only to
visit, and to make report, but not to sententiate any man's cause, or to meddle
with the correcting or reforming of any thing, but afterward in process of
time they were authorized to hear and determine the smallest matters, and to
reform the lighter and lesser offenses: and therefore in the Council of Conc.
Later. de Sent. and Interlocut. 4.
Laterane under Alexander the third, it is ordered, that the Archdeacon shall
not give sentence against any one; But in the Conc. Rhotomag. apud Ioverium 2.
Clas. sect. 2. ex Burchard. l. 1. c. 90.
Council of Rhoane it is appointed, that the Archdeacon and Arch-presbyter
shall be forerunners to the Bishop, and shall reform the lighter and
smaller things they find to be amiss.

Hence in time it came, that Archdeacons much used by Bishops, as most
attendant on them in the visitation of their churches, and reforming some
smaller disorders, at length by prescription claimed the correction of greater
things, as having of long time put themselves into the exercise of such
authority. And thus the Deacons, or at least the chief of them, the
Archdeacons (which at first might not sit in the presence of a presbyter, but
being willed by him so to do) in the end became, by reason of this their
employment by the Bishop, to be greater, not only then the ordinary
presbyters, but then the Arch-presbyters themselves. And therefore it is
confessed by all, that the Archdeacon has no authority or power of
Jurisdiction by virtue of his degree and order, but by prescription only:
neither can he claim more then he can prescribe for; which his prescription
is thought reasonable, because the Bishop is supposed to have consented to his
intermedling in such parts of government, as by prescription he may claim.
Yet lest it might seem absurd for him that is only a Deacon, to exercise
Jurisdiction over presbyters, the canon of the Church provides, that no man
shall possess the place of an Archdeacon, unless he have the ordination of a
presbyter.

Besides the Deanes or Arch-presbyters, which the Bishops used for the
governing and ouer-seeing of certain parts of their Diocese allotted to them,
with such limitations as they pleased, and for counsel and advise in managing
of their weightiest affairs; and the Archdeacons, which they used as spies in
all places, and trusted with the dispatch of what they thought fit; they had
for their direction in cases of doubt, and for their ease in the multiplicitie
of their employments, Annot. in 2. l. Linvvoodi de sequestration.
certain of their clergy, skillful in the canons; and Laws of the Church,
whom they used as Officials to hear all manner of causes, and matters of
instance between party and party, but suffered them not to meddle in the
censuring and punishing of criminal things, or in any matter of office: but in
case of absence, or sickness, they had Vicars general, that might do any
thing almost that pertains to the Bishops Jurisdiction. The former are not
only named Officials, but Chauncellours, though the name of Chancellor be
not in this sense so ancient as the former. Onuphrius in interp. vocum Eccles.
Cancellarius originally, and properly, signifies a Notarie or Secretary,
because these for the preserving of their writings and notes of remembrance,
were wont to sit and write Intra cancellos; that is, Within certain places
enclosing them, made in the manner of Checquer-worke: But from hence in time it
came to be used, for any one that is employed for the giving of answer unto
suitors, for keeping of Records and notes of remembrance, and generally for the
performance of some principal duties pertaining to him, whose Chancellor he
is said to be.

CHAP. 30.
Of the form of the government of the Church, and the institution and
authority of Metropolitanes and Patriarchs.

THis being the form of government of each Diocese, and particular Church, let
us consider what dependence or subordination such particular Churches have. For
it cannot, nor may not be imagined, that each Diocese, or particular church is
absolutely supreme, and subject to no higher authority. The Papists are of
opinion, that Christ constituted and appointed one chief Pastor, with
universality of power, as his Vicegerent general upon earth, placed him in the
chief City of the world, and set him over all the other both Bishops and
Churches: But the ancient Fathers are of another opinion: For Hieron. ad
Euagrium.
Hierome pronounces that all Bishops are equal in order, office, and
ministry, whether of Rome, Eugubium, Tanais, or Constantinople, howsoever
riches and magnificence of Churches and cities, may make one seem to be
greater then another: and Cyprian speaks to the same purpose, saying:
Cyprian. li: 2. epist. 1. and in Concilio Carthaginensi.
Let no Bishop make himself a Judge of other, every one having received his
authority from Christ, and therefore being accountant to him only. And this he
speaks upon occasion of a difference, between him and the Roman Bishops of
that time, about rebaptization.

Wherefore let us examine these contrary opinions, and see which of them is
most agreeable unto truth and reason. For the confirmation of the former of
these two opinions, the Romanists allege many things, to prove, that the best
form of Regiment and government is a Monarchy, and consequently that Christ
who undoubtedly established the best form, appointed one supreme Monarch in
his Church. To this allegation Ockam. Dialog. l. (...). tract. 1. part. 3. cap.
30.
Ockam most excellently and learnedly answers in his Dialogues, showing and
proving at large, that though the government of one, or a Monarchy, be the
best form of Regiment in one city or country, as Aristotle rightly teaches,
yet it is not the best form of policy and government in respect of the whole
world and all the parts of it, so far distant and remote one from another;
because the whole world, and the infinite different countries and regions of
it, regularly may be better governed by many, whereof no one is superior to
other, then by one alone: neither is the same form of government always most
expedient for the whole, and for each part; for greater circuits, and for
straighter or narrower bounds: seeing one man may sustain the burden of
hearing, determining, and dispatching the greater causes and more important
matters in one kingdom or country; but no one can so manage the weightiest
businesses of the whole world. And that in like sort, though it be expedient
that there should be one Bishop over some part of the Church and people of
God, yet there is not the same reason that there should be one over the whole,
seeing no one can dispatch the greater businesses, and manage the weightier
affairs of the whole Christian world. Besides, he says, it would be most
dangerous, that there should be any such one supreme ruler of the whole Church;
for that, if he should fall into error or heresy, all the whole world would
be in great danger to be seduced, the members, for the most part, conforming
themselves to their head, and the inferiors to their rulers and superiors.
That which Ockam says, may be confirmed by the authority of Saint Augustine,
who thinks a Monarchy or the government of one supreme ruler, most fit for
the several countries and parts of the world, but not for the whole. His words
are: Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 4. ca. 15.
Feliciores essentres humanae, si omnia Regnaessent parua, and concordi
vicinitate laetantia; that is, The state of worldly things would be much more
happy, if the whole world were divided out into small kingdoms, joyfully
conspiring together in a friendly neighborhood, then if all should be swayed
by one supreme commander.

Thus then we deny not, but that amongst all the simple and single forms of
government, a Monatchie is the best for each country and people; neither does
Calvin contradict us herein, as De Pont. Romans l 1. c. 1. Calvin. Instit. lib.
4. cap. 6.
Bellarmine seems to report; for he does not simply say, that amongst all
the simple forms of government Aristocratie is best and to be preferred, but
only in the respect of often declinings and swaruings of absolute Kings,
hardly moderating themselves so in so free and absolute a liberty of
commanding all, as that their wills should never swerve from that which is
right and good. De Pont. Romano. l. 1. c. 3.
But Bellarmine himself thinks, that the mixed forms of government are to
be preferred before any of those simple forms of Monarchy, Aristocratie, and
Democratie, as having in them the best that is found in every of those single
and simple forms. And such is the government of the Church of God (Christ
undoubtedly establishing the best form of government in the same.) For the
government of each Diocese, and particular Church, rests principally in one,
who has an eminent and peerless power, without whom nothing may be attempted
or done: yet are there others joined with him as assistants, Council. Carth. 4.
without whose counsel, advice, and consent, he may do nothing of moment and
consequence; whom he cannot at his pleasure displace and remove from their
standings, or deprive them of their honor, or any way hardly censure them of
himself alone; but in Conc. Carth. 3.
the case of a Deacon, he must have two other Bishops to concur with him,
and in the case of a Presbyter, five, without which concurrence he may not
proceed against either of them. The government of a province is principally
Aristocraticall, resting in the Bishops of the province and their assistants,
but it has a kind of chiefty of one having a primacie of order and honor
amongst the rest, who being placed in the Metropolis or Mother city is named
a Metropolitan; This government is so mixed, that the Bishops may do nothing
concerning the state of the whole Province, or out of the limits of their own
Churches without consulting the Bishop of the mother city, nor Lucius 1. in
Epist. ad Episc. Hisp. and Galliae. Council. Antioch. 1. Canone. 9. Council.
Nicen. canone. 4.
he without them; and Council. Antioch. 1. canone. 19.
if they differ in judgment and opinion, he is bound to follow the mayor part
of voices for the ending and determining of all controversies that may or do
arise concerning matters of faith, or of fact. Neither is this the form of
government of one province only, but the government of larger circuits is
altogether like unto it, and in proportion the same. For look what the
Metropolitan is in respect of the Bishops of the province, that and no more is
the primate or Patriarch in respect of the Metropolitans, and Bishops of
diverse provinces; so that as the Metropolitan can do nothing out of his
own Diocese without the concurrence of the mayor part of the Bishops of the
province, though he be in order and honor the first and greatest amongst them,
who must be consulted before they can do any thing; so in like sort, the
Primate or Patriarch may do nothing without the advice and consent of the
Metropolitanes and Bishops subject unto him. So that we see the form of
Church government is mixed in such sort, that in respect of a Diocese or
particular Church, there is a special authority resting in one, though not
excluding nor neglecting the assistance and concurrence of more; but the
government of many particular Churches and provinces is principally
Aristocraticall, all things being swayed by the mayor part of the voices of
the Bishops and Metropolitanes, yet admitting a primacie of order and honor of
one amongst the rest, who must be first consulted, from whom all deliberations
must take beginning, and who sits in all their meetings as a president and
moderatour.

This De Pont. Romans l. 1. c. 8.
Bellarmine endeavors to improve, and therefore labors to show, that the
supreme power of the Church is not in the company of Bishops. His first reason
is, because Christ, as he supposes, gave no authority to his Apostles and
Disciples, but that which he gave to every one of them apart, as to preach,
baptize, bind and loose, remitte, and retain sin. But this silly argument
is easily answered, and the absurdity of Bellarmines confident affirmation is
too too apparent. For to ordain Bishops, to depose Bishops or Presbyters, and
to determine the differences, and controversies that arise amongst them, is, as
I think, a great part of Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction: yet may no
one Bishop do any of these things, but the company of Bishops only. Conc.
Carth. 2. can. 12.
To the ordination of a Bishop, the presence of the Metropolitan, and of three
other Bishops at the least, with the consent of the rest that are absent,
signified in writing, is by the old Canons required: neither did the Church
ever admit less then three Bishops to ordain, unless in certain cases of
necessity: And touching the depriving or degrading of Bishops, Presbyters,
and Deacons, the ancient Canon requires the concurrence and consent of three
Bishops, for the censuring and depriving of a Deacon; of six for the
depriving of a Presbyter; and of twelve for the censuring, judging, and
deposing of a Bishop. Wherefore let us see, if the Cardinal have any better
reason behind.

His second reason is, that it cannot be imagined that CHRIST committed the
government of the Church to the company of Bishops; for that then the Church
should oftentimes lack Governors, for that the Bishops are seldom
assembled by joint consent to decree and determine things. Surely this reason
has far less strength then the former; for in the beginning all the
Bishops of each Province met to the ordination of every Bishop newly
elected; and twice in the year besides, there was a Synod holden, consisting
of all the Bishops of the Province, the Metropolitan not only having power,
but also being straightly bound to convocate his brethren: and they as surely
tied and obliged to come when he called them.

His third reason which he brings to prove, that the government of the
church was not by Christ committed to the company of Bishops, but to some one
chief and supreme amongst them, is, for that the whole multitude of right
believing Christians is one church, and therefore must have one chief Ruler.
For answer hereunto we say, that a church may be named one either in respect
of the same faith, hope, profession, means of salvation, and communion or
fellowship of Saints: and so the whole multitude of right believers throughout
the world is but one church: or in respect of the same immediate communicating
together in Sacraments, and in the actions and exercises of Gods worship and
service. The unity of the church of God in this later sort implies and
requires a necessity of the unity of one chief Pastor; but the unity of the
church in the former sort may stand without the unity of one Pastor. Ockam.
Dialo. l: 2 tract. 1. part. 3. c. 30.
Christian men, says Ockam, in Scripture are compared to sheep, and the
church of God to a fold. Now though it be expedient that these sheep so many
as belong to the same particular fold, that go out to the same pastures to
feed, to the same rivers of water to drink, and do remain and abide
together, should be fed, directed, and guided by the same Pastor; yet the
sheep of diverse folds led out to diverse pastures to feed in, and rivers of
water to drink, may have their diversity of Pastors under the same chief
Shepherd Christ Jesus: neither is there any unity employed in the whole
Church, or in the Churches of diverse Provinces which may not be preserved, as
well by the multitude and diversity of Pastors, bound and knit together in
the bond of conspiring consent and agreement, as by the unity of one chief
Pastor. And in this sort we shall find the Church of God to have stood in
perfect unity in the first and best ages thereof, without finding any want of
the help of one chief Pastor. For how could there be a more perfect unity
in the whole Church, then when the Pastor of each particular Church chosen by
the Clergy, and people of the same, was appointed by the Metropolitan, and
all the rest of the Bishops of the province, for his sincerity in profession,
and godliness of conversation, and ordained to the work of the Ministry by
the joint imposition of all their hands? when the Vide Decret. Damasi ex De^r.
Iuoni^ Carnotens. l. 1. in Tom. (...). Council. apud Binnium, p. 505.
Metropolitanes of several provinces were confirmed by the Primate or
Patriarch, but ordained by the Bishops of their provinces? when the Greg. l. 1.
ep. 24. Vide exemplar literarum Thar^sii ad summos Sacerdotes and Episcopos
Antiochiae, Alexandriae, and Sanctae Vrbis. in 3 Action. Synodi 7 apud Binnium.
Patriarchs elected by the Clergy and people, and ordained by their
Metropolitanes, sent their Synodall letters one to another, testifying and
expressing their faith and profession, before they were received and allowed
one of another, and before tehy were accounted and reputed for lawful
Patriarchs?

Wherefore presupposing that the government of the Church is not Monarchical
in respect of any one supreme Pastor on earth, but mixed; and having seen
how, notwithstanding the diversity of many Pastors, the Church may be
preserved in peace and unity, let us more exactly and distinctly consider what
the ancient form of Church policy and government was.

If we look into the monuments of Antiquity, we shall find, that there were
aunciently three Subordinations in the Church. For the actions of the Bishop
of each particular Church of a city, and places adjoining, were subject to the
censure and judgment of the rest of the Bishops of the same province; amongst
whom for order sake there was one chief, to whom it pertained to call them
together, to sit as moderator in the midst of them being assembled, and to
execute what by joint consent they resolved on. The actions of the Bishops of
a province, and a provincial Synod consisting of those Bishops, were
subject to a Synod consisting of the Metropolitanes, and other Bishops of
diverse provinces. This Synod was of two sorts. For either it consisted of the
Metropolitanes and Bishops of one kingdom and nation only, as did the
Councels of Africa: or of the Metropolitans, and Bishops of many kingdoms.
If of the Metropolitanes and Bishops of one kingdom and state only, the
chief Primate was mederator. If of many, one of the Patriarchs, and chief
Bishops of the whole world, every Church being subordinate to some one of the
Patriarchicall Churches, and incorporate into the unity of it. Thirdly, the
actions of the Bishops of a whole kingdom and Patriarchship, were subject to
an Oecumenicall Synod consisting of all the Patriarchs, and the
Metropolitanes and Bishops subject to them.

Touching provincial Counsels, to the censures whereof the actions of
particular Churches are subject, they were by the ancient Canons of the Church
to be holden in every province twice every year. Council. Nice. canone 5.
It is very necessary, say the Fathers of the Council of Nice, that there
should be a Synod twice every year in every province; that all the Bishops of
the province meeting together, may in common think upon those things that are
doubtful and questionable. For the dispatch of Ecclesiastical businesses, and
the determining of matters in controversy. Conc. Antioc canone. 20.
We think it were fit, say the Fathers in the Council of Antioche, that in
every province Synodes of Bishops should be assembled twice every year. The
first council of Canone. 2.
Constantinople decrees the same: and the Fathers assembled in the Council of
Canone. 19.
Chalcedon complain that in some provinces the Synodes of Bishops are not
holden, and that thereby many Ecclesiastical matters needing reformation are
neglected: and therefore they appoint, that the Bishops of every province shall
assemble every year twice at that place, which the Bishop of the mother
City shall think fit, to amend all things that shall be found to be amiss
in the province. Here we see the necessity of holding these Synodes, and by
whom they were to be called and moderated. Wherefore let us now proceed to
see of whom they consisted, what causes they examined and determined, what the
power of the Metropolitan originally was, and what in process of time, by
positive constitution, upon due and just considerations it grew to be.

Touching the persons that provincial Synodes consisted of, it is clear and
evident, that not only Bishops, but Presbyters also were present in these
Assemblies, and had decisiue voices: whereupon the Council of Council.
Antisiod. canone 7.
Antisiodorum says; Let all the Presbyters being called come to the Synod in
the City. The Council of Tarracon. Conc: Tarrac. canone. 13.
Let letters be sent by the Metropolitan to his brethren, that they bring
with them to the Synod, not only some of the Presbyters of the Cathedral
Church, but also of each Diocese. And the fourth Council of Toledo, describing
the form of celebrating provincial Synodes, has these words: Conc. Tolet. 4.
can. 3.
Let the Bishops assembled go to the Church, and sit according to the time of
their ordination; and after all the Bishops are entered and set, let the
Presbyters be called, and the Bishops sitting in compass, let Presbyters sit
behind them, and the Deacons stand before them. In the first Council of
Toledo, we find these words. Initio, Concilij Toletan. 1.
Considentibus Presbyteris, astantibus Diaconis, and caeteris qui intererant
Concilio congregato, Patronus Episcopus dixit, etc. that is, The Presbyters
sitting together with the Bishops, the Deacons standing before them, and the
rest, which were present in the Council assembled, Patronus the Bishop said,
etc. The like we read of a Synod holden by Gregory the Pope. The words are
these: Greg. lib. 4. Epistola^um, ca: 88.
Gregorius Papa coram sacratissimo corpore Beati Petri Apostoli, cum Episcopis
omnibus Romanae Ecclesiae, and Presbyteris residens, assistentibus Diaconis,
and cuncto Clero, dixit etc. that is, Gregory the Pope sitting before the most
sacred body of blessed Peter, with all the Bishops of the Roman Church and the
Presbyters also, the Deacons standing before them, and all the Clergy, said,
etc. And that Presbyters were not only present in Provincial Synodes, but had
decisiue voices as well as Bishops, it appears by their Vide Subscript.
Council. Elibert^. and Synod. sub. Gregorio.
subscribing to the Decrees of such Synodes, in the very same form and manner
that Bishops did. So that it will be found most false and untrue that Bell. de
Clericis li: c. 14.
Bellarmine has, that Presbyters have no voices in Synodes: and the ancient
form of our Convocation here in England, wherein not only the Archbishops,
and Bishops, but sundry Presbyters also, as well out of Cathedral Churches as
Dioceses at large, are present, and have decisiue voices, will clearly refute
the same.

The causes that were wont to be examined and determined, in the meeting of the
Bishops of the province, were the Conc. Antioch. canonc. 19
ordinations of Bishops, when any Churches were void, and the depriving and
rejecting of all such, as were found unworthy of their honor and place: and in
a word, any complaint of wrong done in any Church, was there to be heard. Ibid.
can. 20.
Let the provincial Synodes be holden twice every year, says the Council of
Antioch, and let the Presbyters and Deacons be present, and as many as think
they have been any way hurt or wronged, there expect the determination of the
Synod. The power of the Metropolitan, was in calling the rest of the Bishops
to the Synod, in appointing the place of their meeting, and in sitting as
President in the midst of them: and so were things moderated, that Ibid. can. 9.
neither the rest might proceed to do any thing without consulting him, nor
he to do any thing without them, but was tied in all matters of difference to
follow the mayor part; and if he neglected his duty in convocating his
brethren, that so things might be determined by common consent, he was by the
Canons subject to censure and punishment. Thus at first all matters were to be
heard, determined, and ended by Synodes, and they holden twice every year: But
in process of time when the governors of the Church could not conveniently
assemble in Synod twice a year, the Fathers of the sixth Canone. 8.
general Council decreed, that yet in any case there should be a Synod of
Bishops once every year for Ecclesiastical questions. Likewise the Canone. 6.
seventh general Council decrees in this sort. Whereas the Canon wills
judicial inquisition to be made twice every year by the assembly of Bishops
in every province, and yet for the misery and poverty of such as should travel
to Synodes, the Fathers of the sixth council decreed, it should be once in the
year, ana then things amiss to be redressed, we renew this later Canon. So
that, whereas at the first there was a Synod of Bishops in every province
twice in the year, now it was sufficient if the Bishops met once. But
afterward, many things falling out to hinder their happy meetings, we shall
find that they met not so often, and therefore the Council of Canone. 8.
Basil appoints Episcopal Synodes to be holden once every year, and
Provincial at the least once in three years: And so in time, causes growing
many, and the difficulties intolerable in coming together, and in staying to
hear these causes thus multiplied and increased, it was thought fitter to
refer the hearing of complaints and Appeals to Metropolitanes, and such like
Ecclesiastical Judges, limited and directed by Canons and Imperial laws,
then to trouble the Pastors of whole provinces, and to wrong the people by the
absence of their Pastors and Guides.

Thus having spoken of the authority of the Metropolitan and his Council in
every province, it remains that we come to Synodes of a larger extent. These,
besides Oecumenicall, whereof we will not yet speak, were of two sorts:
Patriarchicall, wherein one of the Patriarchs and chief Bishops of the world
sat as president; or National, consisting of the Bishops of many Provinces,
within one Country or Kingdom, wherein the Primate sat as President: of which
sort the Councels of Africa were; concerning which Councels it is ordered in
the third Council of Canone 2.
Carthage, that once every year there shall be a general assembly of the
Bishops of Africa, to which all the provinces which have primas seeds, that is,
first Sees, and so may hold provincial Councels, shall out of their Councels
send two Bishops, or as many as they shall think fit; but that out of
Tripolis, because of the poverty of the Bishops of it, one Bishop shall come.
In these Councels, the Legates of the Bishop of Rome were sometimes present,
not as presidents, but assistants, as other Metropolitanes were. There were
many provinces which had primas seeds, that is, first Sees, and so consequently
many Primates; yet for distinction, some call him that was Bishop of that first
See (which was in honor before all the rest of the same country and kingdom,
and to whom in all common deliberations the other Metropolitans did resort) by
an excellency, the Primate; and the rest by the common name of Metropolitans;
in which sense the Bishop of Carthage was Primate of all Africa; and so is a
Primate in order and honor before Metropolitanes, but inferior unto a
Patriarch. Of this distinction of degrees of honor amongst Metropolitanes and
chief Bishops, Hugo de Sancto Victore writes in this sort: De Sacram. (...).
2. part. 3. cap. (...).
Post Sacerdotes altiores sunt Principes Sacerdotum, id est, Episcopi: supra
quos iterum sunt Archiepiscopi: and supra illos qui dicuntur Primates: supra
quos quidam Patriarchas constituere volunt: alii eosdem Patriarchas and
Primates dicunt: that is, after priests we are to reckon the chief priests,
that is, Bishops, as in the first degree and honor above them: above whom
again are Archbishops, and above them they that are named Primates: above
whom some will have Patriarchs to be placed: but others will have Patriarchs
and Primates to be all one. Rabanus in his book Lib. 1. c. (...).
de institutione Clertcorum, sorteth Bishops into three ranks: Patriarchs,
Arch-Bishoppes, who also are named Metropolitanes: and ordinary Bishops.

CHAP. 31.
Of Patriarchs who they were, and the reason why they were preferred before
other Bishops.

TOuching the Patriarchs, they were in the beginning but only three: to wit,
the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioche. The reason, as some think, why
the Bishops of these places were preferred before other, and made Patriarchs,
was in respect had to blessed Peter, who was in sort before expressed, in order
and honor the first and chiefest of the Apostles. For Antioche was honored,
for that he sat there for a certain space, and afterward governed it by
Euodius: Alexandria for that he placed Mark his Scholar there: and Rome
because it was the place of his death and martyrdom, where in his body he
stays and expects the Resurrection of the dead, and the second coming of
Christ. All the Churches founded by any Apostle, are rightly called
Apostolic, but these more specially in which the Apostle Peter sat.
Anacletus epist. 3.
Secunda fedes, says Anacletus, apud Alexandriam beati Petri nomine a Marco
eius discipulo consecrata est. Tertia autem seeds apud Antiochiam eiusdem beati
Petri Apostoli habetur honorabilis; that is, The second See, and in degree and
honor next unto that of Rome, was consecrated at Alexandria, by the authority
of blessed Peter, by Mark his Scholar; and the third See honorable for
Peter's presence in the same, is at Antioche. Leo ad Anatol. ep. 53.
Nihil, says Leo writing to Anatholius, Alexandriae sedi, eius quam per
sanctum Marcum Evangelistam beati Petri discipulum meruit, pereat dignitatis.
Antiochena quoque Ecclesia in qua primum praedicante Apostolo Petro,
Christianum nomen exortumest, in paternae constitutionis ordine perseveret; and
in gradu tertio collocata, nunquam fiat inferior: that is, Let the Sea of
Alexandria lose no part of that dignity which it obtained by Saint Mark the
Evangelist, the disciple of blessed Peter. Let the Church of Antioche also, in
which upon Peter's preaching, the name of Christians first began, continue in
that degree and order, wherein the constitution of the Fathers set it, and
being placed in the third degree, let it never be put lower. This did Leo
write, when the Bishop of Constantinople sought to have the second place in the
Church of God, and to be preferred before the Bishops of Alexandria, and
Antioche. Gregory writes to the same effect to Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria.
His words are. Greg. Epist. li. 6. ep. 37.
Cum multisint Apostoli, pro ipso tamen principatusola Apostolorum Principis
Seeds in authoritate conualuit, quae tribus in locis vnius est. Ipse enim
sublimauit sedem, in qua etiam quiescere and praesentem vitam finire dignatus
est. Ipse decorauit sedemin qua Euangelistam discipulum misit. Ipse firmauit
sedem, in qua septem annis, quamuis discessurus sedit, Cum ergo vnius atque vna
sit seeds, cui ex authoritate dinina tres nunc Episcopi praesident, quicquid
ego de vobis boni audio, mihi imputo; that is, Whereas there were many
Apostles, yet in respect of the chiefty that Peter had, as being Prince of the
Apostles, his Sea only grew to be in chief authority, which in three places is
yet the Sea but of one and the same Apostle. For he exalted that Sea in which
he pleased to rest, and end this present life. He beautified that Sea in which
he placed Mark his Scholar: and he firmly and strongly settled that Sea in
which he sat seven years, though with purpose in the end to leave it. When
as therefore there is one See of one Apostle, in which by divine authority
three sit as presidents, whatsoever good I hear of you, I impute it to my
self. And again in the same place to Eulogius, having spoken to him of the
dignity of Peter's chair in which he sat, he says: He has spoken to me of
Peter's chair, who himself sits on Peter's chair. This is the opinion of
these Roman Bishops, touching the reason of the exaltation of the Seas of
Rome, Alexandria and Antioche above other Episcopal Seas; who, how partially
soever they may be thought to be affected to the chair of Peter, yet herein do
they mainly cross the conceit of the Romanists at this day, in that they
teach that other Bishops succeed Peter in the chair, and that chiefty and
primacy he had, as well as the Bishop of Rome.

The dignity of these 3 Apostolical Churches was confirmed in the Nicene
Council; and each of them confined within the ancient bounds and limits
thereof. Conc. Nicen. Canone 6.
Let the ancient custom, say the Nicene Fathers, continue in Egypt, Lybia,
and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria may have power over all these;
seeing the Bishop of Rome has the like custom. In like sort in Antioche, and
other provinces, let every Church retain and keep her own degree and honor.
De Pontif. lib. 2. c. 3.
Bellarmine much troubles himself about this limitation and bounding of these
Patriarchs, as prejudicial to the illimited jurisdiction of the Roman
Bishop: and therefore though it be most clear that there was a particular
assignation of Churches to every of these Patriarchs, yet he seeks to avoid
the evidence of these words. For whereas Ruff. Hist. eccl. li. 1. c. 6.
Ruffinus says, it was decreede by the Council of Nice, that the Bishop of
Alexandria should have care and charge over Egypt, as the Bishop of Rome has
of the Churches near that city; and Theodorus Balsamon in the explication of
the Nicene canons, with Nilus in his book against the primacie interprets
the words of the Nicene decree in this sense, that the Bishop of Alexandria
should have the charge of Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, and the confirming of
the Metropolitanes in those parts, because the Bishop of Rome, who has a care
of the West, confirms the Metropolitanes of the West; he makes this
construction of the words of the council: Let the Bishop of Alexandria have
the charge of Egypt, seeing the Bishop of Rome was wont to permit him so
to have, before any Council had decreed it. And so, he says, Nicolas the
Pope in his Epistle to Michael the Emperor understands the words; which yet
is most untrue: for Nicolas says no such thing, but only that the Council
makes the custom of the Roman Church the pattern for others to follow. But
the Canone 17.
eight general Council, which no doubt understood the words of the Nicene
Fathers far better then Bellarmine, shows plainly, that the meaning of the
Nicene Canon was, that the Bishop of Alexandria should have power over Egypt,
and the provinces pertaining to it, to confirm the Metropolitanes in the same,
seeing the like custom prevails in the Roman Church; And this Council
confirms the same distinction of the bounds of jurisdiction, within which
every Patriarch is to contain himself, both for old Rome and new, and for the
other Churches of Alexandria and Antioche. The Canons of the Nicene Council
translated out of the Arabian tongue, and published by Turrian, Pisanus, and
Binnius, will fully clear this point, if our Adversaries give any credit unto
them. Apud Binnium Tom. Conciliorum primo, page 352.
For in the eighth of those Canons, the decree, about the meaning whereof we
contend, is thus set down: Constitutum est, vt Episcopus Aegypti, id est,
Patriarcha Alexandrinus, praesideat and habeat potestatem totius Aegypti: that
is, It is ordained that the Bishop of Egypt, that is, the Patriarch of
Alexandria, shall sit as President, and have power over all Egypt, and over
all places, Cities and Towns which are round about it: because so it is fit,
and because likewise the Bishop of Rome, that is the Successor of Peter the
Apostle, has power over all the Cities and places which are about Rome. And
in like sort let the Bishop of ANTIOCH have power over that whole province,
etc. But because perhaps these Canons, though published by themselves, as rare
secrets of Antiquity lately brought to light, will be of little credit with
them, I will add one reason more, which to me seems very forcible to
confirm our interpretation of the words of the Nicene Fathers. Binnius in vita
Hadriani 2. Tom. 3. Council. part. 2.
There was aunciently a great contention between the Church of Rome, and the
Church of Constantinople, about the Churches of Bulgaria, either of these
Churches making claim thereunto, and seeking to bring them within the compass
of their own Jurisdiction: which contention could not have been, if the one
of these two Churches had had an illimited extent of Jurisdiction. But that
neither of them had any such illimited Jurisdiction, it is evident, in that
neither Constantinople, nor Rome, urge any such thing for justification of
their claim, but stand upon their converting of the people of Bulgaria to the
Christian faith, and the planting of religion amongst them. Which either of
these pretending rather then other, sought thereby to justify a title of
jurisdiction, and authority over them.

Wherefore resolving that we have the true meaning of the Nicene canon, let us
return thither whence we have a little digressed, namely to the discourse of
Patriarchical Churches and Bishops set in order and honor before all other.
These as I have already showed, were at first but three, to which afterward
two other were added: First Constantinople, and afterward Jerusalem. Touching
the Church and Bishop of Constantinople, after that city was by Constantine
made the seat of the Empire, and thereby as much or more honored then any
city in the world, the Bishop thereof, before little esteemed, grew exceeding
great: and in the second Council, which was the first of Canone. (...).
Constantinople, was made a Patriarch in degree of honor next the Bishop of
Rome, and before the other two: And again in the Council of Action, 16.
Chalcedon, confirmed in the same. And though Leo resisted against this act of
the Council of Chalcedon, and peremptorily protested, that he would not suffer
the Church of Alexandria to loose the dignity of the second See, and the Church
of Antioch of the third; and his successors many of them persisted in the same
resistance; yet they were forced in the end to give way to the exaltation of
the Constantinopolitane Church; so that after the time of Justinian the
Emperor, they never made any more words about this matter. Whereby we see,
that to be true of Hierome, Hieron. ad Euagrium.
Orbis mayor est vrbe; that is, The world is greater then any one city of the
world, though Rome it self. The Church of Jerusalem, as being the place of
Christ's passion, and whence the preaching of the Gospel took beginning, was
ever much honored; yet was it not so much as a Metropolitan Church at the
first; but the B: and Clergy there of were subject to the Bishop of Caesarea,
as their Metropolitan, and the Bishop of Antioch as their Patriarch; as
Hierome writing to Pammachius against John of Jerusalem testifies: And
thereupon Leo Leo epist. 62.
writing to Maximus Bishop of Antioch, blames Iuuenall Bishop of Jerusalem
for seeking to subject Palaestina to himself, and charge him with insolent
boldness for that attempt. But the In Fragmento Council. 5. apud Binnium. Tom.
2. Council. page 606.
Fathers of the fifth general Council thought good to honor the Church of
Jerusalem, where Christ suffered, and rose again from death: and therefore
whereas the Bishop thereof had formerly but a bare title, and a preeminence
in sitting before other, they made him a Patriarch in order the fifth; and that
he might have Metropolitanes subject unto him, they took some parts of the
Diocese of Alexandria, and Antioche from the Bishops of those Churches, and put
them under him: So that now we have five Patriarchs of the Christian Church.
Touching these, the Canone 2^
eighth general Council takes order, that no man shall offer any indignity
to any of them. To these they were wont to wish all prosperity and long life
in the conclusion of their Councels. Without these, no Council was holden to
be full and perfect. These might convocate the Metropolitanes of their
several divisions, and hold a Patriarchicall Council, which was of greater
authority then either those in the several provinces, or of a whole Nation,
formerly mentioned, because it consisted of more, and more honorable Bishops:
yet had the Patriarchs no greater authority over the Metropolitanes within
their larger circuites, then the Metropolitanes within their lesser compass.
These were by the order of the Canone ^7
eighth general Council, to confirm the Metropolitanes subject unto them,
either by imposition of hands, or giving the Pall: but inferior Bishops they
might not meddle with, but were to leave them to the ordering of their
Metropolitanes.

CHAP. 32.
How the Pope succeeds Peter: what of right belongs to him: and what it is
that he unjustly claims.

WE deny not but that blessed Peter had a kind of primacie of honor and
order, that in respect thereof, as all Metropolitanes do suceede him, as being
greater then other Bishops in honor and place; so the Patriarchs yet more
specially: and amongst them the Roman Bishops in the first place. We will not
therefore put our Adversaries to so much pains, as some other have done, to
prove, that Peter was at Rome; that he dyed there, and that the Bishop of Rome
succeeds him. But this is it which we say, that he succeeded him in the
Bishopric of that City, and in the honor of being one of the prime Bishops
of the world, as the Bishops of Alexandria and Antioche likewise did: but not
in the condition of being universal Bishop, that is, such a one in whom all
Episcopal power and authority is originally invested: from whom it is derived
to others: and who may limite and restrain the use of it in other, as seems
good unto himself. Por Peter was not such an Apostle, but had only a joint
commission with the rest, who were put into it immediately by Christ as well as
he, though he were in some sort the first man in it.

We deny not therefore to the Roman Bishop his due place among the prime
Bishops of the World, if therewith he will rest contented: but universal
Bishop in sort before expressed, we dare by no means admit him to be, knowing
right well, that every Bishop has in his place, and keeping his own standing,
power and authority immediately from Christ, which is not to be restrained or
limited by any, but by the company of Bishops: wherein though one be chief for
order sake, and to preserve unity, and in such sort, that all things must take
their beginning from him, yet he can do nothing without them.

The Bishop of Constantinople, as I have already noted, in the time of the
second general Council, obtained to be one of the four Patriarchs, by
reason of the greatness of his Church and city: and in the fourth holden at
Chalcedon, to have equal privileges with the Bishop of Rome: but not
contenting himself long with this equality, soon after he sought to be above
him, and would be called universal Bishop, seeking thereby to subject to
himself all other Bishops and Churches: in which proud claim he was resisted
by Gregory the 1, who professes, Greg. ep. l. 4. cp. 34. and 38.
that whosoever assumeth this title, overthrows the dignity and honor of all
other Bishops, in his pride is like Lucifer, and may rightly be thought to be a
forerunner of Antichrist. Paul the Apostle, says Greg. when he heard certain
men say, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, and I of Cephas, trembling, and quaking
exceedingly, to hear and see this tearing and renting asunder of the Lords
body, through which his members joined themselves in companies factiously unto
other heads, cried out aloud saying, Was Paul crucified for you? or were ye
baptized in the name of Paul? In such sort therefore did he decline the
particular subiecting of the members of the Lords body to certain Heads, as it
were, besides Christ, yea though they were the Apostles themselves. And what
will thou be able to answer to Christ the Head of the universal Church in the
trial of the last Judgment, which go about by assuming the title of
universal Bishop, to put under thy self all the members of his mystical
body? Who is it, I pray thee, whom thou proposest to thy self for imitation,
in taking to thee so perverse a title, but he who despising the Legions of
Angels, joined with him in society as companions, sought to climb up above
them to the height of singularity, that neither he might seem to be under
any, nor any might be found over whom he was not: who also said, I will
ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the Stars of heaven, I will
sit in the mountain of the testament, in the sides of the North; I will ascend
above the height of the clouds, and will be like unto the most high. For
what are thy brethren, all the Bishops of the universal Church, but the
stars of Heaven; whose life, and tongue or speech, do shine in the midst of
the sins and errors of men, as it were in the midst of the darkness of the
night; whose name and honor while thou seem to trample under thy feet, in
that thou seek by this title of pride to prefer thy self before them,
what else do thou say, but I will ascend into heaven, and exalt my seat
above the Stars of heaven? Are not all the Bishops of the Church; clouds,
who by the words of their preaching power down the graces of GOD like showers
of rain, and shine through the light of good works, whom whiles your
brotherhood despising seeks to bring under it self, what other thing does it
say but this, which is said of the old enemy, I will ascend above the height
of the clouds? And a little after, the same Gregory adds: Surely Peter the
Apostle was the first member of the holy and universal Church: Paul, Andrew,
and John, what other thing are they but heads of particular parts of the people
and Church of God? and yet notwithstanding they are all members of the Church
under one head. Thus does this holy man and worthy Bishop dislike, that any
amongst the Bishops of the Christian Church, should be so proud and insolent,
as to seek to be over all, and subject to none; to subject unto himself all
the members of Christ, as to a head, and to challenge unto himself to be
universal Bishop: Greg. Epist. lib. 4. ep. 3 2.
for that if any such be, if he fall into error or heresy he draws all
other with him, and overthrows the state of the whole church. Yet do the
Roman Bishops at this day, take all these things unto themselves: for they
subject all Christ's members to themselves, as to Heads of the universal
church, upon peril of everlasting damnation: they will be subject to none, or
have any to be over them, so that all depends of them, their standing is the
stay of all, and their fall the ruin of all; and if they err, all err.

But perhaps it will be said, that the name of universal Bishop is not simply
evil, nor these claims simply to be disliked; but when they are made by them
to whom it pertains not to make them, such as the Bishops of Constantinople
were. Surely this evasion will not serve the turn. For Gregory says in the
same place, that no Bishop of Rome ever assumed this title, ne dum priuatum
aliquid daretur vni, honor debito Sacerdotes priuarentur vniuersi: that is,
Lest while some singular thing were given to one, all Bishops should be
deprived of their due honor: thereby showing, that this title, and the claims
accompanying it, are simply to be disliked, as prejudicial to the state of
the whole Church, and the honor and dignity of all other Bishops, by
whomsoever they be made. Some man perhaps will be desirous to know, how our
Adversaries seek to decline the evidence of this clear testimony of so great
a Roman Bishop, witnessing against them in a matter of so great consequence.
I will therefore set down briefly in this place, what I find any where said by
any of them in answer to this authority. The credit of the Author is such,
that they dare take no exception aagainst him; and the generality of his speech
is such, that what he disliketh in the Constantinopolitane Bishop, he
confesses to be evil in any other, and particularly in the Bishop of Rome.
And therefore the only thing that they can devise, whereby to darken the
clear light of truth, is this; that the Bishop of Constantinople did so, and
in such sense challenge to be universal Bishop, that he only would have
been a Bishop, and there should have been no more; then which nothing could
be more absurdly said. For the thing that the Roman Bishops disliked in those
of Constantinople, was not the putting of all other from being Bishops, but the
preferring themselves before other, the subjecting of other to themselves, the
incroching upon the privileges and rights of other, and the challenging of the
power of ordination, and confirmation of them, whom it pertained not to them to
ordain or confirm; as appears by the Epistles of Leo epist. 53.
Leo, blaming Anotolius for subjecting all unto himself, for depriving other
Metropolitanes of their due honor, by encroaching upon their rights, and for
taking upon him to ordain the Bishop of Antioch, who was one of the
Patriarchs. That the Bishops of Constantinople sought not so to be vniuer all
Bishops, that there should be no other Bishops but they only, is most evident
by the Epistles of Leo and Vide epist: Gregor. supra citat.
Gregory, in that they ordained Bishops themselves, and are blamed by them for
presuming to ordain such as they should not have ordained. Wherefore the most
that they can be conceived to have desired, and sought in assuming the title of
universality, is no more but the inuesting of the fullness of all power and
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical originally in themselves, and thereby the
subjecting of all other to a necessity of deriuing ministerial power and
authority from them; of seeking ordination at their hands, and being in all
things pertaining to Episcopal office subject to them: all which things are
challenged by the Bishop of Rome, For the Romanists at this day teach, that the
fullness of all power and jurisdiction Ecclesiastical is originally in the
Pope, and that he communicates a part thereof unto others, with such
limitations as seems best unto himself; that all other Bishops receive their
jurisdiction from him; that all the Bishops of the world cannot judge him: that
he may dispose of all the kingdoms of the world, that his standing is the
stay of all: that his fall would be the ruin of all: and that therefore we
must persuade our selves he cannot err. And hence indeed it follows, that
he only is Bishop in truth, and that there are no other. For if the Pope may
take from any Bishop, so often as he sees cause, as many as he pleases of
them that are subject to him: if he may reserve unto himself what cases he
will, and inhibite Bishops to meddle with them: if he may give leave to
preach, minister Sacraments, and to do all other Ecclesiastical duties, to
whom he will, within any Diocese of the world: if in general councels, where
the power of jurisdiction is principally exercised, where the great affairs of
the Church are treated of, where doubts are resolved, controversies determined,
articles of faith defined, and laws made that bind the whole Church, he have
so absolute power, that he is neither bound to follow the greater, nor the
lesser part of Bishops there present, but may determine what he pleases, when
they have all done, and said what they can. If the assurance of finding out the
truth, and decreeing that which is good and behoofefull, rest not partly in
him, and partly in them, but only in him, as our Adversaries teach: then are
Bishops indeed no Bishops: no judges of controversies, but counselors only to
advise the Pope: no Lawgiuers to the Church, but such as must receive laws
from the Pope: no commanders in their own right in the Church in any degree,
but mere Lieuetenantes, or, to speak more truly and properly, vassals to the
Pope.

CHAP. 33.
Of the proofs brought by the Romanists, for confirmation of the universality
of the Popes jurisdiction and power.

IT is evident by that which has been said, that that universality, whereof
Gregory speaks in his Epistles, and which he so peremptorily condemns, is
claimed by the Popes his successors, at this day; and consequently, that they
are in his judgment the forerunners of Antichrist, and in pride like Lucifer.
Yet because there is nothing so absurd, that some will not defend; nothing so
false, which some will not endeavor to prove true: let us see what the
Romanists can say for proof and confirmation of the universal Jurisdiction of
their Popes. Surely as men careful to uphold the state of the Papacy, under
the shadow of the boughs of which tree they so sweetly rest, and repose
themselves, they have turned over their books to see what may be said, and
out of them allege against us the testimonies of Councels, Popes, Fathers
Greek and Latin, and the practice of Popes, whence such a peerless power
may be proved and inferred.

The first testimony that they bring out of any Council, is out of the Theod.
hist. l. 5. c. 9 citat. a Bellarm. l. 2. de Pont. Romans c. 13. and Bin. in
annot. ad council. Constant. 1.
Epistle written by the Fathers of the second general Council to Damasus
Bishop of Rome, and the other Bishops of the west; wherein the Fathers say, (if
we believe these men) that they came together to Constantinople by the mandate
of the Pope, whose letters the Emperor sent unto them: and confess, that the
Roman Church is the head, and they the members. Truly this is a very ill
beginning, and may make us justly fear, that we shall find little good dealing
in that which follows. For there is no part of this true, which, in the front
of all their proofs, is by them so confidently alleged. For thus the matter
stands between the Fathers of that Council, and the Bishop of Rome. The
Bishops assembled at Constantinople writ to the Bishop of Rome, and the rest of
the Bishops of the West assembled in a Council at Rome, signifying, that they
had been invited by them out of their brotherly love, as their own members,
to come to their Council; and that they wished nothing more, then that they
had the wings of doves, that they might fly away, and rest with them; but that
the state of their Churches not permitting them to be so long absent, and that
intending at the time they understood of their letters, to come no farther then
Constantinople, they could not come, but had sent notwithstanding certain unto
them. This is all that is contained in the letter of those Fathers written to
the Bishop of Rome: in all which there is no word of any mandate of the Pope,
but of a friendly and loving entreatie of the Western Bishops, desiring the
presence of their brethren of the East; no word of head and members, but of
fellow members, nor any thing that may prove a commanding power in the Pope.
Nay, the contrary is most strongly from hence to be proved. Theod. hist. l. 5.
c. 7.
For it was the Emperor, and not the Pope, that called them to Constantinople:
they refused to come to Rome, though they had received the letters of the
Roman Bishop, and his colleagues, entreating and desiring them to come to
Rome, they abode at Constantinople, and were esteemed to be the General
Council, though the Pope held a Council in the West at the same time, which
should have been accounted general, rather then this, if all assurance of
finding out the truth, and making good Laws, did rest in the Pope only. And
lastly, they ordained Bishops of the greatest and most famous Churches of the
world, such, and in such sort, as the Pope did not greatly like, and yet was
forced to give way to their doings, and to ratify that which they had done.

The 2d allegation to prove the universality of the Popes jurisdiction, is,
Bellarm. ubi supra.
that the Fathers of the 3d general Council, holden at Ephesus, professed,
that they deposed Nestorius by force of the mandatory letters of Caelestinus B.
of Rome, and that in their epistle to Caelestinus they say, they reserved the
judgment of the cause of John Patriarch of Antioch to him, as being more
doubtful. The former of these two things they endeavor to prove out of
Euagrius hist. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Euagrius; the later out of the Epistle written by the Fathers of that
Council, extant in the Council it self. For the clearing of this objection
we must observe, that See these things in the Acts of the Council of
Ephesus, the 7. books of Socrates hist and the first of Euagrius.
Nestorius Patriarch of Constantinople, having uttered certain heretical, and
impious speeches, touching the personal union of the natures of God and Man in
Christ, whereby many were scandalized, the first amongst the Patriarchs that
took notice of it, was Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria in Egypt; who after he
found, that Nestorius would not be reclaimed by admonitions, called a Synod
of his Bishops, and condemned the absurd and heretical positions of Nestorius,
and required him to anathematize them, otherwise threatening, that he and his
Bishops, would reject him from their communion, and hold them as brethren who
under his jurisdiction resisted against him. This his proceeding he signified
to the Bishop of Rome, who approved and commended the same; and with his whole
Synod of western Bishops encouraged him to go forward, wishing him not to
doubt of his concurrence with him, but as having all the authority and power
he and his Bishops had, to provide for the church of Constantinople, and to
let Nestorius know, that he was cut off from the unity of the body of their
Churches, if he should not within a certain number of days anathematize his
wicked doctrine, and profess the faith touching the generation of Christ the
Son of God, which the Roman Church, the Church of Alexandria, and Christian
religion every where preaches. Hereupon Nestorius, fearing the course that
Cyrill would take against him, desired the Emperor to summon a general
Council. To this Council came Nestorius, and the Bishops that were under him:
and Cyrill, with his Bishops, assisted with the concurrence of the resolution
and direction of the Bishop of Rome, and other Bishops of the West, though
absent; But John the Patriarch of Antioche and his Bishops were not come.
Whereupon after a while, the Bishops that were present, being weary of staying
there, began to proceed without him, requiring Nestorius to appear in the
Synod, and to answer to such things as should be objected to him; Which when
he refused to do, the Fathers assembled, finding by manifest proof, that he
had taught impiously, condemned, and deposed him, compelled so to do by the
Canons, and the letters of the Bishop of Rome, and his western Bishops, who
had set a time, within which if he submitted not himself, they would reject
him from their communion. Five days after the condemnation and deposition of
Nestorius, came John the Patriarch of Antioche with his Bishops, excusing
himself for his long tarrying in respect of the distance of the place from
whence he came, as also for that his Bishops could not sooner be gathered
together. He was much offended, that they who were come before him had passed
their sentence before his coming; and thereupon without delay, before he had
put off his cloak, or shaken off the dust from his feet, as the story says,
assembling the Bishops subject to him in a Synod, deposed (...) Act. Conc.
Ephesians. Tom. 4. cap. 17.
Cyrill and Memnon Bishop of Ephesus, who were chief agents in the proceedings
against Nestorius. Which deposition of Cyrill and Memnon, was something hastily
confirmed by the Emperor Theodosius. The Synod assembled under Cyrill, in
like sort gave sentence against John, and signified to Caelestinus Bishop of
Rome, what they had done, showing how unadvisedly a few had presumed to
condemn a great many, and the Bishop of the third See, Bishops of greater
Sees, to wit, Cyrill of Alexandria, and Caelestinus of Rome, who was present in
the Council by his Vicegerent: yet referring the final proceeding to his
consideration also, he and his Bishops being as much interessed in this
business, as they that were assembled. In the end by mediation of many great
and worthy ones, John and his Bishops, that formerly were misconceited of
Cyrill, were satisfied, and he sent the confession of his faith unto him; which
he approved, and so they were reconciled, and made friends without any farther
intermedling of the Bishop of Rome. Here is nothing to be found, that any way
argues or imports an universality of power in the Bishop of Rome, but only
his concurrence with the other Patriarchs, as prime Patriarch, in the weighty
and important businesses of the Church: and therefore the Act. Conc. Ephesians. Tom.
4. cap. 19.
Fathers of that Council writing to the Vicars of the Bishop of Rome and other
Bishops, sent by them to the Emperor, to inform him concerning the
differences that had arisen in the Council, and their proceedings, charge and
require them to do nothing but according to their direction; assuring them,
that if they do otherwise, they will neither ratify that they do, nor admit
them to their communion: Thereby showing, that though the Roman Bishop be to
concur with the Fathers assembled in Counsels, yet he is not absolutely
there to command, but to follow the directions of the Mayor part. So that he
has a joint interest with others, but not an absolute Sovereignty over all
others; God therefore having ordained the high tops of Patriarchicall
dignities (as it is in the eighth general Apud Binnium Conciliorum. Tom. 3.
part 2. Act. 1. page 881.
Council) that they might jointly concur to uphold the state of the Church,
and the truth of Religion; and that if one fell, the rest might restore,
settle, and reestablish things again: Which course Cyril. Ep. inter acta Ephe.
Conc.
Cyrill in his Epistle to John of Antioche shows to have been holden by him.
For when he observed that Nestorius his fellow Patriarch erred from the faith,
he first admonished him, and threatened to reject him from the communion of his
Churches. Secondly, he acquainted the Bishop of Rome and the Western Bishops
with the impieties and blasphemies of Nestorius; who thereupon rejected him,
professing that they would admit none to their communion, but such as would
condemn him. Thirdly, he wrote to Iuvenall Bishop of Jerusalem, and to John
Bishop of Antioche, showing his own dislike of Nestorius, and farther
professing, that for his part he was fearful to be cast out of the communion
of the Western Bishops, as he saw he must be, if he accursed not Nestorius.

The next allegation is out of the Council of Action. 3.
Chalcedon, where Theodorus and Ischiron, Deacons, in their bills of complaint
exhibited to the Bishop of Rome as president, and to the whole Council, call
Leo the Bishop, Most holy and most blessed universal Archbishop, and
Patriarch of great Rome. But they that press the testimony of these two
distressed Deacons, flying to Leo for help, should remember, that in the
Council of Action 5. page 455. 460. apud Binnium, tom. 2.
Constantinople under Mennas, not Deacons, but Bishops, and they many, are
reported to have written to the Bishop of Constantinople in this sort: To our
most holy Lord, and most blessed Father of Fathers, John, the Archbishop, and
universal Patriarch; and Eodem Tomo page 438.
Mennas himself also is called Oecumenicall Patriarch, and Archbishop,
oftentimes in that Council of Constantinople: and yet, I think, they will not
acknowledge the Bishops of Constantinople to have had an universal, supreme
commanding power over the whole world.

Hereunto therefore they add another proof, out of the relation of the
Action 16. page 139.
Council of Chalcedon made to Leo; wherein the Fathers complain of Dioscorus,
that as a wild Boar he had violently entered into the vineyard of the Lord,
and wasted the same, plucking up the true fruitful vines, and planting
unfruitful in their places; and that he stayed not there, but reached out his
hand against him to whom the keeping of the vineyard was committed by our
Savior, that is, against the Bishop of Rome, whom he thought to
excommunicate. These words we willingly confess, to be words of just
complaint, upon great cause made by the Fathers of the Council, against
Dioscorus; but they prove not the thing in question. For we make no doubt, but
the keeping of the vineyard of the Lord of hosts was committed to the Bishop of
Rome, not only as well as to other, but in the first place, as being in order
and honor the chief: But that he only received from Christ this power,
authority and charge, and others from him, not we only, but many learned
amongst themselves do deny, as De Pontif. Romans l. 4. c. 22.
Bellarmine testifies.

There are two other testimonies that may be alleged out of the Council of
Chalcedon. For Paschasinus, one of the Vicegerents of the Bishop of Rome in
that Council, calls Conc. Chalced. act. 1. p. 4.
Rome the head of the churches, and In Exempl. epist. Paschasini, page 141.
Leo the Bishop of Rome, head of the universal Church. But they who press so
much the saying of the Popes Legate in favor of the Pope, must know, that by
head he meant chief in order and honor, and not one having all power
originally in himself, and absolutely commanding over all, as the Papists now
teach. For if he had meant so, he had not been endured by the Fathers of that
Council, who peremptorily pronounce, Act. 15 chap. 28.
that it was the greatness of the city, and not any power given by Christ or
derived to him from Peter, that made the Bishop of Rome to be great; and that
therefore they would equal the Bishop of Constantinople unto him, seeing
Constantinople was now become equal unto Rome.

The next testimony that they allege, is out of the Patriarchicall Council of
Action 4.
Constantinople under Mennas, wherein the Fathers profess by Mennas their
president, that they follow and obey the Apostolic See, that they communicate
with them with whom that See communicates, and condemn all those it
condemns. Surely, this reason, howsoever it may seem to have some force, yet
indeed has none at all. For there is no question, but that the Bishop of Rome
with his Western Synods, all which according to the phrase of Antiquity, are
comprehended under the name of the Apostolic See, was more to be esteemed
then the particular Synod under Mennas; and that therefore they might profess
to follow it, and obey the decrees of it; and yet neither think the Pope to
be universal Bishop, nor that the Bishop of Rome with his Western Bishops,
is more to be listened unto, and obeyed, then all the other Bishops of the
Christian World. That Ep. ad Tharas. in conc. 7. act. 2
Adrian the Bishop of Rome, in his Epistle to Tharasius inserted into the
seventh general Council, says, that the Sea of Rome has the primacie
throughout the whole world, and is the head of all Churches (which is the last
allegation of Bellarmine out of Councels) is no more then we granted before,
if it be rightly understood of a primacie of order and honor, and not of an
universal, supreme, commanding power over all.

This is all that Bellarmine can allege out of any ancient Council: in which
his allegations, it will not be amiss for the Reader to observe his guilefull
cunning: who undertaking to produce the testimonies of ancient Councels for
confirmation of the Papacy, brings nothing for the most part, but the words
of particular men: and they either suitors to the Pope, agents for him, or
Popes. To that which he has out of latter Councels, as that of Laterane under
Innocentius, and that of Lions, and Florence, I will answer when I come to
show the opinions of latter times touching the Popes universality of
jurisdiction and power, and therefore will pass them over in this place.

CHAP. 34.
Of the pretended proofs of the Popes Jurisdiction, taken out of the Decretall
Epistles of Popes.

THE next proofs that are brought for confirmation of the universality of
Papal jurisdiction, are the sayings of Popes in their Decretall Epistles.
These Epistles De Pont. l. 2. c. 1^4.
Bellarmine sorteth into three ranks, placing in the first the Epistles of
those Popes that lived within the first 300 years: in the second, the Epistles
of those that lived after the first 600 years: and in the third, the Epistles
of such as came in the midst between these.

Touching the first, he confesses, that certain errors have crept into them,
and that he dares not pronounce them to be indubitate: but Cardinal Cusanus,
a man of great learning, reading, and judgment, minseth not the matter, as
Bellarmine does, but plainly and in direct words professes, that he thinks
these Epistles that go under the names of ancient Popes, are counterfeit. His
words are these. Cusan. de concord. cath. l. (...). c. 2.
In my opinion, the things that are written of Constantine and his donation,
are Apocryphal, as also perhaps some other long and large writings, attributed
to the holy men Clemens and Anacletus the Pope, on which, they that desire to
magnify the Roman See, which is worthy of all honor, and to exalt it more
then either is expedient for the Church, or is any way fit, do either
altogether, or in some sort ground themselves. For assuredly, if any man would
diligently read over and peruse all the writings attributed to those holy men,
and compare the times wherein they lived with those writings, and then would be
conversant in the works of all the holy Fathers, which were till the time of
Augustine, Hierome, and Ambrose, and in the books of Councels, wherein
authentical writings are alleged, committing them to memory, and making use
of the^, he would find this to be true, that neither any mention is made of
those forenamed Epistles in any of those writings, nor that the epistles
compared with the times wherein their supposed authors lived, can be made to
agree with the times of their life; but by the very circumstance of time bewray
themselves to be counterfeit. It is written in the Epistles of Clemens, how he
was made Pope and succeeded Peter: and after the death of Peter, the author of
these Epistles writes unto James, who was brother of our Lord and Bishop of
Jerusalem: and yet it is most manifest that the same James died eight years
before Peter, which was one of the causes (as Beda writes in his commentaries
upon the Canonical Epistles) why the Epistle of James is set first among the
Catholic Epistles. Neither is this the censure of Cusanus only, but Contius
annotat in did. 26. cap. 70.
Contius a learned Canonist, in his annotations upon Gratian, fears not to
pronounce all the decretall Epistles, that go under the names of such Bishops,
as lived before Syluester, to be false and counterfeit. Besides these censures
of learned men, there want not strong and effectual reasons to disprove these
Epistles. For first, they will easily appear to be counterfeit, because they
are barbarously, and rudely written, and are not like the writings of those
men, that lived in the times wherein the supposed authors of those Epistles did
live, but like the writings of such as lived in later and worse times, after
Barbarism had prevailed and overflowed all. Secondly, because the style is so
different from those indubitate remainders of the Epistles of the same Popes,
found in Cypr. epist. 46. and 48. in edit. Pammelij.
Cyprian, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 42.
Eusebius, and Athanas. apologia. 2.
Athanasius, that they cannot be but counterfeit: For whosoever shall compare
them, shall find them to differ as much as gold and dross. Thirdly, for that
all these supposed Epistles are so like one another in style, and oftentimes
have the very same sentences, that it is very likely they came all from one
and the same forge. Fourthly, because neither Eusebius, Hierome, nor any other
ancient writer makes any mention of them. Fifthly, because they follow not the
old translation in their allegations of Scripture, but that of Hierome, which
was not in being in those times, wherein the supposed Authors of these Epistles
did live. Lastly, which is the reason before used by Loco citato. vide etiam
Binnium in annor. in epist. Clem.
Cusanus, because the Epistle to James written after the death of Peter, as
appears in the front of it, and so consequently after the twelfth year of
Nero, could not be written to James the brother of our Lord, who, as Hieron:
Catalog. Script. Eccl. in Iacobo.
Hierome testifies, was slain at Jerusalem in the seventh year of Nero.
But whatsoever become of the censure of learned men branding these Epistles
with the note of forgery, and the reasons brought to disprove them, which
cannot easily be answered; yet Bellarmine will prove, that these Epistles are
mentioned by the ancient, and consequently, that the Cent. 2. cap. 7. ad finem.
Centurie-writers say untruly, that hardly any shall be found before the time
of Charles the great, that speaks any thing of them. To this purpose he
produces Isidore, in his preface before his collection of the Councels,
affirming, that he gathered Canons out of the Epistles of Clemens, Anacletus,
Euaristus, and the rest of the Roman Bishops, by the advice of eighty
Bishops; but this is to justify one counterfeit by another; For this preface
is thought to be counterfeit, because in it there is mention made of the sixth
general Council under Agatho, whereas Isidore was dead forty years before
the holding of that Council. Wherefore he alleges the Council of Vase, as
mentioning the same decretals. But the decrees of that Council are uncertain,
as Binnius annot. in Conc. Vasens. 2.
Binnius notes, by reason of the great confusion that is found in them: and
truly, I think, there is noe man that can make any sense of that which is
cited out of Clements Epistles by that Council. Therefore in the third place
he adds Ruffinus, who in his preface before his translation of the
recognitions of Clemens out of Greek, speaks of an Epistle of Clement unto
James the brother of our Lord, and says, he turned it out of Greek into
Latin: and this, says Bellarmime which we have, is undoubtedly the same that
he translated, as may be proved out of Genna Catalog. illustrium virorum.
Gennadius: therefore the Epistle that is now carried about under the the name
of Clemens, is ancient, and not late or counterfeit. But that these Philistines
may fall by their own sword, we will oppose against Bellarmine the Cardinal,
Baronius the Cardinal, against the Roman reader of controversies, the Roman
Annalist. For Baron. Anno 102. number. 6.
Baronius proves out of De viris l. lustr. cap. 17. vide Annot. Binnij in 1.
Ep. Clement. ad Iacobum.
Gennadius, whom Bellarmine alleges, that these Epistles we have, are not
the same that Ruffinus translated, because those he translated had prefaces
before them, but this of Clement has none. Thus we see the Epistles of the
Popes of the first 300 years, prove nothing, because they are counterfeite.

Of them that were written by such as lived after the first 600 years, I shall
have a fit opportunity to speak in another place. Wherefore let us come to
those of the middle rank, where Bellarmine produces twelve ancient Bishops
of Rome, clayming that supreme, absolute, and commanding authority over the
whole Church, which we deny.

The first of the twelve, is Julius the first, in his Epistle extant in the
second Apology of Athanasius. The witness is good, and we will not except
against him, but he deposes directly against them that produce him; neither
is there any better evidence to be desired, then this his Epistle. For the
Bishops of the East having written to Julius, and blamed him for communicating
with such as they rejected, and going about to reuerse the acts which they had
agreed on; and having told him, that the greatness of cities makes not the
power of Bishops to be the greater: and that therefore he should not taken
on him to be greater then other Bishops, and to undo that which they had
done, because he was Bishop of a greater city then any of them was; he
answers modestly in this his Epistle, that he hops he offends not in
desiring them to come to a Synod, that therein their proceedings might be
examined; seeing the Nicene Council appoints the acts of one Counecll to be
reexamined in another. Secondly he shows, that they whom they sent to inform
him and the Western Bishops, touching their proceedings against Athanasius,
being convicted by the Presbyters of Athanasius, desired him to call a Council
of his own Bishops, and to write to Athanasius, and those of Eusebius part to
come unto the same; wherein they doubted not, but they should prove the things
they had alleged. Thirdly, he shows that if without the solicitation of
their Agents he had desired them to meet in Council, it had been no fault,
nor any way prejudicial unto them. Fourthly, that they who will not have their
proceedings reexamined contemn Councels, by admitting such as were condemned
by the Nicene Council; that Athanasius was not condemned at Tyrus; that he was
not present when he was condemned at Mareotta; and that many wrote in his
defense, to him and the other Bishops of the West; and that yet he foreiudged
nothing, but would have had matters defined in a Counsel. Fifthly, he shows
that though he wrote alone, yet he reported not his own opinion only, but of
all the Bishops of Italy, and the countries thereabout. Lastly, he tells
them, that the Bishops they proceeded against, being no vulgar persons, but
Bishops of such churches as the Apostles themselves planted, before they had
proceeded against them, they should first have written to him and his
colleagues, that from thence might have been defined, what was right and good;
then which course what could be more fitting? For Athanasius Bishop of the
second See, with other his adherents, were not to be judged by Bishops of an
inferior rank, especially in a matter concerning the faith, without first
consulting the Bishop of the first See, and his colleagues, that from thence an
action of such consequence might take beginning. And therefore Julius rightly
tells the Oriental Bishops, that in their rash proceeding against so great
and worthy a Bishop, as was Athanasius, they had offended against the
ordinations of Paul; that the Fathers had not taught them so to do; and that
he had received otherwise from blessed Peter. Here is nothing found, for any
thing I see, that any way proves the Pope to have a supreme commanding power
over the whole church; but rather the contrary: For he does nothing, without
the Synod of the Western Bishops: He challenges not the right of judging
the causes of the Oriental Bishops, either by himself alone, or with his
Synod of Western Bishops: much less deriueth the claim of any such right
from Peter; as the Jesuit untruly misreporteth the matter; but thinks, that
the final, and supreme judging of them, pertains to a general Council.

The next allegation is out of an Apud Theodor. l. 5. hist. Eccles. c. 9.
Epistle of Damasus, wherein writing to the Bishops of the East, he commends
them that they gave due reverence to the Sea Apostolic, and calls them
sons. To what purpose this allegation serves, I know not. For if any man do
think it consequent, that the Pope has an universal commanding power over
all, because the Bishops of the East yielded a kind of due respect and
reverence to the Sea Apostolic, (that is, to the Bishop of Rome, and his
colleagues) for that it was in order and honor the first See; he is greatly
deceived, and may be confuted out of the Apud Theodor. 10.
Epistle of the Oriental Bishops, in answer whereof Damasus writes. For they
write unto him, not as to their Lord and Commander, but as to their brother
and colleague; and direct not their letters to him only, but to him and the
other Bishops of the West. Their Epistle begins in this sort. To their
brethren and Colleagues, Damasus, Ambrose, Britto, Valerianus, Acholius, etc.
and the rest of the holy Bishops assembled in the great city of Rome. Where by
the way, we may observe, that howsoever Damasus call them sons, as being
Bishops of meaner places, and inferior Sees, yet they call him brother and
colleague, as being equal in office and power, though inferior in order and
honor. Besides this, they refused to come to Rome, though earnestly entreated
by Damasus so to do, but stayed at Constantinople, and there held a Council,
wherein they condemned the heresies of the Eunomians, and Macedonians; ordained
sundry Bishops, as the Bishops of Constantinople, Antioche, and Jerusalem,
Nectarius, Flavianus, and Cyrill: they made the Bishop of Constantinople a
Patriarch, and set him in degree of honor next unto the Bishop of Rome. These
ordinations Vide notas Binnii in Council Constantin. Primum conc. tom. 1.
of Nectarius, and Flavianus especially, Damasus liked not, and yet was forced
to give way unto them, and to yield to the Bishops assembled at Constantinople,
(being but an hundred and fifty in number) the name of the general Council,
though about the same time, he, and all the Bishops of the West were assembled
at Rome. Wherefore this testimony might well have been spared. The next
allegation out of the Damas. ep. 4^
Epistle of Damasus to the Bishops of Numidia, is less to be esteemed then the
former; seeing that Epistle has many things in it, which cannot agree with the
state of things in those times. For if the Africans had bin so willing to refer
all greater matters by way of appeal to Rome, as the Epistle of Stephen, in
answer whereunto this of Damasus is written, imports; how could it have come
to pass, that in Zozymus his time, appeals to Rome should seem so strange,
as it appears they did?

That which is alleged out of the Epistle of Syricius to Himericus, Bishop of
Tarracon, and of Zozymus to Hesychius, Bishop of Salona, is to little purpose;
for that Syricius says, he is more zealous of true Religion, then all other
Christians, and that he bears the burden of all that are grieved, is no more
then is attributed to Basil. ep. 48
Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria. Neither is it to be marvailed at, that he
says, the Bishop of Tarracon referred certain matters to the Church of Rome,
as to the head of his body, seeing he was one of the Bishops that were subject
to the Bishop of Rome, as Patriarch of the West. Which also is the reason why
Zozymus gives directions to the Bishop of Salona, touching the time they of
the Clergy were to continue in every of the lower degrees, before they might
be preferred to higher, wishing him to acquaint others near unto him with the
same, and to assure them, that he should answer it with the loss of his
place, whosoever should contemn the authority of the Fathers, and neglect his
prescriptions.

The next Pope that is produced as a witness, is Innocent. cp. 22. ad Episcop.
Maced.
Innocentius the first, in his Epistles to the Bishops of Macedonia, and the
Inter Epistolas August. ep. 91. and 93.
Fathers assembled in the councels of Mileuis and Carthage; out of which
Epistles, four things are alleged for proof of the Popes supremacy. The
first is, that the Church of Rome is by him called head of Churches, yea the
wellspring, and head of all Churches, The second, that doubtful cases were
referred to the Sea of Rome by the Bishops of Macedonia. The third, that all
the Bishops of the world, were wont to consult the Roman Bishop, in doubtful
questions touching matters of faith. The fourth, that the Roman Bishops have
the care of all Churches. To these several objections framed out of the
Epistles of this Roman Bishop, we answer briefly: First, that the Church of
Rome was head of all Churches; that is, first in order and honor amongst them,
but not in absolute supreme commanding power. Secondly, that the Church of Rome
was in more special sort head of such Churches, as were within the
Patriarchship of Rome (as Macedonia was in Innocentius his time) and that this
was the reason, why the Bishops of Macedonia referred their doubts to the
determination of the Sea of Rome. Thirdly, that all the Bishops of the world
consulted the Apostolic See of Rome, and the Bishop thereof, in controversies
of Faith and Religion, not as an absolute supreme judge, to whose
determinations they were bound to stand, but as their most honorable Colleague,
interessed as much as any of them in the maintenance of the truth of Religion,
and the determination of things questioned concerning the Faith. Fourthly, that
they did not consult the person of the Bishop of Rome alone, but all the
Bishops of the West together with him, who were a great and principal part of
the Christian world, though sometimes he only be named, as being the
President of all the Synodes of Bishops throughout the West. Fifthly, that the
Bishops of Rome had the care of all Churches, not as absolute supreme
commanders, but as most honorable amongst the Bishops, and Pastors of
Churches, who were first to be sought unto in matters requiring a common
deliberation, and from whom, all things generally concerning the state of the
whole Church, were either to take beginning, or at the least to seek
confirmation before they were generally imposed, and prescribed; that so being
rightly determined by the Bishops of the chief and principal Churches, other
Churches might receive the same, like waters flowing from a fountain, and
running in purity in all Churches, according to the purity of the head and
beginning.

The sixth Bishop of Rome that is produced to give testimony for the Popes
supremacy, is Leo the first, out of whom seven things are alleged: whereof
the first is, that he Leo epist. 84.
appointed Anastasius the Bishop of Thessalonica, to be his Vicegerent for the
government of the Provinces far off from him: whence it may be inferred as
our Adversaries think, that the Bishops of Rome had an universal commanding
power over all the world. The second, that he Idem epist. 46.
commands Anatolius Patriarch of Constantinople. The third, that he Idem
epist. 62.
wishes the Bishop of Antioch to write often to him, touching the affairs and
state of the Churches. The fourth, that Ibidem.
Cyril the Patriarch of Alexandria besought him, not to permit Iuuenall Bishop
of Jerusalem, to prejudice the right of the Church of Antioch, and to subject
Palestina to himself. The fifth, that he Idem epist. 81
commanded Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria. The sixth, that he Idem epist. 87.
intermeddled in Africa. And the last, that he Idem Sermon 1. in natal. Apost.
says, that Rome had a larger extent of Presidence, in that by Peter's chair
she was made the head of all Churches, then in that, in respect of earthly
dominion, she was Lady and Mistress of a great part of the world. To all these
objections thus mustered together out of the writings of Leo, we answer in
this sort. First, that Thessalonica was within the Patriarchship of Rome, and
that therefore the Bishop of Rome, might have a Vicegerent there, to dispatch
some of those things that pertained to him as Patriarch, and yet have no
universal commanding power over all the world. Secondly we say, that Leo did
not acknowledge Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople to be a Patriach, and that
therefore it follows not, that he would have presumed to have commanded a
Patriarch, if he had commanded him: but that indeed he did not command him. For
thus the case stood. Vide Epist. 46. Leonis.
After the Council of Ephesus wherein diverse Bishops compelled by Dioscorus,
subscribed to impious decrees, Leo besought the Emperor, that a general
Council might be called; but because by reason of wars in many parts of the
world, such a Council could not conveniently be presently called, he sent
certain commissioners to Constantinople, who taking to them the Bishop of
Constantinople, and being assisted by him and the Bishops thereabout, might,
upon repentance and due satisfaction, reconcile and again admit to the
communion of their Churches, such as they should think fit. These
commissioners Leo directed and commanded, as in right he might: But that he
specially commanded the Bishop of Constantinople, it cannot be proved. Thirdly
we say, that Leo in brotherly sort wished the Bishop of Antioch to resist
heretics: and to let him understand of the state of the Churches, and to be a
consort of the Apostolic See in this care: to see that the privileges of the
third See were not deminished by any man's ambition, assuring him, that
whenever he will do any thing for the advancing of the dignity of the Sea of
Antioch, he also will be ready to concur with him. In all which passages
between Leo and the Bishop of Antioch, there is nothing found that has any
show of proof of the Popes supremacy. Fourthly, we say that Cyrill the
Patriarch of Alexandria, besought Leo to give noe consent to the attempts of
Iuuenall Bishop of Jerusalem, seeking to prejudice the Church of Antioch, and
to subject Palaestina to himself: but that he besought Leo, not to permit, nor
suffer Palaestina to be taken from Antioch, and subjected to the Church of
Jerusalem (as if the whole power of permitting or hindering this thing, had
rested in Leo) is but the false report of the Cardinal, according to his
wonted manner of misse-alleaging authors for the the advantage of his cause. So
that the disposition of this matter rested not wholly in Leo, but his
concurrence with the Bishops of Antioch, and Alexandria, was necessary for the
withstanding of the attempts of Iuuenall; which his concurrence and help, he
promised the Bishop of Antioch, as we have already heard, and was ever ready to
yield the same unto him. Fifthly we say that Leo did not command Dioscorus the
Patriarch of Alexandria: but whereas the manner was, when the Patriarchs were
first elected and ordained, that they should mutually consent one to another,
and that he who was newly ordained, should send unto the rest his Synodall
letters, and testimonies of his lawful election and ordination: Dioscorus
being newly elected, and appointed Patriarch of Alexandria, sends his
Synodall letters to Leo Bishop of Rome, that so he might give his consent, and
receive and embrace him as his fellow Patriarch. Leo, that these beginnings of
Dioscorus might be more sure and firm, and nothing wanting to perfection,
fatherly, as more ancient, and brotherly, as of the same rank with him,
putting him in mind of some differences between their two Churches, about the
time of the ordination of Ministers; and for that it seemed not likely unto
him, that Mark the scholar of Peter took any other order in this behalf
then Peter did, says unto him; We will have you to observe, that which our
Fathers ever observed; making this a condition of the allowance and consent he
was to yield unto him; and urging the practice of the Apostles, says, he
shall do well, if obeying these Apostolical institutions, he shall cause that
form of ordination to be kept in the Churches over which God has set him,
which is observed in the Churches of the West; that Ministers of the Church may
be ordained only on the Lords day, on which day the creation of the world was
begun, in which Christ rose, in which death was destroyed; and life, after
which there is no death, took beginning; in which the Apostles received from
the Lord the trumpet of preaching the Gospel, and the ministration of the
Sacrament of regeneration. Sixthly we say, that Leo intermedleth in the Churches
of Africa, and requires some ordained contrary to the Canons, to be put from
their places: tollerateth others, and wills the cause of Lupicinus, a Bishop
who had appealed unto him, to be heard there, because he was Patriarch of the
West: and these parts of Africa were within his Patriarchship: and that yet
this his intermedling in so particular sort with the affairs of the Africane
Churches, was not very pleasing unto those of Africa, as shall appear by that
which follows. Lastly, we say that the Church of Rome was the head of all
Churches in the sense before expressed, and had a presidence of order and
honor amongst them: and had in that sort, as Leo truly says, more subject to
it, then ever were under the Roman Empire: but under any absolute, supreme
commanding power of the Church of Rome they were not. But, says Bellarmine, if
the former testimonies of Leo be avoided, there is one more yet behind so
clear and full for the supremacy of the Pope, that nothing can be said in
answer unto it, in his Epistle to Anastasius, Bishop of Thessalonica. His
words are these: Leo Epist. 84.
Amongst the most blessed Apostles, like in honor, there was a certain
difference and distinction of power; and whereas they were equally chosen, yet
notwithstanding it was given to one of them to have a preeminence amongst the
rest, from which form, the distinction and difference, that is amongst
Bishops, has taken beginning; and by a most wise disposition it has been
provided, that all without difference shall not challenge all unto themselves,
but that there should be in several provinces several Bishops, whose sentence
and judgment should be first and chief amongst the brethren; and again
certain other constituted and placed in greater cities, who might take the
care of more then the former, by whom the care of the whole Church might flow
unto that one seat of Peter, and nothing any where might dissent from the
head. These words truly make a goodly show, and may seem most strongly to
prove the supremacy that the Popes now challenge: but in very deed they most
powerfully overthrow it. For the Bishops of Rome will never be persuaded in
proportionable sort as is expressed in the words of Leo, to challenge no more
in respect of the whole Church, then the Metropolitan Bishops do in respect
of their Provinces, and the Patriarchs in respect of their Churches of a
larger extent: For then they must do nothing, but accordingly as they shall
be swayed by the major part of the voices of the Bishops of the Christian
Church. For the Metropolitan may do nothing in his province, nor the
Patriarch in his larger extent, but as they shall be directed, and swayed by
the major part of the voices of their Bishops: and yet surely the meaning of
Leo was not to give so much to the Bishop of Rome, in respect of all Christian
Bishops, as pertains to the Metropolitanes and Patriarchs, in respect of
their Bishops. For the Metropolitan is to ordain the Bishops of the Province,
and the Patriarch to ordain and confirm the Metropolitanes by imposition of
hands, or mission of the Pall: but the Pope never had any such power in respect
of the Patriarchs, who were only to send their Synodall Epistles to him,
testifying their faith, as he likewise to them, without expecting any other
confirmation then that mutual consent, whereby one of them assured of the
right faith and lawful ordination of another, received and embraced each other
as fellows and colleagues. So that that care of the universal Church, which
Leo says, flows together, and comes up to that one chair of Peter, is to
be understood only in respect of things concerning the common faith, and
general state of the Church, or of the principal, most eminent, and highest
parts, and members of the same: none of which things might be proceeded in,
without the Bishop of Rome and his Colleagues: but otherwise he was not to
intermeddle with inferior persons and causes, within the Jurisdiction of other
Patriarchs, neither immediately, nor upon appeal, and complaint.

The 7t^ Roman Bishop brought to testify for the absolute supreme power of
Popes, is Gelasius: out of whom two things are alleged: The first is, that he
Gelas. cp. ad cp. Dardan.
says, the Sea of Peter has power to loose that which the Bishops of other
Churches have bound. The second, that Idem cp. ad Anast. Imperat.
it has power to judge of every Church, and that no Church may judge of the
judgment of it. For answer to this testimony of Gelasius, first we say, that
the Church of Rome may not meddle with reviewing, re-examining, or reversing
the acts of other Churches, proceeding against Laymen or inferior
Cleargy-men. Secondly, that in the case of a Bishop complaining of wrong, by
the authority of the Council of Cap. 7
Sardica, she might interpose her self, not so as to bring the matter to Rome,
there to be heard: but so far forth only, as to command and appoint a
review to be taken, by the Bishops of the next bordering Province, or at the
most to send some Commisioners to sit with such second Judges. Thirdly, that
in cases which concerned the principal Patriarchs, whether they were
differences between them and their Bishops, or between themselves, the chief
See, as the principal part of the whole Church might interpose it self.
Neither was this proper to the Sea of Rome: for other Patriarchs likewise of
the higher thrones, might interpose themselves in matters concerning the
Patriarchs of inferior thrones: whence it is, that Basil writing to Athanasius
Bishop of the second See, Basil. cp. 48
tells him, that the ordering of the Church of Antioch, which was the 3d See,
did pertain to him, and that he was to see to the settling of things there,
though the quieting of the whole East required the help of the Occidentall
Bishops: and Act. council. Ephesians.
Cyril in the case of Nestorius not yet fully established, in the right of a
Patriarch intermedled, and proceeded so far as to reject him and his adherents
from the communion of the churches of Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis. But the B.
of the inferior thrones, might not judge the superior: and therefore Ibid.
John of Antioch of the 3d See, is reprehended and reproved for judging Cyril
Bishop of the 2d See: and Dioscorus Bishop of the 2d See, is condemned in the
council of In epist. ad Martian. and Valentinian. Imp. and in altera ad ipsum
Leonem quae habetur act. 3. eius. conc.
Chalcedon, as for other things, so for this among other, that he presumed to
judge the first See. So that this is it which Gelasius says, that the Sea of
Rome, that is, the Bishop of Rome, and the Bishops of the West, may judge and
examine the differences between Patriarchs, or between Patriarchs and their
Bishops; but neither so peremptorily, nor finally, but that such judgment may
be reuiewed and reexamined in a general Council: and that no other particular
Church or See may judge the Church of Rome, seeing every other See is inferior
to it; no way denying, but that a general Council may review, ree^xamine, and
reuerse the acts and judgments of the Roman See; as being greater, and of
more ample authority. Neither truly can there be any better proof against the
pretended supremacy of the Popes, then this Epistle, the circumstances whereof
are these. Acatius Bishop of Constantinople, for communicating with certain
Eutichian Heretics, was by the Sea of Rome condemned; some disliked his
proceeding against him, because a Synod was not specially summoned for the
purpose, especially seeing he was Bishop of the Princely city; Gelasius
stands not upon the claim of universal power, thereby to justify his
proceeding, but answers; First, that Eutiches being condemned in the
Council of Chalcedon, all such were accursed likewise, as should either by
defense of such error, or communicating with men so erring, fall into the
fellowship of the same heresy, and that therefore there needed no Synod, but
the Sea Apostolic might execute that was there decreed. Secondly, that the
Catholic Bishops in the East being deposed, and Heretics thrust into their
places, there was no reason why he should have consulted with them. Thirdly,
that he did nothing of himself, but with a Synod of the Western Bishops.

The next four Bishops produced by the Cardinal, are John the second,
Anastasius the second, Felix the fourth, and Pelagius the second; out of whom
he alleges nothing but this, that the Sea of Peter holds the chiefty
assigned of the Lord in the universal Church, and that the church of Rome is
the head of all churches. Whereunto we briefly answer, that the Sea of Peter
ever held the chiefty, and that the church of Rome was ever the head of all
churches, not in universality of absolute supreme power and commanding
authority, but in order and honor in sort before expressed: and that by the Sea of Peter and church of Rome, is meant the whole West church, and not
precisely the Diocese of Rome, as likewise we have noted before; and therefore
these allegations to prove the Popes supremacy over all Bishops, are nothing
to the purpose.

The last of the twelve Bishops brought by Bellarmine, is Gregory the first;
out of whom four things are alleged; the first is, Greg. Epist. lib. 1. cp.
72.
that he required the Africanes to permit appeals to Rome from the Council of
Numidia, and blamed the Bishops of Africa, for that after letters written unto
them, they had degraded Honoratus the Archdeacon. n Idem. l. 2. cp. 37.
The second, that he sent a Pall to the Bishop of Corinth. The third, Idem. li.
4. cp. 56.
that he says, Eusebius Bishop of Constantinople, acknowledged the Church of
Constantinople to be subject to the Sea Apostolic. The fourth, Idem. lib. 7.
cp. 63.
that the Bishop of Constantinople professes his subjection to the Sea
Apostolic. To these objections we answer; First, Vide infra. chap. 39. of
appeals to Rome.
that it is contrary to the resolution of the ancient Councels of Carthage, and
Mileuis, that the Bishop of Rome should admit appeals of inferior Clergymen
out of Africa; and that therefore by some positive constitution or later
agreement, Gregory might be permitted to hear the complaints of an
Archdeacon appealing unto him out of Africa, yet from the beginning it was not
so, though some parts of Africa were ever within the compass of the
Patriarchship of Rome. Secondly, that he sent the Pall to the Bishop of
Corinth, because he was within his Patriarchship; all Patriarchs being to
confirm their Metropolitanes by imposition of hands, or by sending the Pall.
3^. That there was no such Eusebius Bishop of Constantinople in Gregory's time,
as is mentioned in the Epistle alleged; and that they that were, as John and
Cyriacus, strove and contended with Gregory, to be above him, and to have the
first place in the Church; and that not without the help and furtherance of the
Emperor: so that it may be doubted whether Gregory wrote this or not, it being
so contrary to that we know to have bin attempted and sought by the Bishops of
Constantinople, that lived in his time. But granting that Gregory did so write,
and that Eusebius a B. of Constantinople did acknowledge his Church to be
subject to the Sea of Rome, yet he meant nothing else thereby, but that it was
an inferior See and so subject in such sort, as I have declared the inferior
Sees to be subject to the superior; which subjection will no way prove the
supremacy that the Popes now claim. Fourthly, that Gregory does not say that
the Bishop of Constantinople acknowledged himself subject to the Bishop of
Rome. For it was not Primas Byzanzenus, the Primate of Byzantium, that Gregory
reports to have confessed himself subject to the Bishop of Rome, and whose
cause the Emperor commanded Gregory to hear, but Vide annot. in Gratian.
Decr. part. 1. did. 22. c. 3.
Primas Byzanzenus, that is, the Primate of the Byzazene province of Africa. So
that this confession of the Primate mentioned by Gregory, brought to prove that
the Bishop of Rome had a commanding power over the Bishop of Constantinople, is
merely mistaken by Bellarmine, as it was before him by Gratian. But some man
will say, howsoever there be a mistaking of this allegation, yet it is strong
and forcible to prove the thing intended. For Gregory says expressly, that
howsoever all Bishops in respect of humility, be equal, yet there is no Bishop
but if he be found faulty, is subject to the Sea of Rome. That this saying of
Gregory may be found true, certain limitations must be added unto it. For the
Bishop of Rome might not immediately punish every Bishop that he found to
offend, nor upon appeal take notice of the faults and misdemeanors of all
Bishops; but the Council of Canone 9.
Chalcedon orders, that if any inferior Clergyman have ought against
another inferior Clerk, the matter shall be heard and determined by the
Bishop, or such as with the liking of the Bishop shall by the parties be chosen
arbitratours; and if he go against their determination, he shall be punished.
If a Clerk have ought against his own or another Bishop, it shall be inquired
of in the audience of the Synod of the Province: If either Clerk or Bishop
have ought against the Metropolitan of the province, he shall go to the
Primate of the Diocese, or to the throne and See of the Regal city of
Constantinople. This Canon of the great Council of Chalcedon, was confirmed by
the decree of Justinian the Emperor. Justinian. Nouel. 123. c. 22.
If any man (says the Emperor) accuse a Bishop, for whatsoever cause, let the
cause be judged by the Metropolitan: and if any man gainsay the Metropolitan,
let the matter be referred to the Archbishop, and Patriarch of that Diocese,
and let him end it according to the canons and Laws. So that we see the
Bishops of Rome might not intermedle in judging inferior Bishops, subject to
other Patriarchs, neither immediately, nor upon complaint and appeal,
whatsoever their faults be: but they have other supreme Judges, who have power
finally to determine such matters, and from whom there lies noe appeal. This
canon of the Council of Chalcedon, and the Emperors decree confirming the
same, Gregor. Epist. lib. 11. cp 54.
Gregory alleges and allows, only adding, that if there be no
Metropolitan or Patriarch, such things as otherwise should be finally
determined, and ended by them, are to be brought to the Bishop of Rome:
Wherefore it seems that Gregory speaks of the Bishops within his own
Patriarchship, whom sometimes he calls his own Bishops, when he says there
is no Bishop, but if he be found faulty is subject to the Sea of Rome. Of these
he speaks when he says, Idem. lib. 4. Epist. 34. and in cp. 36 ^ortatur
Eulogium Episc. Alexandr, and Anastasium Antiochenu^ vt omnes Episcopos eorum
curae Subjectos ab iniquitate elationis Episc. Constantinopolitani prohibeant.
I impute it to my sins, that my own Bishops should thus despise me. And
again, if the causes of bishops committed to me be thus dealt with, alas what
shall I do? And in this sense he Lib. 11. epist. 42.
wills John of Palermo, to whom he sends a Pall, not to suffer the
reverence of the Apostolic See to be troubled by any man's presumption: for
that the state of the members is then entire and safe, when the canons are
kept, and no injury hurts the head of the faith: not naming the Church of
Rome the head of the Faith, for that the Bishop of Rome has an infallible
judgment, and absolute command in matters of faith, upon which all the world
must depend (as some ignorantly construe him) but because it was the head, that
is, the beginning and wel-spring, whence the doctrine of Faith, the knowledge
of GOD, and all Christian institution flowed to sundry other Churches, which
therefore are in a sort to depend on it, to have recourse to it, and to hold
conformity with it. Innocent in Epist. ad Decentium. Eugubin. Episcopum
No other, faith Innocentius, established and founded the Churches of Italy,
France, Germany, Spain, Afric, and the Isles that lie between, but Peter
and his Successors: and therefore the Bishops of these Churches, must keep
such observations as the Roman Church (from which they took their beginnning)
received from the Apostles, ne caput institutionum omittere videantur, that is,
Lest they seem to forsake the Head, and wellspring of all the institutions
and ordinances they have. This is the reason, why the Churches of these parts
have been so subject to the Church of Rome, namely for that from thence they
received the light of Christian knowledge; but to all Churches it is not an
head in this sort, seeing they received the faith not from Rome, but from some
other Apostolical Church, as Antioche, or Alexandria.

CHAP. 35.
Of the pretended proofs of the Popes supremacy, produced and brought out of
the writings of the Greek Fathers.

Having examined the proofs they bring for confirmation of the Popes
supremacy out of Councels, and the writings, of ancient Bishops of Rome, let
us come to the testimonies of the Fathers Greek and Latin.

The first that they produce amongst the Greek Fathers, is Ignatius, Ignatius
ep. ad Romanos.
who writes to the Holy Church which has the presidence in the Region of the
Romans, or sits before other in the Region of the Romans; from which words
nothing can be inferred that we ever doubted of. For we most willingly
confess the Roman Church to have been in order and honor the first and
chiefest of all Churches, and he says nothing out of which any other thing may
be concluded.

The next is Irenaeus, Irenaeus l. 3. c. 3.
who being to show against Heretics, that the Tradition of the Church is
against them, and for him, and thinking it very tedious to run through the
successions of all Churches, says, he will content himself with that which is
the greatest, ancientest, best known to all, and founded by the two most
glorious Apostles, Peter and Paul, at Rome; for that the whole Church, that is,
the company of all faithful ones, that are euery-where, in which the Tradition
has been ever preserved, must of necessity agree in her tradition with this,
propter potentiorem principalitatem, that is: For that it is the principal of
all other. This testimony of Irenaeus no way proves the thing in question. For
here is nothing of the dependence of all other Churches on the Church of Rome,
in their faith and profession, nor that all Churches have kept the faith in
that Church, that is, in cleaving to it, as to their Head and Mother, as
Bellarmine untruly fansieth: But all that is here said, is nothing else, but
that undoubtedly the same faith was given and delivered to all other Churches,
that was delivered by blessed Peter and Paul, to the Church of Rome the
chiefest of all.

The two next Greek Fathers that are produced to testify for the supremacy,
are Epiph. haeres. 68.
Epiphanius, and Athan. in Apol. 2.
Athanasius, who report, that Vrsacius and Valens, sworn enemies of
Athanasius, repenting them of their former errors, came to Julius Bishop of
Rome, to give an account, and to seek favor and reconciliation. Surely, the
producing of such testimonies as these are, is nothing else but mere trifling;
and they that bring them know right well, that they no way prove the thing
questioned: the circumstances of this narration touching Vrsacius and Valens,
are these. The cause of Athanasius, as himself Apol. praedict.
testifies, was first heard in his own Province, by an hundred Bishops, and he
there acquitted: Secondly at Rome, by more then fifty Bishops, at the desire
of Eusebius his Adversary: and lastly, at Sardica, by three hundred Bishops,
where he was likewise acquitted. To the decrees of this Synod, Vrsacius and
Valens, his enemies, making show of repentance, subscribed, confessing they had
played the Sycophants: neither rested they there, but they wrote to Julius
Bishop of Rome, to testify their repentance, and to desire reconciliation; and
likewise to Athanasius himself. It were strange if any man could prove the
absolute supreme power, and commanding authority of the Bishop of Rome over all
the world by this testimony, wherein nothing is found of submissio^ to Julius,
or of seeking his favor and communion more then the favor and communion of
Athanasius, and all other Catholic Bishops adhering to him. The Epistle of
Athanasius to Felix Bishop of Rome, is a mere counterfeit, as that worthy and
renowned Defense of the Chaleng. Artic. of the Supremacy.
Iuel has proved at large by unanswerable demonstrations; and therefore it
needs no answer. The allegation of the accusation of Dionysius of
Alexandria, to Dionysius of Rome, joined with it by Bellarmine, is of the very
same stamp; and yet if it were not, proves nothing against us. For there is
no question, but that in matter of faith, men may accuse any erring Bishop, to
the Bishop of Rome and his Western Bishops; and that they may judge and
condemn such a one, though the Pope be not supreme head of the Church.

The fifth Greek Father that they allege, is Basil, Basil. Epist. 52. and. 48.
who, as they say, in an Epistle to Athanasius, attributes to the Bishop of
Rome authority to visit the Churches of the East, to make decrees, and to
reuerse the decrees of general Councels, such as that of Ariminum was. Truly
to say no more, the alleging of this testimony, shows they have very little
conscience that allege it. For these are the circumstances of Basils Epistle,
whereof let the Reader judge. Basil writing to Athanasius (whom he highly
commends, for that, whereas other think it well if they take care of their
own particular churches, his care was no less for the whole church, then for
that which was specially committed to him) advises him, that the only way to
settle things put out of order in the Eastern churches by the Arrians, were
the procuring of the consent of the Western Bishops, if it were possible to
entreat them to interpose themselves: for that undoubtedly the rulers would
greatly regard, and much reverence the credit of their multitude: and people
every where would follow them without gainesaying. But seeing this, which was
rather to be desired, would not in likelihood easily be obtained, he wishes
that the Bishop of Rome might be induced, to send some of good discretion and
moderation, who by gentle admonitions might pacify the minds of men, and
might have all things in readiness that concerned the Arimine Council,
necessary for the dissoluing and showing the inualidity of the acts of that
Council. I doubt not but the Reader, upon the bare view of these
circumstances, will easily perceive, that this Epistle of Basil makes very
much against their opinion that allege it: For he prefers, and rather
wishes a Council, then the Popes own interposing of himself, if there had
been any hope of a Council. Besides, these whom the Pope was to send, were
not to proceed iudicially, and by way of authority, but by entreaty and gentle
admonitions to pacify the minds of men; and therefore here is nothing of
visiting the Churches of the East, or voiding the acts of the Council of
Ariminum by way of sentence and formal proceeding, as Bellarmine untruly
reports; but only a reaching forth of the hand of help to the distressed
parts of the Church, by them that were in better state, and a manifesting or
declaring of the inualidity of that Council, the unlawful proceedings of it,
and the reasons why it neither was, nor ever ought to be admitted.

The sixth Greek Father brought to be a witness of the Popes supremacy, is
Gregory Nazianzen, Nazianz. in Carm. de vita sua.
who says, that the Roman Church did ever hold the right profession, as it
becomes the city which is over all the world. This testimony is no less
abused then the former, as it will easily appear to him that will take the
pains to view the place alleged. Nature (says Nazianzene) does not afford
two Suns, yet are there two Romes, the lights of the whole world: the old and
the new seat of the Empire, The one of these lights appears at the rising,
and the other at the setting of the Sun, and both jointly send forth a most
excellent glittering brightness. The faith of the one was a long time, and now
is right, knitting, and joining the West to the saving word of Life, as it is
fit the Mistress and Lady of the world should be. In which words it is
evident, that he speaks of the greatness of the city of Rome, in respect
of her civil and temporal sovereignty; and not in respect of the spiritual
power of the Church; and therefore it is strange that Bellarmine should deny
the same. For though in the time of Nazianzen, the Emperor made his abode, for
the most part, at Constantinople, and not at Rome, yet he calls Rome the
Mistress of the world, in respect of the civil state thereof, as appears in
that he speaks of two famous cities, two lights of the world; and names the
one the old Seat, and the other the new Seat of the Empire.

The seventh Greek Father is Chrysostom, who (if we may believe Bellarmine)
being deposed by Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, and put from the
Bishopric of Constantinople in a Council of Bishops, Chrysostom. Ep. l. ad
Innocentium.
writes to the Bishop of Rome, by his authority to void the sentence of
Theophilus, and to punish him: whence it will follow, that Chrysostom
acknowledged the Roman Bishop to be supreme Judge of the Greek or Eastern
Bishops, and consequently of all the world. For the better manifesting of the
bad dealing of the Cardinal in alleging this testimony, I will briefly set
down all the most material and principal circumstances, of the narration of
the most unjust deposition of Chrysostom, that worthy and renowned Bishop of
Constantinople. Thus therefore the case stood. Sozomen. li: 8. ca. 11. and seq.
Socrates. lib. 6. Pallad. and Gregorius Alex. in vita Chrysostomi Nicephorus l.
13. Baron. an. 404. numero 2. and Binnius. Council. Tom. 1. page 589.
There arose a question in the Churches of Egypt, whether God were (...); that
is, had the shape of a man. Some of the simpler sort of Monks thought, that
God has a bodily form or shape: others thought otherwise, and condemned such
as so thought, as blasphemous: Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, was of
opinion, that GOD is not (...), that is, that God has no bodily shape or
form: which the Monks that thought otherwise greatly disliking, came to
Alexandria with a full purpose to kill and destroy him, as a wicked and
godless person. But he perceiving their affection, presented himself speedily
unto them saying, I have seen you, and looked upon you, as upon the face of
God: and thereby pacified them for the present, supposing he had been of their
opinion, and had thought God to have a face and countenance like man. But
afterward, having upon some dislikes excommunicated Isidorus, a Presbyter of
his Church, Isidorus goes to the Monks, and thereupon Ammonius with certain
other come to Theophilus, desiring him to receive such to the communion, as he
had excommunicated, which he promised to do, but performed not. Hereupon
farther quarrels grew, and Theophilus perceiving that these Monks were in
opinion contrary to the Anthropomorphites, joined himself with the
Anthropomorphites, and intended some ill to the other; whereupon Ammonius,
Dioscorus, and Isidore, came to Constantinople, and desired that the Emperor
and Chrysostom might hear the matter between them. Chrysostom used them
kindly, and suffered them to be present at the common prayers, but admitted
them not to the communion: he wrote to Theophilus, to restore them to the
communion as being right believers, and desired him, if he thought fit to
have their cause heard and examined at Constantinople, to send some to follow
the business for him: Whereunto Theophilus returned no answer; which moved
the complainants to sue to the Empress, that a Council might be called, which
she promised to procure: but in the mean while there being a rumor raised,
that Chrysostom had received Dioscorus and the rest to the communion, and that
he sought to steed them what he could, Theophilus enraged against him, began
to devise how he might put him from his Bishopric. To this purpose he
writes to sundry Bishops, reprehending the books of Origin, wherein the
error of the Anthropomorphites was condemned. Amongst other, he drew into his
faction by this means Epiphanius, a man erring in that point, but otherwise of
great authority for his good life and learning. Epiphanius calls a Synod of
the Bishops of Cyprus, condemns the books of Origin, forbids the reading
of them; and persuades other, and amongst them the Bishop of Constantinople to
do the like. Theophilus likewise followed his example, and with his Bishops
passed the like decree; but Chrysostom neglected the matter: which offended
Epiphanius and Theophilus not a little. Hereupon many of the great ones in
Constantinople, and of the Clergy also, hating Chrysostom, perceiving that
Theophilus was bent against him, urged him to go forward, and procured a great
Synod to be called at Constantinople; which opportunity he neglected not,
commanding the Bishops of Egypt to go thither, and writing to Epiphanius and
the rest of the Eastern Bishops to come thither. Epiphanius accordingly came
thither, showed himself auerse from Chrysostom, and would neither come into
the same house, nor pray with him, though he sought him with great respect:
Whereupon after a while, Epiphanius in great dislike departed from
Constantinople; at the parting of these Bishops, the one of them saying, he
hoped the other should never return home; the other, that he should never dye
a Bishop; both which fell out accordingly: for Epiphanius dyed by the way, as
he was returning home, and Chrysostom cast out of his Bishopric, dyed in
banishment. After the departing of Epiphanius, Chrysostom made a Sermon in
reproof and reprehension of women; which so moved and enraged the Empress,
that she complained bitterly to her husband, and urged him to cause Theophilus
to come quickly, and to hold a Council, which accordingly he did. Chrysostom
was called to come into the Synod; but he answered, that he refused not
judgment, but desired to know his accusers: and what crimes he was charged
with, and protested against these Judges as partial, appealing to a General
Council, whereupon he was deposed. Three days after he withdrew himself;
which put the people into an vproare, who stirring in very tumultuous manner,
forced the Emperor to bring him back again, and caused him to take his
chair again, thirty Bishops bringing him to it. Here began a new
quarrel, for that being deposed by a Synod, he resumed his place without a
Synod: but the matter was reasonably well quieted, till reprehending those in
authority, for permitting certain abuses, the Empress thinking her self
touched, began again to think, how she might procure another greater
Council to be called then before; which Chrysostom understanding, made that
Sermon that begins, Herodias denuo insanire, denuo commoveri, denuo saltare
pergit, denuo caput Ioannis in disco accipere quaerit: that is, Herodias
proceeds and goes on to be mad again, to be moved and stirred again, and
to dance again: she seeks once again to have the head of John in a
platter. It was not long after the preaching of this Sermon, before the Bishops
came together and met in Synod, by the procurement of the Empress: who
omitting all other things, objected unto him, the resuming of his place without
a Synod. He answered, that there were 50 Bishops that consented to him, and
communicated with him. But they replied, that there were more that condemned
him: and that therefore by the Canon he ought not to have resumed his place. To
whom he answered, that that was a Canon of the Arrians, made by them when they
proceeded against Athanasius, and therefore not to be regarded. But that
answer would not serve the turn: wherefore they proceeded to sentence against
him, and put him out of his Bishopric, and the Emperor immediately sent him
into banishment. Being in this distress, and thus grievously wronged, he
writes to Innocentius, and the Western Bishops, desiring them to do what
they can to repress these vile practices, and to write, that the things done
against him be of no force, as indeed they are not: and that he might still
hold communion with them, as before he had done. The Bishop of Rome upon this
his suite, called a Synod of all the Bishops of the West, Vide ep. Innocentii
ad Chrysostom. and Theophilum, apud Binnium. Tom. 1. Conc.
held both Theophilus and Chrysostom in their communion: pronounced the
judgment of Theophilus, and his proceedings against Chrysostom, to be void,
as being against the Canons: and yet told Chrysostom, there was no help, nor
no means to relieve him, but in a general Council, which by all possible
means he will labor to procure: till which time he must be content, and
refer all to God, who takes care of these things. But with how ill success
he sought to procure a general Council for the restoring of him to his place
again, we may find in k Sozomene: who reports, that being desirous that l
Lib. 8. c. 18
Chrysostom might return, he sent with those Oriental Bishops that came to
him to entreat his help and assistance, five Bishops, and two Presbyters to
Honorius, and Arcadius, to obtain a Council, and to have the time appointed:
who were so far from prevailing and obtaining that they sought, that they
were sent away with disgrace, as foreign and outlandish disturbers of the
state of the Empire. These are the principal, and most material circumstances
of the narration and report of the unjust deposition of Chrysostom, his
writing to the Bishop of Rome, and the answer he had from him, and the other
Bishops of the West, which make most strongly against the pretended supremacy
of Popes. For Innocentius tells Chrysostomes friends, that it lies not in
him to help him; but in a general Council: And though he and the Bishops of
the West pronounce the proceedings of Theophilus void, as against the Canons,
and do make them void, as much as by their dissenting they can, yet they
confess, that the absolute voyding of them, and the punishing of Theophilus
was not in them, but in a general Council. But says Bellarmine, Inter
Epistolas Innocentij supradictas.
Chrysostom in another Epistle gives Innocentius thanks for his fatherly
care and kindness, and entreats, that his enemies may not be excluded from
the communion, if by any means they may be reclaimed: therefore it seems
Chrysostom thought, he had an absolute supreme commanding power. What it is
in this Epistle that argues that supreme power which Bellarmine dreameth of,
I cannot tell. For I know no reason why Chrysostom, now a deposed and
distressed Bishop, might not use so respective a form of speech to the Bishop
of the first See, and esteem of him as a father, without acknowledging him to
have any absolute supreme power over all. And all the other circumstances and
parts of the Epistle most clearly make against the Papacy. For he says,
Innocentius had done what he could; but that his enemies notwithstanding went
still forward in their ill courses; and for the avoiding of greater scandals,
distractions, and confusions, desires him not to reject them from his
communion, considering the greatness of the work: for that this was the
contention almost of all the world: So that the Churches were brought upon
their knees, the people dispersed, the Clergy vexed, Bishops banished, and the
constitutions of the holy Fathers violated and broken.

The eighth Greek Father is Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria, out of whom
Bellarmine alleges noe new thing, but the very same which he brought out of
the Council of Ephesus, whereof he was president; and therefore I will make no
new answer here to this renewed allegation, but refer the Reader to the Sea
chap. 33.
answer already made,

The ninth Greek Father is Theodoret, out of whom Bellarmine seeks to
confirm the Papacy, for that though he were a Bishop of Asia, and had under
him eight hundred Churches, yet Theodoret. in Epist. ad Leonem quae habetur in
fine operum ejus.
he acknowledges the Bishop of Rome to be his supreme Judge: and in an Epistle
written to Renatus, a Presbyter of the Church of Rome, says, that that holy
See has the government and direction of the Churches throughout the world. For
answer unto this objection, we must observe, that Theodoret being deposed,
banished, and grievously vexed for matters of faith, seeks to have his cause
reexamined, and heard again by the Bishop of Rome, and the Bishops of the
West; which thing he obtained, and was by Leo, and the rest of the Bishops of
the West, judged Catholic, received to their communion, and, as much as lay
in them, restored to his Bishopric again; yet could he not repossesse his
place, till the Council of Chalcedon put him into it; Cone. Chalc. Act. 1. and
8.
which, though it were informed by the deputies of Leo, that he had long
before received him to his communion, yet admited him not till he was
reexamined, and at the first many of the Fathers disliking his answers as
imperfect, cried out aloud, that he was a Nestorian, and desired that the
Heretic might be cast out, censuring him as Cyril, and other Catholic
Bishops had done before. But when he fully and peremptorily accursed Nestorius
with all his adherents, they all with one consenting voice, pronounced him
worthy of his place, and admitted him to sit in Council with them. Whereby it
apeareth, that howsoever the Western Bishops pronounced him Catholic,
received him to their communion, and, as much as in them lay, restored him to
his place, yet of themselves they neither could, nor did perfect that work but
were forced to leave it to the general Council: all which Leo himself in his
Epistle to Theodoret acknowledges: Leon. Epist. in fine operum Theodoreti.
Adiutorium nostrum says he, in nomine Domini, qui fecit coelum and terram,
qui nullum nos in nostris fratribus detrimentum sustinere permisit: sed quae
nostro prius ministerio definierat, vniuersae fraternitatis irretractabili
firmauit assensu, vt vere ase prodijsse ostenderet, quod prius a prima omnium
sede formatu^, totius Christiani orbis iudicium recepisset, vt in hoc quoque
Capiti membra concordent. Na^, ne aliarum sedium, ad eam quam caeteris omnium
Dominus statuit praesidere, consensus, assentatio uideretur, inuenti prius
sunt, qui de iudicijs nostris ambigerent: that is, Our help is in the name of
the Lord, who made both heaven and earth, who suffered us not to sustain any
loss in our brethren, but confirmed and established by the irreuocable assent
of the whole brotherhood, what things he had before defined by our ministry;
that he might clearly show that thing undoubtedly to have proceeded from
himself, which being formerly framed by the first See, the judgment of the
whole Christian world received: So that herein the head and members conspire
together. For lest the consenting of other Sees to that which the Lord of all
appointed to be the first of all, might seem to be but flattery, there were
some found that at first doubted of our judgments, whether they were right or
not. And he adds, that multum Sacerdotalis officij meritum splendescit, vbi
sic summorum servatur authoritas, vt in nullo inferiorum putetur imminuta
libertas: that is, that the excellent worthiness of the Priestly office does
then most appear in shining brightness, when the authority of the highest is
so retained, that the liberty of the inferior and lesser be thought in nothing
to be diminished or empaired. Thereby insinuating, that he and his Western
Bishops did so go before in their resolution touching the case of Theodoret,
that they no way diminished, much less took away the liberty of other
inferior Sees, but that they might resist and gainesay, till they were
satisfied, and made to see the equity of the judgment of the first See:
accordingly as we find they did in the Council of Chalcedon, rejecting him as
an Heretic, whom the Bishop of Rome had received, till upon more full and
particular examination, they found him to be catholic, and acquitted him in
their own judgment. So that here we see there is nothing to prove the Pope to
be an absolute supreme judge of all, as Bellarmine untruly alleges. But
happily he will say, that Theodoret entreats Renatus to persuade Leo to use
his authority, and to require the Bishops that had proceeded against him, to
come to his Synod in the West, seeing the Sea of Rome has a direction of all
Churches, and that therefore he seems to acknowledge an absolute supreme
power in the Pope. For answer hereunto we say, that the circumstances of this
Epistle do clearly convince and prove he had no such conceit. For first, he
speaks not of Leo alone, as if of himself he could determine the matter of
difference between him and his Adversaries, but of him and his Western
Council, Secondly, he does not say, that he, and his Council alone may
determine the matter; but that his See being the first See, he and his Bishops
may call all other Bishops to their Council: and this is that direction or
government which he says the first See, or Western Church has of other
Churches; namely, in going before them, and inuiting and calling them to
public deliberations, not in peremptory and absolute commanding without them
and over them.

The tenth witness produced out of the Greek church, is Sozomene, out of whom
two things are alleged. The first is, that he says Sozom. l. 3. c. 7.
Julius Bishop of Rome, restored Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, and Paulus
Bishop of Constantinople, to their churches, from which they were violently and
unjustly expulsed by certain Oriental Bishops. The second, Ibidem.
that he did this because the care of all pertained to him in respect of the
dignity of his See. How the words of Sozomene reporting that Julius restored
these Bishops to their churches, are to be understood, we may learn of Julius
himself, who in his Epistle mentioned by Athanasius in his second Apology,
having blamed the Oriental Bishops, for proceeding in a matter of so great
consequence concerning the faith, and the Bishops of the principal Churches of
the world, without him and his Bishops, and, as he understood, very
irregularly; tells them, that he durst not confirm that they had done, that
he communicated still with Athanasius and Paulus, not foreiudging any thing,
but desir^ng them to come to a Synod, where things might be fully debated,
and determined; and that, though he alone wrote for them, yet he wrote in the
name, and with the consent of all the Bishops of the West. Upon which his
letter, they Sozom. vbi supra.
were so far from restoring them to their places, that they took it in ill
part, that he did write unto them, telling him that when he proceeded against
certain Nouatians, they intermedled not, and that therefore he should not
meddle with their proceedings, seeing the greatness of cities makes not the
power of one Bishop greater then the power of another. By which their
peremptory rejecting of his motion, it appears that he neither did, nor
could put the expulsed Bishops into their places again: which thing Ibid. c. 9.
Sozomene himself testifies also, telling us, that they could never recover
their places, till the Emperor by his mandatory letters prevailed. So that
when he says, Julius restored them, his meaning is, that he restored them as
much as lay in him: as likewise it may be said of Cyrill, and John of Antioche,
that after many and bitter contentions, they were in the end reconciled, and
Socr. l. 7. c. 33 Euagr. l. 1. c. 5. Vide acta council. Ephesians.
restored each to other their Churches, from which yet they were never driven
indeed, but in the censures of the one of them passed against the other. But
Sozomene says, the care of all Churches pertained to the Bishop of Rome,
therefore he acknowledges, that he had an universality of power over all.
Surely this consequence will never be made good. For the Metropolitan, or he
that is Bishop of the first See in each Province in respect of the dignity of
his See, has the care of the whole Province, yet can he do nothing, but as
he is directed by the mayor part of the Bishops. So that the care of all is
said to pertain to him, not because he has power to dispose of all things by
himself, but because all public proceedings concerning the whole Province,
must take their beginning from him, and nothing of that nature may be taken in
hand, without consulting him. In like sort, and in the same sense and meaning,
Sozomene says, that for the dignity of his See, the care of all pertained to
the Bishop of Rome; not as if the absolute disposing of all things did rest in
him, but for that he, as prime Bishop of the world, was first to be consulted,
before any thing concerning the common faith, and the whole state of the
Christian Church, were determined; and for that by the assistance and
concurrence of other Bishops, he as first in order and honor amongst them, was
to begin and set forward allthings of greatest consequence tending to the
common good.

Three more witnesses Bellarmine has yet behind, Acatius the Bishop of
Patara; and Justinian the Emperor, out of whom three things are alleged. The
first, that the Bishop of Rome bears about with him the care of all Churches.
The second, that the Pope is over the Church of the whole world. The third,
that the Pope is the Head of all holy Churches. To the first of these
allegations taken out of Acatius his Epistle to Simplicius Bishop of Rome, I
have answered before; as likewise in what sense the Pope may be said to be over
the Church of the whole world, to wit, in respect of a primacie of order and
honor, but not of power; in which sense also, Justinian the elder, writing to
John the second, says, his See is the Head of all Churches. And thus having
examined the testimonies of the Greek Fathers, we are now to proceed to the
authorities of the Latin Church.

CHAP. 36.
Of the pretended proofs of the Popes supremacy, taken out of the writings of
the Latin Fathers.

THe first among the Latin Fathers, that Bell. de Pont. l. 2. c. 16.
Bellarmine produces, is Cyprian; who of all other most clearly overthrows
the error of the Romanists, touching the Papacy, and therefore is very
unadvisedly produced by them in the first place, and appointed to marshall and
conduct the rest of their witnesses; yet let us hear what he will say. Out of
Cyprian four places are alleged. The first is, in his book de vnitate
Ecclesiae. The second, in the third Epistle of his first book written to
Cornelius. The third, in the tenth Epistle of his second book to the same
Cornelius. The fourth, in the eighth Epistle of the first book ad plebem
vniversam. Out of the first of these places they will prove, that he makes
Peter Head of the whole Church. Out of the second, that there is one High
Priest, and one supreme Judge in the Church, whom all men are bound to obey.
Out of the third, that Cornelius was Head of all Catholics. Out of the
fourth, that there is one singular Chair in the Church, wherein he sits
that must teach all.

To every of these allegations, I will answer in order, and make it most
clear and evident, that none of the things imagined by the Cardinal, can
possibly be concluded out of any of the forenamed places. For to begin with
the first: whosoever will but read over Cyprians book of the unity of the
Church, shall most certainly and undoubtedly find, that he speaks not in
that book of Peter's headship of the universal Church, as the Jesuit fansieth:
but of the head, original, and first beginning of Pastoral commission. Which
that it may the better appear, I will as briefly as possibly I can, lay down
the most principal and material circumstances of the whole discourse of that
book, written upon occasion of the Schism of the Nouatians. The first thing
that occurreth in the whole discourse of the book, is the authors observation
of the endless malice of Satan, who when he found the Idols of the Gentiles,
wherein he was wont to be worshipped, to be forsaken, and his Seats and
Temples deserted, almost all professing to believe in Christ, Haereses inuenit
and Schismata, quibus subuerteret fidem, veritatem corrumperet, scinderet
vnitatem: that is, Found out Heresies and Schisms; by which he might subvert
the Faith, corrupt the verity, and cut in sunder the unity: so that Quos
detinere non potest in viae veteris coecitate, circumscribit, and decipit noui
itineris errore that is, Whom he cannot hold in the blindness and darkness of
the old way, those he circumuenteth and beguileth, by making them err, go
aside, and not hold on the right course of their journey in the new way that
leads to life. In the second place he shows, that this so falls out, and
that men are so beguiled, and misse-led into Schisms and Heresies, because
they return not back to the first origin of truth, because they seek not
the head, nor keep the doctrine of the heavenly Master: which if a man would
consider and think of, he should not need to seek out many arguments, nor
fetch any great compass about: but the truth would easily without any great
search offer it self unto him. For therefore did Christ, when he was to lay
the foundations of the Christian Church, say specially to Peter, Matthew. 16. 18.
19.
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and I will give to
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and again after his resurrection,
Ioh. 21. 15. 16.
Feed my sheep: because though rising again from the dead, he gave like
power to all the Apostles, when he said Ioh. 20. 21. and 23.
As my Father sent me, so send I you: whose sins ye remit, they are remitted:
whose sins ye retain, they are retained: yet he would by speaking specially
to one, and by appointing one chair, show what unity should be in the Church.
The rest of the Apostles, says Cypria^, were undoubtedly the same that Peter
was, equal in honor and power: but therefore did Christ in the first place
give or at least promise to give specially and particularly to one that
Apostolic co^missio^, which he meant also to giueto the rest, that he might
thereby show, that the Church must be one, and that there must be but one
Episcopal chair in the world. All the Apostles, say the Cyprian, are
Pastors, but the flock of Christ is but one, which they are to feed with
unanimous consent. There is but one body of the Church, one spirit, one hope of
our calling, one Lord, one Faith, one baptism, one God. This unity all men
must endeavor to keep, especially Bishops, that they may make it appear that
there is but one Bishoply commission in the Christian Church, Cuius a singulis
in solidum pars tenetur, that is, Whereof every one indifferently and in equal
sort has his part. Here is nothing that proves the universality of the Papal
power, or that Peter was by Christ made head of the whole Church. But this
place most mainely overthrows that supposed Headship. For Cyprian teaches,
that Christ meant to give equal power and authority to all his Apostles, and
that the reason, why intending no more to one then to the rest, yet he more
specially directed his speech to one then to the rest, was, only to show, that
there must be an unity in the Church, which he settled in that beginning with
one, from him he proceeded to the rest, not meaning that the rest should
receive any thing from him, but that from himself immediately they should
receive that in the second place, which he had first, and that they should
receive the same commission together with him into which he was first put, that
they might know him to be the first of their company. In this sense Innocentius
says, Inter Epistolas Augustini, epist. 91.
A Petro ipse Episcopatus, and tota authoritas nominis huius emersit: that is,
The Bishoply office, and the whole authority of this name and title took
beginning from Peter: whom, he says, all Bishops must respect, as Sui nominis
and honoris authorem: that is, as the first and original of their name and
honor. And Leo in like sort, Huius muner is sacramentum ita Dominus ad omnium
Apostolorum officium f Leo epist. 89.
voluit pertinere, vt in beatissimo Petro Apostoloru^ omnium summo
principaliter collocaret, v^ ab ipso, quasi quodam capite, dona sua velut in
corpus omne diffunderet; that is: The Lords will was, that the mystery of this
heavenly gift, commission, and employment, should so pertain to the ministry
and office of all the Apostles, that yet he would first and principally place
it in most blessed Peter the greatest of all the Apostles, that so beginning
with him as the head and first, he might proceed from him to pour forth his
gifts into all the body. But, says Bellarmine, Cyprian speaks of another
head of the Church besides Christ, and makes the Church that so enlarges it
self, and has so many parts, yet to be one in this root and head: as the
beams are many, but the light is one, as the boughs are many, but the tree is
one: the rivers are many, but the fountain is one. It is strange that a man of
his learning and judgment should so mis-conceiue things, as he seems to do.
For it is most evident to any one that will but take the pains to peruse the
place, that Cyprian speaks not of a distinct head of the Church different
from Christ, and appointed by him to govern the Church, but of the original,
first beginning, and head of the commission the Pastors of the Church have:
Which commission Christ so gave to all the Apostles, that yet first he gave
it, or at least, first promised to give it to one, and directed his speech
specially to him, to show that none can be Pastors of the Church, but such as
without intrusion are consented on by them, that, having this power in unity
amongst themselves, may communicate it to others. Neither does he say, as the
Jesuit fansieth, that the many parts of the Church are one in subjection to
one head distinct from Christ, as the beams of the sun are one in the same
light; but in the unity of the same maine body: For even as, says Cyprian, the
beams of the sun are one in the same light, and the boughs of the tree are
one in the same tree; so all Churches must derive themselves from the first
Church, and all Pastors their commission from the first commission, which
Christ gave to all his Apostles; yet so, that he put one first into it, and
directed his speeches specially unto one, thereby to setle the^ in an orderly
unity amongst themselves. This is undoubtedly the meaning of Cyprian: For it
can no way stand, either with truth, with the opinion of Cyprian, or with the
opinion of our Adversaries themselves, that rest of the Apostles received their
Ministerial power from Peter, and were subject to him as to an head, and
absolute commander over them, seeing he says expressly, that they were the
same that Peter was, and equal to him, both in honor and power; and besides,
both in this book, and in many other places, he is wont to derive the
original of schisms and heresies, from the intrusion of men into places
already full, ar at least into void places, without due admittance and
allowance of them, that in a kind of coherent concord, rule and govern the
Church; and never from the resistance against one supreme co^mander set over
all. So in his Epist. 52.
Epistle to Antonianus, he proves Cornelius Bishop of Rome to be a true and
lawful Bishop, because having the testimony of the Clergy, and voices of the
people, the place of Fabianus being void, he was ordained to succeed him by
many Bishops then at Rome, who sent their letters abroad, making honorable
report of his due and right coming to the place, and the whole number of
Bishops throughout the world with great unanimity consented: and by the want of
these things proves his factious opposites to be schismatiques.

In the second allegation the Cardinal bewrays very gross ignorance: For it
was not a difference between Cornelius, and the Nouatians, refusing to
acknowledge him to be Bishop, that gave occasion of writing that Lib. 1. Epist.
3.
Epistle, as he untruly says; but the calumniations of Faelicissimus and
Fortunatus, against Cyprian himself: Which factious companions being put from
the communion by Cyprian, and many of his colleagues, flying to Rome, were
there rejected, and thereupon fell to threatening. These threatenings Cyprian
despises, pronounces them to be murderers, shows that they shall not
escape the judgment of God, and that nothing is to be remitted of the severity
of Church Discipline, for fear of these wicked ones, that are enemies of
Priests, and rebels against Gods Church; whom God will undoubtedly much more
severely punish, then they were, who in the time of the law of Moses despised
the high Priest, and other Priests and rulers of the people: who yet answered
such their contempts with their blood; and then adds the words cited by
Bellarmine, that hence all heresies and schisms do arise, for that the Priest
of God is not obeyed, nor one Priest in the Church for the time, and one Judge
in Christ's stead for the time acknowledged: whom if men would obey according to
the divine instructions, no man would attempt any thing against the College of
Priests, no man after the judgment of God, the voices of the people, and the
consent of fellow-Bishops, would make himself a Judge, not so much of the
Bishops, as of God himself; no man pleasing himself would bring in any new
heresy or schism to the renting and dividing of the Church; as if, when a
sparrow falls not to the ground without the will of our Father, it were
possible that he who is ordained a Bishop in the Church, should be ordained
without the will of God. Surely, says he, I speak it provoked, I speak it
grieved and constrained, when a Bishop is placed in the room of one that is
dead, chosen in peace by all the people, protected by divine help in the time
of persecution, faithfully conjoined with all his colleagues, approved to his
people four years in his Bishoply office, in the time of peace keeping the
rules of discipline, proscribed in the times of trouble, so often even with
addition of the title of Bishop, called for to be cast to the Lion, and even
in these very days wherein I write unto thee, called for again to the Lion; if
such a one be impugned by a few desperate and wicked ones, it will easily
appear who they are that so impugn him. All these things are spoken by
Cyprian of his own case, as most clearly appears by his 69 epistle; and
therefore the words are strangely wrested by Bellarmine to prove the Papacy,
when Cyprian speaks of the respect that is due to the B. of every particular
Church, and, by application thereof to himself, shows Cornel. how little he
had bin respected, and how grievously he has bin wronged. But the Cardinal
will prove that he speaks of the Pope, when he speaks of one Pastor, and
of one Judge in the Church for the time, and not of every Bishop or Pastor in
his own particular Church: First, because in the book De vnitate Ecclesiae, he
makes Peter Head and Commander of all the Church; and says, heresies spring
from the not seeking to this Head; then which nothing is more untrue. For
Cyprian does not make Peter Head and commander over the whole Church, as I have
already showed in answer to the former allegation. Secondly, for that when he
speaks of one Judge in the Church in stead of Christ, he must of necessity
by the name of the Church understand the universal Church, and not each
particular Church, because in his Epistle he speaks of Cornelius. A strange
kind of proof, and such as I think can never be made good: For first, the
consequence does not hold, seeing he might speak of Cornelius, and yet
understand by the name of the Church, the diocese of Rome, and not the
universal Church: and secondly, it is untrue that he says, he speaks of
Cornelius. For it is as clear as the Sun at noone day, that throughout the
whole Epistle, he complains of contempts, indignities, and wrongs offered to
himself by Faelicissimus and Fortunatus, and not to Cornelius. But that
Cyprian never acknowledged the supremacy of power which the Roman Bishops at
this day claim, no better proof can be desired then this Epistle will yield:
For these miscreants, Faelicissimus, Fortunatus, and their adherents, fled to
Cornelius, complaining against Cyprian: whom he peremptorily condemns for
this their flying to Rome, as violators of the Canons, and disturbers of the
order of the Church, which requires all matters to be heard and determined in
those places where the accusers and witnesses may be produced, Unless, says
he, a few desperate and wicked companions do think the authority of the
African Bishops to be less then the authority of the other Bishops elsewhere,
and therefore carry things out of Africa by way of appeal to other places. So
that when he calls the Church of Rome the principal Church, whence
Sacerdotall unity sprang, his meaning is, that it is the principal Church in
order and honor, and not in absolute, supreme, commanding power: and that
Sacerdotall unity sprang from thence, not as if all Bishops did receive their
power and jurisdiction from the Bishop of Rome, but for that, though all
receive their Bishoply commission immediately from Christ, by the hands of the
Apostles ordaining them, yet he is to be acknowledged as first in the
commission succeeding Peter, to whom Christ first promised that, which he
meant afterward in as ample sort to give to all the rest.

For answer to the third allegatio^, we must observe that Cyprian in the Lib.
2. ep. 10. ad Cornel.
Epistle cited by Bellarmine, labors to satisfy Cornelius Bishop of Rome,
who was something offended with him, for that presently so soon as he heard of
his ordination, he did not write unto him as to his fellow Bishop. To this
purpose he shows, that he refrained and forbear so to do, till he was by
others assured of his due and orderly election, and ordination, as well as by
himself, because he perceived there was some opposition against him; but that
as soon as his ordination was approved unto him, hearing of some factious and
turbulent men stirring against him, he sent certain of his brethren and
colleagues, to put to their helping hands for the bringing of the divided
members of the body, to the unity of the Catholic church, if by any means
it might be; but that the obstinacy of the one part was such, that they not
only refused the bosom of the root, and common mother, seeking to receive
and embrace them, but set up another head or Bishop; where it is plain and
evident, that he speaks not of the universal church, the common mother of
all believers, but of that particular church of Rome, whereof Cornelius was
Bishop, opposite to the divisions of such as departed from the unity of it, who
being gone out of the bosom and lap of it, chose a Bishop of their own
faction.

The fourth and last allegation will easily be answered, if we do but take a
view of that which Cyprian writes in the Li. 1. Ep. 8. ad plebem vniuer.
Epistle alleged. There is, says he, one God, one Christ, one Church, one
chair founded upon Peter by the Lords own voice. No other Altar may be
raised, nor other new Priesthood appointed, besides that one Altar and one
Priesthood already appointed. Whosoever gathers any where else, scatters.
Surely, it is not possible, that the Cardinal should think as he pretends
to do, that Cyprian speaks of one singular chair ordained by Christ for one
Bishop to sit in, appointed to teach all the world. For the question in this
place is not touching obedience to be yielded to the Bishop of Rome, that
Cyprian should need to urge that point, but touching certain Schismatiques
which opposed themselves against him; and therefore he urges the unity of the
church and of the chair, to show, that against them that are lawfully placed,
with consenting allowance of the Pastors at unity, others may not be admitted;
and that they, who by any other means get into the places of Ministry, then
by the consenting allowance of the Pastors at unity amongst themselves, are in
truth and indeed no Bishops at all. So that Cyprian by that one chair he
mentions, understands not one particular chair appointed for a general
teacher of all the world to sit in, but the joint commission, unity, and
consent of all Pastors, which is and must be such, as if they did all sit in
one chair.

Hitherto we have heard what can be alleged out of Cyprians writings, to prove
the supreme commanding authority of the Pope. Now let us hear what may be
alleged out of the same for the improuing thereof. First, in his book of the
unity of the church he says, There is one Episcopal office whereof every one
equally and indifferently has his part; and secondly, in the Council of
Carthage holden by him and other Bishops of Africa, he says; Council. Carthag.
inter opera Cypriani.
None of us makes himself a Bishop of Bishops, or tyrannically enforces his
colleagues to a necessity of obeying, because every Bishop has his own free
judgment and disposition, and may neither judge other, nor be judged of other,
but must all expect the judgment of God, who only has power to set us over
his Church, and to judge of our actions. To the first of these authorities De
Pont Romans l. 2. c. 16.
Bellarmine answers that each Bishop has his part in the Episcopal office
and communion, equally, and as well as any other, but not an equal part: For
Peter and his successors have that part, that is as the root, head, and
fountain; the rest, those parts that are as the branches, members, and
rivers, and that therefore Peter's Successors are to rule and govern the rest.
But this answer is refuted by the other place, where Cyprian with the whole
Council of Carthage says: None of us makes himself a Bishop of Bishops, or
goes about tyrannically to enforce others to a necessity of obeying, seeing
each Bishop has his liberty, and no one may judge another, nor be judged of
another, but must all expect the judgment of God. If he reply, that this
which Cyprian speaks of the equality of Bishops, is to be understood of the
Bishops of Carthage, amongst who^ none was found, that had power to command
over others, and not generally so as to include the Bishop of Rome, he is
refuted by Cyprian himself: who in his Epistle to' Stephen n Cypr. lib. 2.
epist. 1.
Bishop of Rome, having freely dissented from him, and showed the reasons of
his so dissenting, pro communi honor, and simplici dilectione: that is, For
the fellowship they have in the same honorable calling and employment, and the
simplicity and singleness of his love, says, he hops Stephen will approve
that which is true and right, and which he has so strongly confirmed and
proved, though there be some (so taxing him in a sort as too stiffely cleaving
to his own opinion) that will not easily alter their minds, but holding
communion with their colleagues, stiffely maintain what they have once
conceived. Wherein, says he, Nec nos vim cuiquam facimus, aut legem damus, cum
habeat in ecclesiae administratione voluntatis suae arbitrium liberum
vnusquisque praepofitus, rationem actus sui Domino redditurus: that is, Neither
do we force any man, or give a law unto any man, whereas every governor has
the free disposition of his own will in the administration of the Church being
to give an account of his actions unto the Lord. Here we see Cyprian speaks
in the very same sort in the case between him and Stephen, as he did in the
Council of Carthage, and that generally he makes all Bishops equal, and no
one subject to the judgment of another, but to the judgment of God only, and
the company of their fellow Bishops. And that he did not think the Bishop of
Rome to have an infallibility of judgment, or a commanding authority over other
Bishops, it appears, in that writing to Epist. 74.
Pompeius of Stephens answer to his letters, and sending him a copy of the
same answer, he tells him, that by reading it, he may more and more note
his error in maintaining the cause of heretics against Christians and the
Church of God: and fears not to pronounce of him, that he writes many things
proudly, impertinently, unskillfully, improuidently, and contrary to himself:
and, which more is, contemning his prescription, that heretics should not be
rebaptized, but be received with the imposition of hands only, he charge
him with hard, stiff, and inflexible obstinacy. Firmilianus in epist. 75.
inter epist. Cypriani.
Firmilianus with the Bishops of Phrygia, Galatia, Cilicia, and other regions
near adjoining, assembled in a Synod at Iconium, consented with Cyprian: and
Firmilianus writing to him, tells him of their resolution, and charge
Stephen with folly, who bragging of the place of his Bishoprique, and
pretending to succeed Peter, on whom the Church was founded, yet brings in
many other rocks, and new buildings of many Churches, in that he supposed
heretics to be truly baptized, who are out of the communion of the true
Church: whereas the Church was specially promised to be builded on Peter, to
show that it must be but one. And in great dislike and reprehension of Stephen,
he says, he was not ashamed in favor of heretics to divide the brotherhood,
and to call Cyprian the worthy servant of God, a false Christ, a false Apostle,
and a deceiptfull, and guilefull workman: whereas all these things might much
more truly be said of him: and therefore guilty to himself, Praeuenit, vt
alteri ea per mendacium objiceret, quae ipse ex merito audire deberet: that is,
By way of prevention, he falsely, and lyingly objected those things to
another, which himself truly and deservedly might have had objected to him by
others. Such and so great were the oppositions of Cyprian and his consorts,
against Stephen and his adherents, in the matter of rebaptization: whereupon De
Pont. To. lib. 4. c. 7.
Bellarmine says, it seems that Cyprian sinned mortally, in that he obeyed
not the commandment of Stephen, nor submitted his judgment to the judgment
of his superior. That he erred in the matter of rebaptization, we willingly
confess: but, that he knew not the power, authority, and commission of the
Bishop of Rome, or that he would ever have dissented from him, or opposed
himself against him in a question of faith if he had thought his power to be
universal, and his judgment infallible, we utterly deny. For then he should
not only have erred in the matter of rebaptization, but have been a damnable
heretic, and and have perished everlastingly: whereas yet the Church of God
has ever reputed him a holy Bishop, and a blessed Martyr. Thus having examined
the testimonies of Cyprian, usually alleged, for and against the supremacy of
the Pope, let us proceed to the rest of Bellarmines witnesses.

The next that follows is Optatus, out of whom it is alleged, that Optat.
lib. 2. contra Parmenian.
there was one Episcopal Chair in the whole Church appointed by Christ. But
because this is the same which was formerly alleged out of Cyprian, and
already answered in the answers to the allegations brought out of him,
therefore without farther troubling of the Reader, I refer him to that which
went before.

The next unto Optatus is Ambrose, out of whom three several places are
produced; in the first, his words are these, as Bellarmine cites them. Ambr.
in 3 cap. 1. ad Tim.
Though the whole world be Gods, yet the Church only is called his house, the
Governor whereof at this day is Damasus. For answer hereunto we say, that this
testimony rather witnesses their forgery, then confirms their error. For
the Commentaries attributed to Ambrose, wherein these words are, are not his:
and besides, this addition, (the governor whereof at this day is Damasus) may
be thought to have been put in, in favor of their fancy touching the Papal
universality of jurisdiction; it is so sudden, causeless, and abrupt. In the
second place, Ambrose Ambr. in orat. in Satyrum.
reports of Satyrus, that before he would receive the Sacrament of the Lords
body, he asked of the Bishop by whose hands he was to receive it, whether he
held communion with the Catholic Bishops, and namely, with the Roman Church?
To the inference of our Adversaries, and the conclusion they seek to derive and
draw from these words in favor of the Papacy, I have answered elsewhere, u
Book 3. chap. 41.
whither I refer the Reader. Wherefore let us come to the third and last
place of Ambrose: His words are, We follow the type and form of the Roman
Church x Ambr. de sac. l. 3. c. 1.
in all things; and again, I desire to follow the Roman Church in all things.
Surely, this place of all other most clearly confuteth the error of the
Romanists, touching the infallibility of the judgment of the Roman Church and
Bishop, and the necessity of absolute conformity with the same. For in this
place Saint Ambrose shows, that in the Church of Millaine, whereof he was
Bishop, the manner in his time was, that the Bishop girding himself about with
a towell in imitation of Christ, did wash the feet of such as were newly
baptized; and after great commendation of the same custom, objecting to
himself that the Roman Church had it not; first he says, that perhaps the
Church of Rome omitted this washing, because of the difficulty, and great
labor in performing it, by reason of the multitude of those that were
baptized. Secondly, whereas some said in defense and excuse of the omission of
this washing in the Roman Church, that it is not to be used as a mystical
right in the regeneration of them that are newborn in Christ, but in the
civil entertainment of strangers (the offices of humility and civil
courtesy, being very far different from the mysteries and sacred rights of
sanctification) he reproves them for so saying, and endeavors to show, that
this kind of washing is a sacred and mystical right, tending to the
sanctification of them that are newly baptized, and that out of the words of
Christ to Peter; Unless I wash thee, thou shall have no part in me: and then
adds the words alleged by Bellarmine, I desire in all things to follow the
Roman Church, but notwithstanding we also are men, and have our sense and
judgment: and therefore what we find to be rightly observed any where else, we
also rightly observe and keep: we follow the Apostle Peter, we cleave fast
unto his devotion, and hereunto, what can the Church of Rome answer? Whereby
we may see with what conscience these men allege the testimonies of the
Fathers. Ambrose says, Other men have judgment to discern what is fit to be
done, as well as the Romans: that if any where else they find better
observations then in the Church of Rome, they may lawfully embrace them; that
S. Peter Bishop of Rome was author of his assertion; and that the Church of
Rome has nothing to answer in her own defense, or whereby to justify her
omitting of this sacred washing: and they produce his testimony to prove, that
he thought it necessary to be like in all things to the Church of Rome. Neither
does Bellarmines answer, that he thought it necessary to follow the Church of
Rome in all things necessary to salvation, though he dissented in this
observation, satisfy us; seeing he thought this observation necessary to the
perfect regeneration of the baptized, and consequently to salvation, as
appears in the place it self. Wherefore, when Ambrose says of himself, and
those of Millaine, that they follow in all things the type and form of the
Roman Church it is not to be understood without all limitatio^: but that as
other daughter-Churches do follow the custom of their mother-churches; so the
church of Millaine conformeth her self to the church of Rome in all things, so
far forth as she can persuade her self it is fit and right so to do:
otherwise, out of her judgment and discretion receiving from other churches
that which they have in better sort then she: euenas Gregory Bishop of Rome
Greg. Epist. l. 7. cp. 63.
professed, that he was not ashamed to learn of those churches that were
meaner then his own.

From Ambrose the Cardinal passes to Hierome, out of whose writings he
produces two testimonies. The first, out of his Epistle to Ageruchia, de
Monogamia; the other out of his Epistle to Damasus touching the use of the word
Hypostasis. The first of these two testimonies might well have been spared.
For what can any man infer from this that Hierome says, he did help
Damasus in writing answers to the Synodall consultations of the East and West?
was there ever any man that doubted of the consulting of the Bishop of Rome,
and his Bishops by the Synodes of the East and West, in matters concerning the
faith, and state of the universal Church? Or may it be concluded from hence,
that the Pope has an absolute supreme power in the Church? Surely, I think
not. Wherefore let us pass to the second testimony. Ego, says Hierome to
Damasus, nullum primum nisi Christum sequens, beatitudini tuae, idest,
Cathedrae Petri, communione consocior: super illampetram aedificatam Ecclesiam
scio, Quicunque extra hanc domum agnum commederit, profanus est: Si quis in
arca Noae non fuerit, peribit regnante diluuio; that is, I following no first
and chief but Christ, am joined in communion to your blessedness, that is, to
Peter's chair. Upon that rock I know the Church to be builded: whosoever
shall eat the Paschall Lamb out of this house, he is a profane person: If any
man shall be out of Noah's arc, he shall undoubtedly perish, when the flood
prevails and drowneth all. It is true, that Cyp. Ep. 67.
Cyprian has observed in his Epistle to Stephen Bishop of Rome, that therefore
almighty God appointed a great number and company of Bishops, joined together
by the glue and bond of unity, that if some fall into heresy, and seek to
wast the flock of Christ, the rest may gather the dispersed sheep into the
fold again; and therefore even as if one haven be dangerous, they that sail
will seek to another more safe; and if one Inn upon the way be possessed by
thieves and wicked persons, wayfaring men will turn into another; so in the
Church, when the Pastors of one part of it are infected with error and
heresy, men must fly to them that are right-beleeuers in other parts. This
was the case of Hierome, as it appears by this his Epistle: He lived at the
time of the writing of it in the East parts, where Arrianisme had strangely and
dangerously prevailed, but the West churches were sound. He was urged to
confess and acknowledge, that there are three Hypostases or subsistences in
the Godhead. This form of speaking he suspected, as fearing some ill meaning,
especially because he suspected them that tendered it to him; and therefore
flies for direction to Damasus and the Western Bishops. For it appears that
he sought the resolution of them all, though the manner was to write only to
the chief amongst them. Let us hear therefore what it is that he says, and
what the Jesuit infers from his saying. He admits, says Bellarmine, no
original teacher but Christ: yet is joined in communion with Damasus, that is,
with Peter's chair, and professes, that upon that rock the Church was
builded. Therefore he acknowledges the universality of Papal power and
jurisdiction. This argument of the Cardinal is too weak to prove the intended
conclusion. For though there be no question but that in a true sense the
Church may be said to have been builded on Peter's chair, that is, upon his
office and Ministry, yet it will not follow that they who succeed him in that
chair have universality of power and jurisdiction: seeing Hierome. li 1.
co^tra Iouinian.
Hierome himself teaches, that the Church is builded as well upon the rest of
the Apostles, as upon Peter, and consequently that their chaires are that
rock, upon which the Church is builded, as well as Peter's. And yet besides all
this, Greg. Ep. lib. 6. Epist. cp. 37.
Gregory shows, that Peter's chair being but one, is in three several
places, and three Bishops do sit in it. For Peter's chair is at Alexandria,
where he taught and ruled by Mark his scholar; at Antioch, where he remained
for a time; and at Rome, where in his body he yet still abides, expecting the
second coming of Christ. Upon this chair as on a rock the Church is builded.
But this chair and throne implies not only the office and ministry of them,
who most specially succeed Peter, as the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria, and
Antioch, but of such other also, as in joint commission with them govern the
Church. Whereupon, according to the phrase of Vide apud Binnium Epist. Nichola.
Ignatio Constantinopolitano. Tom. 3. council. p 2. page 879 and alteram Epist.
eiusdem, page 889. and orat. Basilij Imperatoris, p. 859.
Antiquity, the judgment of the Roman See, and the judgment of the Bishop of
Rome with his fellow Bishops of the West, is all one. But some man will say,
that Hierome pronounces him to be a profane person that eats the lamb out
of this house, speaking of the Church of Rome: therefore he thinks all men
and Churches bound for ever to hold communion with the Roman Church. For
answer to this objection, first we say, it may very probably be thought, that
by the house he speaks of, out of which the Lamb may not be eaten, he
means not particularly the Roman Church, but the true Catholic Church of
Christ, which is equally builded upon all the Apostles, in respect of the same
firmness found in them all; but more specially upon Peter, as in order and
honor the chiefest of them; and then there is no question but all men are
bound for ever to adhere to this church, and to eat the Lamb within the walls
of this house. That this is the meaning of Hierome, the very form of his words
do persuade us. I am joined (says he) to Peter's chair, upon that rock the
Church is builded, out of this house (of the Church, doubtless) the Lamb may
not be eaten. Now by the name of the Church immediately going before, is meant
the universal Church: therefore by this house we must understand that great
house, within the walls whereof the whole household of faith is contained.
Secondly we say, that if he speak of the Roman or West Church particularly,
he may be thought to mean, not that he shall perpetually and always be
judged a profane person that eats the Lamb without the walls of that house:
but things so standing as they did when he wrote, no other parts of the Church
being sound, safe, and free from heresies, but the Western parts only. Which
made him say, he knew not Paulinus, who was then Bishop of Antioch, within the
compass of whose Patriarchship he lived, because there was question as well of
his faith, as of the lawfulness of his ordination. For otherwise he ought to
have known him, sought to him, and respected him. Thirdly, we say it is more
then probable, that the whole West Church shall never lose or forsake the true
profession, and that therefore he may rightly be judged a profane person that
eats the paschall Lamb out of the communion of the same; though sometimes
the Bishop of Rome in person be an heretic, other of his colleagues
continuing faithful. And that Hierome was of opinion, that the Bishop of Rome
may become an heretic, it is most clear and evident, in that Hieronym. in
Catalog. Script. in Fortunatiano and Acacio.
he says, that both Liberius and Felix were Arrian Heretics.

Thus have we answered whatsoever may be alleged out of Hierome for the
Papacy, and showed the weakness of those allegations. Now let us see what
authorities may be brought out of his writings against the absolute supreme
power of Popes. First, he says, if we seek authority, Hierome ad Euagrium.
Orbis mayor est vrbe. The world is greater then the greatest city in the
world, and the whole Church is of greater authority then the particular Church
of Rome: And thereupon reprehendeth the negligence or error of the church of
Rome, in permitting contrary to the manner of other churches, Deacons to grow
so insolent, as to dare to sit in the presence of the Presbyters when the
Bishop was away; as also in ordaining Presbyters upon the commendation of
Deacons; So that he blamed not the Deacons only, as Bell. de Pont. li: 2. cap.
16.
Bellarmine untruly says, but the Roman Bishop, to whom the ordaining of
Presbyters pertained. Neither will it follow, that the insolency of the
Deacons presuming to sit in the presence of Presbyters, was unknown to the
Bishop, or not allowed by the Church, as Bellarmine collecteth, because they
are said so to have done, when the Bishop was away. For that circumstance
rather insinuates that though they had not cast off all respect to the Bishop,
yet they had forgotten their duty toward the Presbyters, then that this their
presuming was unknown to the Bishop. Secondly, he pronounces that Hierome vbi
iupra.
wheresoever a Bishop be, whether at Rome or Eugubium, at Constantinople or
Rhegium, at Alexandria or Tanais, he is of the same merit, and the same
Priesthood; the power of riches, and the humility of poor estate not making a
Bishop higher or lower. To this place Bellarmine answers, that all Bishops
are equal in the power of order, but not of jurisdiction. But it is certain,
Hierome thought all Bishops equal, not only in the power of order, but of
jurisdiction also. For Metropolitanes in his time, though in order and honor
greater then the rest, were bound to follow what the greater part of the
Bishops of the Province consented on, and might do nothing but as the greater
part should resolve, howsoever in process of time, by positive constitution,
the Metropolitanes limited and directed by Canons, were trusted with the doing
of many things by themselves alone, rather then the Bishops would be troubled
with often meeting in Councels. But says Bellarmine, it cannot be that
Hierome should think all Bishops equal in the power of jurisdiction, seeing
without all question the Bishop of Alexandria, having under him three great
Provinces, was greater in jurisdiction then the Bishop of Tanais, who had under
him only one poor little city. For answer hereunto we say, that Patriarchs
have no more power over the Metropolitanes subject to them, then the
Metropolitanes have over the Bishops of the Province; and that therefore
howsoever the extent of their power reach farther, yet proportionably it is no
greater then the power of the Metropolitanes within their narrower precincts
and compass, and that the Metropolitan originally is not greater in the power
of jurisdictio^, then any other Bishop of the Province, howsoever he have a
pre-eminence of honor, and sit as a President among the Bishops meeting to
perform the acts of jurisdiction, and by common consent to manage the affairs
of the Province: so that, notwithstanding any thing the Cardinal can say to
the contrary, the testimonies and authorities of Hierome stand good against the
Popes proud claim of universal power.

Wherefore leaving Hierome, who witnesses not for them, but against them, let
us hear whether Augustine will say any thing for them. Out of Augustine sundry
things are alleged: as first, that he says, Aug. ep. 562.
The principality and chiefetie of the Apostolical chair did ever flourish in
the Roman Church: and secondly, that to Bonifacius he says, Idem l. 1. ad
Bonif. c. 1.
Thou disdainest not to be a friend of the humble, and those of the mean sort;
and though thou sit in higher place, yet thou art not high minded: And again.
Ibid.
The watch tower is common to us all that are Bishops, although thou have a
higher room in the same. Surely it is strange to what purpose these places of
Augustine are alleged. For we never denied a principality or chieftie of
order and honor to have belonged anciently to the Bishops of Rome, whilst
they rested contented therewith, and sought not to bring all under them by
claim of universal power: and this is all that can be collected out of
Augustine. But (says Bellarmine) In his Ep. 157.
Epistle to Optatus, speaking of a meeting of Bishops at Caesarea, he says, an
Ecclesiastical necessity laid upon them by the reverend Pope Zozimus, Bishop
of the Apostolical See, drew them thither: therefore he thought the Bishop of
Rome superior unto other Bishops, not in order and honor only, but in power
of commanding also. For answer hereunto, first we say, that a great part of
Africa was within the precincts of the Pat^archship of Rome, and that therefore
the Bishop of Rome might call the Bishops of those parts to a Synodall meeting,
as every Patriarch may do the Bishops under him, though he had no commanding
power over all the world. Secondly, that in a matter of faith concerning the
whole state of the Church, Zozimus as in order and honor first amongst
Bishops, might urge them by virtue of the Canons appointing such meetings, to
meet together in a Synod for the suppressing of such heresies as he found to
arise amongst them, and might justly threaten, if they should refuse so to do,
to reject them from the communion of the Bishops and Churches adhering to him,
and thereby lay an Ecclesiastical necessity upon them, without any claim of
universal power. Neither does the next place (wherein Ep. 92. ad Innoc.
Augustine, and the Bishops assembled in the Council of Mileuis, desire
Innocentius to concur with them in suppressing the heresies of the Pelagians,
which sought to spread themselves into all parts of the world, and to use his
pastoral care and diligence for the preventing of the dangers of the weak
members of Christ) yield any better proof, that they reputed him universal
Bishop. For what do they here attribute to the Bishop of Rome, that. Cyr. l 3.
ep. ^3
Cyprian writing to Stephen in the case of Martianus Bishop of Arle, does not
assume to himself and other his colleagues, saying of himself and the^, that
they are bound to use all diligence to gather together, and call back the
erring sheep of Christ, to apply the medicine of fatherly piety for the curing
of the wounds and hurts of such as are fallen, to recollect and cherrish all the
sheep that Christ purchased with his precious blood; and to know that though
they be many Pastors yet they feed but one flock. But says Bellarmine, why
do they not rather write to the Patriarch of Jerusalem, to the Metropolitan
of Palaestina, or to the Primate of Africa, in which parts of the world
Pelagianisme specially seemed to prevail, then to the Bishop of Rome, if they
did not think him to have an universal power? Surely this question of the
Cardinal shows that either he knows not, or cares not what he writes:
for the cause of Pelagius had been often heard and examined by Synodes of
Bishops in Palaestina; and the Vt patet ex epist. August. supradict.
Primate of Africa with his Africane Bishops did write to Innocentius as well
as Augustine, and those assembled in the Council of Mileuis; as well to
inform him of the guilefull fraudulent, and slipperie dealings of Pelagius,
that he might no way be induced to favor him, (as some feared not to give out
that he did) as also that he might be persuaded to put to his helping hand for
the suppressing of this heretic, who though condemned by many Synodes, ceased
not to fly from place to place, seeking to spread his heresies, and therefore
there was no cause that they should write to either of these.

Thus have our Adversaries found nothing in Augustine and the Africanes, that
any way favors the Popes proud claim of universal power. Neither do the
rest of the witnesses who are next brought forth to give testimony for the
Pope, depose any more to the purpose then the former have done. For that
Prosper says, Prosper. lib. de ingratis.
Rome the Sea of Peter being made the head of Pastoral honor to the world,
holds by religion whatsoever it possesses, not by force of arms; and Idem
l. 2. de vocatione gentium. cap. 6.
that by reason of the principality of Priestly or Bishoply dignity, it became
greater in respect of the high tower of religion, then the throne of princely
power; that Victor Vticensis Lib. 2. de persec. Wandalica.
calls the Church of Rome the head of all Churches; and Hugo de Sancto
Victore says, De sacrament. lib. 2. part. 3. cap. 15.
the Apostolic See is preferred before all the Churches in the world; is no
more then that we ever granted. For they all speak of a chieftie and
principality of order and honor, and not of absolute commanding power. And the
place which our Adversaries bring out of Vincentius Lirinensis Vinc. Lirinens.
in suo commonit.
to prove the Pope to be head of the world, is strangely missealleaged. For
having spoken of the letters of Faelix the Martyr, and holy Julius Bishop of
Rome, he adds, that blessed Cyprian was produced out of the South, and holy
Ambrose out of the North, that so not only Caput orbis, the head of the world,
but the sides of it also might give testimony to that judgment, by the head and
sides of the world understanding the parts of the world, whence these witnesses
were produced, and not the witnesses themselves: So that there is no more
reason to infer from hence, that the Bishop of Rome is head of all the world,
then that Cyprian and Ambrose were the sides of the world. Neither do the
testimonies of Cassiodore Cassiod. l. 11. Epist. 2. ad Ioannem Papam.
who attributes to the Bishop of Rome a general care of the whole Christian
world, and Beda who says, Beda hist. gent. Anglor. l. 2. c. 1.
Leo excercised the Priestly office in the Christian world, make any more for
proof of the Popes universal jurisdiction then the rest that went before. For
their sayings argue not an absolute universal commanding power over all, but
such a care of the whole, as beseems him that is in order and honor the
chief of Bishops, from whom all actions generally concerning the Christian
Church, are either to take beginning, or at least to be referred before final
ending, that so his advice may be had therein. And surely howsoever Anselmus
Ans. de incar. verbi. cap. 1.
says, the custody of the faith of Christians, and the regiment of the Church
is committed to the Bishop of Rome; and Bernard Bern. lib. 2, de consideratione.
writes of him that he is chief of Bishops, heir of the Apostles, in
primacie Abel, in government Noah, in Patriarchicall honor Abraham, in order
Melchizedek, in dignity Aaron, in authority Moses, in judgment Samuel, in
power Peter, and in unction Christ: that others have particular flocks
assigned to them, but that his charge has no limits, with such like
Hyperbolical amplificatio^s of the Popes greatness, sauouring of the corruption
of those late times wherein he lived; yet will it never be proved, that either
he or diverse others speakinges he did, were of the Papal faction, or believed
that the Pope has that universal power and jurisdiction, that is by the
Jesuits. and other Romanists at this day given unto him. For as John Bacon
John. Bacon. sup. Sen. prolog quaest. 10. art. 2.
a learned Schooleman, and countriman of ours, has fitly noted, some
attributed all those things whereof Bernard, and Anselmus speak, to the Pope,
as thinking all fullness of Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction to be
originally found in him, and that by himself alone he might do all things in
the government of the Church, and all other were to receive of his fullness;
which is the opinion of our adversaries at this day: Other attributed these
things unto him, not as having all power in himself alone, but as head and
chief of Bishops, together with their joint concurrence and assent: So that
he had power to judge of the faith, to determine controversies in religion, as
Patriarch of the West, with the joint consent of his Western Bishops, and as
prime Bishop of the world with an Oecumenicall Synod, wherein he was to
sit as an honorable president and moderatour, pronouncing according to the
resolution of the Bishops, and not absolutely disposing things according to
his own liking. Neither is it to be doubted but that very many followed this
latter opinion, and consequently never gave that fullness of power to the Pope
that is now claimed, howsoever they attributed that unto him as president of
Ecclesiastical meetings, which rested not in him alone, but in the whole
meetings and Assemblies; as it is an ordinary thing to attribute that to the
president of any company that is done by the whole company: and as all the
great actions of State are attributed to the Duke of Venice, whereas yet he can
do nothing but as he is swayed and directed by the noble Senators of that
State.

CHAP. 37.
Of the pretended proofs of the Popes universal power, taken from his
intermedling in ancient times in confirming, deposing, or restoring Bishops
deposed.

Having examined the testimonies of Councels, Popes, and Fathers Greek and
Latin, brought to prove the universality of Ecclesiastical power claimed by
the Pope, and found their insufficiency and weakness; let us proceed to see,
by what other proofs our Adversaries endeavor to demonstrate and confirm the
same. The absolute, supreme power of Popes, they labor to prove, by the
authority they exercised over other Bishops; by their laws, dispensations, and
censures; by their Vicegerents which they appointed in places far remote from
them; by Appeals brought unto them; by their exemption from being subject to
any judgment; and by the names and titles that are given unto them. Of all
these I will entreat in order, and first of the authority the Bishops of Rome
are supposed to have exercised over other Bishops, in confirming, deposing, or
restoring them.

Of confirmation Bell. de Pont. li: 2. c. 18.
Bellarmine brings some few examples, but such as will never confirm the
thing he desires to prove. For touching the confirmation of Conc. Chalced.
Action 7.
Maximus in the Bishopric of Antioch, which is the first example that he
brings, first, it was not any confirmation of himself in his Bishoply
office, but only the determining of certain differences between him and
Iuvenall, about their limits, and the confirmation of the same end and
conclusion: Secondly, this end was not made by Leo alone, but by the whole
Council of Chalcedon. Neither is the second proof, that the confirmation of
the chief Bishops of the world pertained aunciently to the Pope, any better
then this. For these are the circumstances of that Leo Ep: 54. ad Marcianum.
Leo writes, whom Bellarmine cites in the second place, as challenging the
right of confirming the Bishop of Constantinople. Anatolius the Bishop of
Constatinople, ambitiously asp^red to be greater then was fit, as Leo thought:
Leo writes to the Emperor in reprehension of his presumption; and says, that
he might have forbornethus ambitiously to aspire higher, seeing he obtained
the Bishopric of Constantinople by the Emperors help, and his favorable
assent. The favor that Leo speaks of, was in that Anatolius not having
passed through the lower degrees of Ecclesiastical Ministry, was somewhat
irregularly preferred to be Bishop of so great a city, which he was content to
wink at, at the Emperors entreaty. And as the manner was, that the four
Patriarchs, should (upon notice given of their due ordination, and Synodall
letters containing a profession of their faith) mutually give assent one to
another before they were accounted Patriarchs, and fully possessed of their
places: by his allowance, in the same sort as others were to allow of him, as
much as in him lay he was content to confirm and make good his ordination,
though somewhat irregular and defective; which no way proves that the
confirming of the great Bishops of the world pertained any otherwise to the
Bishop of Rome, then the right of confirming him pertained unto them. Yet this
is in effect all they can say: For that Ep. 84. ad Anastas. Thessal.
Leo wills the Bishop of Thessalonica to take knowledge of the Metropolitanes
chosen in the Provinces subject to him, as Vicegerent to the Patriarch of Rome,
and by his assent to confirm their ordination; as likewise, that Ep. 87. ad
Episc. Afric.
writing to the Bishops of Africa, subject to him as Patriarch, he tells
them, he is content the Bishop of Salicen turned from Novatianisme, shall
keep his place, if he send unto him the confession of his faith, and that
Greg. l. 1. ep. 34.
Gregory complains, that the Bishop of Salona within his Patriarchship was
ordained without his privity and consent, does no more prove the Pope to be
universal Bishop, then the other Patriarchs, without whose assent none of the
Metropolitanes subject to them, might be ordained. And this was it that so much
grieved Gregory, namely, that his Bishops (thereby putting a difference
between such as were subject to him, in that he was Patriarch of the West, and
others) should so despise and contemn him. But let our Adversaries prove, that
either Gregory, or any of his predecessors ever challenged the confirmarion of
Metropolitanes, subject to any of the other Patriarchs, and we will confess
they say something: Otherwise all that they bring is idle, and to no purpose,
proving nothing that we ever doubted of. For we know the Bishop of Rome had
the right of confirming the Metropolitanes within the precincts of his own
Patriarchship, as likewise every other Patriarch had: and that therefore he
might send the Pall to sundry parts of Greece, France, and Spain, as
Bellarmine alleges, being all within the compass of his Patriarchship, and
yet not be universal Bishop, as Bellarmine would willingly from hence infer.

Wherefore seeing our adversaries have so little to say for the Popes right of
confirming Bishops, let us proceed to see what proofs they can produce of his
power and authority in deposing them. Their first allegation is touching Cyp.
l. 3. ep. 13.
Stephen Bishop of Rome, deposing as they suppose Martianus Bishop of Arle in
France, who had joined himself with Novatianus, denying reconciliation, and
the Churches peace to such as having fallen and denied the faith, afterward
repented and turned again unto God. This allegation is too weak to prove
their intended conclusion: For it is most certain by all circumstances of the
Epistle of Cyprian cited by Bellarmine, that Stephen the Bishop of Rome did not
depose Martianus by himself alone: and therefore Cyprian does not say to
Stephen, therefore has God appointed thee to be over all Bishops, that if
they fall into heresy, or fail in the performance of their duty, thou might
set all right again: but, therefore has God appointed a great number of
Bishops, that if any one of that company and society fall into here sie, and
begin to tear, rent, and waste the flock of Christ, the rest may help, and
as good and pitiful Pastors, gather the scattered sheep of Christ into the
fold again. Neither does he say to Stephen, that he should suspend Martianus,
but that he should write to the Bishops of France to do it, and not to suffer
him any longer to insult upon the company of Catholic Bishops, for that he
was not yet suspended, and rejected from their communion. But some man perhaps
will ask why Cyprian desires Stephen to write to the Bishops of France, and
writes not himself, as if the power of deposing Martianus were no more in
Stephen then in himself. Surely there may be three reasons given of his so
doing; the first, because he was nearer to them then Cyprian. The second,
because he as Patriarch of the West, with his Bishops, was more likely to
prevail then Cyprian with his Africanes alone. The third, for that (as Cyprian
himself observes in the end of this Epistle) it more concerned him then any
other to maintain the reputation of LUCIUS and CORNELIUS his predecessors,
and to oppose himself against Martianus, who joined himself with Nouatianus,
that had schismatically and heretically rent and divided himself from them,
and made a schism in their Church. Neither does that which follows (where he
desires Stephen to write unto him, who is appointed in the room of Martianus,
that so he may know whom to write unto, and with whom to communicate) import,
that he should by himself alone constitute the Bishop of Arle; but that
writing to the people to choose, and the Bishops of the province to direct
them in choosing, and to consecrate him they should choose, he should require
to be certified from them of their proceedings accordingly, that so he might
impart the same unto him.

The next proof that the Pope has authority to depose any Bishop of the
world, deserving to be deposed, is out of the Epistle of Nicholas the first to
Michael the Emperor of Constantinople. But whosoever shall peruse the place,
shall find, that noe such thing can be concluded out of it. For the drift of
Nicolas in that Epistle, is to show, that the inferiors may not judge their
superiors, as the provincial Bishops their Metropolitanes, or the
Metropolitanes their Patriarch; but that still the greater must judge the
lesser. If a Clerk, says the Council of Canone 9.
Chalcedon, have ought against his Bishop, let the matter be heard in the
Synod of the province: but if a Bishop or Clerk, have a complaint against the
Metropolitan, let him go to the Primate of the Diocese, or to the Sea of
Constantinople: So that ever the greater must judge the lesser, and the lesser
may never presume to judge the greater, so long as there is any greater to fly
unto. And therefore John of Antioch in the Council of Ephesus was reproved,
for that being but Bishop of the third See, he presumed to judge Cyril Bishop
of the second See: and Dioscorus Bishop of the second See was condemned in the
Council of Chalcedon, for that he judged Leo, Bishop of the first See. This he
insisteth upon, to show, that the Bishops subject to Ignatius, Patriarch of
Constantinople, had unjustly proceeded against him: and then to show, that this
their proceeding was strange and new, he says, there has scarce been any of
the Bishops of Constantinople deposed, whose deposition has bin holden just
and good, without the concurrence of the Sea of Rome. Now how will this prove
that the Pope has power in himself alone to depose all Bishops worthy to be
deposed? is it consequent, that if the Bishops of Patriarchicall Sees may not
be judged by their own Bishops alone, nor by those that are in degree of
honor inferior to them, and that the Patriarchs of higher Sees, with their
Bishops, must concur with the Bishops of those Patriarchs that are judged,
and that never any Bishop of Constantinople, being next in honor to the Bishop
of Rome, was deposed but by such a Synod, whereof the Bishop of Rome was
president, that the Bishop of Rome has in himself alone the fullness of all
Ecclesiastical power? Surely, I think not, our Adversaries themselves being
judges. But Gelasius in his Epistle to the Bishops of Dardania, says, the Sea
Apostolic by her authority condemned Dioscorus, Bishop of the Second See:
therefore the Pope has all Ecclesiastical power originally seated in himself
alone. Truly this consequence is no better then the former. For by the Sea
Apostolic Gelasius understands the Roman Bishop, and the Bishops of the
West subject to him, who Synodically condemned Dioscorus, and yet not without
the concurrence of many other Bishops: nor so as that the judgment was thought
perfect, till an Vide acta Concilij Chalced.
Oecumenicall Synod confirmed it, as it appears by the course of histories.

The next example is the deposition of Bell. ex Theodoret h^st. Eccl. lib. 5.
cap. 23.
Flauianus, Bishop of Antioch, by Damasus Bishop of Rome. But this example
might have been spared. For it is most certain that Damasus did not depose
Flauianus. The circumstances of the history are these: Eustathius that worthy
Bishop of Antioch, who (...). (...). l^. (...). (...). 7.
made that excellent Oration in the praise of Constantine in the Council of
Nice, and was so earnest and zealous a defender of the true faith against the
Arrians, being by certain Arrians (...). cap 2^. 21.
cast out of his Bishoprique, and banished, upon the occasion of a lewd woman;
charging him to have committed adultery with her, but afterward confessing she
had wronged him, and that she had been suborned by those Arians, so to accuse
him, Eulalius was chosen into his place, whom Euphronius succeeded, and after
him, Placitus obtained the Bishoprique. All these did secretly favor
Arrianisme, and therefore many, both of the people and Priests, forsaking the
public assemblies, had their private meetings, and were called Eustathians;
for that, after the banishment of Eustathius, they began thus to assembe
together. Idem. l. 2. c. 24
Stephen succeeded Placitus, Leontius Stephen, and Ibid. cap. 25.
Eudoxius Leontius; who Cap. 31.
obtaining to be Bishop of Constantinople, left the Church of Antioche void:
Whereupon the Bishops of the province assembled together, and chose Milesius to
be Bishop, some of them hoping that he would favor Arrianisme, and other
knowing that he was an Orthodoxe; the error of the one side mis-perswaded of
the man, and the true knowledge the other had of him, made both willingly to
consent to his election and ordination. But so soon as the Arrians perceived
what he was, they deposed him and sent him into banishment, placing Euzoius in
his place: which when the people and Priests that were Catholic perceived,
who had long endured the insolences of the Arrians, they divided themselves,
and refused to communicate with him. After a while Lib. 3. c. 4.
Milesius, in the time of Julian, returns from banishment; to whom though
such Catholics as divided themselves upon dislike of Euzoius, presently
cleaued; yet would not they that first divided themselves in respect of
Eustathius, neither at the first ordination of Milesius, though Eustathius were
then dead, nor now upon his return by any means be induced to hold communion
with him and his; which Lucifer, one of them that had been in banishment with
Athanasius seeing, and pitying, labored with them what he could to bring them
to unity. But when he saw they would not be induced to join with Milesius and
that Paulinus was their leader, he made him their Bishop: which act of his,
made the Schism more dangerous then before, and of longer continuance, then
otherwise happily it would have been: for it Ibid. cap 5^
continued 85. years. Lib. 5, c. 3.
Milesius perceiving Paulinus to be ordained Bishop over them that were divided
from his communion, seemed noe whit therewith to be offended or displeased, but
spoke peaceably to Paulinus, desiring him that they might join their flocks,
and feed them together: and if, said he, the throne divide us, let me lay
the Gospel in it, and then do thou sit in it sometimes, and I will sit in it
at other times: and if I dye before thee, thou shall have the care and charge
of all: if thou dye before me, the care and charge of all shall be deuolued to
me. This counsel, Paulinus would not harken unto, and therefore the Emperors
officer adjudged the Churches to Milesius, and the guiding of the divided
sheep to Paulinus. Whereupon, when Milesius dyed, Ibid. cap. 23.
though Paulinus would have had the place, yet he was refused, because he had
refused to harken to the Counsel of Milesius: and the Bishops chose
Flauianus, a man very conspicuous for his great labors, and one that had
exposed himself to many dangers for the good of the Church. Yet this
ordination greatly displeased the Egyptians and Romans. Sozomen li. 7. c. 2.
and 11. Socrates li. 5. c. 15.
The reason of which their so great dislike, was for that when there was much
contention between Milesius and Paulinus, it was so agreed, that all they that
were fit for that Bishopric, or might in likelihood be in any hope or
expectation of it, should swear neither to seek it nor accept it, while
either of these lived: nor noe way to hinder, but that after the death of the
one, the other might have the full and entire government of the whole: of
which number it was thought that Flauianus was one, and that therefore not
without perjury, contrary to his vow and oath, he had hindered the reuniting of
the divided parts of the Church.

This dislike conceived against Flauianus, dyed not when Paulinus dyed: but
though Euagrius most unlawfully, and against the Canons had gotten the
Bishoprique, having x Theodoret. li. 5. c. 23.
noe ordination but from his predecessor, (whereas the Canons allow no such
nomination of a Successor, and besides require the presence of the Bishops
of the province) yet would they that at first disliked the ordination of
Flauianus take noe knowledge of any of these things, but communicated with
Euagrius, and incited the Emperor against Flavianus; who being urged
continually by the Bishop of Rome, and others, no longer to suffer Flavianus to
enjoy his place: and told, that suppressing Tyrants, he did ill to suffer the
violatours of the Laws of the Church to escape unpunished; sent for Flavianus,
thinking to send him to Rome, there to be judged in a Synod of Bishops: who
when he came into the presence of the Emperor, told him confidently, that if
any man would object against his doctrine or life, he would desire to be tried
by no other Judges but his greatest enemies; but if the matter were for his
Episcopal chair, he would willingly relinquish it, that the Emperor might
commit it to whom he would; upon which his confident answer, the Emperor
dismissed him, and bade him to go home, and feed the flock committed to him.
Yet long after, many complaints were again renewed against him to the Emperor
by sundry Bishops being at Rome, fearing to tax the Emperor himself for that
he suppressed not the tyranny of Flavianus: but the Emperor bade them say,
what that tyranny was, as if he were Flavianus, for that he had undertaken the
defense of him. Which when they refused to do, professing themselves unwilling
to stand upon terms with the Emperor, he exhorted them to lay aside their
foolish quarrellings, and to reunite the Churches that had long without cause
been divided: for that Paulinus was now dead, and Euagrius came unjustly to
the Bishopric; and the ordination of Flavianus was so far forth allowed of,
that all the Churches of the East, with the Churches of Asia, Pontus, Thracia,
and Illyricum, held Flauianus to be lawful Bishop of the East. Hereupon the
Bishops promised to surcease, and that if Flavianus would send Legates unto
them, they would kindly entreat them, and hold communion with him. Howsoever
it appears by Socr. l. 5. c. 15.
Socrates, that after the death of Euagrius, he procured there should be no
Bishop chosen in opposition to him: and first pacified Theophilus, and
afterward by his means Damasus: Zozo. l. 8. c. 3.
Sozomen reports, that Chrysostom after he was made Bishop of
Constantinople, finding that the Egyptian and western Bishops dissented from
those of the East, in respect of Flavianus, and that all the Churches
throughout the whole Empire were divided about him, besought Theophilus to be
pacified toward him, and to assist him for the reconciling of Damasus also. To
this suite of Chrysostom, Theophilus yielded, and sent certain to Rome; who
prevailing, sailed into Egypt, and from thence, as also from Rome, brought
letters of reconciliation and peace, both from the Egyptian and Western
Bishops. This History, I think, will never prove, that the Bishop of Rome
deposed Flavianus, Bishop of Antioche, and that he could not hold his
Bishopric till the Bishop of Rome consented to him. For the thing that was
sought, was not his holding of his Bishopric, as Bellarmine untruly
reports, but the peace and concord of the Churches, divided about him.
Neither was the difference only between him and Damasus, but all the Bishops
of Egypt, and the West dissented from him likewise: and therefore Amb. cp. 78.
Ambrose shows, that the examining of the matter between Euagrius and him,
was committed to Theophilus, and the Bishops of Egypt, and desires him to
make relation of the end he should make, to the Bishop of Rome, that he also
agreeing thereunto, an universal peace might be concluded. So that nothing can
be concluded out of this history, for proof of the universal power of Popes:
Seeing Damasus could neither of himself alone, nor with the concurrence of the
Western Bishops depose Flavianus, nor by any means persuade the Emperor to
thrust him out of his place, but was sharply reproved by the Emperor for
quarrelling with him, and required to be at peace with him, that so the
Churches formerly divided without cause, might be reunited.

The next instance of the Popes deposing Bishops, is that of Acta Sixti 3. in 1
tom. conc.
Sixtus the third, who deposed Polychronius, Bishop of Jerusalem, if we may
believe Bellarmine: but in truth there was never any such thing. The
circumstances of the whole proceeding against Polychronius, Bishop of
Jerusalem, (if there be any credit in the report of Pope Nicholas, and the
acts of the Council under Sixtus the third) were these. Two c Nichol. 1. in
ep. ad Michael. Imp.
things specially were objected to him: the one, that he went about to violate
the ancient bounds of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Bishops, set and
limited by the Fathers, to prefer himself before the other principal
Bishops, and to make his See the first, whereas in truth it was the last
amongst the Patriarchicall Sees; the other that Simoniacally he conferred
Ecclesiastical honors upon such as would purchase the same. Hereupon the
Bishops subject to him, not willing to proceed against him themselves alone,
complained to the Bishop of Rome, and showed him how much he was wronged by the
undue claims of this Bishop. The Bishop of Rome took not upon him to do any
thing of himself, but called a Synod of the Bishops of the West, and by their
advice, with the concurrence of the Emperor, directed certain out of the
West, authorized by the whole Synod, to go, and sit in Council with the
Bishops of those parts: who together with them examining the crimes objected
to Polychronius, and finding that he was truly charged with them, deposed him
from his Bishopric; so that the Bishop of Rome did not depose him of
himself, but only called a Synod, (as in such a case it was fit he
should) and the Synod deposed him; but in truth it is rather to be thought,
that the acts of the Council under Sixtus the third, are counterfeit, and of
no credit. For Binnius annot. in illud Council.
Binnius shows, that there was no such Polychronius Bishop of Jerusalem in
those times, and brings many other reasons to disprove the acts of this
supposed Council, besides that the absurdity in the proceedings bewrays them
to be counterfeit. For what can be more absurd, then that the accuser of
Polychronius, making good his accusation, should be condemned for accusing
him, and he first condemned; and then presently upon slender or no reasons at
all, restored again?

Thus we see how little our Adversaries are able to say for proof of the Popes
universal power, exercised in deposing Bishops. Wherefore let us now
proceed to see if they can produce any better proofs of his restoring such as
were deposed by others. The first example they bring, is the restitution of
Cyprian. lib. 1. Epist. 4.
Basilides, a Bishop in Spain, but they know right well that the Bishop of
Rome did not restore him to his Bishopric, and that therefore this allegation
serves to no purpose, but to abuse the Reader, and to make him believe they
say something, when they say nothing. The circumstances of the matter
concerning Basilides, are these, laid down in Cyprians Epistles. Basilides and
Martialis, had defiled themselves with some kind of consenting to Idolatry, and
therefore the Clergy and people subject to them, fearful to communicate with
them, write to Cyprian, and the African Bishops, for counsel and help: they
return answer, that they are to withdraw themselves from them, and to proceed
to the election of new Bishops. Hereupon the Bishops of the province coming to
the place where Basilides was Bishop, Sabinus was elected Bishop by the Clergy,
and people, with the liking of all the Bishops of the province, and ordained by
them Bishop in the place of Basilides. After this Basilides goes to Rome,
mis-informeth Stephen the Bishop, and seeks by his means, and the help of
his Bishops, to recover his place again: they communicate with him; and so as
much as in them lies, restore him to his former place and dignity again.
Cyprian condemns the false and ill dealing of Basilides, and reproves also
the negligence of Stephen, that suffered himself so easily to be misled,
taxing him, and such as consented with him, for communicating with such wicked
ones; and showing, that they are partakers of their sins, and that they violate
the Canon of the Church, which the Bishops of Africa, and all the Bishops of
the world, yea even Cornelius the predecessor of this Stephen, had consented
on: to wit, that men so defiled with idolatry as Martialis and Basilides were,
should be received to penitency, but be kept from all Ecclesiastical honor.
Hereupon he exhorts the brethren not to be moved, if in these last times the
faith of some men be shaken, or the fear of God fail in them, or if they hold
not peaceable concord with their brethren: for that both the Apostle, and the
Lord himself foretold, that such things should come to pass in the last
times, the world decaying, and Antichrists revelation drawing on; and
comforts and encourages the^ to hold on in the good course they were in, for
that the vigor of the Gospel, and the strength of Christian virtue, and faith,
do not so wholly fall away in these last times, vt non super sit portio
Sacerdotu^, quae minime ad has rerum ruinas and fidei naufragia succu^bat: that
is, that no remnant of Bishops should remain which should no way sink or fall
in these overthrows of things, and shipwrackes of faith, but full of the fear
of God, courageously maintain the honor of the divine majesty and the dignity
of the Priests. We know, says he, that when the rest yielded, Mattathias
valiantly maintained the law of God: and that Elias stood and strove zealously,
when others forsook the law of his God. Wherefore let them that either violate
the Canons, or treacherously behave themselves, look to it: there are many,
who still retain a sincere and good mind. What if some have fallen away from
the faith? does their infidelity make the truth of God of none effect? God
forbid. For God is true, and every man a liar; and if every man be a liar, and
God only true, what should the servants and Priests of God do, but leave the
errors and lies of men, and keep the precepts of the Lord, and remain in the
truth of God? Wherefore, though some of our Brethren, and Colleagues think,
they may neglect the discipline of God, and rashly communicate with Basilides
and Martialis; let it not trouble nor shake our faith, seeing the spirit of God
threatens in the Psalms, saying, Thou have hated discipline, and cast my
words behind thy back. If thou saw a thief, thou rannest with him, and
had thy portion with the adulterers. These are the circumstances of Cyprians
Epistle, wherein he relates the proceedings against Basilides and Martialis,
and the inconsiderate course held by the Bishop of Rome, hastily communicating
with them: whereby we may see how wisely and advisedly our Adversaries allege
Cyprian to prove, that in ancient times, the Bishops of Rome had power to
restore such Bishops to their places again, as were deposed by other. For thus
they must reason from this place of Cyprian if they will make any use of it:
Basilides and Martialis justly put from their office and dignity, and others
rightly and in due sort chosen into their places, fly to Stephen, Bishop of
Rome, hoping by his means to procure the reuersing of that which was done
against them. He, with such as adhered to him, though they could not restore
them to their places, yet communicated with them. Cyprian offended herewith,
charge Basilides and Martialis with execrable wickedness, for abusing
Stephen, and misse-informing him: and Stephen with intolerable negligence and
inexcusable violatio^ of the Canons, for partaking with such wicked persons;
and wishes all his Brethren and colleagues constantly to hold on their course
against them, notwithstanding the failing of Stephen and his adherents.
Therefore the ancient Bishops of Rome restored to their places such as were
judicially deposed by others: and were thought by the Fathers to have power and
authority so to do. Which kind of reasoning I think the Reader will not much
like of.

Touching Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, Paul Bishop of Constantinople, and
Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra, deposed by the Oriental Synod, their complaints
to the Bishop of Rome, and other Bishops of the West, of the wrongs done unto
them; how the Bishop of Rome with the Western Bishops fought to relieve them,
with how ill success, and how little this instance serves to prove the thing
in question, I have showed Supra, cap. 35.
before: as likewise Theodorets desiring Leo, with his Western Synodes to take
knowledge of his cause. So that it is a vain brag of Bellarmine, that to
these, and the like testimonies of Antiquity, nothing is, nor can be answered.

CHAP. 38.
Of the weakness of such proofs of the supreme power of Popes, as are taken
from their Laws, Censures, Dispensations, and the Vicegerents they had in
places far remote from them.

HAVING examined the pretended proofs of the illimited universality of the
Popes authority and jurisdiction, taken from the power they are supposed to
have exercised in former times over other Bishops, by confirming, deposing, or
restoring them; let us come to their Laws, Dispensations, and Censures, and
see if from thence any thing may be concluded. If they could as strongly prove,
as they co^fide^tly endertake, that Popes in ancient times made Laws to bind
the whole Christian Church, dispensed with such as were made by general
Councils, and ce^sured al men as subject to them; of necessity we must be
forced to acknowledge the fullness of all power to rest in the Roman Bishops.
But their proofs are too weak to make us believe any such thing. For first,
touching the decrees of Popes, they did not bind the whole Christian Church,
but the Western Provinces only that were subject to them, as Patriarchs of
the West. And secondly, they were not made by them without the consent and
joint concurrence of the other Bishops of the West, assembled in Synodes, and
sitting with them as their fellow Judges, with equal power of defining and
determining things concerning the state of the Church; as appears by the
Decrees of Greg. l. 4. ep. c. 88.
Gregory the first, who sitting in Council with all the Bishops of the Roman
Church, (the Deacons and inferior Clergymen standing before them) made
Decrees, and confirmed them by their subscriptions, the rest of the Bishops and
the Presbyters also, who sat in Council with them subscribing in the very
same sort that Gregory did. And of Decrees in such sort made, Leo speaks,
when he Leo ep. 1.
requires the Bishops of Campania, Picene, and Thuscia, to keep and observe
the Decretall constitutions of Innocentius, and all other his predecessors,
which they had ordained as well touching Ecclesiastical orders, as the
Discipline of the Canons, or otherwise to look for no favor or pardon. And in
the very same sort are the words of Citat. a Bell. de Pont. Romans l. 2. c. 19.
Hilarious to be understood, when he says: That no man may violate either the
divine constitutions, or the Decrees of the Apostolic See, without danger of
losing his place. For this he spoke sitting as President in a Council of
Bishops assembled at Rome, of things decreed by Synodes of Bishops, wherein his
predecessors were Presidents and Moderatours, as he was now, but not absolute
commanders. But Bellarmine says, that d Ibid.
Pope Anastasius the younger, in his Epistle to Anastasius the Emperor, wills
him not to resist the Apostolical precepts, but obediently to perform what by
the Church of Rome and Apostolical authority shall be prescribed unto him, if
he desire to hold communion with the same holy Church of GOD, which is his
Head. Therefore the Pope had power to command and give laws to the Emperor,
and consequently had an absolute supreme authority in the Church. Surely this
allegation of the Cardinal is like the rest. For Anastasius does not speak in
any such peremptory and threatening manner to the Emperor, but acknowledging
his breast to be a Sanctuary of happiness, and that he is Gods Vicar on
earth, tells him in modest and humble sort, that he hops he will not
suffer the insolency of those of Constantinople, proudly to resist against the
Evangelicall and Apostolical precepts in the cause of Acatius, but that he
will force them to perform and do what is fit, and in like humble sort
beseeches him, when he shall understand the cause of them of Alexandria, to
force them to return to the unity of the Church. The last instance of the
Popes Law-giuing power, brought by Bellarmine, is the privilege granted to the
Monastery of Saint Medardus, by Ad finem ep. Greg.
Gregory the first; in the end whereof we find these words: Whatsoever Kings,
Bishops, Judges, or secular persons, shall violate the Decrees of this
Apostolical authority, and our commandment, shall be deprived of their
honor, driven from the society of Christians, put from the communion of the
Lords body and blood, and subjected to Anathema, and all the woeful curses that
Infidels and Heretics have been subject to from the beginning of the world,
to this present time. A strong confirmation of the privileges granted is
found in these words, but a weak confirmation of the thing in question: for
the privileges were granted and confirmed in this sort, not by Gregory alone
out of the fullness of his power, but by the consenting voice of all the
Bishops of Italy and France, by the authority of the Senate of Rome, by
Theodoricus the King, and Brunichildis the Queen. So that from hence no proof
possibly can be drawn of the Popes absolute power of making laws by himself
alone, to bind any part of the Christian Church, much less the whole
Christian world.

Wherefore let us pass from the Popes power of making laws, to see by what
right they claim authority to dispense with the Laws of the Church, and the
Canons of General Councels. The first that is alleged to have dispensed with
the Canons of Councels, is Gelas. ep. 1
Gelasius. But this allegation is idle, and to no purpose. For first, it cannot
be proved, that by dispensing he sought to free any, from the necessity of
doing that the strictness of the Canon required, but those only that were
subject to him as Patriarch of the West. And secondly, he did not dispense but
upon very urgent cause, and driven by necessity so to do; and yet not of
himself alone, but with the concurrence of other Bishops of the West,
assembled in Synod. The other instances that are brought of the dispensations
of Greg. li. 12. Epist. 31.
Gregory the first, are nothing else but the instances of the ill consciences
of them that bring them. For Gregory did not dispense with the English, to
marry within the degrees prohibited (as the Cardinal untruly reports) but
only advised Austine, not to put them that were newly converted, from such
wives as they had married within some of the degrees prohibited, in the time of
their infidelity, lest he might seem to punish them for faults committed in
the days of their ignorance, and to discourage other from becoming
Christians. Neither did he dispense with them of Sicilia, for the not keeping
of the canon of the Nicene council, requiring provincial Synodes to be holden
twice every year; but whereas they held not such Councels so much as once in
the year, he commanded that they should not fail to meet in Council once
at the least every year; seeing the Canons require that these meetings should
be twice. These truly are very weak and insufficient proofs of the Papal
power in dispensing with the laws of the Church, and the canons of general
Councels: and yet these are the best, nay these are all that they can make
show to bring out of all Antiquity.

Let us therefore proceed to the censures that the ancient Bishops of Rome are
reported to have exercised, and see if they prove the universality of power now
claimed. The first allegation to this purpose, is the intent of Eusebius. histor.
Eccl. l. 5. c. 23.
Victor, Bishop of Rome, resolving to have rejected from his communion all the
Churches of Asia, for keeping the feast of Easter on the same day the Jews
did. For, says Bell. de Pont. li: 2. cap. 19.
Bellarmine, howsoever Irenaeus and others dissuaded him from executing that
he intended, yet it appears his observation was right, in that it was
afterward confirmed by the Nicene Council, and that he had authority over
all, in that he went about to excommunicate those of Asia for dissenting from
him in the observation of that Feast, and keeping it with the Jews, though he
were content, for the avoiding of some inconueniencies, at the entreaty of
Irenaeus to forbear proceeding against them. For answer hereunto we must
observe, that by reason of the custom of those of Asia, that kept the feast of
Easter precisely at the same time the Jews did, there was moved not a little
contention throughout the whole world, and many Synodes in every place called.
For Eusebius. hist. Ecclesiast. l. 5. c. 21. 22. 23.
in Palestina a Synod was holden, whereof Theophilus of Caesarea, and
Narcissus of Jerusalem, were Presidents; another at Rome, whereof Victor was
President; and another, of the Bishops of Pontus, whereof Palmas as most
ancient, was President: and in sundry other places, other Synodes were called.
But the Synod of the Bishops in Asia, whereof Polycrates was President,
stiffely maintained the ancient custom that had long prevailed in those
parts, and wrote an Epistle to Victor, and those of the Roman Church, to
justify themselves in this behalf. Victor and his Bishops much offended with
this their pertinacy (as they construed it) would for this cause, have rejected
them from their communion. But Irenaeus, with some other of a milder spirit,
and better temper, stayed them from such rash and violent proceedings; and
Irenaeus wrote his letters to this purpose to the Bishop of Rome, and other his
colleagues: so that here is nothing to prove the power of the Pope. For what
was resolved on, both touching the right of the observation, and the
proceedings against them that disliked it, was resolved by the Synodes of
Bishops, and not by Victor alone: as likewise Irenaeus was not alone, but many
other joined with him in the reprehension of Victor, whose number and multitude
prevayled much with him, and stayed his proceedings as well as the persuasions
of Irenaeus. And yet did not the Western Bishops take upon them to
excommunicate those of Asia, as the Cardinal untruly affirms, but only to
reject them from their communion and fellowshippe; there being a very great
difference between excommunication properly so named, and the rejecting of men
from our communion or fellowship. For excommunication properly so named, is a
resolution to deny the Sacraments to such as are to receive them of us, the
abandoning of all fellowship with them, and the requiring and commanding of
others to refrain from all communicating with them in private or public; and
argues him that so excommunicateth, to be superior in authority, and greater
in place then they are whom he excommunicateth. But rejecting from communion,
or refusing to communicate with men, may be found among them that are equal.
So Act. Council. Ephesians. tom. 1. cap. 14.
Cyril wrote to Nestorius, that if he revoked not certain dangerous
positions, he would communicate no longer with him. So the Sozom. lib. 3. cap.
7.
Bishops of the East told Julius Bishop of Rome, that if he communicated with
Athanasius, they would no longer communicate with him. And such was the
proceeding that Victor intended against those of Asia; and therefore proves
not that he was their superior, or had a commanding authority over them. And
yet surely, howsoever it be true, that his manner of observation was better
then theirs, whom he disliked, his intention upon such an occasion to have made
a breach in the Christian Churches, was justly with some bitterness
reprehended by Irenaeus, and his brethren. For howsoever Bellarmine would n
Tert. de praescript in fine.
make the Reader believe by alleging that of Blastus, who urged the keeping of
Easter with the Jews, and sought to bring in Iudaisme, that Victor had reason
to be violent as he was, as perceiving some ill meaning in them that held
the Jewish observation; yet far be it from us to think that Polycarpus, and
so many worthy and holy men, as aunciently kept that observation, were any way
inclinable to Iudaisme. But this difference may be thought to have grown not
from any diversity of Judgment touching matters of faith, but for that in some
places they thought it fit to keep this feast on the Lords day, for very
important reasons moving them so to do; and in other places, though they could
have been content to have done so likewise upon the same reasons, yet kept
they it after the old manner, for the avoiding of the scandal of the Jews,
for the easier winning of them that were not yet gained to Christianity, and
the holding of them in the love and liking of Christian profession, that were
already of Jews become Christians. The next instance is of Nicephorus. li: 13.
cap. 34.
Innocentius the first, who after that he heard of the death of Chrysostom,
whom Theophilus had deposed, and the Emperor Arcadius banished, excommunicated
the Emperor and Empress, and anathematized Theophilus in such sort that he
should utterly be excluded, and have no place among Christians. But this report
may very justly be doubted of, the credit thereof resting only on the
authority of Nicephorus. Seeing the ancient Vide supra cap. 35.
Historians, that report the proceedings of Theophilus and Arcadius against
Chrysostom, and his complaints to the Bishop of Rome, and other Bishops of the
West, of the wrongs that had been done unto him, report also the answer of
the Roman Bishop to have been, that he greatly pitied his case, but saw no
hope of remedy, nor means to relieve him, unless a general Council might be
called, to which purpose he would do his best with the Emperor; and that
Chrysostom himself wished him not to proceed so far, as to reject them
from his communion that were his adversaries, for fear of further
inconveniences; this being the contention almost of the whole world, and the
Churches by occasion hereof every where brought upon their knees. Yea all
ancient Historians are silent, and say nothing of this excommunication, but
report the Sozom. lib. 8. cap 18.
repulse, which the messengers, the Roman Bishop sent to the Emperor to
procure a Council, received; and Theodoret. spe^king of the injury done to
Chrysostom, has these words. Alias virtutes authorum illius revere^i cogor:
qua de causa annitar, vt ipsorum nomina occultem. lib. 5. hist. Eccl. cap. 34.
Theophilus (for ought I know) was ever holden a catholic Bishop, both by
Hierome and others to his dying day; notwithstanding these quarrels between
him and Chrysostom. The excommunication of Leo the Emperor, by Gregory the
third, whereof Zonaras writes in the life of Leo Isaurus (which is a third
instance of Papal censures, against the great men of the world) proves not
the matter in question: For Gregory did not anathematize Leo of himself alone,
but with a Synod of Bishops; neither was he able by his own authority to stay
the Tribute that was wont to be paid to the Emperor, but by his solicitation
r Hierome wrote sundry Epistles to Theophilus, full of all due respects, and
turned his three Paschall books into Latin. Vide Epistolas Hieron. tom. 2.
procured a confederacy of the French and Germans against the Emperors of
Constantinople, and by their means stayed the Tribute that was wont to be
paid; whereupon the Germans and French possessed Rome, and became Lords of it.
The last example is that of Rhegino lib. 2. Otho. Frisingens. l. 6. c. 3.
Sigebert. in Chronico. an. 862.
Nicholas the first, excommunicating Lotharius King of France, and his
concubine Valdrada, together with the Archbishops of Coleyn and Treuers, But
the answer hereunto is easy. For first, this example proves not the thing in
q^estion, to wit, that the Pope has an universal power over all the world,
seeing all these were within the Patriarchship of the Bishop of Rome. And
secondly we say, these circumstances of this proceeding are untruly reported
by Bellarmine. For this is the true report which we find in Rhegino and
others. Lotharius King of Lorrayne, falling in love with Valdrada, which had
been his concubine while he was yet a young man in his fathers house, began
to dislike Thietberga his wife. Hereupon he labors with the Bishops of
Treuers and Coleyn, to find some means to put her away. They call a Synod,
wherein Thietberga is charged to have committed incest with her own brother,
and thereupon pronounced an unfit wife for the King. The King thus freed from
his wife, professes he cannot live single; they pronounce it lawful for him
to marry another wife, and he takes Valdrada to wife, whom he had formerly
kept as his concubine. Nicholas the first, Bishop of Rome, hearing of this,
sends into France to learn the certainty. The Legates he sends, come to
the King to expostulate the matter with him. The King answers, that he did
nothing but what the Bishops of his kingdom in a general Council had
assured him was lawful to be done. Whereupon the Bishops of Coleyn and
Treuers were sent for to Rome, and the Pope called a Council, in which the
opinions and proceedings of these Bishops were condemned, and they degraded by
all the Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons that were assembled in Council. In all
which narration there is no circumstance found, that any way proves the Pope
to have the fullness of all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; but the contrary
rather may from hence be concluded, because nothing is done against these two
Bishops, but by a Synod of Bishops assembled by their own Patriarch. But,
says Bellarmine, Pope Nicholas excommunicated the King, and Valdrada his
supposed wife; therefore he is universal Bishop. The former part of this
saying is most untrue; for the Pope did not excommunicate the King, but
Valdrada only. And I think the excommunicating of one silly harlot, that had
so grievously scandalized the Church of God, and whose cause was judged before
in a Synod, being brought thither, and there examined, by reason of the unjust
proceedings of the Bishops of Coleyn and Treuers, against a lawful Queen, in
favor of her, will never by any good consequence prove the Pope to be
universal Bishop; and yet these are all the proofs the Cardinal can bring
from the censures the ancient Bishops of Rome are reported to have used: and
therefore he De Pontif. l. 2. cap. 20.
proceeds to show and demonstrate the Amplitude of the Popes illimited power
and jurisdiction by the Vicegerents he appointed in all parts of the
Christian world, that were far remote from him, to do things in his name,
and by his authority.

But for answer hereunto, we say, that neither this Cardinal, nor any other
can prove, that the Bishops of Rome had any such Vicars, Vicegerents, or
Substitutes, but only within the compass of their own Patriarchships: and
that therefore from the having of them, nothing can be inferred for
confirmation of their illimited power and authority. So Leo (as we read in his
Leo. Ep. 84.
Epistles) constituted Anastasius* Bishop of Thessalonica, his Vicegerent for
the parts thereabouts, as other his predecessors had done former Bishops of
that Church. Which causing great resort thither upon diverse occasions, may be
thought to have been the reason why the Council of Canon^ 20.
Sardica provides, that the Clergymen of other churches shall not make too
long a Greg. l. 4. cp. 52.
stay at Thessalonica. So the same Epist. 87.
Leo made Potentius the Bishop his Vicegerent in the parts of Africa; Hormisd.
in cp. ad Salust.
Hormisda, Salustius Bishop of Hispalis, in Boetica and Lusitania; and Gregory,
Virgilius Bishop of Arle, in the regions of France: all these places being
within the compass of the Patriarchship of Rome, as Cusan. lib. 2. concord.
cathol. cap. 7. ex Did. 12. cap: Qui* nesciat. and did. 43. cap. Iuxta.
Cusanus shows. And the same may be said of the Bishop of Iustiniana the
first, who was appointed the Bishop of Romes Vicegerent in those parts, upon
signification of the Justinian. Authent. Collat. 9. T^t. 6. sieve Nouella Constable.
131.
Emperors will and desire that it should be so. Neither does the Cardinal
prove any other thing, whatsoever he makes show of. For though Cyril, Bishop
of Alexandria, were the Vicegerent of Caelestinus, in the cause of Nestorius
Bishop of Constantinople, yet was he not his Vicegerent in such sort as they
were that were within his own Patriarchship, as if he had had none authority
of his own, but that only which Caelestinus gave unto him. But Caelest. ep.
ad Cyril. Act. Council. Ephesians. tom. 1. cap. 16. Cyril. epist. ad Nestorium Ibid.
cap. 14.
Caelestinus having been informed by Cyril of the impieties of Nestorius, and
having in his Synodes of the West condemned the same, joined his authority with
the authority of Cyril, that so he might proceed against him, not only as of
himself, and out of the judgments of his own Bishops, but also out of the
consenting resolutions of them of the West. And therefore Euagr. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Euagrius shows, that at or before the time appointed by the Emperor,
Nestorius and Cyril came to Ephesus, where a Council was to be holden: and
that John of Antioch with his Bishops, being not come, after fifteen days
stay, Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, the greatest of all the Bishops that were
present (who also supplied the place of Caelestinus) with the rest of the
Bishops thought good to send for Nestorius, and to require him to appear in
the Synod, to answer to the crimes objected to him. Whereby it is evident,
that (Nestorius being to be judged in a general Council) Cyril being the
greatest of the Bishops that were present, (the Bishop of Rome neither coming
nor sending at the first) was in his own right, Relat. sanctae Synodi ad
pientiss. Imp. inter epist. Synodales vocat Cyrillum caput congrega^orum
Episcorum.
President of that assembly. But the Bishop of Rome, who could not come, (but
having assembled his Bishops in the West, had judged and condemned him) joined
his authority with Cyril, the principal of the Bishops that were present, that
so nothing might be wanting to the perfection of a general Council. So that
it is most certain, that Cyril was president of the Council of Ephesus, not
as a Vicegerent only to the Bishop of Rome, but in his own right, though he
had the authority, direction, and consenting concurrence of the Bishop of Rome,
and all the Western Bishops, joined with the power and authority, which he and
the rest of the Bishops present had of themselves. And therefore Leo Epist 47.
Leo says in express words, that Cyril was President of the Council of
Ephesus, as likewise Photius de 7. Synodis.
Photius and others affirm. The same answer may serve for Acacius. For Epist.
13. Gelasij ad Episc. Dardan.
he was not Vicegerent of the Bishop of Rome, in hearing and determining the
cause of Peter Bishop of Alexandria (who was an Eutychian Heretic) as having
none authority of his own: but there was a joint concurrence of the Bishop of
Rome, and the Bishop of Constantinople, the later having besides his own right
and interest, the full power and authority of the other: and being likewise to
use the help of the Emperor for the reducing of the Church of Alexandria, to
the unity of the faith again: in which business he failed: for though at
first he condemned Peter, Bishop of Alexandria, yet afterward he was content
to communicate with him. For which cause he was justly reprehended as not
answering the trust that was reposed in him, and as being a favorer of
heretics and so in a sort an heretic himself. To these allegations which
we have already heard, Apud Iuellum page 277.
Harding in his answer to Bishop Jewels challenge adds another, of a Bishop
of Alexandria being Vicegerent to the Bishop of Rome, out of the Epistle of
Bonifacius the second, to Eulalius or Eulabius. But De Pontif. li. 2. cap. 25.
Bellarmine refuteth that Epistle, and shows that it is counterfeit, and that
there never was any such Eulabius, to whom Bonifacius might write: and
therefore we will no longer insist upon the examination of the same, but
proceed to the proofs, which our Adversaries bring from appeals made to Rome.

CHAP. 39.
Of Appeals to Rome.

FOR the clearing of the matter of Appeals we must observe, that they are of
three sorts: Of Laymen, of inferior Clergymen, and of Bishops. Of the
appeals of Laymen there is noe mention in all Antiquity: and yet now the
Bishops of Rome reserve all the greater causes even concerning the Laity to
themselves alone, forbidding the ordinary guides of the Church to intermedle
with them: and very ordinarily admit appeals of Laymen to the infinite
vexation of men, and the great hinderance of the course of all Justice. Whereas
it is most wisely and rightly ordered, each Bishop having his portion of the
flock of Christ committed to him, as Cyprian observes, that they that are
committed to their charge should not be permitted to run hither and thither,
but be judged there, where the things, for a Cypr. lib: 1. epist. 3.
which they are called in question, were done, and where the accusers and
witnesses may be present.

Concerning inferior Clergymen the holy Bishops in the Council of Mileuis
speak in this sort: Conc. Mileuit. Canone. 22.
It has seemed good unto us, that if Presbyters, Deacons, and other inferior
Clergi-men complain of the judgments of their own Bishops, the neighbor
Bishops entreated by them with the consent of their Bishops shall hear them
and make an end; and if they think good to appeal from their judgment, it
shall not be lawful for them to appeal, but only to the Councels of Africa,
or to the Primates of their own Provinces. And if they shall make their
appeal beyond the seas, no man in Africa shall receive them to the Communion.
This whole Council Innocentius the first approved, as it appears by his
Epist. 93. inter Epistolas Aug.
Epistle, which we find in the book of the Epistles of S. Augustine. Hereunto,
Bellarmine de Pon. Romans lib. 2. cap. 24.
says, some answer with Gratian. 2. quaest. 6. cap. placuit.
Gratian: who adds to the Canon of this Council, forbidding appeals to be
made beyond the seas, an exception, unless it be to the Sea Apostolic. But
this exception, says Bellarmine, seems not fitting, seeing the Africanes
made this decree, that men should not appeal beyond the seas, especially in
respect of the Church of Rome, and to restrain the making of appeals thither;
there never being any appeal from the Africans to any other church but to the
church of Rome only. And yet Controu. 3 de prim. subject. potest. eccles.
quaest 7. explicat art.
Stapleton answers the authority of this Council as Gratian does, and that
out of Julius and Fabianus, Bishops of Rome, as he says. The Council of
Canone 17.
Sardica (says Bellarmine) decreed, that the causes of Presbyters and
inferior clergymen appealing from the judgments of their own Bishops,
should be determined and ended by the Neighbor-bishops: and Pope Zozimus, as
appears by the sixth Council of Carthage, and the Epistle of the same
Council h Bell vbi supra.
to Bonifacius the Pope, required the same canon to be revived. August. Ep. 162.
Augustine likewise shows, that it was not lawful for those of the clergy
under the degree of Bishops, to appeal out of Africa. Neither was this the
peculiar privilege of Africa alone. For the Council of Canone 9.
Chalcedon ordained; that if a clergie-man have ought against another of the
clergy, the matter shall be heard by the Bishop, or by arbitrators chosen by
both parties, with the Bishops allowance. But if he have ought against his
Bishop, he shall prosecute the same complaint in the Synod of the province.
This canon of the Council of Chalcedon the Justin Novel. Constable. 123. c. 22.
Emperor confirmed, saying, if any of the clergy complain against his Bishop
for any matter, let the cause be judged by the Metropolitan, according to the
sacred rules, and the imperial laws. And if any man appeal from his
sentence, let the cause be brought to the Arch-bishoppe or Patriarch of that
Diocese, and let him according to the canons, make a final end. And yet,
notwithstanding these canons above recited precisely forbidding inferior
clergymen to appeal to Rome, we find that the Vt patet ex Epist. Council. j
Africani ad Coelestinum.
Bishops of Rome admitted the appeal of one Apiarius, judged and condemned in
Africa; which caused a great difference between the Africanes and him.
Whereupon the Fathers in the Council of Africa, wish the Bishop of Rome (as it
beseems him) to reject and repel the wicked and unlawful appeals, as well
of Presbyters, as of other inferior clergymen; seeing the ending and
determining of their causes, is by no decree of any Synod denied to the church
of Africa, and the Nicene canons most clearly commit both inferior
clergymen and Bishops to their own Metropolitanes. Vbi supra.
Bellarmine, to clear the Pope from intrusion, and to avoid the testimonies
and authorities of the holy Bishops and Pastors of the church, which we have
produced to show the unlawfulness of appeals to Rome; answers first: that
though they of the inferior clergy were prohibited to appeal to the Pope, yet
he was not forbidden to admit their appeals; which is a most strange answer.
For if they in appealing did ill, and violated the canons, he could not but
offend, in admitting such their appeals. And therefore Ep. praedict. Conc.
Afric. c. 105.
they of Africa tell the Pope, that it befeemeth him to repel such appeals;
and that to admit them, is to bring in the smoaky puff of worldly pride into
the Church, professing that the ending of such matters belongs to the Church
of Africa, and complaining of intolerable wrongs and injuries done unto them,
when such appeals are admitted; whence it is consequent, that the Pope may not
admit them. Secondly, he answers, that the Bishop of Rome admitted not the
appeal of Apiarius, but heard his complaints, and commanded them of Africa
more diligently to examine his cause: whereas it is most plain and evident,
that the Pope upon his appeal, unadvisedly received him to his communion, and
restored him to his degree and place again. Besides that, to hear complaints,
and to command a review, is in the judgment of all men of sense and
understanding, a kind of an admitting of an appeal; seeing no such thing can
be done but by him that has power to judge of their judgment, whom he
commands to review and reexamine that they have formerly judged.

Concerning Bishops, the Canone 9.
Council of Chalcedon decreed, that if a Bishop have ought against the
Metropolitan, he shall go to the Primate of the Diocese, or to the Sea of the
Princely city of Constantinople, that there the matter may be examined and
heard. And the Novel. 123 c. 22.
Emperor confirming the same canon, decreed* that if the Bishops of one Synod
have any matter of variance among themselves, either for Ecclesiastical right,
or any other occasions; first the Metropolitan, and the other Bishops of the
Synod shall examine and determine the cause; and if either part dislike the
judgment, then the Patriarch of that Diocese shall give them audience according
to the Ecclesiastical Canons, and Imperial laws, neither side having liberty
to contradict his judgment. This decree of the Emperor Greg. ep. l. (...). ep.
54
Gregory the first recites, and allows: only adding, that if there be
neither Metropolitan nor Patriarch, then the matter must be ended by the
Apostolic See, which is the Head of all Churches. So that even in his
judgment, when there is a Patriarch, no Bishop may appeal from him to Rome,
but every one is bound to stand to the end that he shall make. The eight Canone
26.
general Council in like sort appoints Bishops co^plaining of their
Metropolitans, to go to the Patriarch, that he may make an end, and requires
either side to stand to the end that he shall make, seeing the more honorable
Bishops out of sundry Provinces called together by him, sit in council with
him. Yet Epist. citat. (...) Conc. Afric. sive Carthag. 6.
Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Caelestinus Bishops of Rome, by their agents in the
Councels of Africa urged and claimed a pretended right, to admit appeals of
Bishops from any part of the world, as from the canons of the Nicene council.
But the worthy Bishops there present, looking into the decrees of that
council, and finding no such thing as was alleged, lest happily those copies of
the council which they had, might be defective, imperfect, or corrupted, sent
to the most reverend Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch,
for the authentical and indubitate copies: but could find no such thing in them
when they came, as was alleged by the agents of the Bishop of Rome. And
therefore they wrote unto him, and prayed him no more so easily to admit men
coming to him with appeals and complaints, nor to receive to his communion
such as they should excommunicate* because the Nicene council has forbidden
all such admission, committing not only Laymen and inferior Cleargy-men, but
The Africanes though within the Patriarchship of Rome, disliked the appeals of
Bishops to Rome, because they might have right against their Metropolitanes, if
they wronged them: in a general Synod of Africa, wherein the P^imate sat as
President: for otherwise Bishop^ wronged by their Metropolitanes, might by the
Canons appeal to* their own Patriarch.
Bishops also to their own Metropolitans: and requiring that Bishops put from
the communion in their own Provinces, should not be by other, hastily,
suddenly, or unduly restored to the communion. And farther, they besought the
Roman Bishops to repel, as beseems them, the wicked appeals of Presbyters,
and other inferior Clergymen, because no decree of any council has
prejudiced the Church of Africa in this behalf, but all the Fathers most
prudently and justly decreed and determined, that all matters should be ended
in the place where they arise, seeing no Province can lack the grace of the
Holy Ghost, whereby the Bishops of Christ may be able both wisely to see, and
constantly to maintain the right; and especially for that it is lawful for
every one that shall mislike the judgment of them that have the hearing of his
cause, to appeal to the councels of his Province, or to a general Council,
unless happily any man will think, that God will inspire the trial of justice
into one man alone, and that he will deny the same to a great number of Bishops
assembled in Council: and farther they add, that these beyond sea judgments
cannot be thought good, and of force, whereunto the persons of the witnesses
necessary for the finding out of the truth, cannot be brought, either in
respect of the infirmity of their sex or age, or by reason of some other
impediment. And thus we see that the Bishops of Rome could not demonstrate
their right to receive Appeals of Bishops, refusing to stand to the judgments
of their own Metropolitanes and Synodes, out of the Nicene Council, but
failed in the issue. Yet may we not hereupon charge them with falsification or
mistaking, say the worthy Bell. de Romans Pont. li. 2. c. 25.
Proctors of the Roman Church. But we must rather say with counterfeit
Athanasius, in his Epistle to Faelix, that the coppies of the Nicene Council
were corrupted, or in his Epistle to Mark the Bishop of Rome, that they were
burned; then that we should yield any such thing. And yet surely if they were
corrupted, they were not burned: and if they were burnt, they were not
corrupted: and that the Arrians should corrupt the coppies of the Nicene
Council in other things, and leave it inviolable in that part that touches
them most, and condemns their heresy, is strange and unlikely. Ibidem.
Bellarmine says, the Magdeburgians do laugh at the report of the burning of
those coppies of the Nicene Council that were kept at Alexandria, and seems
to confess they have reason so to do. For (says he) the supposed burning
happened in the time of Constantius the Emperor, when as Athanasius being
driven from thence, George the Arrian had gotten into his place as Athanasius
testifies in his Epistle ad omnes Orthodoxos; whereas it may be clearly
proved out of the Chronicle of Hierome, that Mark the Pope was dead at that
time. Besides, if Mark the Pope had sent the true coppies to Alexandria upon
this letter of Athanasius (as is pretended) why should not the coppies that
were found at Rome, and they that were brought from Alexandria into Africa,
have agreed together? How came it to pass that the canon urged for the Popes
advantage in the Councels of Africa, was not found in the coppies sent from
Alexandria? but that that copy altogether agreed with the other that came from
Constantinople and Antioch. Bellarmine therefore passing by these Epistles, as
being of no great credit, alleges sundry things mentioned by the Ancient, as
decreed by the Council of Nice, which yet are not found in those twenty Canons
now extant; to prove that it follows not that the Bishops of Rome falsified
the Council of Nice, because they could not find the things they urged in the
coppies sent out of the East, seeing they might be in some other, as well as
those things that are mentioned by the Ancient, which are not found in these
twenty Canons. The things alleged by him out of the Ancient, as decreed by the
Nicene Council, which yet are not found in the Canons now extant, are in
number seven, whereof some were neither decreed in that Council, nor reported
by the Ancient to have been decreed there. For Hier. praefat. in Judith.
Hierome does not say that the Conncell of Nice, reckoned the book of Judith
among the books of the Canon, but only that some said it did; but that it did
not, Bishop Lindan brings very good reasons, as I have z elsewhere Book 4.
Chap. 23.
showed. The like may be said of the permitting of Clergymen having wives, to
live with their wives. For the Socrat. l. 1. c. 8.
histories do not say, the Council passed a decree to that purpose, but that
whereas the Fathers of the Council were about to have made a decree for the
restraining of Clergymen from Matrimonial society with their wives, they were
by Paphnutius a worthy Bishop and holy Confessor, dissuaded from so doing and
induced to leave it free as they found it. The observation of the feast of
Easter upon the Lords day, is the third instance given by the Cardinal. But if
Zozimus, Bonifacius and Caelestinus could have brought as good proof, that the
decree they urged was passed in the Council of Nice, as may be brought for the
decree touching the keeping of Easter only on the Lords day, they had never bin
resisted, though they could not have found it in the canons. For the order that
the Council took for uniformity in the keeping of this feast, is mentioned in
the Epistle of the Council to the Churches of Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis;
and all histories and writers do agree on it. Touching the having of 2 Bishops
in one city, which August. epist. 110.
Augustine says, Valerius his predecessor knew not to be forbidden by the
Council of Nice, when he caused him to be ordained Bishop, and to sit together
with him, while he yet lived; it is strange that Bellarmine should deny it to
be found among the twenty Canons we speak of, when as in the eighth Canon it
is expressly provided, that if a Nouatian Bishop return to the unity of the
Church in any city where there is a Catholic Bishop already, the Catholic
Bishop shall look out for him some place, in his Diocese, that he may be a
Chorepiscopus, or shall appoint him to be a Presbyter; that both he may remain
in the Clergy, and that yet there may not seem to be two Bishops in one
city. That Atticus in the end of the Council of Chalcedon says, the manner
of writing those letters, that were called Litterae formatae, was devised in
the Council of Nice, no way proves the thing in question. For we inquire not,
what was there devised, but what was there decreed. Lastly, that which the
Canone 14.
Council of Africa has, as out of the Council of Nice, that none should
celebrate the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, but such as are fasting: and
Ambr. Epist. 82.
Ambrose, that none should be taken into the Clergy that have been twice
married, might by them be taken upon uncertain report, as that touching the
book of Judith was by Hierome. But to what purpose does Bellarmine insist upon
these allegations? and why does he so carefully labor to show that all the
decrees of the Nicene Council, are not comprised within the twenty Canons now
extant? Is it because he would thereby make us think, the Nicen Council did
decree any such thing cencerning appeals, as was alleged in the Counsel of
Africa by the Popes agents? Surely no. For he professes, he thinks it very
probable, that the pretended Canons were never made by the Nicene Council, but
that they were the Canons of the Council of Sardica: and his reason is,
because these Canons are in the Council of Sardica, in the very words
alleged. And it is not likely the Fathers in that Council would make the same
Canons, the Council of Nice did, and no way express it, that they did not
make new, but renew such as were made before. Which if it be so, it must
needs be confessed, that the Bishops of Rome were deceived and mistook, when
they alleged Canons as made in the Council of Nice, that were not made there
but in the Council of Sardica. Yet Bellarmine is unwilling to yield so much
to the truth, though it be very mighty and ready to prevail with him: and
therefore rather then he will confess any error or mistaking, he affirms,
that both these are to be esteemed but as one Council: because many of the
same Bishops were present in them both, and confirmed the same faith. A strange
saying doubtless, and contradicted by himself. For in his book De Council.
lib. 1. c. 4. 5. and 7.
De Concilijs, sorting Councels into three ranks, accounting some wholly
rejected, some wholly approved, and some in part rejected, and in part
approved: he reckons the Council of Nice among those of the second sort,
and the Council of Sardica among those of the third sort: because consisting
of three hundred seventy and six Bishops, the three hundredth Occidentall
Bishops confirmed the Catholic faith: and they of the East dividing
themselves from them, confirmed the heresy of the Arrians: whereas here he
will have it to be the same with the Council of Nice, for that it was a
general Council approved, and not reckoned in number the second. But let us
pardon them this error and mistaking, and see what it was the Council of
Sardica decreed. The words of the Fathers of the Council are these: Council.
Sardic. Can. 3. and 7.
It has seemed good unto us, that if a Bishop shall be accused, and the
Bishops of the same region shall judge him and degrade him; if he that is so
deposed or degraded, shall appeal and fly to the Bishop of Rome, and desire
to be heard, if he think good to renew the judgment, let him be pleased to
write to the Bishops that are in the next Province, that they may diligently
enquire into things, and judge according to truth and equity. But if he that
desires to have his cause heard again, shall move the Bishop of Rome to send
a Presbyter from his own side, let him do what he thinks fit. And if he
shall think fit to send some, who being present with the Bishops may judge
together with them, having his authority from whom they are sent, let him do as
he pleases. And if he think the Bishops to be sufficient to put an end to
the matter, let him use his own discretion. For the clearing of this matter,
and that we may the better discern the force of this decree: first, we must
mark that it was made after the division and parting of the Bishops of the
East from them of the West, and so by the Western Bishops alone, and, as it
may seem, respectively to the Provinces of the West, over which the Bishop of
Rome was Patriarch. Secondly, that the Africans took no notice of it; and yet
there were Bishops of Africa at the Council, so that in likelihood this
decree was not confirmed by subsequent acceptance, execution, and practice.
Thirdly, that the Council of Chalcedon, which was absolutely Oecumenicall, and
wholly approved, and so of greater authority then this, that was not an
approved General Council, but in a sort only, Canon^ 9.
decrees the contrary, and refers the final determination of all causes of
Bishops, to the Primate or Patriarch, which the Emperor also confirms, and
will have no man to have power to contradict the end which the Primate or
Patriarch shall make. Lastly, that this canon makes rather against them that
allege it, then any way for them. For by this Canon all matters must be ended
at home, or in the next Province to that wherein they arise; and the Pope may
not call matters to Rome there to be heard, but is only permitted in some
cases to send a Presbyter having his authority, and to put him in commission
with the Bishops of the Province, that so he and they jointly may reexamine
things formerly judged. If this Canon were now observed, I think there would
not be so great exception taken to the court of Rome, in respect of appeals,
as now there is. Bern. l. 3. de consider. ad Eugenium.
Quousque (says Saint Bernard to Eugenius) non evigilat consideratio tua ad
tantam appellationum confusionem? Ambitio in Ecclesia per te regnare molitur.
Praeter ius and fas, praeter morem and ordinem fiunt: repertum ad remedium,
reperitur ad mortem. Antidotum versum est in venenum: murmur loquor and
querimoniam communem Ecclesiarum. Truncari se clamant and (...). Vel nullae,
vel paucae admodum sunt, quae plagam istam aut non doleant, aut non timeant;
that is, How long will it be before thou awake to consider this so great
confusion of appeals? Ambition strives and seeks busily to reign in the
Church by thy means, They are entered, prosecuted, and admitted, beside right
and law, besides custom and order. That which was first found out for a
remedy, is now found to be unto death. I do but express the murmuring and
common complaint of the Churches. They cry out that they are mangled and
dismembered, and there are few or none found that do not either already grieve
at this plague, or fear the smart of this evil. Yet would not the Africans
admit the canon of the council of Sardica, but willed the Pope to send no more
any of his clearkes, to dispatch causes at any man's suite. For that this was to
bring in the smoakie puff of worldly pride into the Church, and in very
earnest sort besought him not to be too easy in admitting any appeals
brought from them. If within a little time after, the Bishops of Rome prevailed
so far, as that Bishops were suffered to appeal out of Africa to Rome, which
was the thing claimed by Zozimus, but denied unto him by the Africans; it is
not to be marvailed at, seeing they still enlarged the extent of their power,
till they had overthrown the jurisdiction of all the Bishops of the West, and
alienated the affections of all other from them. So that there was a schism in
the church, the other four Patriarchs dividing themselves from the Bishop of
Rome, and at their parting using these or the like words, as it is reported.
Gerson. part. 4. sermon de pace and unit* (...), c^nsid (...).
Thy greatness we know, thy covetousness we cannot satisfy, thy
encroaching we can no longer endure, live by thy self. But here we shall find
a great contrariety of judgment among the greatest Rabbis of the Romish church
touching these Africans that thus withstood the claims of Zozimus, Bonifacius,
and Celestinus. For Harding against Bishop Jewels challenge in the Article of
the supremacy, (...) Harding apud Iuell. p. 29^
says, that the whole church of Africa withdrew it self from the church of
Rome by reason of this difference, through the enticement of Aurelius
Archbishop of Carthage, and continued in schism by the space of an hundred
years; during which time by Gods punishment they were brought into miserable
captivity by the barbarous and cruel Vandales, who were Arrians; till at
length when it pleased Almighty God of his goodness to have pity of his
people of that Province, he sent them Belisarius that valiant Captain that
vanquished and destroyed the Vandales; and Eulabius that godly Bishop of
Carthage, that brought home the Africanes again, and joined those divided
members to the whole Body of the Catholic church. A public instrument
containing their submission, being made and offered to Bonifacius the second,
by Eulabius in the name of the whole Province. Which was joyfully received; and
whereof Bonifacius writes to Eulabius Bishop of Thessalonica, desiring him to
give thanks to God for the same. But De Pont. l. 2. cap. 25.
Bellarmine proves at large, that notwithstanding this resistance and
opposition of the Africans against the claims of Zozimus, Bonifacius, and
Caelestinus, yet there never was any apparent breach between the Romans and
them. And for the Epistle of Bonifacius the second to Eulabius, wherein he
says very harshly (as De Concord. Cathol. l. 2. c. 15 and li. cod. c. 17.
Cusanus well notes) that Aurelius sometimes Bishop of the church of Carthage,
with his colleagues, began to wax proud and insolent against the church of
Rome, by the instigation of the devil in the days of his predecessors, (so
condemning Augustine, Alipius, and two hundredth twenty five Bishops more, as
set on by the devil to resist the claims of his predecessors, and the Epistle
of Eulabius Bishop of Carthage, wherein he condemns his predecessors, and
submits himself to the Bishop of Rome,) he professes he greatly suspecteth
they are forged and counterfeit. First, because that which is contained in them
cannot stand with that which is most certainly proved and known to be true
touching the amity and friendship that was between the Roman Church and
Augustine, Eugenius, Fulgentius, and other Africans, after the opposition about
the matters of appeals. Secondly, for that there was no such Eulabius Bishop
of Alexandria at that time, to whom Bonifacius might write, as it appears by
the Chronology of Nicephorus of Constantinople. Thirdly, for that Bonifacius
in his Epistle does signify that he wrote in the time of Justinius the
Emperor; whereas Justinius was dead before Bonifacius was Bishop, as appears
by all histories. So that we may see what gross forgeries there have been in
former times devised only to abuse the simple, and make the world believe,
that all Bishops and churches subjected themselves unto the church of Rome. And
how shameless a defender of Antichristian tyranny Doctor Harding was, that
could not escape this censure of Bellarmine the Jesuit. But it is l^sse to be
maruailed at, that he should so harden his forehead, as not to blush when he
brought into the light, and presented to the view of the world such rotten
forgeries, that was not ashamed to become a proctor of the filthy stews.

Wherefore, leaving him and his counterfeit and apocryphal stuff, which he
sought to vent unto the world, let us proceed from the appeals of Laymen,
inferior Clergymen and Bishops, to speak of the appeals of the chief
Primates or Patriarchs. For the clearing of which point, we must observe, that
it is a rule in Church Government, that the lesser and inferior, may not judge
the greater and superior. And therefore the Bishops of the Province, may not
judge the Metropolitan, but may only declare in what cases he is judged,
excommunicated, suspended, or deposed, ipso facto, by the sentence of the Canon
it self, and by separating themselves from him, and withdrawing themselves
from being subject to him, put him in a sort from his place, and depose him.
But otherwise, if any Bishop have ought against his Metropolitan, he must go
(as I showed before) to the Patriarche, and his Synod, to complain, as to fit
and competent Judges. For against the g^eater person we complain, to the
greater Judge we must fly. If a Clerk have ought against a Bishop, the matter
may be judged in the Synod of the Province; but if Clerk or Bishop have
any complaint against the Metropolitan, the Canon of the Council of Chalcedon
provides (as I noted before) that they shall go to the Primate of the
Diocese, or to the Sea of the Princely City of Constantinople. From whence in
like proportion it is consequent, that though the Metropolitanes and Bishops
subject to a Patriarche, may declare in what cases he incurreth the sentence
of suspension, excommunication, deposition, or degradation, pronounced by the
very Law and canon it self, and so withdraw themselves from his obedience; yet
may they not by way of authority proceed against him, but must fly to another
Patriarche, who in a Synod consisting of his n See these things as large in
the Epistle of Nicholas the first to Michael the Emperor, Epistle 8.
own Bishops, and the Bishops of that Patriarch that is complained of, may
judge and censure him, so that he be a Patriarch, in order and honor greater
then he against whom they complain; seeing the lesser may not judge the
greater. And therefore we find that in the differences that fell out, between
Cyrill of Alexandria, and John of Antioche, John was blamed, for that being
but Bishop or Patriarche of the third See, he took upon him to judge Cyril,
that was Patriarche of the second; and having but a few Bishops joined with
him, to judge Cyril with many. So likewise Dioscorus was condemned, not only
for favoring the wicked heresy of Eutiches, and his violent proceedings in
the second Council of Ephesus; but specially for that being but Bishop of the
second See he took upon him to judge Leo, that was Bishop of the first See.
And this was that which Julius in his Epistle reported by Athanasius in his
second Apology, blamed in the Bishops of the East; namely that they proceeded
to the judging of Bishops of such Sees, as were Athanasius of Alexandria, and
Paulus of Constantinople, without making him first acquainted with the same;
that so their proceedings might have taken beginning from him, as being in
order the first among the Patriarchs. And hence it was, that Vide supra, cap.
35.
Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria taking himself to be Bishop of the second
See, came to Constantinople, and there with other Bishops judged Chrysostom;
and that Chrysostom, as being by virtue of the Canon of the Council of
Constantinople made Bishop of the second See, and set in order and honor
before the Bishops of Alexandria and Antioche, would have taken upon him to
judge some matters concerning Theophilus: and in this sort did sundry Bishops
of Rome in Synodes consisting of their own Bishops, and the Bishops subject to
the Patriarch of Constantinople, judge and depose certain Bishops of
Constantinople. Whereupon Nicholas the first in his Epist. 2.
Epistle to Michael the Emperor says, that scarce any Bishop of
Constantinople can be found, that was orderly deposed and driven from his
Bishopric, and whose deposition held as good and lawful, without the consent
of the Bishop of Rome: and therefore protests against the deposition of
Ignatius as unlawful and unjust, for that he was condemned by his own
Bishops: comparing the Synod that deposed him to the second of Ephesus, and
affirming, that it was much worse then that. For that there Dioscorus Bishop of
Alexandria with his colleagues judged Flauianus, though most violently and
disorderly. But here there was none of the Patriarchs, nor any one Biof any
the meanest city, that was not his own Suffragan. By that which has been
said it is evident, that the great Patriarchs of the Christian Church, are not
to be judged but by some other of their own rank in order before them,
assisted by inferior Bishops; Gelas. epist. 13. ad episc. Dardaniae.
that the Bishop of Rome, as first in order among the Patriarchs, assisted
with his own Bishops, and the Bishops of him that is thought faulty, may
judge any of the other Patriarchs: that such as have complaints against them,
may fly to him and the Synodes of Bishops subject to him, and that the
Patriarchs themselves in their distresses may fly to him and such Synodes for
relief and help, though of himself alone he have no power to do any thing.

Wherefore let us proceed from the distinction and explication of the diverse
and different kinds of appeals, lawful, and unlawful, permitted and
forbidden, to examine the allegations of our Adversaries, and to see whether
from any allowed practice and approved course of appeals made to Rome, in the
Primitive Church, they can infer the Universality of Papal power and
jurisdiction. The first example that De Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 21.
Bellarmine brings, is very impertine^t. For whereas he should prove, that
the Bishops subject to any of the four Patriarchs might lawfully appeal to
Rome, and that there lay appeals from any part of the world thither: he
brings forth the testimony of Leo epist. 89. ad Episc. Galliae.
Leo telling the Bishops of France, subject to him as Patriarche of the West,
that of ancient time appeals were wont to be made out of France to Rome: which
no way proves the Bishop of Rome to be universal Bishop, unless we
will acknowledge every one of the Patriarchs to have been so too: it being
lawful to appeal unto them, out of any the remotest Provinces subject to
the^. From this ill-chosen example, he proceeds to a worse of Epiphan.
haeres. 42.
Marcion the heretic, who being excommunicated by his own Bishop in
Pontus, fled to Rome that he might be absolved of the Roman Church as he
tells us out of Epiphanius. But surely it is most strange that he can be
content thus to abuse himself and others. For he knows right well, that
Marcion did not appeal to Rome, and that if he had so done, the act of a vile
and execrable heretic should not be drawn into example. The history of
Marcion (as we find in Epiphanius) is this: Marcion was the son of a Bishop
in Pontus, he embraced virginity in his first times, and seemed to live a
retired, solitary, and Monastical kind of life; but in the end, casting the
fear of God behind his back, he abused a certain virgin; and not only
fell himself, but drew her also away from the course of virtue and well-doing,
into the fellowship of sinful wickedness. Hereupon he was excommunicated
and put out of the Church by his own Father. For his Father was a right good
and virtuous man, and careful of the things that concerned his calling: and
though after he was put out of his Church, he sought very earnestly to be
admitted to penitency, that so he might be restored to the Church again: yet
his Father exceedingly grieved, not only in respect of his fall, but also in
respect of the dishonor and shame he had brought on him, would by no means
be induced to yield unto it. Whereupon he left that City whereof his Father
was Bishop, and went to Rome in the time of the vacancie of that See, after the
death of Hyginus, and after he had stayed there a certain space, and conferred
with the Presbyters of that Church, he desired to be admitted to their
assemblies. But they told him, they could not so do without the consent of
his honorable Father. For (say they) we have one faith, and one consent, and
we may not contrary our good fellow-minister thy Father. Which their answer
when he heard, he was filled with fury and madness, and professed in great
rage, that he would rent their Church in pieces, and cast a schism into it
that should never have an end. This is the narration we find in Epiphanius
concerning Marcion his going to Rome. Wherein there is nothing that any way
proves, that it was always lawful to appeal from all other Bishops to the
Bishop of Rome. For first, it does not appear that Marcion went thither to
complain of his Father, but being put from the communion by him, and not
obtaining reconciliation by any entreaty, as a runnagate he sought to other
places, and among other went to Rome, hoping there to be received into the
Church. But the guides of that church knowing the canon, which forbids one
church to admit them another has rejected and cast out, utterly refused to
permit and suffer him to communicate with them. And secondly, if he had gone
to Rome by way of appeal, it would most strongly overthrow all such courses,
and prove that the Roman Bishop may not reverse and make void the Acts and
proceedings of other Bishops, seeing the governors of the Roman church at
that time, freely professed unto Marcion, and told him peremptorily, that it
was not lawful for them to admit him to their communion without his Fathers
consent, by whom he was excommunicated. But the truth is, he did not seek by
their authority as superiors, to reverse his Fathers censure and judgment,
or to be restored to the communion of that church, out of which he was eiected
(which had been to appeal:) but being in Rome, desired only to be admitted
to join in prayers and other exercises of Religion, with them of that Church:
which yet (as Epiphanius reports) was denied unto him. The next example is of
Cypr. l. 1. cp. 3
Fortunatus and Faelix in Africa, deposed by Cyprian (as Bellarmine would make
us believe) and appealing to Cornelius Bishop of Rome for relief. But there is
no word of truth in that which this Cardinal writes. For these men did not
go to Rome to complain that they were unjustly deposed (as he untruly
reports) but these are the circumstances of the matter, as we may read in
the Epistles of Cyprian. A company of wicked ones having made Fortunatus (one
of the Presbyters that were suspended by Cyprian, and a great number of other
Bishops) a Bishop in opposition to Cyprian, hasten to Rome to Cornelius with
false reports of the number of Bishops that concurred in the ordination of
Fortunatus; that so he might be induced to admit of him, as a true Bishop, and
hold communion with him. Which when Cornelius wisely refused to do, he feared
not to threaten grievous things unto him. With the suddenness and strangeness
whereof Cornelius much moved, maruailed greatly that Cyprian had not before
certified him of this schismatic ordination, that so he might have been
the better prepared. Whereunto Cyprian answered: That it was not necessary to
be so careful about the vain proceedings of heretics, that he had before
given him the names of such Bishops as were found, to who^, and from whom he
might write and receive letters. And that howsoever false and ill dealing by
haste and prevention thinks to gain all, yet that is but for a little time,
till truth overtake it, and discover it, even as the darkness of the night
continues till the Sun arise. And farther he shows, that these
schismatic companions had no reason to make such haste to Rome, to publish
it and make it known, that they had set up a false Bishop against a true. For
that either it pleased them that they had so done, and then they continued, and
went forward in their wickedness: or they repented of that they had done, and
then they knew whither to return, and needed not to have gone to Rome. For
(says he) whereas it is agreed among us, and it is both just and right, that
every man shall be heard there where his fault was committed; and all Pastors
have a part of the flock of Christ assigned to them, which every one is to
rule and govern, as being to give an account unto the Lord of his actions; it
is not fit, nor to be suffered, that they over whom we are set should run
up and down, and by crafty and deceitful rashness shake in sunder the
coherent concord of brethren, but that they should have their causes handled
where they may have both accusers and witnesses of their crimes. Unless, a few
desperate and wicked companions do think, the Bishops of Africa that judged
them, have lesser authority then others. A more clear testimony or pregnant
proof against appeals to Rome then this, cannot be had. And yet this is one
of the principal authorities, the Cardinal brings to prove the lawfulness
of appeals to Rome. To the next place alleged out of Lib. 1. ep. 4.
Cyprian, touching Basilides and Martialis Bishops of Spain, I have answered
Chap. 37.
already, and made it most clear, that nothing could be alleged more
prejudicial to the Popes claims, and more for the advantage of the truth of
that cause, which we defend. So that it seems our Adversaries have turned
their weapons against themselves, and whetted their swords, and made ready
their arrows, to wound themselves to death. How the facts of Athanasius,
Chrysostom, Flauianus, and Theodoret, appealing to the Bishop of Rome with his
Western Synodes, for relief and help, when they were oppressed and wronged by
the Eastern Bishops, prove not the illimited and universal power of the Pope,
I have at large showed before, to the satisfaction (I doubt not) of all
indifferent Readers. z Supra. c. 35. and 37.
And therefore there remains but only one allegation of Bellarmine touching
appeals to be examined. Gregory the first (says he) put John the Bishop of
Iustiniana a Epist. li: 2. cp. 6.
the first, from the communion, for that he presumed to judge the Bishop of
Thebes having appealed to Rome. The case was this. The Bishop of Thebes wronged
by his fellow-Bishops, made his appeal to Rome. Hereupon John Bishop of
Iustiniana the first, who was the Bishop of Romes Vicegerent for certain
Provinces near adjoining, was appointed by the Emperor to hear the cause;
which he did accordingly. But without all indifferency, and (in sort)
contrary to the Canons; and though upon the discerning of his unjust and
partial proceeding an appeal were tendered to him, yet gave he sentence
against the poor distressed Bishop. Gregory hearing hereof, puts him from
the communion for thirty days space, inioyning him to bewail his fault with
sorrowful repentance and tears, Truly this allegation makes a very fair
show at the first sight. But if we remember that the Bishop of Iustiniana the
first, and the distressed Bishop of Thebes, wronged by him, were within the
Patriarchship of Rome (as Cusan. lib. 2. Concord. Cathol. cap. (...).
Cusanus shows they were) you shall find it was no more that the B of Rome
did, then any other Patriarch in like case might have done, within his own
precincts and limits. Neither can the Cardinal ever prove that the Bishop of
Rome had any such Vicegerent as the Bishop of Iustiniana the first was, but
only within the compass of his own Patriarchship. But (says he) it was a
Greek Bishop, that Gregory thus proceeded against. It is true, it was so. But
what will he infer from thence? Is it not known that many Greek Bishops
were subject to the Bishop of Rome, as Patriarch of the West? was not the
Bishop of Thessalonica a Greek Bishop? and yet I think no man doubts, but
that he was within the compass of the Patriarchship of Rome, as many other
also were, howsoever in time they fell from it, and adhered to the Church of
Constantinople, after the division of the Greek and Latin Churches.

CHAP. 40.
Of the Popes supposed exemption from all humane Judgment, as being reserved
to the Judgment of Christ only.

OUR Adversaries finding their proofs of the Popes illimited power, taken from
such appeals as were wont in ancient times to be made to Rome, to be too
weak, fly to another, wherein they put more confidence; which is his
exemption from all humane Judgment: Christ (whose Vicar he is) having reserved
him to his own judgment only. If this exemption could be as strongly
proved, as it is confidently affirmed, it would be an unanswerable proof of
the thing in question. But the proof hereof will be more hard, then of the
principal thing in controversy between us. Touching this point, I find
Bell. lib. 2. de Pont. Romans cap. 30.
great contrariety of opinions among Papists, as men at their wits ends, not
knowing what to affirm, nor what to deny. For first, there are some among
them that think that the Pope, though he violate all laws divine and humane,
though he become publicly scandalous, and therein show himself incorrigible,
yea though he be a professed and damnable heretic; yet neither is deposed
ipso facto, by the sentence of the canon, nor may be deposed by all the men in
the world. Which opinion if we admit to be true, the condition of the church,
the beloved spouse of Christ and mother of us all, is most woeful and
miserable, in that hereby she is forced to acknowledge a denouring wolf,
making havoc of the sheep of Christ redeemed with his precious blood, to be
her Pastor and guide. Secondly, some are of opinion, that the Pope, if he
become an open and professed heretic, is deposed ipso facto, by the sentence
of the canon, and that the church may declare, that he is so deposed. Thirdly,
there are that think that an heretical Pope is not deposed ipso facto, but
that he may be deposed by the church. Fourthly, many worthy Divines in the
Roman church heretofore have been of opinion, that the Church or general
Council may depose the Pope, not only for heresy, but also for other
enormous crimes. Of this opinion was Cardinal De Concord. Cathol. l. 2. c, 17.
Cusanus, Cardinal Camerac. in Concilio Constant.
Cameracensis, Gers. de auferibilit. Papae consider. 16.
Gerson Chancellor of Paris, Almaine, and all the Parisians, with Vid. act.
Conc. Constantiens. and Basiliens.
all the worthy Bishops and Divines in the Councels of Constance and Basil.
Yet the Papists at this day for the most part dislike and condemn this
opinion, and acknowledge no deposition of any Pope how ill soever, unless it
be for heresy. And Bellarmine (to make all sure) tells us farther, that the
church does not by any authority depose an heretical Pope, but whereas he is
deposed ipso facto, in that he falls into heresy, only declares the same;
and thereupon largely refuteth the opinion of Cardinal Caietane, Caiet. in
tract. de authorit. Pap. and Conc. c. 20. and 21.
who thinks that the Pope when he falls into heresy, is not deposed ipso
facto, but that deserving to be deposed, the Church does truly, and out of
her authority depose him. First, because, (as he says) if the Church or
Council may depose the Pope from his Papal dignity, against his will, for
what cause soever, it will follow, that the Church is above the Pope, which yet
Caietane denies. For as it will follow, that the Pope is above other Bishops,
and of more authority then they, if he may depose them; so if the council of
Bishops may depose the Pope, they are greater then he. Secondly, he says, to
be put from the Papacy unwillingly, is a punishment; so that if the Church may
depose the Pope, though unwilling to leave his place, it may punish him, and
consequently is above him. For he that has power to punish, has the place of
a Superior and Judge. Thirdly, he that may restrain and limit a man, in the
use and exercise of his ministry and office, is in authority above him;
therefore much more he that may put him from it. By these reasons it is
clearly demonstrated and proved, that if the Church or general Council have
authority in case of heresy to depose the Pope, at least in some sort, it is
of greater authority then the Pope. And therefore to avoid this consequence
(as Gerson loco supra citato.
Gerson rightly notes) they that too much magnify the greatness and
amplitude of Papal power, say, that an heretical Pope, in that he is an
Heretic, cease to be Pope, and is deposed by Almighty God. So that the
Church does not by virtue of her authority and jurisdiction depose him, but
only denounce and declare that he is so deposed by God, and to be taken for
such a one by men, and not to be obeyed. This they endeavor to prove, because
all Titus 3. 11.
Heretics are condemned by their own judgment, as the Apostle says, and
stay not as other evil doers, till the Church cast them out, but voluntarily
depart of themselves from the fellowship of Gods people, and cut themselves off
from the unity of the Body of the Church; thereby ceasing to be members of it,
and consequently losing all authority and command they formerly had. For the
clearing of this point, we are to observe, that there are some who run into
errors so directly contrary to all Christianity, and the sense and judgment of
all Christians, that by the very proposing thereof, they abandon and drive from
them all such as dissent: and are abandoned of all. Secondly, there are some
that run not into errors so directly contrary to the sense and judgment of
all Christians as the former, but with such fury, madness, and pertinacy, that
they utterly reject, forsake, and depart from all such as do dissent, or are
otherwise minded. Thirdly, there are some, who though they be not carried with
such violent fury into error, as to condemn, reject, and depart from all that
dissent, yet they run into old heresies formerly condemned, and so by force
of the former condemnation, are rejected, and put out of the lap and bosom of
the Church. Fourthly, there are some who fall into heretical and dangerous
errors, but neither directly contrary to the common sense of all right
believing Christians, nor formerly condemned by the consenting voice of the
whole Church of God, nor with such pertinacy, as either to refuse to
communicate with them that think otherwise, or to seek to deprive, depose,
degrade, or otherwise violently vex and molest them that are under them, for
not consenting to them in their error. The three former sorts of men falling
into error and heresy, voluntarily cut themselves off from the unity of the
Body of the Church, depart from the fellowship of Gods people, and ipso facto
cease to be members of the Church, and lose all authority and command they
formerly had. So that they need not the Churches censure or sentence to cast
them out, departing of themselves: but it suffices that their breaches and
divisions from the maine body of the Christian Church, be published and made
known, that so they may be avoided. So Act. Council. Ephesians. tom. 1. c. 19.
Caelestinus in his Epistle to John of Antioch, says, that if any one have
been excommunicated, or deprived by Nestorius, or any of his adherents, since
the time they first began to publish their impieties, he still continues in
the communion of his Churches, neither does he judge him to be removed from his
place: and the like he has in his Ibid.
Epistle to the Clergy of Constantinople. But the fourth sort of men erring,
do not cease to be members of the Church, nor lose their places by so erring,
till both the point of doctrine wherein they are deceived be tried and
examined, and by lawful and highest authority be found faulty: and their
pertinacie such, as rather to suffer themselves to be rejected, and put from
the communion of all that are otherwise minded, then to alter their judgments.
August. lib. de Baptism. c. 18.
Cyprian fell into an heretical opinion, that the Baptism of Heretics is
void, and that all that have been baptized by Heretics, are to be
rebaptized. Yet because this point was not examined and condemned in a general
Council, nor his pertinacie therein upon such examination and condemnation,
found such, as rather to suffer himself to be rejected from the communion of
all them that thought otherwise, then to give way and alter his judgment, he
was no heretic, neither did he lose his place of ministry in the Church of
God. The question therefore is, whether if the Pope fell into such an error,
as that of Cyprian, by which he does not actually, and ipso facto divide and
cut off himself, the Church may examine it, and judge him to be rejected, and
put from the communion, if he alter not his judgment. If they say it may, then
has the Church power to judge a Pope that is not an Heretic. For he is not
an Heretic till after such determination, he chooses rather to be rejected
from the communion of the faithful, then to alter his judgment. If it may not
judge the Pope so erring, then might the Popes in former times have taught
rebaptization with Cyprian; the error of the Chiliastes, with sundry of the
Fathers: that all right believers, how wickedly soever they live, shall in the
end be saved, with some of the Ancient; that the just shall not see God till
the resurrection, and the like: and yet the Church have had noe power to force
them to forsake and condemn such errors, or to cease from persuading and
inducing men, both by doctrine and example to err in like sort. And then we
may run into their error, who think, that though the Pope be an heretic,
yet he is neither deposed ipso facto, nor may be deposed, but that the Church
must acknowledge a devouring wolf making hauock of the flock of Christ, to be
her Pastor; which Bellarmine himself thinks to be very absurd. Thus then we
see, that all who fall into heresies, do not cut off themselves from the unity
of the body of the Church, nor lose the jurisdiction and authority they
formerly had, ipso facto, as the Papists (to avoid the deposing of Popes by the
authority of the Church) seem to imagine; but that many do so fall into
heresies, that they go not out of themselves till they be rejected and cast
out. But howsoever our Adversaries must not defend, that Popes falling into
heresies are deposed ipso facto, for if they do, they overthrow the whole
building and fabric of Popery. The constant opinion of almost all later
Papists is, Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 4. cap. 3. Stapleton. Rel. Controu. 3.
quaest. 4.
that howsoever the Pope may personally err and fall into heresy, or become
an Heretic, yet the providence of God over him is such, (because he is
Christ's Vicar, Peter's Successor, heir of the Apostles, and head of the
universal Church) that he cannot define or decree any heresy, or prescribe
unto all Christians to believe amiss. Which conceit cannot stand, but falls
to the ground, and is clearly overthrown, if the Pope by beco^ming an
heretic, be deposed ipso facto. For doubtless if the Pope becoming an
heretic ipso facto cease to be Pope, and to be so much as a member of the
Church, then does not the prayer of Christ for the not failing of Peter's faith
extend to him any longer, neither is he any longer any way privileged, by
virtue of his succeeding blessed Peter, but that he may run into all
extremities in most damnable sort, seek to subvert the faith, to force all to
believe as he does, and define and determine that all shall profess the same
doctrine of Devils, that himself does; seeing when God forsakes him, and
puts him out of his protection, the Devil enters into him as he did into
Judas the traitor. And how violent and strange the mouings of the evil spirit
are, we are not ignorant: for sometimes he casts them that are possessed by
him into the fire, and sometimes into the n Mark 2, 2^.
water: sometimes into one extremity, and sometimes into another. Wherefore
either the Papists must confess, that the Pope may define for heresy, and
then all their religion is ouerthrown: or else they must acknowledge, that he
is not deposed ipso facto, by becoming an heretic, but that he is to be
deposed by the authority of the Church, and so make the Church of greater
authority then the Pope: and then they are in worse case then before. For then,
as the Church by her authority censureth him for heresy, lest he subvert the
faith, misse-leade the People of God, and overthrow religion: so she may
likewise censure him in other cases for the avoiding of the like danger: Seeing
such may be his prodigious and hellish conversation, and his execrable
corruption and violence in doing wrong, in perverting justice, in turning
judgment into wormwood, in violating all laws and Canons, in overthrowing
the jurisdiction of all other Bishops, and in making a scorn of all religion,
as may be as hurtful to the Church as heresy. Now that we speak not of an
impossible or strange thing, or never heard of before, when we speak of
monsters, prodigious and hellish monsters, intruding themselves by sinister
means into the holy chair of blessed Peter, let the Reader peruse the
Platina. in Ioanne 10. Benedicto, 4. Sergio 3. and Christophor. 1. Sigon. de
regno Italiae lib. 6. in vita Formosi.
Histories written of the Popes, by their own friends, and by the lovers of
the Church of Rome, which are full of the villainies of this kind of men, in
which nothing is more ordinary, or more often repeated then those honorable
titles of most wicked Popes, Monstra, teterrimamonstra: monsters, most hydeous
and ougly monsters. Let him cast his eyes upon the 50 Popes mentioned by
Genebr. chronol. lib. 4. Saeculo: 10.
Genebrard (that vassal of the Pope, and sworn enemy of all honest and good
men) which are by him acknowledged to have been monsters, and Apostaticall,
rather then Apostolical: and among them upon that monster of monsters, John
the twelfth, then whom a viler hell-hound never breathed upon the earth, and
who seemed to be a very Devil incarnate.

Wherefore let us pass from the case of heresy, to see whether the Pope may
not be deposed for other enormous crimes publickely scandalous. The chief and
principal reason brought by our Adversaries, to prove that he may not be
judged of any, whatsoever he do, is because he has sovereign authority over
all, and is Prince of the whole Church. But this reason (as de Romans Pon. lib.
2. c. 26.
Bellarmine confesses) is Petitio principii, that is, a gross begging of that
which is in question; and besides, they who bring this proof, run round in a
circle, and make themselves giddy by sophistical circulation. For thus they
dispute. The Pope has an absolute sovereignty over all, and is Prince of the
whole Church, because no man may judge him; and if any man doubt, whether he
may be judged or not, they prove full wisely that he may not; because he has
an absolute sovereignty. Wherefore the Cardinal leaves the proving of this
point by reason, and undertakes to demonstrate the same by authorities. But
they are such as are not much to be esteemed. For either they prove not the
point in question, or else they may justly be suspected of forgery and
corruption.

The first testimony he alleges, is out of the Council of Sinuessa, which
was called (as it is supposed) by the Clergy of Rome, in the time of Dioclesian
the Emperor, to examine the fact of Marcellinus, that had sacrificed unto
Idols. Of the acts of this Council, Binnius in his Annotations upon the same,
in the first Tome of the Counsels, says: That very many of the best learned
Divines, do think them to be mere counterfeits, and of no esteem or credit,
and that they were but the device of the Donatists, seeking to blemish the
blessed memory of Marcellinus, whom all antiquity much esteemed and honored.
Whereupon Saint Aug. de vnico Baptismo co^tra Petilian. l. 1. c. 16.
Augustine says, that certain Donatists objected the fall of Marcellinus to
the Catholics, but that they could never yet prove any such crime to have
been committed by him, as they charged him with. Howsoever there are many most
strong and forcible arguments to prove, that the acts of this Council are
mere forgeries. For first, whereas this Council is said to have been holden
at Sinuessa, in a certain vault or cave under the ground, that was named the
vault or cave of Cleopatra, there is no History, nor no Writer that mentions
any such cave, nor any man that can tell of any the least memorial of any such
thing. Neither does that answer satisfy men, that many famous cities have
been made desolate by Earthquakes, and many mountains and plains have
changed both their situation, place, and name. For howsoever they lost their
old names, and are called by new, yet their old names remain still in those
ancient Writers, wherein formerly they were; but the name of this cave or
vault cannot be found in any ancient Writer whatsoever. Secondly, it is very
strange, that in the time of Dioclesian, when the persecution was hottest, and
the flame of that fire consumed and wasted all that came near it, three
hundred Bishops should be assembled together, and meet in such a cave,
whereinto they could not all enter; and so hide themselves, but only 50 at a
time, leaving the rest abroad to be spied and apprehended: then which, what can
be more unlikely? For they are reported to have made choice of a cave to meet
in, that by hiding themselves they might decline the fury of their bloody
enemies, and yet this cave is described to have been in a city, and of so
small receipt and narrow compass, that only 50 could enter into it at a time.
So that 250 were always in open view abroad in the city. Thirdly, in the
accusation that is brought against Marcellinus, it is said, that Dioclesian
brought him into the Temple of Vesta and Isis, and that he caused him to
sacrifice to Saturn and Jupiter; whereas it is certain that diverse Gods and
Goddesses among the heathen had their diverse Temples, so that they never used
to sacrifice to Jupiter in the Temple of Vesta, or to Vesta in the Temple of
Jupiter or Mars. Fourthly, the Author of the Pontifical says, Marcellinus did
sacrifice, and a few days after repenting of that he had done, was martyred.
Now how 300 Bishops in so few days could be brought together, I think
neither the Authors nor the patrons of these forgeries can easily tell us.
These and the like reasons, are brought by Cardinal Baron. annal. Tom. 2.
anno. 303.
Baronius and others, who (thinking that to acknowledge that Marcellinus did
sacrifice to idols, does more disadvantage their cause, then any thing decreed
in it does help it) incline to say, that the acts of this Council are
counterfeite, and that all these things were devised by the enemies of the Sea
Apostolic. But others thinking that the fact of this Pope may be excused, and
supposing that the Decree of this council, that the first See is to be judged
of none, may much help their helpless cause: and Binn. annot. in conc.
Sinuessanum.
for that otherwise they shall be driven to discredit it, their Martyrologies,
and their Breviaries, and Pope Nicholas the first, who urges the saying of
these supposed Bishops in his Epistle to Michael the Emperor, admit this
Council as if it were of credit, and urge the authority of it to confirm
things questioned between them and us; though they be not able to answer the
reasons of the other side, to the satisfaction of any indifferent man: for this
is the manner of these Iesuited Papists, to reject or admit nothing otherwise,
then as they think it may make for them or against them. But to leave them
thus striving and contending one with another, and to come to the saying
alleged by Bellarmine out of this supposed Council, it no way makes for
them, but against them, and cannot stand with the grounds of their own
Divinity, unless they will be of their opinion, who think that the church
must endure an heretical Pope, and that he must be still taken to be a
shepherd of the sheep of Christ, though as a devouring wolf, he make havocke
of the flock of Christ. For is not Infidelity as badde as Heresy? And did not
Marcellinus as much endanger the Church of Rome, and the Religion of
Christians, in making friendship with Dioclesian, by sacrificing to his Idols,
as Liberius did by subscribing to the Arrians wicked proceedings against
Athanasius, and communicating with Heretics? Was it lawful for the clergy
of Rome, upon the knowledge of Liberius his fact to depose him; and might not
the same clergy assisted with three hundred Bishops, judge and depose
Marcellinus? But here we may see the partiality of these Papists, and that
they write without all conscience. For Bellarmine being to justify Felix to be
a true Pope, who possessed the place while Liberius u De Pont. l. 4. c. 9.
lived, says, that in his entrance he was a schismaticke (Liberius yet
living, and continuing a Catholic Bishop:) but that after the fall of
Liberius, for which the Church did lawfully depose him, he was by the same
church, admitted and taken for a true Bishop. Yea, though Liberius were not in
heart an Heretic, but was presumed to be an Heretic, only because he
made peace with the Arrians, and so was an Heretic in his outward courses and
acts, of which men are to judge, and not of the heart. And yet touching Ib.
cap. 8.
Marcellinus, he says, he thinks he lost not his Popedom, nor might not
be deposed from it for that most execrable externe act of idolatry and
infidelity, because it might be thought he did it out of fear. Shall the
uncertain conjecture of the motive that made him do so vile an act, excuse him
from being proceeded against, as an Infidel that does the works of an
Infidel? and shall not the like conjectures stay the proceedings against men
as Heretics, upon their outward concurring with Heretics in some things?
Shall fear excuse Marcellinus? and shall not the impatience of Liberius (no
longer able to endure such intolerable vexations as he was subject to) excuse
him? was it not as strongly presumed, that impatience moved the one to do that
he did, as fear the other? Yes surely much more. For if we may believe the
acts of this feigned Council, Marcellinus was rather won with flattery and
fair promises, then forced with terrors, the Emperor seeking to win him
with kindness, and not to force him with severity and extremity, being
persuaded by Alexander, and Romanus, so to do. For that if he could insinuate
himself into the affection of the Bishop, and assure him unto himself, he
might thereby easily gain the whole city. Thus having examined the first
testimony produced by the Romanists to prove that the Bishops of the Roman
See may not be judged, and found it to be of no credit, let us see if the
next will be any better.

The next is taken out of the Roman Council under Pope Sylvester, consisting
of 284 Bishops, wherein we find these words: Cap. 20.
Neque ab Augusto, neque a Regibus, neque ab omni Clero, neque a populo
iudicabitur primasedes: that is, The first See shall not be judged neither by
Augustus, neither by Kings, neither by the whole Clergy, neither by the
people. Before we come to answer this authority, we must observe, that many
things are most fondly and fabulously devised and attributed to this Syluester,
under whom this imagined Roman Council is supposed to have been holden. For
whereas Eusebius. de vita Constantini. li. 1. cap. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26.
Eusebius, Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Zozomen, and other Historians of credit report, that the conversion of
Constantine the great was partly out of those good lessons he had learned of
his father, and partly by a strange apparition of the sign of the Cross, with
an inscription in it: in hoc vince, that is, in this ouercom, appearing to him
in the air when preparing himself to the war against Maxentius, he
carefully bethought himself to what God he should betake him, and whose help
among the Gods he should specially seek; and partly by a vision of Christ
appearing to him: whereupon he sent for the Priests of that God that had so
manifested himself unto him, and learned of them what God he was. Those fond
men Vide Acta Syluestri quae extant in epist. quadam decretali, Tomo 2. Epist.
Pontif. item Action. 1. Council. Niceni 2. and Baronium anno 324. number. 32. and
Seq. and Binnium in not^s in vita Syluestri.
that published the feigned acts of Syluester, report, that Constantine after
many horrible murders of his nearest Kinsmen, and the parricide of his own
son Crispus, being stricken with leprosy, was wished by the South-sayers to
whom he sought for counsel and advice, to take the blood of Innocents, and to
bathe himself in it for the curing of his leprosy; but that discouraged from
the effusion thereof by the piteous cries of their tender mothers, he be
thought himself better, and sought expiation of his grievous crimes, which all
other denying to him, for so grievous offenses, Hosius of Corduba told him that
the Christians could purge him, and Peter and Paul appearing to him, told him,
he must recall Syluester out of his hiding place, whither he was gone for
fear, and seek baptism of him; and that then he should be purged both from
the impurity of his soul and body, which accordingly was done, and he
recovered. In thankful requital whereof he cast down the Temples of the
false Gods, builded many Christian Churches, and gave to Syluester the city of
Rome, with all Italy, and many other provinces besides, making him temporal
Lord of all those places. Whereas it is most certain, that Constantine was not
baptized till a little before his death, as it appears by Eusebius. lib. 4. de
vita Constantini. cap. 61. 62.
Eusebius, by Hieronym. in Chronico.
Hierome, and by the Synodal Epistle of the Counsel of Ariminum, written to
Constantius, reported by Theodor. hist. lib. 2. cap. 26.
Theodoret, Socrates lib. 2. cap. 29.
Socrates, and Sozom. lib 4. cap. 17.
Zozomen; and as certain, that Constantine was a Christian Emperor, before
Syluester was Bishop. For Eusebius. hist. lib. 10, cap. (...).
in the days of Melchiades his predecessor, he took notice of the
differences among Bishops, in respect of Caecilianus, and rested not till he
had composed them; professing that he so honored the Catholic Church, that
he could not endure any schism to be in it. Notwithstanding the same authors
of lies go forward, and tell us, after the Baptism of Constantine by
Syluester, of a Council holden at Rome by the same Syluester, consisting of
284. Bishops, brought thither, and maintained there at the Emperors charges.
But there are many things that bewray it to be a mere counterfeit. For first it
has a senseless title; for it is named another Roman Council under
Syluester the first, whereas no man can tell of any besides this. Secondly, it
is fronted with a brief Epilogue in steed of a Preface. Thirdly, there is
scarce any sense to be made of any one sentence throughout the whole.
Fourthly, it is said to consist of 139 Bishops out of the city of Rome, or not
far from it, and the rest out of Greece; whereas all men know, the city of
Rome had but one Bishop, so that it was senseless to say, there were in that
Council 139 Bishops out of the city of Rome, or not far from it. And
besides, all men see, how silly a thing it was to muster so many names of
Bishops, without specifying the places whereof they were Bishops. Fifthly,
whereas it is said to have consisted of 284 Bishops out of the city of Rome,
and places near to it, and out of Greece, as if it had been a general
Council; it is strange that the Histories reporting far meaner Councels then
this is supposed to have been, should never make any mention of this, nor the
occasion of calling it. Sixthly, whereas the supposed Fathers of this Council,
do condemn (though in very senseless manner) certain unknown heretics, it
is strange they should make no mention of the Arrians, who were famous, and
This Council was holden after the ending of the Nicene Council, if we may
believe the Epilogue before i^.
at that time troubled all the East. Seventhly, the end why these supposed
Fathers met, was ridiculous. For thus it is expressed, i Vt Ecclesiae regia non
vatieinentur, sed sit fi^ma, and claudat ostium propter persecutorem. Or as
another Edition has it: Vt Ecclesia regia non vacilletur, sed sit firma, and
claudat ostium propter (...) Cap. 1.
persecutorem. For why should these good men forbid the kingly Churches to
prophecy? or why should they fear the shaking or tottering of them? or shut
the door for fear of the persecutor, after Constantine, was become a
Christian, baptized by Syluester, and in requital of his kindness, had given
him all the Empire of the West? Lastly, whereas the manner of Councels was that
the Bishops sat round in a compass, the Presbyters sat behind them, and the
Deacons stood before them: the Conci. Carth. 4. canone 34.
Council of Carthage forbids a Bishop to sit, and suffer a Presbyter to
stand: Hieron. Epist. 85. ad Euagrium.
and Hierome shows, that even in Rome, the manner was, that Presbyters did
sit, and Deacons stand: here it is noted, that none sat but Bishops. These
things being observed touching the credit of this Council, let us come to the
Decrees of it, by which the Pope would exempt himself from all judgment of
men, whatsoever villanyes he should chance to commit. Thus then the Decrees of
this sacred Synod are passed in favor of the Pope. First it is decreed, that
no Presbyter a die onus Presbyterij (latin fitter for Hog-heards m Cap. 19.
then Bishops) shall marry, and that if he do, he shall loose his honor for
12. years. Secondly, it is ordered thus: That if any one shall do against this
present handwriting, he n Cap. 19. and 20.
shall be condemned for ever. For let no man judge the first See: for neither
shall the Judge be judged of Augustus, nor of all the Clergy, nor of Kings, nor
People. These senseless Decrees of a fained and ridiculous Synod, our
adversaries (such is their poverty in this cause) bring forth, as good
authorities for the Pope. But I think the reader will not much be moved with
them, unless it be to pity those that lived before us, who were abused with
such fooleries, and shameless forgeries: and to give thanks to God that has
given us means to descry the cozening devices of Satan's Agents. Neither does
it any thing assure us of the truth of this Council, that Pope Nicholas was
content to make use of it in his Epistle to Michael the Emperor of
Constantinople, seeing he cites also in the same Epistle the Roman Synod
under Sixtus the third, in the cause of Polychronius Bishop of Jerusalem,
whereas yet not withstanding Annot. in acta de Synodali accusat. and expurg.
Polychronij. Tom. 1. Council.
Binnius says confidently, that every learned man will pronounce the acts of it
to be counterfeit, if he attend the names of the Consuls in whose times it is
supposed to have bin holden: the name of him that was accused, and other things
described in those supposed and pretended acts.

To these they add another authority (as it may seem) of the same stamp, out
of the Tomo 1. Conciliorum.
Council of Rome under Sixtus the third, which they endeavor to strengthen
with certain sayings out of a book of one Euodius a Deacon, admitted, and
allowed in the fifth Council under Symmachus. The Roman Council under Sixtus
was called to examine a very foul fact, wherewith Sixtus was charged, which
was the abusing of one Chrysogonet, a professed and consecrated virgin. In this
Council Sixtus presented himself, and professed that it was in his power and
choice either to submit himself to the judgment of the Council, or to refuse
it; and yet voluntarily referred his cause to be there heard: whence our
Auersaries suppose they may infer that all the world may not judge the Pope
against his will. The Barbarismes, and manifold senceles absurdities that are
found in this Council, may justly make us suspect it of forgery. But admitting
it to have bin a lawful Synod, no such thing can be concluded out of it, as
our adversaries dream of. For it was but a Diocesan Synod, and there was
never a Bishop in it, besides Sixtus, whom they went about to judge. And
therefore it was not to be maruailed at, if Sixtus said, it was in his power
and choice whether he would be judged by the Presbyters and Deacons of his
own Church, or not: seeing no Bishop, be he never so mean, may be judged by
the Clergy of his own Church, but by the Synod of the Bishops of the province:
and therefore I greatly fear, they will hardly draw a good argument from hence,
to prove, that the Pope may not at all be judged. For I think it will not
follow: Maximus the exconsul said, it was not lawful for those Laymen, and
inferior Clergymen the^ assembled, to give sentence against the B: of Rome;
and the B: himself protested that he might choose, whether he would be judged
by them or not: therefore the whole Christian world may not judge the Pope.
Wherefore let us come to the sayings of Euodius, and see whether they confirm
the Romish conceit any better. The occasion of the writing of this book of
Euodius, was this: Synod. Romana 3. sub Symmacho. in 2. Tom. Council.
Symmachus the Bishop of Rome, being charged with certain grievous crimes, was
to be judged in a Synod called by Theodoricus the King, not without his own
consent. To this Council he was willing to come, and to submit him self to the
judgment of it; only he desired restitution of such things as had been
taken from him, till he were convicted: which he could not obtain, and yet
presented himself in the Synod. But such was the fury and violence of his
enemies pressing in upon him, that he was in very great danger of his life; and
therefore after the first time, would come no more to the place where the
Bishops sat. Whereupon they not knowing what to do (for it was not fit to
judge him being absent, and there was no reason to proceed against him as
contumacious in refusing to come unto them, seeing his refusal seemed to
proceed from just fear of danger) utterly refused and disclaimed the trying of
his cause, and the judging of it; moved not a little so to do, because great
multitudes of the people communicated with him, and they had no president of
such proceedings against former Bishops. The King somewhat offended herewith,
told them, that if they did not discuss the cause, they would give an ill
example to all Bishops to live wickedly, and at their pleasure, in hope of
impunity; and yet left the matter wholly to them, who did nothing in it, but
only persuaded to unity. Hereupon there grew some distraction among the
Clergy and people of Rome, and some thought the Bishops had done ill in
leaving the matter unexamined. Upon which occasion one Euodius a Deacon,
writes a book in defense of their proceedings, which they approve in their
fifth Synod or meeting, wherein among other things he has these words: Lex
probitatis and mentis est, quae hominem viventem sine lege castigat: proprie
moribus impendit qui necessitati non debet disciplinam. Aliorum forte hominum
causas Deus voluit homines terminare, sed sedis istius Praesulis suo sine
quaestione reservavit arbitrio. Voluit beati Petri Apostoli successores coelo
tantum debere innocentiam, and sublimissimi discussoris indagini iuviolatam
exhibere conscientiam. That is, The Law of virtue and of the mind keeps them
in awe, who live without any other law. He that is not otherwise enforced to
live well, will live orderly for the love of order and good life. Happily God
would have the causes of other men ended by men, but the causes of the Bishop
of this See he reserved no doubt to his own judgment: and his pleasure was,
that the successors of blessed Peter should be accountable for their good or
ill living to Heaven only, and present and exhibit their consciences kept
inviolable to the examination of the most exquisite examiner. For answer to
this allegation we say, that neither the credit of Euodius is so great, that
upon his bare word we should be bound to believe him, nor the authority of
these Fathers such, that whatsoever they approve and allow, must be holden for
good. Notwithstanding, admitting these sayings to be true, their own
Canonists and Divines in their Glosses, do limite and restrain them with
certain exceptions. For first they say, the case of heresy must be excepted,
1 Vide Ockam. dial. l. 6. part. 1. c. 62
there being no question, but that the Pope may be judged and condemned by
men, if he become an heretic. Secondly, the case of Penitential confession,
wherein he yields himself, as in duty bound so to do, to be judged, directed,
and commanded for his souls good, by him to whom he is pleased to reveal the
estate of the same. Thirdly, the case of voluntary submission. It is in my
power (says Pope Sixtus) to be judged or not, but let matters be examined,
and the truth found out. And in like sort, Symmachus submitted himself to be
judged by the Council of Bishops. Fourthly, the case of incorrigible
wickedness, when the Church is grievously scandalized by the notorious ill
life and wickedness of the Pope, and he is found incorrigible in the same.
This case the Gloss excepteth, warranted so to do by the very light of
natural reason, which teaches us, that when any member of the Body, after the
cutting off whereof the body may live and continue, infecteth and endangereth
the rest, and is incurable, it may, and ought to be cut off. Now though the
Pope should in a sort be acknowledged to have the proportion of the head in the
body of the church, yet is he herein unlike unto a natural head, for that the
body of the church dies not when he is taken away from it; and therefore to
stop the deadly infectio^ of his impiety, and outrageous wickedness from
spreading it self any further, he may be cut off. So that this is the only
difference between the Pope and other Bishops, that other may be judged,
though they be not incorrigible, but he is not to be judged of any other,
without his own consent and concurrence, when he may be induced to reform and
correct what is amiss, as being the chief of that company that is to judge of
ill doers; but if he be incorrigible, he may be proceeded against, even
against his will, as we see by the example of Sigebert. Anno. 963. Otho.
Frisingens. li. 6. cap. 23.
John the twelfth, who being prodigiously wicked, and after many and most
earnest admonitions, entreaties and persuasions, of the Emperor and others,
refusing any way to reform himself, the Emperor called a Council, and
deposed him, and chose another to succeed him; and that this deposition was
lawful and good, it is evident, in that the succeeding Pope was holden to be a
true and lawful Pope while he yet lived. But concerning Gregory t Otho
Frising. lib. cap. 32.
the Pope, Henry the third, did rather persuade him to yield, and to relinquish
his place, then depose him, because he found him tractable.

Two other authorities our Adversaries have yet behind, to prove that the Pope
may not be judged. The first, is out of the Council of Action. 3. Epi. ad Man.
and Valentinianum.
Chalcedon, where the Fathers among many other reasons alleged why they
condemned Dioscorus, urge this also as one, that he was so far from
repenting of his manifold evil doings, that he railed against the Apostolic
See, sought to excommunicate blessed Leo, and persisting in his wickedness, was
wilful against the whole Council, and refused to answer to such things as he
was charged with. How it will be inferred from hence that the Pope may not be
judged by a general Council, I see not. For though it be true that the
inferiors may not judge the greater and superior; and that therefore John of
Antioch was condemned for judging Cyril of Alexandria, and Dioscorus for
judging Leo, yet it is no way consequent that either Cyril or Leo, were free
from all judgment, or that they might not be judged by a general Council,
whatsoever they should do. The other authority is out of the Roman Council
under Adrian the second, whose words recited in the eigth general Council are
these: We read that the Roman Bishops have x Action 7.
judged the Bishops of all Churches, but that any one has judged them, we do
not read. For the better understanding and clearing whereof, we must observe,
first that the person of the Bishop of Rome alone is not meant, when he is said
to have judged the Bishops of all Churches; but he must be understood to have
judged them with his Synod, and the Bishops subject to him, as Patriarch of
the West. For otherwise he might not, nor did not judge any B. of himself
alone. 2, That being B. of the first See, he, with his associates, might judge
any other B. or Patriarch, but no particular Patriarch with his Bishops might
judge him and his, because Vide Ockam. Dialog. lib 6. part. 1. cap. 1.
there is no particular person, or company of men, greater then he and his,
being chief Patriarch of the world: but that both he and his may be judged
by a general Council, it appears by the eight general Council, wherein
the words now urged, are recited. For that Canone 21.
Council takes order that all the Patriarchs shall be honored and
respected, and especially the Bishop of Rome, and forbids any man to compose
any bills or writings against him, under pretense of some crimes, wherewith
they will charge him, as Dioscorus did: but that if there be a general
Council, and any question be moved touching the Roman Church, they may in
reverent and due sort determine the same, though they may not proceed
contemptuously against the Roman Bishop. And so first, the Council of Canone
6.
Nice gave laws, as to the other two Patriarchs, so likewise to the Bishop
of Rome, and included him within his own bounds and limits. Secondly, the
Council of Action 16.
Chalcedon made the Bishop of Constantinople a Patriarch, and the Bishop of
Romes Peer, notwithstanding the resistance of those that were there present on
the behalf of Leo, then Bishop of Rome, and the other Bishops of the West. And
this decree in the end prevailed, so that after much contradiction, and long
continued opposition, the Bishops of Rome were forced to yield unto it.
Thirdly, Cusan. Concord. cathol. lib. 2. cap. 1^.
general Councels reexamined and judged again things judged by the Bishop of
Rome, and his Bishops, as the Council of Chalcedon reexamined the judgment of
Leo against Dioscorus, and for Theodoret. And the sixth general Council, the
judgment of Pope Martine, with his Synodes against Pyrrhus, and Sergius: and
the eighth, the judgments of Nicholas and Adrian against Photius. August.
Epist. 152.
Augustine speaking of the sentence of the 70. Bishops against Caecilianus,
retracted and reuersed by Melchiades Bishop of Rome and his colleagues (whom
upon the suites of the Donatists, Constantine appointed to hear the matter)
says, they therefore appealed to the judgments of the Bishops beyond the
Seas, that if by any falsehood and slanders they could prevail, they might
gain the cause: if not, they might say (as all men that have ill causes are
wont to do) that they met with bad judges. But (says he) let us grant that
those Bishops that judged the matter at Rome, were not good Judges; yet there
remained a general Council of the whole Church for them to fly unto, where
the matter might anew have been handled with the former Judges; that their
sentences might be reuersed, if they should have been convinced to have judged
ill. Which thing if they did; let them make it appear unto us. We prove they
did not, because all the world communicated with Caecilianus, and not with
Donatus and his adherents. So that either they never brought the matter to be
scanned in a general Council, or else they were therein condemned also. Here
we See he clearly acknowledges the general Council to have power to
reexamine and reuerse the judgment of the Bishop of Rome and his colleagues.
Saint Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 38.
Gregory likewise acknowledges the universal Church to be greater then he
and his. For, professing to follow the direction of Christ (in the matter
between him and the Bishop of Constantinople) who wills us, if our brother
offend against us, to go and admonish him between him and us; and if then he
hear us not, to take two or three with us, that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word may stand: and if he hear not them, then to tell the
Church, he says, that he had first sent to the Bishop of Constantinople, and
by his messengers admonished him in all gentle and loving sort; and that now he
writes unto him, omitting nothing that in all humility he ought to do: but
that seeing he is thus despised, there remains nothing, but that he use the
help of the Church, for the repressing of the insolency of this man, so
prejudicial to the state of the whole Church. Fourthly, general Councels have
by their decrees ordained many things concerning the Sea of Rome, either
enlarging or limitting the power of it, and the exercise of the same, as it
seemed good unto them: as we see in the Council of Canone 3. and 17.
Sardica. Hosius with the Bishops there assembled, resolved in the honor of
the memory of Peter, to make a Decree, that Bishops condemned by the
Bishops of their own Provinces, might appeal to the Bishop of Rome: and
that it might be lawful for him upon such appeal to write to the Bishops of
the next Province to reexamine the matter again: And if he pleased, to send
some from himself to sit with them in joint commission. Neither did the
Bishops of Rome, Vt patet in Concilio Carthag. 6.
Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Caelestinus, urge the law of Christ, or the right of
Saint Peter, to justify their claim of receiving appeals out of Africa, but
the Decrees of h Action 16.
the Nicene Council. And this is farther confirmed in that the Bishops in the
Council of Chalcedon say, the Fathers gave the pre-eminence to the Bishop of
Rome in ancient times, because it was the seat of the Empire: and that
therefore now, they would give the like to Constantinople, now become the seat
of the Empire, and named new Rome. And as general Councels gave preheminences
to the Roman Bishops, so also they restrained and limited them in the use of
their jurisdiction, when they saw them to incroch too much: as the Council of
Ca 16. and 17.
Sardica took order, that they should not meddle with the causes of Presbyters
and inferior Clergymen upon any appeal, but leave them to to their own
Bishops, and the Synodes of the Provinces, and in the case of Bishops
appealing, not to reuerse the acts of the Synod of any province without
another Synod of the Bishops of the next Province. And the Councels of Action
16.
Chalcedon, and Constantinople the Canone 17.
eighth decreed, that the Bishop This Council of Chalcedon speaks only of
the Patriarche of Constantinople in that restraint, but making him equal with
the Bishop of Rome by the same Canon, restrains the one as much as the other.
Rome, and the other Patriarchs shall confirm the Metropolitanes subject unto
them, by sending the Pall, or by imposition of hands, but shall not
intermeddle in the ordination of Bishops. Fifthly, it appears that the
Roman Bishops; are inferior to the whole Church. First, in that their Legates
Synod. general. 6. action 1.
rise up when they speak in general Councels. And secondly, in that in the
council of Act council. Ephesians. tom. 4. c. 19.
Ephesus, when they with others were sent by the council to the Emperor, they
were willed precisely to follow the directions and instructions given them. For
that if they did not, all their proceedings should be voided, and they
rejected from the communion of the rest. Sixthly, in that the sixth general
council particularly gives laws to the Church of Rome. For in the thirteenth
canon it reprehendeth the Roman Church, because it forbids Presbyters,
Deacons, and Subdeacons, to live in matrimonial society with their wives, and
commands it to leave them to their own liberty in this behalf. And in the
55 canon it reprehendeth the same Roman Church for fasting on Saturdayes in
Lent, and forbids the continuing of that observation any longer. Seventhly,
the Cusan. conc. cath. l. 2. c. 13
Pope is but a Bishop, as appears in that he is ordained by Bishops, and in
that Dionysius acknowledges no higher dignity in the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, then that of a Bishop. Now all Bishops, as Bishops, are equal. For
howsoever Metropolitanes in Provinces, and Primates, or Patriarchs in their
larger circuites, are in all common businesses to be first sought unto, that
actions of that nature may take beginning from them; yet have they no voice
neither affirmative nor negative, in determining or concluding things otherwise
then as the mayor part of those Bishops among which they are in order first,
shall sway them; and therefore they have not a more ample jurisdiction then
other Bishops, but in the administration and exercise of the power of
jurisdiction common to them and other, they have the first place, and are in
honor before others. Wherefore seeing the Pope has not any dignity or
ordination Ecclesiastical, greater then that of a Bishop, and all Bishops by
Gods Law are equal in the power of jurisdiction, howsoever in the execution
and exercise thereof, some be before other, there is no question to be made,
but that the Pope is subject to some censure and judgment. Eighthly, tbe Pope
being a Bishop, and the Councels making laws generally to bind Bishops, it is
not to be doubted but that the same Laws and Canons do bind him. Now many of
those laws and canons do deprive them that shall offend against them, ipso
facto, and other make them depriueable. Therefore he is subject to censure and
judgment. To this our Adversaries answer, Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 2, c. 27
That the laws and canons of general councels do not extend to the Pope, but
only to such as are subject to them, as inferior Bishops, and such as are
below the condition of Bishops. But this answer is easily refuted, because the
Ex diurno libro did. 16 c. 4
Popes anciently at the time of their admission, did by a solemn profession
bind themselves to the observation of the Decrees of general councels, in as
precise and strict sort as any other Bishops. The form of their profession was
this: Sancta octo vniversalia Concilia usque ad unum apicem immutilata servare,
and pari honor, and veneratione digna habere, and quae praedicaverunt and
statuerunt, modis omnibus sequi and praedicare, quaeque condemnaverunt, ore and
cord condemnare profiteor; that is, I profess to keep inviolable the sacred
eight general Councels, even to the uttermost title and iota, and to esteem
them worthy of equal honor and reverence, and by all means to follow and
publish those things which they published and decreed, and to condemn with
mouth and heart whatsoever things they condemned. But Bell. ubi supra. Quoad
directionem, non quoad coactionem.
they will say perhaps, the Pope is in such sort bound to keep the laws of
the church, and the canons of general councels, that he offends God, and
shall be punished by him if he keep them not. But that no man has power to
punish him for the not keeping of them, or to force him to keep them. And that
therefore though he neglect his own salvation, s Dictum Bonifacii did. 4. Si
Papa.
and the salvation of his brethren, yea, though he draw innumerable multitudes
with him into hell, there to perish everlastingly with the devil and his
angels, yet no council, nor company of mortal men upon earth may presume to
censure him, unless he err from the faith, because he being to judge all,
must be judged of none. This answer will be found very insufficient and weak;
for seeing (as it is before proved) all Bishops are equal in the power of
jurisdiction, one has no more power to make laws then another, neither can
any one actiuely bind other to the observation of any thing more then any other
may bind him. And therefore if other Bishops cannot bind the Pope by their
laws, he cannot bind them by his, and so by this means all shall be left free
to do what they will. For it is true of all Bishops that Cyp. in Conc. Cartha:
and lib. 2. ep. 1.
Cyprian speaks of himself, and the Roman Bishop, that none of them
severally has power to judge other, but they are accountant only to God; yet
is every Bishop subject to the companies of Bishops, whereof he is but a
part; and if any one having none other dignity or ordination but that of a
Bishop, may exempt himself from being subject to the Synodes of Bishops, every
one may, and so all shall be set loose and at liberty to do what they list.
But here perhaps some man will say, the Metropolitanes cannot be judged by the
Bishops of the provinces, as being in a sort heads of those companies of
Bishops, but by greater Synodes: therefore the Roman Bishop, being Primate of
the chief part of the Christian world, as Patriarch of the West; and president
of a general Council, as being the first among the Patriarchs, is not to be
judged at all, there being no greater company of Bishops to judge him, then
those of which he is in a sort head and president. For answer whereunto,
first we say, that the Bishops of the Provinces may judge the Metropolitanes
in all those cases, wherein their places are made void, and they put from all
Ecclesiastical honor, ipso facto, by force of the canon it self, that is,
they may declare, that they are by the sentence of them that made the canon
voided out of their places, and consequently, the Bishops of the West subject
to the Pope, as their Primate or Patriarch may judge him, that is, declare and
pronounce, that he is deposed by the sentence of the canon, in all such cases,
wherein Bishops are deposed, ipso facto. Secondly, we say, that though
ordinary Bishops may not be deposed without consulting the Metropolitan, nor
the Metropolitan without consulting the Patriarch, nor the Patriarch of a
meaner See, without consulting them of greater and superior Sees, because
still there is an higher to whom to go: yet he that is the first and in order
before all other, if by no other means he may be induced to reform himself,
or voluntarily to relinquish his place (if his offense so require) may, in case
of grievous and scandalous wickedness, wherein he is found incorrigible, be
deposed by them that are in a sort inferior to him. Neither need this to
seem strange in the deposition of Bishops, seeing the same falls out in
their ordinations. For ordinary Bishops may not be ordained without the
Metropolitanes, who are in order and honor greater then they, nor
Metropolitanes without the Patriarchs, from whom they are to receive
imposition of hands, or confirmation by a Pall sent unto them. But the
Patriarchs are ordained by their own Bishops, and have no imposition of hands
of any that are greater then themselves, nor other confirmation then that which
the meanest is to give to the greatest, as well as the greatest to the meanest.
But some man will say, is there then no difference between him that is the
first among Bishops, and them that are of an inferior condition? Is he no more
exempted from judgment then they? surely no: yet, as some think, there is
some difference between him and them, because they may be judged, though not
incorrigible; but he as being in order and honor the first, is not to be
judged, if by any other means he may be induced to reform himself, or
voluntarily to relinquish his place, if his fault so require. And that in this
case, as well as for heresy, the Pope may be deposed, we have many of the best
learned Papists consenting with us: as Ockam. Dial. l: 6. part. 1. c. 62.
Ockam, Cusan. concord. Cathol. l. 2. cap. 17.
Cusanus, Cameracensis, Gers. de auferibilitate Papae, consid. 16.
Gerson, Almain.
Almaine, the Bishops and Divines in the Counsels of Constance and Basil,
Dried. de dog. matib. extra can. script. sac. constit, l. 4. c. 4.
Driedo; and in a word, all those that think the Council to be of greater
authority then the Pope.

CHAP. 41.
Of the titles given to the Pope, and the insufficiency of the proofs of his
illimited power and Jurisdiction taken from them.

SEEING the universality of the Popes power and jurisdiction cannot be proved
from any exemption he has from being judged; let us proceed to consider the
next proof taken from the names and titles given to him, which is more weak
then any other. For we shall find that other Bishops in ancient times,
writing to the Roman Bishop, sometimes call him brother, sometimes
fellow-bishop and colleague, sometimes Bishop, sometimes Archbishop, sometimes
Patriarch; but that they never gave him any title whence he may be proved to
have an universality of illimited jurisdiction over all.

The first title that our Adversaries Bell. de Romans Pont. li. 2. c. 3^.
urge is that of Pope, which (as I think) will hardly prove the Roman Bishop
to have power over all. For whereas Papa or Papas, among the Greeks signifies
a father, and is the appellation that little children beginning to speak are
wont to give to their parents; and in like sort among the Latins notes a
father or grandfather; hence the Christians in ancient times, did use to call
their spiritual Fathers and Bishops Papes or Popes. So that the name of Pape
or Pope was a common name to all Bishops. Whereupon Hier. in omnib Epist. ad
Augustinum.
Hierome writing to Augustine, calls him Pope, and writes, To the most
honorable Pope; whereas yet he was not universal Bishop, but Bishop of
little Hippo only: and therefore the name of Pope does no way prove every one
that is so called, to be universal Bishop. But they say, the Bishop of Rome is
named absolutely Pope, and none other Bishop, and that whenever the name of
Pope was used absolutely without addition, all men understood thereby the
Roman Bishop to be meant. Whence it may be inferred, that he was greater
then all the rest, as being esteemed a common father of all. But for answer
hereunto we say, that the Roman Bishop was never in ancient times named
absolutely the Pape or Pope, without specification of his name, or the place
whereof he was Pope, but when by some other circumstance it might be known,
what Pape or Pope it was men speak of, accordingly as men are wont to say no
more, but, the Bishop did this or that, when by things going before, it may be
known what Bishop they mean; and so the Vicars of Leo in the Council of
Action 16.
Chalcedon said: The most blessed and Apostolic man the Pope gave them such
directions, as they there specify, without adding of Rome, or the name of Leo,
because all men knew, from what Pope they came, and whose Vicegerents they were
in that Council. For otherwise without some circumstances specifying the
party, men would never have understood whom they had meant, if they had only
named the Pope indefinitely. But the same vicars of Leo, in the Council of
Chalcedon, call him Pope of the universal Church; Therefore, Vbi supr^.
says Bellarmine, we may conclude him to be supreme and absolute commander
over all, out of the titles given unto him. If the Cardinal would but remember
that every Bishop is interessed in the care and government of the whole
Church (as I have elsewhere showed out of Cypr. lib 3. epist. 13.
Cyprian) he would easily find the weakness of this consequence.

Wherefore let us pass from the title of Pope to the next, which is Pater
Patrum, that is, Father of Fathers, which Bellarmine says is given to the
Roman Bishop, and to none else; whereas yet he knows the contrary to be
most true. For the relation made to John the Patriarch of Constantinople, by
the whole Synod assembled, begins in this sort: Relat. Council. sub Menna.
act. 5.
Domino nostro sanctissimo, and beatissimo Patri Patrum, and Oecumenico
Patriarchae, Synodus, etc. Where we see that the Patriarch of Constantinople
is called by a whole Synod, most holy Lord, most blessed Father of Fathers,
and Oecumenicall Patriarch. And the Ibidem. Idem habetur in supplicat. Cleric.
and Monachor. Antioch. ad Joan. Patriarch. and Synod. Congregatam. Ibid.
Epistle of the Bishops of the second Syria, to the same John the Patriarch,
begins thus: To our most holy Lord, and to the most blessed Father of
Fathers, Oecumenicall Archbishop and Patriarch. So that the Title of Father of
Father's is not proper to the Roman Bishop, as Bellarmine untruly affirms.
The title of summus Sacerdos, or high Priest, given to him by Saint Hierome, is
common to all Bishops, in respect of Presbyters, and all Metropolitanes, in
respect of Bishops, (although the third Council of Canone ^6.
Carthage, to show that Metropolitanes h Hier. in praef. Evang. ad Damas^m.
have not an absolute command, will not have them called high Priests, or
chief priests, but only Bishops of the first See) and therefore though the
Pope should be named, most holy Father, chiefest Pope, chief of Priests, or
high Priest, yet nothing could be concluded from hence, that either we deny, or
they affirm.

The title of Vicar of Christ is new, and not found in all Antiquity, the first
in whom we read it being Bern. lib. 2. de Consid.
Bernard; and therefore not much to be stood on seeing the Ancient make all
Bishops the Vicars of Christ, and do never appropriate it unto the Bishop of
Rome. Yet will not Bernards appropriating of it prove the thing in question,
seeing he may be thought to have had an eye in so doing, to the chiefty of
order and honor, (in respect whereof, he is in more special sort a Vicar of
Christ, then some other) rather then to any universality of commission and
authority. Head of the Church the Pope is never called among the Ancient,
though the Cardinal be pleased untruly so to report. But the Bishops
assembled in the Council of Action 1.
Chalcedon writing to Leo, who by Vicars was President of that assembly, say,
he was over them, as the head over the members, not in respect of absolute
commanding authority, but of honorable presidencie only, as it appears in
that (notwithstanding the resistance of his Vicegerents) they passed a decree
for the advancement of the Bishop of Constantinople. For otherwise Saint
Gregory Bishop of Rome allows no man to be called Head of the Church. Greg.
l. 4. ep. 38.
Petrus (says he) primum membrum sanctae and vniversalis Ecclesiae est:
Paulus, Andreas, Iacobus, quid aliud quam singularum plebium sunt capita? omnes
tamen sub uno capite membra Ecclesiae sunt: that is, Peter is the first, and in
honor the chiefest member of the holy and universal Church; Paul, Andrew,
James, what other thing are they then heads of several parts of Gods people?
Yet so, that all notwithstanding are members of the Church under one Head. So
that a Head of the Church, besides Christ, must not be acknowledged, because no
one has an universal commanding power over all, but he only: Yet in a
certain sense the Roman Church is named the Head of all Churches; that is,
the first and chiefest of all Churches, as the city of London may be named the
Head of all cities in this state and kingdom, though it has not a commanding
authority over them, neither is the chief Magistrate thereof head over all
other Magistrates in the kingdom. The authority of the Conc. Flor. Sess. ult.
Florentine Council, naming the Bishop of Rome, Father and teacher of all
Christians, and the Council of Conc, Lugd. cap. Vbi periculum de electione in
6.
Lions naming him the bridegroom of the Church, is not so great, that we
should need much to insist upon any thing that is alleged out of them. And
touching the latter title, we know Ep. 237
Saint Bernard in his Epistles, wishes the Pope not to take it on him, as
being proper to Christ, but to think it honor enough to be a friend of the
bridegroom. And yet if we should yield it unto him, we know what Gerson de
auferibilitate Papae.
Gerson has written, to show how this bridegroom may be taken away from the
Church the spouse of Christ, and yet the Church remain entire and perfect.

The next glorious title of the Roman Bishop, is Bishop of an Apostolic See.
But this is common to him with many others, as some of the rest also are: For,
as not only the Roman Church, but the Churches of Ephesus, Antioch,
Jerusalem, and Alexandria, which the Apostles founded, and in which they sat
as Bishops, are named Apostolical Churches, so the Bishops of all these are
named Bishops of Apostolic Sees. Neither do men know which of the
Apostolic Churches is expressed by the name of the Apostolic See, or which
of the Bishops by the name of the Bishop of the Apostolic See, unless by
some circumstance the same be specified. As when Augustine said, Aug. ep. 106
there were relations made from the Council of Carthage and Mileuis to the
Apostolic See: all men understood what Apostolic See he meant, because it
was known to what Apostolic Church they used to make such relations. Neither
does the principality of the Apostolic chair, which Augustine Ep. 162
affirms to have ever flourished in Rome, argue the supremacy of the Pope,
seeing the principality or chieftie of the Apostolic chair, mentioned by
Saint Augustine, may seem to import the chieftie that the Apostolic chair
has above those that are not Apostolic, or in which blessed Peter the chief
of the Apostles did not sit. For though the chaires of the Apostles were in
diverse places, yet Peter's chair was esteemed the principal of all the rest,
which being the Sea and chair of one, yet was in three places, and three
Bishops did sit in it: Namely the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioche, as
I have showed Chap. 3^
before out of Gregory; yet was the principality, or chieftie of this chair
of Peter more specially in Rome then in the other places, and the Bishop of
Rome in order and honor the first and greatest of the three.

The last title brought to prove the supremacy of the Pope, is that of
Universal Bisho^, which though it be not given to Leo Bishop of Rome, by the
whole Council of C^alcedon: yet is it given to him in the Council. Cha. (...)
action 3.
Epistles of three several Grecians, writing to h^, as we may read in the
third action of that Council: and Saint Greg lib 4. ep. 32.
Gregory says, it ^s offered to his predecessors in that Council, and that
they refused it. This title ^ill prove the supremacy of the Pope no better then
the rest, being common unto over with him, and therefore no way arguing any
thing peculiarly found in him alone. ^or we shall find that the Adrian. ad
Tarasium, 7. Syn. action 2. epist. Prae^ul. Orient. ad eundem, actio. 3.
Bishops of Constantinople are named universal Bishops, and Oecumenicall
Patriarchs, as well as the Bishop of Rome, and that not by one or two
particular men, but by whole Councels, by Emperors, and Popes: and though
Saint Gregory justly disliked this name or title, as profane and prejudicial
to the dignity of all other Bishops and Patriarchs, when it imports an
universality of jurisdiction, and general commanding authority over all, yet
might any one of the Patriarchs be named an universal Bishop, as being one
of those five principal Bishops, to whom all the Bishops and Metropolitanes
in the world were subject.

CHAP. 42.
Of the second supposed privilege of the Roman Bishops, which is
infallibility of judgment.

SEEING our Adversaries cannot prove the universal and illimitted power and
jurisdiction of their Popes, but the contrary is most clearly deposed by those
witnesses which they produce to speak for them, affirmed by those Divines,
whom they cannot but acknowledge to be Catholic, and inferred out of their
own principles; let us proceed to see whether they have any better proofs of
the infallibility of their judgment, which is the next supposed privilege of
the Roman Bishops. Touching this point I find four opinions in the Church of
Rome. The first is: that the Pope is so led into all truth, that he cannot
err in such sort as to become an heretic. And of this opinion was Hierarch.
Eccles. l^. (...). c. 8.
Albertus Pighius. The second leaves it doubtful, whether he may be an
heretic or not, but pronounces confidently that whether he may or not, yet
he cannot define and decree any thing that is heretical. And this is the
opinion of almost all Bellar. l. 4. de pont. cap. 2. Caietan in opusc. de
potest. Papae and Conc.
Papists at this day. The third, that the Pope not only as a particular
Doctor, but even as Pope, may be an heretic, and teach heresy, if he
define without a general Council. This was the opinion of Citat. a Bellar. l.
4. de Pontif. cap. 2. and a Stapletono. cont^. 3. qu. 4.
Gerson, Almayne, and other Parisians; of Alfonsus a Castro, Pope Adrian the
sixth, Cardinal Cameracensis, Cusanus; Occam, Durandus, the Fathers of the
Councels of Constance and Basil, and many more. The fourth that he may err
and define for heresy, though he be assisted with a general Council. Of this
opinion was Doctrinal. fidei. l. 2. art. 2. cap. 19.
Waldensis, and sundry other, as appears by Theorem. 4.
Picus Mirandula in his Theorems. So that it is not true, that vbi supr^.
Bellarmine says, that all Catholics consent, that the Pope with a general
Council cannot err. For these teach that only the resolutions of the
universal Church (which is the multitude of believers that are and have been)
are to be received without any farther question or examination, as undoubtedly
true. These are the differences of opinions found among them that brag so much
of unity and make the ground thereof to be the submitting of their judgments to
the Pope. But because in so great uncertainty and contrariety of judgments,
almost all Papists at this day endine to that opinion, that the Pope, whether
he may err personally or not, yet cannot define for falsehood and err; let us
first see, how they endeavor to confirm the same: and secondly how they can
clear those Popes from heresy, and decreeing for heresy, that are charged
therewith.

To prove that the Pope cannot decree for heresy, Bellarm. de Pontif. l. 2. c.
3.
they allege in the first place the saying of Christ, who professes that he
Luke 2^.
prayed for Peter, that his faith should not ^ile; and least we should
mis-understand the words of Christ, they bring, us the interpretations of
Augustine, Chrysostom, and Theophylact: whereof the first says, August. lib.
de (...) and gratia cap. 8.
(...) when Christ prayed, that Peter's faith might not fail, he prayed that he
might have (...) free, courageous, invincible and resolute will, to continue in
the true faith. The seco^, Chrysostom. homil 83. in Matthaeum.
that Christ did not say to Peter, Thou shall not deny me; but I have prayed,
that (...) faith shall not fail. For by his care and favor it was brought to
pass, that Peter's fai^ should not fail, though for fear he denied his
master. The third brings in Chri^ speaking to Peter in this sort: The^phyl.
in cap. 22. Lucae.
Although for a little time thou shall be shaken, thou ha^ notwithstanding the
seeds of faith hid in thee; although the wind and violent blast of hi^ that
sets on thee, shall shake off the leaves, yet the root shall live, and thy
faith shall not fail. So that all these so understand the prayer of Christ for
Peter, as that he should not only rise again after his fall, and be found
faithful in the end, but that he should never fall in respect of the
persuasion of faith that was to rest immoueably in him, even in that most
dangerous time of the temptation and trial of the Apostles, when Christ was
delivered into the hands of wicked men to be crucified. For howsoever he
denied Christ with bitter imprecations, yet he did it out of fear, and not
out of infidelity, the persuasion of his heart remaining the same that it was
before. Wherefore having the words of Christ, and the meaning of them, let us
see whether the opinion which our adversaries have of the Pope his infallible
discerning and constant defending of the truth, may be confirmed out of them.
If they could prove the contrary to that which was found in Peter to be found
in the Pope by virtue of Christ's prayer for Peter, they might easily make good
their opinion. But otherwise never out of these words. For thus they must
reason, if they will confirm the conceit they have of the infallibility of the
Popes judgment, by Christ's prayer for Pete^* Peter's faith by virtue of Christ's
prayer for him, remained firm, immovable, and most constantly settled in
inward persuasion and affection, though it failed for a little time in outward
profession: Therefore howsoever the faith of the Pope may fail in respect of
the persuasion of his heart, yet it shall never fail in respect of outward
profession. For though he become an heretic in heart, yet he shall ever
profess rightly concerning Christ, to all men that shall come unto him, to
enquire of him, and to be resolved by him. This kind of reasoning, I think,
is not very forcible, and therefore it is much to be doubted, that the
Romanists will never be able to persuade men that the Pope cannot err, by
virtue of Christ's prayer for Peter: Nay that no such thing can be proved out of
Christ's words unto Peter, it is most plain and evident, because the words that
Christ spoke unto Peter, when he said unto him, Luke 22. 32.
I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, and when thou art converted,
confirm thy brethren, are no way appliable to Peter's successors. For that if
they were, first they must ever be right believers in heart, notwithstanding
whatsoever failings in outward confession. Secondly, they must deny Christ as
he did, and afterward repent of such denial; and convert and turn unto God,
that so they may confirm their brethren. For so it was in Peter. And. In bunc
locum.
Theophylact does not attribute the confirmation of the brethren by Peter,
which he is commanded to perform, to his constancy in the true faith, and in
the profession of it; but to the experience that he had of the tender mercy
and goodness of God toward him. Out of which he was able t^ strengthen them
that were weak, to comfort them that were sorrowful, to put then in assured
hope of finding mercy, that otherwise might despair, and to confirm^ them
that were doubtful. For who will not (as the same Theophylact fitly observes
be confirmed by Peter in the right persuasion of the mercies and goodness of
Go^ toward repentant sinners, when he sees him whom Christ had so much
honoure^, after so shameful a fault, and so execrable a fact of the abnegation
of his Lord and Master, the Lord of life, not only received to mercy, but
restored to the dignity of the prime and chief Apostle? To this objection (as
we think) unanswerable, De Pontif. l^b. 4. cap. 3.
B^llarmine answers, first, that it is not absurd, to refer the conversion
of Peter mentioned by Christ, after which he is to confirm his brethren, not
to his turning from sin, but to his brethren, to advise, admonish, and direct
them; not making the sense to be, thou being turned from sin by repentance,
confirm thy brethren, b^ thou whose faith shall never fail, when thou see
any of thy brethren wavering, turn thy self unto them, and confirm them.
Secondly, that it follows not, that the successors of Peter must first fall,
and after repent of their fall, if the words of Christ be applied unto them,
of confirming the brethren; seeing Peter's fall was personal, but his
confirming of his brethren is of office, wherein they are to succeed him, and
not in the things that are personal. This answer of the Cardinal is
insufficient. First, because the current of almost all Interpreters
understands the conversion of Peter mentioned by our Savior, of his turning
from sin, and not of his turning of himself to them, whom he was to advise,
comfort, and confirm. And secondly, because in this his answer he contrarieth
himself. For Eodem cap.
elsewhere (which it seems in making this answer he had forgotten) he denies
that the words of Christ directed to Peter, of confirming his brethren, may be
understood of the universal Church, or the Bishops of it, and faith; Hoc certe
non potest Ecclesiae toti convenire, nisi dicamus totam Ecclesiam aliquando
esse pervertendam, ut postea iterum convertatur: that is, This saying of Christ
cannot agree to the whole Church, unless we say, the whole Church shall at
sometime be perverted, that afterward it may be converted. Whereby it is
clear he thinks, that the latter part of Christ's speech, of confirming the
brethren, can agree to none, to whom the former does not. So that we see, the
words of Christ spoken to Peter, are no sufficient warrant unto us that the
Pope cannot err, and therefore the better to persuade us of the same, our
Adversaries bring the sayings of some great Divines, who conceived that some
such thing may be inferred out of the words as they dream of; as Lucius r. in
ep. ad Epis^. Hisp. and Galliae.
Lucius, Felix 1. ep. ad Benign.
Felix, and Marc. ep. ad Athanas. de missione can. Niceni conc.
Mark, ancient Bishops of Rome, and great Lights of the world in their times.
If they could indeed bring us the judgment and resolution of these ancient
Bishops, they would doubtless greatly prevail with us. But seeing under these
names they bring forth unto us the Authors of shameless forgeries, we are
thereby induced more to dislike their conceits then before. Now that they (who
masked under the names and titles of ancient Roman Bishops, magnify the
greatness of the Roman Church, and plead for the not erring of the Bishops
thereof) are nothing else but ignorant authors of absurd and shameless
forgeries, it will easily appear out of that which I have Chap. 3 4.
elsewhere largely discoursed, to show that the Epistles attributed to the
ancient Popes, are forged and counterfeit; not only by the judgments and
opinions of the best learned on both sides, so censuring them, but by many
reasons inducing us so to think: among which one is, the likeness of the
style found in these Epistles, arguing that they came all out of the same mint,
and were not written by those different Popes, living at diverse times, to whom
they are attributed. Which similitude of style will be found in these Epistles
that our Adversaries allege to prove, that the Pope cannot err, as much or
more then in any other. For in these we shall find the very same words. The
agreeing of witnesses in the same substance of matter with some difference of
words, argues, that they speak truly; but their precise agreement in words
and forms of speaking, argues rather a compact and agreement to speak the
same things, then a desire to utter the truth. So here, the precise using of
the very same words by all these Popes living at diverse times, argues that it
was one man that taught them all to speak. But they will say, Pope Leo in his
third Sermon of his Assumption to the Popedom, says as much as they do: and
that therefore we may not discredit their testimony. Surely if they can prove
that Leo says any such thing as the former Popes are taught to say, we will
most willingly listen unto them. For we acknowledge Leo to have been a most
worthy Bishop, and the things that go under his name, to be his indubitate
works. Let us hear therefore what he says. His words in the place cited by
the Cardinal are these: Christ took special care of Peter, and prayed
specially for him, because the state of the rest is more secure, when the mind
of him that is chief is not overcome. In Peter therefore the strength of all
is surely established, and God does so dispense the help of his divine grace,
that the same firmness that he gives to Peter, is by Peter conferred and
bestowed on all. Here is nothing to prove that the pope cannot err, which is
that our Adversaries undertake to demonstrate, nor that the Roman church
cannot err, which is that the former Popes affirm in their cou^terfeit
Epistles: but that the state of the rest is more secure, when he that is chief
is not overcome, which no man ever doubted of: and that Christ gave, or at
least promised to give that assistance of his grace to Peter, which he meant to
the rest, and to pass it by him unto them, so as they should receive it after
him, but not from him. For thus the words of Leo must be understood, seeing it
is most certain (which thing also Li. 1. de Pont. cap. 11.
Bellarmine himself confesses) that the Apostles received their infallibility
of judgment, and their commission or authority immediately from Christ, and not
from Peter. From Leo they pass to Agatho, who in his Epistle to Constantine
the Emperor, read and approved in the sixth general Action 4.
Council, says, that by the grace of God such has been the felicity and
happiness of the Roman, Church, that it can never be proved to have erred
from the path of the Apostolical tradition, nor to have fallen being depraved
with heretical novelties, but the same faith it received at first, it holds
still, according to Christ's promise which he made to Peter, willing him to
confirm his brethren. Which thing (says Agatho) my predecessors have ever
done as is well known to all. These words of Agatho are not so far to be
urged, as if simply never any of his predecessors had failed to defend the
truth, and confirm his brethren, but that the Roman Church was ever so
preserved from heresy, that howsoever some few in it for a time might neglect
to do their duty, yet neither so long, nor in such sort, but that that Church
and the Bishops of it, were always a stay to the rest in all the dangerous
trials that fell out in ancient times, even as in the question concerning the
two wills of Christ, about which the Council was called, it was; wherein though
Honorius failed, yet the rest that governed the Apostolical throne with him,
did not; and Agatho, who soon after succeeded, showed himself an orthodoxe and
right believer. For, that all the predecessors of Agatho did not always
confirm their brethren in the true faith of Christ, it is most evident, in
that Marcellinus sacrificed unto Idols (if we may believe the Platina in
Marcellino. and acta Council. Sinuessani.
Romish stories) and was forced being convicted thereof to profess himself
unworthy of the Papal office and dignity, in a Synod of Bishops; in that
Athanas. ep. ad Solit. vitam agentes. Hier. in Chronico. and in Catal.
Scriptor. Eccles. in Fortunatiano and Acacio. Da masus in vita Liberij.
Liberius and Felix communicated with heretics, and subscribed to the unjust
condemnation of worthy Athanasius; which was not to confirm the brethren, but
to discourage, disharten and weaken them: and in that Epist. Agathonis ad
Constantinum quae habetur Synod. 6. actio. 4.
Agatho himself does anathematize his predecessor Honorius as a Monothelite,
with whom Leo the second concurreth in his Epistle to Constantine the Emperor:
who anathematizing Theodorus, Syrus, Sergius Pyrrhus, Paulus, and other
Monothelites, adds to them Honorius Bishop of Rome his predecessor; saying we
accurse also Honorius, who did not lighten this Apostolical Church with the
doctrine delivered by the Apostles, but sought to subvert the undefiled faith
by profane perfidiousnesse. With whom also Pope Adrian agrees, who in the
Synod of Rome, called about the business of Photius of Constantinople, says,
that Habentur haec verba in Syno. 8. action 7.
the Roman Bishop has judged of the Bishops of all Churches, but that we
read not of any one that has judged him. For though Honorius were accursed
after his death by those of the East, yet it was because he was accused of
heresy, in which only case the lesser may judge the greater; yet even there it
had not been lawful for any of them to give sentence against him, had not the
consent of the first See b In fine ejusd. Con^ilij.
gone before. So that we see the Epistle of Agatho does not sufficiently prove
that the Popes cannot err. Let us therefore consider whether they have any
better proofs. Nicholas the first (says Bellarmine) in his Epistle to Michael
the Emperor pronounces, that the privileges of the Sea of Rome are
perpetual, rooted and planted by Almighty God, in such sort, that men may
stumble at them, but cannot remove them; may pull at them, but cannot pull them
up; therefore he thinks the Pope cannot err, which is a very bad
consequence. For the infallibility of judgment in the Pope, is not mentioned
among the inviolable privileges of the Church of Rome, and therefore the
privileges of that Church may be inviolable, and yet the Pope subject to
error: e Epist. ad Epis. Arelat. and habetur cap. maiores extra. de Baptis mo
and eius effectu.
neither has Nicolas one word of the Popes not erring. The testimonies of
Epist. ad Petrum Antioch.
Leo the ninth, and Innocentius the third, as being late and partial in their
own cause, may justly be excepted against, yet do they not prove the thing in
question. For they speak of the Sea and throne of Peter, in which the faith
may continue without failing (though the Popes err and seek to subvert the
same) so long as any other, that are to govern the throne with them, persevere
in the true faith.

Wherefore from the prayer of Christ made for Peter, that his faith should not
fail, they descend to other proofs taken from the promise made to Peter by
Christ, Matthew. 16. 18.
that upon him he would build his Church; and his mandate requiring him to Job.
21. v. 15. 16. 17.
feed his sheep, and to feed his Lambs: which are too weak to persuade us
that the Pope cannot err, or is more privileged then other Bishops in this
respect. First, because it is most clear and evident, and confessed by our
adversaries themselves, that the Church was builded upon all the Apostles, as
well as upon Peter, and there is no kind of feeding of Christ's sheep and
flock that comes not within the compass of that office and commission,
which the other Apostles had in common with him: as I have Chap. 22.
elsewhere showed at large. Secondly, because Peter and his colleagues were
foundation stones upon which the Church was builded, in that their doctrine
was received by immediate and undoubted revelation, without mixture of error,
upon which the faith of all after-commers was to stay it self: none of which
things agree to the Roman Bishop. So that it is no way necessary, that there
should be the same infallibility of judgment in him that was in Peter, and in
his colleagues. Thirdly, because we know, and all that are in their right wits
do acknowledge, that a man may be a Pastor in the Church of God, and yet
subject to error: and that therefore Christ's requiring Peter to do the duty of
a Pastor, will not prove that the Pope cannot err.

Wherefore from the Scriptures they pass to the Fathers: and among them first
they produce Theodoret, who in his Epistle to Renatus a Presbyter, says, that
among other things, the reason why the Roman Church has a kind of chiefety
among other Churches, is because it has ever remained free from heresy. From
whence I think hardly any good proof can be drawn, of the Popes not erring.
For how will this consequence ever be made good? There are many things that
make the Sea of Rome great, as the greatness of the city, the Empire, the
sepulchers of those common Fathers and Doctors of truth, Peter and Paul, those
two great lights, that rose in the East, and cast forth their beams into all
parts of the world, but set in the West; and sundry other things, and among
them the felicity and happiness of it, that till the time of Theodoret no
heresy ever prevailed in it: therefore the Bishop of Rome can never err:
Seeing Theodoret does not dispute what may be, but shows only, what by the
happy providence of God had been: and besides speaks not precisely of the
Bishop of Rome, but of the Roman See, Cusan. de concord. cathol. l. 2. cap. 7.
and lib. 1. cap. 14.
including the whole company of the Bishops of the West adhering to him: which
was a great part of the whole Christian Church, and more glorious then the
rest, for that it was more free from heretical novelties in those times then
they. To Theodoret they add Saint August. in Psalm. contra. partem Donati.
Augustine, who says, the succession of Bishops from Peter's chair, to his
time, is that rock against the which the proud gates of hell cannot prevail.
His meaning is, that what all those Bishops have constantly and successively
taught as true, must needs be true: and what they have impugned as false, must
needs be false: seeing it is impossible that any error, or the impugning of
any truth, should have bin found successively in all the Bishops of that, or
any other Apostolical Church whatsoever. But what is this to the Popes not
erring? Surely as little as that of Gelasius in his Epistle to Anastasius the
Emperor, that the glorious confession of the Apostle Peter, thou art the l
Inter Epistol. Gelasij.
Christ, the Son of the living God, is the root of all the faith and piety of
the whole world. and that therefore the Apostolic See carefully looks unto
it, that no chinke be made in it, and that it be not spotted with any
contagion; for that if it should, there were no means of resisting any error.
But because this makes not for them, the Cardinal helps the matter with an
untruth, saying: that Gelasius proves that the Sea of Rome cannot err,
because the confession of it is the root of all the faith and piety that is in
the world: whereas he neither goes about to prove the one nor speaks any
word of the other: but of the excellency of the confession that Peter made,
the necessity of preserving it inviolable, and the care of the Sea of Rome, in
and before his time, for the safe keeping of the same. Wherefore let us come to
the places that are cited to this purpose out of Gregory's Epistles, which show
plainly, they are past shame that manage the Popes affairs, and defend his
cause. For whereas Greg. lib. 4. ep. 32.
Gregory says, that if he that claims to be universal B: do fall, all the
whole Church is overthrown, and that therefore there must be no such
universal Bishop; and particularly shows by the grievous heresies that
prevailed in the Church of Constantinople, how ill it would have been for the
Churches of God, if the Bishops thereof had been universal Bishops, as they
sought to be: they bring this place to prove, that the Pope cannot err:
whereas they should have brought it to show, how dangerous it is, that there
should be any one universal Bishop, such as their Pope desires to be; and
that therefore (as Epist. 67.
Cyprian observes) Almighty God wisely foreseeing what evils might follow such
universality of power and jurisdiction in one man, ordained that there should
be a great number of Bishops joined in equal commission, that so if some
fell, the rest might stand and keep the people from a general downfall. The
next allegation is out of the Epistle to Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria, whereby
the Reader may see with what conscience these Iesuited Papists do cite the
writings of the Fathers. The words of Gregory are these. Greg. l. 6. cp. 37.
Your most sweet Holiness has uttered many things in your leters concerning
Peter's chair, saying, that he yet sits in it in his successors: I truly
do acknowledge my self to be unworthy, not only to be in the number of those
that sit as rulers, but of them that stand to be ruled. But I therefore
willingly accept whatsoever you say, because he has spoken to me of Peter's
chair, that sits in Peter's chair; and although it no way pleases or
delights me to be specially honored, yet I greatly rejoiced, because what
you attributed to me, you gave to your selves. For who knows not, that the
holy Church is firmly established in the soundness of the Prince of the
Apostles? whose firmness his name does show: for he is named Peter of Petra a
Rock, to whom the voice of Verity says, I will give to thee the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and thou being converted, confirm thy brethren: and
again, Simon Ioanna, Love thou me? feed my sheep. Wherefore though there
were many Apostles, yet in respect of the chiefty he had, the chair of Peter
chief of the Apostles grew to be in greater authority then the rest, which is
the chair of one Apostle in three places. For he exalted the Sea, in which he
was pleased to rest, and to end this present life; he beautified that See,
wherein he left the Evangelist his Disciple: and he firmly established that
See, in which he sat seven years, though with purpose in the end to leave it,
and to depart from it. Whereas therefore there is the Sea of one, and that but
one, wherein three Bishops by Gods appointment do sit to rule, whatsoever good
I hear of you, I account it mine own; and what you persuade your selves of
me, think that you also are worthy of the same. If this Epistle prove that
the Pope cannot err, it proves likewise that the Bishops of Alexandria and
Antioche are free from error. For all these succeed that great Apostle Saint
Peter (to whom Christ said, To thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and thou being turned, confirm thy brethren: And again, Love thou
me? feed my sheep) as well as the Pope. All these sit in Peter's chair:
Peter's chair is in Alexandria, and at Antioche, as well as at Rome: and
whatsoever they that are Bishops of Alexandria and Antioche, attribute to the
Bishop of Rome, they may lawfully assume to themselves: seeing they are worthy
of the same, as Gregory in this place tells us.

Wherefore, seeing not only Fathers and Councels, but even Popes also (in
whose defense he writes) fail him, the Cardinal flies for help to the
Priests of Aarons order, and goes about to prove, that the Pope cannot err,
because the high Priest had in his breast plate Exodus 28. 30
Vrim and Thummim, light and perfection, or doctrine and truth, as he will
have the Hebrew word translated, importing (as he supposes) that he could not
err in the understanding of the Law of God. Whereupon (as he thinks) God
commanded all those that any way doubted of the meaning of his Law, to go up
to the high Priest, and to seek to be satisfied by him, saying, Deuteronomy. 17. 9
They shall judge true judgment unto thee. Lyra in his Annotations upon this
place, reports, that there was a certain Gloss of the Hebrews, that if the
High Priest should tell them, that their right hand were their left, or their
left their right, they were to hold it good and right. The like opinion it
seems the Romanists have of the Pope. But Lyra in that place condemns the
folly of those Jews that so thought, because the sentence of no man of what
authority soever he be, is to be admitted, if it contain a manifest
untruth and error; which he says is evident out of the very text it self,
in that it is said, They shall judge unto thee true judgment, Verse. 10.
and thou shall do whatsoever they shall say unto thee, that are over the
place that the Lord has chosen, and whatsoever they shall teach thee according
to his laws. Whereby it appears, that if they speak that which is untrue,
or manifestly depart from the law, they are not to be heard. The Author of the
ordinary Gloss agrees with Lyra, saying; Note that the Lord requires thee to
do, whatsoever the Priests do teach thee according to the Law, because
otherwise thou art not to obey them, unless they teach thee according to the
Law. Whereupon Christ says, Matthew. 23. 2.
the Scribes and Pharisees sit upon Moses chair, who yet (as the Author of the
In eundem locum.
Interlineall Gloss notes) are not generally without exception to be hearkened
unto, but then only, when they utter and deliver pertinentia ad Cathedram;
that is, such things as beseem him to utter, that sits in Moses chair. So
that to conclude this point, neither the Vrim and Thummim in Aarons
breast plate, nor the Mandate of Almighty God to go up to the sons of Aaron
to secke judgment and justice, prove, that they could not err, and therefore
the Pope is still in as bad case as ever he was.

Wherefore finding no help in the Tribe of Leui, nor in the house of Aaron,
they betake themselves to experience, and are in good hope to prove out of the
experience of former times, that the Pope cannot err. First, because (as they
say) whatsoever the Pope condemned at any time as heretical, was ever holden
to be so by the whole Church; and many heresies were never condemned any
otherwise, but by his judgment only. Secondly, because never any Pope was an
Heretic, whereas all other principal Sees and Churches, have had Bishops,
not only erring, but teaching and professing heresy. The instances, that
Bellarmine, gives of heresies and heretics condemned by the Pope, and
rejected for such by the Church, only because he condemned them, are the
Pelagians, Priscillianists, Iouinian, and Vigilantius, and their heresies. It
is hard (I see) for a Blackamoore to change his skin, for a Leopard to put
away his spots, or for a man, that has long acquainted himself with false and
unfaithful dealing, to learn to deal sincerely and truly. For touching the
heretics mentioned by the Cardinal, all the world knows they were
condemned in Synodes by many Bishops, and not by the private censure of the
Bishop of Rome alone. Nay, it is most certain, that others showed more care
and diligence in suppressing some of these heretics and their errors, then
ever the Roman Bishop did, which I will make to appear in the particulars,
beginning with the Pelagians. August. de haeresib Beda de ratione temporum.
Alfons. a Castro contra haeres. lib. 2. page 1^9.
Pelagius the founder of these heretics, was borne in great Britain, and
becoming a Monk in the East parts of the world, after he had sparsed his
errors in other places abroad, returned home into his own country, and
infected it almost wholly with his heresy. Hereupon the Britains sought
help and direction of the French Bishops, because learning at that time
flourished more among them, then it did among the Britains; who willing to
reach forth their helping hands to their neighbors and brethren in this time
of their need, sent unto them Germanus and Lupus, Bishops and brethren,
defenders of the Catholic faith, who cleared the I Will from the Pelagian
heresy, and confirmed it in the faith both by the word of truth, and signs
and miracles. Besides this condemnation of Palagius by the French and
Britains, there were sundry Councels holden to condemn both him and his
wicked heresies, in Palestina, at Carthage, at Mileuise, and at Arausicum: and
it is most certain, that the Church of GOD, and all posterities are more bound
to Saint Augustine for clearing the points of doctrine questioned by the
Pelagians, then to any Bishop of Rome whatsoever. So that it is most untrue,
that the Pelagians were condemned only by the Bishop of Rome: for other were
as forward in that business as he; yea the Sea Epist. 9 5. inter Epist.
Augustini.
Africans were more forward then the Romans, and drew them into the fellowship
of the same work with themselves. The like may be said of the
Priscillianistes; for it is more then evident out of the Council of Bracar,
that they were not condemned by the Bishop of Rome alone, but by many Synodes:
for it is there reported, that Initio actorum Council. Bracar. 1^
Leo did write by Turibius notary of the Sea Apostolic, to the Synod of
Galitia, at what time the heresy of the Priscillianistes began to spread in
those parts; and that by his prescription and appointment, they of Tarracon, of
Carthage, of Portugal, and Boetica, met in Council, and composing a rule of
faith against the heresy of the Priscillianistes, containing certain chief
heads of Christian doctrine, directed the same pattern of right belief to
the Bishop of Bracar, that then was: which heads of Christian doctrine were
recited in the first Council of Bracar, and the heresy of the Priscillianistes
thereupo^ more distinctly and particularly condemned, then ever before. In all
which proceedings, we may see that the Pope does nothing of himself alone, but
being Patriarch of the West, and hearing of a dangerous heresy spreading in
some Churches subject to him, he causes the Bishops under him to meet in
Councels, and to condemn the same. Which (as I think) will not prove, that
the Pope alone condemned heresies, or that some heresies were rejected only,
because the Pope condemned them; or that the Pope cannot err, which is the
thing in question. Touching Iouinian and Vigilantius, their errors are so
uncertainly reported, some attributing to them one thing, and some another,
and some condemning them for things, for which they were not to be condemned,
that it is hard to say, by what lawful authority, or by whom they were
condemned: but that in their errors justly disliked, they were condemned only
by the Bishops of Rome, and therefore taken to be heretics by the whole
universal Church, our adversaries will never be able to prove. That the
errors attributed unto them are uncertainly reported, it appears, in that
Aug. de haeres. cap. 82.
Austine charge Iouinian with two dangerous and wicked assertions, touching
the denial of the perpetual virginity of the blessed Virgin the mother of our
Lord: and the parity of sins: whereof Hierome (who yet was not like to have
spared him) makes no mention. And that they were in somethings unjustly
condemned, it is evident; first, in that Hier. contra Iouinian. lib. 1.
Hierome blames Iouinian for saying, that married persons, virgins, and
widows, if they differ not in other works of virtue, and therein excel one
another, are of equal merit; which the best learned both of the Fathers and
Schoolmen do approve, as I have Book 3. chap. 30.
elsewhere showed at large. Secondly, in in that Hieron. cont. Vigilantium.
he so bitterly inueigheth against Vigilantius for disliking the pernoctations
in the Cemiteries and places of Saints burial, used in ancient times; which a
Council. Elibertin. Canon. 34. 35.
Council for the same reasons that moved Vigilantius to dislike them, took
wholly away, and forbade them to be used any more, and the Roman Churches have
long since disused. But that the Popes peremptory co^demning of an error in
matter of faith, was not taken in ancient times to be a sufficient
demonstration, that they were heretics that defended such errors after his
co^demning of the same, it is evident, in that Aug. lib. 1. de Baptismo c. 18.
Austine says, that the Churches might doubt still touching the matter of
rebaptization, because in the times of Stephen who condemned it, and Cyprian
who urged it, there was no general Council to end the controversy between
them: and in that, after the peremptory forbidding and condemning of
rebaptization by Stephen Bishop of Rome, Cyprian and his colleagues still
persisted in the practice of it, and in urging the necessity of it: and yet
were never branded with the mark and note of heresy, but ever were and still
are reputed Catholics. De Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 7.
Bellarmine, to avoid the force of this argument, fears not to say contrary
to his own knowledge, that Stephen and his adherents never determined the
question of rebaptization. But that he did (and that in most peremptory sort
and manner) it is more clear and evident, then that the Sun shines at
noone. For Firmilian. ad Cyprian. inter Epistolas Cyprian ep. 75.
Firmilianus a famous learned Bishop charge him, that he caused great
dissentions throughout all the Churches of the world, that he grievously
sinned: in that he divided himself from so many flocks of Christ's sheep:
that he was a schismaticke: that he had forsaken the communion of
Ecclesiastical unity: willing him not to deceive himself, but to be well
assured, that in thinking he could put all other from the communion, he had
put himself out of the communion of all: that he brake the bands of unity
with many Bishops in all parts of the World, as well in the East, as in the
South with the Africanes, not admitting such as came from them unto him into
his presence, or to any speech with him: and farther commanding the brethren,
that none of them should receive them to house. So that he not only denied the
peace of the Church, and the communion of Christians unto them, but the entering
under the roof of any man's house, that would be ruled by him; and that thus he
held the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, rejecting them as damnable
miscreants that dissented from him, and calling blessed Cyprian, a false
Christ, a false Apostle, and a deceiptfull labourer or workman. And Eusebius.
Hist. l. 7. c. 4.
Dionysius, a famous and worthy Bishop reports, that he wrote concerning
Hellenus and Firmilianus, and all the Bishops in Cilicia, Cappadocia, and
Galatia, and all the bordering countries, that he would not communicate with
them for the same cause of rebaptization: which yet (as he says) was agreed
on in many very great Synodes of Bishops. If this be not sufficient to prove,
that Stephen determined the question of rebaptization, I know not what can be.
For first, he commanded, that none should be rebaptized when they returned
from the societies and profane conventicles of heretics, but that they
should be admitted with the only imposition of hands. Secondly, he delivered
his own opinion, that rebaptization was unlawful, confidently, as having so
learned of his elders, and not in doubting manner. And thirdly, he rejected all
them from his communion, that thought and practiced otherwise then he did, as
it appears by the testimonies of Firmilianus and Dionysius; so that it is
strange, that Bellarmine should be able so to harden his forehead, as not to
blush when he says, that Stephen did not define any thing touching the
question of rebaptization; that he did not make it a matter of faith, and
necessary to be believed of all: and that he did not excommunicate those that
were to her wise minded, but only threatened them that he would so do. It is
true in deed, that Cyprian, howsoever he definitiuely delivered in a Council
of Bishops, what he was persuaded men were to believe and practice touching
rebaptization: and protested against Stephen, as a proud, ignorant, and
unadvised man: yet did not urge this his decree so, as to reject from his
communion all that should dislike it: but left every Bishop to his own
judgment, as being to give an account to God only. But how the Jesuits can
defend against all the former proofs, that Stephens proceedings were like to
those of Cyprian, and that he also left every man to his own judgment, and
rejected no man from his communion, for dissenting from him, I cannot see. By
that which has been said, it appears, that the Ancients did not think
every thing to be heresy that the Roman Bishops defined to be so: and that
therefore they did not think him free from danger of erring. Neither need we
to marvel (says Bellarmine) if in former times men had not learned this
lesson, seeing to this day they are not judged to be heretics that think the
Pope may err. Yet so kind is he to Cyprian, that (whereas Austine excuses
him in his error, and thinks his sin was venial) he Vbi supra.
pronounces he sinned mortally, and so without particular repentance (whereof
there is little likelihood) perished everlastingly, notwithstanding his
martyrdom. The reason of this difference of the censures of Austine and
Bellarmine is, because Austine looked only or principally to his error, but
Bellarmine to his contempt of the Bishop of Romes Decrees and determinations.

CHAP. 43.
Of such Popes as are charged with heresy, and how the Romanists seek to
clear them from that imputation.

Having examined our Adversaries proofs of the infallibility of the Popes
judgment, taken from the acceptance of his judgment as right and good by all
the world, whenever he defined anything: let us come to the other proof of
the same, taken from the felicity of the Roman See in former times. In
exposit. symboli.
Ruffinus says, that before his time no heresy had ever taken beginning in
the Roman Church, but our Adversaries proceed farther, and fear not to Bell.
de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 8
pronounce after sixteen hundred years, that no heretic did ever sit in the Sea of Rome: which their proud brag will be found much more vain then true,
and many unanswerable instances will be brought of wicked heretics
possessing that chair. Tertullian in his book against Praxeas speaks of a
Bishop of Rome, but names him not, that admitted and allowed the prophecies
of Montanus and his two Prophetesses, Prisca and Maximilla, and held communion
with the Montanists till he was dissuaded by Praxeas. Who (as he says) caused
the prophecies of Montanus and his Prophetesses to be banished, and brought in
heresy, who banished their Paraclete, and crucified the Father. But because
Tertullian was a Montanist, and wrote partially in things that concerned them
(though Annotat. in Tert. contra Praxeam.
Rhenanus say, the Bishop of Rome did Montanize) yet for my part (no other
history reporting any such thing of any Roman Bishop) I will not upon
Tertullians bare word, charge any of them with any such heresy.

But (howsoever we think of Tertullians report) we find in the Council of
Sinuessa, in the In vita Marcellini.
Pontifical, in the Epistle of Nicholas the first, to Michael the Emperor, in
In Marcellino
Platina and others, that Marcellinus did sacrifice unto idols, and so at least
in outward action showed himself an infidel; which is a higher degree of
impiety then heresy. If it be said, he committed that execrable act of
idolatry, not out of any mis-perswasion of his mind, but fear of death, it
will be replied, that if the passion of fear be able to work so ill effects
in Popes, as the utter abnegation of Christianity, and the professing of
themselves to be Pagan infidels, by public outward acts of idolatry, there
is little reason to be given, but that some other sinister and vile affection
may carry them as far to make profession of heresy, a thing not so ill as
Paganism. Wherefore Annal. Ann. 303. number. 99.
Baronius, to prevent the worst, and to make all sure, inclines to deny, that
ever Marcellinus committed any such act of idolatry, and discrediteth the
report of the Council of Sinuessa, in which he is said to have been
condemned. Wherein he does as much disadvantage the Roman cause another way,
in depriving his friends of so good an authority as the resolution of that
sacred Synod, that Prima seeds a nemine iudicatur, that is, that the first See
is judged of none; as he advantageth it in the clearing of Marcellinus; and
therefore he is rightly blamed by Binnius for his inconsiderate rashness in
this behalf. g Annot. in acta conc. Sinuessani.


But that we may be assured, that Popes may be heretics as well as infidells,
we have the confession of as good a man as Baronius, acknowledging the same.
For De Pontif. li. 4. cap. 9.
Bellarmine says, that Liberius (howsoever for a long time he continued
constant in the profession of the true faith, so that for the same his
constancy he was banished, and another by the Arrian faction put into his
place) yet in the end weary of banishment, he was brought to subscribe to
heresy, and was in his outward courses an heretic whatsoever his heart was,
whereof God only is the searcher; so that justly as an heretic he was
condemned, and pronounced to be no Pope any longer by his own Clergy. This he
proves out of the testimonies of Athanas. in epist. ad solitar^. vitam agentes.
Athanasius and Hieron. in Chronico. and in Catalog. Script. Eccles. in
Fortunatiano.
Hierome, who say expressly, that being weary of his continuance in
banishment, he was at last brought to subscribe to heresy: And Hill. in lib:
aduers. Constanti^
Hilary (who speaking to Constantius the wicked Arrian Emperor) has these
words: Afterward thou did turn the course of thy war against Rome,
whence thou tookest the Bishop, o wretched Emperor! I can hardly say,
whether thy impiety were greater in sending him into banishment, or in sending
him home again. Thereby insinuating that he restored him upon very ill
conditions. And that he was not restored, but by some kind of consenting with
the Arrians, it is most clear, in that Zozom. lib. 4. cap. 14.
Zozomen reports, that the Arrian Bishops assembled at Sirmium, sent their
letter to Felix, then Bishop of Rome, and the Clergy there, kindly to receive
Liberius, and that both Felix and he might sit as Bishops, and govern the
Roman Church together: which they would never have done, if they had not found
him tractable and yielding; yet could not these two Bishops endure one the
other long, notwithstanding these letters. And therefore In Ch^onico.
Hierome says, that Liberius impatient of any longer continuance in
banishment, subscribed to heretical prauity, and so returned to Rome as a
conqueror, and cast out Felix who had possessed himself of the Episcopal
chair, and put diverse other of the Clergy also out of the Church; and Vbi
supra.
Bellarmine himself confesses, he has seen in the Vatican Library,
manuscript Epistles of Liberius, some written to the Emperor, and some to the
Eastern Bishops, wherein he signifies plainly enough, that in the end he was
content to yield to the will of the Emperor. And besides, if the Romanists do
not acknowledge that Liberius was a convicted heretic, (there being no other
cause but heresy for which (as they think) a Pope may lawfully be judged and
deposed) they must put Felix, who was Pope while Liberius yet lived, out of the
number of Popes, whom yet their church does worship as a Pope Saint, and a
Martyr. So that we see, Liberius was justly judged and condemned as an
heretic; and that, seeing a Pope, in that he becomes an heretic, cease
to be Pope, he lost all the privileges that belong to Peter's successors, and
so might decree for heresy: yea, I think there is no reasonable man but will
confess, that his subscribing to heresy that is the head of the church, is a
decreeing for heresy. Now that he subscribed to heresy, we have the express
testimony of Saint Hierome. Hieron. in Catalog. Script. Ecclesiast. in Acacio.
After the banishment of Liberius by the means of Acatius, Bishop of
Caesarea in Palestina, who was a great man with Constantius the Emperor,
Felix, a Deacon of the church of Rome, was chosen Bishop, and appointed to
succeed him. This Felix, (as Theodoret. hist. Eccles. l. 2. cap. 17.
Theodoret testifies) was a Catholic, and held the profession of faith
agreed on at Nice, but communicated freely with the Arrians. Whereupon he was
so much disliked by those that were Catholics, that none of them would once
enter into the house of prayer while he was within. For that, though he were
not in persuasion and vocal profession a full Arrian, yet by communicating
with them, and being ordained by them, he consented to their wicked and
heretical courses. Neither does it appear by any history of credit, that ever
he refused to communicate with the Arrian heretics, during the time he
quietly possessed and enjoyed the Bishopric of Rome. But the contrary is more
then probable, because when Liberius subscribed, and was thereupon sent home
with letters of commendation from the Arrian Bishops assembled at Sirmium,
Sozom. l. 4. 14.
they carefully provided for Felix his continuance in the Episcopal office
still, and desired that the violences and outrages committed in the time of his
ordination (when the people for the love they bare to Liberius were in an
uproar, and some of them were slain) might be forgotten, and that both of them
might sit and govern the church together, as Bishops of the place; which
favor the Arrian Bishops would never have showed to Felix, if he had
disclaimed their communion. So that it is more then probable, that he never
forsook the communion of the Arrian heretics. For Liberius returning as a
conqueror, so soon as he came to Rome, cast him out of the Church, and
shortly after he dyed; and therefore I cannot see what reason the Romanists
have to put this good man into the Calendar of their Pope Saints, whose
entrance into the Episcopal chair was not only schismatic (there being a
catholic Bishop yet alive, and suffering banishment for the catholic faith)
but violent and bloody also (for he got the place by the means of bloody
heretics, making himself guilty of all the sins of those heretics with
whom he communicated) and of whose relinquishing and abandoning the communion
and fellowship of the Arrians, there is no mention found in any Author of
credit, but in the Author of the In Felice.
Pontifical only, who has as many lies as words in his narration concerning
Felix. For first, he says, he sat but one year, three months, and three
days, whereas it is reported by Theodoret. vbi supra.
Theodoret, that Liberius had been more then two years in banishment before
suite was made to the Emperor for his return; all which time Felix was Pope.
Secondly, he says, Felix declared and published Constantius the son of
Constantine to be an heretic, and that Constantius was rebaptized, or the
second time baptized by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, near unto Nicomedia;
which thing is most false, as Binnius annot. in vitam. Felicis.
Binnius in his Annotations tells us, because both Athanas. lib. de Synodis.
Athanasius and Socrates: lib. 2. cap. vlt.
Socrates do affirm, he was baptized by Euzoius an Arrian, when he was ready
to die. And Hilarious after the time of this supposed baptism inueyeth against
him, for that not being baptized, he presumed to prescribe to the Church a
form of faith. Thirdly, he says, Felix built a certain Church, while he was
a Presbyter, whereas it is certain, that of a Deacon he was made a Bishop,
and never lived in the degree of a Presbyter. And fourthly, touching the death
of Felix he is very uncertain and doubtful, z Hilar. lib. de Synodo.
and others speak nothing of his martyrdom at all. Hereupon (as both De
Pont. l. 4 c 9.
Bellarmine, and Annot. in vit. Felicis.
Binnius report) in the time of Gregory the thirteenth, in the year of our
Lord 1582. where certain learned men in Rome were deputed to correct the
Martyrologe, they were doubtful whether they should put his name into the new
Martyrologe or not, seeing both his entrance into his Bishopric was violent,
bloody, and schismatic, and his end uncertain, and they inclined to leave
it out; which they had done, if a certain marble chest had not been found in
the Church of Cosmas and Damianus, the 28 of July, the day before his wonted
and accustomed feast, with this inscription in old characters: Here lies the
body of Felix the Pope and Martyr, who condemned Constantius the heretic.
Whereby we see how little reason the Roman Church has to worship this Saint,
and to admire the providence of God, in preserving this See Apostolic from
heresy; in that, as they would bear us in hand, Felix after he heard of the
subscription of Liberius, who thereby ceased to be Pope, condemned the
Arrians, was admitted by the Catholics, and became a true Bishop, suffering
death upon the return of Liberius; as if the very See did change the minds of
all that sit in it, and make them good, how bad soever they were before;
whereas Felix Ruffin. Eccl. hist. l. 1. c. 22.
being in his entrance a schismaticke, in communion, if not in profession, an
heretic, and in his ordination which was void, no Bishop, and no history of
credit reporting either his condemning Arrianisme, or his admission to be a
Bishop after the deposition of Liberius by the Catholics, or what his end
was; it appears that heretics and schismatickes may possess the chair of
Peter, and be worshipped for Pope Saints after their death. But whatsoever
became of Felix, they say, Liberius after the death of Felix became a
Catholic, and got the love of the Catholics; and so by their acceptance of
him, became a true Bishop again, and in that state dyed. Thus do our
Adversaries seem to carry this matter very fairly, as if all were safe and
well, whereas indeed they are in a very great strait, for either Liberius was
an heretic before his return home, and justly deposed for heresy, or else
Felix was never true Bishop, and then their Church has worshipped a
schismaticke as a Pope-Saint for the space of a thousand yrares: if he were an
heretic, and justly deposed (as to justify Felix, they must be forced to
confess) he could never be restored to the Episcopal office and dignity
again. For the Hier. contra Luciferianos. Cypr. l. 2. cp. 1
Canon of the Church is, that no Catholic becoming an heretic, and being
condemned by the Church for such a one, shall ever be received to
Ecclesiastical honor again: so that he could not dye true Pope, as our
Adversaries dream he did. Let them show us how they can clear themselves from
sundry absurd contradictions in this point, and we will rest satisfied. For we
do not deny, but that he might repent of his subscribing to heresy, and dye
a Catholic, though some of the testimonies that Bellarmine brings, will
scarce prove it.

The next Pope that we find to have been touched with any suspicion of
heresy, is Anastasius the second, whom the Author of the In vita Anastasii 2.
Pontifical taxes. First, for that he communicated with Photius, a Deacon of
the Church of Thessalonica, that had communicated with Achacius, Bishop of
Constantinople, without the counsel of the Bishops and Presbyters of the
Catholic Church; which his inconsiderate action, made many of the Presbyters
and Clergy refuse to communicate with him. Secondly, for that he sought to
restore Achacius, whom Felix and Gelasius his predecessors had condemned: for
which fact he was suddenly stricken of God, in such sort that he dyed. To
these Did. 19. ca. Anast.
Gratian adds another taxation, reprehending him for that he allowed the
baptism and ordination of such as were baptized and ordained by Achacius after
he was become an heretic. But because the baptism and ordination of
heretics is holden good, and it appears by the Epistle of Anastasius to
Anastasius the Emperor, that Achacius was dead before he was Bishop, and that
he desired to have the name of Achacius razed out of the Diptickes of the
Church, after his death: I will pass by this censure of the Author of the
Pontifical, and Gratian as doubtful, and leaving Anastasius, come to
Vigilius; who (as In Breviario c. 22.
Liberatus reports) to get the Popedom like a notable dissembling hypocrite,
pretended at Rome to be a Catholic, but in his letters to Theodora the
Empress, who was an heretic, condemned the Catholic faith: and promised
that if Syluerius might be thrust out, and he put into his place, he would
restore Anthemius Bishop of Constantinople, rejected by Agapetus for heresy.
Which being brought to pass by Theodora the Empress, and Syluerius unjustly
banished, he sat for a while as an Antipope and an heritique. But when as
Syluerius was dead, he professed himself a Catholic, and refused to perform
that he had promised to Theodora. Whether this man being an heretic in his
outward profession at his entrance, and by such profession getting the Popedom
unjustly, schismatically, and as an Antipope, could ever after be true Pope,
let our Adversaries give us answer, when they have advisedly thought of it.

The next Pope that is charged with heresy, is Honorius the first, whom the
Christian world, and not a few particular men only condemned as a
Monothelite. For in the Action 13.
sixth general Council, his Epistles to Sergius the heretic are publicly
read and condemned, and he accursed as an heretic. The Action 7.
seventh general Council likewise does anathematize Honorius, Sergius,
Syrus, and the other Monothelites. In the Action 7.
eigth general Council, called about the matter of difference between
Ignatius and Photius, the acts of the Council of the West under Adrian the
second, are read and allowed; wherein Adrian professes, that none of the
inferior Sees may judge the greater, and specially Rome, unless it be in case
of heresy; in which case they of the East did anathematize and accurse
Honorius: which yet (he says) they would not have adventured to do, if the
Roman Church had not gone before them in such condemnation of her own Bishop.
Pope Leo the second in his Epistle to Constantine the Emperor, which we find
in the end of the sixth general Council, accurseth the same Honorius as an
heretic and a wicked one, that defiled and polluted the Apostolic chair
with heresy. With Leo consents In Synod. 7. action 3.
Tharasius Bishop of Constantinople, In Epistola Synodica quae habetur in
eadem. 7. Synod. action 3.
Theodorus Bishop of Jerusalem; Synod. 7. action 6.
Epiphanius in his disputation with Gregory, in the sixth Action of the seventh
general Council: In Carm. de 7. Synodis.
Psellus, De 6. aetatib. in vita Constantini. 4.
Beda, and the In vita Leonis.
Author of the Pontifical. These authorities may seem very sufficient to
prove, that Honorius was an heretic: yet so well are our adversaries affected
to him, that they will rather discredit them all then suffer him to be spotted
and disgraced: and therefore some of them say, that the sixth general Council
is corrupted; and likewise the Epistle of Leo the second, in the end of it: and
that the Fathers in the 7th Council were deceived by the 6th, as likewise Pope
Adrian with the whole Roman Synod, and the other Authors, that concur with
them in the condemnation of Honorius. Others think that indeed the 6th
Council condemned Honorius, but upon false information, and so erred in a
matter of fact. Which conceit is no way probable. For that the Fathers of the
Council proceeded not rashly, Action 12.
but caused the Epistles of Honorius written to the heads of the faction of the
Monothelites (for which he was suspected,) to be openly read and examined. But
(say they) first, these Epistles happily were counterfeit, 2ly If they were not
counterfeit, there is nothing in them contrary to the truth. Neither of these
answers is sufficient. For first, that the Epistles were not cou^terfeit, it
appears by Maximus, Disp. Maximi cum Pyrrho in 2 Tom. Council. apud Binnium.
who answers a place brought out of one of the^, and shows the meaning of
it, as from the Secretary that wrote it, then living. 2ly, If these Epistles had
bin cou^terfeit, the Legates of Agatho present there, would have taken
exception to the^, and not have consented to the condemnation of one of his
predecessors upon cou^terfeit evidence. Neither is the 2^ answer better the^
the 1st: for that the Fathers assembled in a general Counsel, should not be
able to understand the Epistles of Honorius, and judge whether they were
heretical or not, as well as the Jesuits now living, is very strange. But let
us suppose the Jesuits to have more wit the^ all those worthy Bs and Fathers
that were assembled in the sixth Council, and let us see by taking a view of the
Epistles themselves, whether they may be cleared from the error they have bin
charged with, or not. It is not to be denied, but that Honorius in these his
Epistles Action 12. Synod: 6. and act. 13.
confesses, that the nature of God in Christ, works the things that are
divine: and the nature of man, the things that are humane, without division,
confusion, or conversion of one of the^ into another: and that the differences
of these natures remain inviolable. But in that he denies, that there are two
actions in Christ, the one of Deity, and the other of Humanity; in that he
says, it is absurd to think, that where there are more natures then one,
there must be more actions then one: and allows of Cyrus Bishop of
Alexandria, and Sergius Bishop of Constantinople, who were Monothelites, rather
then of Sophronius Bishop of Jerusalem, a right worthy and learned Bishop
(who defended the truth against them both, and whose learned Epistle to Sergius
Bishop of Constantinople, we find in the Action 11.
sixth general Council:) it cannot be avoided but that he erred in matter of
faith, in such sort, as by consequence it overthrows that distinction of the
two natures of God and man in Christ, which he seemed to acknowledge. Neither
can it be cleared from suspicion of heretical and bad meaning, that he makes
it but a curiosity of philosophers to acknowledge a twofold action in Christ,
and denies that the fathers ever defined any such thing; whereas Pope Martine
the first in the Concilior. Tomo 2.
Synod of Rome says, it is clear by the determination of the Fathers, that
the two natures of Christ remain unconfounded in the union, and undivided, as
also his two wills, and the two distinct actions, and natural properties of
them. Maximus in his disputation with Pyrrhus, found in the second Tome of the
Counsels, clears one sentence of Honorius, wherein he seems to
acknowledge but one will in Christ; affirming out of the testimony of him that
wrote that Epistle for Honorius, that he meant it of one will of the humane
nature of Christ; thereby showing, that there was no such contrariety of
desires found in him as in us. But what is that to the other things that are
objected to him? Two objections our Adversaries have against them who think
that Honorius was condemned for heresy. The first is, that the sixth general
Council could not condemn him, without being contrary to it self, in Action
4.
allowing the Epistle of Agatho, wherein he says; that the faith never failed
in Peter's chair, and that his predecessors did always confirm their
brethren. The second, that some Writers speaking of the Monothelites, and
naming diverse of them, omit him; that 2. Tomo. council. apud Binnium.
Maximus in his Dialogue against Pyrrhus, Theophanes Isaurus in his History,
cited by In vita Honorij apud Platinam.
Onuphrius, and Emmanuel Chalica in his book in the defense of the Latins
against the Greeks, affirm, he was ever a catholic; and some other, as
Beda, Anastasius Bibliothecarius, Blondus, Nauclerus, Sabellicus, and Platina,
do speak of him as of a Catholic Bishop. The first of these objections I
have answered elsewhere, showing that some of Agathoes predecessors, might b
Chap. 42.
for some short space fail to do their duty, in confirming their brethren,
and swerve from the truth; and yet that be true he says in that Epistle, that
in the Sea it self the faith never failed: and that his predecessors fell not
either so many, or in such sort, but that the Bishops of that Church did ever
reach forth their helping hands to other, either in the beginning of each
heresy, or before it was utterly extinct and suppressed; as it fell out in
this, both in respect of Pope Martine and others before, and of himself now.
To the second we say, that it does not seem to be strongly proved, that
Honorius was no heretic, by the silence of some few. That Maximus does not
clear Honorius generally, but one sentence of Honorius only. That Theophanes
Isaurus does not go about to clear Honorius from heresy, but says only,
that the Canons of the sixth Council were not made by the same Fathers that
were at first assembled, but by others. So speaking nothing of Honorius, who
was condemned in the Council, and not in the canons; and that the rest, to
wit, Chalica, and some few other living long after the time of Honorius, are no
sufficient proof against that cloud of witnesses, which we produced in the
beginning. And therefore there is yet nothing brought to reprove the testimony
of onr witnesses, or to make good that he was always a catholic, which is
the thing to be proved.

With Honorius we may join Gregory the third, who in his Decret. part. 2.
causa 32. qu. 7. Cano. proposuisti.
Epistle to Bonifacius, gives leave to a man, whose wife falls into some
such infirmity, as makes her unfit to company with him, to marry another; so
that he give her maintenance. And that he speaks not of any impediment
before marriage not known, which makes the contract void from the beginning,
but of such infirmities as fall out afterward, it is evident. First, in that
he says: If any man's wife shall be taken with such infirmity, etc. Secondly,
in that he provides: That the husband shall provide for her maintenance; which
in case of a void contract from the beginning, is no way reasonable. Thirdly,
in that he says: He shall thus provide for her, seeing infirmity, and not
wickedness drives him from her. Fourthly, in that he says: It were better he
should contain; seeing in case of abuse by unknown defect and impediment,
making the contract void from the beginning, there is no more cause why a man
so abused, should contain and refrain from marriage, then any other. Now to
permit marriage by reason of any defect or infirmity ensuing after the first
marriage, I think our Adversaries will not deny to be erroneous, seeing the
contrary is defined in the Sess 24. c. 2.
Council of Trent. Neither does it excuse this error of Gregory, that
Bellarmine alleges out of Lib. 1. de sermon Dom. in monte c. 29.
Austin, who makes some doubt whether the wife with her husbands consent,
yielding to the wicked desires of him in whose hands he is, to save his life,
be excusable from sin; seeing he does but upon a particular accident propose a
disputable question; and the other resolves and gives warrant for the
practice of an unlawful thing, and that as a Pope in his directions to
Bonifacius, having newly converted certain barbarous people to the faith of
Christ.

Wherefore let us proceed to see whether therebe any more Popes that may justly
be charged with error or heresy. We read in the Sigebert. in Chronico anni
900. and Seq. Platina. in Stephan. and Sergio.
stories of the Church, that one Formosus, Bishop of Portua, being hardly
thought of, and suspected by John the Pope, left his Bishopric, and fled for
fear of him; that being called back by John, and refusing to return, he was
anathematized by him; and that at last coming into France to satisfy the
Pope, he was degraded, and put into a Lay habit, and made to swear never to
enter into Rome any more, nor ever to communicate but as a Lay man: yet
afterward by Martinus, John's successor, he was restored to his Bishopric,
absolved from his oath, came to Rome, and in the end obtained to be Pope,
contrary to the minds of many of the Romans, who desired rather to have had
one Sergius a Deacon of the Church of Rome, but prevailed not. Whereupon there
grew great question with much scandal, some affirming that his consecration,
and the consecration of such as he ordained, was void: others, that whatsoever
were thought of Formosus, yet for the dignity of his Bishoply office, and the
faith of those he ordained, their ordinations were to be holden for good,
especially seeing he was absolved from his perjury by Martinus the Pope. The
next Pope (save one) that succeeded Formosus, was Stephen, who sat but four
months, yet was not idle, but though he had been ordained Bishop of Anagnia
by him, persecuted him with deadly hate, and pronounced the ordinations of all
such as he had ordained to be void. After him succeeded Romanus, and after
Romanus, Theodorus, who being contrarily minded to Stephen, reconciled those
whom Stephen had degraded, but presumed not to consecrate or ordain them
again. After Theodorus, followed John, who, to confirm the ordinations of
Formosus, pronounced void by Stephen, called a Council of 72 Bishops, the
Archbishops of France, and the King being present: and in the sight of them
all, caused the Acts of the Synod which Stephen held for condemnation of
Formosus, to be burned. After John succeeded Benedictus, and aftet him Sergius
the Deacon, that missed the Popedom when Formosus got it. This Sergius in
revenge of his former repulse, forced the Romans with threats and terrors,
to account the ordinations of Formosus void, and (which is not to be spoken)
drew him out of his grave after he had rested in it a good space: put upon him
the Papal vestures, set him in Peter's chair: commanded him to be beheaded,
and then cutting off three of his fingers, caused him to be cast into Tiber,
degrading all that he had ordained. Here we see Popes clearly convinced of
heresy, and defining and decreeing for heresy. For seeing Formosus was
sometime undoubtedly a true Bishop, it was an error in faith to say, that his
ordinations were void. This is so clear, that De Pont. lib. 4. c. 12.
Bellarmine denies it not, but says only, that neither Stephen, nor Sergius
published any decree, that their ordinations were void, whom Formosus had
ordained, and that they were to be re-ordained: but did only so re-ordaine, de
facto, in their fury, and distempered passions: wherein he is clearly refuted
by Anno 902
Sigebert, who says expressly, that they decreed omnes ordinationes eius
irritas esse debere: that is, That all his ordinations were to be taken and
reputed for void.

To Stephen and Sergius we may add Caelestinus the third, who (as De haeres.
lib. 1. c. 4.
Alfonsus a Castro truly affirms) cannot by any means be excused from
heresy, in that he taught, that the bond of marriage is so dissolved by
heresy, that he whose wife falls into heresy, may lawfully leave her and
take another. This decree of Caelestinus is not now to be found in the
Decretals, but it was in the ancient; and Alfonsus, professes he read it In
Decretal. cap laudabilem de conuersione Infidelium.
there himself. Now that it is heretical in the judgment of our adversaries,
it is evident, in that Cap. Quanto de diuortijs.
Innocentius the third teaches the contrary, and the Sess. 24. can. 5.
Council of Trent defines otherwise. Neither does Bellarmines answer, that
he did not pass any Decree, but only deliver his own private opinion, help
the matter. For Alfonsus a Castro. contra haeres. lib. 1. c. 2.
Gratian makes the Decretals equal in authority with the Canons of Councels,
and our adversaries are wont to prove the Popes power by his Decretals, as if
all they were subject to him, and bound to obey him to whom he writes them.

The next Pope that is charged with heresy, is Nicholas the fourth, who Cap.
exijt de verb. signif. in Sexto.
defines, that Christ taught both by word and example most perfect poverty,
consisting in the abandoning of al propriety in things, and right or claim to
them, either in particular, or in respect of the whole College and company of
men living together, and that such poverty is pleasing to God, and meritorious.
For the better understanding of this matter we must distinguish the use of
things, and the propriety in them, or right and claim to them. Ockam oper is
90. dierum. c. 2.
The propriety in things, and the right and claim to them, is twofold;
either absolute, when men may judicially challenge a thing as their own, and
use it how, and in what sort they will, so that it be not prohibited by the law
of God and nature; or restrained and limited: as Clergymen may challenge the
possessions and lands belonging to them, and judicially recover them if they be
withheld from them; yet may they not so freely dispose of them, as Laymen
may of theirs. The use of things is twofold. For there is vsus juris, and vsus
facti. Vsus facti is when one has the use of a thing, but so, that he has no
right to use it, warrantable by any positive or humane law; and if any one will
deprive him of it, he cannot by law hinder him. Vsus juris, is the right one
has to use a thing, leaving the claim of the possession of the substance of
it to the owner thereof. This kind of use is likewise twofold: nudus, and
vsus-fructus. The former is when one has right to use a thing; but so limited
and restrained, that he may neither sell, let, nor give the same right. The
later when he may. The Franciscan Friars imagining the height of Christian
perfection to consist in extreme poverty, by their vow of poverty abandon, not
only in particular, as do other Religious, but in general, even in respect of
their whole company and society, all interest, right and claim to lands,
livings and possessions, or to the use of any such things leaving nothing to
themselves, but the bare use of such things as by free gift, begging, or
labor, come to their hands; without all right to use them pleadable and
justifiable by any course of humane law. So that if any one will take the bread
out of their hands, before it come to their mouths, or the clothes from them,
wherewith they hide their nakedness, they may not complain of him for so
doing, nor prosecute any suite against him for it. This kind of poverty Pope
Nicholas affirms Christ taught, both by word and example, and wills the
Franciscanes according to their rule, strictly to observe the same. And for
their safety and security takes order, that all moueables given to them for
use, shall in respect of right belong to the Church of Rome, as likewise their
Oratories, and Cemiteries But their dwellinges not so, unless the giver
express an absolute gift (which yet must not be to the Friars, but to the
Church) and the Church expressly accept the same. For otherwise the owner may
at his pleasure take them away again. Farther he orders, that such such
things as are given to them, and they have the use of, they may either of
themselves change them for such other things as they need or desire, or cause
the governor and disposer of them appointed by the Pope, to sell them, and
with the money to buy such things as they need, and let them have the use of
them, as books and the like. For with money they themselves may not meddle.
Pope John the two and twentieth, following Nicholas, and finding by experience,
that these Friars did but abuse the world with their fair shows of
perfection, In extrauagant. ad Conditorem Canonum.
condemned their hypocrisy, and would be no patron of it, as his predecessor
was. First, therefore he showed, that perfection consists essentially in
charity, which Paul names the bond of perfection, and that the abandoning of
propriety in things makes nothing to perfection, farther the^ it excludes the
care that is wont to be found in men, in getting, keeping, and disposing of
them, weakening the act of divine love, So that if there be as much carfulness
in men after the disclaiming of propriety in things, as before, their seeming
poverty makes nothing to Christian perfection. Now he says, that after the
ordination of his predecessor, these Friars were no less careful in getting
and keeping things both by begging, judicial suing, and the like means, then
any other mendicants that have some things as their own in common. And that
therefore howsoever they pleased themselves, their observation was of no more
perfection then theirs that had something of their own in common. Secondly, he
showed, that these mendicants having the use of such things as are given to
them, and the Church of Rome the propriety (in name and title, but not in
deed, being only to secure them in the use thereof, and to make no benefit)
that it is but a single right the Church has, and that they are in truth and
indeed no poorer then they that have things of their own; seeing they may
change the use of one thing for another, or at least cause the procurator,
designed by the Church of Rome, to change things into money, and buy for them
such as they rather desire to have, making use of all things that come to their
hands at their pleasure, as much as they that have them of their own. Thirdly,
he pronounced, that to think that Christ and his Apostles had nothing of
their own in special or common, and that they had no right to use such
things, as they had, to sell them, give them, or with them to buy other, is
contrary to the Gospel, condemns Christ and his Apostles of injustice, and
overthrows the whole Scripture. Yet Pope Nicholas defined, that Christ and
his Apostles had nothing of their own, either in special or common, and that
the having of a common bag no way contrarieth this conceit, seeing that was
but by a kind of dispensation in the person of the weak and imperfect; and to
show, that he disliketh not them that come short of his perfection. Thus we
see Pope Nicolas erred in a matter of faith, patronized hypocrites in their
faignes shows of counterfeit perfection, and was disliked and contraried by
his own successor John the two and twentieth for the same; by reason whereof
there grew a maine difference between Pope John and the Franciscan Friars, he
charging them with heresy and persecuting them from place to place: and they
likewise disclaiming him as a damnable heretic, and no Pope. The principal
men on the Friars part were Vid. litera^ Michael. Caesen. in fine Diolog.
Occami.
Michael Caesenas, and Occam. in opere 90. dierum and alibi.
Occam the great Schoole-man, who has written much against Pope John, touching
this argument.

Neither is Pope John (though in this point of Christian perfection he were of
a sounder and better judgment then his predecessor) and any happier the^ he.
For he is likewise charged with error in matter of faith (and that not
unjustly) by the same Friars, that he so much hated and persecuted. For (as
Occam testifies in his 2. partis tract. 1. in initio.
Dialogues) he taught, that the souls of the just shall not see God till the
general resurrection: and that not faintly, or doubtingly, but in such
passionate and violent manner, as not to endure those that thought otherwise.
Part. 4. operum ejus. With Gerson agrees Adrian. 6. in q. de Confirmat. circa
finem.
Gerson likewise in his sermon upon Easter day, before the French King and his
Nobles, says, That the thief on the cross in that very hour that Christ
spoke unto him, was made happy, and saw God face to face, according to the
promise of Christ made unto him, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise;
and that thereby the doctrine of John the two and twentieth is proved false,
that was coudemned by the Divines of Paris with the sound of trumpets, before
King Philip, uncle to the King before whom then he spoke; the King rather
believing the Divines of Paris, then the Court of Rome. De Pontif. lib. 4. cap.
14.
Bellarmine, to derive the hate of this matter from the Pope to others, would
willingly fasten this error on Calvin, and to that purpose alleges Instit.
lib. 3. c. 20. and 24.
two places out of him. But neither of them proves any such thing. For in the
first, he speaks not of any stay of the Saints departed without, in outward
courts, out of heaven till the resurrection (as the Cardinal strangely
misunderstandeth him) but shows by a most apt comparison, that as in the time
of MOSES Law, the high Priest only entered into the Holiest of all to make an
atonement, and all the people stayed without: So none but Christ goes into
the presence of God, to make peace, and to work the great work of
reconciliation, and that all the sons of men are to expect without, till he
bring them assurance of favor and acceptance. And in the second place where
says, that the dead are joined with us that live in the unity of the same
faith, his meaning is not, that faith opposite to sight is found in the Saints
after death, as it is in us, but that they have a clear view, and present
enjoying of those things which we believe. Neither is there any thing found in
Calvin that may any way excuse the error of Pope John. Thus then (I hope) it
does appear by that which has been said, that Popes are subject to error,
that they may become Heretics, and define for heresy, and that therefore the
second supposed privilege of the Roman Bishop, which is infallibility of
judgment, is found to have no proof at all. Wherefore let us proceed to the
third, which is his power to dispose of the kingdoms of the World, and to
overrule the Princes and Potentates thereof.

CHAP. 44.
Of the Popes unjust claim of temporal dominion over the whole world.

TOuching the right and interest of Popes in intermeddling with secular
affairs, and disposing of the Kingdoms of the world, there are three opinions
among the Romanists. The August. Triumphus. Alvarus Pelagius, and alii cit. a
Bellarm.
first is, that the Pope is sovereign Lord of all the world, or at least of
all the Christian world; and that the Princes of the Earth are but his
Vicegere^ts and Lieuetenants. The Bellar. and alii
second, that the Pope is not sovereign Lord of the world, nor of any part
thereof: and that therefore he may not at his pleasure intermeddle with the
affairs of Princes, but only in case of some defect found in them, as when
they fail to do their duty, or seek to hinder the common good, especially of
the Church. The Waldensis, Gerson, Heart, and many other cited in the
examination of Blackwell.
third, that he may not at all intermeddle with the disposition of earthly
kingdoms, or restrain, or depose Princes, how much soever they abuse their
authority.

The first of these three opinions, had anciently, and has presently, great
patrons and followers. Yet De Pont. l. 5. c. 2. 3. and 4^.
Bellarmine very confidently and learnedly refuteth the same. First, showing
that the Pope is not sovereign Lord of the whole world. Secondly, that he is
not Lord of the Christian world. And thirdly, that he is Lord of no part of
the world. That he is not Lord of the whole world, he proves, because not of
those Provinces that are possessed by Infidels, which he demonstrateth. First,
because Christ committed none but only his sheep to Peter; and therefore gave
him no authority over Infidels which are not his sheep; whereunto Saint Paul
agrees, professing that he has nothing to do to judge them that are
without. Secondly, because dominion and the right of Princes is not founded in
grace or faith, but in free will and e 1 Cor. 5, 12.
reason, and has not sprung from the written Law of Moses, or Christ, but from
the law of Nations and Nature. Which is most clear, in that God both in the
Old and New Testament approves the Kingdoms of the Gentiles and Infidels, as
appears by that of Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar: Dan. 2 37.
O King, thou art King of Kings, For the God of Heaven has given thee a
kingdom, power, and strength, and glory, and in all places where the children
of men dwell, the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the heaven has he
given into thine hand, and has made thee a ruler over them all. And that of
Christ, Matthew. 22. 21,
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's. With whom the Apostle agrees,
requiring the Christians of his time, not only to pay tribute to Heathen kings;
but also Romans 13. 5
to obey them for conscience sake; which men were not bound to, if they had no
authority and right to command. Neither can it be said, that heathen princes
are the Popes Lieuetenants, and theresore to be obeyed for his sake, though not
for their own, seeing the Pope would have no such Lieutenants, if it lay in
him to place them, or displace them. Lastly he proves, that the Pope has no
such sovereign right of commanding over all, as is pretended, seeing it had
been vain for Christ to give him a right to that, whereof he should never
get the possession. And having thus proved, that Infidels were truly and
rightly Lords of the countries subject to them before the coming of Christ,
that he found no nullitie in their titles, nor ever seized their kingdoms and
dominions into his own hands, as some fondly imagine that he did, he
proceeds to prove, that Princes when they become Christians, lose not the
right that they formerly had to their kingdoms, but get a new right to the
kingdom of heaven. For that otherwise Christ's grace should destroy nature, and
his benefits be prejudicial to such as are made partakers of them. Whereas
Christ came not to destroy and overthrow things well settled before, but to
perfect them: nor to hurt any, but to do good to all. For confirmation whereof
he alleges part of the Hymn of Sedulius, which the whole Church does sing.
Hostis Herodes impie, Christum venire quid times? Non eripit mortalia, Qui
regna dat coelestia; that is, O impious enemy Herod, why do thou fear
Christ's coming? He will not deprive thee of thy transitory kingdom upon
earth, that gives an eternal kingdom in heaven. Whence it follows, that
Christ imposed no such hard condition on those kings that were to become
Christians, as to leave their crowns and dignities.

And so he comes to his second proposition, that the Pope is not temporal
Lord of the Christian world, which he confirms. First, because if the Pope
were sovereign Lord of all the Christian world, Bishops should be temporal
Lords of their cities, and the places adjoining subject to them. Which neither
they will grant, that contend for the sovereignty of the Pope, nor can stand
with that of Saint Ambros. in Oratione de tradend. Basilicis.
Ambrose, who says, If the Emperor ask tribute, we deny it him not. The
Church lands do pay tribute. And again, Tribute is Caesar's, it is not denied
him, but the Church is Gods, and may not be yielded to Caesar. And that of
Hosius Bishop of Corduba, who (as we read in In epist. ad solitariam vitam
agentes.
Athanasius) tells the Emperor, that God has given him the Empire, but that
he has committed to Bishops, those things that pertain to the Church.
Secondly, out of the confession of Popes, Leo epist. ad Martian. 38. and 43.
Pope Leo confessing, that Martianus the Emperor, was appointed to the Empire
by God, and that God was the author of his Empire: And Epi. ad Anastas. quae
habetur. Did. 96. ca. duo sunt.
Gelasius writing to Anastasius the Emperor, and acknowledging that there are
two things by which principally the world is guided, to wit, the sacred
authority of Bishops, and the regal power of Princes; with whom Gregory
agrees when he says, Greg. lib. 2. epist. 61. ad Mauritium.
Power over all is given from heaven to the piety of my Lord.

And from hence he infers his third proposition, that the Pope is temporal
Lord of no part of the world, in the right of Peter's successor, and Christ's
Vicar. For, if there were no nullitie in the titles of infidel kings and
princes, nor no necessity implied in their conversion, of relinquishing their
right when they became Christians, but that both infidels and christians,
notwithstanding any act of Christ, continued in the full possession of princely
power and right, it could not be, that Christ should inuest Peter, or his
successors, with any kingly authority, seeing he could give them none, but
such as he should take from others.

Nay, he proceeds farther, and shows, that Christ himself, while he was
on the earth, was no temporal Lord or King, and therefore much less gave any
temporal dominion or kingdom to his Apostles. That he was no temporal king,
he proves, because the right to be a King or Lord in such sort as men are
Kings or Lords, is either by inheritance, election, conquest, or special
donation and gift of Almighty God. Now that Christ according to the flesh, was
a King by right of inheritance, he says, it cannot be proved, because though
he came of the kingly family, yet it is uncertain whether he were the next
in blood to David or not. And besides, the kingdom was taken away from David's
house, before Christ was borne; and God had foretold, that of the house of
Ieconiah, of which Christ came (as we may read in the Verse. 12.
first of Saint Matthew) there should never be any temporal King such as
David, and the rest that succeeded him were, saying; Ierem. 22. 30.
Write this man barren, a man that shall not prosper in his days; for there
shall be no man of his seed to sit upon the throne of David, and to have
power any more in Judah. And whereas it might be objected, that the Angel
prophesied, that Luke 1. 32.
the, Lord God should give unto Christ, the seat of David his father, the
Cardinal answers out of Hierome, upon the place of Hieremie: and Ambrose
upon Luke, that the words of Almighty God which we read in Hieremie, are to be
understood of a temporal kingdom, and the words of the Angel of a spiritual
and eternal kingdom. That Christ was not a temporal King by right of
election, he proves by that of Christ himself, when he says, Luke 12. 14.
O man, who has made me a judge, or a diuider among you. And by that of S.
John where he says, that Ioh. 6. 15.
When Christ knew they meant to come and take him, and make him a King, he fled
again himself alone into a mountain. So that he neither was chosen, nor
would have accepted of any such choice. That by right of conquest and victory
he was not a temporal King, it appears, in that his war was not with
mortal Kings, to deprive them of their kingdoms, but with the prince of
darkness; according to that of the Apostle: 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
To this purpose did the Son of God appear, that he might dissolve the
works of the Devil. And that again, Ioh. 12. 31.
Now is the Prince of this world cast out. And that of Saint Paul, who
speaking of Christ, says, Colos. 2. 15.
That spoiling principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly,
triumphing over them in himself. So that his warrefare was not, by carnal
weapons to get himself an earthly kingdom, but by spiritual weapons, mighty
through God, to get a spiritual kingdom, that he might reign in the hearts
of men, by faith and grace, where Satan reigned before by infidelity,
disobedience and sin. Lastly, that he was no temporal king by any special
gift of God his Father, it is evident out of his own words, when he says,
Ioh. 18. 36.
My kingdom is not hence: For as the Chrysostom. Theophylact. Cyril. and Aug.
in hunc locum. Ambros. li. 3. in Lucam, prope finem.
Fathers note upon these words, Christ meant by so saying, to put Pilate out of
doubt, that he affected no temporal kingdom. And therefore the sense of his
words, must needs be this, I am a King, but not in such sort, as Caesar and
Herod: My kingdom is not of this world, that is, The supports of it, are not
things of this world, it does not consist in honor, riches, and power of this
world. This thing the Cardinal farther proves to be true, because he came to
minister, and not to be ministered unto: to be judged, and not to judge: and by
his whole course of conversation, showed the same, never taking upon him to do
any kingly act. For whereas he cast out the buyers and sellers out of the
Temple, it rather pertained to the Priests office, then the kings, according
to that, which we read in the old Testament, that the 2. Chron. 26. 20.
Priest drove the king himself out of the Temple, when disorderly he presumed
to do things not pertaining to him: and yet he did it not by any Priestly or
kingly authority, but after the manner of Prophets, by a kind of divine zeal,
like that wherewith Number. 25. 7.
Phinchees was moved to kill the adulterer and adulteress, and 1. King. 18. 40.
Elias to slay the Prophets of Baal. This most true opinion of the Cardinal,
that Christ was no temporal king, is farther confirmed, in that such a kind of
kingdom had not been necessary. Nay, it had been an hinderance to the work
he had in hand, which was to persuade to the contempt of glory, honor,
riches, pleasures, and all such other earthly things, wherewith the Kings of
the earth abound: and by suffering death, to overcome him that had the power of
death; and to reconcile the world unto God. And besides, in that all the
places, where any mention is made of the kingdom of Christ, are necessarily
understood of a spiritual and eternal kingdom. So in the Psalm, Psalm. 2.
I am appointed of him a King, to preach his commandment. And again, in the
book of Daniel: Dan. 2. 44.
In their days shall God raise up a kingdom, which shall not be destroyed for
ever. And of his kingdom there shall be no end. Whereas the kingdoms of men,
continue but for a time: and therefore if Christ had been a King in such sort
while he was upon the earth, as men are, he had ceased to be so, when he left
the earth. And then it could not have been true, that of his kingdom there
should be none end. Nay seeing the kingdom of the Jews was possessed by the
Romans, at, or immediately after the time of the departure of Christ out of
the world and afterward by the Saracens, and Turks: how could that of Daniel
have been fulfilled, that his kingdom shall not be given to another people,
if his kingdom had been like the kingdoms of men? So it is true, that Christ
came into the world to be a king, and that GOD gave him the seat of David his
father. But this kingdom was divine, spiritual, eternal, and proper unto
him, in that he was the Son of God, and in that he was God and Man. But a
temporal kingdom, such as the sons of men have, he had not. And hereupon
Saint Augustine brings in Christ speaking in this sort, Aug. in 15 Ioannis.
Audite Iudaej and Gentes, audi circumcisio, audi praeputium, audite omnia
regnae terrena, non impedio dominationem vestram in hoc mundo, etc. that is,
Hear O Jews and Gentiles, hear circumcision, and uncircumcision, hear all
ye kingdoms of the earth, I hinder not your dominion and rule in this world,
because my kingdom is not of this world. Fear not therefore with that most
vain and causeless fear, wherewith Herod feared, and slew so many innocent
babes, being cruel, rather out of fear then anger, and so forward: showing
that the Kingdom of Christ is merely spiritual, and such as no way
prejudiceth the kingdoms of men. Which the Gloss. super illud Matthew. 21.
Benedictus qui venit.
Gloss confirms, noting that Christ, while he was yet to live longer in
this world, when the multitudes came to make him a King, refused it: but that
when he was ready to suffer, he no way reproved, but willingly accepted the
hymns of them, that received him in triumphant manner, and welcomed him to
Jerusalem, honoring him as a King; because he was a King, not having a
temporal and earthly kingdom, but an heavenly. Whereunto Leo agrees, showing
that Herod, when he heard a Prince was borne to the Jews, feared a
successor; but that his fear was vain and causeless, saying, Leo sermon. de
Epiphania.
O caeca stultae aemulationis impietas, quae perturbandum putas divinum tuo
furore consilium! Dominus mundi temporale non quaerit regnumqui praestat
aeternum. that is, Oblinde impiety of foolish emulation, which think to
trouble and hinder the Counsels of God by thy fury. The Lord of the World, who
gives an eternal Kingdom, came not into the World to seek a temporal
kingdom. And Fulg. sermon. de Epiph.
Fulgentius accords with him, saying, The gold which the Sages offered to
Christ, showed him to be a King, but not such a King as will have his Image
and superscription in the coin, but such an one as seeks his image in the
sons of men. Whence it follows, he was no temporal or mundane King: seeing
they have their images and superscriptions in their coin, that are kings after
the manner of the World. This assertion may be proved by many unanswerable
reasons. The first is this, Christ standing before Pilate, and being asked by
him if he were a King, answered, Ioh. 18. 36.
That his Kingdom was not of this world. Therefore he was not temporal or
mundane King. This consequence foam deny, affirming that Christ intended not in
his answer to Pilate, to deny his kingdom to be a temporal, earthly, and
mundane kingdom, but that he meant only to let him know that he had received
his kingdom of God, and that the World neither gave it him, nor chose him to
it. And therefore he said, Regnum meum non est hinc, and not Regnum meum non
est hic, that is, My Kingdom is not hence, and not, My Kingdom is not here.
This was the evasion of Pope John the two and twentieth (as Ockam oper^s 90.
dier. c. 53
Ockam testifies) but he refuteth the same by most clear circumstances of
Scripture, and evidence of reason, showing that Christ being accused unto
Pilate as an enemy to Caesar, in that he made himself a King, so cleared
himself, that Pilate pronounced that he found nothing against him; which he
could not, nor he would not have done if he had confessed his Kingdom to be a
mundane Kingdom, though he had derived the right and title of it from Heaven.
For Caesar would not have endured any claim of such a Kingdom, though fetched
from Heaven. Neither durst Pilate have pronounced him guiltless that had made
such a claim, and therefore Christ, when he said, his Kingdom was not of
this World, meant not only to deny the receiving of it from the World, but
also the dependence of it upon any thing in the World: the supports of it not
being things earthly, but heavenly and divine, it no way consisting in riches,
honor, power, and worldly greatness, as do the kingdoms of men, but in the
power of God. Which thing is aptly expressed by Christ himself, when he says,
Ioh. 18. 36
If my Kingdom were of this world, my Soldiers would fight for me. The
second reason is this. He that is no judge of secular quarrels, nor divider of
inheritance, is no King. For these things belong to the office of a King. But
Christ was no judge of such quarrels, and differences; therefore he was no
King. That he was no judge of secular quarrels, nor divider of inheritances,
it is evident by his own Luke 12. 14.
denial thereof. Which Saint Ambrose excellently expresses, saying; Ambros.
in eum locum.
Be^ terrena declinat, qui propter diuina descenderat; nec iudex dignatur esse
litium, and arbiter facultatum, viuorum habens mortuorumque iudicium, and
arbitrium meritorum: that is, He does well decline things earthly, who
descended and came down for things divine. Neither does he vouchsafe to be a
judge of quarrels, and an arbitratour to determine the differences of men about
their possessions, who is appointed to be judge of the quick and dead, and to
whom it pertayneth to discern between the well and ill doings of men. And
again; Merito refutatur ille frater, qui dispensatorem coelestium gestiebat
terrenis occupare: that is; That brother is worthily rejected, and has the
repulse, who sought to busy him whom God has appointed the disposer of things
heavenly, with things that are earthly. The third is, because Christ refused to
be a King when it was offered him, and told his disciples, that Math. 20. 25.
The kings of the nations have dominion over them, and they that are great,
exercise authority. But that it should not be so with them, but that whosoever
would be great among them, must be their minister. The fourth; he that is a
King and will never meddle with the things that belong to a King, is justly to
be charged either with wickedness, or negligence. But Christ never meddled with
any thing pertaining to the office of a temporal king in this world; therefore
either he was no such king, or he may be charged with malice or negligence. But
neither of these two latter may be admitted; therefore he was no such king.
The fifth; there cannot be two kings of one kingdom, unless either they hold
the same jointly, or the one acknowledge to hold the same, as of and from the
other. But Caesar and Christ, neither held the kingdom of Iudaea jointly,
neither did Caesar hold it as from Christ, nor Christ as from Caesar. Therefore
either Caesar was no true king, or Christ was no secular king of that kingdom.
But that Caesar was a true king, it appears by the testimony of Christ
himself, saying; Math. 22. 21.
Give, or rather render, to. Caesar the things that are Caesar's. Now Caesar
claimed tribute as Lord of the country, and therefore he was truly Lord and
King of it. That Caesar held not of or from Christ as man, it is evident; and
much more, that Christ, who wholly refused to be a king, did never acknowledge
to hold any kingdom from mortal man. The sixth; that was the kingdom of
Christ whereof the Prophets prophesied: But they prophesied not of any earthly
kingdom; therefore Christ's kingdom was not earthly. That they prophesied not
of any earthly kingdom, it is evident, in that the kingdom they prophesied
of, was to be confirmed and restored by him: but the earthly kingdom of Iudaea
was not confirmed by the coming of Christ, but upon the refusal of him
utterly overthrown; therefore it was not that the Prophets prophesied of. That
the kingdom they prophesied of, was to be confirmed, restored and bettered,
the words of the Prophets are proof sufficient. (...). 2^ 5. etc.
Behold the day comes (says the Lord) and I will raise up unto David a
righteous branch, and a king shall reign, and he shall be wise, and shall do
judgment and justice in the earth. In those days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell boldly. And this is the name that they shall call him by:
The Lord our righteousness. And again, Esaias 9 6.
A little child is borne unto us, and the principality or rule is on his
shoulders. His name shall be called wonderful, the mighty God, Father of the
world to come, the Prince of peace, the increase of his government and peace
shall have no end. He shall sit upon the throne of David, and upon his
kingdom to order, and to stablish it with judgment, and with justice from
henceforth even for ever. Now that the kingdom of Iudaea was not established,
but utterly overthrown immediately after Christ's departure hence, upon and for
the refusal of him, the words of Christ foretelling it, and the event of
things answering unto his prediction, are proof sufficient. Luke 19. 43.
The day shall come upon thee (says Christ to Jerusalem, the chief city of
that kingdom) that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and hold thee
in straight on every side, they shall cast thee to the earth, and thy children
that are in thee, and shall not leave a stone upon a stone, because thou
knew not the time of thy visitation.

Thus we see it strongly proved, that To which pur pose see Wall. dens. Doctr.
lib: 2. art. 3. cap. 76. and 77.
Christ himself was no temporal or earthly king, and therefore much less
Peter or the Pope, that pretends to be Christ's Vicar, and Peter's successor.
Notwithstanding, they that are otherwise minded, endeavor to prove, that Christ
was a temporal king, and that he left a kingly power to Peter and his
successors. First, out of Scripture strangely wrested. Secondly, out of the
testimonies of Popes. (For better authorities they have none.) The principal
text of Scripture which they allege, is in the Gospel of Saint Matthew, where
our Savior says, Math. 28. 18.
All power is given me in heaven and in earth. But De Pontif. l. 5. cap. 5.
Bellarmine tells them, and the best Divines agree with him, that that place
is not to be understood of a temporal power, such as earthly kings have, but
either of a spiritual, whereby Christ so reigns in earth, in the hearts of
men by faith, as he does in heaven in the presence of his glory among the
Angels; or a divine power over all creatures, not communicable to mortal men.
The former of these interpretations the Author of the Interlineall Gloss
follows, the later Lyra upon this place: his words are; Licet Christus,
quantum ad diuinitatem ab aeterno haberet hanc potestatem, and in quantum homo,
ab instanti conceptionis, haberet potestatem in coelo, and in terra,
authoritative, tamen executive non habuit ante resurrectionem suam, sed voluit
esse passibilitati subiectus propter nostram redemptionem; that is, Although
Christ, in that he was God, had this power from all eternity, and in that he
was man, had power both in heaven and in earth, from the first moment of his
conception in respect of authority, yet in respect of the execution and
performance of the acts of it, he had it not before his resurrection, but was
pleased to be subject to passibilitie for our redemption. Let us come
therefore from the Scripture to the testimonies of later Popes; for Fathers,
ancient Counsels, or ancient Bishops of Rome, they have none to speak for
them. The first Pope that they allege, is Pope Nicholas, in a certain Epist.
Nichola^ citat. (...) Gratian. Did. 22. cap. omnes.
Epistle of his, where he says (as they tell us) that Christ committed and
gave unto blessed Peter, the Keybearer of eternal life, the rights both of the
earthly and heavenly Empire. To this authority first we answer, that Pope
Nicholas has no such words in any Epistle; howsoever Gratian, who cites them
as the words of Nicholas, mistook the matter. Secondly, that supposing the
words to be the words of Nicholas, his meaning may be, that the spiritual
power of binding and loosing, which Christ left to Peter, is not only of force
in earth, but in heaven also, that being bound in heaven that is bound on
earth, and they being repulsed from the throne of grace in heaven, and
excluded from Gods favors, that are rejected from the holy Altars, and put
from the Sacraments of the Church. Whereupon Homil. (...). de verb. Esaiae.
Vidi Dominum.
Chrysostom says, that the power of the church directs and commands the
very Tribunal of heaven, and adds, that heaven takes authority of judging
from the earth: For that the Judge sits on earth, and the Lord follows the
sentence of his servants, according to that of Christ, Math. 16. 19.
Whatsoever you shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. Others expound
the supposed words of Pope Nicholas of the spiritual power of Peter over the
good and bad in the visible church, the good being named the kingdom of
heaven, and the bad an earthly kingdom or company. But howsoever, it is most
certain, that Pope Nicholas in his Epistle to Michael the Emperor, has the
clean contrary to that which some would charge him with. For there he shows
that howsoever before Christ, some were both kings and priests, as was
Melchisedeck, and as likewise some other among the Pagans were, yet after
Christ none were so. Neither did the Emperor take unto him the rights of the
chief Priesthood, nor the chief Priest the name of the Emperor. Sed mediator
Dei and hominum, homo Christus, sic actibus propriis and dignitatibus
distinctis, officia potestatis vtriusque discreuit, vt and Christiani
Imperatores pro aeterna vita pontificibus indigerent, and Pontifices pro cursu
temporalium tantummodo rerum Imperialibus legibus vterentur; that is: But the
Mediator of God and men, the man Christ, did so distinguish and sever the
duties and offices of either of these kinds of power by their proper actions,
and distinct dignities, that both Christian Emperors should stand in need of
Bishops, for the attaining of eternal life; and that Bishops should use the
laws of Emperors, for the course of temporal things only: that so both the
spiritual action and employment might be free from carnal turmoyles, and that
he who goes on warfare unto God, might not at all be entangled with secular
businesses: and that on the other side, he might not seem to be set over the
things that are Divine, whom the businesses of this world should possess: that
both the modesty of each of these orders and degrees might be preserved, and
that also, no one having both these kinds of power should be lifted up too
high. The next authority is that of Bonifacius the eighth, who has these
words (speaking of the Church, which is one, and whereof he supposes the
Bishop of Rome to be the head*) Bonifac. 8. in extravagant. unam Sanctam de
Maioritate and obedientia.
We are instructed by the Evangelicall sayings, that in this Church, and in
the power of it there are two swords, to wit, a spiritual, and a temporal.
For when the Apostles said, Behold here are two swords, to wit, in the Church
(because they were the Apostles that spoke) the Lord did not answer that it
was too much, but that it was enough; and therefore surely, whosoever denies
the temporal sword to be in the power of Peter, seems not well to consider
the word of the Lord commanding him to sheathe his sword. The answer unto this
authority is easy. For Bonifacius (as Duaren. de Sac. Eccl. Minist. and Benef.
l. 7. c. ^0.
Duarenus notes) was a vain, busy, turbulent, arrogant, and proud man,
presuming above that which was fit, and challenging that which no way pertained
unto him; and therefore we may justly reject both him and his sayings. But for
the words of our Savior it is evident, that they prove no such thing, as this
Pope would enforce out of them. Some (says In 22 Lucae.
Maldonatus) from these words would prove, that the Church has two swords, the
one spiritual, the other temporal; which, whether it have or have not, cannot
be proved out of this place, where other swords are meant then either of Civil
or Ecclesiastical authority. Our Savior tells his Disciples, the times
approaching will be such, as that a man had need for his own defense to sell
his coat to buy a sword. Whereupon the Disciples supposing they should use
material swords in their own defense, answer, that they have two swords. To
whom Christ replyeth, that it is enough, not confirming their erring opinion,
but answering them Ironically, as Theophylact and Euthymius think. Or
otherwise letting them understand, that though the times would be such, as that
many swords would not suffice to defend them, yet that these two were enough,
because he meant to use none at all, but to suffer all that the malice of his
enemies could do unto him. This, Maldonatus delivers to be the literal
sense of Christ's words, and shows a mystical sense of them also out of
Beda, much more apt then that of Bonifacius. Duo gladii (says Beda) sufficient
ad testimonium sponte passi Salvatoris. Vnus, qui and Apostolis audaciam pro
Domino certandi; and evulsaictu eius auricula, Domino etiam morituro pietatem,
virtutemque doceret inesse medicandi. Alter, quinequaquam vagina exemptus,
ostenderet eos nec totum quod potuere, pro eius defensione facere permissos:
that is, Two swords are sufficient to give testimony unto our Savior, that he
suffered willingly. The one of which might show, that the Apostles wanted no
courage to fight for their Master: and by the ear that was cut off by the
stroke thereof, and healed again by the Lord; that he wanted neither piety to
compassionate the miserable, nor virtue and power to make him whole that was
hurt, though now he were ready to dye. And the other, which never was drawn
out of the sheath, might show, that they were not permitted to do all that
they could have done in his defense. It is not to be denied, but that S. (...).
4. de consid. ad Eugen.
Bernard mystically expounding the words of Christ, says; the Church has two
swords of authority. But he thinks it has them in very different sort. For
it has the use of the one, and the benefit of the other, The one is to be
drawn by it, the other for it. So that this is all that he says, that the
sword of civil authority is to be used by the Soldiers hand, at the command
of the Emperor, by the direction, and at the suite of the Church. From
Bonifacius they pass to Cap. Licet de foro compe^enti.
Innocentius the third, who in the vacancy of the Empire, willed those that
were wronged in their rightful causes, to have recourse either to some Bishop,
or to himself: And Clemens the fifth, who Clem^n lib. 2 Tit. 11. de Sententia
and re judicat^.
professes to intermeddle with certain secular businesses and affairs, and
to determine certain civil causes upon three several grounds. Whereof the
first is, his greatness, making him superior to the Emperor. The second, his
being in steed of the Emperor, in the vacancy of the Empire. And the third,
the fullness of power, which Christ the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords gave
unto Peter, and in him to his successors. Whatsoever we think of the former
of these two Popes, who seems to ground his intermedling in civil affairs
upon some law of the Empire, and concession of civil Princes, accordingly as
we read of Decreti part. 2. causa 11. quaest. 1. ca. Quicunque.
Theodosius, that he permitted any Laymen having civil differences among
themselves, to refer the same to Ecclesiastical Judges if they listed.
(Which concession proceeding ex pietate, not ex debito, that is, out of piety,
and not out of any right or necessity that it must be so, is long since
grown out of use; the state of Churchmen being much changed from that it
was, when he granted them that privilege as De Sacr. Eccl. Minist. and benef.
lib. 1. c. 2.
Duarenus shows.) Yet Pope Clemens can by no means be excused from
heretical impiety, affirming that which is most untrue, as may appear by the
many fold reasons brought before to prove the contrary; nor from Antichristian
pride, in seeking to tread underneath his feet, the crowns and dignities of
Kings and Princes, and to lift himself up above all that is called God.

CHAP. 45.
Of the Popes unjust claim to intermeddle with the affairs of Princes and
their states, if not as sovereign Lord over all, yet at least in Ordine ad
spiritualia, and in case of Princes failing to do their duties.

THAT Christ was no earthly King, that he left no Kingly power to Peter, and
that the Pope has no mere temporal power, in that he is Christ's Vicar, or
Peter's successor, it is most evident out of the former discourse, and the
Cardinal Jesuit confesses so much; and yet Bellar. de Pon. Romans lib. 5. c. 6.
he thinks the Pope has a supreme power to dispose of all temporal states
and things, in ordine ad bonum spirituale, that is, in a kind of reference to
the procuring and setting forward of the spiritual good. But this fancy is
most easily refuted by unanswerable reasons presupposing his former concession.

For first, no man can take away, limit, or restrain any power, or the
exercise of it, but he in whom it is in eminent sort, and from whom it was
received. But the civil power that is in Princes, is not in the Pope, neither
did it proceed and come originally from him; therefore it cannot be
restrained, limited, or taken away by him. The mayor proposition is evident:
the assumption is proved, because civil power is in heathen infidels, who no
way hold of the Pope. Secondly because it is agreed by all Divines of worth and
learning, that the civil power in the first original of it, is immediately
from God: or if not immediately by his own delivery thereof, yet by no other
mediation then that of the law of nature and nations. Tert in Apol. aduersus
Gentes. cap. 30.
The Emperors know (says Tertullian) who gave them the Empire, they know that
it was even the same God, who gave unto them to be men, and to have humane
souls. They well perceive, that he only is God, in whose only power they
are: a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi, ante omnes and super omnes Deos: that
is, After whom, they are in order the second, but among all other the first,
before and above all Gods. And again, Inde est Imperator, vnde and homo
antequam Imperator; inde potest as illi, vnde and spiritus: that is, From
thence is the chief ruler and Emperor, whence he was a man before he was an
Emperor: from thence has he his power, from whence he received the spirit of
life. The Author of the answer to the reports of a great and worthy Judge among
us, who has lately written in the defense of the Popes ouerspreading
greatness, seems in part to agree with Tertullian, and tells us, Ans. to
the reports of Sir Ed. Cook. chap. 2. page 26.
that civil power is received from God, not immediately by his own delivery
thereof, but mediately rather by the mediation of the law of nature and
nations. For by the law of nature God has ordained that there should be
politic government, which the law of nations assuming, has transferred that
government to one, or more, according to the diverse forms thereof. And Diolog
lib. 2. tractat. 2. part. 3. cap. 22.
Occam proves at large, that Imperial power is not from the Pope, and that it
is heretical to say, that all lawful civil power is from the Pope.

Our second reason is this: Absolute and sovereign civil Princes while they
were infidels, had true dominion, rule and authority, holding it as immediately
from God, not depending on any ruler of the church, as has been showed
before. But when they become Christians, they still remain in the same
fullness of authority, in as ample and independent sort as before, because the
benefit of Christ tends to no man's hurt, and grace overthrows not nature:
therefore still they remain independent and subject to none in the same power,
and in the exercise of it. If they shall say, they are subject to none while
they use their authority well, but that if they abuse it, they lose the
independent absoluteness thereof; their saying will be found to be
heteticall. For if upon abuse of independent authority, they that have it, lose
and forfeit it ipso facto, then authority and abuse of authority, or at least
extreme abuse of it, cannot stand together; which is contrary to that of Saint
Augustine, where he says: Aug. de Bono Coniugali. c. 14
Nec tyrannicaefactionis perversitas laudabilis erit, si regia clementia
tyrannus subditos tractet, nec vituperabilis ordo regiae potestatis, si Rex
crudelitate tyrannica saeuiat: aliud est namque iniusta potestate just velle
vti; and aliud est iusta potestate unjust velle vti: that is, Neither shall
the perverseness of tyrannical usurpation ever be praise worthy, though the
tyrant use his subjects with all Kingly clemency, nor the order of Kingly power
ever be subject to just reprehension, though a king grow fierce and cruel like
a tyrant. For it is one thing to use an unlawful power lawfully, and another
thing to use a lawful power unrighteously and unjustly.

The third reason may be this. If God did give to the Pope authority to depose
Princes, erring and abusing their authority, he would give them the means to
execute that their authority reaches unto, to wit, civil greatness, armies
of Soldiers, walled cities, towers, and strong holds, both for defense and
offense, and all other things necessary for the putting down of wicked
Kings. But the Pope as Christ's Vicar has none of these, neither was he at
any time as a temporal Prince, the greatest monarch of the world, and so able
to repress the insolences of all heretical, pagan, and wicked Kings,
hindering the peaceable proceeding of the Gospel of Christ: therefore he has
no such authority. For to say, that God gives authority, and not the means
whereby it may execute and perform that which pertains to it, is impious.
The only means the Pope has to depose Princes, are two; but neither of them
within the compass of his power to dispose of. The first, is the raising of
subjects against their Prince. The second, is the raising of neighbor Princes.
The former of these means is very defective, seeing (as De Pont. lib. 5. cap.
7.
Bellarmine rightly observes out of Ecclesiasticus) Ecclus. 10 7.
Such as the Ruler of a city is, such are they that dwell in it: And therefore
if the King be an heretic, the most part of his people will be so too, and
rather assist him for the maintenance of his heresy, then resist against him
for the suppressing of it. Which thing (as he says) experience teaches: For
when 1. King. 12. 30
Jeroboam became an Idolater, the greatest part of the kingdom worshipped
Idols. When Constantine reigned, Christian Religion flourished: When
Constantius reigned, Arrianisme prevailed, and ouerflowed all: When Julian
swayed the Scepter, the greatest part returned to Paganism. So that Socrates.
lib. 3. cap. 19.
Iouian being chosen after his death, refused to be Emperor, protesting that
being a Christian, he neither could, nor would be Emperor over infidells.
Whereupon they all professed, that howsoever they had dissembled before, yet
they were still in heart Christians, and now would show it again. So that we
see, the first means for the suppressing of erring Princes, is no means, or a
very uncertain one. And a second is worse then the first: For I never read in
any Divine, of what religion soever, that one King is bound to make war upon
another, upon the Popes command, for the suppressing of heresy. And therefore
the Pope may breath out excommunications till he be breathless, but can go no
farther by any means that God has given him.

Fourthly, thus we reason. Either the power of the Pope is merely
Ecclesiastical and spiritual, or it is not. If it be not, then has he
civil authority from Christ, which they deny. If it be, then can it inflict no
punishments, but merely spiritual, and Ecclesiastical. For of what nature
each power is, of the same are the punishments it inflicteth. The temporal
power inflicteth only temporal, outward, and corporal punishments, as loss
of goods, imprisonment, banishment, or death. The spiritual only spiritual,
as suspension, excommunication, and the like. Now I suppose the loss of a
kingdom, with all the riches and honor of it; and captivity, banishment, or
death, upon resistance against the sentence of deposition, is a temporal and
external punishment of the worst nature and highest degree that may be.

Lastly, if sovereign Kings may be put from their Kingdoms upon abuse of
their authority, either they forfeit and lose the right of them ipso facto, and
are deprived by Almighty God: and then the Pope can but declare what God has
already done, as any man else may upon perfect understanding of the case: or
else other neighbor Kings, or their own subjects are to depose them, and the
Pope is only to put them in mind of their duty, and as a spiritual pastor to
urge them to the performance of it: and then he deposes the^ not, but they. Or
lastly, the power of assuming their authority to himself, upon their abuse
thereof, pertains unto him: and then in civil authority he is the greatest
and over all; which yet these men deny. For he that is to judge of Princes
actions: and upon dislike, to limite, restrain, or wholly take their power
from them, is supreme in that kind of authority. And if he may take civil
authority from other, and give it to whom he pleases, there is no question but
he may give it unto himself, and so has power upon all defects of Princes,
to take into his own hand that which formerly pertained to them, and to do
the acts that were to be performed by them.

Now as these reasons strongly prove, that the Pope cannot depose Princes in
ordine ad spiritualia, so the weakness of the reasons brought to prove it, will
much more confirm the same. Their first reason is taken from the perfection
and excellency of the Ecclesiastical or spiritual power, which they say is
greater and far more excellent then that which is civil. Whereunto we answer
with Doctrine. fid. l. 2. art. 3. c. 78.
Waldensis, that though the spiritual power be simply more perfect and
excellent then the civil, yet either of these in the performance of things
pertaining to them, is greater then the other, and each of them independent of
the other. Ambrose was greater then Theodosius in respect of the administration
of divine things, and might either admit him to, or reject him from the
Sacraments. But Theodosius in respect of all temporal things was greater then
he, and might command him, send him into banishment, or take away all that he
had. The Sun is more excellent then the Moon, and the influence thereof more
powerful; yet is there a kind of influence upon the waters, wherein the Moon
is more excellent then the Sun. In like sort, the power which is spiritual may
do greater things then that which is temporal, and yet the temporal may do
those things the spiritual cannot do. And therefore it will not follow, that
the Ecclesiastical state, and the principal Ministers of the Church may take
unto themselves the authority of Kings, or take upon them to do the things that
pertain to Kingly offices, because they are greater in dignity, and have a
greater power; unless they had a greater dignity and power in the same kind.
Nowthey who most amplify the greatness of Ecclesiastical power, preferring it
before the other which is civil, never make the greatness of it to consist, in
that in civil affairs it may do more then that; but in that it has a more
noble object, and more wonderful effects. Nazianz. orat. ad Ciues trepidantes.
We also (says Nazianzen) have power and authority, and that far more ample
and excellent then that of civil Princes, insomuch as it is fit the flesh
should yield to the spirit, and things earthly to things heavenly. Chrysostom. hom.
5. de verb. Esaiae VidiDominum.
Priesthood (says Chrysostom) is a Princedome, more honorable and great then
a Kingdom; tell not me of the purple, diadem, scepter, or golden apparel of
Kings, for these are but shadows, and more vain then flowers at the spring
time. If you will see the difference between them, and how much the King is
inferior to the Priest, consider the manner of the power delivered to them
both, and you shall see the Priests tribunal much higher then that of the
King, who has received only the administration of earthly things. But the
Priests tribunal is placed in heaven, and he has authority to pronounce
sentence in heavenly affairs. And again, Hom. 4.
Earthly Princes have power to bind but our bodies only, but the bands which
Priests can lay upon us, do touch the soul it self, and reach even unto the
heavens, so far forth, as that whatsoever Priests shall determine here beneath,
that God does ratify above in heaven, and confirm the sentence of his
servants upon earth. Petrus Blesen. Epist. 146.
When king Richard the first returning from the holy land, was taken and hold
as a prisoner by Duke Leopold of Austria, and the Emperor Henry the sixth;
Queen Elenor his mother seeking all means to procure his deliverance, among
other things, wrote a letter to the Bishop of Rome, entreating him to
interpose his authority. The words of her letter are these, expressing the
passion and earnest desire of her heart. This only remains (o Father) that
you draw forth the sword of Peter against malefactors; which sword, God has
appointed to be over nations and kingdoms. The Cross of Christ does excel
the Eagles that are in Caesar's Banners, the spiritual sword of Peter is of
more power then was the temporal sword of Constantine the Emperor, and the Sea Apostolic is more potent then any Imperial power or authority: and I
would ask whether your power be of God, or of men? did not the God of Gods
speak to you in Peter the Apostle, saying: Whatsoever you shall bind upon
earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever you shall loose on earth shall
be loosed in heaven? and why then do you so negligently, or rather cruelly
delay, for a long time, to lose my son? or why dare you not do it? perhaps
you will say, that the power given you by God of binding and losing, is for
souls and not for bodies. Let it be so, truly it is sufficiont for us if you
will bind the souls of those that hold my sons body bound in prison. By all
these sayings of them that most admired the excellency of Priesthood, it
appears, that the excellency thereof above princely power is in respect of
the object thereof, which is more noble; and the effects thereof, which are
more wonderful: and not in respect of greater power, authority and right to
dispose of temporal affairs and businesses, either simply, or upon any abuse
or negligence of civil Princes. So that from hence it cannot be inferred, that
the chief ministers of the Church may depose the Princes of the world. Lib. 2.
de. Sacrament. part. 2. c. 4.
Hugo de sancto Victore says: There are two kinds of power, the one terrene,
the head whereof is the King: the other spiritual, the head whereof is the
pope. To the Kings power those things pertain that are terrene: to the Popes,
those that are spiritual: and look how much the spiritual life is better
then the earthly, so much does the spiritual power excel the earthly in
honor and dignity: For the spiritual power does constitute the terrene power,
that it may be; and judges it whether it proceed aright, or not. But it self
was first instituted of God, and when it goes aside, can be judged of none
but of God only. From hence (as Doct. Fid. li. a. art. 3. ca. 78.
Waldensis shows) some men took an occasion of error, affirming, that the
root of terrene power, does so far fotrh depend upon the Pope, that by
commission from him, the execution of things pertaining thereunto, is derived
unto the Prince: and that when the Prince goes aside or fails to do his
duty, the chief Bishop may manage the civil affairs; because, he says, the
spiritual power does institute the civil power, that it may be. But these men
presume too far, and in so doing offend, because the terrene power of Kings
is not reduced into any other originally, as having authority over Kings, but
unto Christ only: and yet notwithstanding, as the Priest joyneth the man and
his wife in marriage, and blesses them that they may be man and wife, and
joyful parents of happy children; and judges afterward, whether they
perform the duties of marriage or not. So the chief Priest sets the crown
upon the head of the Empreor, anointeth him with holy oil, takes an oath of
him for the defense of the Christian faith and religion, puts upon him the
royal robes, and thereby inuesteth him with royal power, and puts him in
possession of his Imperial state and dignity. But it is not to be imagined
(says Waldensis) that the imperial power is from the power of the Church, or
depends of it, though certain solemnities be used by Bishops in the
inauguration of Kings and Emperors; neither may the chief Ministers of the
Church any more challenge the disposing or managing of civil affairs, upon
any defect or failing of civil Princes, then they may, the administration and
dispensation of holy things, upon the defect or failing of the Ecclesiastical
Ministers. Yet in case of necessity, either of these two states may and ought
to help and succor the other; not (as he says) vt vtens potestate, sed
fraternitatis accessu: that is, Not as having authority, or by virtue thereof
presuming to do any thing; but as one brother makes have to help another in
danger, reaching forth the hand to stay him that is standing, and to raise him
that is fallen. Both the brethren, (says Waldensis) both Simeon and Leui,
Priesthood and knighthood, Bishoply power, and that which is Princely, must
rise up together for the rescuing of Dinah their sister, out of the hands of
him that seeks to dishonor her: Vi charitatis etsi non authoritatis: that
is, By force of charity, though not of authority. So that according to his
opinion, the chief Ministers of the Church inuest the Princes of the world
with their royal authority, according to the saying of Vbi supra.
Hugo; but give them not their authority: they may judge of the actions of
Princes, but they may not praeiudicare, they may not prejudice Princes. They
may in the time of need come to the succor, and in the time of danger reach
forth the helping hand to the civil state, shaken by the negligence or malice
of civil princes: but it must be by way of charity, not of authority; as
likewise the civil state may, and ought to be assistant to the
Ecclesiastical in like danger, defect, or failing of the Ecclesiastical
ministers.

The next argument that our Adversaries bring, is taken from a comparison
between the soul and body, expressing the difference between the civil and
Ecclesiastical state, found (as they say) in In Orat. ad populum timore
perculsum and Imp. ^ascentem.
Gregory Nazianzen. But that we may the better understand the force of this
argument, we must observe, that in the comparison which they bring, they make
the Ecclesiastical state and spiritual power, like the spirit, and divine
faculties thereof: and the civil state like the flesh, with the senses, and
sensitive appetite thereof. And as in Angels there is spirit without flesh, in
bruit beasts flesh and sense without spirit; and in man both these conjoined:
so they will have us grant, that there is sometimes Ecclesiastical power
without civil, as in the Apostles times, and long after; sometimes civil
without Ecclesiastical, as among the heathen, and sometimes these two
conjoined together. And as when the spirit and flesh meet in one, the spirit
has the command; and though it suffer the flesh to do all those things which
it desires unless they be contrary to the intendments, designs, and ends of
it: yet when it finds them to be contrary, it may, and does command the
fleshly part to surcease from her own actions, yea it makes it to fast,
watch, and do and suffer many grievous and afflictiue things, even to the
weakening of it self. So in like manner they would infer, that the
Ecclesiastical state being like to the spirit and soul, and the civil to the
body of flesh, the Church has power to restrain, and bridle civil Princes,
if they hinder the spiritual good thereof, not only by censures
Ecclesiastical, but outward inforcement also. This is the great and grand
argument our Adversaries bring to prove, that Popes may depose Princes: wherein
first we may observe their folly, in that they bring similitudes, which serve
only for illustration, and not for probation, for the maine confirmation of one
of the principal points of their faith: Bellar. in Epist. ad Blackwellum.
which whosoever denies, sins in as high a degree as, Marcellinus that
sacrificed unto Idols: and Peter, that denied his master. Secondly, we see how
much Princes are beholding unto them that compare them to bruit beasts, and at
the best, to the brutish part that is in men, common to them with bruit
beasts. If they say, Nazianzen so compares them, they are like themselves,
and speak untruly: for he compares not Princes and Priests to spirit and
flesh, but going about to show the difference of the objectes of their power
makes the spirit to be the object of the one of the^, and the flesh of the
other. Not as if Princes were to take no care of the welfare of the souls of
their subjects, as well as of their bodies, but because the immediate procuring
of the souls good, is by preaching, and ministration of the Sacraments, and
Discipline, which the Prince is to procure, and to see well performed, but not
to administer these things himself: as also because the coactiue power the
Prince has, extends only to the body, and not to the soul, as the
Ecclesiastical power of binding and loosing does. Thirdly, we may observe,
that if this similitude should prove any thing, it would prove, that the civil
state among Christians has no power to do any act whatsoever, but by the
command or permission of the Ecclesiastical. For so it is between the spirit
and the body, and sensitive faculties that show themselves in it. The
Philosophers note, that there is a double regiment in man: the one political
or civil, the other despoticall; the one like the authority of Princes over
their subjects that are freemen, the other like the authority of Lords over
their bondmen and slaves. The former is of reason in respect of sensitive
appetite, which by persuasion it may induce to surcease to desire that which it
discerns to be hurtful, but cannot force it so to do: the other of reason
and the will, in respect of the loco-motiue faculty; and this absolute, so
that if reason cannot win a desisting from desire in the inferior powers
that show themselves in the body, yet the will may command the loco-motiue
faculty, and either cause al outward action to cease, how earnestly soever
sensitive desire carry unto it, or to be performed how much soever it resist
against it: as it may command and force the drinking of a bitter potion, which
the appetite cannot be won unto, and the rejecting and putting from us those
things that are most desired. Neither can the appetite and sensitive faculties
perform any of their actions without the consent of the will and reason: For
if the will command, the eyes are closed up and see nothing, the ears are
stopped and hear nothing, how much soever the appetite desire to see and
hear. Neither only have the souls higher powers this command over the
inferior faculties, in respect of things that may further and hinder their own
good and perfection, as they may command to watch or fast, for the prevention
and mortification of sin; but they may also at their pleasure, hinder the whole
course of the actions of the outward man, withdraw all needful things from the
body, and deprive it even of life it self, though there be no cause at all so
to do. So that if the comparison of the civil and Ecclesiastical state to
the soul and body do hold, from thence may it be inferred that the Church has
power to command in all things pertaining to the commonwealth, and that the
civil magistrates have none at all. For the lower faculties neither have, nor
ought to have any command further then they are permitted by the superior;
neither can they do any thing contrary to the liking of the superior, though
never so just and reasonable. And so we see how silly a thing it is to reason
from these similitudes, and that they that so do, build upon the sands, so that
all the frame of their building comes to the ground.

The third reason brought by our Adversaries, is this: Every commonwealth must
be perfect in it self, and able to defend it self from all injuries that any
other may offer unto it, and if it can no other way free it self, it must have
power to depose the Prince, and change the government. Therefore the Church
must be able to defend it self against all injuries of wicked Kings, whether
Infidels, Heretics, or Apostataes: and if otherwise it cannot defend it self
from their violences and wrongs, it must have power to depose them. This
consequence I think will never be found good in the judgment of any
indifferent Reader. For the kingdoms and co^mon-wealths of the world, the
good, prosperity, and happiness whereof is outward, must have outward means to
repress the insolences of all such as seek to impeach or hinder the same; But
the Church being a society, the happiness and good whereof is not outward, but
inward, consisting in the graces of God, and the hope of a better life in the
world to come, may be perfect in it self, though it want means to repress
outward violences and insolences. The Apostle himself, who was a chief
co^mander in it, professing that the 2 Cor 10. v. 4
weapons of his warfare were not carnal, but mighty through God, for the
casting down of proud thoughts; but not for the overthrow of cities and towns,
or the subduing of the Princes of the world. So that the perfection of this
society or commonwealth standing in the inward graces of the spirit, and the
expectation of future happiness, she may attain her own end, enjoy her own good,
and flourish in the midst of all pressures, more the^ in any state of outward
prosperity; and so undoubtedly she does. For as the gold is more pure the more
it is tried in the fire; as the cammomill smells the sweeter the more it is
trodden on; as the palm tree spreads the further the more it is pressed down;
as the ark of Noe rose the higher the more the floods did swell: so Gods Church
did then most grow, increase and prosper, when the persecutions were hottest.
And therefore S. Austin says (speaking of the primitive Christians)
Includebantur, ligaba^tur, torqueba^tur, trucidaba^tur, and multiplicaba^tur; x
Aug. de Ciu. Dei. lib. cap.
that is, they were shut up in prisons and dungeons, they were bound in fetters
and chains, they were tortured and racked, yea, they were slain with the
sword, and yet they increased and multiplied. And Sermon. 33. in Cantica.
S. Bernard distinguishing three several times of the Church, in all which
she complained of bitterness, the first under persecuting heathen Emperors;
the second, in the conflicts with heretics, and the third, when she had rest
from both these; says, the state of the church was worst in her peace, and
brings her in complaining and saying: Amarissima amaritudo mea in pace mea;
that is, My bitterness is most bitter in the days of my peace. For now omnes
amici, omnes inimici, omnes domestici, nulli pacifici; serui Christi seruiunt
Antichristo: that is, All are friends, and all are enemies, all are of my
household, but none are at peace with me; the servants of Christ serve
Antichrist. So that it follows not, that if the church must have means to
attain her own end, and enjoy her own wished good, that she must have power
sufficient to procure her outward peace, and repress the insolences of
outward enemies. And yet besides, this reason charge Christ with want of care
of his Church, who left it without means to defend it self against outward
violence for the space of 300 years together, during the time of the heathen
Emperors; and afterward also under the reign of Apostataes and heretics.
For De Pont. lib: 5 cap. 7.
Bellarmine says, that the primitive Christians did not depose Nero,
Dioclesian, Julian the Apostata, Valens the Arrian, and other like, because
they wanted temporal forces.

The next reason is more strange then this. For first, forgetting what they are
to prove, in steed of proving that the Pope may depose Princes, they endeavor
to prove, that the people may depose Princes when they fall into heresy, and
that the Pope is to judge of heresy. Secondly, they conclude, that Christian
people may not endure their King if he fall into heresy, because they may not
choose a king that is an infidel or heretic. That they might not choose an
heretic (which no man denies) they prove, because the Deuteronomy. 17. 15. 16.
Jews might choose none to be their king that was not of their brethren, lest
he should draw them to idolatry. But the consequence they go not about to
prove, which we deny, and they will never be able to confirm. For there is no
question but people are bound to be subject to such a king, as in conscience
they might not choose, if they were free and to make choice. Exodus 18. 21.
When Moses was counseled by Iethro, to choose Elders and rulers to assist him,
he told him what manner of me^ they should be, to wit, men fearing God, dealing
truly, hating covetousness: and none but such ought electors, having freedom
of choice, to choose: and yet I think, though a king be covetous, he is not
presently to be deposed. And therefore Vbi supr^.
Bellarmine (like an honest man) confuteth his own argument, and says, that
infidels that had dominion over people before they became Christians, are to be
tolerated by Christians, if they seek not to draw them to idolatry, whom yet
I think Christians might not choose to reign over them if they were free.
Besides this, if Bellarmine say true, that subjects sin as much in
tollerating kings that are infidels, Apostataes, or heretics, as in choosing
such to rule over them when they were free, all the primitive Christians that
tolerated Nero, Dioclesian, Julian the Apostata, Constantius, Valens, and
other heretics sinned damnably in so doing. Neither will Bellarmines answer
that they are to be excused, though they did not depose the^, because they
wanted strength, avoid the same. For it is evident by Tertullian, that they
wanted not strength if they had thought it lawful. In Apologet. aduersus
Gentes, cap. 37.
If we should go about to avenge our selves (says Tertullian) we should not
want means. For behold, we are more in number, and greater in strength, then
any one nation and people of the world. We are strangers unto you, and yet
behold, we have filled all places pertaining unto you, your Cities, your Isles,
your Villages, your Towns, your Councel-houses, your Castles, and strong Forts,
your Palaces, your Senates, and your market places: only your Idol Temples we
have left free unto you. What war should not we be able to take in hand? or
what attempt should seem hard unto us? though we were too weak who so
willingly are slain, if it were not more lawful to be killed then to kill in
our profession. Nay, though we should never arm our selves, nor lift up our
hands against you, but only depart away, and withdraw our selves into some
remote parts of the world, how should we confound and amaze you? How could you
endure so great a loss? How would your cities be left desolate, and none found
to dwell in them? So that it was not want of strength that held the Primitive
Christiansin subjection to their heathen and persecuting Emperors, but the
persuasion they had, that it was their duty so to be subject, persuading
themselves they had their power from heaven: and therefore Ibid. cap. 30.
Illuc suspicientes (says Tertullian) manibus expansis, quia innocuis, capite
nudo quia non erubescimus; denique sine monitore, quia de pectore oramus
precantes sumus omnes semper pro omnibus Imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam,
imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem, populum
probum, orbem quietum and quaecunque hominis and Caesaris sunt vota: that is,
Looking up thither, with hands lifted up and spread out, because innocent,
with bare heads, because we are not ashamed, and without a remembrancer,
because our prayers proceed from the desires that lodge within in our breast,
we all pray always for all Emperors and rulers, desiring God to grant unto
them a long life, a secure reign, a safe house, valiant armies, a faithful
Senate, good people, a quiet world; and all the good things that the heart
either of a private man, or of Caesar can desire. O silly erring Christians,
durst you pray for the prosperity of them, whom you should have persecuted with
fire and sword, and utterly have destroyed? But it is not to be maruailed at,
if you thus erred: for you were Christians, and had no Jesuits among you, from
whom these mysteries of deposing Princes might have been learned: so that we
may hope that ignorance did excuse you, and that ye are not gone to hell for
this neglecting of your duty. But some man perhaps will say, Tertullian might
be deceived in this point. Let us hear therefore whether others were of his
mind or not. Iulianus Imperator (says Citat. a Gratiano Decret. 2. part. causa
11. qu. 3. cap. 94.
Ambrose) quamuis esset Apostata, habuit tame^ sub se Christianos milites,
quibus cum dicebat, producite aciem, pro defensione Reipublicae obediebant ei.
Cumaute^ dicer^ eis, producite arma in Christianos, tunc cognoscebant
Imperatorem Caeli; that is, Iuli^ the emperor, though he were an Apostata, yet
had under him Christian soldiers, who when he said unto them, bring forth your
armies for the defense of the commonwealth, willingly obeyed him. But when he
said unto them, bring forth your forces, and fight against the Christians,
took knowledge of the Emperor in heaven, and not of him. And S. Citat. ibidem
cap. 98.
Augustine says to the same purpose, that Julian the Emperor was an Infidel,
an Apostata, a wicked man, and an idolater; and yet there were Christian
soldiers that served this unbelieving Emperor, when they came to the cause of
Christ they acknowledged none other Emperor, but him only, whose throne is in
heaven. When he required them to worship Idols, or to burn incense, they
preferred God before him. When he said, bring forth your armies, and go against
such a nation, they presently obeyed him: so did they wisely distinguish
between the eternal and temporal Lord, and yet they were subject to the
temporal Lord for the eternal Lords sake. Neither was this the private
conceit of these men alone, but all other the worthy Fathers, and Bishops of
the Church were of the same mind, and persuaded themselves, that they owedall
duty to kings and Emperors, though they were heretics or infidels. And
therefore Athanasius (whe^some charged him, that he had spoken evil of
Constantius the Arrian heretic to Constance his brother, and sought to make
variance between the^) in his Apology to Constantius, calls God to witness
against his own soul, that he had never don any such thing; and tells the
Emperor, he was not mad, nor had not forgotten the saying of the wise man.
Eccles. 10. 20.
Curse not the King in thy secret thought, and speak not evil of the rich and
mighty in the retired places of thy chamber. For the fowls of heaven will
carry forth thy voice, and that that has wings will make report of thy words.

The fifth reason that they bring, to prove that Christians may depose
mis-beleeuing Emperors and Kings, if they have means so to do, is, because the
Apostle 1. Cor. 6.
wills the Corinthians that were become Christians, to appoint new judges of
their controversies about temporal affairs and businesses, that they might
not be forced to bring their pleas before heathen magistrates that were their
enemies, to the scorn of their profession: which is so silly a reason, that I
cannot persuade my self they propose it in earnest, but only for fashions sake
to help to make up a number. For they know right well, these Judges the
Apostle speaks of, were but only arbitrators chosen by the agreement of the
parties, and not absolute rulers over them with abrogation of the magistracy
of those heathen rulers, to whom they were subject, and therefore
notwithstanding any thing the Apostle writes, there were Ockam. 8. quaest.
super potest. and dignit. Papali. quaest. 1. c. 11.
three cases, wherein the faithful and believing Corinthians might lawfully
come before the Heathen Judges. The first, if the Infidels in the controversies
they had with them about secular things, drew them thither. The second, if a
believer being contenitous, drew them to those tribunals, refusing to have
things determined otherwise. The third, if the believer had none other means
to recover his right, which he was bound in conscience to recover and preserve,
for in such a case he might become a plaintiff before Heathen Magistrates.

But (says De Pont. l. 5. c. 7.
Bellarmine) the believing husband, whose wife being an Infidel, will not
dwell with him without continual blaspheming of God the Creator, and
soliciting him to Infidelity and Apostacy, is freed from his wife: and
likewise the believing wife from her unbelieving husband, so continuing to
blaspheme Christ, and to solicit her to Idolatry, therefore by like reason
the believing people are freed from the yoke of an unbelieving King, seeking
to draw them to Infidelity. This argument drawn from comparison, fails many
ways. For first, according to De Matrim. Sacram. lib. 1. controv. 4. c. 12
Bellarmines opinion, the believing party is free from the other remaining in
Infidelity, though the Infidel do neither depart, nor solicit, or persuade
to Idolatry, if there be not a present conversion: so that the believer may
dismiss his wife which he married in infidelity, if she continue an
infidel, though she neither depart from him, nor seek to win him to
infidelity. But touching a King who is an unbeliever, he thinks (though 2 a
2 dae q. 10. art. 10.
Thomas be of another opinion) that the people converting to Christianity,
cannot shake off his yoke, unless he seek to draw them back to infidelity;
and therefore all that, is not lawful to the people, in respect of an
unbelieving King, that is lawful to the husband, in respect of his unbelieving
wife, or to the wife, in respect of her unbelieving husband. Secondly this
comparison if it prove any thing, mainely overthrows the opinion of
Bellarmine. For if the husband and the wife were Christians when they were
married, and afterward one of them fall into heresy, apostasy, atheism, or
whatsoever else, and seek never so violently to draw the right believer to the
same evils; yet the bond of marriage remains inviolable, and is not, nor may
not be dissolved: and therefore if this comparison hold, a Christian King
falling into heresy, apostasy, or atheism, and seeking to draw his people to
the same, does not lose the right of dominion he has over them. Thirdly, in
Bellarmines opinion it is not refusal to dwell together, nor solicitation to
idolatry that could make a separation, if the band of matrimony contracted
between Infidels were simply firm and indissoluble, as that of Christians is.
But heathen Princes have as good interest in their Kingdoms (which are not
founded upon grace or faith, but upon the light of reason, the freedom of
will, and the Law of Nature and Nations) as believers: therefore their
soliciting to infidelity and idolatry, cannot make their titles to their
kingdom void. Lastly, malicious desertion or refusal to dwell with the
believer, unless he some way at lest by silence consent to the blasphemies of
the Infidel, is directly contrary to the nature, essence, end, and intendment
of marriage, and therefore dissolueth marriage: but the abuse of sacred
authority to the promoting of impiety, and suppressing of true Religion, is not
contrary to the nature and essence of authority, but to the right use of it;
and therefore it does not make void the title of magistrates, seeing it is
certain that lawful authority may stand with most horrible abuse of the same.

Wherefore let us proceed to their seventh proof. When Princes (say they)
come to the Church, and are admitted to the Communion of the faithful people
of God, they are not admitted but upon promise and agreement, that if they
forsake the faith, or hinder the good of GODS people, they will be content,
and it shall be lawful for the Governors of the Church to take their
authority from them; therefore when Princes become heretics or Apostataes,
it is lawful by their own agreement and consent for the Governors of the
Church, to depose them. The antecedent of this Argument, I think, will never
be made good. For what Prince in his admission to be a Christian, did ever
thus condition with the Church, either expressly, or by necessary implication?
examples of any such stipulation, I am persuaded they can bring us none. It
is true indeed, that the very vow of a Christian made in Baptism, implies in
it a resolution and promise, rather to depart with any thing, and lose all,
then to forfeit the inheritance he is entitled unto, to dishonor God, or any
way to hinder the good of his church: but this vow and promise is made to God,
and not to the church; and therefore God may take from Christian kings their
kingdoms, when they become heretics, and seek to misleade the people, as
forfeited upon their own agreements; but the Church has nothing to do with
them, more then the great Turk, upon any such forfeiture made unto Almighty
God. It is true, that all infidels, and wicked ones, have forfeited their
kingdoms to God; but yet in the title of mundane justice, they have right to
them still, and may not be dispossessed of them by mortal men, unless they
be specially authorized by almighty God, as the Israelites were to cast out
the Canaanites. And this was the meaning of Wickliffe, when he affirmed, that a
Prince being in state of mortal sin, cease to be a Prince any longer,
namely in respect of any title he can plead to God, if he be pleased to take
the advantage of the forfeiture; but in respect of men, he has a good title
still, in the course of mundane justice. So that whosoever shall lift up his
hand against him, offers him wrong. The Church therefore may proceed no
further then to admonish Princes, when they offend, and for grievous and
scandalous faults, to deny unto them the benefit of her Communion.

The last proof they bring for deposing Princes, when they become heretics,
is taken from the office of a Pastor, to whom it pertains to drive away
wolves, to restrain and keep the Rams, and great leaders of the flocks,
from hurting those sheep that are more weak. This reason as it is the last,
so it is the worst of all. For each Pastor must do these things according to
the nature and quality of his Pastoral office, and therefore a spiritual
Pastor must perform them by spiritual and ecclesiastical censures, driving
away the wolves from his flocks, by suspension, excommunication, and anathema,
and restraining the Rams from hurting the rest, by the same means, so
binding them with bands that exceed all the bands of restraint, used by the
secular powers.

CHAP. 46.
Of examples of Churchmen deposing Princes, brought by the Romanistes.

Having examined the reasons brought to prove that the chief governors of the
Church may depose Princes erring from the faith, and hindering the course of
religion; let us see what examples our Adversaries produce of the practice of
deposing them. The first is the example of Samuel 1. Sam 9.
appointing Saul to be a king, and afterward 1. Sam. 15. 23
deposing him for his disobedience. But in this example they are grossly
deceived. For first, Samuel was neither high Priest nor Priest at all, not
being of the posterity of Aaron. Secondly, Samuel did not appoint Saul to be
king, as being of higher authority, but as obeying and executing the mandate of
God, as the meanest man in Israel might have done: as we read in the second of
the Kings, of 2. Kings. 9. 1.
one of the sons of the Prophets, who at the commandment of Elizeus
anointed Iehu king over Israel, yet was neither Elizeus, nor he, greater in
dignity then Kings. Thirdly, we do not read in the sacred History, that
Samuel deposed Saul, but that God deposed him, and that Samuel was the
messenger sent from God to let him know it. Because (says Samuel) thou have
cast away the word of the Lord, the Lord has cast thee away that thou shall
not reign. And again, the Lord has cut away the kingdom of Israel from thee
this day. Yea so far was Samuel from deposing Saul, that he mourned for him,
till God blamed him, saying. 1. Sam. 16. 1.
How long do thou mourn for Saul? whereas I have cast him away that he
should not reign over Israel.

The next example is that of Hieremy the Prophet, to whom the Lord said, Ierem.
1. 10.
I have set thee over nations and people, to pluck up, and to root out, and
to destroy, and throw down, to build and to plant. Whence they infer, that
the chief Priest is over the kingdoms of the world, and may give them to whom
he will. But first, we must observe, that Hieremy was not the high Priest,
but one of an inferior rank; and that therefore if we will conclude any thing
from hence, touching the power of disposing kingdoms by Priests, every Priest
must have this power. Secondly, we must know that Hieremie was set over the
kingdom of Judah and other kingdoms, not to rule them, but prophetically to
denounce unto them and foreshew the things, that afterward should fall out.
Whereupon Lyra interprets the words of Almighty God in this sort. Lyra in
hunc locum.
Constitui te super Gentes, and super regna, vt euellas, id est, euellendo
denuncies, transferendos inde habitatores; and destruas, quantum ad occidendos;
and disperdas, quantum ad fugientes per diuersas vias; and dissipes, quantum ad
morientes in fuga vel captiuitate; and aedifices and plants, id est, denuncies
Iudaeos reaedificandos, and plantandos in terrasua, etc. that is; I have set
thee over nations, and kingdoms, that thou might pluck up, that is, that
thou might denounce and foreshew, that the inhabitants being plucked up out
of their places, shall be carried into another place; that thou may destroy,
that is, denounce the destruction of such as shall be slain. That thou may
scatter, that is, denounce and foreshew the dispersion of such as shall fly
diverse ways. That thou may overthrow, that is, declare and foreshew the
overthrow of them that shall die in flight or in captivity. That thou may
build and plant, that is, foreshew, that the Jews shall be builded and planted
again in their own land; which was fulfilled in the time of Cyrus, who gave
liberty to the people to return into their own country, and to reedifie the
temple; and in the time of Artaxerxes, who gave leave to Nehemiah to reedifie
the city of Jerusalem, as we may read in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah.
The author of the interlineall Gloss interprets the words in this sense:
that the Prophet was appointed by almighty God, over kingdoms and people, to
pluck up vices and sins, to destroy the kingdom of the Devil, and to build
the Church of God. Saint Hierome likewise interprets the words in the same
sort: Hieronym. in eundem locum.
Considerandum est (says he) quod quatuor tristibus, duo laeta succedunt.
Neque enim aedificari poterant bona, nisi destructa essent mala; nec plantari
optima, nisi eradicarentur pessima, etc. that is; We must consider, that two
joyful and happy things succeed four grievous and sorrowful things. For
neither could good things be builded, if evil things were not first destroyed;
nor the best things be planted, if the worst things were not first plucked up
by the roots. For every plant which our heavenly Father has not planted,
shall be plucked up by the roots. And every building which has not a
foundation upon the Rock, but is builded upon the sand, is dug down and
destroyed by the word of God; and Jesus shall consume it by the spirit of his
mouth, and destroy it by the coming of his presence* that is; he shall
destroy for ever all sacrilegious and perverse doctrine, and that also which is
lifted up against the knowledge of God, and the confidence that men have in
their own wisdom he shall-scatter, destroy, and cast down; that in steed of
these things, the things that savor of humility may be builded; and the
things which agree with Ecclesiastical verity may be builded and planted in
the place of the former things, which were destroyed, and plucked up. Here is
pulling up of all false doctrine, and throwing down whatsoever is lifted up
against the knowledge of God, that those things that savor of humility, and
are agreeable to Ecclesiastical verity, may be builded and planted. And thus
to pluck up and to plant, to cast down, and to build up, pertayneth to
Hieremies office and calling; but for deposing of Kings, and transferring
kingdoms, no ancient written could ever find any thing in this place.

The third example that they produce, is that of 2. Chon. 26.
Vzziah, who after much prosperity in all that he took in hand, and many
glorious victories obtained, not contenting himself with the honor of a King,
but presuming to come into the Temple to offer incense, and intruding upon the
Priests office also, was by them resisted, and told it would be displeasing to
allmighty God, that he did. But he waxing angry, would not desist, till being
stricken with leprosy, and the very earth trembling and quaking for horror
of so vile a fact, he was by the Priests; and the remorse of his own
conscience forced to go hastily out of the Temple. This leprosy departed not
from him till his dying day, and therefore he was by virtue of Gods law
constrained to depart from the society of men, and to dwell apart; and Iotham
his son ruled over the kings house, and judged the people of the land. How
this place will prove, that the deposing of Kings belongs to Priests, I know
not, for surely Vzziah was not deposed, but being forced to live in an house
apart by himself, and in that respect unfit for the government, his son
supplied his place in judging the people of the land: but he continued king
still; and if he had been cleansed from his leprosy before his death, no
doubt, might, and would have resumed his kingly dignity, and the public
administration of justice. Whereupon we shall find that Iotham is said to
have reigned no more but 2. King. 15. 33.
16 years, because after his fathers death in his own right he reigned no
more. Though otherwise we find mention of things that fell out in the 2.
Kings 15. 30
20 year of his reign. So including the time of his ruling for his father in
his right. So that here was nothing done by the Priests, but that which
pertained to their priestly office, which was to keep the holy places, and
attend the Altars, and to judge of the plague of leprosy. But for deposing the
King, they meddled not.

The fourth example is of Iehoiada the high Priest deposing Athaliah, and
setting up Ioash, as they tell us. The story is this. 2. Chron. 21. 22. and 23.
Iehosaphat dies, and Iehoram his son succeeds him. This Iehoram marries
Athaliah the daughter of Ahab, the son of Omri; and he walked not in the
ways of Iehosaphat and Asa kings of Judah, but of wicked Ahab, whose daughter
he married. Whereupon God stirred up the spirit of the Philistines, and
Arabians, and they came, and took away all the substance that was found in his
house, and his wives and sons, so that none was left him, but Iehoahaz or
Ahaziah his youngest son. After this Iehoram dies, and Ahaziah reigns in
his stead, who followed the counsel of Athaliah, and did wickedly in the sight
of the Lord. This Ahaziah going to Iehoram the son of Ahab, and being found
with him when Iehu came to execute judgment against the house of Ahab, was
there slain by Iehu. After his death Athaliah his mother, destroyed all the
Kings seed of the house of Judah, and usurped the kingdom: But Iehoshebeath
the wife of Iehoiada the Priest, sister to Ahaziah, stale away Ioash the Kings
son, from among the Kings sons, that he should not be slain; and he was
hid in the house of God six years, all which time Athaliah reigned. But in
the seventh year Iohoiada waxed bold, took the Captains of hundreds in
covenant with him, and went about in Judah, and gathered the Levites out of all
the cities of Judah, and the chiefe-fathers of Israel; and they came to
Jerusalem: and all the congregation made a covenant with the King, and said,
The Kings son must reign, as the Lord has said of the sons of David.
Hereupon the King is proclaimed, Athaliah is slain, the house of Baal
destroyed, and the Altars and idols that were in it broken down. In all this
narration there is nothing that makes for the chief Priests power of deposing
lawful kings, if they become heretics: For first, Athaliah was an usurper
and no lawful Queen. Secondly, here was nothing done by Iehoiada alone, but
by him, and the Captains of hundreths, and the chief Fathers of Israel, that
entered into covenant with him. Thirdly, there is great difference between the
high Priest in the time of the Law, and in the time of Christ. For before the
coming of Christ, the high Priest even in the managing of the weightiest
civil affairs, and in judgment of life and death, sat in the Council of
State, as the second person next unto the King by Gods own appointment.
Whereas our Adversaries dare not claim any such thing for the Pope. And
therefore it is not to be maruailed at, if the high Priest, being the second
person in the kingdom of Judah, by Gods own appointment, and the Uncle and
Protector of the young king, whom his wife had saved from destruction, be the
first mouer for the bringing of him to his right; and when things are resolved
on by common consent, take on him not only to command and direct the Priests
and Levites, but the Captains and soldiers also, for the establishing of
their King, and the suppressing of a bloody tyrant and usurper. For all this
might be done by Iehoiada, as a chief man in that state: and yet the Pope be
so far from obtaining that he claims (which is to depose lawful kings for
abusing their authority) that he may not presume to do all that the high
Priests lawfully did, and might do: as not having so great preeminence from
Christ, in respect of matters of civil state in any kingdom of the world as
the high Priest had by Gods own appointment in the kingdom of Judah and
Israel. In the old Law (says De potest. and dignitate Papali, qu. 1. c. 10.
Occa^) the high Priest meddled in matters of war, in the judgment of life
and death, and the loss of members, and vengeance of blood and; it beseemed
him well so to do: But the Priests of the new Law may not meddle with things of
this nature. Wherefore from the power and dominion, which the high Priest of
the old Law had, it cannot be concluded, that the Pope has any power in
temporal matters.

The fifth example is of Ambrose, repelling Theodosius the Emperor from the
communion of the Church, after the bloody and horrible murder, that was
committed at Thessalonica by his commandment. The story is this Sozomen. li.
7. c. 24. Theodoret. li^. 5. ca. 16. and 17.
The coachman of Borherica, the Captain of the soldiers in that town, for
some fault was committed to prison. Now when the solemn horse-race and
sporting fight of horsemen approached, the people of Thessalonica desired to
have him set at liberty, as one of whom there would be great use in those
ensuing solemn sports. which being denied, the city was in an uproar, and
Botherica, and certain other of the magistrates were stoned to death, and most
despitefully used. Theodosius the Emperor hearing of this outrage, was
exceedingly moved, and commanded a certain number to be put to the sword,
without all judicial form of proceeding, or putting difference between
offenders and such as were innocent: So that seven thousand perished by the
sword, and among them many strangers (that were come into the city upon
diverse occasions, that had no part in the outrage, for which Theodosius was so
sore displeased) were most cruelly and unjustly slain. Saint Ambrose
understanding of this violent and unjust proceeding of the Emperor, the next
time he came to Millaine, and was coming to the Church, after his wonted
manner, met him at the door, and stayed him from entering with this speech: Thou
seem not to know, O Emperor, what horrible and bloody murders have been
committed by thee; neither do thou bethink thy self now thy rage is past,
to what extremities thy fury carried thee: perhaps the glory of thine Imperial
power, will not let thee take notice of any fault, and thy greatness repelleth
all check of reason controlling thee: but thou should know the frailty of
man's nature, and that the dust was that beginning whence we are taken, and and
to which we must return. Let not therefore the glory of thy purple robes make
thee forget the weakness of that body of flesh that is covered with them: Thy
subjects O Emperor are in nature like thee, and in service thy fellows, for
there is one Lord and commander over all: the maker of all things. Wherefore
with what eyes will thou behold his temple, or with what feet will thou tread
on the sacred pauement thereof? will thou lift up to him those hands, from
which the blood yet droppeth? will thou receive with them the sacred body of
our Lord? or will thou presume to put to thy mouth the cup replenished with the
precious blood of Christ, which have shed so much innocent blood by the word of
thy mouth, uttering the passion of thy furious mind? Depart therefore, add
not this iniquity to the rest, and decline not those bands, which God above
approves. With these speeches the Emperor was much moved: and, knowing the
distinct duties, both of Emperors and Bishops (for that he had bin trained up
in the knowledge of heavenly doctrine) returned to the Court, with tears and
sighs. A long time after (for eight months were first past) the solemn feast
of the Nativity of Christ approached, and all prepared themselves to solemnize
the same with triumphant joy. But the Emperor sat in the Court, lamenting and
pouring out rivers of tears: which when Ruffinus, master of the palace
perceived, he came unto him, and asked the cause of his weeping: to whom
(weeping more bitterly then before) he said, O Ruffinus, thou make but a
sport of these things, for thou art touched with no sense of those evils,
wherewith I am afflicted, but the consideration of my calamity makes me sigh
and lament: for that whereas the doors of Gods Temple are open to slaves and
beggars, and they go freely into the same to make prayers unto their Lord,
they are shut against me; and, which is yet worse, the gates of heaven are shut
against me also; for I cannot forget the words of our Lord; who says,
Whomsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. To whom Ruffinus
replied, I will run, if it please thee, O Emperor, to the Bishop, and
entreat him to unloose these bands, wherewith he has bound thee. No (says
the Emperor) it is to no purpose so to do, for he will not be entreated. I
know his sentence is right and just, and that he will not transgress the law
of God, for any respect of imperial power. Yet when Ruffinus was earnest, and
promised confidently to pacify Ambrose, he bade him go with speed, and
himself followed after in hope of reconciliation, trusting upon the promises
of Ruffinus. But when Ambrose saw Ruffinus, he said unto him: O Ruffinus, thou
do imitate the impudency of shameless dogs; for having been the aduiser
and counselor to so vile murders, thou have hardened thy forehead, and having
cast away all shame, blushest not, after the committing of so great and
horrible outrages, against men made after the image of God. And when he was
importunate with him, and told him the Emperor was coming, full of fiery
zeal, he brake forth into these words: I tell thee Ruffinus, I will not suffer
him to pass the thresholds of Gods house; and if of an Emperor he become a
tyrant, I will joyfully suffer death, Whereupon Ruffinus caused one to run to
the Emperor, and to desire him to stay within the Court. But the Emperor
being on the way when the messenger met him, resolved to come forward, and to
endure the reproof of the Bishop. So he came to the sacred railes, but entered
not into the Temple; and coming to the Bishop, besought him to unloose him
from the bands wherewith he was bound. The Bishop somewhat offended with his
coming, told him, the manner of his coming was tyrant-like; and that being
mad against God, he trampled under his feet the laws of God. Not so (said the
Emperor) I press not hither in despite of order, neither do I unjustly
strive to enter into the house of God. But, I beseech thee, to unloose me, to
remember the merciful disposition of our common Lord, and not to shut the
door against me, that he would have opened to all that repent. What
repentance therefore (says the Bishop) have thou showed, after so grievous
an offense? what medicines have thou applied to cure thy wounds? It pertains
to thee (says the Emperor) to prepare the medicines, that should heal me,
and to cure my wounds; and to me to use, that thou prescribest. Then (said
Ambrose) seeing thou make thy displeasure judge, and it is not reason, that
gives sentence, when thou sit upon the throne to do right, but thy
furious proceedings; make a law, that when sentence of death and confiscation
of goods shall be passed, there may pass thirty days before the execution of
the same, that so, if within that space it be found unjust, it may be reuersed;
or otherwise, it may proceed. This law the Emperor most willingly consented
to make, and thereupon Ambrose unloosed him from his bands; and he entered into
the Temple, and prayed unto God, not standing, nor kneeling, but prostrate upon
the earth, and passionately uttering these words of David. Psalm 119. ^5.
My soul cleaves to the pauement, Lord quicken me according to thy word. Here
we see an excellent pattern of a good Bishop, and a good Emperor; and it is
hard to say, whether Ambrose were more to be commended for his zeal,
magnanimous resolution and constancy, or the Emperor for his willing and
submissiue obedience. But of deposing Princes here is nothing, Ambrose being so
far from any thought of lifting up his hand against the Emperor, that he
resolved to subject himself unto him, even to the suffering of martyrdom, if
need should require. But (says Bellarmine) Ambrose exercised civil
authority, in that he took notice of this murder of the Emperor, being a
criminal cause, and forced him to make a civil law, for the preventing of
furious and bloody proceedings in judgment. This surely is a weak collection:
for the Church has power, by virtue of her Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to
take notice of such horrible crimes as murder, and to punish them with
spiritual punishments. Neither was the inducing of Theodosius to make a civil
law for the preventing of such like evils, as he was now censured for, before
he would reconcile him to the Church, an act of civil authority: But such
testimonies as this is, they that have no better must be forced to use.

That which follows of In fine epist. Greg.
Gregory's confirming the privileges granted to the Abbey of Saint Medardus,
in such sort, that whatsoever Kings, Judges, or secular persons should go about
to violate them, should be deprived of their honor, proves not the thing in
question. For it is evident, that the confirmation of these privileges was
passed, not by S. Gregory alone, but by a whole Council, and more specially by
Theodoricus the King, and Brunichildis the Queen, who might bind their
successors, and other inferior secular Rulers under pain of deprivation,
though neither Gregory of himself, nor yet a council of Bishops, could do
any such thing by their authority alone.

Wherefore let us proceed to the next example. Zenaras in vita Leonis Isauri.
Gregory the second (says Bellarmine) excommunicated the Emperor Leo the
third, who was an enemy to Images: he forbade any tribute to be paid him out
of Italy, and consequently deprived him of part of his Empire. Surely if Greg.
the second of himself alone had had such power, as to forbid all Italy upon his
dislike to pay any more tribute to the Emperor, there were some good show of
proof in this allegation. But if we examine the stories, we shall find the
case to have been far otherwise then Bellarmine would bear us in hand it
was. For first, Gregory did not excommunicate Leo of himself, but called a
Synod to do it. Secondly, he did not forbid the paying of tribute out of
Italy, to the Emperor: but the circumstances of the History are these. Leo
seeking to win the Bishop of Rome, and the people of Italy to the casting down
of Images in the West, as he had done in the East, Gregory the Bishop did not
only refuse to obey him, but admonished all other to take heed they did no
such thing for fear of any Edict of the Emperor. By which exhortation the
people of Italy already mis-conceited of the Emperors government, were so
animated, that they were likely to have proceeded to the election of a new
Emperor: and Naucler. in Chron. vol. 2. Gener. 25. page 654.
Nauclerus shows, that the decrees of the Bishop of Rome, dissuading the
people of the West from obeying the Emperor, in casting down of Images, were
of so great authority, that the people and soldiers of Ravenna first, and
then of Venice, began to make show of rebellion against the Emperor, and his
Exarche or Lieutenant, and to enforce the Bishop of Rome, and the other people
of Italy, to disclaim the Emperor of Constantinople, and to choose another in
Italy. And that this rebellion proceeded so far, that every city putting
down the Magistrates of the Exarch, set up Magistrates of their own, who^
they named Dukes; but that the Bishop of Rome at that time pacified the^, and
by his persuasions stayed them from choosing any new Emperor, in hope that he
would amend. So that we see, the Bishop of Rome with his Bishops, by their
authority did nothing but stay the people from obeying the Emperors unlawful
Decrees, as they judged them; but no way went about to depose the Emperor, or
to deprive him of any thing that of right pertained to him. But the people of
Italy moved against the Emperor, proceeded further then the Bishop of Rome
would have had them to have done. For they put down the Magistrates appointed
by the Emperor, and set up other of their own; and would have forced the
Bishop of Rome, and the other people of Italy, who yet consented not unto them,
to disclaim the Emperor of Constantinople, and to choose another in Italy. And
therefore, if at that time they forbear to pay any more tribute, (as Vbi supra.
Zonaras says they did) it was not because the Pope forbade them so to do (as
having supreme power in civil things) but being averse from the Emperor, as
for other dislikes, so by the Popes persuasions, they stayed the tribute of
themselves, as of themselves they put down the Magistrates of the Emperor,
without the liking of the Bishop of Rome. That which Lib. 5. cap. 18. Chronici.
Otho Frisingensis has, that the Pope having often admonished the Emperor,
and found him incorrigible, persuaded the people of Italy to depart from the
Empire, seems to be contrary to the reports of Lib. Chron. ab initio mundi
cum figuris and imaginibus in 6. aetate mundi.
the Author of the great Chronicle, Vbi supra.
Nauclerus, Chron. lib. 1.
Rhegino, and others; but yet makes the Pope only a perswader, and the people
of Italy the doers of that was done. And in like sort it must be understood
that Zonaras says, the Bishop of Rome stayed the paying of tribute to the
Emperor, namely, that his dislike of the Emperors courses, together with
their own distaste of his actions, did so auert the minds of the Italians from
the Emperor, that they refused to pay him tribute; that being attributed to
him, as done by him, which his persuasions (though tending to another purpose)
did work without his liking, and against his will. And in the same sense it
is, that Chronic. anni. 731.
Sigebert says, Gregory charged the Emperor with error, blamed him for it,
and turned away the people of Rome, and the tribute of the West from him.

The third instance of Popes intermedling in the disposition of the kingdoms
of the world, is that of Zacharias the Pope, of whom Gregory the seventh, in
his Epistles writes thus: Gregor. 7, lib. 8. epist. 21.
Another Roman Bishop also, to wit, Zacharias, deposed the French King from
his kingdom, not so much for any fault done by him, as for that he was unfit
to sway so great power; and put Pipine, the father of Charles the great,
afterward Emperor, into his place, freeing and absoluing all the Frenchmen
from their oath of feaultie. Which words of Gregory are found likewise in the
decrees. To this allegation Dialog. lib. 1. tract. 2. 3. part. cap. 18.
Occam b Part. 2. Causa 15. c. 6.
answers, that Zacharias did not depose Childericke the French King (as
Gregory the seventh untruly reports) but only gave allowance of the Peers
doposing of him. And to that purpose alleges the Gloss upon the decrees,
which says, Gloss. super. cap. allegat.
Dicitur deposuisse quia deponentibus consensit: that is, The Pope is said to
have deposed the King, because he gave consent to those that did depose him,
and allowed their act. But he notes also, that there are others, that do not
so excuse the Pope, but do think he put his sickle into another man's harvest,
and took upon him to do that he had no authority to do; which other Popes
likewise have not feared to do, in prejudice of the right of the laity, as
they show out of another Gloss. extra. de foro competenti. Ca. Siquis Clericus.
Gloss. So that the Cent. 8. c. 10.
Century writers are not alone in the reprehension of this fact of Zacharias,
(as De Pontif. l. 5. c. 8.
Bellarmine untruly anoucheth) notwithstanding I rather follow the judgment of
the author of the Gloss, and think, that he did but give his opinion, what
might be done, and approve the act when it was done. For confirmation whereof,
I will lay down the circumstances of the narration touching the proceedings in
this matter, as I find them reported by ancient writers. First, all Lib. Chron:
Aetate. 6. in Pipino.
Historians agree, that the Kings of France in those times, giving themselves
to idleness and pleasures, wholly neglected the government: that they were
seen but only once in the year of their subjects; and that the governor of
the Kings house ruled all. Neither did things stand thus for a short space, but
Chron. anno. 750.
Sigebert says, they continued so 88 years. In this office of a prefect or
governor, Pipine incceeded his auncesters, but exceeded them in the greatness
of worthy exploits; neither did any thing hinder the course of his great and
honorable actions, but that he was forced to suffer and endure a king almost
witless and mad with diverse senseless fooleries. Wherefore they who write the
histories of France report, that the Nobles and people of that nation duly
weighing the virtue of Pipine, and the witless follies of Childericke the
King, consulted Zachary then Bishop of Rome, and desired him to tell them,
whether he thought so foolish and unworthy a King were any longer to be
endured; or Pipine to be defrauded of royal dignity which he deserved, and was
right worthy of. Who when they had received answer from the Pope that he was
to be esteemed the King, who knew best how to perform kingly duties: the French
by the public and common advice and counsel of the whole nation, proclaimed
Pipine King, and shore the head of Childericke, and made him a Clearke.
Naucler. Chronol. vol. 2. Gener. 20.
Nauclerus says, the French men anciently had their kings descended of an
ancient stock, who of Meroueus the son of King Clodius the second, were
called Merouingians: the race of which kings continued till Childericke, and in
him ended. For long before, they were of no esteem or authority, neither had
they any thing, but the vain and empty title of Kings, for the riches and
power of the kingdom were in the hands of the prefects of the palace, who
were called the chief of the Kings house, and swayed the whole kingdom, who
at that time were the successors of Charles Martell, and were named Dukes.
Neither was there any other thing permitted to the King, but that contenting
himself with the bare name of a King, having long hair and a long beard, he
should sit upon the throne, and have some show of a ruler and hear Ambassadors
coming from all parts, and give such answers unto them (as out of his own
power) which he was taught and commanded to give. He had nothing to live on,
but such a stipend and allowance, as the Prefect was pleased to allow unto him.
He possessed nothing but one little village: once only in the year, he was
seen of his subjects in a public and solemn assembly, and having saluted
them all, returned again into his private course of life, leaving the
government of all to the Prefect. Pipine therefore, who then supplied that
place, as succeeding his ancestors in the same, considering the sloth and
idleness of these Kings, who neglecting the commonwealth did hide themselves
in their own private houses: and that both the Nobles and people took notice
as well of his virtues, as of the senseless follies of Childericke, consulted
the Pope (as we heard before:) upon whose answer (that he was to be reputed
King, that could best do the duty of a King) the French by a public decree of
the whole nation, chose Pipine to be King, which thing Zachary approved.
Chroni. lib. (...). cap. 21. and 22.
Otho Frisingensis says, that the French se nt messengers to Rome sciscitandi
gratia, to ask the Popes advice, and to be resolved by him: upon whose
answer, and by whose authority (warranting them it was lawful so to do)
Bonifacius Archbishop of Mentz, and the other Princes of the kingdom, met
together, and chose Pipine King. And Rhegino says, Pipine was chosen King
according m Lib. 2.
to the manner and custom of the French, and being anointed by the hands of
Bonifacius Archbishop of Mentz, was by the French lifted up into the royal
throne, and Childericke who was but in title only a King, was shorn, and
thrust into a Monastery. With these agrees Loco citato.
Sigebertus, and the rest. Wherefore to conclude this point, touching the
deposition of Childericke, we must observe. First, that he was not deposed for
heresy, or any way going about to hinder the course of religion; and that
therefore the Pope could not depose him, unless Princes be subject to such
censures for defects of nature, and negligence in doing their duties. Secondly,
that he and his predecessors for almost an hundred years, were put from all
government, and were but in name only Kings, others having the authority, and
that with the allowance of the whole state. So that it is the less to be
marvelled, if the Pope being consulted as a Divine, answered, it was fit
rather that he should have the name, title, and inauguration of a King, that
was to do the duty, then he that was to be but a shadow only. Yet do I not
say, that he spoke like a good Divine. Thirdly, that in those times the
University of Paris was not yet founded: and the kingdom had few learned men,
and that therefore they sought to forrainers. For otherwise we know that
afterward the Kings and Princes of France rather Gerson in Sermon. de paschate
part. 4. operum eius:
believed the Divines of Paris then the Court of Rome, in greater matters then
this. Fourthly, that the Bishop of Rome as Patriarch of the West, was the
chief Bishop in these parts of the world, and therefore not unfitly consulted
in a matter of such consequence as this was.

Wherefore let us now proceed to the fourth instance, which is that of the
translation of the West Empire, from the Emperors of Constantinople to Charles
the Great, which our Adversaries say, was done by Pope Leo the third. But
surely whosoever shall look into the course of Histories shall find, that this
instance makes rather against them, then for them. For it is most certain,
that the Pope by his papal power did not translate the Empire. Sigebert anno
801.
The Romans, says Sigebert, (who long before in their hearts were fallen away
from the Emperor of Constantinople, now taking the opportunity of the occasion
offered, while a woman having put out the eyes of Constantine the Emperor her
son, took upon her to rule over them) with one consent proclaimed Charles
the King their Emperor, and by the hands of Leo the pope set the Crown upon
his head, and gave him the title of Caesar and Augustus. With Sigebertus the
author of Aetate. 6. in Leone.
the great Chronicle agrees; His words are these. In the time of the
solemnities of the Mass celebrated upon Christmas day in S. Peter's Church, Leo
the pope by the decree of the people of Rome, and at their entreaty crowned
Charles proclaimed Emperor of the Romans, and set such a Diadem upon his
head, as the ancient Emperors were wont to wear; and then the people, which
was present in great number with joyful acclamation cried out thrice: Carolo
Augusto, a Deo coronato, magno et pacifico Imperatori, vita and victoria. So
that we see, it was the decree of the Romans that made Charles Emperor, and
that they used Leo for the performance of the solemn rites of his Coronatio^
and unction. With Sigebert and the Author of the great Chronicle, we may join
Anno. 800.
Lambertus Schaffnaburgesis. His words are, Carolus a Romany Augustus est
appellatus. That is: the Romans proclaimed Charles Augustus, And Chronog. vol.
2. gener. 27.
Nauclerus says, Pontifex populi Romani consensu, Carolum Romanorum
Imperatorem declarat, etc. that is: The high Bishop, with the consent of the
people of Rome, proclaims Charles Emperor of Romans, and crowns him with
a Diadem. The people with a joyful shout, crying out thrice, Carolo Augusto,
a Deo coronato, magno and pacifico Imperatori, vita and victoria. But to clear
this point: and to make it evident to all the world, that howsoever the Pope
and Clergy might concur in this act, with the people and nobles of Italy, as
having part and interest in matters of state as well as other, yet the Pope by
his Papal power did not translate the Empire; three things are to be observed.
The first, that in the time of Gregory the 2d, there was a great rebellion in
Italy against the Emperor of Constantinople, and a desire to choose a new
Emperor, and that they of Rauenna and Venice proceeded so far in it, that
they would have forced the Bishop of Rome, and others to concur with them:
whereby it appears, that the act of translation was not proper to the Bishop
of Rome, but proceeded from the concurring desires of the Italians, and was
their act, rather then his. The second, that Charles Great. chron. in Carolo.
was a mighty, potent, and great prince, having under him all France, Spain,
and a great part of Germany, with many other countries; and by his sword had
subjected to him, the Lombards, and was Lord of the greatest part of Italy,
before either the people proclaimed him, or the Pope crowned him Emperor. So
that howsoever the Italians by Leo the B. proclaimed, crowned, and accounted
him Emperor; yet it was his right of inheritance, and his sword that had
possessed him of the thing, before ever they gave him the title of the West
Empire. The third, that whether the Italians had right to choose an Emperor or
not, it mattereth nothing, seeing they rebelled against their Emperor, and
thought, that in case of such necessity they might so do; and that therefore
the objection of Bellarmine against our position, is too weak, when he says
the people had no power to choose the Emperor. For howsoever anciently the
Emperors were chosen by the souliers, or came to it by inheritance, yet the
people at this time de facto took upon them to choose, without curious
disputing the question of right.

The fifth instance of the Popes intermedling in the disposition of the
kingdoms of the world, is that of Gregory the 5, who (as Bellarmine says)
appointed the form of choosing the Emperor by the seven Princes of Germany,
and ordained that the Emperor should ever after be chosen by them. For the
clearing of which point, we must observe Great. chron. in Gregory (...).
Naucl. vol. 2. Generat. 28. and sequentibus.
that the Empire of the West, being translated from Constantinople into France
in the person of Charles the great, he dyed, and Ludouicus his son succeeded
him. Lotharius succeeded Ludouicus, and Ludouicus his son succeeded him.
Carolus Caluus his uncle succeeded Ludouicus; Carolus Crassus his brother
Ludouicus son, succeeded him. This Carolus Crassus for his unfitness, was put
from the Empire, and Arnulphus his nephew, son of Carlomaine was chosen in his
place; who was the last of the race of Charles the great, that was crowned
Emperor, whom Ludouicus his son succeeded, but was never crowned. In whom
dying without children, the race of Charles did wholly cease. After him Otho the
Duke of Saxony was greatly desired; but refusing to be Emperor in respect of
his old age, the French by his advice chose Conradus; and Conradus when he dyed
named Henry the son of Otho Duke of Saxony, who reigned in East-France: But
upon the death of Ludouicus the third, the Lombards possessed themselves of the
Empire in Italy, eight of them successively holding it for the space of 50
years, till Otho the son of Matilda (daughter of Theodoricus king of the
Saxons) and Henry the king; who succeeding his father, and being very famous
for the things he had done in France and Germany, was desired by Agapetus the
Pope, and many nobles of Italy now weary of the tyranny of the Lombards, to
come and relieve them; which he did, and entering Italy with 50000. armed men,
put Berengarius the Lombard from the Empire, and Albertus from the kingdom of
all Italy; and was crowned Emperor in Rome by John the twelfth, who died
Emperor, and Otho the second his son succeeded him, and Otho the third his
son succeeded him. This third Otho (as Vol. 2. Generat. ^4.
Nauclerus says) having no heirs male, by the advice, and with the consent of
the Princes of Germany, made a Decree, that after the death of the Emperor, an
election of the new Emperor to succeed should for ever be made in the city
of Franckford; and appointed electors three Archbishops, of Mentz for Germany,
of Coleyn for Italy, and of Treuers for France: and with these four other
secular Princes, to wit, the Palatine of Rhene, who by office should be the
Emperors Pantler; the Duke of Saxony, who should be his Marshall; the Marquess
of Branderburge, who was to be his Chamberlain; and the King of Boheme, who
was to be chief Butler. This ordinance greatly displeased the Romans, yet
notwithstanding Gregory the fifth then Pope, who was a Germane borne, and of
the Emperors house, seeing how hardly Otho the Emperor came to the Empire,
though it were his inheritance, called a Synod; and with the consent of the
Princes of Germany, confirmed the ordinance of the Emperor, and decreed, that
these 7 electors, should for ever have power to choose the Emperor in the name
of all; who being chosen, should be called Caesar and king of Romanos, and
after his coronation by the Pope, be named Augustus and Emperor. Concord.
Cathol. l. 3. c. 4.
Cardinal Cusanus says, the Emperor Otho, with the consent of the nobles,
Primates, and both the states of the Clergy and people, ordained electors in
the time of Gregory the 5. who was a Germane, and decreed, that they should
have power for ever to choose the Emperor in steed of all. It is not therefore
to be granted (says he) that the Princes electors have their power of choosing
the Emperor from the Pope, so that without his consent they should not have it,
or that he might take it from them if he would. Who therefore gave the people
of Rome power to choose the Emperor, but the law of God, and nature? whence the
Electors, appointed by the common consent of all the Germans, and other
subject to the Empire in the time of Henry the second, have their power
originally from the common consent of them all, who by natures right had power
to constitute them an Emperor; and not from the Bishop of Rome, who has no
power to give to any province of the world, a King or Emperor, without the
consent thereof. But the consent of Gregory the 5. who as Bishop of Rome in his
degree and place, had interest to give voice in the choosing of the Emperor,
concurred with the resolution of the Princes and people.

The sixth instance is of Gregory the 7. deposing Henry the 4. who (indeed) was
the first Pope that ever took upon him to depose Emperor or King. Wherefore
for the better understanding of the whole course of the proceedings of this
Pope, we must observe, Otho Frisingens. Chronic. lib. 6. c. 32. 33.
that in the time of Henry the 3. about the year of our Lord 1040. there was
an horrible confusion of Gods Church and people in the city of Rome, three
several pretenders inuading the chair of Peter, and challenging the name of
his successors, and (which more increased the misery) the revenues of the
Church were divided among these three, and several Patriarchicall places
assigned to them; one of them sitting at S. Peter's, another at S. Mary the
greater, and the third named Benedict, in the palace of Lateran; and all of
them lived very lewdly and wickedly (as Otho says the Romans reported unto
him being in Rome.) A certain religious Presbyter named Gratian, considering
this miserable state of the Church, and taking pity on his distressed mother,
moved with the zeal of piety went to the three pretenders, and persuaded them
for money to leave the holy seat of Peter; assigning to Benedict, as being of
greater esteem among them, the revenues of England for his maintenance, and as
a recompense of his voluntary relinquishing the claim to the Popedom. The
citizens of Rome admiring the happy atchieuement of this Presbyter, chose him
to be Pope, as being the deliverer of the Church from so great a schism; and
changing his name, called him Gregory the 7. But when Henry the King heard of
it, he passed into Italy. Gratian understanding of his coming, met him at
Sutrium, and to pacify his wrath, offered him a precious Diadem. The King at
the first honorably received him; but afterward calling a Council of
Bishops, induced him to give over the Popedom, as having by Symony obtained
it at the first; and with the consent of the Roman church placed Suidegerus
Bishop of Babenberge in the Papal chair, who was named Clemens. This Clemens
dyed, and Popio Patriarch of Aquileia succeeded him, and was named Damasus.
Damasus dyed, and Bruno Bishop of the Tullians succeeded him, and was named
Leo. This man being of a noble race in France, was appointed Pope by the
authority of the Emperor: and having put on the Papal purple robe, journeyed
through France, til he came to Cluniack where one Hildebrand was Priour. This
Hildebrand moved with zeal came to Leo, and told him he did ill to assume the
Papal office by virtue of the Emperors nomination being a Layman, but that
if he would be advised by him, he would direct him into a course, whereby he
might without offending the Emperor, preserve the liberty of the Church in
choosing her chief Bishop. This advice Leo hearkened unto, and putting off his
purple robe, put on the weed of a pilgrim, and so going to Rome with this
Hildebrand in his company, by his advice and counsel, found the means to get
himself chosen Pope by the Clergy and people of Rome. Leo dyed, and Gebehardus
afterward named Victor, succeeded him, and Stephen him: about whose time Henry
the third dyed, and Henry the fourth his son succeeded him; and after
Stephen, Benedict, and Nicholas, Alexander gate the papal See, Naucler. Vol.
2. Gener. 36.
against whom great exception was taken, for that contrary to the custom, he
was chosen without the Emperors consent, and with the liking of the young
Emperor and his mother (as some report.) Another was set up by the Bishops of
Lombardy, affirming that no man might be chosen or designed to the Popedom
without the Emperors allowance. And besides, Anno Archbishop of Coleyn went
to Rome to expostulate the matter with Alexander and the Cardinals adhering to
him, and to know of him, how he durst contrary to custom, and the law
prescribed and imposed anciently upon the Popes, assume the Popedom without
the consent of the Emperor; alleging many things to show the unlawfulness of
this fact, and beginning at Charles the great, he named many Emperors who had
either chosen or confirmed Popes, and made good their election. But being ready
to go forward: and to add more proofs unto that which he had said, Hildebrand
the Archdeacon (the whole company of Cardinals beckening unto him so to do)
stood up, and answered in this sort. Archbishop Anno, the Kings and Emperors
of Rome never had any authority, right, or commanding power in the choice of
the Pope: and if at any time, any thing were done violently or disorderly, it
was afterward corrected and set right again by the censure of the Fathers.
After the death of Alexander, this Hildebrand, who thus ever opposed himself
against the Emperors claims, was by the Romans chosen Pope without the
Emperors consent. Which the Bishops of France understanding, knowing well of
how violent, severe, and intractable a disposition he was, unwilling to have
him possess so high a place in the Church, told the Emperor, that if he did
not in time prevent the matter, and void his election, greater evils and perils
would beset him, then he could at first think of. Whereupon he sent
Ambassadors to Rome to know the cause why the Romans contrary to the ancient
custom, had chosen a Pope without his consent. And if they gave not
satisfaction, to put Hildebrand from the Papal dignity which he had unjustly
gotten. The Ambassadors coming to Rome, were kindly and courteously
entertained, and when they had delivered their message, Hildebrand (like a vile
dissembling hypocrite) contrary to his own practice, and that which he had
persuaded other unto, answered, that he never sought this honor, but that it
was put upon him: and that yet he would not accept of it, till by a certain
Ambassador, he was assured, that not only the Emperor, but the Princes of
Germany consented to his election. Which answer when the Emperor received, he
was fully satisfied, and with all readiness, by his royal consent confirmed
his election and commanded that he should be ordained. Thus we see, how to
serve his own turn, he could now acknowledge the Emperors interest, and
refuse to be ordained before he had obtained his confirmation, which yet
before in the case of Alexander he disclaimed: though a some say, he never
yielded so much to the Emperor, but ever (...) Otho. (...) lib. 6. cap. ^4.
and 35.
held out against him, disclaiming his intermedling, and that a most horrible
schism ensued thereupon. Howsoever, he was no sooner Pope, but he began to
molest the Emperor, challenging him for Symony in conferring Ecclesiastical
dignities, and requiring him to come to some Synodall answer; which when he
refused to do, he excommunicated him, deprived him of his Empire, and absolved
his subjects from their Oath of obedience, This was the first Pope that ever
presumed to depose any Emperor. Lego and relego (says Otho Fris. l. 6 Chron.
c. 35
Otho Frisingensis) Romanorum Regum and Imperatorum gesta, and nusquam invenio
quenquam eo^um ante hunc a Romano Pontifice excommunicatum, vel regno privatum,
nisi forte quis pro anathemate habendum ducat, quod Philippus ad breve tempus a
Romano Pontifice inter poenitentes collocatus, and Theodosius a beato Ambrosio
propter cruentam caedem a liminibus Ecclesiae sequestratus sit: that is, I
read, and I read over again and again, the Acts of the Roman Kings and
Emperors, and I no where find any of them before this, excommunicated by the
Roman Bishop, or deprived of his kingdom, unless happily any man do think
that is to be taken for an excommunication, that Philip was for a short time
put among the Penitents by the Bishop of Rome, and Theodosius for his bloody
murder stopped by blessed Ambrose from entering into the Church. And therefore
whatsoever Gregory pretends c Decr. part. 2. cause. 15. q. 6. and l. 8. ep. 21.
to the contrary, professing that he treads in the steps of the Saints, and
his holy predecessors; yet it is true that In Chron. anno 1088.
Sigebert says, (which he hops he may say with the leave of all good men)
that this novelty (that he say not heresy) had not showed it self in the
world in their time, that the Priests of that God which makes hypocrites to
reign for the sins of his people, should teach his people that they owe no
subjection to wicked Kings, and that they owe no feaulty unto them, though they
have taken the oath of feaulty: that they are free from perjury that lift up
their hands against the king to who^ they have sworn, and that they are to be
taken for excommunicate persons that do obey him. What horrible confusio^s
followed upon this censure of Gregory, Otho Frisingensis reports in most
tragical manner. His words are these. How e Chro. l, 6. c. 36
great evils, how many wars and dangers of wars followed thence? How often
was miserable Rome besieged, taken, and sacked? How one Pope was intruded upon
another: as likewise one King set up against another, it is irksome to me to
remember. To conclude, the whirle-winde of this tempest inwrapped in it so many
evils, so many schisms, so many perils of the souls and bodies of men, that
it alone may suffice in respect of the cruelty of the persecution, and the long
continuance of the time thereof, to set before our eyes the infelicity of man's
miserable condition. For Naucler. Vol. 2. Gener. 37.
first the Emperor offended with the Pope for molesting him about the
Investitures of Bishops, which his Predecessors anciently had and enjoyed,
and the Clergy discontented with him for his forbidding marriage; he was in an
assembly of the States and Bishops of Germany, holden at Worms, deposed, and a
letter written to him, requiring him no longer to meddle with the Episcopal
Office, But such was the resolution and stoutnesse of this turbulent and
unquiet spirit, that being encouraged by certain Bishops of Germany, and
promised their aid and help, he deprived the Bishops that had given sentence
against him, and deposed Henry the Emperor, absoluing his subjects from their
Oath of obedience. Whereupon many of the Princes of Germany, and first of all
the Saxons formerly averse from him, withdrew their subjection, pretending,
that they might justly cast off the yoke, and refuse to obey him any longer,
seeing having been called to give satisfaction to two Popes, concerning
certain crimes objected to him, he had refused to appear, and was thereupon
excommunicated. These rebellions and defections so affrighted the Nobles and
Princes of the Empire that still remained well affected to the Emperor, that
for the staying of present confusio^s, and preventing of other, they thought
good that the Pope should be entreated to come into Germany, and that then the
Emperor should submit himself unto him, and ask forgiveness; which thing
accordingly was effected: for the Pope was persuaded, and consented to come
into Germany, and was coming toward Augusta, as far as Versella. But when
he came thither, prete^ding fear that the Emperor meant not well toward him,
he brake off his journey, and went to Canossu^, and there stayed. Which the
Emperor hearing of, and doubting what might be the cause of his stay, hastened
thither, and putting off all Royal robes, on his bare feet came to the gates
of the town, humbly beseeching that he might be let in: but was stayed without
3 days, though it were extreme cold winter weather: which he endured
patiently, continually entreating, till in the end he was let in, and
absolved; but yet conditionally, that being called, he should appear in an
assembly of Princes and Bishops, to answer such crimes as were objected to
him; and either to purge himself and so retain his kingdom; or otherwise
failing so to do, to lose it. This his submission afterward he made known to
the Italians, who understanding what he had done, were exceedingly enraged
against him, derided the Legates of the Pope, and contemned his curses, as
being deposed by all the Bishops of Italy for just causes, as namely, for
simony, murder, adultery, and other most horrible and capital crimes; and
told him, that he had done a most intolerable thing, in submitting himself
and his kingly Majesty to an heretic and most infamous person. Yea they
proceeded so far, that they told him, because he had so done, they were
resolved to make his son Emperor in his steed; and to go to Rome and choose a
new Pope, by whom he might be consecrated, and all the proceedings of this
false Pope voided. But the Emperor excusing himself for that which he had
done, as driven by necessity so to do, and promising to revenge these wrongs,
when opportunity should be offered, pacifyed them in such sort, that they
began to incline to him again. Yet were not his evils at an end hereby. For
his enemies among the Germans presently took the opportunity of this his
relapse, and calling an assembly with the Legates of the Pope, chose a new
Emperor, Rodolphe Duke of Sueuia; to who^ the Pope sent an imperial crown,
having this inscription: Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodolpho. Which when
he heard of, he called a Council of the Bishops of Italy and Germany, and
charging Hildebrand the Pope with most horrible crimes of heresy, necromancy,
perjury, murder, and the like, deposed him; chose Guibertus, Bishop of
Rauenna in his place, and gathering together a great and mighty army, went
against Rodolphe abiding in Saxony; where a most terrible and bloody battle
was fought between them: in which battle Rodolphe was wounded; and going
aside from his companions, with many other likewise wounded, was carried to
Mersberge, where he died; who a little before his death beholding his right hand
cut off in that battle, fetching a deep sigh, said to the Bishops which by
chance were present: Behold, this is the hand with which by solemn vow and
oath I obliged my faith and feaulty to Henry my Lord. Behold now I leave his
kingdom and this present life, see you that made me climb up into his
throne, what you have done: would to God you had led me the right way, whom you
found so willing to follow your advice and counsel, and to be directed by you
Yet did neither the ill success of the former attempt, nor the speeches of
Rodolphe at his death, blaming those that had set him a work, and condemning
himself for that which he had done, discourage the ill affected from
proceeding on in their rebellious practices. For they set up Hermannus, Prince
of Lorrayne, in steed of Rodolphe, and proclaimed him Emperor, whom the
Emperor Henry slew likewise, as he had done the other; and rested not till he
made Pope Hildebrand leave Rome, and fly to Salernum; and brought the new Pope
named Clement, to be inthronized, and himself crowned by him in Rome. The acts
of Hildebrand (says Nauclerus) were such, that the writers be very doubtful
whether the things that were done by him, were done out of any love of virtue,
or any zeal he bare to the faith, or not. They that loved him best, disliked
his stiffenes, as Annal.
Auentinus witnesses. Li. 6. cap. 32.
Otho Frisingensis notes, that his disposition was such, that for the most
part, he ever liked that which others disliked. So, that of Lucane might be
verified of him: Victrix causa Diis placuit, sed victa Catoni: that is, The
prevailing part and cause best pleased God, but that which fell, and had the
overthrow, had Catoes wishes. And though he commend his zeal, yet in his
prologue of his 7. book he taxes him, and others like unto him, in very
bitter sort. His words are these: Videntur tamen culpandi Sacerdotes per omnia,
qui regnum suo gladio, quem ipsi ex regum habent gratia, ferire conantur. Nisi
forte David imitari cogitant, qui Philistaeum primo virtute Dei strauit,
postmodum proprio gladio iugulauit: that is, Notwithstanding whatsoever may be
said, the Priests seem altogether blameable, and worthy of reproof and
reprehension, which go about to strike Kings and princes with that their sword
which they have by the grace and favor of Princes; unless happily they do
think it lawful for them to imitate David, who first overthrew and cast to
the ground the proud Philistine by the power of God, and afterward slew him
with his ownesword. Of this Hildebrand Anno 1085.
Sigebert says, he found it thus written: We will have you know, you that
manage the Ecclesiastical affairs, and to whom the care of the Church is
committed, that the Lord, Pope Hildebrand, who also was called Gregory, being
in extremis, and drawing near his end, called unto him one of the 12
Cardinals, whom he loved dearly, and more then any of the rest; and in his
hearing confessed to God, to holy Peter, and to the whole Church, that he had
sinned exceedingly, and grievously offended in the Pastoral charge committed
to him, and in governing the people of whom he had undertaken the care; and
that by the persuasion and instigation of the Devil, he had stirred up hatred
and wrath against mankind: and then commanded the forenamed Confessor to make
haste to go to the Emperor, and to the whole Church of God, to ask
forgiveness for him, because he saw the end of his life was near at hand. And
besides all this, in great haste put on him an Angelical vesture or robe, and
released and brake in sunder the bands of all those bitter curses whereunto he
had subjected the Emperor. These were the turbulent proceedings of this cursed
Hildebrand, indeed a brand taken out of the very fire of hell, to set on fire
the course of nature, and to put the whole world into a combustion; whereof (if
this report mentioned by Sigebertus be true) it repented him not a little
before his death. But howsoever, it is most certain, that his best friends in
the end began wholly to dislike him, when they saw whither his violent and
furious passions carried him, and what woeful effects followed the same.
Gerochus (says Annal. lib. (...) page 563.
Auentinus) then whom no man was found more earnestly to defend Hildebrand by
books written to justify his proceedings, and who published to the world
diverse crimes objected to the Emperor, mentioned by no other writer, at the
last, constrained by the force of truth, taxed the pertinacy, if not the
tyranny, of the Pope and his adherents, in this sort. Romani (inquit) sibi
diuinum vsurpant honorem, rationem actorum reddere nolunt, nec sibi dici aequo
animo ferunt, cur ita agis? Illud Satyricum inculcant, Sic volo, sic iubeo, sit
pro ratione voluntas; that is, The Romans take unto themselves the honor that
is proper unto God: they will give no account for any thing they do; they will
be subject to no control, neither can they endure with any patience, that
any man should say to any of them, sir, why do you so? That Satyricall saying
they have often in their mouths: so I will have it, so I command it to be.
Let my will stand for a reason, for so it shall. Thus we see how ill a
beginning the Popes made of deposing Emperors, and how bad success they had.
Which is not to be maruailed at, seeing in these attempts and practices they
were contrary to Christ and his Apostles. For these (as Auentinus notes)
acknowledged the Emperors, as also all the holy Fathers did, to be in the
second place and rank after God, and before all mortal men, given, appointed,
and chosen by the immortal God; and honored them, as having the crown set
upon their heads by God himself; they prayed daily for their prosperity, they
paid tribute unto them, and proclaimed them rebels against God, that refused to
be subject to them. After this bad beginning, some two or three other Popes
succeeding, attempted in like sort as Hildebrand had done, to depose such
Emperors as they were offended with. Concerning whose attempts and practices,
let the Reader consider the censure of Cardinal Cusanus. His words are these:
Cusanus de concord. Cathol. l. 3. c. 41
Let it suffice the Pope, that he excels the Emperor, as much as the Sun
does the Moon, and the soul the body; and let him not challenge that which
pertains not to him: neither let him affirm, that the Empire is not but by
him, and in dependence on him: and if happily the deposing of some kings and
Emperors, the translation of the Empire move him so presumptuously for to
think, let him know, that if the respect of religion, and due consideration of
humility hindered not, it were easy to answer all those things truly and
most clearly; and so, that happily these things should no way argue so great a
power in the Pope, as Pope, without the consent or willing acceptance of the
parties contending, as is imagined. For there wanted not in ancient times men
to defend Henry the fourth crowned at Basil by the Legates of Rome, from the
excommunication of Gregory or Hildebrand. Yea such there were that were
Cardinals at that time, and a certain Council holden at Rome, nay which more
is, the General Council at Basil, holden at that time, did the same things
concerning the choosing of Honorius Pope, for which Henry the Emperor was
pronounced excommunicate. And in like sort there are found things excellently
and strongly written in defense of Frederick the second, a most valiant man,
and a most constant defender of the Faith, as also in defense of other
Emperors. How much the Popes proceedings against Frederick the second,
hindered the course of the sacred war undertaken at that time against the
Infidels, how many things the Pope charged him with, which he utterly
disclaimed, and how much all Christian Princes in the end began to dislike
the pride of the Roman Court, the Sea Math. Paris. Henric. 3. p. 682.
Histories of those times do sufficiently make known unto us. Wherefore to
conclude this point, touching the Popes pretended power of deposing Princes;
seeing the first that ever attempted to exercise the same, was that brand of
hell Gregory the 7. seeing he had so ill success in this his proud attempt,
and caused such confusions in the Christian world, as the like had seldom or
never bin before; and seeing the best learned about those times, and since,
condemned the opinion of the^ that think the Pope may depose Princes, as new
and strange, if not heretical: we may safely resolve, that the Pope taking
upon him to give and take away kingdoms, which is proper to God, is that
Antichrist that sits in the temple of God, as if he were God.

CHAP. 47.
Of the Civil dominion which the Popes have by the gift of Princes.

Having proved that the Popes neither directly, nor indirectly have power over
Princes and the Kingdoms of the world, or any thing to do in the managing and
disposing of civil affairs, by virtue of any grant from Christ, let us
proceed to see what temporal dominion and civil power they have by the grant
of Princes. It is the resolved opinion almost of all men (says De Concord.
Cath. l. 3. c. 2.
Cusanus) that Constantine the Emperor gave the whole Empire of the West to
Sylvester Bishop of Rome, and to his successors for ever, so that there can
be no Emperor of the West, but such a one as must wholly depend of the Pope,
and acknowledge that he holds the Imperial Crown of him. Neither were
there many found in ancient times, that durst make question of this donation
of Constantine, yet does this great Cardinal and worthy Divine profess, that
having sought diligently to find out the original of this supposed grant, and
the certainty of it (presupposing that Constantine might make such a grant,
which yet will never be proved) he greatly wo^dereth if ever there were any
such thing. For that there is no such thing to be found in authentical books,
and approved Histories. I have read over (says he) again and again, all the
Acts of Popes and Emperors that by any means I could meet with, the
Histories of Saint Hierome, who was most diligent in collecting all things, the
works of Augustine, Ambrose; and other learned Fathers, and the Acts of
General Councels which have been since the Council of Nice; and can find no
such thing as this supposed donation, nor any thing that may import, that ever
there was any such donatio^, neither can it stand with the course of things
reported unto us by the ancient Historians and writers: Damasus at the request
of Hierome, wrote the lives and actions of his Predecessors: and yet in the
life of Syluester reports no such thing. He adds further, that having
diligently perused the Charter of this grant, he found in it most evident
arguments of forgery and falsehood, and therefore says, he thinks these
things concerning Constantines donation to be Apocryphal, as some other large
writings attributed to Clemens and Anacletus the Popes. For first, the Epistle
of Melchiades touching the Primitive Church, and the bounty of Constantine is
proved cou^terfeit, in that he speaks of the Council of Nice, holden after
his death, and of Constantines donation, supposed to have been granted in the
time of Sylvester, who succeeded him. Besides this, in the Charter of donation,
Constantine professes, that he was a Leper, that he was freed from the same
by Sylvesters means, by whom he was baptized, and that he was first
instructed in Christianity by him. Whereas it is a mere fable that is reported
of Constantines leprosy, and it is most certain that he was a Christian
before Syluester was Bishop of Rome. I no where ever read (says Locorum
Theologic: lib. 12. c. 5.
Melchior Canus) in any good and approved authors, that Constantine was a
Leper; But another of that name surnamed Copronymus, whence happily, through
ambiguity of the name, this error might spring, unless this rumor concerning
the Leprosy of Constantine may seem to have sprung from that we find
reported of him: that he went out of the City of Byzantium to certain hot
bathes for his healthes sake. Thomas Aquinas in his 3. part. quaest. 69. in 4.
argumento.
sum mentions this vulgar history of Constantines Leprosy, and (as it
seems) approves the same; but Caietane does not so, writing upon Thomas;
neither wants he good authors to induce him to reject this fabulous report:
for he has Platina in the life of Mark, Lib. 2.
Ludouicus Viues in his book de corruptis disciplinis, and Lib. Parerg. 7. c.
19.
Alciat, all flatly denying and rejecting this report: and he has all ancient
writers of that age, passing it over in silence: who would never have omitted
it, if they had known of any such thing, and would undoubtedly have known it,
if there had been any such thing. Touching his Baptism, all the ancient
Historians In Chronic.
Hierome, Lib. 4. de vita Constantin.
Eusebius, Lib. 2. cap. 39.
Socrates, Lib. 1. hist. Eccles. c. 31.
Theodoritus, Lib. 3. cap. 34.
Zozomen, Tripart. hist.
Cassiodorus: Pomponius Laetus, and other of that rank affirm, that he was
baptized by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, a little before his death, and not by
Syluester. The author of the Pontifical, who is full of fables, the fained
Charter of Constantines donation, and some late writers, deceived by these late
forgeries, affirm, that he was first converted to Christianity by Syluester
Bishop of Rome, and by him baptized, which by no means can be true: it being
most certain he was a Christian in the time of Melchiades, Syluesters
predecessor. It is most certainly true (says Concord. Cathol. l3. c. 2.
Cusanus) that Constantine the Emperor was a Christian in the time of
Melchiades the Pope, as it appears by Austine in diverse places, especially in
his Epistle to Glorius and Eleusius. These are proofs more then sufficient,
that the Edict of donation attributed to Constantine is counterfeit and forged:
and therefore Vbi supra. Did. 96. cap. Constantinus.
Melchior Canus writes thus of it. The Lawyers do sufficiently show, that that
form of donation, which is attributed to Constantine, and commonly carried
about, is feigned and counterfeit, in that they brand it with the disgraceful
inscription of chafe. Eusebius, Ruffinus, Theodoret, Socrates, Zozomen,
Eutropius, Victor, and the other approved authors, who most diligently wrote
all the acts of Constantine, do not only pass by this supposed donation,
without making any mention of it, but also deliver, that Constantine by his
last will and testament, so divided the Provinces, subject to the Roman
Empire, among his three sons, that all Italy fell to the lot of one of them:
which being so religious a Prince, he would not have done, if he had formerly
given Italy, and all the Western part of the Empire to the Pope. Lib. 15.
Ammianus Marcellinus reports, that Constantine held the Sovereignty of Rome,
and appointed Leontius to be his Leiuetenant there, and all Historians do
report that sundry Emperors long after the time of Constantines supposed
donation, ruled and reigned as sovereign Lords in Italy: and even in Rome it
self, Epist. Agathonis. lecta in 6: action. 4.
Pope Agatho writing to Constantine, that called the sixth General Council,
acknowledges that Rome is Imperatoris seruilis vrbs, that is, the Emperors
city in all humble and submissiue subjection: and it is most evident that Io.
Diaconus. in vita Gregorij. lib. 1. c. 40.
in the time of Gregory the first, the Emperor held the city of Rome, and
governed it by a Lord Deputy. But some man perhaps will say, that the acts of
Syluester in which this donation is found, are approved by Gelasius, and a
Synod of Bishops, and that therefore we may not doubt of it. This
allegation is easily answered. For (as Concord. Cathol. li. 3. cap. 2.
Cusanus rightly notes) it is a very weak and slender confirmation of the
acts of Pope Syluester, that is found in Gelasius, and the Synod of Bishops
holden by him. For Gelasius says only, the author of these acts is not
known, and that yet they are read by some Catholics in the Church of Rome,
and many Churches by ancient use imitate the same. The writings also (says
he) concerning the invention of the holy cross of our Lord, and some other
writings concerning the invention of the head of Saint John Baptist, are truly
but novel and late revelations, and yet some Catholics read them. But when
writings of this kind shall come into the hands of Catholics, let that
sentence of blessed Paul the Apostle be before them 1 Thessalonians. 5: 21.
Prove all things, and hold that which is good. Touching Gratian in whom this
Charter of Donation is now found: Hist. part. 1. tit. 8. cap. 2.
Antoninus Archbishop of Florence notes, that in the old books it was not
found. And therefore it is rightly noted and distinguished from other things of
more credit by the inscription of Pale^, that is chafe, because there is no
good corn in it as Platina observes in the life of John the seventh, with
whom Cap. cum Enixa Did. 5. in annot.
Contius, the author of a Preface before the Decrees, agrees; affirming that
those things that are so noted, were at the first put into the margent only,
and so after crept into the text, and that many of them are not found in the
most ancient books of Decrees. And in his Annotations upon that Part. 1. decr.
Did. 46. cap. Constantinus.
part of the Decrees, where this feigned charter of Constantine is found,
insinuates, that this Chafe is not in all books of Decrees. Touching
Isidore, the Centur. 4. c. 7.
Magdeburgians testify, that in old copyes there is nothing found concerning
this supposed donation, and the like may be thought of Iuo; so that there is no
Author of any credit, that gives testimony to this donation: and they that do
speak of it, speak so differently and uncertainly, that from thence
Chronogr. ^ol. 2. c ner. 11.
Nauclere gathers that the whole is but a forged matter, and mere devise.
For in the Vbi supra.
Decrees there is mention of a donation of the city of Rome, of all Italy, and
other Provinces of the West, but in the fained Decret. 2. part causa. 12. qu.
1. cap. 15.
Epistle of Melchiades, and in the 6. Decretal. Bonifac: 8. lib. 1: tit: 6:
electione and elect. potest: cap: 17:
Decretall of Bonifacius the eigth there is no mention but only of the city
of Rome: so that though it be not to be doubted, but that Constantine gave
Princely gifts unto the Church, and other Emperors and Princes augmented the
same in such sort, that the Church long since had ample possessions, great
revenues, and a goodly patrimony in sundry parts of the West: yet I think we
may most safely affirm with Platina, Otho Frisingensis, Cusanus, Valla,
Nauclerus, Canus, and sundry other, that there never was any such donation as
is imagined, but that both Rome and all Italy, with the Western Provinces
remained still subject to the Empeperour, till the time of Pipine the father of
Charles the great, being governed either by the Emperors themselves, or by
such as they appointed when they lived away and made their abode in other
places, as in process of time they resided in a manner altogether at
Constantinople, made great by Constantine, and better liked of by his
successors then Rome it self. Whereupon we read of one Naucler: vol 2. Gen:
19: and 20.
Narses the Emperors Lieuetenant, a good man, and a good governor, who having
vanquished the Goths, ruled the Romans in great peace and quietness for a
long time; till moved with envy they made complaints of him to the Emperor
Justinius, and Sophia his wife, professing that it were better for them to be
under the Goths again, then to endure the proud and insolent command of this
Lieuetenant. Upon which complaints the Emperor displaced him, and sent one
Longinus to succeed him. Which thing so offended Narses, that he called the
Lumbards into Italy, whose coming made the Greek Emperors in time to lose
Rome, and all Italy. Longinus the successor of Narses, after he was
established in his place, (whereas before there were no Garrisons in the towns
of Italy, but every city was governed by her own Magistrates) put garrisons
into diverse towns, and brought in a new form of government into Rome, and
into all Italy, which more afflicted it, then all the calamities that it had
been subject unto for the space of 160. years before, though such and so
grievous, that Rome was sometime left desolate, to be inhabited by wild
beasts. This man brought in a new name of dignity, to express the honorable
place and office, of the chief commander in Italy under the Emperor, calling
it the Exarchate, and him that so ruled the Exarch. This Exarch remained at
Rauenna, and went not at all to Rome: he appointed no one President over a
whole Province or country, but left every City to be governed by her own
Magistrates, whom he called Dukes, and made none other difference between
Rome and other cities, but that whereas the Governors of other places were
called Dukes, the Governor of Rome first placed, was called a President, and
they that followed him Dukes, whence we read of the Roman Dukedom. Neither
had the Romans after the times of Narses and Basilius, either Consulls or
Senate lawfully called together, but all their affairs were managed by some
Grecian Duke, whom the Exarch sent unto them. This form of government
continued till the time of Leo the third, who breaking down Images in the East
parts of the world, and seeking to bring the Pope and Christians of the West to
do the like, procured himself so great dislike and ill will among them, (the
Pope persuading them to contemn his commandments in this behalf as
unlawful) that they of Rauenna and Venice began to rebel against him and
his Exarch, and would have chosen a new Emperor, but that the Pope (in hope
that he would amend) staide them by his persuasions from so doing. Idem.
gener. 25. Rhegino. lib. 1.
Yet this rebellion proceeded so far, that the Cities deposed the Magistrates
set over them by the Exarch, and appointed new of their own. The city of Rome
slew Marius Spatharius, that was her Duke, and his son Adrian, and chose
another. They of Rauenna were divided among themselves: whereupon the Exarch
was slain, and in the mean while the Lombards brought into Italy by Narses,
and now grown to be strong, possessed themselves of Bononia, and other places.
The Emperor hearing of these innouations in Italy, Naucler. gener. 25. (...)
sent another Exarch, who sought to appease the Lombards with gifts, and to
incite certain Romans against the Pope to take away his life. So that the
Pope was greatly distressed on every side, fearing both the Emperor and the
Lombards. But being encouraged by the people so to do, he excommunicated the
Exarch, whom the Emperor had sent, and pacified the Lombards, and afterward
wrought a reconciliation between the Exarch and himself: and persuaded him to
go to Rauenna, and there to make his abode as other his predecessors had done.
After this the Lombard besieges Rome again, and puts the Pope and the
inhabitants in great fear, yet did they not send to the Emperor for help, by
reason of the great dislikes that were between them, as also for that there
was little hope of any help to come from him, being scarce able to defend the
City of Constantinople from the Saracens, but to Charles Martell, Father of
Pipine, who by entreaty persuaded the Lombard to remove his siege and go away.
After this again Aistulphus King of the Lombards besieged Rauenna, and took
it, and put the Romans into as great a fear, as ever they had been in
before. Whereupon the Pope writes to the Emperor, signifying in what state
Rome and all Italy was, and that if he did not presently send aid, they must
fall into the hands of Aistulphus. Upon these letters of the Pope, the Emperor
sends to Aistulphus to persuade him to desist from inuading his countries and
territories, but effects nothing. And therefore the Pope consulteth with the
Romans what was fit to be done. Who resolve to send to the Emperor, and to
let him know, that if he would not presently come in person with the forces of
the Empire to relieve Italy, they must be forced to seek defense and relief
elsewhere. According to this resolution, messengers were presently sent to
Constantinople, but not returning in time, the Romans were forced to seek to
Pipine for help: who came in person, and restored the Bishop of Rome to his
place from whence he was fled, forced Aistulphus to swear and give pledges to
restore all things to him that he had taken away: but he was no sooner gone
out of the country, but he did more mischief then ever, whereof Pipine
understanding, gathered a new army and returned into Italy, with a full
resolution to subdue this Tyrant, and to settle the peace of the Church of
Rome. The Emperor hearing that the Romans had sought help of Pipine, sends
to him great gifts and presents, and beseeches him to restore Rauenna and the
Exarchate to the Empire, whereunto of right it pertayned, and not to give them
to the Romans or Pope. Whereunto Pipine answered; That he was now the second
time come into Italy, not for gain, but for his souls health, and to repress
the insolences of the Lombards, that they might not hurt the Church, and that
therefore he meant to take Rauenna and the Exarchate, and other parts of Italy
out of the Lombards hand, and to give them to the Pope and Roman Church* and
so he did. Now the Exarchate was divided into two regions, the one named
Pentapolis, containing five cities, to wit, Rauenna, Caesena, Classis, Forum
Liuii, and Forum Popilii: the other Aemilia wherein were Bononia, Rhegium,
Parma, Placentia, and whatsoever land there is from the bounds of those of
Placentia and Ticine to Adria, and from Adria to, Ariminium. But the state of
things was not so settled by Pipine, but that Desiderius, who succeeded
Aistulphus in the kingdom of the Lombards, began a fresh to wrong the Church
of Rome again, and therefore in the time of Adrian the Pope, Charles the
Great, was entreated to come into Italy; which thing he willingly yielded to
perform, and came to relieve them whom his father before had set free, and
rested not till he had subdued the Lombards, and restored to the Church of
Rome all that which Pipine had given, confirming his gift with more ample
privileges then before, and therefore to show their thankfulness to him, the
Romans did him all the honor that possibly they could deuile, and a Did. 63.
cap. Adrianus.
Synod was holden in Rome called by Adrian, consisting of an hundred fifty and
three Bishops, religious men and Abbots, and Adrian the Pope and the Bishops
assembled in Council, with unanimous consent, yielded to Charles right and
power to choose the Pope, and to order the Apostolic See, they granted unto
him also the dignity of being a Patrician, that is, a noble man of Rome, and
besides all this decreed, that Archbishops and bishops in all provinces,
should receive inuestiture from him: and that no man should be consecrated a
Bishop, unless he were first approved and commended by the King, and invested
by him: subjecting all such as should dare to go against this decree, to
excommunication and confiscation of goods, if they should not speedily repent,
and show themselves sorry for so doing. This privilege the French Kings enjoy
in a sort unto this day, especially in certain Provinces of France. After this
the second time, Charles the Great was occasioned to come to Rome, by reason of
some violences offered to Leo Bishop thereof, at what time the Bishop of Rome
considering, that the Emperors of Constantinople did hardly hold the title of
Emperors, that they were able to yield little relief in time of need, and
that they did in a sort forsake the Western part of the Empire, and besides
all this, differed in some matters of religion: and on the other side,
considering that Charles was a most mighty Prince, and one that deserved well
of the Church, as Pipine and Martell had done before him, with the consent of
the people of Rome, taking from him the title of a Patrician proclaims him
Emperor.

Thus we see Pipine gave certain countries to the Pope and Church, and Charles
confirmed the same gift. But they did not so give them, but that they retained
(as De regno Italiae. lib. 4.
Sigonius notes,) Ius, principatum, and ditionem, that is, the right
sovereignty and royalty to themselves, and their successors, so that the
Romans were to do the Emperor service, and pay him tributes, they were by an
oath of fealty to oblige themselves unto him, and As Lotharius did. Naucler.
vol 2. generat. 28.
he by his princely power might appoint Magistrates to judge and rule the
people, yet such was the encroching of the Roman Bishops, that they could not
endure long to be in this subjection, but sought wholly to cast off the yoke of
the Emperors. Whereupon Frederick Barbarossa (as Gener. 39.
Nauclerus reports out of De gestis Frederici. lib. 2. c. 5.
Frisingensis) some differences growing between him and the Pope, and Cities
of Italy, inquired of the Princes and Lawyers, in what sort and how far forth
the Cities of Italy were subject to the Empire: and they with one consent did
al adiudge unto him all royalties, as coins, tolles, shippings, confirmation
of dignities, of Judges and Consuls, tributes and judgments anciently
established, besides such other things as he might require when the Empire
should stand in need. But the Pope alleged at the same time, that the
Emperor might send to Ambassadors to Rome, without his conniuence, and that
they of his Eschequer might make no collection of money, in the Castles,
Villages or towns, subject to the Pope, but only at that time when first he
puts on the Imperial Crown in Rome. And Otho Frisingensis adds, Radeuici
Frising. appen. ad Othon em de r^b. gestis Frederici lib. 2. cap. 30.
that these articles were proposed to the Emperor by the Popes Legates, to
wit, that no messengers or Ambassadors should be sent to the city without the
Popes priuity, seeing all the Magistrates of that town are the officers of
Saint Peter, with all royalties: that no money should be collected out of the
Popes Lordships, but only at the time of the Emperors Coronation; that the
Bishops of Italy should only take the oath of fealty, and do no homage to the
Emperor: and lastly that the Emperors Ambassadors should not challenge any
entertainment in Bishops Palaces. To these Articles Ibid.
the Emperor answered in this sort. I truly desire not the homage of the
Bishops of Italy, if they please to renounce those royalties that do belong
unto us: who, if they willingly hear from the Pope, What have thou to do with
the King? they must be content to hear from the Emperor also, What have thou
to do with mundane possessions? That our Ambassadors are not to abe received
and entertained, I will easily grant, if any Bishop may be found, whose
Palace stands upon his own ground, and not upon ours. But whereas the Pope
pretends that the Emperor may send no Ambassadors to Rome without his
priuity, that all Magistrates there are the officers of Saint Peter, this
matter, I confess, is of moment and consequence, and will require a more grave
and mature deliberation. For seeing by the providence and ordinance of God, I
am the Emperor of Rome, and so called. I shall but only carry a show of a
Sovereign Lord, and have the empty title without the thing, if the Sovereignty
and command of the City of Rome be taken from me. Thus did the good Emperor
seek to maintain the right of the Empire, yet out of a good and Christian
disposition, was willing to refer all differences between the Pope and him,
to the trial of law, or of arbitrament. But the Pope would not consent to any
such thing. Wherein he showed more policy then good disposition, as knowing
that he must needs fall in this suite, if the matter came to trial. For it
is most evident, that Supra.
Lotharius appointed Magistrates even in Rome it self, to judge the people;
that the Nobles of Rome took the oath of fealty to the Emperor Ludouicus
father to Lotharius. This oath was taken in the time of Frederick the first,
in Verona; The form of the oath was this: Radeuici append. ad Othonem. lib. 1.
c. 19.
I do swear that from this time forward, I will be faithful and true to my
Lord Frederick Emperor of Romans against all men, etc. And that I will never
go about to take from him his royalties etc. These were the differences
between Frederick Barbarossa and the Pope, and the opposition grew so great
and strong, that diverse of the Cardinals conspired against the Emperor, and
gave large sums of money to Adrian the Pope to excommunicate him. And this
conspiracy was confirmed with oaths, that none should draw back or seek the
Emperors favor without the rest. And that if the Pope should dye, they should
choose none, but one of the conspiring Cardinals to succeed him, But as David
said, Psalm. 109. 28.
They shall curse, but thou shall bless: so GOD that spoke by the mouth of
David, turned all that these conspiratours did to a contrary effect. For it
came to pass that some few days after the Pope had denounced r Naucler. vol.
2. gener. 39.
excommunication against the Emperor at Anagnia, going forth to refresh
himself with some few accompanying him; he drank of the water of a certain
well, and presently a Fly entered into his mouth and stuck so fast in his
throat, that by no skill of Physicians it could be drawn out, till he had
breathed out his last breath. Yet were not the conspirators discouraged by this
accident, but after his death, the greater part of Cardinals chose Rowland the
Chancellor a professed enemy to the Empire, and one of the conspiratours in
contempt of Frederick and the Germane Nation, (though there were some other
that chose Cardinal Octauian and named him Victor.) This Rowland naming
himself Alexander the third, after he came to the Popedowe, had many dangerous
conflicts with the Emperor, and was oftentimes put to the worse by him, in so
much that in the end he was forced to disguise himself, and in the habit of a
Cook, to fly to Venice, where he lived for a certain space in base
condition: till in the end being known, he was honorably entertained, and
kindly entreated by the Venetians: which when Frederick understood of, he was
greatly displeased with them for entertaining his enemy, and sent his Son
with a great Navy and strong army, by force and violence to fetch him thence.
But such was the ill hap of the young Prince, that being incountred by the
Venetians, he was by them taken prisoner: neither could his deliverance by any
means be procured, unless Frederick would come in Person to Venice, and
seek to be reconciled to the Pope: This hard condition the Emperor yielded to
for his Sons sake; went to Venice in person, and was reconciled to the Pope
upon this condition: that he should restore to the Pope the city of Rome,
and whatsoever belonged to the royalty of it, and that he should do such
penance as he should inioyne him: which being yielded unto, he came to the
door of Saint Marks Church, and all the people looking on, the Pope
commanded him to prostrate himself on the ground, and to ask forgiveness,
and then treading on his neck said: It is written: Psalm. 91. 13
thou shall go upon the Aspe and Basiliske, and thou shall tread upon the
Lion and the Dragon: and when Frederick said unto him, Non tibi sed Petro
cuius successor es, pareo: that is, I do not thus submit my self to thee but
to Peter: the Pope answered, and mihi and Petro: that is, thou shall do it
both unto me and unto Peter. This story so lively describing the insolency
and pride of the Pope, which hitherto has gone for current, is now by certain
Romanists called in question, (so little do they regard their own Historians,
and so freely may they cast aside whatsoever stands in their way.) Howsoever,
we see how mainely the Popes did strive after they had gotten a kind of civil
dominion under the Emperors, to cast off their yoke wholly, and not content
therewith, sought to be Lords also over the Emperors, and to make them
acknowledge that they hold their Empire from them. How and upon what occasion
Leo the third, with the consent of the people of Rome, proclaimed and anointed
Charles the Great, King of France by inheritance, and of Italy by conquest, and
Emperor of Rome, I have showed before. Yet (as Sabel. Ennead. 8. l. 8
Sabellicus notes) the opinions of men in the world were greatly altered and
changed after this new inauguration, for whereas before the Empire was thought
to be from Heaven, and the gift of God: Now many began to Which Ockam dial. l.
(...) tract. 2. part. 3. proves to be false and heretical ^y many reasons.
think it to be the gift of the Pope. Whereupon we read that Adrian the
fourth upon the report of some villainies offered to the Bishop of Landa in the
parts of Germany, as he returned from Rome, and not so pursued, sought out and
revenged, as was expected, by Frederick Barbarossa then Emperor, writes unto
him, and maruailing at his negligence in revenging wrongs offered to men of the
Church, puts him in mind what benefits x Radeuicus Frising in Append. ad
Othon. l. 1. c. 9.
he had received from him and the Church of Rome, as namely the fullness of
Imperial dignity and honor, and the crown appertaining thereunto, and
professes that he would have been willing to have conferred greater
benefits then these upon him, knowing right well how much good he might do
unto the Church. Ibid. c. 10.
This Letter being brought to the Emperor by two Cardinals, Bernard and
Rowland, offended the Emperor and Princes exceedingly, especially in that it
was said in the Letter, that the fullness of dignity and honor was co^ferred
upon the Emperor by the Pope, and that he had received the Imperial crown
of his hand; and that it would not grieve him if he had received greater
benefits of his hand. They which heard this Letter read, were induced to make
a strict construction of the words, and to think the Pope uttered them in the
sense which they conceived, because they knew well that certain Romanists had
not feared to affirm, that the Emperors had hitherto possessed the Empire of
Rome, and the Kingdom of Italy by the Popes gift, and that they had not only
uttered such words, but that by writing they had affirmed the same, and by
painting lively represented it, that so it might be transmitted and sent over
to posterities. For in the Palace of Lateran they had painted the manner of
Lotharius the Emperor his receiving the Crown of the Pope, and written over
it these words. Rex venit ante fores, iurans prius urbis honores, post homo fit
papae sumit quo dante coronam. That is, the King does come before the gate,
first swearing to the cities state: the Popes man then does he become, and of
his gift does take the Crown. This painting and superscription being reported
to the Emperor the year before, when he was near the city, by certain
faithful and trusty subjects of his, greatly displeased him. But the Pope
perceiving his dislike, promised that both the writing and the painting should
be taken away, that it might give no occasion of contention and discord. These
Romish practices making the Emperor and his Nobles to understand the words of
the Popes Letter in the worst sense, caused the message of these Cardinals to
be very offensive, and a general murmuring against them was heard among the
Princes: which growing more loud, and being heard and discerned by the
Legates, one of them adventured in the quarrel of his Master to demand of
whom the Emperor has his Empire, if he have it not of the Lord Pope? Which
speech of the Cardinal so enraged the Princes, that one of them, (to wit, Otto
the County Palatine of Boiaria) had with his sword run him through, had not
Frederick the Emperor interposed his authority, and pacified the present rage.
The Emperor seeing in what terms things stood, took the best course he could
for the security of the Legates, and commanded that they should presently be
had to their lodgings, and that the next morning they should be gone, and
return directly to him, that sent them, and not to wander up and down in the
Territories of Bishops and Abbots; and as he thus happily dispatched them away
in safety, so after they were gonne (providently by letters) he caused it to be
made known throughout the whole Empire, what had passed between him and the
Pope. The Tenor of his letters was this. Whereas the divine power, from which
all power proceeds both in heaven and earth, has committed to us, his
anointed, the rule of the Kingdom and Empire; and ordained that by Imperial
arms we should preserve the peace of the Churches, we are forced not without
great grief of heart to complain unto you, that from the head of the holy
Church (in which Christ imprinted the Character of his peace and love) the
causes of dissension, the seminary of evils, and the poison of a most
pestiferous disease do seem to flow: by means whereof if God turn not away
this evil, there is danger, least the unity betwixt the Priesthood and
kingdom be broken, and a schism follow. For of late, as we were in the Court
of Bisuntium, consulting about things concerning the honor of the Empire and
good of the Churches, there came unto us certain Legates from the Pope who
professed to bring such a message as tended greatly to the increase of the
honor of the Empire. But when we had the first day honorably entertained them
(as the manner is) and the second day sat with our Princes to hear their
message; They (as it were) puffed up by reason of the Mammo^ of iniquity, out
of the height of their pride, out of the haughtiness of their arrogant minds,
and out of the execrable elation of their swelling hearts, presented unto us an
Embassage contained in letters written by the Pope, the tenor whereof was: That
we should always have before the eyes of our mind in what sort the Lord Pope
had conferred upon us, the Ensign of the Imperial crown, and that yet
notwithstanding it would no way repent him, if he had done us greater favors,
and we had received more benefits of him. These things not only much
affected, but so moved the Princes, and enraged them in such sort, that if we
had not stayed them by our Princely authority, the two wicked Priests, (the
Legates) had never returned alive. Wherefore seeing they had many schedules
sealed to be written in at their pleasure, by which (as formerly they were wont
to do) they might scatter the poison of their iniquity throughout all the
Churches of the Germane kingdom; make bare and naked the holy Altars, and
carry away with them the vessels of the house of God as a prey; that they might
proceed no farther in mischief, we commanded them without wandering or going
aside to return the same way they came. For whereas we have our kingdom by
the election of the Princes from God only, who in the passion of his son
subjected the world to 2 sword^ and the Apostle Peter informed the world with
the same doctrine, saying, Fear God x 1. Pet. 2. 17.
and honor the King. We are well assured, that whosoever shall say, that we
receive our Imperial crown as a benefit from the Pope, he is contrary to the
institution of God, the doctrine of blessed Peter, and is a liar: and therefore
our hope is, that you will not suffer the honor of the Empire (which has
continued from the Constitution of the City, and the Institution of Christian
Religion, inviolable till our times) to be diminished by such unheard of
novelties and presumptuous pride. But howsoever know ye, that we will rather
run into peril of death it self, then suffer such a shameful confusion to
fall out in our times. Radeuic. vbi* supra. cap. 15.
After the return of the Cardinals, and their complaints made, the Pope wrote
letters to the Archbishops and Bishops of Germany, telling them with what
indignity the Emperor dismissed his Legates, and how he forbad any to come to
Rome out of his kingdom: and prayed them to advise him better, and to let him
know, that the Church (which is builded upon a most firm and sure rock) shall
continue for ever, howsoever it may be shaken with winds and tempests. Cap.
16.
The Bishops of Germany having received these letters from the Pope, writ
back unto him, that howsoever the Church cannot be moved, yet they were
greatly shaken by reason of these differences between him and the Emperor:
and tell him that the words of his letter were such as that neither the Emperor
and Princes could endure them, nor they knew how to defend them, as being
strange and unheard of before these times. Notwithstanding they let him know,
that after the receipt of his letters, they communed with the Emperor about
these affairs, and received from him such an answer as beseemed a Catholic
Prince, to wit, that there are two things whereby his Empire must be swayed;
the Laws of Emperors, and the use and custom of his ancestors. These limits
he is resolved not to pass, and whatsoever will not stand with these, he will
utterly refuse and reject: he is willing to give all due reverence unto his
ghostly father, but that he ascribes the crown of his Empire to the divine
favor only, the first voice in the election to the Archbishop of Mentz, and
the rest to the other Princes in order: that he acknowledges to have received
the unction of a King from the Archbishop of Coleyn, and the supreme unction,
which is that of an Emperor, from the Pope: and that whatsoever is besides
these, is more then enough, and proceeds from that which is evil: that he
had not sent away the Cardinals in contempt, but forbad them to proceed any
further with such writings as they had, tending to the dishonor and scandal
of the Empire: and that he had not restrained the going of men into Italy upon
necessary occasions, to be allowed by their Bishops, nor simply inhibited the
coming of men from thence, but that his meaning was to meet certain abuses,
whereby the Churches of his Kingdom had been grieved, impouerished, and
oppressed: all discipline of men living retired and in cloisters utterly
overthrown. Lastly, that God having exalted his Church, by means of the
Empire, in the head city of the world, it should not be by any means, that
the Church in the head city of the world should overthrow the state of the
Empire, that the matter began with painting, that it proceeded from painting to
writing, that the writing now begins to be urged as good authority, but that he
will not suffer it, nor endure it so to be, being resolved first to loose his
crown before he give any consent to the abasing of the crown of the Empire
in such sort: and therefore requires the paintings to be raced out, and the
writings to be recalled, that such monuments of enmity between the Kingdom and
the Priesthood may not remain: and hereupon they beseech the Pope by new
letters to mollify that which was too hard, and to sweeten that which was too
sour in the former. Cap. 17.
This so wise, just, and reasonable an answer of the German Bishops,
prevailed so far with the Pope, that he sent other Legates of a milder spirit
and better temper to the Emperor, with new letters wherein he sought to
qualify whatsoever was offensive in the former: Cap. 22.
for touching that he wrote of the benefit the Emperor had received of him
(which so highly displeased the Emperor, supposing that he meant that he had
received the Imperial crown, as a mere favor or good turn from him) he
answered that howsoever the word Benefit be taken in another sense sometimes,
yet he used it in that signification which it has by Original institution
and first imposition. So that the word Benefit being compounded of two simple
words, been and factum, signifies a good fact, or a thing well done, and in
this sense his setting of the crown upon the Emperors head might be called a
benefit, not as being a mere favor or good turn, but for that it was well
and honorably done of him to set the Ensign of Imperial majesty and power
upon the head of him, to whom such power pertained, and so were things at that
time pacified by the good indeauor of the Cardinals, and by this mild letter of
the Pope. But afterward they brake out again: Whereupon the Pope wrote in
this sort to the Emperor. Appendix vetusti scriptoris ad Radewinum in fine
hist. O* thonis Frisingensis. Naucler. vol. 2. gener. 39
Adrian the Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to Frederick the Roman
Emperor, greeting and Apostolical blessing. The divine law, as it promises
long life to them that honor their parents, so does it pronounce the sentence
of death against them that curse father or mother. For we are taught by the
voice of truth, that whosoever exalts himself shall be brought low.
Wherefore son beloved in the Lord, we do not a little marvel, that you
seem not to give so much reverence to blessed Peter, and to the holy Church of
Rome as you ought to do. For in your letters written to us, you put your name
before ours; Wherein you incur the note of insolency, that I say not
arroga^cy; What shall I say of the fealty you promised and swear to blessed
Peter? how do you observe it, when you require of them who are Gods, and the
sons of the most High, to wit Bishops, the doing of homage unto you, and
exact fealty of them, enclosing their sacred hands in your hands, and
manifestly opposing your self against us, shut not only the doors of the
Churches, but the gates of the Cities of your kingdom also, against our
Cardinals sent as Legates unto you from our own side? Repent, repent therefore
we advise thee, of us thou receiuedst thy consecration, and therefore take
heed, lest affecting things denied unto thee, thou lose that which is yielded
to thee. To this letter of the Pope, the worthy Emperor answered in this sort.
Ibidem.
Frederick by the grace of God, Emperor of Romans, to Adrian Bishop of the
Catholic Church, wishing unto him a firm adhering and cleaving to all those
things which Jesus began to do and speak. The law of Justice gives to every
one that which is his own. Neither do we offend in this behalf; for we
derogate nothing from our parents, but give unto them in this our Imperial
state all due honor, to wit, to those our Noble progenitors, from whom we
received the dignity of our kingdom, and our Crown, and not from the Pope.
Had Sylvester Bishop of Rome any thing pertaining to Royal state and dignity
in the time of Constantine? was not liberty restored to the Church, and peace
by his means? And has not your Popedom received all such royal dignities as
it now enjoys from Princes? And why then is it so much disliked, that when
we write unto the Bishop of Rome, by ancient right, and after the old manner,
we put our name before his, and according unto the rule of Justice, permit him
writing unto us to do the like? Turn over the Histories and Monuments of
Antiquity, and if you have not yet observed it, you shall there find that
which we avouch: and why should we not require homage and the performance of
other duties due from subjects to Princes, of them who are Gods by adoption,
and yet think it no disparagement to hold things pertaining to our Royal
state? especially, seeing he who was author and beginner both of your dignity
and ours, who never received any thing of any mortal King, but gave all good
things unto all, paid tribute unto Caesar for himself and Peter, and gave you
an example to do the like; either therefore let them put from them the things
they hold of us, or if they think it behoouefull to retain and keep them
still, let them yield unto GOD the things that are GODS, and to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's. The doors of our Churches, and the gates of our
Cities are shut against your Cardinals, because we find them not to be
Preachers, but men desirous of a prey, not Confirmers of peace, but polling
companions to get money, not such as come to repair the breaches of the world,
but greedily and insatiably to gather gold. But whenever we shall see them
such as the Church requires them to be, men bringing peace, enlightening their
Country, assisting the cause of those of mean degree in equity and right; they
shall want nothing that is necessary for them. To conclude; When you thus
contend about things little pertaining to Religion, and strive with secular
persons about titles of honor, you seem to have forgotten that humility
which is the keeper of all virtues, and that meekness that should be in you.
Let your Father-hood therefore take heed, lest while you move questions about
things unworthy to be stood upon, you scandalize them who with attentive ear
listen to the words of your mouth, and wait for your speeches as for the
latter rain. We are forced thus to write unto you, because we see the
detestable Beast of pride has crept up even to the seat of Peter. Provide
always well for the peace of the Church, and fare you always well. Thus we
see how the popes not contenting themselves with the fullness of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, though they had no just title unto it, proceeded
yet further; and partly by the favor of Christian princes, and partly by fraud
and violence, got to be great princes in the world, and stayed not till they
made challe^ge to be over the mightiest Emperors, and to dispose of their
crowns and dignities. So showing themselves to have the perfect mark and
character of him of whom the Apostle speaks; 2 Thessalonians. 2* 4*
Who sits in the temple of God as God, and is lifted up above all that is
called God. Yet could they not so prevail in these their hellish practices,
nor so carry away the truth of GOD, and the liberty of his Church into
captivity, but that there were ever found both Christian Emperors, and learned
Divines to resist them in their unjust claims.

CHAP. 48.
Of general Councels, and of the end, use, and necessity of them.

Having examined what may be said for proof of the Universality of the Bishop
of Romes power and jurisdiction, first we find that the Son of GOD gave him
no power in the commonwealth, but a Father-hood only in the Church. Secondly,
that in the Church, he neither gave him an illimited power of commanding, nor
infallible judgment in discerning, but that the greatest thing that either he
can challenge or we yield unto him, is to be the prime Bishop in order and
honor; the first and not of himself alone, or out of the fullness of his own
power, but with the joint concurrence of others equal in commission with him,
to manage the great affairs of Almighty God, and to govern the Christian
Church: so that the fullness of Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction is in
the companies, assemblies, and Synodes of Bishops and Pastors, and not in any
one man alone. I showed Chap. 27.
before, that in the churches founded and established by the Apostles,
containing whole Cities and places adjoining, though there were many ministers
of the word and sacraments, yet one was so the Pastor of each of these
Churches, that the rest were but his assistants, and might do nothing without
him: and that therefore there was an inequality established even from the
beginning, not of order only, but of degree also, between such as are
Pastors of Churches, and are named Bishops, and such as are but their
assistants named by the common name of Presbyters, yet is the power of him that
excels the rest in degree in each Church See D. Bilson of the perpetual
government of the Church cap. 14. page 307.
fatherly not Princely: for things were so ordered in the beginning, that as
the Presbyters could do nothing without the Bishop, so the Bishop in matters
of moment might do nothing without his Presbyters: and thereupon the Council
of Carthage decrees, Council. Carthag. 4. Canone. 23.
that the Bishop shall not presume to hear and sententiate any man's cause
without the presence of his Clergy. And though it be said that the Bishop
alone may hear and determine the causes of such Clergy men as are below the
degree of Presbyters and Deacons; yet that alone excludes not his Clergy; but
the concurrence of other Bishops, which in the causes of Presbyters and Deacons
is necessarily required. For without the presence and concurrence of his
Clergy, the Bishop may proceed to no sentence at all. If any difference grew
between the Bishop and his Clergy, or if [consenting] any one found himself
grieved with their proceedings, there was a provincial Synod holdentwise
every year, in which the acts of Episcopal Synodes might be re-examined.
These provincial Synodes were subordinate to National and Patriarchicall
Synodes, wherein the Primate of a Nation or Kingdom, or one of the Patriarchs
sat, as President. And in these National or Patriarchicall Synodes the acts of
provincial Synodes might be re-examined and reuersed. Of all which I have
spoken before, in due place and upon fit occasion, and have Chap. 30.
showed at large of whom these Synodes do consist. So that it is evident, that
the power of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction rests not in Bishops alone, but
in Presbyters also, being admitted to Provincial and National Synodes, and
having decisiue voices in them as well as Bishops, nor in any one
Metropolitan, Primate or Patriarch, within their several precincts and
divisions, but in these and their fellow Bishops jointly, and that much less
there is any one in whom the fullness of all Ecclesiastical power, and the
right to command the whole Church does rest. So that this fullness of power, is
found only in the general assembly of Pastors, called a general Council.
Wherefore now it remains that we speak of General Councels. Wherein, first
we are to consider the vtility and necessity of such Synodall assemblies and
meetings. Secondly, of whom they must consist. Thirdly, what assurance they
have of divine assistance and direction: and, Fourthly, who must call them.

Toucing the first, the causes why general Councels are called, are three. The
first is, the suppressing of new heresies, formerly not condemned. The second,
a general and uniform reformation of abuses crept into the Church. The third,
the taking away of Schisms growing in Patriarchicall Churches, about the
election of their Pastors, and the rejecting of intruders, violently and
disorderly possessing themselves of those Patriarchicall Thrones. And so we
find, that the Council of Nice was called by Constantine, for the suppressing
of the damnable heresy of the Arrians: the eight general Council, by
Basilius, for the ending of the difference that was grown in the Church of
Constantinople about Ignatius and Photius, contending for the Episcopal
chair: and that all General Councels, intended and sought the reformation of
abuses, there being scarce any one wherein Canons were not made, for the
reformation of disorders; in so much that the Fathers of the sixth General
Council, having only condemned the Heresy of the Monothelites, and made no
Canons, met afterward again many of them, and made those Canons that are now
extant, and are the chief direction of the Greek Church unto this day. These
being the causes for which Councels are called, it is evident that the holding
of them is not absolutely and simply necessary, but in a sort only. For
Heresies may be suppressed by the concurrence of Provincial Synodes, holden
in the several parts of the world; as they were in the first 300. years, when
there were no General Counsels: But one part of the Christian Church seeking
the help of another, in common dangers, and one part readily concurring with
another (as for the extinguishing of a dangerous fire threatening all, or the
repressing and repelling of a common enemy) by mutual intelligence passing
from one to another; they abandoned Heresies newly springing up, and preserved
the unity of the common faith. Neither was this course holden only in the time
of persecution, during the first 300. years, but afterward also, in the time
of the Churches peace, we find the same course to have been followed, in the
suppressing of the Pelagians; and therefore Aug. lib. 4. contra duos Epist.
Pelagian. cap. 12.
Austine affirms, that there were but some few heresies of that nature, that
a General Council of all the Bishops of the East and West, was necessarily to
be called for the suppressing of them. And indeed we find, that, if some
five or six heresies have been condemned by the censure of General
Counsels, an 100. have been suppressed and extinguished by other means. And
of those, for the condemning whereof General Counsels were holden, some were
not extinguished a long time after. For that of the Arrians grew stronger
after, then ever it was before, and those of Nestorius and Eutyches, continued
some hundreds of years after the ending of those Councels, in which they
received the sentence of condemnation. How is it then that In praefat.
Conciliorum.
Isidore says, the Church before Constantines time was divided and rent into
diverse Factions and Sects, because there was no General Council? as if there
were no other means to preserve Unity, but General Councels, and that
wheresoever they may be had, Peace were presently established. For the clearing
hereof we say, that such new opinions, as growing up in those times, found a
concurring dislike in the several Churches, seeking one to another, were then
suppressed, when yet there could be no General Councels, as the heresies of
the Marcionites, Valentinians and the like. But they, wherein there grew
difference among the chief Pastors and Bishops of the Churches, could not
be determined in those times, as the errors of the Millenaries, of those that
kept Easter after the Jewish observation, and of those that held the necessity
of re-baptizing of such as were baptized by heretics: in which point many
worthy pastors and Bishops of the Church did err, in the first ages of the
Church, neither could their error be extinguished, as Austine notes: nor the
truth so cleared, as that all dissenters should incur the note of heresy,
till the decree of a Council passed about it. Aug. lib. 7. de Baptismo. contra
Donatist. cap. 7.
Quaestionis huius obscuritas; (says Austine) Prioribus Ecclesiae temporibus
ante schisma Donati, magnos viros and magna charitate praeditos, Patres and
Episcopos, ita inter se compulit, salua pace, disceptare and fluctuare, vt diu
Conciliorum in suis quibusque regionibus diuersa statuta nutauerint, donec
Plenario totius orbis Concilio, quod saluberrime sentiebatur, etiam remotis
dubitationibus formaretur* that is, The obscurity of this question, in former
ages of the Church before the schism of Donatus, did cause great men, and
Fathers, and Bishops, endued with great charity, so to strive among themselves,
and to waver as doubtful and uncertain, without breaking the bond of Peace,
that for a long time the Decrees of Councels in several Regions, were diverse
and different, without any settled certainty, till that which was most
wholesomely conceived, was fully formed, settled, and established by a plenary
Council of the Bishops of the whole world, and no place left for doubting and
uncertainty any longer. Thus we see that some heresies may easily be
suppressed without troubling all the Bishops of the world to meet in a General
Council, and that some others cannot easily be suppressed without General
Councels: and as heresies may be suppressed by the mutual concurrence of
several churches; so by the like correspondence, the severity of discipline may
be vpholde^ uniformly, and schisms prevented. When Cornelius was elected and
ordained Bishop of Rome, at the first, (...) Cypr. cp. 45. and 55.
because there was some oppositio^, Cyprian and others were fearful to write
unto him as to the Bishop of Rome, but afterwardbeing fully informed, touching
the lawfulness of his election and ordinatio^, they rejected his Competitours,
and communicated with him only: and the like we shall find to have bin
practiced generally by all Bishops, carefully seeking to be certified out of
other Provinces and parts of the Church, by such Bishops as were known to be
Catholics, who came lawfully into places of Ministry, and being so come, held
the unity of Faith and Charity, that so they might hold Communion with them,
and reject those that entered otherwise. Whereupon Vbi supra.
Cyprian tells Cornelius Bishop of Rome, to who^ in Africa he might write as
to Catholic Bishops, and from who^ he might receive letters, as from
Catholics. Notwithstanding General Councels are the best means for
preserving of unity of doctrine, severity of discipline, and preventing of
schisms when they may be had: and though they be not absolutely necessary to
the being of the Church, yet are they most behoouefull for the best, readiest,
and most gracious governing of the same: and how-soeuer there may be a kind of
exercise of the supreme jurisdictio^ that is in the Church by the concurrence
of particular Synodes, and the correspondence of several Pastors, upon mutual
intelligence of the sense, judgment, and resolution of every of them; yet the
highest and most excellent exercise of the supreme Ecclesiastical
jurisdictio^, is in General Councels. Here the Papists are wont to argue,
that the Protestants having no General Councels, have not the exercise of the
supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdictio^: and consequently that they are not that
Church, out of which no salvation is found: but this is a very silly trifling
and playing with their own shadows; neither is it any thing else buta mere
abusing of themselves and others, thus idly and fondly to jangle. For first
the Protestants being but a part of the Christian Church, never challenged to
themselves the authority that belongs to the whole, as the Papists do, who
excluding all the Christians of Graecia, Armenia, Russia, and Aethiopia, out of
the fellowship and communion of Saints, and (as much as in them lies) casting
them into hell; suppose a General meeting of those of their own faction, to
be a General Council. And secondly, if the Protestants did think themselves
to be the whole Church; yet their argument were of no force, seeing the whole
Church may be without the benefit of General Councels, much longer then the
Protestants have been, since the divisio^ between them and the Papists: for
the Christians of the primitive church had no general council for the space of
300 years after Christ. But to return to the point from which we are a little
digressed (occasioned so to do by this frivolous objectio^ of the Papists)
touching the good and profitable use of General councels, there is no
difference between us and our Adversaries, but it is agreed on both sides, that
though they be not absolutely necessary, yet they are very behoofefull, and
much to be desired in diverse cases: neither ever was there any man of
judgment that thought otherwise. For, that which Ep. ad Procopium 102.
Nazianzen has, that he never saw good end of any council, is not to be
understood as spoken generally and absolutely, but respectively to the
turbulent times wherein he lived, and the Arrian faction so prevailed, that
many Synodes were holden for the overthrow of the Nicene faith, without all
respect to the good of the Church.

CHAP. 49.
Of the persons that may be present in General Councels: and who they are of
whom general Councels do consist.

Having spoken of the necessity, profit and use of General Councels, it
remains that we proceed to see, who they are, that may be present in such
Councels, and of whom they do consist. The persons that may be present, are of
diverse sorts. For, some are there with authority to teach, define, prescribe
and to direct: others are there to hear, set forward and consent unto, that
which is there to be done. In the former sort, none but only Ministers of the
word, and sacraments are present in Councels, and they only have deciding and
defining voices; but in the latter sort, * Laymen also may be present:
whereupon we shall find, that Bishops and Presbyters subscribe in this sort:
Ego N. definiens, subscrips^, that is, I, as having power to define and decree,
have subscribed. But the Emperor or any other In the Council of Eliberis: in
the first Council of Carthage about rebaptization, and in the third Council
of Rome under Faelix the third many of the people were present.
Lay-person, Ego N. consentiens, subscripsi: that is, I, as one giving consent
to that which is agreed on by the spiritual Pastors, have subscribed. That the
Emperor and other Laymen of place and sort may be present in General
Councels, no man makes doubt. For though Pope Did. 96. cap. Vbinam.
Nicholas seem to deny, that the Emperors may be present in other Councels,
where matters of faith are not handled; yet he confesses, they may be present
in general Conncels where the faith, which is common to all, and pertains not
to Clergymen alone, but to Laymen and all Christians generally, is treated
of, it being a rule in nature and reason, Occam. Dialog. 2. part. lib. 6. part.
1. c. 85.
Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus tractari debere: that is, that that which
concerns all, may be handled and meddled with by all, so far forth as
conveniently it may, and as there is no manifest reason, in respect of the
disturbance and hinderance of the deliberation, to repel them from such
intermedling: for, in such cases there may be a repelling of men having
interest in such businesses and affairs: and therefore In Epist. ad Strateg.
Bithiniae ante Council. Chalcedon.
Pulcheria the Empress, Commanded the Captain of Bythinia, with violence to
drive out of the Council of Chalcedon, such Monks, Clerks, and Laymen, as
being of no use, did but pester the Council, and to leave none there but such
as the Bishops brought with them.

But our Bellar. l. 1. de concilijs c. 15.
adversaries say, the Protestants affirm that Laymen ought not only to be
present in general Councels, but also to have decisiue yoyces, as well as they
of the Clergy, and thereupon charge us with great absurdity. Wherefore, for
the answering of this objection, we must observe, that there is a threefold
decision of things doubtful and questionable. The one such as every one upon
the knowledge of it must yield unto upon peril of damnation, upon the bare
word of him that decideth. The second, to which every one must yield upon like
peril, not upon the bare word of him that decideth, but upon the evidence of
proof he brings. The third, such as every one must yield unto, not upon
peril of damnation, but of excommunication, and the like censure
Ecclesiastical. In the first sort the Protestants say, that only Christ the
son of God has a decisiue voice: In the second sort, that any Laymen as
well as Clergymen: for whosoever it is that brings conuincing proofs,
decideth a doubt in such sort, as that no man ought to resist against it.
Whereupon In Cap. Significasti de Electione.
Panormitan says, that the judgment of one private man is to be preferred
before the sentence of the Pope, if he have better authorities of the Old and
New Testament, to confirm his judgment. And Part. 1. de examine. Doctrinarum.
Gerson says, that any learned man may and ought to resist against a whole
Council, if he discern it to err of malice or ignorance; and whatsoever
Bishops determine, their determinations bind not the conscience further then
they approve that they propose, some other way then by their authority only.
So that in this sense, the Protestants truly say, that Bishops must not
proceed Praetor-like, but that all that they do, must be but in the nature
of an inquiry, and their Decrees no farther of force, then reason does warrant
them. For, howsoever the Son of God has promised to be with his Church to the
end of the world, which shall be fulfilled in respect of his elect and chosen
who cannot err damnably and finally, yet has he not tied himself to any one
sort or company of men, neither is it certainly known, but that all they that
meet in a Council, may err notwithstanding Christ's promise. To which
purpose it is, that Brentius, and other say, We cannot be certain of the
determination of Counsels, because every company of men professing CHRIST, is
not the true Church, seeing all that so profess, are not Elect; neither do
they deny all authority and jurisdiction to such as are not known to be Elect,
nor give it all to such as no man can know who they be (as Li^. de concilijs
cap. 19.
Bellarmine untruly says they do,) for in the third sort they willingly
acknowledge, that Bishops have deciding voices, and power so to judge of
things, as to subject all those that shall think and teach otherwise then they
do, to excommunication and censures of like nature. And that therefore they
are properly Judges; that their course of proceeding is not a bare Inquiry and
search, but a binding determination, and that they have a Pretorlike power, to
bind men to stand to that they propose and decree: and in this sort, we all
teach, that Laymen have no voice decisiue, but Bishops and Pastors only,
which may be confirmed by many reasons. First, because, when the question is,
in what pastures it is fit the sheep of CHRIST should feed, and in what
pastures they may feed without danger, the duty of consulting is principally,
and the power of prescribing, wholly, in the Pastors, though the sheep of
CHRIST being reasonable, have and must have a kind of discerning, whether they
be directed into wholesome and pleasant pastures or not. Secondly, none but
they, whom Paul says, Ephesians. 4. 11.
CHRIST going up into heaven; gave for the gathering together of the Saints
for the work of the Ministry, have authority to teach, and to prescribe unto
others, what they shall profess and believe: of whom the LORD said by Jeremy
the Prophet: Ierem. 3. 15.
I will give you Pastors that shall feed you with knowledge and doctrine.
Thirdly, because in all Councels, Bishops and Pastors only, are found to have
subscribed to the decrees made in them, as defining and decreeing; howsoever
other men testified their consent by subscription, and Princes and Emperors,
by their royal authority, confirmed the same, and subjected the contemners and
violaters thereof to imprisonment, banishment, confiscation of goods, and the
like civil punishments, as the Bishops did to excommunication, and censures
Spiritual.

So that it is agreed on, that Bishops and Ministers only, have decisiue
voices in Councels, in sort before expressed, but, the question is only
whether all Ministers of the Word and Sacraments have such decisiue voices, or
none but Bishops. The Papists think, that this is the peculiar right of
Bishops; but they are clearly refuted by the Universal practice of the
whole Church, from the beginning. For, in all Provincial and National
Synodes, Presbyters did ever give voice and subscribe in the very same sort
that Bishops did, whether they were assembled, to make Canons of discipline,
to hear causes, or to define doubtful points of doctrine, as I have Chap. 30.
before showed at large: and that they did not anciently sit, and give
decisiue voices in General Councels, the reason was; not, because they have no
interest in such deliberations and resolutions, but, because seeing all cannot
meet in Councels, that have interest in such businesses, but some must be
deputed for, and authorized by the rest, therefore it was thought fit that
Bishops, who are the chiefest among such as have interest in deliberation of
this nature, should in giving decisiue voices, supply the places of the rest,
especially seeing the manner was ever in all the first Counsels, that the
chief Patriarchs, being acquainted with the matter, that should be debated,
sent to all the Metropolitanes subject to them, who calling Provincial
Synodes, consisting of their Bishops and Presbyters, discussed such doubts,
and then by common consent, choosing out certain principal Bishops, to go
to the General Council in their name, sent by the^ their resolutions. So,
that in effect, Presbyters did subscribe as well as Bishops: seeing they that
went and subscribed, were not to vary from the instructions they carried with
them. That this was the course, it is evident by that of Euagrius, lib. 1. cap.
3.
John Bishop of Antioch in the third General Council, excusing his long
tarrying, by reason that his Metropolitanes could not sooner assemble their
Clergy to consult: and by the Acts of the sixth General Council Epist.
Agathon. and Romans Synod. in action 4. Synodi sextae.
where we find the suggestion of Agatho Bishop of Rome, sent to the Council,
subscribed by himself and the whole Synod of the West, subject to the Sea
Apostolic: in which Synod sundry Bishops do subscribe as Legates sent from
National Synodes. But if we shall come to latter Councels, holden in the
West, and esteemed (by the Papists) to be General, we shall find that
Presbyters did give voices decisiue in them, as well as Bishops. For Platina
in Innocent. 3
in the great Council of Lateran (as they call it) under Innocentius the
third, there were but four hundred eighty two Bishops, but of Abbots and
Priours Conventuall eight hundred: who yet have much less to do in the
government of the Church, then Presbyters having care of souls. And Lib. 1. de
council. c. 1^.
Bellarmine himself confesses, that by privilege and custom, Presbyters, as
namely Cardinals, Abbots; and the Generals of the Orders of Friars, may give
decisiue voices in General Councels; which they could not do, if by Gods Law
it pertayned to Bishops only. For there is no prescribing against the Law of
GOD; and therefore I cannot see why the Romanists should so bitterly Bellarm.
ibid.
censure the council of Basil, because Presbyters were admitted to give voices
in it. Having cleared who they are that are to be admitted to be present, and
to give voices in General councels, let us proceed to see what number of
Bishops is required to make a General council, and what order must be kept
in the holding of it. Touching the first, the Divines require three conditions
to make a General council, whereof the first is, that the summons be
General, and such as may be known to all the principal parts and provinces
of the Christian World. The second, that no Bishop whence-soeuer he come, be
excluded, if he be known to be a Bishop, and not excommunicate. The
third, that the principal Patriarchs be present with the concurrence of the
particular Synodes under them, either in person, or by their substitutes and
Vicars, or at least by their provincial Letters, as the Patriarch of Rome was
present in the second General council, (though he were not there in person
nor by substitutes.) And hereupon the Action 6.
second council of Nice takes exception to a certain Synod holden in
Constantinople as not General, because neither all that were present did
consent, neither was there a concurrence in it of the Bishop of Rome and his
Bishops; either by his Vicars, or provincial letters; nor of the Patriarchs
of the East, to wit of Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, and the Bishops
subject to them; and therefore pronounces, that the words of those foolish
men, assuming to them the name of a General council, were not a candle set
on a candlestick, to give light to all in the house, but a mere smoke full
of darkness, blinding the eyes of men, and were uttered as it were under the
bed, and not upon the mountain of right belief, and that their sound did
not go forth into all the earth, nor their words to the uttermost ends of
the World, as the sound, voice, and words of the former six General councels
did. But that we may the better discern how far forth the presence of the
chief Patriarchs is necessary in General councels, and that we be not
deceived in this point, we must observe, that when we speak of patriarchs,
either we understand them, and their Synodes, or themselves singly and apart:
If we speak of them in the former sense, no Synod can be accounted fully
and perfectly General, to which the presence of any one of the chief
patriarchs is wanting: and therefore the first council of Ephesus was an
imperfect General council, when before the coming of John of Antioch, and
his Bishops, it proceeded to the condemnation of Nestorius. And we see how
great turmoyle and confusion that has caused, which could never be quieted
and taken away, till Cyrill president of that council, and John were
reconciled, and the Acts of the council confirmed by the joint consent of
them both: and hence Concor. cath. l. 2. c. 3.
Cusanus says it is, that the eighth General council, when the Vicar of the
Apostolical Throne of Alexandria came, rejoiced greatly, and said, we
glorify the GOD of all, who has supplied unto this universal Synod what was
wanting, and has now made it most full and perfect. But if we speak of them
in the second sense, that is, singly and by themselves alone, in case of
heresy or wilful refusal, the council may proceed without them, and yet
want nothing that pertains to the perfection of a general Council, as did
the Council of Ephesus, and the Council of Chalcedon, proceeding to the
condemnation of Nestorius and Dioscorus, upon such evidence as they had against
them, though they refused to present themselves in those Synodes: so that the
concurrence of the Bishops subject to them be not wanting, as in the case of
Nestorius and Dioscorus it was not. For the Bishops subject to Nestorius
subscribed to his condemnation, and the Bishops of Alexandria gave their
consent to the condemnation of Dioscorus their Patriarch, and approved the
proceedings of the synod against him, though they Council. Chalced. action 5.
refused to subscribe to the acts and decrees of it, till they had a new
Patriarch chosen in his place. Which refusal though it were ill taken at the
first, yet were the fathers in the end persuaded, by the mediation of the
Judges, to forbear their subscription, till they might have time to choose a
new Patriarch; so that it is not the personal presence, or co^curre^ce
precisely of those chief Bishops or Patriarchs, to whom all other Bishops are
subject, that is required to the fullness and perfection of a General Council,
but the coming of some from the several Synodes subject to the Patriarchs,
or from the Patriarchicall synod, where some out of all these do meet, or at
the least the sending of Synodall letters, that so the consent of all may be
had: The Provinces that are near the place where the Synod is holden, sending
the greater number, and they that are most remote, sending some few, with
instructions from the rest, or at the least their Synodall letters, expressing
their opinion, judgment, and resolution. Bellar. lib. 1. de Council. c. 17.
So in the Council of Nice, there were many Bs out of the East, but out of the
West only two Presbyters out of Italy, one Bishop out of Spain, one Bishop out
of France, and one out of Africa. But Theodoret. hist. Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 9.
in the second and third Councels, there were many out of the East, and none
out of the West. But the Bishops of Rome, Bellarm. vbi supra.
Damasus and Caelestinus, as Patriarchs of the West, confirmed those Councels,
and gave consent unto them in their own names, and in the names of all the
Bishops of the West, whom they had gathered together in Synodes. In the
Council of Chalcedon, there were none present out of the West, but the Legates
of Leo, but he sent by them the consent of the Bishops of Spain, France,
Italy, and other parts of the West: who having holden Synodes in their several
Provinces, wrote unto him, that they approved his judgment, touching the point
in controversy, which was to be debated in the general Council; and that
they would most willingly concur with him in the form of instruction, which
he meant to send to the Council.

Touching the order that must be kept in general Councels. Cusan. de Concord.
Cathol. lib. 2. c. 3.
First the Book of God must be laid in the midst of them that are present.
Secondly, the meeting must be openly and not in secret. Thirdly, it must be
free, and every man must be permitted boldly to speak what he thinks.
Whereupon Pope Nicholas, when some objected to him the number of Bishops that
met in the Council of Photius, answered, that the great concurse of Bishops
in the Councels of Nice and Chalcedon, was not so much respected as their free
and religious uttering of their judgments and resolutions; and Agatho writing
to Constantine the Emperor touching the Bishops that were to meet in the sixth
general Council, has these words: Grant free power of speaking, to every one
that desires to speak for the faith which he believes and holds, that all
men may most clearly see and know, that no man, desirous and willing to speak
for the truth, was fobidden, hindered, or rejected, by any terrors, force,
threatening, or any other thing that might auert and turn him away from so
doing. And as there must be a liberty and freedom of speech, in General
Councels, so there must be a desire of finding out the truth, and an
intending and seeking of the common good, that private respects, purposes and
designs be not set forward under pretense of religion; and therefore Leo the
first, writing to the Emperor, of the error of the second Ephesine Counsel,
has these words. While private intendments, and designs were set z Leo.
epist. 25.
forward, under pretense of religion, that was effected by the impiety of a
few, that wounded the whole universal Church; we find by certain report,
that a great number of Bishops, came together unto the Synod: who being come
together in such great multitudes, might very profitably have been employed in
deliberating and discerning what was fit to be resolved, if he who challenged
unto himself the chief place, would have observed such Priestly moderation,
as that (according to the manner and custom of such meetings, all men having
freely uttered their opinions) that might peaceably and rightly have been
decreed, that might both agree with faith, and bring them into the right way
that were in error. But here we find, that when the Decree was to be passed,
all they who were come together, were not permitted to be present: for we
have been informed, that some were rejected and others brought in, who, at the
pleasure of the foresaid Bishop, were brought to yield captive hands to those
impious subscriptions: for that they knew that it would be prejudicial to
their state, unless they did such things as were enjoined them. Which kind of
proceedings, our substitutes sent from the Apostolical See, discerned to be so
impious, and contrary to the Catholic faith, that by no violent means they
could be enforced to consent thereunto, but constantly protested, and
professed, (as beseemed them) that that which was there agreed on and decreed,
should never be admitted or received by the Apostolical See. And a little
after he has these words. All the Bishops of those parts of the Church, that
are subject unto us, as suppliants in most humble manner, with sighs and
tears, beseech your most gracious Majesty, that, seeing both those Substitutes
which we sent, did most constantly resist against such impious and bad
proceedings, and Flauianus the Bishop offered a bill of appeal unto them, you
would be pleased to command a general Council to be holden in Italy. Vide
haec omnia apud Cusanum loco cita^o.
Thus we see what things are essentially required to the being of a Council,
and what order is to be observed in it. The next thing that follows in order
to be entreated of, is the Presidentship of such and so sacred an assembly.

CHAP. 50.
Of the President of General Councels.

TOuching the Presidentship of General Councels, it pertained in a sort, to
all the Patriarchs, and therefore Photius in his discourse of the seven
Synodes, in diverse of them, names all the Patriarchs, and their Vicegerents,
Presidents: as having an honorable pre-eminence, above and before other
Bishops in such assemblies; yet we deny not, but that as these were over all
other Bishops, so, even amongst these also there was an order; so that one of
them had a pre-eminence above and before another. For the Bishop of Alexandria,
was before the Bishop of Antioch, and the Bishop of Rome before him, anciently,
even before the time of the Nicene Council; and afterward the Bishop of
Constantinople, made a Patriarch, was set before the other two, next unto the
Bishop of Rome. And as these were thus one before another in order and honor,
so they had pre-eminence of honor in Synodall assemblies, accordingly, in
sitting, speaking, and subscribing, though this were not always precisely
observed. For Eusebius de vita Constantini li. 3. cap. 10. and 11.
in the Council of Nice, there being two ranks of seats; the one in the one
side of the hall, and the other in the other, where the Council met, the
Emperor sitting in the midst, in the upper part of the hall, Eustathius
Bishop of Antioch, sat in the highest seat in that rank that was on the
right hand, and made the Oration to the Emperor; but in subscribing, many were
before him. And Hosius the Bishop of Corduba in Spain, a man of great fame was
chief president, composed the form of faith there agreed on, and subscribed
it first, and then in the second place the Presbyters, that were the
Vicegerents of the Bishop of Rome, who in respect of his old age could not be
present, subscribed to the same form of faith, and after them Alexander the
Bishop of Alexandria. That Hosius was President of the Council of Nice: and of
many other Councels besides, we have the testimony of Epist. ad solitariam
vitam agentes.
Athanasius. The reason why he being a Bishop of so mean a place, should be
so honored and set before all other, was the good opinion that all men held of
him being a man famous and renowned throughout the world, Theodoret. hist.
Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 7.
which moved Constantine after he heard of the differences in the Church of
Alexandria, between Alexander and Arrius, to send him thither before ever he
thought of calling this Council, hoping that by his wisdom and authority he
might quiet all. But our Adversaries, lest any prejudice might grow to the
Church of Rome by this ill president of the council of Nice, in admitting so
mean a Bishop to be her president, and neglecting the Bishop of Rome,
adventure to say, that Hosius was not president in his own right, but as the
Bishop of Romes Vicegerent, and supplying his place, though they be no way
able to prove the same, and the clear evidence of the thing it self reprove
them. For the Eusebius. l. 3. de vit. Constant. c. 7.
Histories speak of Presbyters the Bishop of Rome sent to supply his place,
but mention not Hosius as employed in that sort: which they would not have
omitted, if he had been employed so also; and besides in the subscriptions,
both as they are found in the ordinary Edition of the council of Nice, and
that which is out of the Greek book found in the Vatican, put forth by Pisanus
the Jesuit, Hosius subscribeth first without any signification of his
supplying the place of the Bishop of Rome, as Legates are ever wont to do, and
as Vitus and Vincentius his Legates do in this Council: for the form of their
subscription is this, We have subscribed for, and in the name of the most
reverend man, etc. So that that which Lib. 1. de council. c. 19
Bellarmine alleges out of a certain preface before the council of Sardica,
the Author whereof is not known, is little to be esteemed, as no way able to
weaken the authorities and reasons which we bring. Touching the second
General Council, the Council of Action 6. p. 136. apud Bin.
Chalcedon expressly affir meth, that Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople was
president of it, and, if we look to the subscriptions, we shall find that
he subscribed first, and before all other. So that it is evident, that Damasus
then Bishop of Rome, was not president of that assembly. And Vbi supra.
Bellarmine confesses as much: but he faith, if he had been present, he had
doubtless been president: which happily may be true, yet his reason to prove
it, is not good, which he takes from the Epistle of the council to Damasus.
For in that Epistle the Fathers and Bishops acknowledge themselves members of
that body, whereof h Apud Theod. l. 5. c. 9.
Damasus and his company are a part: but do not call him their head, as he
untruly reports. Neither does the Epistle of Damasus to the Fathers of the
council, yield any better proof. For though he call them sons, yet it will
hardly follow, that they would have taken him for a president of their meeting,
especially seeing it is probably supposed, that they therefore stayde of
purpose at Constantinople, that more freely, and with greater authority they
might compass such things as they intended, then if they should have gone to
Rome, where Damasus with his Western Bishops might have crossed, or at least
in some sort hindered their intendments and designs. In the third General
council, which was the first at Ephesus, Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria was
President, as it appears evidently by the acts of the council, and the
Histories of those times: and had also the authority of Caelestinus Bishop of
Rome joined unto him, as may be seen by the Act. conc. Ephesians. Tom. 1. c. 16.
Epistle of Calestinus written unto him, which is found among the Acts of the
Ephesine Council. Whereunto agrees that of Valentinian and Martian, in their
Conc. Chalced. action 3.
Epistle to Palladius, expressly saying, that both Caelestinus Bishop of Rome,
and Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, were presidents of the Council of Ephesus:
and also that of the whole Council of Action 4.
Chalcedon, professing expressly, that both Caelestinus and Cyrill were
presidents of that assembly: which thing the very Acts of the council it
self, sufficiently prove: in which he is described to have moderated all, as
chief and principal among the Bishops present, yet not by his own authority
alone, but supplying also the place of Caelestinus Bishop of Rome. And in like
sort Lib. 1. c. 4.
Euagrius does not say, that he supplied the place of Caelestinus, as if he had
not been president in his own right: but that he also supplied the place of
Caelestinus: for so it is in the Greek: and De 7. Synod.
Photius says, Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, (who also supplied the place of
Caelestinus B. of Rome) and Memnon Bishop of Ephesus, and Iuvenall Bishop of
Jerusalem, were Presidents of the first council of Ephesus. Thus it is
evident, that Cyrill sat as President in the council of Ephesus, though not
without the concurrence of the Bishop of Rome, who joined his authority with
him, and sent his own resolution, and the resolutions of his Bishops unto him,
and the Council, though he Act. Council. Ephesians. tom. 2. cap. 17.
sent none out of the West to that meeting, till long after the Council was
begun, and many things therein done. In the fourth General Council, holden
at Chalcedon, the Legates of the Bishop of Rome, had the first and chiefest
place: but in the fifth, Eutychius Bishop of Constantinople sat as President,
and had the first place. And Binnius in Annotat. in Council. 5.
though Vigilius then Bishop of Rome, being at that time at Constantinople,
could neither be induced to be present, nor to agree unto it, while it was
holden, nor to confirm and allow it when it ended, yet it was judged a lawful
General Council, and he and so many more as resisted against it, for their
wilful dissenting, were sent into banishment. This Council was called by
Justinian the Emperor, to examine and condemn an Epistle of Ibas; certain
works of Theodoret, and the person of Theodorus Bishop of Mopsuestia, who
all were thought favorers of Nestorius, and yet received to grace in the
Council of Chalcedon, in hope that they would thereupon embrace and receive
that Council, which were auerse from it; as thinking (though untruly) that it
favored the Nestorians; as also to condemn the errors of Origin and his
followers. That this Council, notwithstanding the contradiction of Vigilius,
was admitted and received as a true and lawful General Council, it appears
by Gregory Bishop of Rome, who having allowed of the first four General
Councels, adds these words; Greg. lib. 1. Epist. 24. ad Ioannem
Co^stantinopol.
I do also in like sort reverence and honor the fifth Council, in which the
Epistle of Ibas, full of error, is rejected, in which Theodorus, separating and
dividing the person of the Mediator of God and Men, and imagining two
subsistences in Christ, is convinced to have fallen into perfidious impiety:
and in which also the writings of Theodoret (wherein the faith of blessed Cyril
is reprehended,) are found and pronounced to have bin published by a
boldfoolishnesse: but I truly reject all those persons, which the forenamed
reverend and sacred Councels do reject, and embrace and honor those which
they reverence and honor, because being established and agreed unto, and
things settled in them by general consent, he destroys and overthrows
himself and not them, whosoever presumes either to lose those whom they bind,
or to bind those whom they lose. Whosoever therefore shall be otherwise
minded, let him be anathema. So that the Presidence and presence of the
Bishop of Rome, is not so necessary in General Councels, but that in case of
his wilful refusal a Council may proceed and be holden for lawful, without
his consenting to it. It is true indeed, Socrates lib. 2. cap. 13.
that the Canon of the Church prescribes, that no General Council shall be
holden without the Bishop of Rome, and the Bishops subject to him; but the
meaning of the Canon is not, that s Cusanus Concord, Cathol. lib. 2. ca: 2.
lib. 3. cap. 15.
all proceedings are void and unlawful, wherein his presence is not had, but
wherein it is not sought and expected: for, if he wilfully refuse to join with
the rest, or his negligence be intolerable, the state of the Church requiring,
that order be presently taken, they may proceed without him, as appears by
the Eight General Council, wherein some things were resolved on, before the
coming of the Vicars of the Bishop of Rome: and by this Fifth, wherein neither
the Bishop of Rome, nor any of his Bishops would be present, nor give any
consent unto it, and yet it is reputed a lawful General Council. And, as a
Council may be holden in such a case, without the presence or concurrence of
the Roman Bishop, and those that are subject to him, so being present, if he
refuse to concur in judgment with the rest, they may proceed without him,
and their sentence may be of force, though he consent not to it; as we see in
the Council of Chalcedon. And though General Councels, wherein the Bishop of
Rome, with his Bishops, refuse to be present, or being present, to give
consent to that which is decreed, be not so full and perfect, as they are that
have his concurrence together with the Bishops subject to him, and therefore
the like effect does not presently follow; yet we shall find, that all such
determinations, consented and agreed unto uniformly, by all the other
Patriarchs, do in the end generally take place. So that even the Romans
themselves are forced to yield unto them; as we see it came to pass, that
the Decrees of the Fifth General Council, wherein the Romans refused to be
present, and to which they would yield no consent, were soon after generally
received; the Romans themselves yielding unto them; and Vide Acta ^orum
Conciliorum.
likewise the acts of the Fourth general Counsel, wherein the Decree of
equalling the Bishop of Constantinople, to the Bishop of Rome, and preferring
him before the other Patriarchs, passing without the consent of the Bishop
of Romes Legates, and resisted by the Bishops of the West, yet prevailed in
the end, and forced the Ro^e Bishop to yield unto it. For after the time of
Justinian the Emperor, none of the Bishops of Rome was ever found to
contradict it any more. So that to conclude and resolve this point, even as no
Chapter-act is good, wherein the meanest (having voice in Chapter) is refused,
neglected, or contemned: and much less, wherein he that is chiefest and
President is contemned: and as the Acts of Provincial Synodes are void,
wherein the meanest Suffragan is not called and expected: so there is no
question, but that all the acts of general Councels, are void, wherein the
Bishop of Rome, so long as he continues Catholic, and keeps his own
standing, is not specially above all other expected and desired. But, as things
may pass in these assemblies, without their consent, whose presence is so
necessarily to be sought (as we see in provincial Synodes the mayor part
swayeth all, and the Metropolitan has no negative,) see in a general
Council, things may pass by the consent of the greater part, not only without
the consent, but even against the liking of the Bishop of Rome, and his
Bishops. In the Sixth and seventh General Councels, the Bishop of Romes
Legates, and Vicegerents (in a sort) had the Presidentship: yet so, as that
Tharassius Bishop of Constantinople: rather performed the duty of a Moderator
and President in the seventh, then they, as it will easily appear to any one
that will but take a view of the Acts of that Synod.

So that we find that neither the Bishop of Rome had the Presidentship in all
Councels, nor that there was any certain and uniform course holden in giving
preheminences to the chief Bishops, in the first seven General Counsels. For
See the acts of these councels.
in the Council of Nice, Hosius does first suscribe: after him, the
presbyters, that supplied the place of the Bishop of Rome: then Alexander
Bishop of Alexandria, the Bishop of Jerusalem after all the Bishops of Egypt,
Thebais, and Lybia; and the Bishop of Antioch after all these, and the Bishops
of Palaestina, and Phoenicia also, and yet he sat in the highest place on the
right side. In the second, neither the Bishop of Rome, nor any Western Bishops
were present: the first that subscribed was Nectarius, the next Timothy of
Alexandria and after him Dorotheus, then Cyril of Jerusalem, and Meletius of
Antioch after him, and after all the Bishops of Palaestina and Phoenicia. In
the third, Cyril subscribed first, and after him Iuuenall Bishop of Jerusalem,
for John of Antioche came not before the condemnation of Nestorius Bishop of
Constantinople (to which they subscribed) was past. In the fourth, to the
condemnation of Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria: First the Legates of Leo Bishop
of Rome subscribed: then Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople: after him the
Bishop of Antioch, and Iuuenall Bishop of Jerusalem, almost after all the
Bishops in the Synod, though in the order of sitting he was placed in the
fifth place: but where they subscribe to the decree touching matter of faith,
he subscribeth in the fourth place, after Rome, Constantinople, and Antioch. To
the act for advancing the sea of Constantinople, and setting it before the rest
of the Patriarchicall thrones next to Rome, the Legates of the Bishop of Rome
subscribe not, but Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople in the first place; after
him, Maximus of Antioch; and in the third place, Iuuenall of Jerusalem. In the
fifth, they sat and subscribed in this sort. First, Eutychius Bishop of
Constantinople, then Apollinarius of Alexandria, after him Domninus of Antioch,
and last of all the Legates of Eustochius of Jerusalem: for the Bishop of Rome
was not there in person, nor by his Legates. In the sixth, the Emperor sat in
the highest place, in the midst: His great men, and the Consuls sat by him:
on the left side the Legates of the Bishop of Rome, the Vicars of the Bishop of
Jerusalem, and the Bishops that were present out of the Roman Synod: On the
right side, sat first, the Bishop of Constantinople, next him the Bishop of
Antioche, then he that supplied the place of the Bishop of Alexandria, and
so in order the Bishops subject to them: yet in subscribing, the Bishop of
Rome was first, Constantinople second, Alexandria third, Antioch fourth, and
Jerusalem last. In the seventh, the Legates of Adrian Bishop of Rome had the
first place, and subscribed first: after them the Bishop of Constantinople
Tharassius; and then they that supplied the rooms of the other three
Patriarchicall Thrones. But Tharassius rather performed the duty of a President
and Moderator, then the Legates of Rome, as I showed before. These are all the
General Councels that the Greek and Latin Churches jointly acknowledge; and
by this view which we have taken of them, we may see how diversely things have
been carried, both concerning the Presidentship in General Councels, and the
preheminences of the chiefest Bishops in the same.

Yet, as the Graecians were content in the Sess. ult.
Council of Florence, that the Bishop of Rome should have all such
preheminences again, as he had before the division of the Churches, if other
matters might be agreed on: So if the Bishop of Rome would disclaim his
claim of universal jurisdiction, of infallible judgment, and power to
dispose at his pleasure the Kingdoms of the World, and would content himself
with that all Antiquity gave him, which is to be in order and honor the first
among Bishops, we would easily grant him to be in such sort President of
General Councels, as to sit and speak first in such meetings: but to be an
absolute commander, we cannot yield unto him. Cardinal Summa de Eccles. l.
3. c. 23*
Turrecremata rightly notes, that the Presidentship of Councels whereof men
do speak, is of two sorts, the one of honor, the other of power.
Presidentship of honouris, to have pre-eminence in place, to propose things to
be debated, to direct the actions, and to give definitive sentence according
to the voices and judgment of the Council. Presidentshippe of power is, to
have the right, not only of directing, but of ruling their doings also that
are assembled in Council, and to conclude of matters after his own judgment,
though the greater part of the Council like it not, yea though no part like
it. A Presidentshippe of the former sort, Antiquity yielded to the Bishop of
Rome, when he was not wanting to himself. And if there were no other
differences between us and him, we also would yield it him; But the latter
kind of presidentshippe we cannot yield, unless we overthrow the whole
course of Councels, and go against the stream of all Antiquity. This seems
(says Desacris Eccles. minist. and benef. l. 3. c. 2
Duarenus) to be consonant unto the Law of GOD, that the Church which the
Synod does represent, should have the fullness of all power, and that the Pope
should acknowledge himself subject unto it. For Christ did not give the power
of binding and loosing to Peter alone, whose successor the pope is said to be,
but to the whole church. Although I do not deny, but that he was set before
the rest of the Apostles; yet so often as any one was to be ordained, either
Bishop, or Deacon, or any thing to be decreed, that concerned the church;
Peter never took it to himself, but referred it to the whole church. But
herein did his pre-eminence stand and consist, that as prince of the Apostles
it pertained to him to call the rest together, and to propose unto them the
things that were to be handled; as with us at this day the president of the
court of parliament calls together the whole Senate, and when occasion
requires, begins first to speak, and does many other things, which easily
show the greatness of the person which he sustaineth: and yet notwithstanding
he is not greater or superior to the whole court; neither has he power over
all the Senators; neither may he decree any thing contrary to their
judgments. But the judgment of all controversies pertains to the court it
self, whose Head the president is said to be; nay, which is more, the court
commands, judges, and punishes the president as well as any other, if
there be cause so to do. And these things truly were likewise in the
Ecclesiastical state heretofore, but I know not by what means it is now
brought about, that supreme power over all Christians is given to one, and that
he is set free from all Laws and canons, after the example of the Emperors.

This is the judgment of the learned and worthy Duarenus; yet the Jesuits,
and Iesuited papists at this day, will needs have the pope to be president of
General councels, in such sort, that he may conclude of matters after his own
judgment and liking, though the greater part of the council like it not, yea,
though no part like it. But this their conceit is easily refuted: first by
reason, and then by the practice of the church from the beginning. For first,
either Bishops are assembled in General Councels, only as the Popes
Counselors to give him advise; or they are in joint Commission with him, and
sit as his fellow Judges of all matters of faith and discipline. If only as
Counselors to advise him, Councels should not consist only or principally of
Bishops. For, as they say commonly, that many a doting old woman may be more
devout, and many a poor begging Friar more learned the^ the Pope himself: so
there is no question, but that many other may be as learned and judicious as
Bishops; Augustine. Ep. 19. ad Hieron.
Though (says Austine) according to the titles of honor, which the custom of
the Church gives men, Austine a Bishop be greater then Hierome a Presbyter,
yet Hierome in worth and merit is greater then Austine. In the late Council
of Trent, there is no question, but that Andradius, Vega, and other Doctors
that were there, were every way comparable with the greatest Bishop or
Cardinal; yet Bishops only as of ordinary right, and some few other, by
special privilege, gave decisiue voices in that Council: other, how learned
soever, being admitted only to discuss and debate matters, and thereby to
prepare and ripen them, that the Bishops might more easily judge of them: and
therefore the current of most Papists is against that conceit of making Bishops
to be but the Popes Counselors only, as appears by De Gener. Council.
authoritate. lib. 1. page 46. and 47.
Andradius, Loc. Theolog. lib. 5. cap. 5.
Canus, De Concilijs lib. 1. cap. 18.
Bellarmine, and many more. That Bishops (says Loco citato.
Melchior Canus) are not Counselors only to advise, but Judges to determine
all matters doubtful touching Faith and manners; may easily be proved by the
proceedings of all ancient Councels. For the Fathers of the Nicene Council,
desire Syluester to confirm what they have decreed; and Leo professes, that
he approves all those things which the Council of Chalcedon decreed touching
the Faith: and the Council it self speaking to Leo says, Honor our
judgment with the concurrence of thy Decrees. And the sixth Actio. 18.
General Council says: We anathematize Theodorus, Sergius, Syrus, etc. And
a little after: All these things being determined by this holy Council, and
confirmed by our constant subscription, we decree, that no man make any
farther ado about matters of faith, etc. Are these the words of him that only
gives advice and counsel? or of him that judges and determines what shall
be believed and done? and in all the rest, the Fathers speak not as
Counselors that are to advise, but as Judges that have power to determine: For
the third chapter of the Nicene Synod has thus: The great Synod has
altogether forbidden, etc. Thus far Melchior Canus, learnedly and strongly
proving, that Bishops are not present in General Councels, as the Popes
Counselors to advise him; but as Judges together with him to define and
determine: which if it be granted, we may easily in the second place prove,
that the Pope may not determine things of himself contrary to the judgment of
all the rest. For, though the chief President of a Company, may have a
negative voice, against the affirmative of all the rest, yet never was there
any company of Judges, having power to judge and determine, wherein one might
not only dashe what the rest agreed on, but determine also what he pleased,
though none concurred with him. When in any commission, some certain number of
men may determine and resolve, and none has power to contradict, they are
absolutely Judges, and the power of judging rests wholly in them; when in
their resolutions they may be so gainsaid by others, that yet others can
do nothing without them, they are Judges in part, and the power of judging
rests in part in them; But when another may dash what they consent on, and
do what he pleases, whatsoever they say to the contrary, they may be in the
nature of Counselors to advise, but not of Judges to determine. For
wheresoever there are many Judges, either the power of determining, both
affirmatively and negatiuely rests in the Mayor part; or else any one has an
absolute negative, and only the concurrence of all an affirmative, as in
Iuries here in England; or thirdly, either one man, or some certain men have
their negative, and the affirmative is only in the Mayor part. And therefore
it is most fond and frivolous, that Canus has in answer to this our argument;
for whereas we say, if Bishops be Judges, the Pope may not resolve against the
Mayor part of them, he has these words; Canus loco (...). page 164.
I deny that it is necessary to follow the judgment of the Mayor part, when we
treat of matters of Faith, neither do we here measure the sentence by the
number of voices, as in humane elections or judgments; Knowing that oftentimes
it comes to pass, that the greater part does overcome the better; that those
things are not always best, which please most; and that in things which
pertain to doctrine, the judgment of the wise is to be preferred, and the
wise are exceeding few, whereas there is an infinite number of fools. Four
hundred Prophets did lie unto Achab, but the truth came out of the mouth of
one Michaeas alone, and he very contemptible, and therefore the Judgments of
Divine things are not to be moderated by humane reasons: The Lord saves and
delivers, sometimes, sooner with a few then many. This saying of Canus is
contrary to all course of Judgment in the world, and contradicted by his own
fellow and friend Cardinal Lib. 1. de Concilijs. cap. 18.
Bellarmine, who says, that in Counsels, things are to be carried by number
of voices, and not by disputation; that in the Council mentioned in the Acts,
the question was defined by the voices of the Apostles: and that in the
Council of Action. 4.
Chalcedon the ten Bishops of Egypt were condemned as Heretics, because
they yielded not to the Mayor part of that Council. Thus does he cross his
fellow Canus. But let not Canus be offended with him for so doing; for he will
presently cross himself also: for I hope he thinks the Bishops of Egypt
were rightly judged Heretics for refusing to subscribe to the Judgment of
the Mayor part of Bishops in the Council of Chalcedon (seeing he brings
this censure to prove that the determinations of Counsels do bind the
conscience) and then it will follow, that the greater part of Bishops in a
General Council cannot err; which yet he presently denies, Eodem Capite.
and says the greater part of this Council did err, and resolved that which
was reuersed by the Pope. If he say that those ten Bishops of Egypt,
refused to subscribe to that which was agreed on by the Mayor part with the
Legates of Rome, and that therefore they might justly be judged Heretics, as
contradicting the Judgment of them that cannot err, it stands no better
with his resolution Lib. 2. de Council. cap. 11.
elsewhere, that the Mayor part of Bishops in a General Council, with the
Legates, may err. But passing by these Contradictions and absurdities of the
Cardinal, let us see if he can clear this doubt any better, which has so
much troubled Canus. For the avoiding of this one poor argument, he is forced
to divide the Pope, as otherwise finding no means to escape the force thereof.
Lib. 1. de Concilijs. cap. 18.
The Pope therefore (he says) may be considered two ways; either as he is
President of a Council, and so he is tied to follow the Mayor part; or as he
is chief Prince in the Church, and so he may go against the Mayor part, and
resolve what he pleases of himself: and yet this divided consideration no way
deuideth or breaks the force of our argument, but leaves it entire and whole
as it found it. For we seek not the difference between a President and a
chief and absolute Prince, but whether the Bishops sitting in Council with
the Pope, be his fellow Judges, or not: which they cannot be, if he may not
only dash what they would do, but also do what he pleases without them. And
besides this, if the Pope do sit in General Councels as President, and so as
bound to pronounce according to the Mayor part of voices in all Decrees, then
he sits not there as absolute Prince, having power not only to dash what
others would do, but also to do what he pleases of himself without them,
and contrary to their judgments; and so cannot define and determine contrary
to the judgment and resolution of the Mayor part. The only answer that may
be imagined to this objection, is, that as inferior Judges may determine a
thing, which yet by a superior authority may be reuersed, and the contrary
decreed, so the Bishops in a General Council, as Judges, may decree and
determine, and yet the power of re-examining and reuersing all, if need be,
may rest in the Pope as superior Judge unto them, which yet no way clears
the doubt. For howsoever it be true in Judges and Judgments, distinct,
separate, and subordinate one to another, that one may dash that the other
does, and do the contrary without the consent of the other, yet of Judges
joined in one Commission, and of the same judgment it cannot be so conceived.
Now the Judgment of the General Council includes in it the Judgment of the
Pope; the Pope and Council make one Judge, and are not separate, distinct, and
subordinate Judges, and therefore no such thing can be said of them. If it be
said that he who is joined in commission with others, in some inferior Court,
and has a Negative voice in it only, and no absolute affirmative, may in a
superior Court have both, and that therefore the Pope, who has no absolute
voice affirmative and negative in a General Council, may have such a voice in
some higher Court, it will be found to be too shameless a saying. For there
neither is, nor can be any higher Court then that of a General Council
consisting of the Bishop of Rome, and all the other Bishops of the World. So
that all answers failing, we may safely conclude, that if Bishops be Judges
Ecclesiastical, truly and properly, (as we have proved them to be by
unanswerable reasons, and our Adversaries confess) the Pope has no absolute
voice affirmative and negative in General Councels; that is, to dash what the
Mayor part would do, and to do that they by no means like of. This Lib. 1.
de Gener. council. authoritate.
Andradius saw, and therefore he disclaimeth the position of Bellarmine, De
Pont. l. 4. c. 3.
that all the assurance the Council has of finding out the truth, is
Originally in the Pope, and from him communicated to the Council: and holds
that the Council has as good assurance of finding out the truth, and better
then the Pope himself: And therefore he says, that though he thinks it
impossible the Pope should dissent from the council, so as to define contrary
to it, yet; if it should so fall out (as he thinks it not impossible) that
the Bishop of Rome, should altogether dislike in his opinion that which the
Council resolves on, and which he should consent unto, and (though he define
not the contrary) yet despise the Decrees of the Council, and in his private
opinion gainsay them; he thinks in such a case, men were to conceive none
otherwise of him then if he should depart from the faith and profession of the
ancient Councels, which the consent of all ages has confirmed, and Lib. 1.
Epist. c. 4. and 24.
Gregory professes to honor and esteem as the four Gospels, seeing the
power and authority is as great in all Councels, as in those which the same
Gregory says, that whosoever holds not their certain resolutions, though he
seem to be a stone elect and precious, yet he lies besides the foundation.
And, because the authority of Cardinal Turrecremata is great with all those
that defend the dignity of the Pope against the Bishops that were assembled in
the Council of Basil, and such as are of their judgment, therefore he
produces his opinion in these words: If such a case should fall out (says
Cardinal De Pont. Max. Generaliumque conc. authoritate ad Basilien^. oratorem.
Respon. number. 67. and 68.
Turrecremata) that all the Fathers assembled in a General Council with
unanimous consent should make a decree concerning the faith, which the person
of the Pope alone should contradict, I would say according to my judgment,
that men were bound to stand to the judgment of the Synod, and not to listen
to the gainsaying of the person of the Pope: for the judgment of so many and so
great Fathers in a General Council, seems worthily to be preferred before
the judgment of one man. In which case that Gloss upon the Decrees is most
excellent, that when the faith is treated of, the Pope is bound to require the
Counsel of Bishops, which is to be understood to be necessary to be done,
as often as the case is very doubtful, and a Synod may be called, and then
the Synod is greater then the Pope; not truly in the power of jurisdiction,
but in the authority of discerning, judgment, and the amplitude of knowledge.
This is the opinion of this great champion, who so mainely in defense of the
Popes universal jurisdictio^, impugned the Fathers that were assembled in the
Council of Basil. Whereby it is evident, that the pope may not go against the
consent of a General Council, and that he may not dissent from it, being
greater in the authority of discerning and judgment then he is; and
consequently that he has no negative voice in Councels. Which may further be
proved; for that if he had a negative voice, as the Council has, then were
there two absolute negatiues: but where there are two absolute negatiues, it is
uncertain whether any thing shall be resolved on or not, (whereas yet the
state of the Church requires resolution and certain concluding of matters,
that men may know what they are to believe.) Therefore the Pope has none, but,
the only negative is that of the Council, a part whereof the Pope is, giving
a voice as others do. And this the manner of other Synodes confirms. For in
Provincial, National, and Patriarchicall Councels, the Metropolitanes,
Primates, and Patriarchs have no absolute negative, but give only a single
voice: and the absolute negative, as also the affirmative, is only in the
Mayor part; and as Cardinal Turrecremata, learnedly and rightly makes the
authority of the General Council, in discerning and defining what is to be
believed, greater then the authority of the Pope: and that the Council is
ratherto be listened unto, then the Pope, dissenting from the Council; so
there is no doubt, but that (the authority of Councels being as great in making
necessary laws for the good of the Church, as in resolving doubts and
clearing controversies) the Council is greater then the Pope in the power of
making laws, and consequently in the power of jurisdiction, which he denies,
and they of Basil affirm.

The greatest allegation on the contrary side is the confirmation that ancient
Councels sought of the Bishop of Rome: for that may seem to import, that their
decrees are of no force, unless they be strengthened by his authority:
whereunto Vbi supra.
Andradius answers out of De iusta Haeret. punitione lib. 1. c. 6.
Alfonsus a Castro and others, that General Councels carefully sought to be
confirmed by the Bishop of Rome, not as if in themselves without his
confirmation they were weak and might err, nor for that they thought him to
have as much or more assurance of not erring then they; but that it might
appear, that he that has the first place in the Church of God, and the rest,
did consent and conspire together in the delivery, and the defense of the
truth. But because happily this answer may seem too weak, therefore for the
clearing of this doubt, we must observe, that all the ancient Councels, were
holden in the East, and that in some of them, neither the Bishop of Rome, nor
any of his Western Bishos were present, and in others very few: For, there
were only three out of the West, in the name of all the rest, in the great
Council of Chalcedon, wherein 630 Bishops met. Now seeing the authority of
general Councels is from the consent of all other Bishops of the Christian
Church, as well as those that meet in them, it was necessary that the Bishop
of Rome, as Patriarch of the West, and the Bishops subject to him, though they
were no more infallible in judgment then the other, yet should by consenting
with the rest, confirm that was done; seeing they were not present to give
consent when it was done. If it besaid, that in diverse of them, there were
some for the Bishop of Rome, and some in the name of the Synodes subject to
him, who having instructions from them, gave consent in their names, and that
therefore there needed no further confirmation, it will be easily answered.
First, that it was possible for those Legates, being but few, to forsake their
instructions, and to do contrary to them, as Vt patet in Epist. Nicolai. ad
Patriarchas.
Rodoaldus and Zachary the Legates of Pope Nicholas did in the Council under
Michaell the Emperor, wherein Photius was set up, and Ignatius put down.
Secondly, that Bellarm. de Concilijs. lib. 2. cap. 11.
it was necessary, that the Fathers should wholly follow those instructions
that they brought, and absolutely agree unto them: and therefore when things
were concluded, it was fit there should be a signifying of that which was
done, and a desire of the confirmation of the same. Thirdly, some things might
be concluded, to which the instructions reached not, and in respect of them, a
confirmation was necessary: as the Council of Action 3.
Chalcedon decreed certain things wihout the compass of Leos instructions,
and therefore sought his confirmation. Besides all this, we must note that the
confirmation which the ancient Councels sought, was not from the person of the
Bishop of Rome alone, but from him and his Synodes, as I have proved before:
And De Concilijs lib. 1. cap. 17.
Bellarmine himself confesses; saying, that in the second and third Synodes,
there were no Bishops of the West present, but that the Bishop of Rome in his
own name, and in the name of the Bishops, and Synodes subject to him, did
confirm them. So that this confirming of Councels by the Pope, proves no more
that he is infallible in judgment, or that all the assurance of finding out
the truth is originally in him, and from him communicated to general
Councels: then that all the Bishops and Synodes subject to him, are free from
possibility of erring: and that National or Provincial Synodes in the West,
are more infallible in their judgments, then those that are General in the
East. The next allegation to prove that the Council is nothing without the
Pope, is, that a promise was made to Peter, that Luke. 22. ^2.
his faith should not fail, but that no promise was made to the Council: that
promise of Christ, Matthew. 18. 20.
that where two or three are gathered together in his name, he will be in the
midst of them, being no way proper to Councels and Bishops, Bellarm. lib. 2.
de Concilijs cap. 16.
having no authority when they are assembled, which they have not when they are
single and divided. This allegation is contradictory to the resolution, and
contrary to the practice of all times. For first, that promise of Christ, that
where two or three are gathered together in his name, he will be in the
midst of them, was ever thought to assure his presence in a lawful General
Council, in very special sort, and otherwise then any where else; and that
upon very good ground of reason. For if God be present with private men,
meeting together in his fear about the things that concern them, and with a
few particular Pastors of Churches, for the direction of them in things that
concern them, there is no question but in General meetings, wherein all the
variety of the gifts of God, bestowed on men, is gathered together, and things
concerning the state of the whole Christian Church treated of, he is present
in most peculiar sort and manner. Secondly, though Christ the son of God,
gave no authority to the whole universality of Christian men, and therein the
Church and Commonwealth may seem to differ, yet he gave Commission to the
Generality of pastors, more then to each one apart, and being assembled, they
have that power which severally they have not, as to ordain, judge, suspend,
and depose pastors and Bishops. And howsoever, in each Province the rest are to
know him that is the first among them, and to do nothing pertaining to the
whole Province, without consulting him first, yet may he do nothing without
them. And as this is the Canon and Law of the Church in particular Provinces,
so in Churches of larger extent, comprehending whole countries, subject to one
Patriarch, and much more in the whole Church, wherein there is no one having so
much power in respect of the rest, as the Metropolitan has, in respect of the
Bishops of the Province; and the Patriarch, in respect of the Metropolitanes:
For the Bishops are to be ordained by the Metropolitan, and the
Metropolitanes are to be ordained, or at least confirmed by the Patriarch;
whereas among the Patriarchs, there is no one, to whom it pertayneth to
ordain the rest, or to confirm them in any special sort, or otherwise then
they are to confirm him.

Thus then it being proved by conuincing reasons, and the confession, not
only of such Papists as make the Pope among Bishops to be but as the Duke of
Venice among the great Senators of that State (greater then each one, but
inferior to the whole company of them) but of such also as attribute much more
unto him; that he has no such Presidentship in General Councels, as that he
may determine what he will against the liking of all, or the greater part of
Bishops, but that he is bound to follow the greater part; and that General
Councels are of force, not from the absolute authority of the Pope, only
aduising with other Bishops* but from their consents as well as his: Let us
proceed to see if the practice of former times prove not the same. I find
(says Concord. Cathol. lib. 2. c. 8.
Cusanus) that in all the first Eight General Councels, the Popes, or the
Legates of the Popes, (for themselves were never present in person) did ever
subscribe in the very same sort that the other Bishops did, without note of
any singularity. For every Bishop was wont to subscribe in this form,
An^ens, vel consentiens, vel statuens, vel definiens, subscripsi: and this was
the form the Legates of the Bishop of Rome observed. But (says Cusanus)
that no man may doubt, but that all things were determined by the joint consent
of such as met in General Councels, and not by the sole authority of the
Bishop of Rome alone, we find in the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon,
that Dioscorus being the third time warned to appear, and refusing so to do,
Paschasinus the Legate of Leo the Pope, said unto the Synod, We desire to
learn of your Holiness, what punishment he is worthy of. To whom the Synod
answering, let that be done, that is agreeable to the Canons: Paschasinus
said, Does your righteousness or reverend worthiness command us to use
Canonical vengeance against him? Do you consent? or do you resolve
otherwise? The holy Synod said, we consent, none dissenteth. This is the
agreeing and consenting will of the whole Synod. Julian the Bishop of Hypepa
said to the Legates of Leo, We desire your Holiness, in that you are more
eminent then the rest, having the place of the most holy Pope Leo, to pronounce
the sentence of just vengeance against this contumacious person, the Canons
requiring the same. For, we all, and the whole Synod agree to the sentence of
your Holiness. Paschasinus said, Let what pleases your blessedness be
pronounced with unanimous consent. Maximus of Antioch said, what your holiness
thinks fit to be done, we consent unto. After this the Apostolical Legates
pronounced the sentence, whereby Leo the Pope had deposed and condemned
Dioscorus, and thenadded. Let not this holy Synod be slack to determine what
is agreeable to the canons touching Dioscorus. Whereupon Anatolius of
Constantinople, and every Bishop in the council gave sentence against him,
saying, I judge him to be rejected from all Sacerdot (...) and Episcopal
Ministry. Here (says Cusanus) the Reader may see, that the Apostolical
Legates (because they have the first place in the council) pronounce the
sentence, and yet no otherwise, but if the council command them so to do;
that all in order pronounce sentence likewise; and that the force of the
sentence depends on the unity and consent of will in them that are present.
Neither is this course observed only in General councels; but that, in those
also that were Patriarchicall the other Bishops subscribed in the very same
form that the Bishop of Rome did, it is evident. For, in the council under
Pope Martine, before the sixth General council, Martine subscribed in this
sort: I Martine, Bishop of the city of Rome, decreeing and determining, have
subscribed to this definition of confi^ation of the true faith and condemnation
of Sergius of Constantinople, Pyrrhus and Paulus: And in the very same sort
subscribed Maximus of Aquileia, defining and confirming the true Faith, and
condemning the Heretics: And so did a hundred and three Bishops more. And
in the council under Symmachus we read that the Synod said: whatsoever
Clearke, Monk, or Layman, either of the superior or inferior order, shall
presume to go against these decrees, let him by the sentence of the canon be
rejected as a Schismaticke. And the Bishops subscribed thus. I Symmachus, of
the holy catholic church of the city of Rome, have subscribed to this
constitution made by us, by the inspiration of the Lord. I Lawrence, Bishop of
the church of Millaine, have subscribed to this constitution made by us, etc.
And so the rest in order. In the Council of Africa, Gennadius said, We must
by our several subscriptions give force and strength to the things we have
spoken: And all the Bishops said, Fiat, fiat, that is, Let us so do. So the
Vicars of old Rome said in the eight General council: Seeing by the happy
providence of God all things are come to a good end, we must by subscription
give strength to that which is done. And the like we find in the end and
conclusion of all councels: Hactenus ex Cusano. Loco citato.
whereby it appears, that the strength, vigor, and force of all canons made
in councels, is from the uniform consent of them that have voices in councels,
and not from the Pope, or head of such assemblies. In the Action 5
council of Chalcedon we find, that a form of a decree touching the faith was
agreed on by all, besides the Romans, and certain of the East, who would have
some things added out of the Epistles of Leo. The Bishops urged, that all had
liked and approved that form the day before, and that it did confirm the
Epistle of Leo, which they all had received, and desired the Judges, that all
might be cast out of the Synod that would not subscribe. The Vicars of Rome on
the contrary side told them, that if they would not consent to the Epistle of
Leo, they would return, that a Synod might be holden in the West: and the
Judges commanded them to come to some conference, a certain selected number
of them: or else to declare their Faith by their several Metropolitanes, that
so there might remain no further doubt or discord: and told them, that if they
would follow none of these courses, nor agree to make a certain Decree
touching the true Faith, a Synod should be holden in the West. So that we see,
that without the concurrence of the other Bishops, nothing could be done by the
Romans, and those of the East: that there was no other remedy, in case they
would not have agreed in determining the doubts then a foot, but to call
another Synod, wherein a greater number of the Western Bishops might be
present. So that the Pope was not at that time reputed an abso lute commander
in General councels.

CHAP. 51.
Of the assurance of finding out the Truth, which the Bishops assembled in
General Councels have.

Having showed who have decisiue voices in General Councels, what presence of
Bishops is necessary to the being of them, what order is to be observed in
their procedings, who is President in them, and what his authority is, it
remains that we proceed to see what assurance they have of finding out the
Truth, and who is to call them. Touching the first of these two, some have
been of opinion, that the Bishops and Fathers in Councels are so guided by the
spirit of Truth, that their Decrees and determinations may be joined to the
Canonical Scripture, and reckoned parts of it. This position Melchior Locor.
Theologic. li. 5. ca. 5.
Canus says, a man excellently learned, and that had so profited in Divinity,
that he might be thought matchable with great and eminent Divines, feared not
to hold in his hearing: and adds, that Did. 19. ca. In Canonicis.
Gratian seems to have been of the same opinion, where he affirms, that
the Decretall Epistles of Popes are Canonical Scripture, and alleges Austine
for proof thereof. But the fame Canus refuteth that opinion as absurd, and
shows that Gratian mistook Saint Austine. For whereas Saint Austine has
these words, Aug. de Doctrine Christ. lib. 2. cap. 8.
In Canonicis scripturis Ecclesiarum Catholicarum quamplurium authoritatem
sequatur: inter quas sane illae sunt, qu^ Apostolicas seeds habere, and
epistolas accipere meruerunt. That is: In reckoning the books of Canonical
Scripture, let the diligent searcher of the Scriptures follow the authority
of the greater number of Catholic Churches. Among which they truly which were
so happy, as to have Apostolic seats, and to receive Epistles from Apostles,
are specially and principally to be regarded. Gratian cites the place thus; In
Canonicis Scripturis Ecclesiarum Catholicarum quam plurimum scripturarum
solertissimus indagator authoritatem sequatur: inter quas fane illae sunt quas
Apostolica seeds habere and ab ea alij meruerunt accipere epistolas. So that
whereas Saint Augustine says, that in reckoning the Canonical books of
Scripture, a man must follow the authority of the greater number of Catholic
Churches, and among them especially such as either had Apostolical seats, as
Jerusalem and the like; or received Epistles from some of the Apostles, as did
the Churches of Corinth and Galatia; Gratian makes him say, that the Epistles
which the Apostolical See received, or other received of it, are to be
reckoned among Canonical Scriptures. This oversight of Gratian, De fide and
ordine credendi. Theorem. 15.
Picus Mirandula long since observed, and after him Aduersus haeres. lib. 1.
cap. 2.
Alfonsus a Castro: whereby we may see how easy it was for men in former
times to run into most gross errors; before the reviving of learning in
these latter times, while the blind did lead the blind. For Gratian was the
man out of whom Turrecremata. lib. 4. summae de ecclesia part 2. cap. 9. and
Caietan. in lib. de primatu Romans Ecclesiae cap. 14. were misled in this point.
by Gratian as Alphonsus notes.
the greatest Divines of former times took all their authorities of Fathers
and Councles, as appears by their marginall quotations. And how ignorantly
and negligently he mistook them, and mis-alleaged the^, this one example is
proof sufficient.

But whatsoever we think of Gratian we shall find that not only our Divines,
but the best learned among our adversaries also, put a greatdifference between
the sacred scriptures of the holy Canon, and the Decrees of Councels. For,
first they say, the Scripture is the word of God revealed immediately, and
written in a sort from his own mouth; according to that of S. Peter; 2. Pet.
1. 21.
the holy men of God, spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost: And that of
S. Paul: 2. Tim. 3. 16.
All Scripture is by divine inspiration: which is not so to be understood, as
if always the holy Writers had had new revelations, and had always written
that, which before they were ignorant of: for it is certain that the
Evangelists Matthew and John, wrote those things which they saw, and Mark and
Luke those things they heard from others, as Luke himself confesses in the
beginning of his Gospel. But the holy writers are therefore said to have had
immediate revelation, and to have written the words of God himself: because
either some new things and not known before, were revealed to them by God: or
because God immediately inspired and moved the Writers to write those things
which they had seen and heard and directed them that they should not any way
err in writing: whereas Councels neither have, nor write immediate revelations
or words of God, but only declare which is that word of God uttered formerly to
the Prophets and Apostles, how it is to be understood, and what conclusions
may be deduced from it by discourse of reason. Secondly, the holy Writers
performed that which they did, without any further labor or travel, then
that, in writing and calling to mind what they had seen and heard: but in
Councels, the Bishops and Fathers, with great pain and travel, seek out
the truth by discourse, conference, reading and deep meditation: and
therefore the holy Writers are wont to attribute all to God only, and the
Prophets were wont often to repeat, The Lord says. Thirdly, in the
Scriptures, not onethe whole sentences, but every word pertains to Faith: for
no word is therein vain or ill placed. But in Councels there are many
disputations going before resolution, many reasons brought for confirmation of
things resolved on, many things added for explication and illustration, many
things uttered obiter, and in passage, that men are not bound to admit as
true and right: nay many things are defined in Councels that men are not bound
to stand unto. For it is the manner of Councels, sometimes to define a thing as
certainly and undoubtedly true, pronouncing them Heretics that think
otherwise, and subiecting them to curse and Anathema: and sometimes as probable
only, and not certain, as the Clementina vnica De summa Trinitate and fide
Catholica.
Council of Vienna decreed, that it is more probable, that both grace, and
virtues accompanying grace, are infused into Infants when they are baptized,
then that they are not: and yet is this no matter faith in the Church of Rome.
Fourthly, in the scripture all things, (as well concerning particular persons,
as in generality) are undoubtedly true. For, it is as certain that Peter and
Paul had the spirit of God, as that no man can be saved without the
illumination and sanctification of the spirit: but in the determinations and
decrees of Bishops assembled in a general council it is not so: for they
may err in judging of the persons of men, and therefore there is no absolute
certainty in the canonization of Saints, as both Quodlibet. 9. art. vlt.
Thomas and Locorum. Theol. li. 5. c. 5. Citat etiam Antoninum. part. 3. tit.
12. cap. 8. Idem and Caietan. Opusc. de indulgent ad Iulium. ca. 8.
Canus do confess. Fifthly, in Scriptures there are no precepts touching
manners, either concerning the whole church or any part of it, that are not
right equal, and just. But councels may err, if not in prescribing things
evil, in stead of good, yet in prescribing things not fitting nor expedient,
if not to the whole church, yet to some particular part of it, as not knowing
the condition of things therein. Yea Vide Canum Loco citato.
some there are that think it not heretical to believe, that general councels
may prescribe some laws to the whole church, that are not right, profitable,
and just: as to honor such a one for a Saint, who indeed is no Saint: to admit
such orders of Religious men as are not profitable: to receive the communion
only in one kind, and the like. And there are Andrad. de authoritate (...)
Concilior. lib. 1. sol. 66.
many that confidently pronounce, that general counsels may decree such
things as may breed inconvenience, and may savor of too great severity and
austerity, which the guides of the church in the execution of the same must be
forced to qualify and temper. So that the only question is, whether a
general council may certainly, define any thing to be true in matter of
faith, that is false: or command the doing of any act as good and an act of
virtue, that indeed and in truth is an act of sin. Touching this point,
there are that say, that all interpretations of holy Scriptures agreed on in
general councels, and all resolutions of doubts concerning things therein
contained, proceed from the same Spirit from which the holy Scriptures were
inspired: and that therefore general councels cannot err either in the
interpretation of Scriptures, or resolving of things doubtful concerning the
faith. But these men should know, that Occam. Dialog. li. 3. primi tract. 3.
part. cap. 8.
though the interpretations and resolutions of Bishops in general councels,
proceed from the same Sperit, from which the Scriptures were inspired, yet not
in the same sort, nor with like assurance of being free from mixture of
error. For the Fathers assembled in general councels, do not rely upon
immediate revelation, in all their particular resolutions and determinations,
as the Writers of the Books of holy Scripture did, but on their own
meditation, search and study, the general assistance of Divine grace
concurring with them. That the Fathers assembled in General councels, rely not
upon any special and immediate revelations, may easily be proved by sundry
good and effectual reasons. For first, whenever we hope to come to know any
thing by special and immediate revelation from God, we use not to betake our
selves to study and meditation, but to prayer only, and other good works, or
at least principally to these: Whence it is that Daniel when he hoped to
obtain of GOD the interpretation of Nebuchadnezars dream by special and
immediate revelation, did not exhort his companions and consorts by study to
search out the secret he desired to know, but by prayer and supplication to
seek it of GOD. And after he had found out the secret he sought for, he
said, Dan. 2. 23.
O God of my Fathers, I confess unto thee, and praise thee, because thou have
given me wisdom and strength, and have showed unto me those things which we
desired of thee, and have opened unto us the word of the King: Whence also it
is, that Christ promising-his Apostles, that he would reveal unto them what
they should speak, when they should be brought before Kings and Rulers,
wills them, To Math. 10. 19 and 20.
take no care how, or what to speak, for that it should be revealed unto them
in that hour what they should speak; It is not you that speak (says our
Savior) but the spirit of my Father that speaks in you. When as therefore
we hope to learn any thing of GOD by immediate revelation, we must not apply
our selves to study, and meditation, but to prayer. But when men meet in
General councels, to determine any doubt or question, they principally give
themselves to meditation, study and search; therefore they hope not to be
taught of GOD by immediate revelation. Secondly, when we desire to have things
made known unto us by immediate revelation from GOD, we go not to them that
are most learned, but to them that are most devout and religious, whether they
be learned or unlearned, whether of the clergy or the Laity, whether men or
women, because for the most part GOD reveals his secrets, not to them that
are wiser and more learned, but to them that are better, and more religious and
devout; according to that of our Savior, r I give thee thanks Math. 11. 25
O Father, LORD of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from
the wise, and men of understanding, and have opened them unto Babes. And
therefore the 2 Kings 22.
good King Josias, when he desired by revelation to know the will of GOD
touching the words of the volume that was found in the Temple, he sent
Helkiah the High Priest to Huldah the Prophetess, and sought not concerning
the words of the Law among the Priests, whose lips are to preserve
knowledge, and at whose mouth men ought to seek the Law: because though the
Law be to be sought at the mouth of the Priest, in all those things which may
be learned by study, meditation, and search, yet in those things that are to
be learned by revelation, recourse must be had to them that have the spirit
of prophecy, if any such be; or else to them that are most holy, and whose
prayers are most acceptable unto God. Neither are men for satisfaction in these
things, rather to go to the Priests, then to any Layman, that is utterly
unlearned; But in councels men go to them that are more learned, and of better
place in the church, though they be not the best and holiest men: Therefore
questions touching matters of faith, are not determined in councels by
immediate revelation. If it be said, that the Apostles and Elders, in that
first council which is mentioned in the Acts 15
Acts, relied on the knowledge they had of the Scriptures and Truth of GOD,
and did not wait for a new immediate revelation; and that therefore this kind
of reasoning will bring them within compass of the same danger of erring, that
we subject their Successors unto, because they rely not upon immediate
revelation, but search and study: It will be easily answered, that though the
Apostles and others assembled in that council, depended not upon immediate
revelation, but the knowledge they had of the Scriptures and Truth of GOD, and
thence inferred what was to be thought of the matter then in question, yet were
they not in danger of erring, as their successors are, because they relied not
on such imperfect knowledge, as study and meditation begets, but such as divine
revelatio^ causes: to wit, perfect and absolute; whence they knew how to
derive the resolution of any doubt or question, being specially assisted by
the Spirit of Truth. Neither let any man think that the Apostles assembled
in this Council were any way doubtful what to resolve, when they heard the
matter proposed, because there is mention made of great disputation in that
meeting: For, (as it may be thought) that questioning and disputing was among
the Elders and Brethren, and not among the Apostles; the meanest of them being
able to resolve a far greater matter without any the least doubt or stay. So
that it is absurd that Loc. Theolog. lib 5. cap. 5.
Melchior Canus from hence infers, that the Decrees of this Council,
wherein there was so great a dispute, are not Canonical Scripture, any other
ways then the words of Pilate are, because they are recorded by the
Evangelists in the holy Scripture. But to return to the matter, whence this
objection made us digress, it is no way necessary to think, that the Fathers
are any otherwise directed by the Spirit of Truth in General Councels, then
in Patriarchicall, National, or Provincial; Seeing General Counsels consist
of such as come with instructions from Provincial, National, and
Patriarchicall Synodes, and must follow the same in making Decrees, as has
been showed before: and consequently, that they are not led to the finding out
of the truth in any special sort or manner, beyond that general influence
that is required to the performance of every good work. So that as God
assisting Christian men in the Church, only in a general sort to the
performance of the works of virtue, there are ever some wel-doers, and yet no
particular man does always well; and there is no degree or kind of Moral
virtue commanded in the Law, but is attained by some one or other, at one time
or other, one excelling in one thing, and another in another, yet no particular
man, or company of men, has all degrees and perfections of virtue, as
Hieronym* lib: 1: contra Pelagianos.
Hierome fitly notes against the Pelagians: so in like sort, God assisting
Christian men in the Church, in seeking out the truth, only in general sort,
as in the performance of the actions of virtue, and not by immediate revelation
and inspiration, as in the Apostles times; there are ever some that hold and
profess all necessary truth, though no one man, or company of men do find the
truth ever, and in all things, nor any assurance can be had of any particular
men, that they should always hold all necessary truths.

And therefore we may safely conclude, that no man can certainly pronounce,
that whatsoever the greater part of Bishops assembled in a General Council
agree on, is undoubtedly true. Neither are we alone in this conclusion, but
sundry excellently Learned among our Adversaries in former times, even in the
midst of the Papacy, concurred in the same. For Doctrinal fidei. li: 2. c.
19.
Waldensis expressly affirms, that, General Counsels have erred, and may
err; and confidently delivers, that it is no particular Church, that has
assurance of holding the truth, and not erring from the Faith, neither that of
Africa, which Donatus so much admired, nor the particular Church of Rome, but
the Universal Church: nor that Universal Church which is gathered together in
a General Council, which we have found to have erred sometimes, (as that at
Ariminum under Taurus the Governor, and that at Constantinople under Justinian
the younger, in the time of Sergius the Pope, according to Beda and certain
other) but that Catholic Church of Christ which has been dispersed
throughout the whole world by the Ministry of the Apostles, and others their
successors, ever since the Baptism of Christ, and continued unto these times,
which undoubtedly keeps the true faith, and the faithful testimony of
Christ, teaching Babes Heavenly wisdom, and retaining the truth constantly in
the midst of all extremities of errors. And again in another place,
speaking of Counsels, he says; Ibid. cap. 27.
that which the multitude of Catholic Doctors, with unanimous consent,
resolves and delivers to be true, Catholic, and Orthodoxe, is not lightly
to be esteemed; though happily all that are there present are not led by the
spirit: for this very unanimous consenting is a great and excellent thing, and
much to be respected: though sometimes by the faults of men carried with
sinister respects, it tend to scandal and ruin: and thereupon, having showed
the different degrees of authority found in the Church, (which I have Book. 4.
ca. 5.
elsewhere set down at large) he pronounces Cap. 19.
; that only the consent of the Fathers successively from the beginning (as
absolutely free from danger of erring, and next in degree of authority to the
Canonical Scripture) is to be listened and hearkened unto: And that no man
should think it strange that the Fathers successively in all ages, should be
(...) certain and infallible Judges in matters of faith, then a General
Council of (...) ^ting at one time and in one place, seeing so many wise, just
and holy Fathers can neither be contained within the straites of one place,
nor are in the world at one time, but were given successively by Almighty God,
to give testimony unto the faith in their several times, in a constant and a
perpetual course: all which Fathers we may gather together, and have present
all at once, so often as we desire to consult them and to be resolved by them
in matters of difficulty and doubt, though they could never be all assembled
into one place, or meet together, while they lived in the flesh. Neither is
this the private conceit of Waldensis only, but De fide and ord. credendi
Theorem. 4.
Picus Mirandula affirms, that howsoever many Di^es are of opinion, that
general Counsels, wherein the Pope is present, cannot define any thing amiss
concerning faith and good living, yet there are other that dissent from them,
affirming that Counsels have erred, and may err, as that at Ariminium, and
the Second at Ephesus. Whereas the former sort answer, that these Councels
might err, because the Pope was not present in them, they reply, that the
second Council of Ephesus was lawfully called, the Popes Legates being
present, and yet tended to the overthrow of the true faith, so that Leo was
forced to procure the Council of Chalcedon for the reuersing of the Acts of
it. And this their opinion of the possibility of the erring of general
Councels, they prove and confirm by the possibility of their dissenting one
from another; and the possibility of their dissenting one from another, by the
directions which the Sea* Clemangis his disputation, with a certain Schoole-man
of Paris, wherein he proves by excellent reasons that General Counsels may
err. This disputation is found in the book in^uled Speculum Ecclesiae
Pontificiae, lately printed at London.
Divines do give, to show to which we are to stand, when they are found
contradictory one to another. Besides these, there are other who Syluester: vt
est apud Canum. lib. 5. c. 5.
say, that General Counsels may err for some short time, but that they
cannot long persist in error: and a third sort, Vt idem Canus refert.
who think that General Councels may err when they proceed disorderedly, or
use not that diligence they should.

Neither is this opinion of the possibility of the erring of general Councels,
the private conceit of late Writers, but the Ancient accord with them in the
same. For Lib. 2. de Baprismo. cap. 3.
Austine pronounces that the writings of the Bishops that have been
published since the Canon of the Scripture was perfited, may be censured and
reproved by such as see more; by the grauer authority of other Bishops, by the
prudence of the learned, and by Councels, if in any thing they be found to
have erred from the Truth; that Councels holden in several Regions and
Provinces, must without all resistance give way to those that are general; and
that among general Councels, the former must be content to be amended by the
latter, when by experiment that which was shut up is opened, and that which lay
hid is found out, and known. Neither does De Council. li. 2. cap. 7.
Bellarmines evasion, that Austine speaks of matters of fact, wherein
Councels may err, or of conversation and manners, which may vary, serve the
turn: seeing the drift of Austine is to show, that no writings of men are free
from errors, but only the Canonical Scriptures: and that therefore they must
be content to be examined judged, and controuled even in matters of Faith. And
Apud Gratian. did. 50. Ca. Domino Sancto.
Isidore speaking of differences in doctrine and matters of Faith, and not of
Fact only, as Bellarmine in the same place confesses, acknowledges that
Councels may dissent one from another, and consequently err: and gives
direction which is to be followed; in case such difference do fall out. I have
thought good (says he) to add in the end of this Epistle, that so often as in
the Acts of Counsels, there is found disagreement of judgment, the sentence
and judgment of that Council is rather to be holden, which in Antiquity or
greatness of authority excels the other. (...) Socates. lib. 2. cap. 29.


But what need we insist upon Authorities to prove that Councels may err? In
the time of Constantius the Emperor, we know there was a general Council
holden, consisting of exceeding many Bishops, gathered together out of all
parts of the world, one part of the^ meeting at Ariminium in the West, and the
other at Seleucia in the East. In both these divided assemblies, there were
exceeding many right believing Bishops, and between these, there was a
continual intercourse: and yet things were so carried, that both parts
consented to the betraying of the sincerity of the Christian profession, and
the wronging of worthy Athanasius: some purposely out of an heretical
disposition: some, out of a mistaking of things, being abused by cunning
companions; some for that they could no longer endure to stay in a strange
country, consenting to that which they should not have consented unto. If it
be said that Liberius Bishop of Rome, did not consent to this Council, it
will easily be answered, that though at the very first he did not consent to
the Heretical practices of the Arrians; yet in the end he did, after he had
been in banishment for a time. As likewise Vigilius refused to subscribe to
the Fifth General Council, till he was banished for his refusal. The only
thing that can be said, is, that they proceeded not orderly in this Council,
but violently, and fraudulently. But this absolutely overthrows the
infallibility of Councels, and their Decrees. For if Councels may err when
they proceed disorderly, and use not that diligence for the finding out of the
Truth, which they should, what certainty can there be in their Decrees? Seeing
it may be doubted, whether they proceeded orderly, and consequently, whether
they erred or not. Leo ep. 25.
Leo confesses, that in the Second Council of Ephesus, there were a great
number of worthy Bishops, who might have been sufficient to have found out and
cleared the Truth, if he that obtained the chief place had used accustomed
moderation, and suffered every one to speak his mind freely, and not forced
all to serve his vile designs. If it be said, that howsoever this was a
General Council, and lawfully called, yet the resolution was not the
resolution of a General Council, because it was not consented unto, but
mainely resisted by the Legates of the Bishop of Rome, we shall find that in
the Vt patet ex Epistola Nicolai ad Patriarchas and caeteros Episc. Orientis,
and ex Zonara in vita Mic^. Imp.
councels under Michael the Emperor, the Legates of the Bishop of Rome
consented also to an ill and unlawful conclusion there made. If it be further
alleged, that howsoever the Legates of the Bishop of Rome may err as well as
other Bishops in the council, when they presume to define without
instructions, or to go against their instructions, yet the Pope himself
cannot give consent to any thing that is not true and right; it will be proved
that Popes also may be so misled by sinister affections, as not only to
consent to that they should not, but also to miscarry all in Council as well
as others. For In chron: an. 90
Sigebert reports, that Stephen Bishop of Rome, and after him Sergius,
called Councels, and proceeded in them in furious manner against Formosus their
Predecessor, not only pulling his dead body out of the grave, and
despightfully re-ordaining such as he ordained, but judicially pronouncing and
defining, that his ordinations were void, which was an error in Faith, seeing
he was known once to have been a true and lawful Bishop, though in respect
of perjury or violent intrusion, he had been judged never to have been
lawful Bishop of Rome.

But here I cannot pass by the contradiction of Cardinal Bellarmine,
strangely forgetting himself, and saying he knows not what. For first he
says, Ce conc. in Lib: 2. c. 2.
it is certain, and a matter of Faith, that a General council confirmed by
the Pope, cannot err. Secondly, he says, De Pont. l. 4. c. 3.
the infallibility of Councels is wholly in the Pope, and not partly in the
Pope, partly in the Bishops. And thirdly he says, De conc. l. 2. c. 5.
he dares not to affirm it to be a matter of Faith, that the Pope is free
from danger of erring, though he have a particular Council concurring with
him. So strangely does the good man cross himself, and ouer-throw that in one
place which he built in another. For how can it be certain and a matter of
Faith, that the General Council approved by the Pope, cannot err, if it have
no certainty of not erring but from the Pope, and it be not certain that the
Pope cannot err. That Councels, though lawful, to which nothing wanted but
the Popes consent, have erred, he says, it is most certain and undoubted. So
that General Councels are not in themselves free from error, but their
infallibility rests in the Pope. Now that it is not certain, that the Pope
is free from danger of erring, he proves, first, because they are still
tolerated by the Church, and not condemned as Heretics, that think the pope
subject to error, even in judicial sentence and decree. Secondly, out of
Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 2. 3. and 4.
Eusebius, who says, that Cornelius the pope with a National council of all
the Bishops of Italy decreed, that Heretics ought not to be rebaptized, and
Stephen afterward approved the same sentence, and commanded that Heretics
should not be rebaptized; and yet Ep 74. ad p^mp.
Cyprian thought the contrary, and earnestly maintained it, charging Stephen
with error and obstinacy, which he would not have done, if he had thought the
pope free from danger of erring. Neither would the Church have honored him as
a Catholic Bishop and blessed Martyr, that thus confidently contradicted the
Pope, and resisted his decrees and mandates, if it were certain, and a matter
of Faith, and all men under pain of Heresy bound to believe, that the Pope
cannot err. Wherefore to conclude this point, how can we be sure with the
certainty of Faith, that General Councels cannot err, if their infallibility
depend on the Popes, who may be most prodigiously impious, and worse then
infidells; not only erring in some particular points concerning the Faith, but
overthrowing all, as he did, that Picus Theorem. 4.
Mirandula speaks of, who peremptorily denied that there is any God; and
confirmed the same his execrable impiety by the manner of his entering into the
Popedom, and living in it: And that other Ibidem.
he speaks of, who denied the immortality of the soul, though after his
death, appearing to one of them to whom in his life time he had uttered that
his impious conceit, he told him he now found, to his endless woe and misery,
that soul he thought mortal to be immortal, and never to dye.

Yet Ockam. Dialog. lib. 3. primi tract. 3. part. cap. (...).
when there is a lawful General Council according to the former description,
to wit, wherein all the Patriarchs are present, either in person, or by their
deputies, and the Synod of Bishops under them signify their opinion, either
by such as they send, or by their Provincial letters, if there appear nothing
to us in it, that may argue an unlawful proceeding, nor there be no
gaine-saying of men of worth, place, and esteem, we are so strongly to
presume that it is true and right, that with unanimous consent is agreed on in
such a Council, that we must not so much as profess publicly that we
think otherwise, unless we do most certainly know the contrary, yet may
we in the secret of our hearts remain in some doubt, carefully seeking by the
Scripture and Monuments of antiquity to find out the Truth. Neither is it
necessary for us expressly to believe whatsoever the Council has concluded,
though it be true; unless by some other means it appear unto us to be true,
and we be convinced of it, in some other sort then by the bare determination
of the Council only. But it suffices that we believe it, implicit, and, in
praeparatione animi, that out of the due respect we bear to the Councels
Decree, we dare not resolve otherwise, and be ready expressly to believe it, if
it shall be made to appear unto us. But, concerning the General Councels of
this sort, that hitherto have been holden, we confess that in respect of the
matter about which they were called, so nearly, and essentially concerning the
life and soul of the Christian Faith, and in respect of the manner and form
of their proceeding, and the evidence of proof brought in them, they are, and
ever were expressly to be believed by all such as perfectly understand the
meaning of their determination. And that therefore it is not to be maruailed
at, if Greg. lib. (...). Epist. 24.
Gregory profess, that he honors the first four Councels as the four
Gospels; and that whosoever admits them not, though he seem to be a Stone
elect and precious, yet he lies beside the foundation and out of the
building. Of this sort there are only six; the first, defining the Son of
GOD to be co-essentiall, co-eternall, and co-equall with the Father. The
second, defining that the holy Ghost is truly God, co-essentiall, co-eternall,
and co-equall with the Father and the Son. The third, the unity of Christ's
person. The fourth, the distinction and diversity of his natures, in, and after
the personal union. The fifth, condemning some remains of Nestorianisme; more
fully explaining things stumbled at in the Council of Chalcedon, and
accursing the Heresy of Origin and his followers, touching the temporal
punishments of Devils and wicked Cast-awayes: and the Sixth, defining and
clearing the distinction of operations, actions, powers, and wills in Christ,
according to the diversity of his natures. These were all the lawful General
Counsels (lawful I say both in their beginning, and proceeding, and
continuance) that ever were holden in the Christian Church, touching matters of
Faith. For the Seventh, which is the second of Nice, was not called about any
question of Faith, but of manners: In which our Adversaries confess there may
be something inconueniently prescribed, and so as to be the occasion of great
and grievous evils: and surely that is our conceit of the Seventh General
Council, the second of Nice: for howsoever it condemn the religious adoration
and worshipping of Pictures and seem to allow no other use of them, but that
which is Historical: yet in permitting men by outward signs of reverence and
respect toward the Pictures of Saints, to express their love toward them,
and the desire they have of enjoying their happy society, and in condemning so
bitterly such as upon dislike of abuses, wished there might be no Pictures in
the Church at all: it may seem to have given some occasion, and to have opened
the way unto that gross Idolatry which afterward entered into the Church.
The Eigth General Council was not called about any question of Faith or
Manners, but to determine the question of right between Photius and Ignatius,
contending about the Bishopric of Constantinople. So that there are but
seven General Councels, that the whole Church acknowledges, called to
determine matters of Faith and Manners. For the rest that were holden
afterward, which our Adversaries would have to be accounted General, they
are not only rejected by us, but by the Grecians also, as not General, but
Patriarchicall only: because either they consisted only of the Western
Bishops, without any concurrence of those of the East; or, if any were
present (as in the Council of Florence there were) they consented to those
things which they agreed unto, rather out of other respects, then any matter
of their own satisfaction. And therefore howsoever we dare not pronounce that
lawful General Councels are free from danger of erring (as some among our
Adversaries do) yet do we more honor and esteem, and more fully admit all
the General Councels that ever hitherto have been holden, then they do; who
fear not to charge some of the chiefest of them with error, as both the Cap.
5.
Second, and the Action. 15. Canon. 28.
Fourth, for equalling the Bishop of Constantinople to the Bishop of Rome;
which I think they suppose to have been an error in Faith.

CHAP. 52.
Of the calling of Counsels; and to whom that right pertains.

FROM the assurance of Truth which lawful General Counsels have, let us
proceed to see by whom they are to be called. The state of the Christian
Church, the good things it enjoys, and the felicity it promises, being
spiritual, is such, that it may stand, though not only forsaken, but
grievously oppressed by the great men of the world: and does not absolutely
depend on the care of such as manage the great affairs of the World, and
direct the outward course of things here below: and therefore it is by all
resolved on, that the Church has her Guides and Rulers distinct from them that
bear the Sword, and that there is in the Church a power of conuocating these
her Spiritual Pastors, to consult of things concerning her welfare, though
none of the Princes of the World do favor her, nor reach forth unto her their
helping hands: neither need we to seek far, to find in whom this power
rests: for there is no question, but that this power is in them that are
first, and before other, in each company of spiritual Pastors and Ministers;
seeing none other can be imagined, from whom each action of consequence, and
each common deliberation, should take beginning, but they, who are in order,
honor, and place before other, and to whom, the rest that govern the Church
in common, have an eye, as to them, that are first in place among them.
Hereupon, we shall find that the calling of Diocesan Synodes, pertains to the
Bishop; of Provincial to the Metropolitan; of National, to the Primate; and
of Patriarchicall, to the Patriarch; in that they are in order, honor, and
place before the rest; though some of these (as De Concilijs li, 2. cap. 12.
Bellarmine truly notes) have no commanding authority over the rest. Touching
Diocesan Synodes, I showed Chap. 29.
before, that the Bishop is bound once every year at least to call unto him
the Presbyters of his Church, and to hold a Synod with the^: and the Canon.
19. and 20.
Council of Antioch ordains, that the Metropolitan shall call together the
Bishops of the Province by his letters, to make a Synod. And the Canon. 6.
Council of Tarracon in Spain decrees, that if any Bishop warned by the
Metropolitan, neglect to come to the Synod (except he be hindered by some
corporal necessity) he shall be deprived of the communion of all the Bishops
until the next Council. The Canone 1
Epaunine Council in like sort orders, that when the Metropolitan shall
think good to call his Brethren the Bishops of the same Province to a Synod,
none shall excuse his absence without an evident cause. Touching National
Councels, and such as consist of the Bishops of many Provinces, such as were
the Councels of Africa, the calling of them pertained unto the Primate, as it
appears by the second council of Canone 1
Carthage, in that the Bishop of Carthage being the Primate of Africa by virtue
of particular canons concerning that matter, by his Letters called together the
rest of the Metropolitanes and their Bishops. And concerning Patriarchicall
councels, the Canone 17
eighth General council takes order, that the Patriarch shall have power to
convocate the Metropolitanes that are under him, and that they shall not refuse
to come when he calls them, unless they be hindered by urgent causes. And to
this purpose it was, that the Bishops within the Patriarchship of Rome were
once in the year to visit the Apostolical thresholds; which to do, they take
an oath still even to this day (as De concord cath. l. 2. c. 18. cit. did. 93.
c. 4
Cusanus notes) so that it is evident, that there is a power in Bishops,
Metropolitanes, Primates, and Patriarchs, to call Episcopal, Provincial,
National, and Patriarchicall Synodes; and that neither so depending of, nor
subject to the power of Princes, but that when they are enemies to the Faith,
they may exercise the same without their consent and privity, and subject them
that refuse to obey their summons; to such punishments as the canons of the
Church do prescribe in cases of such contempt or wilful negligence. But that
we may see to whom the calling of General Councels does pertain in the times
of persecution, and when there are no Christian Princes, we must observe, that
among the Patriarchs, though one be in order before another, (As the
Patriarch of Alexandria is before the Patriarch of Antioch, and the Patriarch
of Rome before the Patriarch of Alexandria) yet is not one of them superior to
another in degree, as Bishops are to Presbyters; nor so in order, honor, and
place, as Metropolitanes are to Bishops, or Patriarchs to Metropolitanes, whom
they are to ordain, or at the least to confirm: And therefore no one of them
singly and by himself alone, has power to call unto him any Patriarch, or any
Bishop subject to such Patriarch; But as in case when there grows a
difference between the patriarchs of one See and another, or between any of
the patriarchs and the Metropolitanes and Bishops subject to them; the
superior patriarch not of himself alone, but with his Metropolitanes, and
such particular Bishops as are interessed, may judge and determine the
differences between them, if without danger of a further rent it may be done
(as in the case of Chrysostom and Theophilus it could not;) So if there be any
matter of Faith, or any thing concerning the whole state of the Christian
church, wherein a common deliberation of all the pastors of the church is
necessary, he that is in order the first among the patriarchs, with the
Synodes of Bishops subject to him; may call the rest together, as being the
principal part of the church, whence all actions of this nature do take
beginning: And this is that which Julius Bishop of Rome has, when Apud
Athanas. Apol. 2.
writing to the Bishops of the East, he tells them, that the manner and
custom is, that they should write to him and the Western Bishops first; that
from thence might be decreed the thing that is just: and again, that they
ought to have written to them all, that so that which is just might be decreed
by all. And hence it is that Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 9.
Damasus, Ambrose, Brito, Valerianus, and the rest of the holy Bishops
assembled in the great city of Rome, out of their brotherly love sent for the
Bishops of the East, as their own members, praying and desiring them to come
unto them, that they might not reign alone. So that the power of calling
General Councels, when the church has no princes to assist her, is not in the
Pope, but in the Western Synod: and yet has not this Synod any power over
all the other Churches, as a supreme Commander, but is only (as a principal
part among the rest) to begin, procure, and set forward, as much as in her
lies, such things as pertain to the common good: neither may it by virtue of
any canon, custom, or practice of the church, excommunicate the rest for
refusing to hearken when it calls: as it appears by the former example: in
that they of the East came not when they were called, and entreated to come to
Rome by Damasus, Ambrose and the rest; but stayed at Constantinople, did some
things which they disliked, and yet were forced to give way unto them, and as
being greater in authority then they, bare the name of the general Council:
though they were assembled at Rome, at the same time in a very great number.
But if the greater part concur with them, they may excommunicate those few,
that shall wilfully and causelessly refuse to obey them. If it be said, that
hence it will follow, that there is no certain means of having a general
Council at all times, as there is of Provincial or Patriarchicall, (which may
seem absurd) it will be answered, that Bellar, ait Aliqua Concilia
Simpliciteresse necessaria, generalia non simpliciter sed suo quodam modo. lib.
1. de Conciliorum authorit. cap. 11. and 10.
there is not the like necessity of having General Councels, as there is of
having those more particular Synodes: and that therefore it is not absurd to
grant, that the Church has not at all times certain and infallible means to
have a General Council, as it has to have the other. Nay, that it has not,
it most plainly appears, in that Sozomen. lib. 8. cap. 18.
in the case of Chrysostom greatly distressed and greiuously wronged,
Innocentius professed unto him, he knew no means to help him, but a General
Council; which to obtain, he became an humble futer to the Emperor, but was
so far from prevailing, that the messengers he sent were returned back
again unto him with disgrace.

Thus we see to whom the calling of Councels pertains, when there is no
Christian Magistrate to assist the Church, but when there is a Christian
Magistrate, it pertains to him to see, that these assemblies be duly holden
accordingly as the necessity of the Church requires, and the Canons prescribe.
And therefore we shall find, that though Christian Emperors, Kings and
Princes within their several dominions, oftentimes permitted Bishops,
Metropolitanes and Patriarchs, to hold Episcopal, Provincial, National, or
Patriarchicall Councels, without particular intermedling therein, when they saw
neither negligence in those of the Clergy, in omitting to hold such Councels
when it was fit, nor intrusion into their office; yet, so often as they saw
cause, they took into their own hands the power of calling these more
particular Synodes: And touching general, there was never any that was not
called by the Emperor.

That Emperors, Kings and Princes in their several dominions respectively
called particular Councels, is proved by innumerable examples. For Constantine
the great, called the first Council of Arle as it appears by his Tom. 1.
Conciliorum. page 267. apud Binnium.
Epistle to Crestus: and Binnius confesses it. The Council of Aquileia was
called by the Emperors, as it appears by the Epistle of the Council to
Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius the Emperors, in the first Page 523.
Tome of the Counsels. The Tom. 1. Council. page 535. Binnius ex S^uero. lib.
2. and Prospero in Chronico Maximum Imp. indixisse oftendit
Council of Burdegalis was called by the Emperor against Priscillian. The
Council of Agatha by the permission of the King, as as appears in the Page
304.
second Tome of the Councels. The Tom. 2. Council. page 309.
first of Orleans was called by Clodoueus. The Tom. 2. page 314.
Epaunine Council by Sigismund the son of Gundebald. The second of Tomo. 2.
page 477.
Orleans, by the command of Childebert the French King. The Council of Tomo.
2. page 508.
Aruerne, by the permission of the King Theodobertus. The Fifth of Tomo. 2.
page 514.
Orleans, by Childebert. The first of Tomo. 2. page 640.
Bracar, by Ariamirus, or (as some will have it) Theodomirus. The second of
Tomo. 2. page 656.
Turon, with the conniuence of the King. The second of Tomo. 2. page 663.
Bracar by Ariamirus. The Tomo. 2. 697.
first Cabilon Council, by the mandate of Gunthram; as likewise that of Tomo.
2. 698.
Matiscon, and Tomo. 2. 705.
Valentia. The third of Tomo. 2. 706.
Toledo by Richaredus. The Councels of Tomo. 2. 722.
Narbone, and Tomo. 2. 956.
Caesar-Augusta; by Richaredus, King of Sueueland. Many other examples might be
produced, but these suffice, to show what the ancient practice was, and what
Christian Princes in former times took upon them in this behalf. And that
they did lawfully, so to intermeddle, it appears, in that Lib. 7. Epist. 114.
citat. a Cusan. lib. 3. Concord. Cathol. cap. 10.
S. Gregory writing to Theodoricus, exhorts him by the crown of life, to
call Councels, and reform abuses.

Wherefore let us proceed to see who called the General Counsels, that have
bin holden in the Christian Church. Having perused (says Concor. Cath. lib. 3.
cap. 13.
Cusanus) the Acts of all the General Councels, to the Eighth inclusiuely:
which Eighth was holden in the time of Basilius the Emperor, I find, that they
were all called by the Emperors. Whereupon (says he) Elias the most holy
Presbyter, that supplied the place of the Bishop of Jerusalem said openly in
the Eighth General Council, in the hearing of all, that Emperors did ever
call Councels, and that Basilius was not inferior to those that went before
him, in the care of providing for the Church by Synodall meetings. And
Anastasius the Popes Library Keeper, in his Gloss upon the same place, says,
that the Emperors were wont to call Counsels out of the whole world. Which
thing is so clear, that Apolog. 2. contra Ruffinu^.
Hierome writing against Ruffinus, and taking exception againsta certain
Council, bids him say, what Emperor it was that commanded that Council
to be called? and therefore De Concilijs. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Bellarmine confesses it, and gives four reasons, why it was so: whereof the
first is, for that there was an Imperial Law, that there should not be any
great Assemblies without the Emperors priuity, consent, and authority, for
fear of sedition. The second, for that all those Cities in which such Councels
might be holden, being the Emperors, they might not be holden without his
consent. The third, for that the Counsels were holden at the Emperors
charges, both in respect of carriages, and the diet, and intertainment ofthe
Bishops, during the time of their being in Council, as Eusebius. de vita
Constantini. lib. 3. cap. 6.
Eusebius in the life of Constantine does testify; and Theodoret. lib. 1. cap.
7.
Theodoret in his History. The fourth, for that it was fit the Popes in
those times, acknowledging the Emperors to be their Sovereign Lords, should
(as we read they did) as suppliants beseech them to command Counsels to be
called. And surely, if we had neither his confession, nor reasons, we need
not doubt hereof, having the testimony of all stories to confirm the same. For
Lib. 10. cap. 1.
Ruffinus says, Constantine called the Council of Bishops at Nice: and with
him Lib. 1. cap. 7.
Theodoret agrees, saying expressly, that Constantine called the noble Synod
of Nice: and Lib. 3. cap. 6.
Eusebius in his book of the life of Constantine, affirming, that by his
letters most honorably written, he drew together the Bishops out of all
parts, marshalling them as a mighty army ofGod, to encounter the enemies of the
true faith. The occasion of calling this Council, was the Heresy of Arrius,
denying the Son ofGod to be consubstantiall with the Father. The next
General Council after this, was the first at Constantinople, called for the
suppressing of the Heresy of Macedonius and Eunomius, who denied the holy
Ghost to be God co-essentiall and co-eternall with the Father, and this
Council was called by Theodosius the elder, as Lib. 5. cap. 9.
Theodoret testifies. Euagrius. lib. 1. cap. 3.
The third was holden at Ephesus, and called by Theodosius the Younger, at the
suite of Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, fearing the proceedings of Cyrill
Bishop of Alexandria, and Caelestinus Bishop of Rome against him. The Fourth
Council was holden at Cahlcedon, and called by Martian the Emperor. The
occasion was this: Idem. lib. 1. cap. 9. and 1^.
In the time of Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople, the Heresy of Eutyches
began, about which a Provincial Council was called at Constantinople;
whereunto unfortunate Eutyches being called, was found to have uttered horrible
blasphemies: for he affirmed, that howsoever before the personal union, there
were two distinct natures in Christ, yet after the union, there was but one;
and besides affirmed, that his body was not of the same substance with ours:
Whereupon he was put from the Ministry of the Church and degree of
Priesthood. But not enduring thus to be deprived of his place and honor, he
complains to Theodosius the Emperor, pretending that Flauianus had fained
and devised matters against him, and rested not, till he procured a Synod at
Constantinople of the neighbor Bishops to re-examine the matters, who
confirming that which was formerly done, another by hi^s procurement was called
at Ephesus by Theodosius, and Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria made President
of it. In which Council all things were carried in a very disordered and
violent sort: for Dioscorus permitted not the Bishops to speak freely,
neither would he suffer the letters of the Bishop of Rome (who was absent)
to be read; such Bishops as he disliked, he violently cast out of the
Council, and retained none but such as were fit to serve his turn. He
deposed Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople, Eusebius of Dorileum, Domnus
Bishop of Antioch, and Theodoret, with sundry other. The Legates of the Bishop
of Rome offended with these violent proceedings, protested against them as
unlawful; and Flauianus (who was not only deprived, but so beaten, that not
long after he died) appealed to the Bishop of Rome, and other Bishops of the
West for help and remedy: upon the hearing of which complaints, Vt patet in
Epist. Leonis 42. and 43.
Leo then Bishop of Rome, with many other Bishops of the West, went to the
Emperor, and in most humble and earnest manner upon their knees besought him
to call a Council in Italy, which he would not yield unto, but called one at
Chalcedon, commanding him and all other Bishops to come unto it. The fifth
Council was holden at Constantinople, and called by Justinian the Elder, as
Lib. 4. c. 13
Euagrius testifies. I have showed Cap. 49.
before what the occasion of calling this council was, and that though
Vigilius Bishop of Rome, and the Western Bishops refused to be present in it,
together with the rest, or to confirm it when it ended, yet it was holden a
lawful council. The sixth General council was holden at Constantinople, and
was called by Constantine the fourth, as appears by his letters to the
Bishopps of Rome, Constantinople and the rest prefixed before it: The occasion
whereof was the Heresy of the Monothelites, who denied the diversity of wills,
actions, and operations in Christ, and consequently of natures. The seventh was
holden at Nice, about the use of Pictures in the church, and called by
Constantine the Emperor, as appears by his Epistle to Adrian Bishop of Rome,
prefixed before it. The eight was holdenat Constantinople, about the difference
between Ignatius and Photius, and called by Basilius the Emperor, as
appears by the Appendix to the Acts of that council; collected out of
diverse Authors by Surius, and extant in the second part of the third Tome of
Councels, set out by Binnius. So that we see all the Eight General Councels
were called by the Emperors, and not by the Popes, which thing is so clear
and evident, that our Adversaries dare not deny it, but seek to avoyde the
evidence ofthe truth (against which they dare not directly oppose themselves)
by all the shifts they can devise; for first they say, Bell. de conc. l. 1. c.
12.
that though it be not so proper to the Pope to call Councels, but that others
may do it, ifhee assent unto it or approve it, yet that without his Mandate,
Assent or Approbation of such indiction and calling, no council is lawful.
Secondly, they say, Ibid.
that the Emperors called councels by the authority of the Pope: and thirdly,
Andrad. de author. Gener. conc. l 3. p. 59.
that happily they presumed above that was fit forthem to do. Wherefore let us
see how they prove that they say.

That the right of calling Councels belongs to the Pope, and not to the
Emperor, and consequently, that the Emperor may call none without his assent,
Vbi supra.
Bellarmine endeavors to prove in this sort. They that meet in councels,
must be gathered together in the name of Christ: to be gathered in the name of
Christ, is, to be gathered by him that has authority from Christ; and none
has authority from Christ to call together the Pastors of the church, but the
Pope only: therefore none but the Pope may call councels. To this argument we
answer, that indeed they must meet in the name of Christ, who assemble in
councels: but that to meet in Christ's name, imports not in the promise made
by Christ, a gathering together of them that meet by his authority. And that
the Cardinal can never prove, that the Pope, and he only, is authorized to
call together the Pastors of the churches. That to be gathered together in
Christ's Name, imports not to be called together by public authority, as
Bellarmine untruly affirms, it is evident by his own confession, in that
he acknowledges, that the gathering together in Christ's Name, to which d De
conc. l. 2 c. 2.
he has promised to join his own presence, may be verified of many or few,
Bishops or Laymen, private or public persons, about private or public
affairs: whereas private men meeting about private businesses, are not
gathered together by any one having authority to command them, but by
voluntary agreement among themselves: and therefore De conc. author. l. 1. p.
13 and 14
Andradius tells us, that both by the circumstance of Christ's speech, and the
commentaries of the holy Fathers it is evident, that his words agree to every
meeting of such men, as being joined together in Faith and charity, ask any
thing of GOD: and particularly produces Hom. 6^. in Matthaeum.
Chrysostom expounding Christ's words as Calvine does, whom Bellarmine taxes;
to wit, that they are said to be gathered together in Christ's Name, whom
neither respect of private gain induces. nor the ambitious desire of honor
inviteth, nor the pricks ofhatred and envy incite and drive forward, whom the
inflamed love of peace, and the fervent affections of Christian charity impell,
and not the spirit of contention: and in one word, they who meet to seek out
(by force of divine grace, with common and heartiest longing desires sought and
obtained) what especially pleases Christ, and what is true. For they that come
together to set forward, and advance their own private designs and to serve
their own contentious dispositions, and to deceive miserable men with the
glorious name of a Council, are by no means to be thought to come together in
Christ's name, nor to hold Ecclesiastical assemblies, but such as are most
pestilent and hurtful: of which sort they were, which were holden heretofore
in the time of Constantine and Constantius, at Tyrus, Jerusalem, Antioch,
Sirmium, and Seleucia, and infinite other conuenticles of Heretics, to which
that most aptly agrees, which Epist. 25.
Leo the Pope pronounces of the second Council of Ephesus, to wit, that while
private causes were promoted and set forward under pretense of religion, that
was brought to pass by the impiety of a few, that wounded the whole Church.
But (says Bellarmine) this note of meeting in the fear of God, with desire of
finding out the truth and doing good, discerns not lawful Councels from
other, seeing all that meet in Councels, pretend that they come together out
of a desire of the common good, and not for private respects: and that
therefore this is not to meet in Christ's name: which is strangely said of him;
as if lawful Councels rightly proceeding in their deliberations, might not be
discerned from other by any thing that other may pretend: or as if this his
silly argument might sway against the circumstances of Christ's words, and the
Commentaries of the holy Fathers. Wherefore passing from this first exception
against his Argument, we secondly answer unto it, that Christ did not give
the power of calling General Councels to the Pope alone, as he alleges: and
in what sort Christ committed his Church to Peter, to be governed by him: as
likewise in what sense it is that Sermon. 3 in die Assumptionis.
Leo says, Though there be many Pastors, yet Peter rules them all, we have
largely Cap. 24.
declared already. So that from hence nothing can be concluded to prove, that
Christ gave the power and right of calling General Councels to the Pope alone;
And thirdly we say, that though it be true, that Christ did not leave his
Church to be governed by Tiberius Caesar an Infidel, so continuing, or to his
successors like unto him in Infidelity; yet he that promised to give Esaias 49.
23.
Kings to be nursing Fathers, and Queens to be nursing mothers unto his
Church, left it to be governed by those nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers,
which he meant in succeeding times to raise up for the good, comfort, and peace
of his faithful people, after that their faith, patience; and long suffering
(more precious then gold) should be sufficiently tried in the fire of
tribulation. Wherefore let us pass to the Cardinals second argument, which is
noe better then the first. For neither has the Pope power either Civil or
Ecclesiastical, to enforce all Bishops to be present at such assemblies as
he shall appoint, neither did the Emperors informer time want means to
enforce all to come when they called for them. And touching the present state
of things, we are not so foolish, as to think the right of calling general
Councels to rest in the Emperor, having so little command as now he has, but
we place it in the concurrence of Christian Princes, without which no lawful
General Council can ever be had. His third reason, taken from the proportion
of Metropolitanes and Patriarchs, calling Provincial and Patriarchicall
Synodes, holds not, as I have showed before. Neither that which seems of
all other to be strongest, taken from the ancient Canon of the Church, that
without the liking judgment, and will of the Bishop of Rome, no Council may be
holden, mentioned by Lib. 2. cap. 13.
Socrates and Lib. 3. cap. 9.
Zozomen. For first the Canon is not to be understood of the person of the
Bishop of Rome, but of him and his Western Bishops. Secondly, it is not so to
be understood, as if simply without him and his Bishops, no General Council
could be holden, but, that without consulting him, and first seeking to him
and his, no such Council may be holden; as I have largely Chap. 49.
showed before. For otherwise we know that Vigilius Bishop of Rome, refused
to have any part in the deliberations of the Fifth General Council, or to
confirm the Acts of it when it ended. Yet was is ever holden to be a lawful
General Couucell, he and his being sufficiently sought unto, and their
presence desired. As likewiso Leo consented to the calling of the Council of
Chalcedon, only for the determination of that question of faith, that was then
debated, and Leo Epist. 53. 54. 55.
gave no consent to the Decree therein passed touching the sea of
Constantinople, yet did this Council prevail, and the succeeding Bishops of
Rome were forced to give way to that Canon their predecessors so much disliked.
And therefore, whereas the Bishop of Romes Legates, in the Council of
Chalcedon do except against Dioscorus for presuming to hold n Action. (...).
a Synod without the authority of the Apostolic See, which they say never was
lawful, nor never was don: their meaning is not that in no case a Council may
be holden without the Bishop of Rome, and the Bishops of the West, but that
there never was any such Synod holden without requiring and admitting the
concurrence of the Bishop of Rome, and the Bishops of the West. And that
therefore Dioscorus was justly to be condemned, who not only took upon him by
the favor of one near about the Emperor to be President of the Second
Council of Ephesus, whereof they speak, and sit before the Bishop of Romes
Legates, being but Bishop of the Second See, but also Action. 3. page 73. apud
Binnium.
rejected the Synodall letters of Leo, and the Bishops of the West, not
suffering them to be read; and, as if all the power had been in him alone,
deprived the Bishops of Constantinople and Antioch, notwithstanding the
Protestation of the Roman Legates against such proceedings, and their appeal
from the same; and still carried on with his furious passions, rested not till
he had pronounced sentence of excommunication against blessed Leo, and all the
Bishops of the West. The next testimony which Bellarmine brings, no way
proves that, for proof whereof it is brought: for it is not said in the
Council. 2. Action 6.
place cited by him, that the Council holden at Constantinople, against the
painting of those things that are reported in the story of the Bible, and for
the defacing of such pictures made for Historical use, was therefore void,
because it was called without the consent of the Roman Bishop (as he
untruly reports:) but that it was no General Council, seeing many that
were present consented not, but disliked the proceedings of it* and besides, it
neither had the Bishop of Rome to concur, nor his Bishops, neither by
their Vicegerents, nor by Provincial letters; neither yet the Patriarchs of
the East; to wit, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, nor their Bishops. It
is true indeed, that the Council. Romans 4. sub Symmacho.
Bishops assembled at Rome by the command of Theodoricus, to examine the
matters objected to Symmachus the Pope* told him, the Council should have
been called by the Pope, and not by him; but they spoke of particular
Councels, which oftentimes, by the permission of Princes were wont to be called
by Metropolitans Primates, or Patriarchs, and not of general whereof our
question is: and yet I have showed before, by many testimonies, that Princes
when they saw cause, did call Councels of this sort also. So that the speech of
these Bishops (affected to their Patriarche, and unwilling to come to any
scanning of his actions) is not much to be esteemed. The next testimony out of
the Epistles of Epist. 93. cap. 17.
Leo testifies the Cardinal cares not what he says, so he say something:
for it is true indeed, that Leo says: He directed his Letters to his Brethren
and fellow-bishops, and summoned them to a General Council, but means not a
Council absolutely General, consisting of all the Bishops of the world, of
which our question is, but of all the Bishops of those parts to which he
writes, being subject to him as Patriarch of the West, as appears by the
circumstances of the Epistle cited. But Epist. 1. ad Orientales.
Pelagius the Second in his Epistle to those that John of Constantinople called
to his Synod as General, says, The authority of calling general Councils,
was by singular privilege of blessed Peter, given to the Apostolic See; that
no Synod was ever reputed lawful, that was not strengthened by the authority
of the Sea Apostolic: and again, that Councels may not be holden without the
judgment and liking of the Bishop of Rome: therefore all is true that the
Cardinal has hitherto alleged. Hereunto (though Pelagius may seem somewhat
partial in his own cause) we answer, first with De Concilijs lib. 1. cap.
12.
Bellarmine himself, that the calling of General Councels is not so proper to
the Bishop of Rome, but that another may do it, if he consent, or if he ratify
the indiction. Secondly, that though he refuse to ratify it, if his resence
and concurrence be sufficiently sought and desired, it may be lawful, and of
orce, as it appears by the Fifth General Council, which Vigilius refused to
have any part in. The last testimony that Bell. produces to prove, that the
power of calling Councels does not properly belong to the Emperors, is a
saying of Valentinius reported by Zozom. l. 6. c. 7.
Zozomen: but it makes clearly against himself The circumstances of Zozomens
report are these. The Bishops of Hellespont, Bithynia, and some other,
professing to believe that CHRIST the Son of GOD is con-substantial with his
Father, sent a Legate to Valentinian the Emperor, and desired him to give them
leave to meet about matters concerning the Faith. To whom the Emperor
answered, that it was not lawful for him, being one of the Laity, to
intermeddle in these Businesses, but willed, that the Priests and Bishops, to
whom the care of these things pertayneth, should meet in one place
where-soeuer it should please them: for here we see, that the Bishops durst
not presume to assemble themselves without the Emperors leave: which mainely
crosses the conceit of the cardinal: neither does the Emperor say, the
calling of councels pertains nothing to him, but the intermeddling with the
matters that are brought in question in them; and therefore bids them meet
by themselves, not intending to be present among them; not meaning that it was
not lawful for him to be present, (for then he should condemn Constantine,
and other that were present, either in person, or by Deputies) nor that it was
simply unlawful for him to intermeddle, (for they intermeddled as I will show
in that which follows) but that he might not so intermeddle as Bishops and
Priests, to who^ properly it pertains to determine these things; yet, if
Princes perceive, that they who meet in councels, be swayed by sinister and
vile affections, not seeking the clearing of the truth, but the suppressing of
it, they may, and in duty are bound to hinder their proceedings by all lawful
means, that come within the compass of their Princely power.

Wherefore seeing our Adversaries cannot prove, that the right that Princes
have to call councels depends on the consent of the Pope, and that without
his consent or ratification, their indiction of councels is unlawful, let us
see how they can prove, that the Emperors called General Councels by the
Popes authority, and as commanded or required by him so to do, and not
otherwise. We know that Theod. hist. Eccl. l. 2.
Liberius entreated Constantius to call a council: and that Leo ep. 24 and 43.
Leo with other Bishops of the West, on their knees besought the Emperor
Martian to call a council in Italy, and could not obtain it; but were
commanded to come to the council the Emperor appointed at Chalcedon, and
were straightly charged and required to come or send unto it at the time
appointed, not finding so much favor as to have it deferred for a little time.
And therefore it is greatly to be feared that Bellarmines allegations will be
too weak to prove, that the Emperors called councels by the Popes authority,
and as commanded by him. For first, touching the council of Nice, Lib. 1. c.
2.
Ruffinus shows, that Arrius having broached his devilish Heresy, and being
often admonished by his Bishop, Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, no way
reforming himself, Alexander wrote to other Bishops, signifying what was
fallen out in his Church, so that in the end, the matter came to the Emperors
ears: who there-upon (by the counsel of the Bishops advising him so to do)
called the council of Nice; and De authorit. Gener. Council. l. 1. p. 59
Andradius says, he was induced so to do by the persuasion of Alexander
Bishop of Alexandria, but that the Bishop of Rome commanded him so to do, it
no way appears. Indeed the author of the In vita Sylv.
Pontifical says, Constantine called it with the consent of Sylvester. And
the Fathers in the sixth Action 18. p. 88. apud Bin.
General council (out of him or some such Author) say, that Constantine and
Sylvester called it. But the author of the Pontifical is of no credit in this
behalf, reporting in the same place the curing of Constantines Leprosy, which
is acknowledged by all learned men to be a mere fable: and besides, Lib. 1.
c. 16.
Zozomen is of opinion, that the council of Nice was not holden in the time of
Sylvester, but of Julius that succeeded him* wherefore let us proceed to the
next proof. Damasus the Bishop of Rome (says Bellarmine) called the first
council of Constantinople, and Theodosius the elder did but send his Letters
to the Bishops to that purpose. Therefore the calling of General Councels
pertains to the Pope. How little the Jesuits care what they write, it
appears by the dealing of the cardinal in this matter. For whereas both Lib.
5. c 8.
Socrates, Lib 7. c. 7
Zozomen, and Lib. 5. c. 7.
Theodoret do testify, that the Emperor called the Bishops to
Constantinople, without making any mention of the letters of the Bishop of
Rome, and that they came upon his summons; he says, it was not the Emperor
that called them to Constantinople, but the Pope; and that the Emperor did
nothing but transport and conueigh his letters unto them; wholly mistaking the
story. For the letters he speaks of, were not to call the^ to Constantinople,
whither they came upon the Emperors summons, but to Rome, where the Bishops of
the West were assembled in Council, whither they refused to come. Neither does
he show any more faithfulness and sincerity in that he has touching the
Council of Ephesus. For whereas the Constat ex Euagrio lib. 1. cap. 4.
Epistol. Caelestini ad Cyril. Photio in lib. de 7. Synodis.
stories report, that things were managed in that Council by the industry of
Cyrill, with the concurrence of the authority of Caelestinus, and that Cyrill,
was there present and President, not only in his own name, but also as
supplying the place of Caelestinus, he infers from hence, that it was the
Pope that called the Council. That the Council of Chalcedon was called by the
Emperor, it is most evident; The Pope (as I have showed) being not able to
prevail so much, as to get it deferred for a time: yet will Bellarmine prove,
that Leo called that Council, though not without the help of the Emperor.
First, out of the Epistle of the Emperor to Leo, prefixed before the Council:
And secondly, out of the Inter Epist. ad Concilium Chalced. pertinentes.
Epistle of the Bishops of the lesser Maesia, written to the Emperor. But
these proofs are too weak: For the Emperor having resolved to have a
Council, tells Leo in his Epistle, that it remains that he come unto it:
or if it seem troublesome unto him, that he signify so much to him by his
letters, that he may write to Illyricum, Thracia, and the East, that all the
holy Bishops may come together into the place he shall appoint; and may
declare, publish, and set forth by their Decree such things as may be
behoouefull to the religion of Christians and the Catholic Faith, accordingly
as his Holiness also shall define, according to the Ecclesiastical Canons;
but says nothing whence it may be inferred that Leo called the Council. For
I think it will not follow, that because the Bishop of Rome was to come to
the Council, or otherwise to send Synodall and Provincial Letters from
himself and his Bishops, that so with one uniform consent things might be
agreed on, therefore the Pope called the Council. The Epistle of the Bishops
of the lesser Maesia is less to the purpose, then the former of the Emperor:
for they say. The Council of Chalcedon was holden by the command of Leo
Bishop of Rome, the chief of all Bishops, and the most honorable Bishop
and Patriarch Anatolius; joining the Bishop of Rome and the Bishop of
Constantinople together, in commanding this Council to be holden. So that if
the Cardinal will prove from hence, that the Pope called the Council, he may
prove likewise, that the Patriarch of Constantinople called it. But the truth
is, they might command the Bishops under them to assemble, after they
received the Emperors letters, but the Council was called by neither of them.
And therefore whereas Epist. ad Episc. Dardaniae.
Gelasius says, the Sea Apostolic only decreed, that the Council of
Chalcedon should be holden, his meaning is not, to exclude the Emperor and his
Authority, but the other Patriarchicall Sees, and and to let the world know,
that the Sea of Rome alone, by the authority it had with the Emperor,
prevailed so far, as to obtain his royal Edict, for the gathering together
of the Bishops in this Council; or else he speaks untruly. For we know
the Emperor took upon him in such peremptory sort to call this Council, that
he would not be entreated by the Roman Bishop, and other Bishops of the
West, neither for the time, nor place, but out of his absolute authority
appointed both, as it seemed good unto himself. Three other proofs the
Jesuit has yet behind. The first is out of Socrates, out of whom he says
it may be proved, that Julius the Pope called the Council of Sardica: but
how, I cannot tell. For Lib. 2. cap. 16.
Socrates says expressly, that the Council of Sardica was called by the two
Emperors, Constance and Constantius: whereof the one reigned in the East, the
other in the West; the one by his Letters desiring it, the other most willingly
performing that he desired. But of Julius calling it, he makes no mention.
If the Jesuit think it may be proved, that Julius called it; because among
them that sought to excuse themselves from coming upon fained pretenses, some
complained of the shortness of the time appointed for this meeting, and cast
the blame thereof upon Julius, he is greatly deceived; seeing Julius might be
blamed, for procuring the Emperor Constance, by his Letters directed to
Constantius his brother, to set so short a time as he did; though he did not
call the Council himself. And that it was not the Authority of the Pope that
brought the Bishops together in this Council, it is most evident, in that,
Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 7.
when he wrote to them to restore Athanasius to his place, they rejected his
Letters with contempt, maruailing, that he meddled more with their matters then
they did with his. Neither is it likely, that Constantius would be commanded by
Julius to call this Council. Seeing when the Council had commanded Athanasius
to be restored to his place, yet he Socrates lib. (...). cap. 18.
refused to give way, till his brother threatened to make war upon him for it.
But it this proof fail, Bellarmine has a better. For he says, Sixtus the
third, in an Epistle to those of the East, writes, That Valentinian the
Emperor called a Synod by his authority, whence it follows, that the calling
of General Councels pertains in such sort to the Popes, that the Emperors
may not call them, but by warrant and authority from them. If the Reader will
be pleased to consider of this proof, he shall easily discern how little
credit is to be given to Iesuited Papists in their allegations. For first,
Sixtus does not say, the Emperor Valentinian called a Synod by his authority,
but that he commanded a Synod should be called by his authority; that is,
commanded him to call it. And the author of the In vita Sixti. 3.
Pontifical, speaking of the calling of the same Synod, says, the Emperor
commanded that the Council and holy Synod should be congregated. Secondly,
it was but a Diocesan Synod, consisting of the Presbyters and Clergy of Rome
called together, about certain crimes objected to Sixtus, whereof he purged
himself before them. Now I think it will not follow, that, if the Bishop of
Rome might call together the Clergy of his own Diocese, the calling of
General Councels pertained to him only: or that, if the Emperor thought fit,
rather to command the Roman Bishop to call together his Cleagie, then to
do it immediately by his own authority; therefore he would have done the
like in summoning General Counsels, consisting of all the Bishops of the
World. Wherefore let us pass to the last of his proofs, taken out of the
Epistle of Adrian the second, to Basileius the Emperor, prefixed before the
eighth General Council, which undoubtedly upon proof, will be found to be no
better then the rest. For first; it is grounded on the saying of a Pope, that
lived many hundred years after Christ, and long after the division of the
Empire, and the withdrawing of the Church of Rome from the obedience of the
Emperors of the East, and so not much to be regarded in a question concerning
the right of the Emperor. Secondly he speaks not in his own name, but in
the name of all the West Church. And thirdly, that he says, Adrian wrote this
Epistle after he had received the Emperors letters, calling him to the
Council, and therefore (...) may be thought, that when he says, we will
etc. he expresses his consenting to the Emperors mandate, and not any
commanding of him.
We will that by your industry, a great assembly be gathered; proves not that
the Pope took upon him peremptorily to command the Emperor. For seeing in the
whole Epistle he uses words of exhorting praying and entreating; these words
may seem to import no more, but, Our desire is, that there should be such an
assembly by your industry, in which our Legates sitting as Presidents, matters
may be examined, and all things righted. Or, we, though no way subject to your
Empire, yet at your request, are content that such a Council be called, and
that our Legates do sit in it, with the Bishops subject to your Imperial
command. For that Basileius called the Council, appears by his words to the
Bishops in the beginning of it.

But if none of these exceptions against the Emperors ancient practice of
calling Councels will hold, our Adversaries, rather the^ they will suffer the
Pope to be a looser, will not stick to charge the Emperors with usurpation,
and taking more on them then pertained to them. Whosoever (says Lib: 1. de
authorit. general. Council. page 59.
Andradius) shall think, that the power and authority of Emperors, is to be
esteemed and judged of, by the things done by them in the Church, rather then
by Christ's institution, the Decrees of the Elders, and the force and nature of
the Papal dignity it self, he shall make unbridled pride, and headlong fury
to be chief commander, and to sway most in the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. Thus
does Andradius censure the ancient Christian Emperors, and exemplifieth not
only in Constantius the Arrian, but Justinian also (as himself confesses) a
good Emperor. For refutatio^ of which most unjust exception, we say, that
howsoever it be not to be doubted, but that ill affected, or ill directed
Emperors did sometimes that which was not fit; yet, that in calling Councels
by their Princely authority, and commanding all Bishops to come or send unto
them, they exceeded not the bounds and limits of their commission, it is
evident, in that never any Bishop durst blame them for it; But all sought unto
them, even the Bishops of Rome themselves, praying them so to do, as I showed
before by the examples of Liberius, Innocentius, and Leo: which thing also De
conc. l. (...) c. 13.
Bellarmine himself confesses: Wherefore seeing it is evident by the allowed
practice of former times; that the calling of General Councels belonged to the
Emperors, after they became Christians, let us see what they took on them in
these Councels, after they had called them; and consequently, what right,
power, and authority Christian Princes have to manage the affairs, and
command the holy Bishops and Ministers of the church.

CHAP. 53.
Of the power and authority exercised by the ancient Emperors in General
Councels: and of the supremacy of Christian Princes in causes and over persons
Ecclesiastical.

THe first thing that Christian Emperors in ancient times assumed to
themselves in General Councels, was, to be present in them when they pleased:
as we read of Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 3. c. 10.
Constantine the Great, that he not only called the Council of Nice, but was
present in it; of Conc. Chalced. act. 1. p. 4. apud Bin.
Martian, that he was present in the Council of Chalcedon, with Pulcheria the
Empress; of Conc. 6. act. 1 to. 3. apud Bin. p. 8.
Constantine the fourth, that he was present in the sixth General Council;
and Vt patet in act. conc. 8.
Basileius in the eighth: and when they pleased to be absent, to send some in
their stead; as Act. Ephel. conc. tom. 1. c. 32.
Theodosius the younger sent e Candidianus to be present for him in the council
of Ephesus, and Martianus, Vide act Synod. Chalced.
though present in the first Session, yet being for the most part of the time
absent, appointed certain secular Judges to sit in the Council of Chalcedon.

The second thing that they assumed to them, was, to sit in the highest place:
and so we read, that Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 3. c. 10.
in the council of Nice, all the Bishops being placed in order, the Emperor
(some few going before him) entered into the Council; at whose coming all the
Bishops rose up, and did reverence unto him, and he passed through the midst
of them, as an heavenly Angel of God, having on a purple robe, and shining
vesture be-decked with gold, pearls, and precious stones; and stayed not till
he came to the highest place, where a little seat of Gold was prepared:
wherein yet he sat not down, but stood upright till the Bishops had bowed
and beckened unto him to sit down. In like sort we read of Vbi supra.
Martian, that he sat in the highest place in the Council of Chalcedon, with
the Senators and Judges by his side: And of Vbi supra.
Constantine the fourth, that he sat in the highest place in the sixth
General Council. And when they were not present in person, the Senators and
secular Judges deputed by them, sat in the midst in the highest room: as
we shall find they did in the councels of Chalcedon, at such times as the
Emperor was away.

The third thing which the Emperors took on them either in their own
persons, or by such as they deputed* besides the defense of the Bishops from
outward violence, was a kind of direction of things that were to be done in
the council. This direction consisted in seven things: First, in providing
that nothing should be done passionately, violently, and by clamor of
multitudes, but that the ground of each thing should be sought out. Secondly,
in providing that nothing should be extorted by fear and terror, from them
that meet to decree for truth and justice, without all private and sinister
respects. Thirdly, in seeing that nothing should be omitted, that the holy
Canons require to be done for the finding out of that which is true and right;
that so both error and wrong might be avoided. Fourthly, in not suffering
them to pass from one thing to another, before that they had in hand were
fully ended; nor to digress to things impertinent, which might breed
confusion, and hinder the effecting of that which was intended* And in putting
an end to each action, when they saw as much done as was fit, or otherwise
deferring the farther deliberation to some other time. Fifthly, when they found
an indisposition in them, to agree to such and so clear determination of
matters in question, as might satisfy all, to dissolve the Council, and to
call another. Sixthly, in judging and pronouncing according to that they saw
alleged with the approbation and assent of the Council. Lastly, in
subscribing and confirming by their royal assent, the things resolved and
agreed on. All these things (as Concord. Cathol. lib. 3. cap. 28.
Cusanus rightly notes) the Emperors took on them in General Councels; and
the performance of every of these we may find in the Council of Chalcedon,
but specially the First and the Fifth. For Council. Chalced. Action. 4.
whereas the ten Bishops of Egypt, that were there in the name of the rest,
refused to subscribe to the Acts of the Council, till they should have a new
Patriarch chosen and ordained (not out of any dislike of that was done, or as
being of another judgment, but because the custom of their country permitted
them not to subscribe, unless their Patriarch went before them in so doing)
there was a general clamor against them, of all the Bishops, crying out
alowde, that they were to be excommunicated and Anathematized. And though they
fell prostrate on their faces before the whole Council, professing their
refusal to proceed from no private conceit, and desiring to be pitied, and
not urged to any formal subscription, for that if they should do any such
thing, they were sure never to be endured by the Bishops of their Country;
yet could they find no favor or relenting, till the secular Judges, out of
their discretion, finding the true ground of this their stay to subscribe, to
be such as they alleged, delivered their opinion, that it was a thing
reasonable, and in pity to be granted unto them, that they should be foreborne
and stay in the City, till their Archbishop were chosen: Which when
Paschasinus the Legate of Rome heard, he said, if your glorious excellency
command that it be so, let them put in sureties not to depart the City, till
their Archbishop be chosen; and the rest of the Bishops agreed to him. So
that the matter which was ready to be swayed by the whole Council, with
clamor and outcry in a very violent sort, was stayed by the wisdom of the
secular Judges, the poor distressed suppliants pitied, and the hard
proceeding of the Bishops against them hindered. And in the same Actio. ead.
Council we read, that the Bishops having agreed on a form of Confession of
Faith, were desired by the Emperors Deputies the secular Judges, for the
satisfaction of all men, to add certain words out of the Epistle of Leo, to
that form of Confession: which when they all (some few of the East, and the
Legates of Rome excepted) with great clamor refused to do; the Judges told
them, the Emperor should know of their clamorous courses: And that if they
would not agree together to make some good end, a Council should be called in
the West; and they forced to walk thither.

Neither did Christian Emperors only thus intermeddle in General Counsels,
as chief Lords of the whole world, but particular Kings and Princes likewise
within their several dominions and Kingdoms did as much. For we read that
Naucler. vol. 2. generat. 25.
Charlemaigne, with the advice and counsel of the servants of GOD, and his
Nobles, gathered together into a Synod all the Bishops in his kingdom, with
their Presbyters, that they might advise him how the law of God and religion
(well established in the times of former Princes, but now much fallen and
decayed) might be restored, and Christian people attain salvation, and not be
misled by false Priests: and by the advice of his Bishops and Nobles,
according to this his good intent and purpose, he ordained Bishops in his
cities, and set over them Bonifacius as their Archbishop: he decreed that a
Synod should be holden once every year, that in his presence the Decrees of
the Canons and Laws of the church might be restored, and what should be found
amiss in Christian religion, amended: he degraded false Priests and Deacons,
and clearkes that were whoremongers and adulterers; he prescribed penance to
certain offenders, and subjected them to imprisonment and other corporal
punishments and corrections. This Act of Charlemaine is alleged by Cusanus
Concord. Cathol. li: 3. cap. 8.
Cusanus, and greatly approved: yea the same Ibid. cap. 40:
Cusanus complaining of the abuses of the Court of Rome (in that things are
carried thither, that should be determined in the Provinces where they
begin, in that the Pope intermedleth in giving Benefices before they be
void, to the prejudice of the original Patrons, by reason whereof young men
run to Rome and spend their best time there, carrying gold with them and
bringing back nothing but paper, and many like confusions, which the Canons
forbid and need reformation) adds, that the common saying, that the secular
power may not restrain or alter these courses brought in by Papal authority,
should not move any man: for that, though the power of temporal Princes ought
not to change any thing established canonically for the honor of GOD and good
of such as attend his service, yet it may and ought to provide for the common
good, and see, that the ancient canons be observed. Neither ought any one to
say, that the ancient christian Emperors did err, that made so many sacred
constitutions, or that they ought not so to have done. For (says he) I read,
that Popes have desired them for the common good, to make laws for the
punishment of offenses committed by those of the clergy. And if any one shall
say, that the force of all these constitutions depended upon Papal or Synodall
approbation, I will not insist upon it, though I have read and collected four
score and six chief heads of Ecclesiastical rules and laws made by old
Emperors, and many other made by Charles the Great and his successors: in
which order is taken, not only concerning others, but even concerning the
Bishop of Rome himself, and other Patriarchs, what they shall take of the
Bishops they ordain, and many like things: and yet did I never find, that
the Pope was desired to approve them, or that they have no binding force, but
by virtue of his approbation. But I know right well, that some Popes have
professed their due regard of those Imperial and Princely constitutions. But
though it were granted, that those constitutions had no further force then
they received from the canons, wherein the same things were formerly ordered,
or from Synodall approbation, yet might the Emperor now reform things amiss
by virtue of old canons, and Princes constitutions grounded on them. Yea, if
he should with good advice (considering the decay of piety and divine
worship, the ouerflowing of all wickedness, and the causes and occasions
thereof) recall the old canons, and the ancient and most holy observation of
the Elders, and reject whatsoever privileges, exemptions, or new devices
contrary thereunto, (by virtue whereof, suites, complaints and controversies,
the gifts and donations of benefices, and the like things are unjustly brought
to Rome, to the great prejudice of the whole Christian Church) I think no man
could justly blame him for so doing. Yea he says, the Emperor Sigismund had
an intention so to do, and exhorts him, by no fained allegations of men
favoring present disorders, to be discouraged: for that there is no way to
preserve the peace of the Church (whatsoever some pretend to the contrary)
unless such lewd and wicked courses, proceeding from ambition, pride, and
covetousness, be stopped, and the old canons revived.

From that which has been observed touching the proceeding of Christian Kings
and Emperors in former times, in calling Councels, in being present at them,
and in making laws for persons and causes Ecclesiastical, it is easy to
gather, what the power of Princes is in this kind, and that they are indeed
supreme Governors over all persons, and in all causes, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil: which is that we attribute to our Kings and
Queens, and the Papists so much stumble at, as if some new and strange
opinion were broached by us. Wherefore, for the satisfaction of all such, as
are not maliciously obstinate, refusing to hear what may be said, I will
endeavor in this place upon so fit an occasion to clear whatsoever may be
questionable in this point; and will first entreat of the power and right that
Princes have in causes Ecclesiastical, and then of that they have over persons
Ecclesiastical: and jn treating of causes Ecclesiastical, I will first
distinguish the diversities of them, and the power of meddling with them. Causes
Ecclesiastical therefore are of two sorts: for some are originally and
naturally such; and some, only, in that (by favor of Princes out of due
consideration) they are referred to the Cognizance of Ecclesiastical persons,
as fittest Judges, as the probations of the Testaments of them that are dead,
the disposition of the goods of them that dye intestat, and if there be any
other like. Causes Ecclesiastical of the first sort, are either merely and
only Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, or mixed. Merely Ecclesiastical, are of
three sorts. First, matters of Faith and Doctrine. Secondly, matters of
Sacraments, and the due administration of them, Thirdly, the orders, degrees,
and ordination of such as attend the Ministry of the word and Sacraments.
Mixtly Ecclesiastical, are of two sorts: either such, as in one respect belong
to one kind of cognizance, and in another to another, as marriages, which are
subject to civil disposition, in that they are political contracts: and to
spiritual, in that they are ordered by the divine law: or such as are equally
censurable by Civil and Ecclesiastical authority, as murders, adulteries,
blasphemies, and the like. All which in the time when there is no Christian
Magistrate, or when there is ouer-great negligence in the civil Magistrate*
are to be punished by the spiritual guides of the Church. Whereupon we shall
find that the ancient Councels prescribed penance to offenders in all these
kinds. But when there is a Christian Magistrate doing his duty, they are to
be referred, specially either to the one or the other of these; and
accordingly to be censured by the one or the other: as we see the punishment
of adultery, usury, and things of that nature is referred to Ecclesiastical
persons, and the punishment of murder, theft, and the like to the civil
Magistrate. This distinction of causes Ecclesiastical premised, it is easy to
see what authority Princes have in causes Ecclesiastical. For first, touching
those causes that are Ecclesiastical, only in that they are put over to the
cognizance of spiritual persons, there is no question but that the Prince has
a supreme power, and that no man may meddle with them any otherwise then as he
is pleased to allow. And likewise touching those things which in one respect
pertain to civil jurisdictio^, and in another to spiritual, or which are
equally censurable, by both, there is no question but that the Prince has
supreme power, in that they pertain to civil jurisdiction. So that the only
question is, touching things naturally and merely spiritual: The power in
these is of two sorts: of Order, and of Jurisdiction. The power of Order, is
the authority to preach the Word, minister the Sacraments, and to ordain
Ministers to do all these things: and this power the Princes of the World have
not at all, much less the supreme authority to do these things, but it is
proper to the Ministers of the church. And if Princes meddle in this kind,
they are like to 2 Chro. 26. 16
Vzziah that offered to burn incense, for which he was stricken with Leprosy.
The power of Jurisdiction stands first in prescribing and making Laws.
Secondly, in hearing, examining, and judging of opinions touching matters of
Faith. And thirdly, in judging of things pertaining to Ecclesiastical order and
ministry, and the due performance of Gods divine worship and service. Touching
the first, the making of a Law is the prescribing of a thing under some pain
or punishment, which he that so prescribes has power to inflict. Whence it
is consequent, that the Prince (having no power to excommunicate, put from the
Sacraments, and deliver to Satan) can of himself make no canons, such as
Councels of Bishops do; who command or forbid things under pain of
excommunication, and like spiritual censures; but (having power of life and
death, of imprisonment, banishment, confiscation of goods, and the like) he may
with the advice and direction of his Clergy, command things pertaining to
Gods worship and service under these pains, both for profession of Faith,
ministration of Sacraments, and conversation fitting to Christians in general,
or men of Ecclesiastical order in particular: and by his Princely power
establish things formerly defined and decreed against whatsoever error, and
contrary ill-custome, and observation. And herein he is so far forth supreme,
that no Prince, Prelate, or Potentate, has a commanding authority over him:
yet do we not whatsoever our clamorous Adversaries untruly report, to make us
odious,) make our Princes with their Civil States, supreme in the power of
commanding in matters concerning God, and his Faith and religion, without
seeking the direction of their Clergy, (for the Anno. (...). Elizab.
Statute that restored the title of Supremacy to the late Queen Elizabeth, of
famous and blessed memory, provides, that none shall have authority newly to
judge any thing to be Heresy, not formerly so judged, but the high Court of
Parliament with the assent of the Clergy in their Convocation,) nor with them,
so, as to command what they think fit, without aduising with others,
partakers of like precious Faith with them, when a more general meeting for
farther deliberation may be had, or the thing requires it. Though when no
such general concurrence may be had, they may by themselves provide for those
parts of the Church that are under them. From the power and authority we give
our Princes in making laws, and prescribing how men shall profess and
practice touching matters of Faith and Religion, let us proceed to treat of the
other part of power ascribed unto them, which is in judging of errors in Faith
and disorders, or faults in things pertaining to Ecclesiastical order and
ministry according to former determinations and decrees. And first, touching
errors in faith, or aberrations in the performance of Gods worship and service,
there is no question, but that Bishops and Pastors of the Church (to whom it
pertains to teach the truth) are the ordinary and fittest Judges: and that
ordinarily and regularly, Princes are to leave the judgment thereof unto them.
But because they may fail, either through negligence, ignorance or malice,
Princes having charge over Gods people, and being to see that they serve and
worship him aright, are to judge and condemn them that fall into gross
errors, contrary to the common sense of Christians; or into any other heresies
formerly condemned. And though there be no general failing, yet if they see
violent and partial courses taken, they may interpose themselves to stay them,
and cause a due proceeding, or remove the matter from one company and sort of
Judges to another. And hereunto the best learned in former times agreed,
clearly confessing, that when some thing is necessary to be done, and the
ordinary guides of the Church do fail, or are not able to yield that help
that is needful, we may lawfully fly to other for relief and help;
Waldens. doctrine. fidei. lib. 2. c. ^0.
when these two things do meet in the state of the Church, (says Waldensis)
to wit, extreme necessity, admitting no delay, and the want of ability to
yield relief in the ordinary Pastor or Guide, we must seek an extraordinary
Father and Patron, rather then suffer the frame, fabric and building of the
Lord Christ to be dissolved. If any man happily say that Epistolar. lib. 5.
ep. 32.
Ambrose, a most worthy Bishop, refused to come to the Court to be judged in a
matter of faith by Valentinian the Emperor, and asked; when ever he heard
that Emperors judged Bishops in matters of faith? seeing if that were granted,
it would follow, that Laymen should dispute and debate matters, and Bishops
hear; yea that Bishops should learn of Laymen, (whereas contrariwise, if
we look over the Scriptures, and consider the course of times past, we shall
find that Bishops have judged of Emperors in matters of faith, and not
Emperors of Bishops) and that therefore it cannot be without usurpation of
that which no way pertains to them, that Princes should at all meddle with the
judging of matters of faith. This objection what show soever it may seem to
carry, is easily answered, for first, the thing that Valentinian took on him,
was not to judge according to former definitions, but he would have judged of a
thing already resolved on in a general Council, called by Constantine the
Emperor, as if it had bin free and not yet indged of at all: whereas we do not
attribute to our Princes with their Civil Estates, power newly to adiudge any
thing to be heresy without the concurre^ce of the State of their Clergy, but
only to Judge in those matters of faith, that are resolved on, according to
former resolutio^s. And besides this, Valentinian was known to be partial; he
was but a nouice, and the other judges he meant to associate tohimselfe
suspected; and therefore Ambrose had reason to do as he did. Wherefore let us
proceed to the other part of the power of jurisdictio^, that consists in
judging of things pertaining to Ecclesiastical Order and Ministry. Concerning
which point, first it is resolved, that none may ordain any to serve in the
work of the Ministry, but the spiritual Pastors and Guides of the church.
Secondly, that none may judicially degrade or put any one lawfully admitted
from his degree and order, but they alone. Neither do our Kings or Queens
challenge any such thing to themselves: but their power stands, first, in
calling together the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, for the hearing and
determining of such things, and in taking all due care, that all things be
done orderly in such proceedings, without partiality, violence, or
precipitation, according to the Canons and Imperial laws made to confirm the
same. Secondly, when they see cause, in taking things from those whom they
justly suspect, or others except against, and appointing others in their
places. Thirdly, in appointing some selected men for the visitation of the
rest. Fourthly, in joining temporal menincommission with the spiritual guides
of the church, to take view of, and to censure the actions of men of
Ecclesiastical order: because they are directed not only by Canons, but laws
Imperial. Fifthly, when matters of fact are objected, for which the canons and
laws Imperial judge men depriueable; the Prince, when he sees cause, and
when the state of things require it, either in person, if he please, or by such
other as he thinks fit to appoint, may hear and examine the proofs of
the same, and either ratify that others did, or void it: as we see in the
case of August. Epist. 162.
Caecilianus, to whom it was objected that he was a Traditor, and Faelix
Antumnitanus that ordained him, was so likewise, and that therefore his
ordination was void. For first, the enemies of Caecilianus disliking his
ordination, made complaints against him to Constantine; and he appointed
Melchiades and some other Bishops, to sit and hear the matter. From their
judgment, there was a new appeal made to Constantine. Whereupon he sent to
the Proconsull to examine the proofs that might be produced. But from his
judgment the complainants appealed the third time to Constantine, who appointed
a Synod at Eusebius. li. 10. cap. 5.
Arle. All this he did, to give satisfaction (if it were possible) to these
men; and so to procure the peace of the Church. And though he excused himself
for meddling in these businesses, and asked pardon for the same: (for that
regularly, he was to have left these judge ments to Ecclesiastical persons)
yet it no way appears, that he did ill in interposing himself in such sort
as he did, the state of things being such as it was: nor that the Bishops
did ill, that yielded to him in these courses, and therefore in cases of like
nature, Princes may do whatsoever he did, and Bishops may appear before
them, and submit themselves to their judgment; though in another case Ambrose
refused to present himself before Valentinian the Emperor, for trial of an
Ecclesiastical cause. Neither is it strange in our state that Kings should
intermedle in causes Ecclesiastical. For In Henrico. 2. page 96.
Matthew Paris shows, that the ancient laws of England provided, that in
appeals men should proceed from the Archdeacon to the Bishop, from the
Bishop to the Archbishop, and that, if the Archbishop should fail in doing
justice, the matter should be made known to the King; that by virtue of his
commandment it might receive an end in the Archbishops Court; that there
might be no further proceeding in appeals without the Kings consent.

From the power which Princes have in causes Ecclesiastical, let us proceed to
the power they have over persons Ecclesiastical; and see, whether they be
supreme over all persons; or whether men of the Church be exempt from their
jurisdiction, That they are not exempted by GODS law, we have the clear
confession of Cardinal De Clericis lib. 1. cap. 28.
Bellarmine, and others: who not only yield so far unto the truth, forced
so to do by the clear evidence thereof, but prove the same by Scripture and
Fathers. The Cardinals words are these: Exceptio Clericorum in rebus
politicis, tam quoad personas, quam quoad bona, iure humano introducta est, non
diuino; that is, The exemption of Cleargy-men in things civil, as well in
respect of their persons, as their goods, was introduced and brought in by man's
law, and not by the law of God. Which thing is proved, first, out of the
precept of the Apostle to the Romans, Romans 13. 1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: and adds: Ver. 16.
Therefore pay ye tribute: For when the Apostle says, Let every soul be
subject: he includes Cleargy-men, as Chrysostom witnesses: and therefore
when he adds, for this cause pay ye tribute, he speaks of Cleargy-men
also. Whence it will follow, that Cleargy-men are bound to pay tribute; unless
they be exempted by the favor and privilege of Princes, freeing them from so
doing* which thing Thomas Aquinas also affirms, writing upon the same place.
Secondly, the same is proved out of the Ancient. Decr. 2. part. causa 23. qu.
8. ca. Tributum.
For Vrbanus says: The tribute money was therefore found in the mouth of the
fish, taken by Saint Peter, because the Church pays tribute out of her
outward and earthly possessions. Ino^at detradend. Basilicis.
And Saint Ambrose says, if tribute be demanded, it is not denied, the
Church-Land pays tribute. Now if Vrbanus, Bishop of Rome, and worthy
Ambrose Bishop of Millaine (then whom there was never any Bishop found more
resolute in the defense of the right of the Church) say, that tribute is not to
be denied, but paid unto Princes by men of the Church: and in respect of
Church-land, I think it is evident, there is no exemption by any Law of GOD,
that freeth the goods of Churchmen from yielding tribute to Princes. For
touching that text, (where our Savior says unto Peter, Math. 17. 25.
What think thou Simon, of whom do the Kings of the Gentiles receive
tribute? of their own children, or of strangers? And Peter answers, of
strangers: Whence CHRIST infers, that the children are free) brought by some
to prove the supposed immunity of Cleargy-men to be from GODS own grant,
Bellarmine sufficiently clears the matter. For first he shows, that CHRIST
speaks of himself only, making this argument; Kings sons are free from
tribute, as being neither to pay to their own fathers, seeing their goods are
common: nor to strangers to whom they are not subject: therefore himself being
the Son of the great King of Kings, owes no Tribute to any mortal man. So
that when he said, the children are free, he meant not to signify, that any
other are free: but only that himself was free. Secondly, he rightly
observes that this place would prove that all Christians are free from
Tribute, if it proved any other then CHRIST to be so: for all Christians are
the sons of GOD by adoption and grace. And Hierome writing upon this place
has these words: Our Lord was the Kings son both according to the flesh, and
according to the spirit, descending of the stock of David, and being the Word
of the Almighty Father: and therefore as being the Son of the Kingdom owed
no tribute, but because he assumed the humility of flesh, it behooued him to
fulfill all righteousness: but unhappy men that we are! we are called after
the name of Christ, and do nothing worthy so great an honor. He for the great
love he bare toward us, sustained the cross for us, and paid tribute: but we
for his honor pay no tribute, and as Kings sons are free from tribute. These
words are brought by some to prove the imagined freedom we speak of but
first, they are so far from proving any such thing, that Erasm. citat. 3 Sixto
Senense. Bibl. sanct. l. 6. annot. 75.
Erasmus thinks Hierome reprehended it, and disliked it as a thing sauouring
of arrogance, that cleargymen should refuse to pay tribute, which, he says,
is contrary to the conceit of men in our time, who think it the height of all
piety to maintain this immunity. And Ibid.
Sixtus Senensis says: that Hierome speaks not of that tribute which
subjects pay to their Princes here in this world, but of that which we all owe
to CHRIST, so that this is that he says, why do not we wretched men,
professing our selves to be the servants of Christ, yield unto his Majesty the
due tribute of our service, seeing Christ, so great and excellent, paid
tribute for our sakes? S. Austine in his Quaest. 2^.
first book of Questions upon the Gospels, says: that Kings sons in this world
are free, and that therefore much more the sons of that Kingdom, under which
all kingdoms of the World are, should be free in each earthly Kingdom: which
words, Secunda secundae q. 104. art. 6.
Thomas, and Lib. supradict. annot. 76.
Sixtus Senensis understand of a freedom from the bondage of sin, but Com. in
concord. Evang. c. 69.
Iansenius rejects that interpretation, because Austine says: the children
of Kings are free from tribute, and thinks that Austines meaning is; that if
God the King of Heaven and Earth had many natural sons, as he has but one
only begotten, they should all be free in all the Kingdoms of the world: and
other apply these words to cleargy-men, though there be nothing in the place
leading to any such interpretation. But whatsoever we think of the meaning of
Austine, Bellarmine says it cannot be inferred from these his words, that
cleargy-men by Gods Law are free from the duty of paying tribute: because (as
Chrysostom notes,) Christ speaks only of natural children: and besides
prescribes nothing, but only shows that usually among men, Kings sons are
free from tribute: and therefore, whereas the authority of Bonifacius the
Eighth In 6. cap. Quanquam de de Sensibu^.
who affirms, that the goods and persons of Cleargy-men are free from
exactions, both by the law of God and man, is brought to prove the contrary:
He answers, first, that happily the Pope meant not, that they are absolutely
freed by any special grant from God, but only that there is an example of
Genesis 47.
Pharaoh an Heathen Prince, freeing the Priests of his Gods mentioned in
Scripture, which may induce Christian Kings to free the Pastors of Christ's
Church. Secondly, that it was but the private opinion of the Pope, inclining to
the judgment of the Canonistes: and that he did not define any such thing. So
that men may lawfully dissent from him in this point. So that we see by the
testimonies of Scripture and Fathers, and the confession of the best learned
among our adversaries themselves, that Almighty God did not by any special
exemption free either the goods or persons of Cleargy-men from the command of
Princes, and that in the beginning they were subject to all services,
judgments, payments and burdens, that any other are subject to, and required
by Christ the Son of God, and his blessed Apostles, to be so.

But some man happily will say, that though Christ did not specially free,
either the goods or persons of Cleargy-men from the subjection to Princes, yet
there are inducements in reason, and in the very light of nature, such and so
great, to move Princes to set them free, that they should not do well if they
did not so. Whereunto we answer, that there is no question to be made, but
that the Pastors of the Church that watch over the souls of men, are to be
respected and tendered more then men of any other calling, and so they are, and
ever were, where any sense of religion is, or was. The Apostle Saint Paul
testifies of the Galathians Galath. 4. ver. 14. 15.
that they received him as an Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus himself, and
that they would have even plucked out their eyes to have done him good. Ruffin.
l. (...). c. 2. Theodoret. lib. (...). cap. 11.
The Emperor Constantine honored the Christian Bishops with the name and
title of Gods, acknowledged himself subject to their judgment, though he
swayed the scepter of the World: and refused to see what the complaints were
that they preferred one against another, or to read their bills, but professed
that to cover their faults he would even cast from him his purple Robe. Whence
it came that many privileges were anciently granted unto them, both in
respect of their persons, and goods. For first, Constantine the Great, not
only gave ample gifts to the Pastors of the Churches, but exempted them also
from those services ministeries and employments, that other men are subject to.
His Epistle to Anelinus the Proconsul of Africa, wherein this grant was made
to them of Africa, is found in Lib. 10. Hist. Eccl. cap. 7.
Eusebius. Neither is it to be doubted, but that he extended his favors to the
Bishops of other Churches also, as well as to them. The words of the Grant are
these. Considering that the due observation of things pertaining to true
religion and the worship of God, brings great happiness to the whole state
of the Commonwealth and Empire of Rome: For the encouragement of such as
attend the holy Ministry, and are named Cleargy-men, my pleasure is, that all
such in the Church wherein Caecilianus is Bishop, be at once and altogether
absolutely freed, and exempted from all public Ministeries and Services.
Neither did the Emperors only exempt them from these services, but Nouel.
Constit. 79. 83. and 123.
they freed them also from secular judgments, unless it were in certain kinds
of criminal causes. Wherein yet a Bishop was not to be co^ue^ted against his
will before any secular Magistrate, without the Emperors command. Neither might
the temporal Magistrates condemn any Cleargy-man, till he were degraded by
his Bishop, howsoever they might imprison and restrain such upon complaints
made. And answerably hereunto the Council of Matiscon provides, Council.
Matisconen^. 1. Canon 7.
that no Cleargy-man for any cause, without the discussion of his Bishop, shall
be wronged and imprisoned by any Secular Magistrate, and that if any Judge
shall presume to do so to the Cleargy-men of any Bishop, unless it be in a
criminal cause, he shall be excommunicated as long as the Bishop shall
think fit. This was all the immunity that Cleargy-men anciently had by any
grant of Princes, and as much as ever the Church desired to enjoy: but that
which in latter times was challenged by some, and in defense of the claim
whereof, Thomas Becket resisted the King: till his blood was shed, was of
another kind. For whereas it was not thought fit by the King and State of
the Realm at that time, that Churchmen found in enormous crimes, by the kings
Justices, should be delivered over to their Bishops, and so escape civil
punishment, but that confessing such crimes, or being clearly convinced of
them before the Bishop, the Bishop should in presence of the Kings Justices
degrade them, and put them from all Ecclesiastical honor, and deliver them to
the Kings Court to be punished: Becket was of a contrary mind, and thought,
that such as Bishops degraded or put out of their Ministry of the Church,
should not be punished by the civil Magistrates; because as he said, one
offense was not to be punished twice. Matthew. Pari^ in Henrico. 2. page 98.
The occasion of this controversy between the King and the Arch-bishoppe, was
given by one Philip Brocke, a Canon of Bedford: Who being brought before the
Kings Justices for murder, used vile and contemptuous speeches against them;
which though it were proved against him before the Arch-bishoppe, yet he was
only deprived of the benefit of his Prebend, and driven out of the Realm for
the space of two years, for so horrible and bloody a crime. This was one of
those sixteen Articles concerning the ancient customs of the Realm,
whereunto Becket and the rest of the Bishops did swear, and whereof he so
soon repented again: namely that Cleargy-men accused of any crime, should at
the summons of the Kings Justices appear in the Kings Court, to answer to
such things as to that Court should be thought to appertain; and in the
Ecclesiastical, what pertained thereunto: and that the Kings Justices should
send to see, what was there done: and that if they should be convicted of any
enormous crime, or confess the same; the Bishop should not protect the^:
then which course nothing could be devised more reasonable. Neither is it
absurd for sheep to judge their Pastors in these cases, as Bellarmine u De
Clericis. lib. 1 cap. 28.
fondly affirms. That the Council of Canone. 9.
Chalcedon, and Toledo, forbid Cleargy-men to leave the Eccesiasticall Judges,
and to prosecute their quarrels one against another before Temporal
Magistrates; and the Counsels of y Toletanum. 3. Can. 13.
Carthage, and Catthag. canone. 9.
Agatha, condemn Canone. 23.
them that choose rather to be tried in Civil Courts then Ecclesiastical,
when they have power to choose; or that begin suites there without the
permission of their Bishop, no way contrarieth any thing that I have said:
for howsoever some things are to be handled in the Ecclesiastical Courts, as
properly pertaining to them, either naturally and originally, or by grant of
Princes: and other things concerning Churchmen, not to be brought into
Civil Courts but in due sort, and with respect had to their places and ranks,
yet never had they any such absolute exemption and immunity, but that in
criminal causes, such as theft murder, and the like, and in trial of the
title oflands and inheritances, and the right of aduocation of Churches, they
were to be tried in civil Courts, and no other, whether the differences
grew between Laymen and Cleargy-men, or Cleargy-men among themselves. As
likewise they were to do homage, and swear fealty, for such lands, honors,
and Baronryes, as they held of Princes. Thus we see, how favorable Princes
have been in granting privileges concerning the persons of such as attend
the service of God. Neither were they less careful to free such lands and
possessions as they endowed the Church with, from such burdens taxes and
impositions, as other temporal possessions are subject to. So that howsoever
in the Apostles times, and long after, even till the time of Ambrose (as it
appears Ambros. in Orat. de tradeud. Basilie^.
by his writtings) the Church Lands paid tribute, yet afterward by Codice
Justinian l. sancimus. Tit. de Sacrosanctis Ecclesijs.
Justinian and other Christian Emperors, they were freed from those
impositions. Neither is it to be maruailed at, that Christian Princes, out of
their devout and religious dispositions were thus favorable to the Church,
seeing even the Heathen Princes did as much for the Idolatrous Priests of their
false-Gods: for we read in the book of Cap. 47.
Genesis, that in the time of that great famine that was in the days of
Joseph, when the people of Egypt were constrained, after all their money and
cattle were spent, to sell their land to Joseph the Steward of Pharaoh, in
whose hands all the provision of Corn was, to buy them bread, so that all the
land of Egypt became Pharaohs; yet the Priests were not forced to sell their
lands; for they had an ordinary from Pharaoh, and they did eat their ordinary
which Pharaoh gave them. And when as afterward Joseph let the people enjoy
their land again, which he had bought for Pharaoh, yet so, that only four
parts of the increase thereof should be to themselves, for the seed of their
fields, for their meat, and for them of their householdes and their children
to eat; and the fifth part should be Pharaohs, whose now the land was: the
land of the Priests was free from this rent and charge, as not being Pharaohs.
Yet were not the privileges and immunities which Christian Princes gran^ed to
Ecclesiastical persons, to prejudice other men, nor to lay too heavy a burden
on them; and therefore it was lawful for Princes, when they saw any
inconveniences, in that too much of their land, by passing into the right and
possession of Churchmen, was freed from services and charges, to Dried o de
libert. Christian. l. 2. c. 3.
stop the passing of any more into such dead hands as would yield them no
help; and cleargy-men were bound in conscience voluntarily to, Canone 19.
contribute to all public necessities when need required; though the Temporal
Magistrates might not impose any thing upon them as we find it ordered in the
third council of Lateran, and in the Canone 46.
fourth under Innocentius the third: yea if they should contemptuously and
presumptuously refuse to bear part of the common burdens, notwithstanding any
pretended privileges, the supreme Prince might force them to put too their
helping hand, rather then the whole state of the commonwealth should be
shaken and endangered, or other parts and members of it too heavily burdened,
as De ^cr. Eccl. Mini^t. and Benef. l. 7. c. 10.
Duarenus learnedly and excellently shows. This may suffice touching the
exemption of Cleargy-men, either in respect of their persons or goods, and the
right by which they enjoy the same. And thus have we run through all the
different Degrees and Orders of Ecclesiastical Ministers, and showed what
their power, office, and authority is, both severally, and assembled in
councels: and what power Princes have to command over them, or to intermeddle
with the businesses and affairs more specially belonging to them:

CHAP. 54.
Of the calling of Ministers: and the persons to whom it pertains to elect
and ordain them.

NOw it remains that we first treat of the calling of Ministers; for Heb. 5.
4
No man takes this honor upon him but he that is called, as was Aaron^:
Secondly, of the things required in them: and thirdly of their maintenance,

Touching the first, which is the calling of Ecclesiastical Ministers, Saint
Lib. 1. com. in ep. ad Galat. c. 1
Hierome notes, that there are 4 sorts of such men as are employed in the
businesses and affairs of Almighty God. The first are such as are sent neither
of men, nor by men, but by Jesus Christ, as the Prophets in old time, and
since the coming of Christ, those Twelve designed immediately to the Work of
the Ministry by Christ's own voice, specially called Apostles, The second,
such as are sent of God, but by man, as Bishops and Ministers, which succeed
the Apostles, and derive their commission from them. The third are such as are
sent of men, and not of GOD, who are they that are ordained by favor of men,
not judging rightly of the quality of them that are to serve in this calling;
who yet are not simply denied to be sent of God, as if they had no commission
from him, but therefore only, because if the Ordainers had done their duties;
they should have made a better choice, and sent other, and not these: for being
sent by men that have authority, though abusing the same, they have a true and
lawful Ministry till they be put from it by superior authority, else were
all Ministration of Sacraments, and other sacred things void, performed by
such as simoniacally or by sinister means get into these holy places. The
fourth are such as neither are sent of GOD, nor of men, nor by men, but of
themselves, of whom our Savior Christ says, John. ^0. 8.
all that came before me were thieves and robbers: and of whom almighty GOD
pronounces, and says by the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 23. 21.
I sent them not, and they (...): I spoke not to them, and they prophesied.
This evil is carefully to be declined, and therefore CHRIST would not suffer
the devils to speak that which was true, least under the pretense of truth,
error might creep in; seeing he that speaks of himself cannot but speak
lies. These are the four sorts of them that serve in the work of the
Ministry; whereof the last have no calling at all and all they do is void:
the Third have a lawful commission, though they obtained it by sinister
means, and be unworthy of it, so that they could not be put into it, without
the fault of the ordayners. The First had a lawful but extraordinary calling,
needful only in those first beginnings of Christianity, and not longer to
continue. The second have that calling which is Ordinary and to continue,
whereof we are now to speak. In this calling there are three things implied:
Election, Ordination, and Assignation to some particular Church, whereof men
elected and ordained are appointed to take charge.

In ancient times there was no ordination at large, without particular
Assignation, and sine titulo, allowed, as it appears by the Council of
Chalcedon, forbidding any (...) Canone 9:
such thing to be done, and voyding any such Act if it should be done, and
therefore in those times the very electing and ordayning, was an assigning of
the elected and ordained to the place of Charge they were to take, and a giving
of them the power of jurisdiction as well as of order. But this Canon in latter
times grew out of use: whence ensued great confusions in the state of the
Church, as De sacris Eccles: minist: and Benefi: lib: 1: cap: 16:
Duarenus rightly notes: yet are we not of opinion, that all such ordinations
are void in the nature of the thing; whatsoever the Ancients pronounced of
them according to the strictness of the Canons. For seeing Ordination, which
is the sanctifying of men to the work of the holy Ministry, is a diffeernt
thing in nature from the placing of them, where they shall do that holy work;
and a man once ordained needs not any new Ordination, when he is removed from
one Church to another, it is evident that in the nature of the thing,
Ordination does not so depend on the title and place of Charge the Ordained
enters into, as that Ordinations at large should be void; yet are they not
to be permitted, neither are they in our Church. For the Ordinations of
Ministers in Colleges in our Universities, are not within the compass of
those prohibited Ordinations at large, and sine titulo: and none other, by the
order of our Church, may be Ordained, unless he be certainly provided of some
definite place of charge and employment. And as the Ancient were thus precise
in admitting none into the holy Ministry, but with assignation of the
particular place of his employment; so they took as strict order, that men
once placed should not suddenly be removed and translated to any other church
or charge. In the Council of Canon^ 1:
Sardica, Hosius the President of that Council said; That same ill custom and
pernicious corruption is wholly to be plucked up by the roots, that it may not
be lawful for a Bishop to pass from his city to any other city. For the
cause why they do so, is known to all, seeing none is found to pass from a
greater city to a lesser: whence it appears, that they are inflamed with
ardent desires of covetousness, and that they serve their own ambitious
designs, that they may exercise dominion, and grow great. If therefore it
seem good to you all, that such an evil as this is, may be more severely
punished, let him that is such a one, be rejected from all communion, even
such as Laymen enjoy. To whom all the Bishops answered; it pleases us well.
To whom Hosius replied; Though any shall be found so ill advised, as happily in
excuse of himself to affirm; that he received letters from the people, to
draw him from his own city to another; yet I think, seeing it is manifest,
that some few not sincere in the Faith, might be corrupted by reward, and
procured to desire his translation, all such frauds should altogether be
condemned: So that such a one should not be admitted, so much as to the
communion which Laymen enjoy, no not in the end: which thing if it seem good
unto you all, confirm and settle it by your Decree. And the Synod answered,
it pleases us well. Leo, to the same purpose writes thus; Leo ep: 8^: cap: 8:
If any Bishop, despising the meandness of his own city, shall seek to
get the administration and government, of some more noted, and better
respected place, and shall by any means translate and remove himself to a
greater People, and more large and ample charge, let him be driven from that
other chair which he sought, and let him be deprived also of his own. So
that he be neither suffered to rule over them, whom, out of a covetous
desire, he would have subjected to himself, nor over them, whom g in pride
he contemned and scorned. And the like is found in other: but as Lib. 5. cap.
8.
Theodoret shows, it was ambition, and such other like evils, that these Holy
Fathers sought to stop and prevent, rather then generally to condemn all
Translation of Bishops from one Church and city to another. For these changes
may sometimes bring so great and evident vtility, that they are not to be
disliked. And therefore the same Ibidem.
Theodoret shows that notwithstanding this Canon, Gregory Nazianzen, was
removed from his Church, and constituted Bishop of Constantinople. And Lib. 7.
cap. 39.
Socrates reports, that Proclus was removed thither from Cyzicum. Wherefore
passing by these matters as clear and resolved of, Let us proceed to see,
first, to whom it pertains to Elect: Secondly, to whom it belongs to
ordain such as are duly elected and chosen to the work of the Ministry.

Touching Election, D. Bilson. perpet. government. cap. 15. page 339.
we think, that each Church and People, that have not by law, custom, or
consent, restrained themselves stand free by Gods law to admit, maintain and
obey no man, as their Pastor, without their liking: and that the peoples
election by themselves or their rulers, depends on the first principles of
humane fellowships and assemblies: for which cause, though Bishops by Gods law
have power to examine and ordain, before any may be placed to take charge of
souls: yet have they no power to impose a Pastor on any Church against their
wills, nor to force them to yield obedience and maintenance to any without their
liking. And therefore anciently (as Epist 89.
LEO shows) the custom was that he should be chosen of all, that was to
be over all, that the wishes and desires of the Citizens should be expected,
the Testimonies of the people should be sought, the will and liking of the
noble and honorable should be known, and the Clergy should choose. All which
things are wont to be observed and kept in ordinations, by them that know the
rules of the Fathers, that the rule of the Apostle may be followed in all
things, who prescribes, that he who is to be over the Church, should not
only have the allowance of the faithful, giving witness unto him, but the
testimony also of them that are without, and that no occasion of any scandal
may be left, while he, who is to be the Doctor ofpeace, is ordained in peace
and concord, pleasing unto God, with the agreeing and consenting desires of
all. And in the same Epistle he adds Teneatur subscriptio Clericorum,
honoratorum testimonium, ordinis consensus and Plebis: That is, Let the
subscription of the Clergy be had, the testimony of the honorable, and the
consent of the order and people. Lib. 1. Epist. 4.
Cyprian to the same purpose writes thus: The people being obedient to the
precepts of the Lord, and fearing God, ought to separate themselves from a
sinful and wicked Ruler, and not intermingle themselves, or to have any
thing to do with the sacrifices of a sacrilegious Priest: especially seeing
they have power either to choose such Priests as are worthy, or to refuse such
as are unworthy. And a little after in the same Epistle, he has these words:
For which cause it is diligently to be observed and kept, as from the
tradition of God, and the Apostles, (which thing also is observed and kept with
us, and almost throughout all Provinces) that for the due performance of the
work of Ordination, when any Ruler and Governor is to be ordained, the
Bishops of the same Province, which are nearest, should come together unto that
people, over whom he is to be set, and that the Bishop should, be chosen in
the presence of the people, which most fully and perfectly knows the life of
every one, and has perceived by their conversation what kind of works they
are wont to do. Which thing also we see to have bin don in the Ordination of
Sabinus our Colleague, to wit, that upon the voices of the whole brotherhood,
and the judgment of the Bishops, which came together and which sent their
letters, expressing their opinion of him, the Episcopal dignity was co^ferred
upon him, and with the imposition of hands he was ordained into the void room
of Basilides. That in the time of Chrysostom, the people had interest in
choosing their Pastors, it is evident out of his book of Lib. 3.
Priesthood. The Fathes of the Nicene Council (as we find in Lib. 1. cap. 9.
Theodoret) write to the Church of Alexandria, and to the beloved brethren of
Egypt, Lybia, and Pent^polis in this sort: If happily any Bishop of the Church de
fall asleep, let it be lawful for such of the sect of Meletius, as have been
not long since restored to the Communion of the Church, to succeed into the
place of him that is dead, if so be that they shall seem to be worthy, and
the people shall choose them: yet so notwithstanding, that the voice and consent
of the Bishop of the Church of Alexandria be added to seal and confirm the
same. And touching the election of Nectarius, the Bishops of the first
council of Constantinople write thus: Theod. l. 5. c. 9
We have ordained the most reverend and beloved of God Nectarius, Bishop,
before the whole Council, with all consent and agreement, in the presence of
Theodosius the Emperor, beloved of God, and of the whole clergy, the whole
city likewise with unanimous consentagreeing thereunto. And Leo provideth and
takes order what shall be done, when they that should elect, agree not. His
words are these: Leo ep. 84. c. 5.
When ye go about the election of the chief Priest or Bishop, let him be
advanced before all, upon whom the consenting desires of the Clergy and People
concur with one accord: and if their voices be divided betwixt twain, let
him be preferred before the other, in the judgment of the Metropolitan, which
has more voices and merits: but let none be ordained against their wills and
petitions, least the people despise or hate the Bishop which they never
affected, and less care for religion when their desires are not satisfied. And
Grego^y the Bishop of Rome long after, allowing the election by the people,
has these words: Gre. l. 2. ep. 2^
If it be true that the Bishop of Salona be dead, hasten to admonish the
clergy and people of that city, to choose a Bishop with one consent that may
be ordained for them. And to Magnus about the election of the Bishop of
Millaine, he says: Lib. 2. ep. 2^
Warn the Clergy and people that they dissent not in choosing their Priest,
but that with one accord they elect some one, that may be consecrated their
Bishop. By all which testimonies we see what interest aunciently the people
had in the choice of their Bishops, and how careful good Bishops were that
they should have none thrust upon them against their wills, that they should
proceed to election with one accord if it might be; or otherwise, that such
should be ordained as were desired by the greater part, and that all things
might be done peaceably and without tumult.

But how much in time they abused this their power, it is too evident. For In
Epi^. (...)
Nazianzene reporting the choice of Eusebius to be Bishop of Caesarea,
says, the City of Caesarea was in a tumult, and the people divided about the
choice of their Bishop; and the sedition was sharp, and hardly to be
appeased; and that, as men distracted in many minds, some proposing one, and
some another, as is often seen in such cases, at length the whole people
agreeing on one of good calling among them, commended for his life, but not yet
baptized, took him against his will, and with the help of a band of soldiers
that was then come to the City, placed him in the Bishops chair, and offered
him to the Bishops present, and mixing threats with persuasions, required to
have him ordained and pronounced their Bishop. Likewise at Antioch (as Lib. 1.
c. 24.
Eusebius reports) there was raised a grievous sedition about the deposing of
Eustathius: and after, when another was to be chosen, the flame thereof so
increased, that it was like to have consumed the whole city. For the people
being divided into two parts, the Magistrates of the city supported the sides,
and bands of soldiers were mustered as against an enemy: and the matter had
undoubtedly been tried by the sword, if God, and the fear of the Emperor
writing to them, had not assuaged the rage of the multitude. But howsoever,
such was the dissension, that eight whole years the place was without a
Bishop. Euag. (...) 2. c. (...). and 8.
When Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria was deposed by the Council of
Chalcedon, and Proterius set in his place, a mighty and intolerable sedition
grew among the people for it: some affecting Dioscorus, and some cleaving to
Proterius. The people opposed themselves against the Magistrates, and when they
thought with strong hand to suppress the uproar, the multitude with stones,
beat the soldiers into the church, besieged the^ in it, and destroyed a number
of them with fire: and, upon the death of Martian the Emperor, they chose a
new B. and brought him into the church on Easter day. They slew Proterius, and
six other with him in the Temple, and drew his body wounded and mangled along
through the quarters of the city. Ruffin. l. 2. (...) c. ^1.
The like dissension grew in the Church of Millaine after the death of
Auxentius the Arrian Bishop; but the issue was very happy: for Ambrose, at
that time a secular Magistrate, seeing the division to be very dangerous, and
threatening the overthrow of the state of the city, entered into the Church, and
made an excellent Oration, persuading them to peace; wherewith all sides were so
well pleased, that with one consent, they desired to have Ambrose for their
Bishop, who was not yet baptized: and the Emperor was careful to satisfy
their desire, and commanded that it should be as they had desired Ibid. cap.
10.
In the Church of Rome, after Liberius, Damasus succeeded in the Episcopal
office: whom Vrsinus, a certain Deacon of that Church, not enduring to be
preferred before him, waxed so mad, that having persuaded and drawn unto him
a certain ignorant and rude Bishop, and gathered together a company of
turbulent and seditious persons in the church of Sicinius, he procured
himself to be made Bishop against all order, law, and ancient custom. From
which fact proceeded so great sedition, nay so great war (some of the people
defending Damasus as lawful Bishop, and some Vrsinus) that the places of
prayer were filled with the blood of men. The people in this sort abusing their
authority and power, were restrained by the decrees of Coucels, and by the
laws of Princes, and their right and power to choose their Pastors, many
ways limited and straightened, till in the end it was wholly taken from them. For
first, the Council of Canone 13.
Laodicaea forbad, that elections of such as were to serve in the holy
Ministry of the Church, and execute the Priests office, should be left to the
multitudes. But that Council was but particular, and could prescribe no laws
to the whole world: and therefore after this, the people swayed things very
much still, and Vbi supra.
Leo Bishop of Rome, after this time, charged the Bishops to thrust none
upon the people without their consent. And even in the Roman church the
election of the people continued a long time after this decree of the Council
of (...). For Pope Nicholas the second, in the Council of Laterane, in the
year of our Lord 1059. with the consent of the whole Synod, decrees on this
sort: Decreti part. 1. did. 23. ca. 1.
Instructed and guided by the authority of our predecessors, and other holy
Fathers, we decree and determine, that when the Bishop of this Universal
Church of Rome dies; first of all the Cardinal Bishops shall most diligently
consult together about the election of a new, and soon after they shall take
unto them the Cardinal Cleargy-men, and so the rest of the Clergy and people
shall come to give consent to the new election. And because the Sea Apostolic
is preferred before all the Churches in the world, and therefore can have no
Metropolitan over or above it, the Cardinal Bishops doubtless supply the
place of the Metropolitan, and are to promote and lift up the new elected
Bishop to the top of Apostolic height. Yea the presence and testimony of
Laymen was not excluded in such elections a longtime after: For Platina in
vita Greg. 7.
Gregory the seventh was elected by the Cardinals of the church of Rome,
Clearkes, Acoluthes, Subdeacons and Presbyters, many Bishops, Abbots and
others, both of the Clergy and Laity being present.

But Christian Princes, Kings and Emperors, being chief among those of the
Laity, and so having a sovereign consent among and over the rest, in such
elections as pertained unto them by the right of humane fellowship and
government, interposed themselves in these businesses, and sundry ways
abridged that liberty, that the people in some places took unto them. Lib. 8.
cap. 2.
Zozomen notes, that after the death of Nectarius, Bishop of Constantinople,
the Clergy and people resolved to have Chrysostom a Presbyter of Antioch, a
man famously renowned throughout all the Empire, to be their Bishop. Which
their resolution the Emperor confirmed by his assent, and sent and fet him,
and called a Council to make his election more authentical. Likewise
Socrates. lib. 7. cap. 29.
after the death of Sicinius, though some would have had Philip, others P^clus
Presbyters of that church to succeed, yet the Emperor by the persuasion of
certain vain men, called a stranger thither, to wit, Nestorius, who afterward
proved an Arch-hereticke, Idem. l. 7. c. 39.
After the death of Maximianus, successor to Nestorius, the Emperor took
order without delay that Proclus might be placed in the Bishops chair by
the Bishops present, before the body of Maximianus was buried, least any
variance and quarrelling might ensue.

Neither did the Emperors medlelesse with the election of the Bishop of Rome,
then of Constantinople. For (as Annot in Platinam, in Pelag^o. 2.
Onuphrius rightly observes) after the Goths were driven out of Italy by
Narses, the Lieutenant of the Emperor, and the country subjected again to the
Empire of the East, in the days of Justinian the Emperor there began a new
custom in the election of the Roman Bishops; which was, that so soon as
the Bishop of that See should be dead, the Clergy and people (as formerly
they had done) should presently choose another to succeed into his place: but
that he might not be confecrated and ordained by the Bishops, till his
election were confirmed by the Emperor, and till he gave leave to ordain him
by his Letters Pattents. For which confirmation a certain sum of money was
paid, which it is likely Justinian did, or by his authority caused Vigilius
the Bishop of Rome to do it, that the Emperor might be assured of the
conditions of the newly elected Bishop, least a factious and busy man being
chosen, he might conspire with the barbarous people that then sought to
encroch upon the Empire, and so cause a reuolte of the city of Rome and the
country of Italy from the Eastern Empire, the Bishop growing great, and the
Emperor being far off. Upon which constitution it came to pass that the
Romans chose for the most part such a one, as they thought would be acceptable
to the Emperor, and of whom he might be persuaded, that he would attempt
nothing prejudicial to the state of the Empire, the Lombards about that time
or presently after troubling Italy. This custom was continued till the time of
Benedict the Second, Platin^ in Benedicto (...).
in whose time Constantine the Emperor, for the good opinion he had of him,
and love he bare to him, gave commandment that the election of the Bishop of
Rome being resolved on, the Bishops should presently proceed to the ordination
of him, without expecting any confirmation from the Emperor. But the power of
confirming the newly elected Bishop of Rome before he might be ordained, or
execute the Bishoppely office, was again restored to Charles the great and his
successors Kings of France and Emperors of the West, in more ample sort then
it had been before, by Decreti. part. 1. Did. 63. c. 22.
Adrian the First; which being again taken from his successors by Platina in
Adriano. 3.
Adrian the Third, was restored to Otho the First, King of the Germans, and
Emperor of the West, by Decreti. part. 1. did. 63. c. 23.
Leo the Eigth. From which time it continued till Gregory the Seventh, See
before cap. 46.
who though he was glad to seek the Emperors confirmation himself, when he
first entered into the Popedom, yet afterward he disclaymed it as unlawful:
so condemning many of his Predecessors, that had allowed and confirmed this
part of Imperial power, under great pains and curses to fall upon such as
should ever go about to violate the same. After whose times other Popes
reserved the whole power of electing the Roman Bishop to the Cardinals
alone, as we see the manner is unto this day. Thus writes Onuphrius,
professing that he carefully looked over all the ancient monuments of the
Roman Church, to find out the certainety of these things. Neither need we to
doubt of the truth of that he writes, yet for farther proof, least any man
should doubt, I will produce the reports of Historians, and the Acts of
Councels to confirm that he says. Platina in the life of Pelagius the 2d
says, nothing was done in the election of the Roman B. in those days,
without the Emperors consent and confirmation: and shows that the reason why
Pelagius was created Bishop without the command of the Emperor, was, for
that they could send no messenger to him, the City being besieged. And
touching Gregory the First, In vita Gregorij, 1.
he reports, that when he was chosen Bishop of Rome, knowing the Emperors
consent necessarily to be required in the election and constitution of the
Bishop, unwilling to possess that place and room, he sent unto him,
earnestly entreating him to make void the election of the Clergy, and people:
which his suite the Emperor was so far from granting, that he sent to
confirm the Election, and to enforce him to take the Pastoral charge upon
him, in that most dangerous and troublesome time. Whereby we see how far
the Emperors intermedled in the election and constitution of the Roman
Bishops in those days. It is true indeed, that the same Platina reports,
that In vita. Benedicti. 2.
Constantine admiring the sanctity and virtue of Benedict the second, sent unto
him a sanction, that ever after all men should presently take him for Bishop
(without expecting the concurrence of the authority of the Emperor of
Constantinople, or the Exarch of Italy) whomsoever the Cle^rgy, people; and
armies of the Romans should choose. Not-with-standing this freed^me and
liberty continued not long: for (as we may read in the Part. 1. did. 63. c.
22.
Decree^) Charle^ the Great, and Adrian the first held a Synod in the Church
of Saint Savior in Rome, wherein met 153 Bishops, religious men and Abbottes,
in which Synod Adrian with the consent of the Bishops there assembled, gave
unto Charles power to choose the Bishop of Rome, and to order the Apostolical
See, together with the dignity of being a Patrician or Nobleman of Rome, and
besides decreed, that all Arch-bishoppes and Bishops in the Provinces abroad,
should seek investiture of him, and that no man should be esteemed a
Bishop, or be consecrated, till he were allowed and commended by the King.
This Decree the council published, anathematizing all that should violate it,
and confiscating their goods; yet did Plat. in Ad^. 3.
Adrian the third (as Platina reports) take so good heart unto him, that
whereas Nicholas the first did but attempt such a thing rather then perform
it, he in the very beginning of his Papal dignity made a Decree, that without
expecting the Emperors consent or ratification, the election of the Clergy,
Senate and People should be good. But Leo the Eight in a Synod gathered
together in the Church of Saint Savior in Rome, following the example of
Adrian the first, with the consent of the whole Synod restored unto the
Emperor that power and authority which Adrian the first had yielded unto him,
and Adrian the third had sought to deprive him of. The words of that council
are these. Did. ^3. (...). 26.
I Leo Bishop, and servant of the servants of God, with the whole Clergy and
people of Rome, do constitute confirm, and strengthen, and by our
Apostolical authority grant and give to our Lord Otho the first King of
Germans, and to his successors in this Kingdom of Italy for ever, power to
choose a successor, and to order the Bishop of this highest See Apostolic,
as also Arch-bishoppes, and Bishops, that they may receive investiture from
him, and consecration whence they ought to have it, those only excepted which
the Emperor himself has granted to the Popes and Archbishops; and that no
man hereafter of what dignity or religious profession soever, shall have power
to choose a Patrician or a chief Bishop of the highest See Apostolic, or to
ordain any Bishop whatsoever, without the consent of the Emperor first had,
which consent and confirmation notwithstanding shall be had without money. So
that if any Bishop shall be chosen by the clergy and people, he shall not be
consecrated unless he be commended and invested by the forenamed King. And
if any man shall attempt to do any thing against this rule and Apostolical
authority, We decree, that he shall be subject to excommunication, and that if
he repent not, he shall be perpetually banished, or be subject to the last,
most grievous, deadly and capital punishments. Hence it came that when any
Bishop was dead, they sent his staff and ring to the Emperor: and he to whom
the Emperor was pleased to deliver the same, after a solemn fashion and
manner, was thereby designed and constituted Bishop of the void place. Thus
we see how authentically, under great pains and curses, the Pope and council
yield that right to the Emperor, subjecting all that ever should go about to
disanull their Decree, to the great curse, perpetual banishment, and grievous
punishments. Yet Pope Hildebrand, who, as if he had been a firebrand of hell,
set all the world in a Combustion, Naucler. vol. 2. G^ner. 36.
disanulled this Law as impious and wicked: and Victor, Vrbanus, and Paschalis
succeeding him were of the same mind. By reason whereof there grew a great
dissension between the Popes and Emperors: Henry the fourth, and after him
Henry the fifth, challenging not only the right of confirming the election of
the Popes, but power also to confer Bishoprics and Abbeyes by Investiture
of staff and ring, as the Popes Adrian and Leo had yielded and granted to
Charles and his successors; which thing also had been enjoyed by the Emperor
for the space of three hundred years: and the Popes on the other side thinking
it unlawful for the Emperors in this sort to bestow either Bishopric or
Abbey, and forbidding them so to do, under pain of the great curse. But Henry
the fifth forced ^ope Paschall to confirm unto him the ancient right again,
and to accurse all such as should dislike, resist, or seek to disanull it:
which yet not long after be reuersed again in another Council: and in the
Ibidem Gener. 38.
days of Calixtus, the Emperor resigned his right, and the Pope allowed, that
within his kingdom of Germany, elections should be made in his presence, and
that with the advice of the Metropolitan and Bishops of the Province he might
assist and strengthen the better part, and that the elected should receive from
him all things belonging to the King by the reaching forth of his Scepter. In
Henrico. 1: page 62.
Matthew Paris says; the contention between Pope Paschall and Henry the
Emperor about the inuestiture of Bishops and Abbots, which the Emperors had
enjoyed three hundred years in the times of threescore Popes was so ended,
that both Bishops and Abbots should first swear Canonical obedience to their
Ecclesiastical superiors, and be consecrated, and then receive Institution
from the Emperor by rod and ring. Thus we see what right and interest ancient
Emperors challenged to themselves in the election of the Bishop of Rome, and
in conferring other dignities of the Church, and that the latter Popes
condemned that as evil and wicked which their Predecessors not only allowed,
but prescribed under great and grievous pains and curses. Whereupon Annal.
lib. 4. page 3 22.
Auentinus notes, that among the Popes, Eadem facta modo superstitionis, modo
pietatis, modo Christi, modo Antichristi, modo iusticiae, modo tyrannidis
nomina accipiunt: that is, That the same factes, deeds and things, are at one
time branded with the mark of superstition, and at another time set out with
the glorious title of Piety: at one time attributed to Christ, at another time
to Antichrist; at one time judged just and righteous, and at another time
tyrannical and unjust. Chronograph. lib. 4. saeculo. 10.
Genebrard (acknowledging that there have been many vile monsters that have
gotten into Peter's chair, and that there were fifty Popes rather Apotacticall
and Apostaticall, then Apostolical) lays the blame upon the Roman
Emperors, as if they had placed those monsters in Peter's chair. It is well
he confesses that such beasts have entered into the Church of Rome, but if
he did not, we would easily prove the same. For (to omit Hildebrand, whom
some called a monster, and an enemy to mankind, who caused more Christian
blood to be shed, and more grievous confusions to rent and shake in sunder the
Christian world, then any heretics or persecutors had ever done before, so
that he was forced to confess at his death to God, to holy Church, and
blessed Peter, that he had grievously offended in his Pastoral office; and
Ioane the Whore, because (as Annot: in Platinam in Ioanne 8.
Onuphrius thinks) she was not Pope but the harlot of John the twelfth: the
Stories mention such vile monsters sitting in that Chair, that Lib. Chron: in
Benedicto. 4.
Benedict the fourth is highly commended, for that though he did nothing
memorable, yet he lived an honest and a good life. But that the Emperors were
the cause of the placing of these Monsters (as Genebrard would make us believe)
it may not be yeldeed. For between the time of Adrian the third (who took the
power of confirming popes from the Emperors) and the reign of Otho the first,
to whom it was restored by pope Leo: there entered Formosus, Bonifacius,
Stephen, Romanus, Theodorus, John the ninth, Christopher, and Sergius, all, men
of ill note: and John the twelfth, then whom the earth did never bear a more
prodigious and vile monster. Otho Frisingens. chron. li. 6. cap. 23.
This wretch, Otho, at the earnest suite of the Romans, caused to be deposed
by a Council of Bishops, and Leo to be chosen. Whereupon the power of
choosing the pope, and ordering the Sea Apostolic, was again by consent of
Leo the pope, and the people and Clergy of Rome, given and confirmed to him
and his successors for ever, in sort before expressed. For (as De regno Ital.
lib: 7.
Sigonius says) Leo rightly considered, that after the time of Adrian the
third, the ambition of the Romans filled the Church with beasts, disordered
these elections, and set all in a tumult: and therefore thought no means so
fit to reform these disorders, to repress these insolences, and prevent
these mischiefs, as to put the bridle into the Emperors hands again. Yet not
long after, the Romans casting off the yoke, and breaking the bands in
sunder, put in Boniface the seventh, Benedict the ninth, and Syluester, who
sold the Popedom to Gregory the sixth, all which popes were so intollerably
wicked, that Platina in Gregorio. 6.
Platina calls them teterrima monstra, that is, most vile, hideous and ougly
monsters. And Otho Frisingens: Chron: lib: 6. cap. 31.
Henry the second called a Council, and deposed Gregory the last of them, and
placed Twideger a Germane in his place, who was afterward named Clemens, who
again restored the right of choosing the Pope to him and his successors: for
that (as Sigonius De regno Ital. lib. 8.
notes) after the law prescribing and requiring the Emperors consent to be
had in such elections was taken away, the state of the church was newly put in
great danger. So that Henry the second was forced to come into Italy, to set
things in order. And therefore it is more then ordinary impudency in Vbi supra.
Genebrard, to impute all the confusions in the elections of the Roman Bishops
to the Emperors, who were not the causes of them, but oftentimes staide them
by their Princely power. Neither is it less strange that he and other dare
condemn that authority in the Emperors as unlawful, which had continued from
the time of Justinian to Benedict, and was again confirmed by Adrian, Leo, and
other Popes, with their Counsels of Bishops; and by virtue where of Saint
Gregory and other possessed the Episcopal chair, who are unjustly censured by
Genebrard, as entering by the Posterne gate, in this respect. Neither have the
Popes been better, or the election freer from faction, since the Emperors
were wholly and finally excluded, then they were before. For what shall we say
of Bonifacius the Eigth, of whom it is said, Platina in Bonifacio. 8. and
Wal^ngham in Edwardo. 3.
that he entered like a Fox, and died like a Dog, that he coosened poor
Caelestinus his predecessor, and by false practices won him to resign the
Popedom to him, and resting not contented herewith, took upon him to dispose
of all the Kingdoms of the world at his pleasure? of Vide acta Concilij
Constantiensis Sess. 11. act. 6. and Sess. 12.
John the three and twentieth, a vile man, and a Devil incarnate? and Alexander
the sixth, of whom so many horrible things are reported by In Alexandro 6.
Onuphrius, Anthropologiae lib. 22.
Volaterran and others? And touching factions and schisms, whereas there have
bin thirty of them in the church of Rome, never any endured so long as the last
which was since the Emperors were wholly excluded from intermedling with Papal
elections. For it continued forty years, and could never be ended but by the
help of Sigismund the Emperor in the Council of Constance. Wherefore seeing
so many Counsels and Popes yielded the power of electing, or at least of
allowing and confirming the Popes to the Emperors, and seeing so good effects
followed of it, and so ill of the contrary, there is no reason why our
Adversaries should dislike it. For seeing the people aunciently had their
consent in these affairs, O^ho (...). de gestis Frederic. (...). (...). 11.
ca. (...).
Frederick the Emperor had reason when he said, that himself as King and
ruler of the people, ought to be chief in choosing his own Bishop.

Neither had the Emperors only this right in disposing of the Bishopric of
Rome and other dignities Ecclesiastical, but other Christian Kings likewise
had a principal stroke in the appointing of Bishops. For (as Vol. 2. genesis 38.
Nauclere notes) the French Kings have had the right of Inuestitures ever
since the time of Adrian the first: and Defens pro liberate Ecclesiae
Gallicanae. cap: 43.
Duarenus shows, that howsoever Ludouicus renounced the right of choosing the
Bishop of Rome, yet he held still the right of Inuestiture of other Bishops,
into the place whereof came afterward, that right which the King uses, when
in the vacancie of a Bishopric he gives power to choose, and some other
royalties which the Kings of France still retain. It appears by the Canone 6.
twelfth Council of Toledo, that the Kings had a principal stroke in
elections in the Churches of Spain: and touching England, Matthew Paris
testifies, that Henry the first by William of Warnaste his (...) In Henrico.
1. page: 56.
agent, protested to the Pope, he would rather loose his kingdom then the
right of Inuestitures; and added threatening words to the same protestation.
Neither did he only make verbal protestations, but he really practiced that
he spoke, and gave the Arch bishopric of Canterbury to Rodolphe Bishop of
London, inuesting him by Pastoral staff and ring. Articuli cleri prescribe,
that elections shall be free from force, fear, or entreaty of Secular powers:
yet so as that the Kings license be first asked, and after the election done,
his royal assent and confirmation be added to make it good. Whereupon the
Statute of prouisors of Benefices, made at Westminster the five and twentieth of
Edward the third, has these words: Our Sovereign Lord the King and his
heirs shall have and enjoy for the time, the collations to the
Archbishoprickes and other dignities elective, which be of his aduowry, such
as his progenitors had, before free election was granted: since that the first
elections were granted by the Kings progenitors, upon a certain form and
condition, as namely to demand license of the King to choose, and after choice
made, to have his royal assent. Which condition being not kept, the thing
ought by reason to return to his first nature.

So that we see, that at first the Clergy and people were to choose their
Bishops and Ministers; yet so, that Princes by their right were to moderate
things, and nothing was to be done without them. But when they endowed Churches
with ample revenewes and possessions, and disburdened the people of the charge
of maintaining their Pastors, they had now a farther reason to sway things then
before. And thence it is, that the Statute aboue-mentioned says: the Kings
gave power of free elections, yet upon condition of seeking their license and
confirmation, as having the right of nomination in themselves, in that they
were Founders. Likewise touching Presbyters, the ancient Conc. Carth. 4.
Canone 22.
Canon of the Council of Carthage (which was, that Bishops should not ordain
clearks without the consent of their Clergy, and that also they should have
the assent and testimony of the Citizens) held while the Clergy lived together
upon the common contributions and divident, but when not only titles were
divided and distinguished, and men placed in rural Churches abroad: but
several allowance made for the maintenance of such as should attend the
service of God by the Lords of those Country towns, out of their own lands,
and the lands of their tennants, they that thus carefully provided for the
Church, were much respected. And it was thought fit they should have great
interest in the choosing and nominating of Clearkes in such places. Novel.
Constit. 123. c. 1. 8
Justinian the Emperor, to reward such as had been beneficial in this sort
to the Church, and to encourage others to do the like, decreed: That if any
man build a Church or house of Prayer, and would have Clearkes to be placed
there, if he allow maintenance for them, and name such as are worthy, they
shall be ordained upon his nomination. But if he shall choose such as be
prohibited by the Canons as unworthy, the Bishop shall take care to promote
some whom he thinks more worthy. And the Council of Conc. Toletan. 9. Canon.
Toledo about the year of Christ 655, made a Canon to the same effect. The
words of the council are these: We decree, that as long as the Founders of
Churches do live, they shall be suffered to have the chief and continual
care of the said Churches, and shall offer fit Rectors to the Bishop to be
ordained. And of the Bishop neglecting the Founders shall presume to place any
others, let him know that his admission shall be void, and to his shame; but
if such as they choose be prohibited by the Canons as unworthy, then let the
Bishop take care to promote some whom he thinks more worthy. Whereby we see
what respect was anciently had to such as founded Churches, and gave lands and
possessions to the same: yet were they not called Lords of such places, after
such dedication to God, but Patrons only: because they were to defend the
rights thereof, and to protect such as there attended the service of God: and
though they had right to nominate men to serve in these places, yet might they
not judge or punish them if they neglected their duties, but only complain of
them to the Bishop or Magistrate: Neither Duaren. de sacris Eccl. Minist. l. 5.
c. 4
might they dispose of the possessions thus given to the Church, and dedicated
to God, but if they fell into poverty, they were to be maintained out of the
revenewes thereof. This power and right of nomination and presentation resting
in Princes and other Founders, can no way prejudice or hurt the state of the
Church, if Bishops (to who^ examination and ordination pertains) do their
duties in refusing to consecrate and ordain such as the Canons prohibit; but
very great confusions did follow the Popes intermeddling in bestowing
Church-liuings and dignities, as we shall soon find if we look into the
practice of them in former times.

CHAP. 55.
Of the Popes disordered intermedling with the elections of Bishops and other
Ministers of the Church: their usurpation, intrusion and preiudicing the right
and liberty of others.

THe Popes informer times greatly prejudiced the right and liberty of other men
and hurt the estate of the Church of God three ways: first by giving
privileges to Friars, (a people unknown to all antiquity) to enter into the
Churches and charges of other men, to do Ministerial acts, and to get unto
themselves those things which of right should have been yielded to other.
Secondly, by Commendams, and Thirdly, by reseruations and provisions.

Touching the first, In Henrico. 3. page 672.
Matthew Paris notes that about the year of our Lord 1246, the Preaching
Friars obtained great privileges from the Pope, to preach, to hear
confessions, and to do other ministerial acts, every where disgracing the
ordinary Pastors, as ignorant and insufficient to govern the people of God.
This new found order of Friars, he says, seemed to many discreet and wise men
to tend to the overthrow of the order of Pastors and Bishops settled by the
blessed Apostles and holy Doctors: and that, not having been above thirty
years in England they were grown more out of order, then the Monks of S.
Austine and Benedictes order were in many ages. For such was their impudent and
shameless boldness, that they came to the Synodes of Bishops, Prelates, and
Archdeacons, sitting as Presidents in the midst of their Deanes, Rectors,
and other worthy men, requiring their letters of commission and privilege to
be read, and themselves to be admitted and commended to preach in their Synodes
and Parish Churches as Ambassadors and Angels of God with all honor. In this
insolent sort went they up and down from place to place, and asked of every
man, (though of a religious profession) to whom he confessed himself; and if
any one answered, that he made his confession to his own Priest, they asked
again, what Idiot that was? they told him he was never hearer of Divinity,
that he never studied the Decrees, and that he was not able to discuss any
one co^trouersy; adding that such Priests wereblind, and guides of the blind;
and willed all men to come unto the^ as to men knowing to discern between
Leprosy and Leprosy: to whom the hard and obscure things were known, and the
secrets of God revealed: whereupon many (especially Noblemen and Noblewomen,
betook themselves to these, contemning their own Pastors: so that the
ordinary Ministers grew into great contempt, which grieved them not a little,
nor without cause. But of these Fryerly people no man has written better then
Armachanus: Armacanus Sermon. 4. fact. in vulgari apud crucem S. Pauli London.
Anno. 1356.
who excellently deciphereth their intolerable hypocrisy, injustice, and
covetousness, joined with all cunning and coozening practices and devises.
Their hypocrisy he discovers, in that though they pretended poverty, yet
they had houses like the stately palaces of Princes, Churches more costly then
any Cathedral Churches, more and richer Ornaments then all the Prelates of the
world, more and better books then all the Doctors and great learned men of the
world: cloisters, and walking places so sumptuous, stately and large, that men
of arms might fight on horseback and encounter one another with their spears
in them, and their apparel richer then the greatest and most reverend
prelates. Their injustice he shows in their injurious intruding into other
men's Churches and charges, depriving the^ of their authority, honor; and
maintenance: and their covetousness, in that they sought only to do those things
that might bring gain: and insinuated themselves into the favor and liking of
the great ones of the world, little regarding those of mean condition.
Whereupon he warns all men to take heed of them as wicked seducers, that
enter into houses and lead captive simple women laden with sins, bringing in
sects of perdition; and in covetousness making merchandise of men by crafty
and fained words of flattery. See to this purpose Clemangis de corrupto
Ecclesiae statu. Gerson contra Bullam. Mendicantium.
This is that unprofitable, and most dangerous and damnable generation of
disguised and masked hypocrites, which like Locusts are come out of the
bottomless pit, in these last ages of the world, eating up and devouring
whatsoever is green and flourishing upon the earth.

The Monks in their beginning were a people of a far other sort: For they
took not on them to preach or minister Sacraments, but were a kind of
voluntary penitents, according to that of Saint Hierome; Hier. contra.
Vigilantium non procul a fine.
Monachus Plangentis, non Docentis officium habet; that is, a Monk is a
mourner, he is no teacher. And again: Ad Heliodorum.
Alia Monachorum est causa, alia Clericorum. Clerici pascunt ones, Ego pascor.
Illi de Altari viuunt, mihi quasi infructuosae arbor^ securis ponitur ad
radicem, si munus ad Altar non defere: that is, The condition of Monks and of
Clearkes is very different. Clearkes feed the sheep, but I am fed; they
live by the Altar, but if I bring not my gift to the Altar, the Axe is lifted
up against me, and laid as to the root of an unfruitful tree. And therefore
(as De Sacris Eccles. minist. and Benef. li. 1. c. 20.
Duarenus notes) in ancient times Monks were mere Laymen, neither were
there any Priests or Clearkes found in Monasteries; but they came all, as
other of the people did, to the common Temples and Churches, to be taught, to
pray, and to receive the Sacraments. Which thing he says, Justinian the
Emperor plainly enough expresses: and with him agrees Bishop Panopliae
lib. 4. cap. 75.
Lindan, who says, that in ancient time all Monks were Laymen, and that they
were all excluded and shut out of the Quire: when they came into the Temple and
house of God, sometimes they did send for a Priest to do Ministerial acts
among them, and in the end some of them were ordained Priests, that so they
might have the Ministration of Sacraments among them, and make as it were a
certain Church among themselves, and so neither be forced to go to other
Churches, nor to borrow Priests from other. And to the same purpose Erudition.
Theol. de sacra. fidei lib. 2. part. 3. cap. 4.
Hugo de Sancto Victore says, that by special favor and indulgence, the
divine orders of Ministry are granted to Monks, that they might live more
quietly within themselves; not that they should exercise Prelacie in the people
of God; but that they might celebrate the communion of God within their own
private retiring places, which yet they say in the beginning was not so. For
Monks and men dwelling in the wilderness, are said to have had Priests
assigned unto them. But (as Vbi supra.
Duarenus notes) hereby the passage was opened, and all Monks began to be
ordained Priests, (though they had no government of the Church) that they
might procure the more dignity to themselves: the order and degree of
Cleargy-men being more high and honorable then that of Monks. Neither did
they long contain themselves within these bounds after they had attained to be
Priests: but got authority and jurisdiction over Churches abroad, either
because they were founded within their lands, or for that it pleased the Pope
to take them from Bishops, and subject them to these Monks. At the first (as
the same Ibidem ca. 21:
Duarenus notes) they lived apart, in certain abiding places, which they had
in the mountains and deserts, whence they were called not only Monks, but
Heremites and Anchorites, though at certain hours and set times they met.
Afterward they began to live together, and the places where they lived were
called Caenobia of the communion of life. And when certain Ecclesiastical
persons remaining in cities and places of resort, and teaching the people, tied
themselves to like observations, though happily not altogether so strict, as
these had done, they were called Vide Cassandri cosultat. de Canonicis.
Canonici, that is Regulars, rather then Monachi, Monks, of which order S.
Austine is supposed to have bin the author. Afterward in process of time,
some other Cleargy-men living together, and tied to the observation of rules
and Canons, but not so strict as these, nor so near to Monkish profession,
were called secular canons, and the other for distinctions sake Canons Regular.
In these societies young men were trained up, as likewise they were in all
Cathedral Churches, till the founding of the Universities, passing through all
the minor orders and performing for a space the duties belonging to them, that
so they might be fitted for greater employments. Duarenus vbi supra. cap. 22.
The Monks had one among them, that commanded over all the rest, named
Coenobiarcha, Archimandrita or Abbas; and for the better perforformance of his
duty, took unto him another, whose help he might use in the governing of
those that were subject to him, who was named a Prior. This Prior either
assisted the Abbot in the government of those Monks, which lived within the
bounds of the Monastery, and was called a Prior Claustrall; or those lesser
Couents that were abroad and yet subject to the Abbot, and was named a Prior
Conventuall. By that has bin said, we see, that the profession of Monks in
the beginning was voluntary penitency, and a retired life, not meddling with
public affairs, either Civil or Ecclesiastical, (as appears by the
Decree of the council of Canone 4.
Chalcedon) that they were mere Laymen, that they gloried not in the
perfection of their estate, as they that call themselves Religious in our time
do, but confessed, that men of action and employment, who conflicted with the
manifold oppositions of the World, and declined not the battle, were more
valiant Soldiers of Christ in his spiritual warfare, then themselves, who
fearing their own weakness did run away. They acknowledged themselves
inferior to the whole Ecclesiastical order, came to the common Prayers and
Sacraments with the rest of the people, and paid their Tithes, and yielded all
other duties, as well as the rest: howsoever in the end they degenerated, and
grew out of kind, putting themselves into the Ministry, intruding themselves
into the government of the Church, spoiling the Bishops of their Jurisdiction,
and inferior Pastors of their maintenance, by appropriating to themselves the
livings that formerly belonged to them,

But the Friars profess an intermeddling with the public direction and
guidance of the people of God, causing great confusions in the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, and are most unlike the ancient Monks, and their beginning was
but of latter time. These were principally of four sorts: but among them all
the Minorites or Franciscans seemed to be the strictest. For whereas the Monks
possessed lands in common, though none of them had any personal propriety in
any thing, and the rest of the Friars had the right of moveable goods in
common, though they possessed no lands, these professed to have nothing but the
bare and single use of things, without all right or claim, as I have showed
Cap. 43.
before. About which profession of theirs, there was great contention in the
time of John the two and twentieth, the folly and hypocrisy of which men
(thinking perfection to consist in poverty) is sufficiently refuted by De
Cosinliis Euangelicis and statu perfect.
Gerson, In extravagant. tit. de verb* signif. and in extravag. ad Conditorem
Canonum.
John the two and twentieth, Com. in concord. Evangel. c. 100.
Iansenius, and other, who show, that perfection consists in the virtues of
the mind, that poverty or riches neither make a man better nor worse, and
consequently pertain nothing to perfection, otherwise then as the care and
love of them hinders, or the neglect of them furthereth the fervency of love.

From this first way whereby the Pope disturbed the Ecclesiastical order,
which was by giving privileges to exorbitant Friars, let us proceed to the
second, which is by Commendams. In ancient times (says De sacr. Eccl Minist.
and Be nef. l. 5. c. 8. All commendams are not to be condemned,
notwithstanding any abuse of the same: for sometimes by reason either of the
scarcity of sufficient Pastors, or the insufficiency of the Pastors maintenance
arisi^g out of one Church. more Churches then one are committed to one.
Duarenus) when a worthy Pastor was not presently found to be set over a
church so soon as it was void, to avoyde those evils and inconveniences,
which for the most part Anarchy brings forth, the custom was, that in the
mean while the void church should be commended and committed to some honest
man, who being but as a Tutor and Procurator only, should be bound faithfully
to give an account of that he should do. For he was not Pastor of the
church, but appointed only for a time to take care of it. But in time, this
thing (which was at first most profitable and behoouefull, and devised to
provide for churches in vacancie,) was strangely turned to the hurt and plague
of them. For they who by the canons may not have the government of churches or
Monasteries committed to them, have both churches and Monasteries commended
unto them perpetually, and as long as they live. And such is the form of this
committing or commending in the Popes grants, that they to whom churches are so
commended, have free power not only to dispose of such things as belong unto
them, but to consume, waste and spend them, without being subject to any
account. And truly it is strange, that men of wit and understanding, who
devised this fraudulent kind of practice, found not out some fairer color of
so great and gross a corruption, that so they might not have seemed so
plainly and openly to have despised the canons, and to make a mock of them.
Thus far Duarenus. In this sort the Pope gave the greatest Bishopperickes in
the World in Commendam, or perpetual administration to his Cardinals, and
sometimes in title also; but so, that they were called Bishops elect of such a
place, and never consecrated.

The third way whereby the Pope preiudiceth the Church, is by taking on him to
give Church-liuings in all parts of the world to whom he pleases; a thing
never thought of in the first ages of the church. For the Bishop of Rome had
no power to ordain Clearkes out of his own Diocese, or Bishops out of his
own Province, the Canons providing that a Bishop should be chosen by the
Clergy and people, and ordained by the Metropolitan and other Bishops of
the Province, It is true indeed, that as Patriarch of the West he was to
confirm the several Metropolitanes subject to him, either by imposition of
hands, or by sending the Pall as all other Patriarchs likewise were to do;
but in the Patriarchshippe of any of the rest he might not meddle, as
appears by the Binnius in vita Adrian^ secundi. tom. 3. Council. part. 2.
contention between Rome and Constantinople about the Bulgarians; nor within
his own Precinctes further then the confirming of the Metropolitanes, as it is
evident by the Council of Action. 16.
Chalcedon, forbidding the Patriarche of Constantinople to meddle in the
ordinations of Bishops, and requiring him to content himself with the
confirmation of Metropolitanes, to whom yet in the same Council equal
privileges with the Bishop of Rome are given. So that it is not likely that
in those times the Roman Bishops challenged to themselves any such power and
right, as now they do. Nay De Sacris. Ec. minist. and Benef. l. 3. cap. 1.
Duarenus pronounces, that there is no doubt, but that the more ancient and
holy Bishops of Rome, contenting themselves with their own Church, left the
administration of other Churches free to their own Bishops, as rather
thinking themselves Bishops of that one city then of the whole world, which
thing happily moved a certain Bishop (of whom Paulus Li. 9. de rebus gestis
Francor.
Aemylius makes mention) to answer somewhat peremptorily to Gregory the
Eleventh, asking him why he went not to his Church? for whereas Gregory satte
at Auinion, and not at Rome, he said unto him, If one should ask thee why
thou go not to Rome, that has been so long forsaken of her Bishops, thou
would have much less to answer then I have. But the latter Bishops of
Rome contented not themselves herewith; neither did they think it enough to
be Bishops of Rome, and prime Bishops amongst and before the rest, but
they would needs be universal Bishops, and therefore thought it no robbery
to concur with all other Bishops, and to prevent them if they could in
giving void Benefices before them: And because it was not easy to prevent the
Bishops in this sort, in Provinces and Kingdoms far remote, therefore they
found out a more certain and ready way, whereby to take from them their right
and power: for a custom grew in and prevailed, unknown to former times, of
certain Papal graunts wherein Benefices not void were commanded to be
bestowed and conferred when they should be void, upon such as the Pope should
think fit, and specially upon strangers. These were called Gratiae
expectatiuae, and Mandata de prouidendo: and Matthew. Parisiens. in Henrico: 3.
p. 639.
hereof the whole state of England complained to Innocentius the Fourth,
affirning, that by virtue of these Provisions, there were so many Italians
beneficed in England, that the revenues which they had from hence was 60000
marks; which was more then the bare revenue of the Kings, and yet as if this
had not been enough, there came one Martine with Commission from the Pope to
wrong the poor Church of England a little more. This man conferred certain
Benefices actually void of the value of thirty marks by the year upon
strangers, and when they dyed he put in others without the priuity of the
Patrons, and went about to assure to such as he pleased the like Benefices not
yet void, whenever they should be void; besides many other most unjust
exactions, wherewith he vexed the poor English, putting all such as resisted
against him under the sentence of excommunication and interdiction, taking more
on him then ever any Legate did (though he came not as a Legate) to the great
prejudice of the Crown of England; seeing no Legate was to come hither,
unless he were desired by the King. The Messengers that the State of England
sent to the Pope, to make known their greiuances and complaints were greatly
disliked by the Pope, and their message no way acceptable to him: and therefore
though dissembling the matter he gave them some good words, as if there should
be no more such Provisions made, but only for some particular persons, and
they not above twelve in number, yet such was the good nature of the man (as
Matthew Page 669.
Paris notes) that he would not suffer the poor English, though sore beaten
with many stripes, once to cry or complain. But because they published these
their complaints in the Council of Lions, which was holden at the time of
their coming, he was exceeding angry, and Ibidem.
dealt with the French King to make war against the King of England, and
either to deprive him of his Kingdom, or to make him wholly to stoop to the
pleasure of the pope, and the Court of Rome: which the French King utterly
refused to do. After these things thus past between the Pope and the English,
he did worse then ever before. Page 674.
Whereupon there was a new meeting of the States of England, wherein these
grieuances were made manifest, and complained of: First, that the Pope was not
content with his ordinary reuenew of Peter Pence, but exacted other
contributions without the Kings knowledge. Secondly, that the Patrons of
Churches were not permitted to present Clearkes, but Romans were put into
them, who neither understood the Language, nor ever meant to live here; but
carried away the money out of the Realm. So that neither was the people
instructed, hospitality kept, the Churches repaired, nor any good done: and
beside, Page 667.
the Original Patrons were deprived of their right, one Italian succeeding
another in the Churches founded by them, without their knowledge, and that
unwelcome Messenger, Non obstante, too often sent unto them. These their
complaints, the King, the Bishops, Abbots, Lords and Commons made known by
their letters Page 687.
and messengers to the Pope, with earnest desire of reformation and redress:
but could receive none other answer from him, but that the King of England had
his Counsel, and so had he; that the king began to kick against him, and to
play the Frederick. And such was his displeasure, that all English were
repelled and driven away as Schismatickes. After this, new letters were again
written to the Pope, and in the end a privilege was granted, that noe
Provisions c P. 689.
should be made for Italians, Cardinals, or the Popes Nephews, before the
King were first earnestly entreated to be content with the^, only to abuse such
as would be abused. For the Pope went forward still in his provisions, as
formerly he had done, as appears by his letters to the Abbot of Saint
Albons, and by the Page 791.
worthy letters of the Bishop of Lincoln written to the pope about these
matters, and his Page 843.
speeches against the Pope a little before his death. And here by the way, it
is worth the noting, that Page 848.
Matthew Paris has, that in the time of Gregory the Ninth upon complaint of
onde Robert Tewing Patron of the Church of Lathune, the popes Grant made in
prejudice of his right was reuersed, because it was not known that the Patron
of that Benefice was a Layman when it was given by the pope. So that if it
had been in the gift of a Cleargy-mam, it must have stood: so ready was the
head of the Church to oppress Churchmen, and their possessions of all other
were most fit for spoil. So little respect was there had to religion in
those days, and so were all things returned to their old Chaos again: Whence
it came that Page 496. Page 791.
the hearts of all men went away from the pope and the Church of Rome, whereof
the one sought to be esteemed a Father, and the other a Mother to all
Churches: but the one of them proved a step-father, and the other a
stepmother. Neither did the pope like a wild Bore make havoc only in the
Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, planted in this Island, which lay open to be
spoiled by all passengers, but he played his part also in all other Kingdoms of
the West: though some resisted more against his intrusions then others.
Touching France, we read in the book entitled, Pro liberate Ecclesiae
Gallicae, aduersus Romanam aulam, defensio Parisiensis Curiae, Ludouico
vndecimo Gallorum Regi quondam oblata, turned out of French into Latin by
Duarenus, and added to his book De sacris Ecclesiae Ministeriis, that there
being a great number of goodly Churches founded by the Kings of France, when
the Bishops of Rome began to prejudice the liberties of them, the King, the
Nobles, the Princes of the blood, the Clergy and commons, assembled to resist
the vexations, oppressions, and wrongs of the Court of Rome, and made many good
Constitutions for the repressing of such insolences. So Lewys, when first the
Pope began to meddle, in the year one thousand two hundred sixty seaue^,
decreed that Preslacies and Dignities elective should be given by election: and
such as are not elective, by collation, and presentation of Patrons: and that
the Court of Rome should extort no money for any such thing out of the Kingdom
of France. And when, notwithstanding this Decree, in process of time the Court
of Rome attempted diverse things contrary to the liberty of the church of
France, Charles the Sixth, with the advice of his Nobles, Prelates, Abbottes,
Colleges, Universities, and other parts of his Kingdom, in the year one
thousand four hundred and six, made a Constitution, whereby he restored the
church to her ancient liberty: and this Decree was published in the year one
thousand four hundred and seven; in which year Benedict the Pope, and his
Ministers having imposed and exacted great sums of money, a new complaint was
made to the King: and thereupon a Decree made, that nothing should be paid
out of France in the nature of Annates or Tenthes, and that such as had been
excommunicated for refusal of them, should be absolved again. In the year
one thousand four hundred and eighteen, a Constitution was made, whereby all
Reservations and Apostolical graces, as they call them, together with all
exactions of the court of Rome were forbidden. And when as the Romans
contemning all Constitutions, ceased not to trouble and confound the Hierarchy
of the Church, and scattered abroad every where throughout the World their
Reservations and expectatiue graces, (whence followed great and horrible
deformities in the church) at last a General Council was assembled for the
Reformation of the church, in the Head and members: which prohibited these
Reseruations and expectatiue Graces, restored the canons touching Elections and
Collations, and subjected all that should contumaciously resist (yea though the
Pope himself) to due punishment. The Decrees of this council, Charles the
Seventh confirmed, with the consent of all Estates of his Kingdom, and this
his Decree of Confirmation was called the Pragmaticall Sanction. But the Popes
never rested till they had, if not wholly overthrown it, yet greatly weakened
it. The attemptes of Pius the Second (who being a private man in the Council
of Basil, set it forward what he could) are not unknown, as also of Sixtus
the Fourth, Innocentius the Eighth, Alexander the Sixth, Julius the Second, and
Leo the Tenth, who published a Constitution, whereby the Pragmaticall Sanction
was much weakened, though not wholly taken away; and those his new Decrees were
called Conventa, that is, agreements between the King and him. From these
Decrees the University of Paris appealed to a General council. And thus we
see how well the Popes fulfill the commandment of Christ in feeding his
Sheep, that labor so mainely the ouer-throw of those canons, which being
taken away, the whole Ecclesiastical Order is confounded, whole countries are
made desolate and forsaken, Kingdoms are robbed of their money and treasure,
and churches are ruinated and subverted. For so did all good men out of woeful
experience complain in former times.

Wherefore passing by these intrusions, usurpations, and tyrannical
inter-meddling of Popes with things not pertaining to them, it is evident by
that which has been said, that the Election of fit Ministers to teach the
people of God, pertains to the clergy and people, by the reasons and grounds
of humane societies, unless by their own consent, forfeiture, restraint of
superior authority commanding over them, or special reasons prevailing more
then those general grounds of humane fellowship, it be taken from them. As in
case of founding churches and endowing them with lands, the Patrons have the
right of presenting: and in cases of intolerable abuses, negligences or
insolences, the Prince (as Head of the people) assumeth to himself the
nomination of such as are to serve in the holy Ministry of the church.

Some there are that think the right of the people in choosing their Pastors
and Ministers to be such, as that it may not be limited, restrained, or taken
away upon any consideration what-soeuer, and that therefore there is no lawful
Election of Ecclesiastical Ministers, unless the people choose: But the error
of these men is easily refuted. For seeing the Scripture and Word of GOD gives
no such power to the people, and all the interest they have, or can claim,
is but from the ground of humane fellowship, subject to many limitations,
alterations and restraintes, there is no reason to think that necessarily the
people must ever elect their Pastors. In the reformed Churches of France and
Geneua, the people give no voices in the election of Ministers, but are only
permitted, if they have any causes of dislike or exception, to make them known
to the Pastors and guides of the Church; and the power of judging of such
exceptions rests wholly in them. In so much that when one Morellius a
fantastical companion sought to bring the elections of Bishops and Ministers
to be Popular, and swayed by the most voices of the people, he was condemned
by all the Synodes in France, as Epist. 83.
Beza shows in his Epistles. That there is no precept in the whole new
Testament forcing popular elections it is evident: And the only example that
is brought of any such thing, is that of the Acts. 6.
seven Deacons; but first there was some special reason, why the peoples
consent was sought in the election of these Deacons, being to be trusted with
the treasure of the Church, and the disposing of the contributions of the
faithful: and secondly, from one example, a general rule may not be
gathered, Seeing the circumstances of things, times and persons, admit infinite
varieties; some allege that place in the Acts for proof of popular
elections, where the Apostles are said to have appointed Elders or Presbyters
by Acts. 14. 23.
(...), because (...) signifies that kind of election, that is made by the
more part of the voices of the Electors expressing their consent by lifting up
of their hands, as sometimes men show their consent by going to one side of
the place or room where they are, whence they are said, Pedibus ire
insententiam. But surely these places are unadvisedly alleged for proof of
popular elections. For first, the Apostles only are said (...), and
consequently the election pertayned to them only, and they only elected; for
(...) signifies to elect, and not to gather voices. Secondly, though (...) do
originally signify that kind of election, which is made by many, expressing
their consent, and giving their voices or suffrages by lifting up of their
hands; yet may it be extended more generally to signify any election of many
expressing their consent by writing, by lively voice, or by going to one side
of the place where they are; yea any choice whatsoever, though made by one
alone, as it appears in that the Acts. 10. 41.
Apostles are said to have been witnesses formerly designed and appointed by
(...), whereas Christ only chose them, and they were not elected by the voices
of many, or any but himself alone. And in Ecclesiastical writers the Can.
Apost. cap. 1. Chrysostom. hom. 14. in Acta. in illa verba. cum orassent
impo^uerunt illis manus. Council. Nicen. in epist. ad Alexandrinos. apud
Theodoret. hist. Ec. li: 1. cap. 9.
same word signifies Ordination that is by Imposition of hands, as it were
easy to prove by many testimonies of Antiquity.

CHAP. 56.
Of the Ordination of Bishops and Ministers.

FROM the Election of Ministers, whereof we have sufficiently spoken, let us
proceed to their Ordination, with which none but the Guides of the Church are
trusted; And therefore, howsoever the people may sometimes elect; yet they are
charged, 1. Tim. 5. 22.
not to lay hands hastily on any man, nor to communicate with other men's
sins. So that the moderation of all things in this kind rests in them, and
this is all that the Scripture prescribes touching the designing and
appointing of Ministers: namely, whom, and how, they that have power of
ordaining, must ordain. Ordination is the setting of men a part to the work
of the Ministry, the commending of them with fasting and prayer to the grace
of God, and the authorizing of them to perform things pertaining to God; which
others, without such sanctification neither may nor can do. Wherein the
Ceremony of Imposition of hands is used. First, to express the setting of
them apart for sacred employment. Secondly, to let them know that the hand of
God is with them, in all that they do in his name, and by his authority to
guide, direct, strengthen and protect them. Thirdly, to note out the person
upon whom the Church by her prayers desires the blessings of Almighty God to
be powered in more plentiful sort then upon others, as being to take charge of
others. This Ordination is either of Bishops, to whom the care and
government of the Church is principally committed; or of other inferior
Cleargymen.

Touching the Ordination of Bishops, the Council of Canone. 4.
Nice decrees, that a Bishop must be ordained by all the Bishops in the
Province: and that if it seem hard, either in respect of some urgent
necessity, or the length of the ways, that they should all meet, yet there
must be three at the least to concur in all such ordinations, the rest by
their letters testifying their consent, and the Metropolitan confirming that
they do. The Council of Canone 19.
Antioch in like sort decrees, That a Bishop shall not be ordained without
a Synod, and the presence of the Metropolitan; That the Metropolitan by his
letters shall call unto him all the Bishops in the Province, if conveniently
they may come together; if not, that at the least the greater part be present,
or give their consent by writing. And that if at any time there grow any
difference among the Bishops of the Province about the person that is to be
ordained, the greater part of voices shall sway all. In the Second Council of
Canone. 1^.
Carthage, all the Bishops with one consent said: It seems good to us all,
that without consulting the Primate of each Province, no man easily presume,
though with many Bishops, to ordain a Bishop in what place soever without
his command: but if necessity shall require, that three Bishops in what
place soever they be with the command of the Primate shall have power to
ordain a Bishop. And because the concurrence of the Metropolitan, was to
be sought, and his presence or direction had in every ordination; therefore
least by his fault there might be too long and dangerous delays, it was
ordered that unless it were in case of necessity, all ordinations should be
within three months after the voydance of any place: and that if by the fault
of the Metropolitan there were any longer delay, he should be subject to
Ecclesiastical Censure and punishment. In latter times under the Papacy, they
Bellar. de notis Ecclesiae. li: 4. cap. 8.
permitted by special dispensation one Bishop assisted with two mitred Abbots,
to ordain a Bishop, contrary to all the old Canons requiring three Bishops
at the least. The form and manner of ordination we find in the Fourth
Council of Canone. 2.
Carthage, which prescribes that when a Bishop is to be ordained, two
Bishops must hold the book of the Gospels over his head, and that one pouring
forth the blessing upon him, all the other Bishops that are present must
touch his head with their hands: This is the form of Episcopal ordination.

But touching Presbyters and Deacons, the Hispalens. Canone. 6.
Council of Hispalis says: That the Bishop alone may confer Ecclesiastical
honor upon them, but that alone he cannot take it from them, which yet is not
so to be understood, as if the Bishop alone without his Presbyters might
ordain Presbyters, but that he may without the concurrence of other Bishops,
give that honor of Presbyteriall order, which without them he cannot take away
again. For otherwise the Council of Carthagi. 4. Canone. 3.
Carthage provides that in the ordination of a Presbyter, the Bishop holding
his hand on his head, and blessing him, all the Presbyters that are present
shall hold their hands by the hands of the Bishop. Whereas Ibid. Canone 4.
in the ordination of a Deacon, it suffices that the Bishop alone, put his
hands upon the head of him that is ordained; because he is not sanctified to
Priestly dignity, but to the service of the Church. So that other Ministers are
to concur in the ordination of the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, as
well as the Bishop; being equal to him in the power of Order and Ministry,
and his assistants in the work of it; yet has the Bishop a great pre-eminence
above them in the Imposition of hands: For regularly no number of Presbyters
imposing hands can make a Minister without the Bishop. The reason whereof is,
because no Ordinations are to be made sine titulo, that is, without title or
place of employment: and none but Bishops have Churches, wherein to employ men;
seeing they only are Pastors of Churches, and all other are but their
assistants and coadiutors: not because the power of order which is given in
Ordination is less in them then in Bishops. So that Bishops alone have the
power of Ordination, and no man may regularly do it without them. Whereupon
ordinarily, and according to the strictness of the old canons, all Ordinations
made otherwise, are pronounced void: as we read of one Athan. Apol. 2.
Coluthus, whose ordinations were therefore voyded, because he took on him to
ordain, being no Bishop, but a Presbyter only.

But seeing Bishops and Presbyters are in the power of order the same; as when
the Bishops of a whole Church or country fall from the Faith, or consent to
them that so do, the care of the church is devolued to the Presbyters
remaining Catholic; and as in the case of necessity they may do all other
things regularly reserved to Bishops only* (as In 4 Cap. ep. ad Ephesians.
Ambrose shows, that the Presbyters of Egypt were permitted in some cases to
confirm the baptized, which thing also Lib. 3. Ep. 26.
Gregory after him durst not condemn.) So in case of General defect of the
Bishops of a whole country, refusing to ordain any but such as shall consent
to their Heresies, when there appears no hope of remedy or help from other
parts of the Church, the Presbyters may choose out one among themselves to be
chief, and so add other to their numbers by the imposition of his and their
hands. This I have proved in my Chap. 39.
third book out of the authorities of Armachanus, and sundry other, of whom
Alexander of Hales speaks. To which we may add that which In Sent. l. 4.
did. 24. q. 5.
Durandus has, where he says: That Hierome seems to have been of opinion,
that the highest power of consecration or order, is the power of a Priest or
Elder. So that every Priest in respect of his Priestly power may minister all
Sacraments, confirm the baptized, and give all Orders, howsoever for the
avoydiug of the peril of Schism, it was ordained that one should be chosen
to have a pre-eminence above the rest; who was named a Bishop, and to whom it
was peculiarly reserved to give Orders, and to do some such other things. And
afterward he says: that Hierome is clearly of this opinion. Neither can the
Romanists deny this, and justify their own practice. For their Chorepiscopi,
or Titular Bishops, are no Bishops (as I have Chap. 29.
proved at large out of Damasus, not disputing or giving his private opinion,
but resolving the point, and prescribing to other what they must believe and
practice, and yet do they of the Church of Rome permit these to ordain, not
only Subdeacons, and other inferior Cleargy-men, but Priests and Deacons
also; and hold their Ordinations to be good and of force. If any man happily
say, that (...) Bishop when he is old, and weak, or otherwise employed, may
have a Coadiutor, and consequently, that it is no such absurdity to admit these
Suffragan and Titular Bishops; and that therefore they may have power to
ordain, as being truly Bishops, and yet Presbyters in no case be permitted
so to do: for answer hereunto let him read what I have written in the 29.
chapter of this book concerning this matter.

CHAP. 57.
Of the things required in such as are to be ordained Ministers: and of the
lawfulness of their Marriage.

FRom the election and ordination of Ministers, we are to proceed to the
things required in them that are to be chosen and ordained. 1 Timothy 3.
If any man (says the Apostle) desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a
worthy work. A Bishop therefore must be unreprovable, the husband of one
wife, watching, sober, modest, harberous, apt to teach, not given to wine, no
striker, not given to filthy lucre: but gentle, no fighter, not covetous, no
young scholar, but well reported of, even of those that are without. The
canons of the church require the same things, and add some other; as that no
man may be chosen and ordained a Minister of the Word and Sacraments till he be
thirty years of age: nor none that was baptized in his bed, and the like. The
Papists proceed further, and not contenting themselves with the moderation of
the Apostle, and the Primitive Fathers, admit none into the holy Ministry, but
those that are unmarried, or being married, promise to live from their wives:
and yet not so neither, if either they have been twice married, or if they
married with a widow. Wherefore letting pass the things the Apostle
prescribes, and those other which the Canons add, of which there is no
question, let us come to the marriage of them that are to be admitted into the
holy Ministry of the Church.

It is clearly confessed by the best learned in the Roman Church, that
Bishops, Presbyters and other Cleargy-men, are not forbidden to marry, or being
married, before they enter into the Ministry, to continue in matrimonial
society with their wives, by any law of God: and therefore there is little
fear of offending against God, either by admitting such into the Ministry as
will not live single, or by entering into it, with purpose of marriage. Secunda.
secundae. quaest. 88. art. 11.
Non est essentialiter annexum debitum continentiae ordini sacro (says
Aquinas) sed ex statuto Ecclesiae: vnde uidetur, quod per Ecclesiam possit
dispensari in voto continentiae, solemnizato per susceptionem sacri ordinis:
that is, It is not essentially annexed unto holy order, that men should
contain and live single that enter into the Ministry, but by the Decree of the
Church only. So that it seems, that the Church may dispense in the vow of
continency, though made solemn by taking holy orders. And in another place he
says: Part. 3. quaest. 53. art. 3.
that it is from the Churches constitution, that they who are entered into the
holy orders of the Church, may not marry: which yet is not the same among the
Graecians, that it is among the Latins. For the Graecians make no vow, and do
live with their wives that they married before they entered into orders: of the
same opinion is In Sent. lib. 4. did. 39. quaest. 2. and 3.
Bonauentura, who acknowledges, that in the Primitive Church, it was otherwise
touching this matter, then now it is in the Church of Rome; and endeavors to
give reasons of the difference. In 4. sent. did. 37.
Scotus, and Dialog.
Occam, are of the same judgment: and all the rest of the School men of note
agree with them. And In respons. ad articulos Parisienses. Opusc. tom. 1.
tract. 27.
Caietane, a great learned Divine, and a Cardinal in our time, pronounces
confidently, that it cannot be proved, either by reason or authority, (setting
aside the Laws that are positive, and vows which men make to the contrary)
that a Priest does sin in contracting marriage. And that therefore the Pope
with good conscience may dispense with such a one, and give him leave to marry;
though there be no inducement of public profit, or benefit leading him so to
do. And adds that reason seems to be strong on the contrary side for the
lawfulness of such dispensation: because (as it appears by Peter Lombard in
the fourth of the Sentences) neither Order, in that it is Order, nor holy
Order, in that it is holy, crosses or hinders marriage. And (as it is in the
Decrees) Deacons in ancient times might marry, even in the West Church: and
(as it is in the same Decrees) they of the East Church are joined in marriage,
even after they are entered into holy Orders. Neither is that gloss to be
admitted, which expounds their coupling or joining in marriage, of the living
in marriage formerly contracted: Seeing the whole course and coherence of the
Text speaks of the Contract of Marriage, as by the opposition of the practice
of the West Church (the Priests whereof are said not to marry) it may be
confirmed. These are the words of Cardinal Caietan. With him agrees
Cardinal De Clericis lib. 1. c. 8.
Bellarmine, and confirms that he says by three reasons, whereof the first
is this: Priests are not forbidden by Gods Law to company with their wives,
which they married before they entered into holy Orders: Therefore they are not
forbidden to marry after they are entered. The consequence he proves; because
if any thing be found in marriage that cannot stand well with the sacred
function and employment of Ministers, it is the act of Matrimony and not the
contract, which is a thing most honest, and is soon past. Whereupon, they that
dislike the marriage of Churchmen, were wont to allege the cares of
household, and of children, causing distraction of mind, and other like things,
and not the contract or Sacrament of marriage: and therefore he rightly
reproves Clicthoueus, for that he Lib. de Contitinentia Sace^dotum. cap. 4.
thinks the matrimonial society of such as were married before they became
Ministers of the Church, is not forbidden by Gods law; and yet fears not to
say, that the contract of marriage ensuing after the entrance into the holy
Ministry is forbidden. Wherefore leaving the consequence as good and
sufficiently proved, he confirms the antecedent in this sort. That presbyters
are not forbidden by Gods law to live with their wives, which they married
before they entered into the holy Ministry, it appears in that the Roman
Church has for many ages past permitted the Presbyters of the Greek Church to
live with their wives which they married before their Ordination; which it
could not do, if so to live were forbidden by Gods law: That so the Roman
Church has allowed those of the Greek Church to live with their wives, he
proves by good authority. For in the Cap. cum Olim. De coniugatis.
Decretals it is reported, that a certain Grecian, while he was yet in the
minor Orders, according to the custom of the Greek Church married a wife, and
afterward when he was a Priest begat a son of his lawful wife. This Priests
son was thought fit to be a Bishop, and chosen so to be: the Arch-bishoppe
made question, whether he might confirm his Consecration or not, as doubting
of his Legitimation. To whom Innocentius the Third writes thus: We
considering that the East Church never admitted the vow of continency, but that
they of the East while they are yet in the Minor Orders contract marriage, and
when they are in the higher Orders, use that marriage which they then
contracted, do command, that unless any custom be against it (in that these
Grecians live among the Latins) if there be no other Canonical impediment,
you proceed without doubting to the Confirmation and Consecration of him.
Whereby it is evident that the Bishop of Rome allowed the marriage of the
Grecians: for Innocentius says, this Presbyter, after he was a Presbyter,
begatte a son of his lawful wife: and approves, nay commands his son
as lawfully begotten to be ordained, if it were not offensive, because he
conuersed among the Latins. The next reason that Bellarmine brings is, for
that there is no prohibition of Almighty GOD found either in the old, or new
Testament: and the third, for that it is said in the Counsel of Cap. 10. and
Di: 20. ca. de Libellis.
Ancyra, that Deacons, with the license of the Bishop, may marry after they
are ordained. Whence it follows, that they are not forbidden to marry by GODS
Law; seeing Bishops may not dispense with GODS Law. And This Council (as
Bellarmine truly notes) is most ancient, and approved by Leo the Pope.

The uttermost therefore that our Adversaries can say, is that the Church by
her authority has forbidden the marriage of Presbyters and Bishops: wherefore
let us take a view of the laws of the Church concerning this matter: and for
our more orderly proceeding in the examination of the same, let us first
observe what the Church decreed, touching them that being married enter into
the Ministry. Secondly, touching them that entered being single. Concerning
the first, it is evident, that till the time of Siricius, married men were
permitted throughout the whole Church to enter into the Ministry, and to live
with their wives. In the Epistles of Epist. 49.
Cyprian among other things, Nouatus, ordained a Presbyter of Carthage by
Cyprian, is charged, first, that he suffered his own father to die of hunger,
and took no care for his burial when he was dead. Secondly, that by violence
offered to his own wife, he caused her to be delivered of her child before
her time; so that the child dyed, and he was guilty of the murder thereof: for
which crimes he feared to be put from his Priestly function, and the
Communion of the Church; and therefore prevented his punishment by a voluntary
Schismatic departure. Where we see a Presbyter permitted by Cyprian to live
with his wife, and no way blamed, for that he had companied with her: but for
that when she was with child by him, he had stricken her in such violent
sort, that she was untimely delivered, not without the death of the child.
Whereupon Pamelius has this annotation upon the Epistle of Cyprian: Many
married men at that time were taken into the Clergy, because there were few
other to be had: and therefore it is not to be maruailed at, that Cyprian
makes mention of the wife of Nouatus who was a Priest. That Tertullian was
married, it appears by the book which he has written to his wife: and that
neither he nor she voluntarily seperating themselves had vowed continency, it
appears by the persuasions he uses to induce her to live single, and not to
marry again after his death, in those evil and dangerous times, if happily he
should die before her; or at the least, if she could not nor would not
contain, to marry with none but a believer. Had she bound her self by vow to
contain, he would not thus have left her to her own liberty, and if she
could not, nor would not contain, he was bound by the Apostles rule, not to
defraude her, but to yield unto her due benevolence. Neither have we these
examples only, but many more: for we read in Gratian, of the sons of
Presbyters and Bishops, that were promoted to the Papal dignity. Did. ^6
So was Bonifacius the Pope, the son of Iucundus the Presbyter: Faelix the
Pope, the son of Faelix the Presbyter: Agapetus the Pope, son of Gordianus
the Presbyter: Theodorus the Pope, son of Theodorus the Bishop, and many
more he says there were, who being the sons of Bishops or Presbyters,
were advanced to sit in the Apostolical Throne. And adds, Ibid.
that when the sons of Presbyters and Bishops are said to have been
advanced and promoted to be Popes, we are not to understand them to have been
such as were borne of fornication, out of lawful marriages, which were lawful
unto Priests before the prohibition: and in the Oriental Church are proved to
be lawful unto them even unto this day. Lib. 5. c. 2^
Socrates says, that in Thessalia there was a particular custom grown in,
that if a Cleargy-man, after he became a Cleargy-man, companied with his wife,
which he married while he was yet a Layman, he should be put out of the
Ministry of the Church. Whereas all the most famous Presbyters and Bishops
also in the East, might if they pleased, but were no way by any Law constrained
to refrain from the company of their wives. So that many of them even when
they were Bishops, did beget children of their lawful wives. A particular
and most approved example whereof we have in the Father of Gregory Nazianzene:
who being a Bishop, not only lived with his wife till death divided them,
but became the Father also of Gregory Nazianzen, (as worthy and renowned a man
as any the Greek Church ever had) after he was entered into the priestly
Office, as appears by his own words reported by In Carm. de vita sua.
Gregory Nazianzen. For after many motives used by him to Gregory Nazianzen his
son, to persuade him to assist him in the work of his Bishoply Ministry,
the last that he most insisteth on, is taken from the consideration of his
old age, dis-inabling him to bear that burden, and perform that work any
longer that hitherto he had done. And therefore entreating him to put to his
helping hand, he breaks out into thesewords: Thou have not lived so long a
time as I have spent in the priestly office, therefore yield thus much unto
me, and help me in that little time of my life that is yet behind: or else
thou shall not have the honor to bury me, but I will give charge to another
to do it. Here we see Gregory Nazianzens father was employed in the priestly
function before he was borne: and that therefore he became the father of so
worthy a son after he was a Bishop, or at least after he was a Presbyter.
Neither was the father of Gregory Nazianzene singular in this behalf. For Ep.
ad Drac.
Athanasius writing to Dracontius, (who being greatly in love with a retired
and monastical kind of life, refused the Bishoply Office when he was chosen
unto it; for that he feared he might not in that state live so strictly as
formerly he had done) controuleth this his conceit; and tells him that he
may in the Bishops office hunger and thirst as Paul did, drink no wine as
Timothy, and fast often as did the Apostle. So that the Bishops Office is no
cause of doing ill, or doing less good then may be done in other states of
life: and there-upon assures him, that he has known Bishops to fast, and
Monks to eat: Bishops to drink no wine, and Monks to drink it: Bishops
to work miracles, and Monks to do none: lastly, many Bishops never to have
married, and Monks to have become fathers of children: and on the contrary
side Bishops to have become fathers of children, and Monks to have lived
altogether as Monks without desire of posterity. Neither can this authority of
Athanasius be avoided, as Bellarmine seeks to avoyde it; namely, that those
Bishops did ill, which he says, became fathers of children. For Stromat. l.
3 p. 196
Clemens Alexandrinus an ancient Greek Father says expressly, The Apostle
admits the husband of one wife to be a Bispoppe, and that though he be a
Presbyter, Deacon, or Layman, if he use marriage aright, and so as not to
incur just reprehension, he shall be saved by the procreation of children.
In 1 ad Tim. 3
Chrysostom accords with Athanasius and Clemens Alexandrinus, and says,
that marriage is in so high a degree honorable, that men with it may ascend
into the Episcopal chayres: even such as yet live with their wives. For though
it be an hard thing, yet it is possible, so to perform the duties of marriage;
as not to be wanting in the performance of the duties of a Bishop: whereunto
Lib. 1. cap. 11.
Zozomen agrees saying of Spiridion that though he had wife and children, yet
he was not therefore any whitte the more negligent in performing the duties of
his calling, and of Gregory Nyssene it is reported that though he were married,
yet he was no way inferior to his worthy brother that lived single. But some
happily will object, that Epiphanius is of another mind, and that he says,
Epipanius Here Is. 59.
where the strictness of the canon is observed, none but such as are
unmarried, or resolved to refrain from matrimonial society with their wives,
are admitted into the ministry of the Church. We deny not, but that he says
so: But he confesses in the same place, that many in the Church did live with
their wives in his time, and beget Children even after their admission into the
ministry. So that the strictness of the Canon he speaks of, was not
general, but in some certain places only, as I noted before out of Lib.
(...). cap. 21.
Socrates. Nay, it is evident by Socrates, that howsoever in Thessalia,
Thessalonica, Macedonia and Hellas this strictness prevailed; yet all the
Bishops of the East besides, were left to their own liberty: and howsoever
some in diverse places went about to take away this liberty, yet the worthyest
men the Church had, stood in defense of it, protesting they would not suffer
themselves to be inthralled in this behalf. to which purpose, that of the
famous and renowned Synesius is most excellent: who, when they of Ptolemais
would needs have him to be their Bishop; (which thing he little desired)
he made them acquainted with his present condition, and resolved purpose for
the time to come. Synesius ad fratrem page 68. lib. Epist.
God (says he) the Law, and the sacred hand of Theophilus has given unto me
a wife, I therefore tell all men aforehand, and testify unto all, that I will
neither suffer my self to be altogether estranged and separated from her,
neither will I live with her secretly as an adulterer. For the one of these is
no way pious and godly, and the other no way lawful: but I will desire and
pray unto God that exceeding many and most good and happy children may be borne
unto me. Neither will I have him, that is to be chief in ordayning of me to
be ignorant hereof.

This liberty the council in Canone 12.
Trullo impeached in respect of Bishops, but in respect of Presbyters it
continues in all the East Churches of the world, even till this day, Greek,
Armenian, and Ethiopian: warranted unto them by the Canons of the Apostles;
Judgment of Bishops, Decrees of Councels, and the consent of all other parts
of the World. For first, the Apostle Saint Paul tells the Corinthians 1.
Cor. 9. 5.
he had power to lead about a wife a sister, as well as the brethen of the
Lord and Cephas. Which words Stromat. lib. 3. page 192.
Clemens Alexandrinus interprets in this sort. Paul fears not in a certain
Epistle to speak to his yoake-fellow: which he did not lead about with him,
because he had no need of any great service. Therefore he says in a certain
Epistle: Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife; as the rest of the
Apostles? but they truly, as it was meet, because they could not spare their
Ministry: attending without distraction to preaching, lead their wives about,
not as wives but as sisters; which should minister together with them, among
the women which kept the houses, by whom the doctrine of the Lord might enter
into the closet of women, without reprehension or suspicion. Neither does
Clemens Alexandrinus only so understand the words, but a Decreti part. 1.
did. 31. ca. 11.
Roman Bishop also. So that our Adversaries have no reason to charge us
with heretical perverseness, for expounding the Apostles words, of the
Apostles wives. Neither can their interpretation of faithful women following
the Apostles, and ministering unto them things necessary, any way stand with the
Apostles drift and meaning: for first, it is no way to be conceived, that those
Apostles which had wives, would not lead them about rather then strange women.
Secondly, the word of leading about, implies a kind of authority, right and
interest, in those women which the Apostles lead about: which might be verified
of them in respect of their wives, but not in respect of such women as out of
their devotion followed them, if any so did. Thirdly, the Apostle does not
say, We have power to lead about a woman a sister, as they read it, but a
sister, a woman, or wife. Now the addition of woman to sister is idle and
needelesse: seeing every sister is undoubtedly a woman; Therefore we must
understand the Apostle to say; a sister, a wife. Hier. contra Iouinian. lib. 1.
Hierome indeed understands the Apostles words of strange women, and not of
their wives: yet denies he not, but that other interpret them otherwise, and
translateth, and alleges the words doubtfully, of the Apostles leading about
women or wives. Besides this claim that the Apostle makes of power and
authority in this behalf, elsewhere prescribing what manner of men must be
chosen unto the Bishops office, he says, 1 Timothy 3. 3.
A Bishop must be the husband of one wife, one that can rule his own
house, having children under obedience, with all honesty. Now to say, they were
to forsake their wives as soon as they should enter into this calling, is most
absurd, and contrary to the very Law of God and nature. For it is not in the
power of the man to withdraw himself from his wife, with whom he is one
flesh, seeing 1. Cor. 7. 4.
the man has not power of his body, but the wife. Whereupon Part. 3. qu. 53.
art. 4. ad Primum.
Thomas Aquinas resolves, that a man entering into holy Orders, cannot without
the consent of his wife withdraw himself from her; but is bound to live with
her still, and to yield unto her due benevolence. Neither may man and wife part
by consent perpetually, but for a time only, according to that of the Apostle;
Defraud not one another except k 1. Cor. 7. 5.
it be by consent for a time, that ye may give your selves to fasting and
prayer; and again come together, that Satan tempt you not for your
incontinency. Answerable hereunto, the Canons attributed to the Apostles forbid
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons l Canone. 6.
to put away their wives upon any pretense of religion. The words of the
Canon are these: Let no Bishop Presbyter or Deacon, put away his wife upon
any pretense of religion; if he do let him be put from the Communion, and if
he persist, let him be removed from his Order. This Canon (says In
explicatione canounm.
Zonaras) condemns those sacred Ministers of the Church that put away their
wives. For that such putting of the^ away seems to be done in disgrace of
marriage: as if the companying together of man and wife were an impure and
unclean thing. Whereas the Apostle pronounces, that Hebr. 13. 4.
Marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled. The Romanists to avoid and
decline the force of this testimony, say, that this Canon forbids Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons the casting away of all care of providing for their
wives, but not the forsaking of their company: but this their evasion is easily
refuted. First, because there is no show of evil in Cleargy-mens providing for
the necessity of their wives, which they married while they were Laymen: nay
it would seem unto all men most unnatural for them to cast off all care of
them, and all men would condemn them for so doing; but in the companying with
them (in the sinister judgment of some men) there is: in respect whereof some
forsake their wives, under a pretense of religion: Secondly, because the
Fathers in the Canone^ 12.
Sixth General Council (who no doubt understood the meaning of these Canons
far better then the Romanists do) understand them, as forbidding Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons, the refrayning from companying with their wives, and
not the neglecting to provide for their necessities. In the Council of Nice
some went about to make a Law, that Bishops and Ministers of the Church should
not, after their entering into the holy Ministry, company with their wives,
which they had formerly married. But Socrates. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Paphnutius Bishop of a city in the upper Thebais, who was a most holy man, by
whom miracles had been wrought, and who for confessing the faith of Christ,
had had one of his eyes pulled out though himself were never married, cried
out aloud, and besought them, to lay noe such heavy yoke on the necks of them
that were entered into the holy Ministry: affirming, that Marriage is
honorable among all, and the bed undefiled: calling the company of a man
with his wife by the name of chastity: and aduising them to take heed, least
they did greatly hurt the state of the Church by making so strict a law, for
that all cannot endure so severe a rule of Discipline: and for that also this
rule happily cannot be so easily observed by their wives. To these speeches of
Paphnutius the whole assembly of Bishops assented. So that this controversy
was ended, and each man left to his own liberty. This of Paphnutius is
reported by Vbi supra.
Socrates, Lib. 1. c. 22
Zozomen, In vita Paphnutii.
Suidas, Hist. Eccles.
Nicephorus, and alleged by Did. 31. c. 12.
Gratian as true: yet De Clericis l. 1. c. 20.
Bellarmine and the Jesuits fear not to reject it as false, as if they knew
better what was done one thousand three hundred years ago, then all that ever
have been since: and the better to discredit this poor report, they charge
both Socrates and Zozomen with Heresy, and contemn their stories. So must all
go to the ground, that stands in their way, be it never so ancient; and yet
they are the men that plead Antiquity. But if this be a feigned and
counterfeit story, what are the signs of the forgery, whereby they discern it
to be so? Surely there appear none; but it cannot be true (the Jesuit says)
because it is contrary to the report of Epiphanius and Hierome. Touching
Epiphanius I have showed already, that he has nothing contrary to this
narration of Socrates and Zozomen: for he confesses that Bishops and
Presbyters in his time (...) Here Is. 59:
lived with their wives, and begatte children of them, in such places where the
strictness of the Canon was not admitted. So that the Canon he speaks of,
which was admitted in Thessalia, Thessalonica, Macedonia, and Hellas, and was
proposed and rejected in the Council of Nice, was but particular and local;
which may stand well enough with the narration of Socrates and Zozomen, that
the Council of Nice decreed nothing touching this point, but left it as they
found it. The like may be said of Hierome. For Hierome writing against
Vigilantius, speaks of certain Bishops, which would ordain no Deacons
unless they married wives, thinking that no single men live chastely: who
surely (if any such were found in those times) are not to be excused. But if
they only demanded first of them that were to be ordained, before they
ordained them, whether they would live continently, or not, and if they
answered that they would not, willed them to marry before they ordained them
(as Zonaras writing on the Canons of the Apostles shows that they do in the
Greek Church) they were not to be blamed: Seeing the council of Canone 10.
Ancyra permitted Deacons, protesting when they were ordained, that they would
not live single, to marry after they were entered into Orders. But Contra
Vigilantium.
Hierome in opposition to the practice of these men, asks what the Churches
of the East, of Egypt, and of the Apostolic See shall do, which admit into
the Clergy, virgins, or such as contain, or such as if they had wives, yet
cease to be husbands? whereby it may seem, that this Canon of Bishops
living from their wives, was admitted generally, which is contrary to the
narration of Socrates. But they that urge these words of Hierome, should
consider; first, that he does not say, that these Churches mentioned by him,
admitted none to the Ministry, but such as were single, or having wives,
resolved to live no longer with them in matrimonial society; but that they
admitted such as had never been married, or having had wives, ceased to be
husbands, contrary to their practice, that would admit none, as he says,
unless they saw their wives to have great bellies, or heard the children
crying in their mothers arms. Secondly, supposing that these Churches
mentioned by Hierome, admitted none but such as had never been married, or
having been married, ceased to be husbands, he plainly shows by the
particular mention of these Churches; As in the council of Constantinople,
Can. 2. Egypt, and the East a^e opposed to A^a, Thracia, etc.
that there was no such thing generally prevayling: and so no way contrarieth
the report of Socrates and the rest. Wherefore seeing neither Epiphanius nor
Hierome, will by their contradiction eleuate the authority of Socrates,
Zozomen, and the rest, the Cardinal will improve their narration by another
means. The council of Canone 3.
Nice, he says, forbids Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, to have any
woman in their houses, besides their Mother, Sister, or Aunt: whence he
thinks it may be inferred, that it did forbid every of these to have any
Wife dwelling with them in the same house; seeing if they might have wives,
they might undoubtedly have handmaides to attend them. This proof is no better
then the former: for in the canons of the Nicene council, translated out of
the Arabian tongue, and put into the sirst Tome of councels by Binnius out of
Alphonsus Pisanus; (in which, as Francis Turrian professes, in his Proeme
before the same canons, there is nothing but that which is approved, and worthy
that great Synod of Nice) the Decree of the council is conceived and
expressed in such words, that it is evident it was never meant to be extended
to such Bishops, Presbyters, or Deacons, as have wives; but to such only, as
never were married, or are widowers. The words are these. Canone 4.
We decree, that Bishops dwell not with women, neither any Presbyter that is
a widower: the same is decreed touching every Presbyter that is unmarried, and
the Deacons which have no wives: and that Priests might live with their wives
in those times, the 78. of those Canons makes it most clear, for it lays a
more heavy punishment upon him, that has a wife living, and living with him,
if he commit adultery, then upon him, that never was married, or is a
widower. Wherefore let us pass from the Council of Nice, to the Council of
Gangra. Lib. 2. cap. 33. and Sozome. lib. 3. cap. 13.
Socrates shows that Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, so far
disliked marriage, that he persuaded many women to forsake their husbands,
that he contemned married Presbyters, and condemned the prayers and blessings
of Presbyters having wives, which they married while they were Laymen. Now it
is not to be imagined, that he would have despised them if they had put away
their wives, (for he persuaded to that; and many women harkening unto him,
departed from their husbands) but because they retained them still; yet did the
Canone 4.
Council of Gangra condemn him; adding, that if any one contrary to the
Apostolical Canons, shall presume to put any one of them, that have taken holy
orders, as Presbyters, or Deacons, from companying with their wives, he shall
be deposed. To this we may add the Sixth General Council holden in Trullo,
wherein a Decree was passed, that such as do enter into the Ministry being
married, shall be permitted to live with their wives. The words of the
Council are these: Canone 13.
Because we have understood, that it has been delivered to the Church of
Rome for a Canon, that Deacons or Presbyters, who shall be thought worthy to
be ordained, shall profess and promise to company no more with their wives;
we keeping the ancient Canon of Apostolical perfection and order, will and
decree, that the marriages of such men, as are in holy orders, henceforth, and
from this moment of time shall be firm and stable, no way dissoluing their
conjunction with their wives, nor debarring them from companying with them, at
convenient times. Wherefore if any man be found worthy to be ordained a
Subdeacon, Deacon, or Presbyter; Let him by no means be debarred from entering
into such a degree; because he lives with his lawful wife, neither let it
be required of him, at the time of his ordination, to promise to refrain from
the lawful companying with his wife; least by so doing, we be forced to do
wrong to marriage, ordained of God, and blessed by his presence: The
Evangelicall voice crying out alowde, the things which GOD has joined, let no
man sunder: And the Apostle teaching, that Marriage is honorable, and the bed
undefiled: And again saying; Art thou bound to a wife? seek not to be
loosed, etc. Thus do the Fathers and Bishops assembled in this Council,
forbid and condemn the putting of Presbyters, Deacons, and Subdeacons from
the society with their wives, alleging the ancient Canon, use, and custom,
and many excellent authorities, and reasons out of the Scriptures and word of
God; showing that no such thing can be done without great injury to the
state of Marriage, and without separating those whom God has joined together:
and yet suddenly forgetting themselves, they Canone 12.
forbid Bishops to live with their wives; so overthrowing the ancient
custom and Canon, and separating those that God has joined together. Whereby
that which had been free from the Apostles times (as In explicatio. Canonum
Apostol:
Zonaras notes) was forbidden, and the Canon of the Apostles repealed. Yet did
these Fathers (as we see) most carefully provide, that Presbyters and Deacons
should not be restrained. And indeed, this liberty has continued according
to their Decree in this behalf passed; ever since, in all the East Churches of
the world. For first, touching the Greek Church, which is principally directed
by the Canons of this Council, it is evident by Cap. 21.
the censure of the Oriental Church, upon the Confession of Auspurge,
translated out of Greek into Latin, and published by Stanislaus Socolouius.
Secondly, the Sixth Canone ^3.
General Council testifies, that the Armenians were so far from disliking
the marriage of their Cleargy-men, that they ran into the other extreme. For
they confined the Election of Churchmen within the stock of Churchmen; as
the Priesthood was confined in the time of Moses law, and contained within the
tribe of Leui. And thirdly, Damian. a Goes de morib. Aethiop.
Damianus a Goes witnesses, that among the Ethiopian Christians, Cleargy-men
are married: and that by dispensation of the Patriarche, after the death of the
first wife, their priests and Ministers may marry the second, though without
such dispensation they may marry but once. The Armenians and Aethiopians (I
suppose) have not restrained their Bishops from living in matrimonial society
with their wives, more then their Presbyters and Deacons: seeing they take no
notice of the prescriptions of the Sixth General Council, wherein this
restraint began: The Armenians receiving but only the three first, and the
Aethiopians only the first four General Councels.

Thus having taken a view of the course of things in the Church, from the
beginning, and made it evident, that generally there never prevailed any
restraint of Cleargy-men from companying with their wives, which they married
while they were but yet Laymen, or in the inferior orders and degrees of
Ministry: and that the greatest part of the Christian world has ever from the
beginning, even unto this day enjoyed the liberty which some unjustly sought to
impeache; let us see where it was restrained or taken away, and by whom. Of the
restraint in Thessalia, whereof Heliodorus was Author, as likewise in
Thessalonica, Macedonia and Hellas, and of the endeauours of Eustathius Bishop
of Sebastia in Armenia, resisted by the Bishops in the Council of Gangra, I
have spoken sufficiently already and have showed, that this restraint could not
prevail, nor continue in those parts: all these Churches holding their
liberty in this matter even unto this day. Therefore I will proceed to speak
of the restraint, that some sought to bring into the West Church. The first
restraint of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons from companying with their
wives, that I do find in the West Church, was in the Provincial Council of
Canone. 33.
Elliberis in Spain, holden in the year three hundred and five, twenty years
before the Council of Nice, consisting of nineteen Bishops. But I hope our
Adversaries will not much press us with the authority of this Council: seeing
themselves make so little account of it as they do. There are some most
excellently learned (says Tom. 1. Conciliorum:
Binnius, in his notes upon this Council, that think it erroneous, and of no
authority, and that it is to be contemned as rejected by the Church, for
favoring the heresy of Nouatus, the conceit of Vigilantius, and their
opinion, that would have no pictures in Churches. Locor. Theolog. lib. 5. cap.
4.
Melchior Canus says, the thirty sixth Canon of it is erroneous: and De
Imaginib. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Bellarmine says, it was but Provincial, not confirmed, and that it erred in
many things: namely, in not admitting to the Communion of the Church upon their
repentance, such as in the time of persecution denied the faith, or otherwise
ran into grievous and enormous crimes and sins. And Cardinal Baronius,
howsoever Tom. 1. anno. Domini 57. number. 119. and trib. sequent.
varying in his opinion touching this Council, yet Tom. 2. anno 305. number. 42.
confesses, there is no mention of it among the Ancient, as of others; and
that it was utterly suppressed, as if it had never been because it was ill
thought of, as favoring Nouatianisme. And therefore contrary to this Council,
the Council of Canone. 4 and 5.
Ancyra, nine years after decreed, that they that fell in the time of
persecution, and denied the faith, after condign penance should be received
to the Sacraments of the Church again: and that Canone 9.
Deacons protesting at the time of their ordination, that they cannot; nor are
not resolved to contain, but that they purpose and desire to marry, shall
remain in the Ministry, though they marry after their ordination. This
council was confirmed by Did. 20. cap. de Libellis.
Leo the fourth, and by the Council of Nice, as it is in the Action 4.
Council of Florence. So that hitherto, no restraint of Cleargy-men from
companying with their wives prevailed. But almost four hundred years after
Christ, Inter Epistolas Dec^etales
Syricius Bishop of Rome, writing to the Bishop of Tarracon, (by whom he
understood that very many Priests and Deacons in those parts, after their
ordination, lived with their wives which they had formerly married, and begat
children of them as before; and justified their so doing by the example of
the Priests of the Law) excusing that which was done, as proceeding from
ignorance, if they would acknowledge themselves in fault, and refrain for the
time to come, commanded that no such thing should be any longer permitted.
Whereupon the Can. 2. and 3.
second Provincial Counsel of Arle, holden in the time of this Syricius,
decreed, that no married man should be admitted to the degree of Priesthood,
unless he would promise to refrain from the company of his wife, and yet
permitted him to have her living in house with him. Epist. 3.
Innocentius the first, who began his Popedom about the year of our Lord
four hundred and two, insisted in the steps of Syricius his Predecessor, and
drew some particular Bishops to concur with him. So that in some particular
councels, the lawful society and companying of Cleargie-men with their wives,
began to be restrained. In the Canone 3.
second council of Carthage, as it is usually reckoned, but indeed the last,
the Legate of the Bishop of Rome being present, procured the Bishops to pass
a Decree, that Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, should refrain from the
company of their wives; falsely affirming, that the Apostles did teach so, and
Antiquity practice so; contrary to that which I have before alleged out of
the canons of the Apostles, the council of Gangra, the speeches of Paphnutius
in the council of Nice, the report of Socrates the Historian, and the Decree
of the sixth General council, affirming the leaving of Cleargy-men to their
liberty in this behalf to be Apostolical and Ancient. The Canone 1.
first council of Toledo holden in the year of our Lord four hundred,
decreed, that Deacons which had lived with their wives, should not be
preferred to be Presbyters, nor Presbyters to be Bishops, though they had
so done before the restraint made by the Bishops that were before them, but
laid no other punishment on them. The Council of Canone 9.
Agatha holden in the year five hundred and six, shows plainly, that at
that time many Provinces took no knowledge of the Decree of Syricius and
Innocentius; but that their Presbyters and Deacons lived with their wives
still; and excuses them in respect of their not knowing of any restraint; and
continues them in their places, only debarring them from further promotion,
and prescribing that the Decree of Syricius shall take place in time to come;
and that such as know of it and disobey it, shall be removed from their
places. The Canone 2.
first Council of Turon, holden in the year four hundred four score and
two, sought to remitte something of the severity of some particular Councels,
wherein the Bishops directed by the prohibition of Syricius and Innocentius,
had gone too far. The words of the Council are these: Though our Fathers,
out of the authority committed to them, decreed that what Priest or Deacon
soever, should be found to begette children of their wives, should be put
from the communion of the Lord; yet we moderating this extreme severity, and
by a more equal constitution mollifying and mitigating that which was too
hard, have decreed: That a Priest or Deacon continuing in Matrimonial society
with his wife, and not ceasing from the procreation of children, shall not be
lifted up to any higher degree, nor offer sacrifice unto God, nor minister to
the people: but let this be enough for them, that they are not put from the
Communion. Thus we see, that within a short time after the publishing of these
Decrees, the Bishops were forced out of due consideration to remit something
of that severity, that some other set on by Syricius and Innocentius had used,
till at length the execution of these Decrees was in a manner wholly neglected
as unprofitable, and too heavy a burden for the Ministers of the Church to
bear. Whereupon we shall find, that in all the Provinces of the West, the
Presbyters and Deacons of the Church were married, at that time that Hildebrand
climed up into the Papal Chair, and had been long before. Priests in those
times (says Lib. 5. Annal. Boiorum. page 564.
Auentinus) had wives publicly, as all other Christians, and begat sonues and
daughters of them, as it appears by the instruments of donations made to
Churches, and Abbaies, wherein these Priests wives together with their
husbands, are brought as witnesses, and are styled by the name of
Presbyterissae. Yea so general and so well settled was the marriage of
Cleargy-men in those times, that when Hildebrand began to restrain and
forbid it, the whole Nation of Cleargie-men rose up against him, called him
Monster, and enemy of mankind, and pronounced him to be Antichrist. And such
was the resistance against this rash and inconsiderate attempt of the Pope,
that he could by no means prevail, though he caused so great confusions,
tumults and disorders in the Christian world, as the like had never been
seen in any of the bloody persecutions, that were in the time of the Primitive
Church: and was forced to confess a little before his death, that he had
caused grievous scandals in the Christian world. The circumstances of the whole
narration found in the Historians are these. Naucler. vol. (...). generat. 36.
So soon as the Decree of Hildebrand was published, presently the whole
faction of Cleargy-men was enraged against him: crying out that he was an
heretic, and a man damnably erring in his judgment, who forgetting the
speech of our Lord, that says, All men receive not this word; Let him that can
receive it, receive it: and of the Apostle who says, Let him that cannot
contain, marry; for it is better to marry then to burn, would by violent
inforcement constrain men to live after the manner of Angels; and while he
denied, and sought to restrain the ordinary and accustomed course of nature,
loosed the reins, and gave free liberty to whoredom, and uncleanness:
protesting, that if he should go forward to urge the execution of this his
Decree, they were resolved rather to forsake the Ministry, then their
marriage. And that then he, before whom men did stincke, should see, whence
Angels are to be had, to undertake the government of the Church and people of
God. Notwithstanding all this resistance, and these earnest protestations,
Hildebrand went forward, urged the matter, and reproved the Bishops as
careless and negligent. The Archbishop of Mentz fearing the Popes
displeasure, and yet considering, that it would be no easy matter to alter a
custom so strongly and by so long tract of time confirmed, proceeded
moderately in those parts, where he had to do: giving those of the Clergy
half a years respite, to advise themselves, praying and beseeching them to
resolve to do that willingly, which of necessity they must do. But after the
time expired, which he had given unto them, he called a Synod, and was
earnest with them, that without all further delay or excuse, they would
presently, either abjure their marriage, or put themselves from serving any
longer at the Altar. They on the contrary side alleged many reasons to
persuade him, not to urge them to any such extremities: and when they found,
that neither entreaty, and humble petition, nor weight of reason would
prevail, but that though professing himself unwilling thus to urge them, yet
he was forced so to do by the Popes mandate; and that therefore he must have
no denial, but that they must yield; they went out of the Councell-house, as
if it had been to deliberate, and resolved among themselves either never to
return, or otherwise so to return, as to pull him out of his chair, before
he should pronounce so cursed a sentence against them, and to take away his
life from him; that so his unhappy end might be a warning to all posterities,
that no succeeding Bishop might ever dare to attempt, so to wrong and
dishonor the Priestly degree and order. The Archbishop by the means of some,
that wished well unto him, understanding of this conspiracy, to prevent the
tumult, which he saw to be unavoidable, if he did not speedily give them
some satisfaction and contentment, sent unto them, besought them to be quiet,
and to return into the Synod; and promised, that as soon as any opportunity
should be offered, he would do his best endeavor to persuade the Pope to
desist from these courses: These things were done in the year 1074. The year
following, the Arch-bishoppe again urged by the Pope called another Council
at Mentz, to which the Popes Legate came, bringing his letters and mandates,
and requiring him to urge them presently, to yield, and if they should refuse
so to do, to punish them with the loss of their degree and order, which thing
when he was about to do, presently all the Cleargy-men which sat round
about, rose up, and so refuted, and rejected that he said, with words, and by
the violent moving and shaking of their hands, and gesture of their whole
bodies, showed themselves to be so moved against him, as that he feared ever
to go out of the Synod alive; and so at last, overcome with the difficulty of
this atttempt, he resolved to desist from meddling with this matter any more,
which he had so often to no purpose taken in hand, and to leave it wholly to
the Pope to do what he would. These were the vain attempts of the Romanistes
for the restrayning of lawful Marriage, which though they prevailed not at the
first, according to the wishes of the wicked Pope, yet caused the most horrible
confusions in the Western Church, that ever had been: for Laymen taking
occasion hereupon, despised their Priests, meddled with the Ministration of Holy
things, ministered the Sacrament of Baptism, anointed men with the filthe
which they took out of their ears, in stead of oil; did many things most
disorderly, and committed sundry intolerable outrages. And therefore it is
most strange that De Clericis. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Bellarmine should so forget himself as he does, For whereas all stories
impute these confusions, prophanations and contempts of sacred things to the
restraint of marriage, and the disgracing of it, so hard is his forhead, that
he blusheth not to write, that the marriage of Ministers would hinder the due
and reverent administration of Sacraments; and that experience showed it, in
that in Germany, in the time of Gregory the Seventh when Priests began to
marry wives, there grew so great contempt of the Sacraments, that Laymen
began to administer them, as Nauclerus, and others report. In which speech of
his, there is no word true: for neither did Priests begin to marry in Gregory's
time, but had been ordinarily married long before, as Vbi supra.
Nauclerus testifies, saying, it was an old and confirmed custom, that was
not easily to be altered, which Gregory sought to take away, when he went
about to forbid the marriage of Priests: So that they did rather cease to marry
in his time then begin. Neither does any story impute the confusions,
prophanations, and contempts of Sacraments and sacred things in those times to
the marriage of Priests, which was publickely allowed long before, without any
such evil ensuing, as Vbi supra.
Aventinus, and others do testify, but to the restraint of it. And therefore
it was not the beginning (as Bellarmine untruly says) but the ending of
Priests marriages in Gregory's time, that brought in so many and hideous evils
into the Christian world. Thus having seen with how bad success Gregory the
Seventh began this restraint in other parts of the Christian world, let us
take a view of our own country, and see what footing it had here. Lib. 7.
Henry Huntingdon an ancient Historian and of good creditte, reports that
before the time of Anselme Bishop of Canterbury, the marriage of Presbyters
and other Ministers of the Church, was not forbidden in England; and that when
he forbad it, howsoever he pleased some, for that there seemed to be greater
purity in single life, then in the state of Marriage; yet this his prohibition
seemed to other to be very dangerous: fearing that whiles he sought to bring
men to that, which is above the reach, and without the compass of humane
frailty, he would occasion many grievous and scandalous evils. But howsoever,
this his endeavor took not place by and by, for the same author reports,
that after that time one John Cremensis, a Cardinal came into England, and
went about to restrain the Marriages of Churchmen: So that it appears, that
Anselme had effected nothing. This worthy Cardinal (as he reports) held a
Synod at London, and in the same made a vehement and bitter speech against the
marriage of Presbyters; asking if it were not an impure and unfitting thing for
a Minister of the Church to rise up from the side of an harlot, (for so it
pleased him to term the lawful wives of Churchmen) and to go to the Altar
to consecrate the Sacrament of the Lords Body and Blood. But see the judgment
of God, says Huntingdon. The Impure Cardinal that had thus inveighed against
Marriage, the night following was taken in bed with an Harlot though he had
said Mass and consecrated the blessed Sacrament in the morning; which thing
Math. Paris. in Henrico. 1. page 67.
was so evident that it could not, and so foul, that it was not fit to be
concealed, and he adds, that if any Roman Prelate or other dislike this his
most true report, he were best to take heed he follow not the example of
Cremensis, least the like dishonor come unto him as did unto Cremensis, who
being at first received in very glorious manner, was in the end cast out with
disgrace; and who despising lawful marriage, feared not to commit most filthy
whoredom. Hereupon it seems, the matter of restraint of Presbyters marriage
had no good success at that time; which appears also in that Math. Paris. in
Henrico. 1. page 68.
after this time in a Council it was referred to the King, and he was
authorized and appointed to punish such Presbyters and ministers of the Church,
as he should find married, but he notably deceived the Popes Agents, that thus
authorized him; for he took money of such as were found to be married and
suffered them so to redeem their liberties, which grieved them not a little:
yet did they in the end so far forth obtain their desires, and the tyranny
of Antichrist so far prevailed, that Presby ters durst no longer be known
publicly to be married, but were forced to take another course: for as it
appears by the Constit. Othonis de vxoratis a Benefici^ amouendis.
Decrees of Otho, in the time of Henry the Third, many contracted matrimony
secretly, and when in process of time children were borne unto them, for their
good when they saw it fit, they would take order it might be proved they were
married, and their children borne in marriage, either by witnesses, or public
instruments, either while they lived, or after their death. Whereby it is
evident, that howsoever the impure Romanists sought to keep Cleargy-men from
marying, and to force them by the censures of the Church, and other extremities
to put away their wives, yet at that time they durst not pronounce their
marriages void, nor their children illegitimate; for if they had, these men
would not so carefully have provided to be able to make proof of their
marriages for the good of their children. So that though there wanted not
instruments, set a work by the Pope some hundreds of years past, that sought
to restrain the marriage of Cleargy-men, yet was not their restraint like unto
that of the Romanists at this day, for they did not so restrain Cleargy-men
from marying, or living with their wives, as to pronounce their marriages to be
void, neither did they separate those that God had joined together, but if
they would marry, or continue with their wives, which they had formerly married,
they permitted them so to do, and only put them from the minstery. Presbyters
in former times (says o Duarenus) if they took wives in those n De Sacr.
Ecclminist, and Benef. l. 4. c. 8.
places where marriage was forbidden, were put from the ministry, or perhaps
where more severity was used, were excommunicated; but their marriage was not
voyded; yet is it not to be denied, but that Syricius and Innocentius spoke
very vnreverently of the state of marriage, endeavoring to prove that
Presbyters are not to be suffered to marry, because to live in marriage is to
live in the flesh, and they that live in the flesh cannot please God. How
absurd and inconsiderate this kind of reasoning is, every man (I think) will
easily discern: for whereas the Heb. 13. 4
Apostle, and after him Socrat. l. 1. c. 8
Paphnutius in the Council of Nice, pronounce that marriage is honorable among
all, and the bed undefiled: and Chrysostom affirms* that it is so
honorable, that men may be lifted up into the Bishops chaires with it; with
what face can these men say, that to live in marriage (...) In 1 ad Tim. 3
is to live in the flesh, in such sort as not to please God. De Romans Pont. l.
4. c. 10
Bellarmines evasion, that they speak not of marriage simply, but of forbidden
marriage, such as that of Priests is, when they say, to live in marriage is to
live in the flesh, and that therefore they say only, they who live in unlawful
and forbidden marriage, live in the flesh; and cannot please God, will not serve
the turn. For they speak not of unlawful and forbidden marriage, but go about
to prove, that marriage is to be forbidden and denied to Presbyters, by a reason
taken from the nature of it, and something in it, or consequent of it, in
respect whereof it cannot stand with the holiness of the degree and calling of
Presbyters and Ministers: So that they say simply, to live in marriage; is to
live in the flesh: and that therefore the holy Ministers of the Church, who may
not live in the flesh, must be forbidden to marry; their words being a reason
moving them to prohibit marriage, and not taken from the prohibition, as it
will easily appear to any one that will take the pains to view the Epistles
of the Roman Bishops (if yet they have not been corrupted, as many other t
Syricli ad Himericum c. 7. Innocen* ad Victricium c. 9. and in cp ad Exuperium
c. 1
things of like nature have.) But how-so-euer we censure these sayings of the
Popes, it is most certain, that those particular Bishops of the West, who upon
misconce it, sought to restrain Presbyters from living with their wives, yet
never proceeded so far as either to pronounce their marriages unlawful, or to
dissolve them, till of late. And therefore they were most contrary in their
judgments to the lewd assertions of Papists; who think and teach, that the
marriages of Churchmen are adulteries, and fear not to say, that it is worse
for a man to take a wife to live with continually, then to join himself unto
harlots: which prodigious assertion, all men in former times, even they who
were most averse from the marriage of Cleargy-men would have detested. If a
Presbyter (says the council of Can. 1.
Neocaesarea) will marry a wife, let him be put from his order, but if he
commit fornication or adultery, let him be driven further, and put to
penance. Whereunto the council of Can. 33. and 18
Helliberis beforementioned, agrees, prescribing that such as commit
adultery shall be put from the communion of the Church for ever: and likewise
the council of Can. 12.
Arverne. Some other indeed there were that proceeded a little further, and
put them from the communion of the Church, that would live in Matrimonial
society; but the Bishops in the Council of Turonens. (...). Canone. 2.
Turon thought good to moderate that extremity, and only to keep them from
further promotion and sacred employment: and with them the Bishops in the fifth
Council of Canone. 4.
Orleans agree So that these Bishops though inconsiderately restraining
marriage, yet durst not pronounce the marriages of Churchmen void, as our
Adversaries now do; neither did they (for ought I can read) force men to make
any vow of continence. For though some of them required a promise of living
single, yet was it no vow; seeing a promise made to men is far different from
a vow, which is a promise made to God. And many of them (as it may seem)
urged such as they admitted into the Ministry to no such promise at all: but
received them in such sort, that they should so long be employed, as they would
refrain, and that if they pleased to marry, they should still enjoy the
Communion of the Church, but should not be employed in sacred function any
longer. Touching the promise which some required, the second Council of Toledo
prescribes, that at eighteen years of age they of the Clergy shall b
Canone. (...).
resolve to marry, or promise to contain; and that at twenty they shall be
made Subdeacons. The Council of Canone. 10.
Ancyra provides, that if Deacons shallprotest when they are ordained that
they will not live single, but will have wives, they shall be permitted to
marry, and yet keep their places. But if professing that they will contain,
they betake themselves to former or new marriages, they shall enjoy the
Lay-communion, but shall be put out of the Ministry and Clergy. Whereby it
appears, that there was no uniform observation in the promise of
continency, that was required: seeing the one of these two Councels requires
it at eighteen years of age, of such as were not yet Subdeacons, and the
other leaves such as were to be Deacons to their own choice at the time of
their ordination: nor that this promise was thought to make void the ensuing
marriage; seeing such as contrary to promise, returned to the state of marriage,
were permitted to enjoy the communion of the Church as Laymen, though in some
places they were put out of the Ministry and Clergy. I say in some places,
because it appears by the Council. Tolet. 1. Canone. 4.
Council of Toledo, appointing that such shall have but the places of Lectors
only, that they were not wholly deprived of the honor of Cleargy-men in all
places. Afterward indeed in the Canone. 10.
Ninth Council of Toledo, the Bishops finding that all their former endeavors
prevailed not, though they voyded not the marriages of Cleargy-men, nor judged
them to be adulteries as our Adversaries do, yet they adjudged such as should
be borne of such marriages to a kind of bondage, and deprived them of that
possibility of inheritance, which formerly they might have had. But this was
but the particular Decree of that provincial Council, and so could bind
none but those few Churches in those parts. Neither did it. For long after
here in England, (as I have showed) the Ministers of the church were publicly
married without any such wrong done either to them or their children. And long
after the restraint of Gregory the seventh, when this Decree of single life
had in some sort prevailed, they did still secretly marry, and when they saw
cause for the good of their children, made proof of their marriages. Neither is
it to be maruailed at, that some particular Synodes in the west, set on by the
Bishops of Rome, went about in some sort to restrain the lawful Marriages of
churchmen: (lawful I say, both by the law of God, and the resolution,
allowance, and practice of the greater part of the Christian Churches) seeing
they forbade those, which even in the judgment of our aduersauersaries
themselves, I think cannot be denied to have been lawful. If the widdowe or
relicte of a Presbyter or Deacon, shall join herself to any man in marriage
(says the first Council of Orleans) let them after chastisement be
separated, or if they persist in the intention of such a crime, let them be
excommunicated. Wherewith f Canone. 15.
the Canone. 32.
Epaunine Council agrees, and the second Council of Canone. 29.
Bracar, saying: If any widow of a Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon take an
husband, let no Cleargy-man, nor no religious woman banquet with them; neither
let her ever communicate, only at the time of her death, let the Sacraments of
the Church be administered unto her. Likewise, the Council of Canone. 22.
Antisiodorum, decrees to the same effect. Neither can it be answered, that
these Councels forbid the widows of Presbyters, Deaco^s, and Subdeacons to
marry, because during the life of their husbands, upon some voluntary parting,
they bound themselves by promise to live continently. For the Council of
Matisconens. 2. Canone 16.
Matiscon decrees, that if the wives of Subdeacons, Exorcistes, or Acoluthes,
shall after their death, join themselves in marriage the second time, they
shall be separated, and thrust into the houses of Nuns. And yet these might
lawfully live with their husbands, even in the judgment of them that made this
decree. Neither were they any way induced necessarily to promise to contain.

Thus having seen, where, when, and by whom, the forbidding of the lawful
marriage of Presbyters entered into the Church, in what sort it was urged at the
first, how afterward, what contradiction it found, and how far forth in the
end it prevailed; it remains that we proceed to see what good followed upon
it. Where first Annal. Boiorum. lib. 5. page 565. and 571.
Aventinus tells us, that after the restraint of Hildebrand, under the honest
name of Chastity, the greatest part every where, without check of punishment,
committed whoredoms, incests, and adulteries, and that the Law of single
life, which offended the good, was exceeding pleasing to impure companions, who
now for one wife might have six hundred Harlots. Neither is this the private
conceit of Auentinus, alone, but all good and wise men bear witness with him,
that he speaks the truth; and say as much as he. Bern: speaking of the state
of the Clergy in his time, says, Bernard. de Conuersione, ad Clericos. c. 29.
Many, not all truly, but yet many undoubtedly, who neither can be hid they
are so many, nor care to be hid they are so shameless; many surely seem to
have made the liberty in which they are called, to serve as a fit occasion to
satisfy the flesh; abstayning from the remedy of Marriage, and pouring forth
themselves into all manner of sinful wickednesses. And in the same Chapter he
says, That if we dig down the wall, according to the words of the Prophet
Ezechiell, we shall see horrible things in the house of God. For after
whoredoms, adulteries, and incests, there are found the passions of ignominy,
and the works of impurity and filthiness. Would to GOD (says he) those
things that are most unnatural, were not committed: that neither the Apostles
needed to write of them, nor we to speak; and that no man would believe that
so abominable lust did ever possess the mind of man. Were not those Cities,
which were the Mothers of this impure filthiness, long since condemned by the
judgment of God himself, and consumed with fire? Did not the fire of hell,
impatient of delay, prevent the time, and in a sort before the time, consume
that cursed Nation? Did not fire, brimestone, and the sto^mie tempest, consume
the very earth and ground it self, as privy to such confusions, as should
never so much as once be thought of? Was not all the whole land and ground it
self turned into an horrible Lake? Surely, five heads of the Monster Hydra are
cut off: but woe is unto us, innumerable more are risen up. Who has reedified
those Cities of villainy? who has enlarged the walls of impuritie? and who
has spread out those venomous branches? Woe, woe! the enemy of mankind has
scattered every where round about, the unhappy relics of that sulphurous
burning, and has sprinkled the body of the Church with those execrable ashes,
and has filled some of the Ministers of the Church, with that filthy,
stinking, and impure running sore. Saluianus in like sort, in his book of
divine Providence, has these words. Saluianus de Diuina prouideutia lib 5.
citat. ab E^encaeo. lib. 1. de Continentia. cap. 12.
It is surely altogether a new and strange kind of conversion, that some men
talk of, lawful things they do not, and unlawful things they commit.
They refrain from marriage, but refrain not from Rape. What do thou O
foolish persuasion? God forbad sin, not marriage: your deeds agree not with
your profession. You should not be the friends of enormous crimes, who
profess to do the works of virtue. It is a preposterous thing that you do,
it is not conversion but auersion. You that have long since (as the same is)
forsaken the work of honest marriage, cease at the last; from sinful
wickedness. With these agree the Historians generally, Sigebertus in C^onico.
Anni 1074.
reporting that innumerable evils followed the prohibition of the marriage of
Cleargie-men, published by Pope Hildebrand; that few lived continently, though
some counterfaited so to do for filthy lucres sake, and for ostentation; and
that many joined both perjury and adultery together: and not contenting
themselves with an ordinary degree of wickedness, multiplied their whoredoms
and adulteries exceedingly.

Whereupon we shall find, that many of the best learned, most judicious, and
worthiest men, the Church had in latter times, wished the Law of single life to
be taken away, even as many resisted it when it was first made. Durandus in his
book Rubric. 4^ fol. 35
De modo celebrandi Concilii, proves by many reasons, that it were fit that
the liberty of marriage were again restored to Priests in a General council.
AEn. Sylv. de gest. council. Bas.
In the council of Basil, when exception was taken against the choice of
Amedeus Duke of Savoy, (who^ many thought fit to be Pope) for that he had been
a married man, and had children, it was answered by some of good esteem, that
that was no exception, and that happily it were much better that Priests were
permitted to live in marriage, then restrained. For that many of them might be
saved in chaste marriage, which now perish in their filthy and impure single
life. Aeneas Sylvius a great man in that council, who was afterward Pope, and
named Pius the second, in an Ep. 307. ad Joan. Fiundt.
Epistle to a friend of his, who was in the holy orders of the ministry of the
church, and yet desirous for the avoiding of fornication, to marry a wife,
writes thus: We suppose that you are not ill advised, if when you cannot
contain, you seek a wife, though that should have been thought on before you
had entered into holy Orders. But we are not Gods, neither can we foresee
things to come. Wherefore seeing things are come to this pass, that you cannot
resist the law of the flesh, it is better to marry then to burn. Yet cannot
the Pope be persuaded to dispense with you; but he stands resolved to hold
his severe course still, and thinks it not fit to grant that to one, which
may be hurtful unto many. If therefore you desire safely to marry, you must
expect some other Pope, who may be more inclineable and yielding. And of this
Aeneas Sylvius, afterward named Pius the second, In Pio 2.
Platina, and Ennead. 10 l. 6. page 731.
Sabellicus report, that he was wont to say, That they had, no doubt, reason
to lead them so to do, that forbade the Marriage of Cleargy-men, but that
there were much greater reason now to leave it free again. Fastorum l. 1.
Baptista Mantuanus says, that many thought the Laws against marriage to be
evil; that they which made those Laws, had not sufficiently considered what
the nature of man can bear, that CHRIST never put so unpleasant a Yoke upon
the necks of men; that this burden, too heavy for the shoulders of men to
bear, has brought forth many monstrous effects: that it was a show of Piety,
but indeed too great boldness, that laid this burden upon the shoulders of
men; that it had been more safe to have gone that way wherein the divine Law
directs us, and to have trod in the steps of the Ancient Fathers, whose
life was better in marriage, then ours that is single. Tit. Qui Clerici vel
^oventes matrimonia contrahere possunt. Citat. ab Andr. Frisio l. 4. de
Ecclesia.
Ioannes Antonius says, in the time of the Primitive Church, it was lawful
for Presbyters, and such as were entered into holy Orders, to have wives, so
that they refrained from companying with them, upon the days wherein they
celebrated: that afterward in the Western Church, they that were entered into
holy Orders were commanded to contain: which commandment (he says)
yielded matter to ensnare the souls of many men, and therefore he verily
believes, that as the Church brought in this precept of continency, so the
time will come, when the same Church will reverse and revoke it again: which
revocation shall be agreeable to that of the Apostle, who says, 1 Cor. 7. 25.
Concerning Virgins, I have no commandment, but I give advice. With Antonius
agrees Panormitanus: who proposing the question, whether the Church may give
leave to Presbyters to contract marriage, or to live y De Clericis conjugatis.
cap. cum olim.
in marriage, as the Graecians do, answers, that he believes it may: and
that he is assured it may in respect of them, who are not tied by vow employed
or expressed. Which he proves, because continency in secular Cleargy-men is
not of the substance of order, nor prescribed by the Law of GOD. For that
otherwise the Graecians should sin, and no custom could excuse them: seeing
no custom is of force against the Law of GOD. Neither does he only think,
that the Church has power thus to do, but professes, he thinks it were
behoouefull, and for the good and salvation of the souls of men, that such as
are willing to contain, and to lead a life of higher perfection, should be
left to their own will, and that such as are not willing to contain, should
by the Decree of the Church be set free to contract marriage. Citat. ab Andre^.
Frisio. de Ecclesia, lib. 4.
Alfonsus Veruecius, as Andreas Frisius tells us, discoursing of the words of
Paul, (For the avoiding of fornication, let every one have his own wife)
says, they contain no precept, but a concession or grant: and affirms,
that by virtue of this grant, every one that cannot otherwise avoid
fornication, may marry a wife. And after certain remedies prescribed to be
observed and used by Presbyters, that they may avoid fornication, at last,
confidently gives counsel to him, who having tried all those means cannot
contain, rather to marry a wife, and so to provide for his own salvation,
then to commit fornication, and so cast himself headlong into eternal death:
but yet persuades such a one to do nothing without seeking the Popes consent
hopeing that he will dispense in such a case; seeing the power he has, was
given him for edification, and not for destruction. I dare confidently say,
(says De Invent. Rerum. lib. 5. cap. 4.
Polydere Virgill) that it has been so far from being true, that this
enforced Chastity has excelled that which is in marriage: that no sinful
crime has brought greater disgrace to the order of the Ministry, more evil
to religion, or made a greater and deeper impression of sorrow in all good
men, then the stain of the impure lust of Priests. And therefore happily, it
were behoouefull for the Christian commonwealth, and for the good of them that
are of that sacred order and rank, that at the last a public Law might be
made to give leave to Priests to contract marriage. Wherein rather they might
live honestly and holily without infamy, then in most filthy manner defile
themselves with this sin of Nature. And Bishop Citat. a chemnitio^n exami
ne Trident. Council.
Lindan says: Surely even at this day, it is lawful to take chaste and honest
married men into the order of Priesthood: which (in my judgment) might much
better be done in some provinces of Germany, then to set over them certain
most impure companions, or any longer to endure and tolerate Knaves,
Apostataes, and sacralegious Pastors. With these agrees In Declamat. de
la^dib. Matrimonij.
Erasmus, affirming, that in his conceit, he should not ill deserve, nor take
the worst course for the furthering of humane affairs, and the right informing
of the manners of men, which should procure liberty of marriage (if it might
be) both for Priests and Monks. And therefore Sigismund the Emperor, a
lttle before the Council of Basil began, published a reformation of the
Clergy, in which among other things this was one, that forasmuch as more evil
comes by the forbidding of marriage then good, it were better and more safe to
permit Cleargy-men to live in the state of marriage according to the custom of
the Oriental Churches, then to forbid them so to do. In the Council of Trent,
the Orator of Bauaria moved to the same purpose. And Vbi spura.
Chemnitius reports from George the Prince of Anhault, that Adolphus Bishop
of Mersbergh his uncle, would often say, before ever Luther began to stir,
that if there were a Council, he would be a perswader, that Cleargy-men
might be permitted to marry: and professed that he knew, that many for the
quiet of their consciences secretly contracted marriage with those women which
they kept under the name of Concubines. And surely even the Popes themselves
were content to wink at things in this kind. Georgius Cassander, a man of
infinite reading, excellent judgment, and singular piety and sincerity, and
therefore so much respected and honored by Ferdinand and Maximilian the
second, that they held him the fittest man in the world to compose the
controversies in religion, and sent for him to come unto them for the same
purpose, is clearly of opinion In Consultatione de Sacerd. Caelibatu.
that howsoever some in ancient times forbad the marriage of Cleargy-men, yet
now it were fit and necessary that that law were abrogated: first, because it
is found by woeful experience, to be the cause of many grievous evils:
secondly, for that the severity of Discipline, and strictness in all courses
of life, that was in use when this Law began first to be urged, is clean
gone, or much decayed, even in the opinion of all. So that that which was
fit in those times, may now be most unfit. Thirdly, for that many godly
and learned men are thereby Aeneas Syluius writing to Petrus Noxetus has these
words. Adhuc caui ne me ^acer ordo inuolueret. Timeo enim continentiam etc.
Epist. 50.
discouraged from entering into the Ministry, refusing to bind themselves to
the observation of this law of single life whereby the Church loses the
benefitte of their labors; few young men, indeed religious and pious,
applying themselves to the study of Divinity: but such only for the most part,
as seek nothing but rich and good livings, that intend a dissolute course of
life, and resolve aforehand, to wallow in all impurity of lust, (besides some
fevve, who inconsiderately before they know themselves, fall into the snare.)
Neither does he only think it fit, that married men be admitted into the
Ministry; and suffered to company with their wives, according to the custom
of the Oriental Churches, but is of opinion also, that they may be permitted
to marry, after they are entered into holy Orders, yea though there were no
allowed example of any such thing heretofore; seeing the prohibition is but
positive, and many positive constitutions have been abrogated. But indeed
there are not only examples of men marying after entering into Orders: but also
of the Churches allowing the same. For touching Subdeacons and Deacons, there
can be no question; seeing the Council of Canone. 10.
Ancyra, which was most ancient and confirmed by Leo the Pope, as De Clericis.
lib. 1. cap. 18.
Bellarmine himself confesses, decreed, that Deacons, with the Bishops
leave, might marry vviues after their entrance into holy Orders. Vide supra.
In the time of Gregory the Seventh, and before, as it appears by the
stories of those times; Priests did marry after Orders: and when he went
about to forbid them so to do, he was condemned by the whole Nation of
Cleargie-men, and deposed in a Council of Bishops: being justly disliked as
for other things, so for this his Antichristian and vile attempt. Neither did
those men, which desired a Decree to be passed, to give the liberty of marriage
unto Churchmen, of whom I have spoken, desire only the permitting of married
men so to continue, but of such as are not married for to marry, as it easily
appears by their discourses. And surely howsoever there might be some reason
of expedience, rather to permit married men to enter into the Ministry, and
to continue in the same state, then to suffer such as come into it unmarried,
to marry afterward: yet if the one be lawful (as Vbi supra.
Bellarmine rightly notes) the other cannot be unlawful. For if any thing
be found in marriage, that cannot stand with the sanctity of the Ministry, or
the due execution of it, it is not the contract, which is a thing most seemly
and honest and soon past, but the act of it, and the cares accompanying that
state of life. The manner, custom and observation of the Greek Churches, is
described by Zonaras in his explication of the Canons of the Apostles: where he
says, that Presbyters, Deacons, and Subdeacons before they be ordained, are
asked whether they will live single or not: and if they answer that they will;
they are presently ordained. But if they answer, that they will not: they are
permitted to take them wives first: and then are ordained after marriage. So
that they give them leave to marry after they have chosen them, though before
they ordain them: but if refusing to marry before ordination (when they are
willed to resolve what they will do) they marry afterward, they are put
from the Ministry, but not from their wives.

For farther proof hereof see the first book of Claudius Espencaeus de
Continentia.
By that which has been said, it is most clear and evident, that the marriage
of Ministers is justifiable by Gods Law, by the Canons and practice of the
greatest part of the Church, and by the judgment of sundry of the greatest and
worthiest of the World, in those places, where it seemed to be most disliked,
in all ages, even till our time: yet there remains still one doubt, touching
the lawfulness of their Marriages that by vow had promised the contrary.
Concerning which point, two things are to be observed: first, whether their
marriage be void, that vowed not to marry. Secondly, whether they do sin
that upon any occasion, or change of the state of things, do contrary to such
their vow. Touching the first of these two points, to wit, that the marriages
of such as had vowed the contrary, are not void, we have the judgment of
sundry the best learned among the Fathers. For first, Cyprian speaking of
Virgins has these words: Cyprian. lib. 1. Epist. 11.
Quod si ex fide Christo se dicauerunt, pudice and cast sine vlla fabula
perseuerent. Ita fortes and stabiles praemium virginitatis expectent, si autem
perseuerare nolunt, aut non possunt, melius est nubant, quam in ignem delictis
suis cadant: That is: if by faith they have dedicated themselves to CHRIST, let
them chastely, and with all honest shamefastness, without lying, or falsehood so
continue, and resolute and constant, let them expect the reward of Virginity:
but if they will not, or cannot persevere, it is better that they should marry,
then that by their sins they should fall into the fire. Which words are
clear enough for proof of that which we defend. Yet De Monach, l. 2. c. 34
Bellarmine and some others seek to avoyde them; making as if Cyprian did
only say, that if Virgins that are to resolve, and are yet free, think they
cannot contain, it were better for them to marry then to burn. But this
evasion serves not the turn: for Cyprian speaks of such as have already
dedicated themselves to God, willing them to persevere; and yet says, if they
will not, or cannot contain, they were better to marry then to burn: and
therefore he thinks marriage after a vow made to the contrary to be good,
though he that voweth without constant purpose of performing, is not without
fault. Pamelius writing on this place of Cyprian has these words: If Cyprian
by a certain indulgence permitted such Virgins upon whom the veil was not
yet put, to marry rather then to burn, let no man marvel at it: seeing their
marriages, if they do marry, are not dissolved by any Canons, but they are
only enjoined penance. Saint Austine agrees with Cyprian: for, speaking of
the marriages of such as had vowed the contrary, he has these words: Aug. de
bono Viduitatis.
They who say, that the marriages of such men are not marriages, but rather
adulteries, as it seems to me, do not acutely and diligently enough
consider what they say: but a certain likeness and show of truth deceives
them. For, because they are said to choose CHRIST to be their Husband, which
out of a certain love of Christian sanctity, refuse to marry, there are some
that argue and say, that if she be an adulteress which marryeth to another
man while her husband lives, as the LORD himself defined in the Gospel, then
so long as CHRIST lives, over whom Death has no more dominion, she must
needs be an adulteress, which having chosen him to be her husband, marryeth
unto any mortal man: They truly which thus say, seem to be moved, by some
reason, that is not to be contemned: but they little consider, how great
absurdity follows upon that which they say: for seeing a woman may laudably
(even while her husband lives) with his consent vow continency unto CHRIST;
according to the argument of these men, no woman may so do; least (which once
to think is impious) she make CHRIST himself an adulterer, to whom she
marryeth, her husband yet living. After this refutation of their reasons, he
goes forward to show the absurd consequences of their opinion. By this
inconsiderate opinion (says he) of them that think the marriages of women,
fallen from an holy purpose, if they do marry, to be void, not a little evil
is brought forth: for from hence it comes, that women are separated from
their husbands, as adulteresses, and not wives. And while they thus separate
them, and force them to contain, they make their husbands truly and indeed
adulterers: when as (these their wives yet living) they marry. Thus does
Austine resolve, that marriages after vows made to the contrary, are lawful
and good; though the not performing of vowed continency, is a sin (as he
thinks) more grievous then adultery, not for that the marriage of such is to
be condemned, but because the inconstancy in not performing that was
purposed, and the violating of the vow are condemned. Non susceptio a bono
inferiori, sed ruina ex bono superiori: not for that they do a lesser good,
but because they fall from a greater. Lastly, not for that they afterward
married, but for that they violated their first faith of continency. Which thing
that the Apostle might briefly insinuate, he would not say, that they have
damnation which marry after the purpose of a more high degree of sanctity: not
for that they are not to be disliked that so do, but least their marriage it
self might seem to be condemned; but when he had said, they will marry, he
by and by adds, Having condemnation, and expresses why; Because they have
broken their first faith. That it may appear that the Will which fell from a
former purpose, is condemned and reproved, whether marriage follow or not. If
any man doubt whether Saint Austine were the Author of this book, De bono
viduitatis, wherein these things are found, as some do; and consequently,
whether he were of the opinion we have recited, or not: he may easily know,
that this is Saint Augustines judgment, whether this be his book or not; by
his Epist 70
Epistle to one Bonifacius, who had vowed a monastical retired, and single
life, and yet afterward did marry; whom he tells, he cannot now, as
otherwise he would, exhort to that kind of life, which he had formerly vowed,
because of his wife, so that he thought not his marriage void, or that he was
to be separated from his wife. His words are these: Thy wife hinders me
that I cannot exhort thee to this kind of life; without whose consent it is not
lawful for thee to contain. etc. And De sancta Virginitate. cap. 34.
elsewhere speaking of certain women, who abode not in that which they had
first vowed, which had a desire of marriage, but married not for fear of
disgrace, he says; It were better for them to marry then to burn: that is,
then to be wasted with the secret flame of the conscience in lust. And Hierome
also is of the same opinion. For speaking to a certain virgin that had
privately vowed virginity, and that could not endure the straight keeping of
her mothers house, he has these words: Hieron. Epist. 47. de suspecto
Con^bernio vitando.
If thou be a virgin, why do thou fear careful and diligent keeping? If
thou be corrupted, why do thou not openly marry? This is as a board to swim
out on after shipwreck. So should thou temper that which thou begannest
ill, by using this remedy. Neither truly do I say this, for that I take away
repentance after sin, (that so that which is ill begun, may still continue) but
for that I despair of drawing of you from that ill company into which you are
entered. And in his Epistle to Demetriades he has these words: The ill name
and report of some that behave not themselves well, disgraceth and dishonors
the holy purpose of virgins, and obscureth and blemisheth the glory of the
Heavenly and Angellike family: who must be plainly and peremptorily urged and
required either to marry, if they cannot contain, or to contain if they will
not marry. To these we may add Heresi. 61.
Epiphanius, who indeed makes it (...), that is, a thing evil, and such as
God will judge and punish, to forget, neglect, and not to perform a vow made
to God; but not (...), that is, a thing that casts men into the condemnation
of hell fire, and plungeth them into everlasting destruction as to live in
adultery: Who defends, that it is better to descend to that state of life,
which is lawful and honorable, with one fault of breaking the vow passed to
the contrary, and with tears of repentance to wash away the impurity of that
one, fault of inconstancy, and so to be saved, then to live in sin
continually and so to perish. So that, though he think it a fault for a man
to promise a course of continency to GOD by vow, and not to perform it; yet
he thinks it better for a man after this one fault committed, which may be
repented of and forgiven, to marry, then by living in continual adultery, to
add one sin unto another, and to plunge himself into endless destruction.
Erudit. Theolog. de Sacram. fidei. lib. 2. part. 11. c. 12.
Hugo de sancto victore makes two constructions of the words of Saint Austine
before alleged. Whereof the one is, that he speaks of secret vows,
whereof the Church can take no knowledge, because there is no witness of
them; and that Saint Austines meaning is, that marriages after such vows, are
to be reputed good by the Church. The other is, that the Church in the time of
Austine, allowed marriages, after a vow made to the contrary, but that now the
same Church (for consideratio^s her moving) has determined otherwise, and by
her authority made them void. The former of these constructions is too weak
and cannot be allowed. For, that Austine thinks marriage is lawful and good,
after known vows made to the contrary, it is evident by his Epistle to
Bonifacius, whom he blames for breaking his vow, whereof himself and Alipius
were witnesses, and yet allows his marriage; as also for that in the place
interpreted by Hugo, he shows that some who were of another judgment, (as
indeed we find Epist. 2. ad Victricium. cap. 12.
Innocentius Bishop of Rome to have been) dissolved marriages after vows made
to the contrary, which they would not, nor could not have done, if those vows
had been altogether secret and unknown. Neither does that he says in the 2d
place, any better avoid the clear evidence of Saint Austines judgment, then
the first. For no difference of times, and conditions of men and things, can
so change the nature of vows and marriages, as that a vow at one time should
make void an ensuing marriage, and not at another. Others therefore there be,
who go about to avoid the evidence of the authorites of Austine and the
Fathers brought to prove the validity of marriage, after vows made to the
contrary, by making a distinction of vows. These men therefore make 2. sorts
of vows: naming some simple, and other solemn; and affirm that the latter do
debar men from marriage, and void their marriages if they do marry; but that
the former do so debar them from marrying, that they cannot marry without
some offense, and yet if they do, their marriage is good and not to be voyded.
The Divines of the Church of Rome (as In secundam secundae. quaest. 38. art. 11.
Caietane rightly notes) differ much in opinion, about the difference of these
vows. For some of them think, that they differ in such sort, as that one of
them is a promise only, and the other a real and actual exhibition; and that
the solemnity of a man's vow consists in a real and actual exhibition of
himself, and putting himself into such an estate, as cannot stand with
marriage. But this opinion (as he rightly notes) cannot be true; seeing
there is no such repugnance simply, and in the nature of the things, between
the Order of the holy Ministry and Marriage: as appears in that the
Ministers of the Greek Church (as tied by noe vow) are judged by all to live
in lawful Marriage, notwithstanding their Ministry; and also in that the
entering into noe religious Order, voydeth marriage, unless it be approved by
the Church. There is therefore (as he shows) another opinion, that it is not
from different nature of the vows, that the one voydeth marriage contracted,
and the other does not; but from the authority of the Church, that will have
marriage after a vow made in one sort to be void, and not in another The
latter of these two opinions De Monachis. lib. 2. c. 34.
Bellarmine says, Scotus, Paludanus and Caietane follow: and (as Panormitan
reports) the whole school of Canonistes. And these do answer to the
authorities of the Fathers, denying marriages to be void after a solemn vow,
that they are to be understood to deny them to be void by Gods Law, and that
there was no Law of man then passed to make them void, when they lived, that
they knew of, and that therefore they might rightly be of opinion in those
times, that no vows made ensuing marriages to be void; seeing no vows do
void marriages by GODS Law, and there was no law of man in their time making
marriage void in respect of a vow made to the contrary. So that even in the
judgment of many of the best learned of our Adversaries themselves, Marriage
after a vow is not void by Gods law, but only by the positive Constitution of
the Church, which will have it so to be. But against this positive
Constitution two things may be alleged: first, that it began from that
erroneous conceit, which Anstine refuteth in his book do bono viduitatis: as
it appears by the Epistle of Innocentius, grounding his resolution for
voyding of marriages in this kind, upon that very reason of their being
espoused to Christ, which have vowed unto GOD that they will live continently.
Secondly, that the Church has no power simply to forbid any man to marry,
whom Gods Law leaves free: seeing single life is one of the things that men
may be counseled and advised unto, but cannot be prescribed and imposed by
commandment: that the Church may keep men from marriage, if they will enjoy
some favors, as we see in Colleges and Societies, or that She may by her
Censures punish such as unadvisedly, and without just cause, shall break their
vow and promise, we make no question: but that She may simply forbid any one
to marry, how faulty and punishable soever otherwise, we utterly deny. Neither
is the reason that is brought to prove this power to be in the Church of any
force. For though it were granted, that the Church by her authority for
respects best known to her self, may forbid a man to marry with some of
those with whom God permits him to marry; yet will it not follow, that she
may absolutely forbid any one to contract marriage; seeing parents to whom it
pertains to direct the choice of their children, may forbid them to marry
with such as they justly dislike, and yet they may not simply restrain them
from marying. So that though it were yielded, that the Church for causes best
known to her self, may forbid marriage with more then the Law of God does: and
that in such sort, as to void it, having greater power in this behalf then
natural parents: yet would it not follow that she may simply forbid any one
to marry, and void his marriage if he do: whereas the Law of God voideth it
not. And so we see, that as marriage after a solemn vow is not void by the
Law of God, so the Church has no power to make any law to make it void.

But because though it be so, yet it may seem, that no man that had vowed the
contrary can marry without sin, it remains, that we proceed to consider
and see whether there be any cases, wherein a man, that vowed the contrary, may
marry without offense to God. First, touching this point, the Schoolmen
generally resolve, that the Pope may dispense with a Priest, Deacon, or
Subdeacon to marry though he have sollemnely vowed the contrary by entering
into holy Orders; because the duty and bond of containing is not essentially
annexed unto holy Orders, but by the Canon of the Church only. Secunda
secundae, quaest 88. art. (...)
Aquinas, and they of that time thought he might not dispense with a Monk to
marry. For that single life is essentially employed in the profession of a
Monk, and cannot be separated from the same, as it may from the office and
calling of a Priest. But since that time the general opinion is that he may;
because though single life cannot be separated from the profession of a Monk,
yet he that is a Monk may be freed from that profession that he has made, and
cease to be a Monk. Neither is this only the opinion of the Schools, but the
practice of Popes has concurred with the same. For (as In 4. sent. did. 58.
Petrus Paludanus reports) a Pope reviued a Monk, who was next in blood, and
to succeed in the Kingdom of Arragon, and dispensed with him to marry a wife
for the good of that Kingdom. In secunda secundae loc. cit.
Caietan says, the like is reported in the stories of Constantia, daughter and
heir of Roger King of Sicily; who was a religious woman, and of fifty years
of age, and yet by the dispensation of Caelestinus, was called out of the
Cloister, and permitted to marry with the Emperor Henry the Sixth, who begatte
of her Frederick the Second. And Lib. 4. de eccl.
Andreas Frisius reports out of the Histories of Polonia, that Casimirus,
son of Mersistaus King of Polonia, was a Monk, and ordained a Deacon, and
yet when after the death of Mersistaus his father, there was none to sway the
Scepter of that Kingdom, (whence many mischiefs followed) Benedict the Ninth
gave him leave to marry a wife, making him to leave his Cloister, his Vows,
and Deaconship, that so there might be a succession in that Kingdom. So that
there is no question, but that for a common good, men may be dispensed with to
marry, that have solemnly vowed the contrary. Yea Opus. tom. 1. tract. 27.
Cardinal Caietan proceeds further, and says, that the Pope may dispense
with such to marry as have vowed the contrary, not only for the public
benefit and good of the whole, or Commonwealth, but for the greater good of
the parties that have so vowed. Erudit. theol. de sacr. fid. l. 2. part. ^2. c.
4
Hugo de Sancto Victore disputing what vows they are that must be kept,
pronounces peremptorily, that the vows of fools are to be broken, and not
kept; and defines all those to be the vows of fools, that either are made
de malo, or de bono male: That is, for the doing of some ill, or for the doing
of some good, but not well. For example, if one vow to kill a man, as they did
in the Acts, that Acts 23. (...).
bound themselves by a vow neither to eat nor drink till they had killed
Paul; such a vow is de malo and malum; That is, it is for the doing of an evil
thing, and it self is evil. In quo prima culpa fuit vovere, secunda foret, si
impleretur, perficere: that is, in which kind it was ill to vow, and it would
be worse to perform: and therefore such vows are not to be kept. Neither are
they only the vows of fools, that are made for the doing of some evil, but
they also that are made for the doing of good, if they be not well and rightly
made, are to be reckoned among the vows of fools that are to be broken. Now
that vow is not well made, which though it be touching something that is good,
yet it is touching that which either one may not lawfully do, or it is not
expedient for him to do: One may not do, as if a woman vow continency without
the consent of her husband: Which it is not expedient to do, as if a man in
fasting or any other work purpose the doing of that which is above his
strength and ability. All these vows of fools, as well of the second, as of
the first kind, may be broken without seeking any dispensation. For a
dispensation is then needful when the vow is good and advisedly made, and yet
(in some particular case that may fall out) not to be kept. In which case
either the whole is remitted, or some other thing equivalent is by way of
commutation enjoined. Wherefore let us consider what is to be thought of the
vows of single life, made by men of the Clergy in latter times. Touching
which Vbi supra.
Andreas Frisius rightly notes, that if the vows of children in respect of
their want of judgment, and the vows of them that are constrained, be little
to be regarded, because they are not voluntary, there is little respect to be
had to those vows of single life, that men made in latter times; seeing for
the most part they desired not that they vowed, but some other things; in
respect whereof they doubted not to vow that, they had neither purpose nor
desire to perform. It was the hope of honor, wealth, ease, and a voluptuous
life, that drew the most part of them to make promise of that which they never
had any love unto, and some other of a better mind, finding that they could
not otherwise enter into the Ministry of the Church, ran into it, before
they considered of the great weight of the burden which they put upon their
shoulders. It cannot be denied (says In Consult de Caelibatu Sacerdotum.
Cassander) but that they did ill, and ensnared the consciences of men, who
admitted young men not yet known to themselves, into the Ministry, and when
they found the burden of single life too heavy, which yet together with the
honor of their calling they were forced to take up, rather dissembled, and in
a sort approved any impurity in them, then they would remitte any thing of
their own law, or suffer them to marry, without consideration of the
difference of times, manners, and course of life; which have made things not
only hard but impossible to be performed, that were in the time of greater
severity of discipline (as De vita spirituali.
Gerson rightly observes) not so hard. So that from this hard Law, and the
violent urging of it, many grievous and most abominable scandals in the Church
have proceeded. Wherefore seeing in the judgment of the best Learned of the
Fathers, marriages are good notwithstanding vows made to the contrary, I think
we may boldly resolve, that howsoever they did ill, that made inconsiderate
vows of single life, which they never meant to perform; yet they did not ill,
that out of consideration of their own infirmity chose rather to marry, then
continually to displease God by wallowing in all impurity. Hugo de sancto (...)
E^ud. Theolog. de Sacrament. fidei lib. 2. part. 11. ca. ^2.
victore brings in the secret thoughts of men bound with such vows,
soliciting and urging them in this sort: Thou can not resist so violent a
passion, nor endure the heat of such burning desires, which have proclaimed
war against thee, not for this day, or the next, or the third, or fourth
alone, nor for the space of a month, or a year; they will never leave thee,
they will not spare thee, they will give thee no peace nor rest, so long as
thou shall live upon the earth, and carry about with thee this mortal flesh,
they will always oppress thine intention, and auert thy cogitation, that thou
shall never be able to lift up thy mind with liberty, or thy will with purity
unto God. See therefore what thou do: Thou loosest this world, and gainest
not the other. It were better for thee at least to avoyde these present
torments, then wholly to perish, and no where to see or enjoy any good. God does
see that thou suffer these things unwillingly, that thou art drawn to that
thou would not, and give consent but by constraint. It may be he will have
respect to the violence of thy passion, that he will take pity on thee, and
pardon thy excess; especially seeing the Apostle says, it is better to marry
then to burn; and again, for the avoiding of fornication, Let every one have
his own wife; it is better to use the lawful remedy for this infirmity, then
sinfully still to burn in lust. Where unto he brings in the inconsiderate
votary, answering thus. The Lord knows that I cannot contain. When I thought
I could, I willingly resolved so to do, and would willingly still continue in
the same will and resolution, if I could endure it. But I can no longer abide
the heat of these burning desires. Wherefore I resolve to do that which only
remains, which is to marry a wife, and so to suppott my weakness and
infirmity: Sorry truly, that I am forced to come down from the height of that
good I aspired unto; but yet despair not, because I descend to those things
that are lawful. I had rather, in inferiori bono saluari, quam in summo
periclitari, that is, I had rather be saved, containing my self within the
limits of the lower degrees of good, then to endanger my self in the highest:
and if it be a fault that I descend, and perform not that I purposed, I will
repent of this my fault, and by all due satisfaction pacify and appease my
God; nothing shall seem hard unto me, so that I may avoyde this passion, and
decline this death, in qua viuens teneor, that is, in which I am holden though
I live. These reasons he says must needs prevail, and cannot be resisted;
if marriage after a vow made to the contrary be lawful; if the Church may not
dissolve it, and if salvation may be attained by men living in it, as I have
sufficiently proved they may: and therefore our Adversaries rashly condemn
such as in our time have married, notwithstanding their vows. If a man (says
Vbi supr^.
Frisius) shall undertake to carry a burden to a certain place, and after
finding his inability to perform it, shall desire to be excused, and that some
lighter burden may be laid upon him, he is much better to be allowed of, then
he that goes on in that he undertook, and fainting by the way hurts
himself, and disappointeth him that set him on work: and in like manner he
is rather to be approved, that prays to be eased of the ouer-heauy burden
of single life, and resolves to live honestly in marriage, then he that will
still live single, though never so wickedly, whatsoever Pighius and Eckius
prate to the contrary: who fear not to prefer a Priest that lives in
adultery, before him that marieth a wife. Besides all this which has been
said, seeing single life is not simply good, and to be desired, but
respectively to certain ends, therefore they that chose to live single, and
intended not the glory of GOD, the good of his Church, and the more
opportunities of doing good without distraction, did not make any lawful vow;
seeing a vow must be of that which is good, and properly of the better good;
and consequently were not tied to the keeping of it; it being resolved, that
the vows of fools, that is, such as are made without respect to the right
end, without due consideration of their own strength, and a free and voluntary
purpose of performing that they promise, are not to be kept. Whence it will
follow, that the most part of the vows men made in latter times, not intending
the right end, are not to be kept.

CHAP. 58.
Of Digamie, and what kind of it, it is that debarreth men from entering into
the Ministry.

HITHERTO we have proved the lawfulness of Ministers marriage, and
sufficiently showed that no Law of GOD or the Church forbids it, and that no
rash and inconsiderate vow hinders it, if men cannot contain: Now let us
proceed to see, whether they be any more restrained and limited in their
marriage then other men. Some there be who think they are, and teach, that
they must marry but once only; whereas other may lawfully marry as often as
they please. And further, they suppose, that if any man have been twice
married, or have married a Widow, he may not be admitted into the Ministry.
The ground of which conceit is that of the Apostle, where he says: 1. Tim. 3.
2.
A Bishop must be the husband of one wife: But the meaning of the Apostle is,
that he, who is to be chosen a Bishop, must not have more wives then one at
one time. So that the Digamie the Apostle condemns is not the having of two
or more wives successively, but the having of more then one at the same time.
Of which it is that Apologia. 2.
Iustine Martyr speaks, when expounding that saying of our Savior: He that
marieth her that is for saken, commits adultery, he concludes that they,
who according to man's law run into Digamies, by our Masters judgment are
found to be sinners. And therefore In locum Timothei praedict and in Titu.
Chrysostom expounds the text of the Apostle as meant of Polygamy, which is
the having of many wives at once. His words are these: The Apostle says not
this as making a Law, that none without a wife may be made a Bishop, but
appointing a measure of that matter. For it was lawful for the Jews to be
joined in the second marriage, and to have two wives at once. Thus does he
interpret the Apostles words, though he were not ignorant that some followed
another interpretation. And therefore De Cleric^. lib. (...). cap. 23.
Bellarmine untruly denies, that any of the Ancient followed this
interpretation, but Theodoret. And the Annotations upon that place
Rhemistes confess that Chrysostom so interprets them, but they say, that
writing upon Titus he follows the other interpretation; but surely it were
strange if he should so soon forget himself. Let us hear therefore what he
says, that so we may the better discern whether he dissent from himself, and
interpret the words of the Apostle to Titus as they would have him, or not.
His words are these: The Apostle purposes utterly to stop the mouths of
heretics which condemn marriage; showing that marriage is without fault, and
so precious, that with it a man may be preferred even to the holy seat and
chair; of a Bishop. Also with this saying he chastizeth unchaste persons,
while he suffers them not after their second marriage to be taken to the
government of the Church. For he which is found not to have kept his
benevolence toward his wife, which is gone from him, how should he be a
good teacher of the Church? Nay rather to what crimes shall he not daily be
subject? for you all know, that although by the Laws, such second Marriages
are permitted, yet that thing is open to many accusations. Therefore he will
have the Bishop to give no occasion to them that are under him. These are the
words of Chrysostom. Neither can any man doubt, that will advisedly consider
them, but that he speaks of a second marriage while the first wife lives,
but is gone away (for so are the words, and not defunct or dead, as our
Adversaries translate for their advantage,) and not of a second marriage after
the death of the first wife. For if he did, he would not condemn them that
marry the second time as unchaste and wanton, or make them subject to any
crimes. With Chrysostom agrees Theodoret: his words are these; Theod. in
loc. Tim. praedict.
The preaching then began, and neither did the Gentiles exercise Virginity,
nor the Jews admit it, for they esteemed the procreation of children to be a
blessing. And therefore for as much as at that time they were not easily to be
found which exercised continency, of such as had married Wives he commands
them to be ordained which had honored Temperancie. And concerning that saying,
the husband of one Wife, I think certain men have said well. For of old
time both Greeks and Jews were wont to be married to two, three, or more wives
at once. And even now when the Imperial Laws forbid men to marry two Wives at
one time, they have to do with Concubines and Harlots. They have said
therefore that the holy Apostle says, that he that dwells honestly with one
only Wife is worthy to be ordained a Bishop. For, say they, he does not
reject the second marriage, who has often commanded that it should be used.
For a woman (says he) is bound by the Law, so long as her husband lives; but
if her husband be dead, she is free, that she may marry with whom she will,
only in the Lord, etc. For if he have thrust away his Wife, and be joined to
another, he is worthy to be reprehended, and is justly subject to
accusation: but if force of death have disjoined his first Wife, and Nature
urging, have compelled him to be joined to a second Wife, his second marriage
is proceeded not of his will, but of casualty. These things considered (says
Theodoret) I admit the interpretation of those which have so understood the
place. Neither do Chrysostom and In ^und. loc.
Theodoret only thus interpret the words of the Apostle, but Theophylact also.
The Apostle (says he) prescribes, that he who is to be chosen a Bishop, must
be the husband of one Wife, because of the Jews to whom Polygamy was
permitted, that is, to join marriage with many together. And Hierome makes
mention of this Interpretation. The Apostle Hier. ad Oce^m.
(says he) was of the Jews, and the first Church of Christ was gathered out
of the remains of Israel. He knew it was permitted by the Law, and ordinary
among the people, by the example of the Patriarchs and Moses, to begette
children of many Wives: which thing also was permitted unto the Priests, and
therefore he commanded that the Priests of the Church should not take unto
themselves the like liberty, nor have two or three vviues at once: but that
they should have one only wife at one time. And though he rather incline to
another interpretation; yet in his Commentary upon Titus, he mentions this
again, without any signification of dislike, and says, We must not think
that every one that has been but once married, is better then he that has
been twice married, but that (indeed) he may better exhort to one only
marriage, and continency, that can bring forth his own example in teaching.
For other wise if a young man marry a wife, and she dye within a little
while after, and after her he marry a second, which within a short time he
loses also, and then continue continent, he is to be preferred before him
that lives with one wife till his old age. So that oftentimes, if he that
has been but once married, be preferred before him that has been twice
married, his happiness is chosen rather then his will. And as sundry great and
vvorthie Divines did so interpret the Apostles words as to condemn
Polygamie, and not to exclude from the Ministry mentvvice married; so the
practice was according thereunto. For hovv-soeuer many urged the other
Construction of the Apostles words, and excluded men twice married from the
holy Ministry; yet others did not so. And therefore Tertullian, who was a
Montanist, and condemned second marriage, in his book of Monogamie,
interpreting the Apostles words, of such as had married the second wife, and
speaking bitterly against the Catholics of those times, says: the Holy Ghost
fore-savv there should come some that should affirm all things to be lawful
for Bishops. For (says he) how many are there among you that govern the
Church, which have married the second time: insulting against the Apostles, and
not blushing when these words are read under them. Vbi supra.
Hierome was of opinion, that men twice married might be chosen to be Bishops
or Presbyters, if they married both, or one of their vviues before they were
baptized. Which was the case of very many in those times: seeing, (besides
those who were converted from Paganism) many that were borne of Christian
parents put off their baptism along time. So that some were elected Bishops
before they were baptized, as we read of Ruffinus lib. 2. cap. 11.
Ambrose. Hereupon he says, the number of such as had bin twice married, and
yet were admitted into the holy Ministry, was exceeding great. His words
are these: All the world is full of these Ordinations: I speak not of
Presbyters, nor those of inferior degrees: I come to Bishops, whom if I shall
go about particularly to name, I shall muster together so great a number as
will exceed the multitudes of them that were at the Council of Ariminum. And
it appears by the Epistle of Epist. 22. cap. 1. and 2.
Innocentius to the Bishops of Macedonia, that they thought as Hierome did:
that such as were not twice married after Baptism might be admited into the
Ministry, how often soever they had been married before. It is true that
Innocentius was of another mind, and De bono coniugali.
Austine likewise: But Hierome who is wont to spare no man that crosses his
conceit, calls them Hypocrites, and tells them that they are like the
Scribes and Pharizees, that did strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel that
tithed Mint and Annis-seede, but let pass the weightier things of the Law:
because they admitted such into the Ministry, as had kept Harlots before their
Baptism, and yet rejected such as had been married, for that sin is washed
away in Baptism, and nothing else. Rem nouam audio (says he) quia peccatum
non non fuit, in peccatum reputabitur. That is, it is a new and strange thing
that I hear, because it was no sin to have a wife, therefore it shall be
reputed for a fault and sin. Whoredom, Impiety against God, parricide, incest,
and the sin against Nature, are purged and washed away in the Baptism of
Christ: but this, that a man has had a wife, sticks fast unto him still. So
are the filthy stews preferred before the honorable and undefiled
mariage-bed. Let the Pagans hear what the Haruestes of the Church are, out of
which our Barnes are filled. Let the Cathecumens (who are not yet baptized)
hear likewise, and let them take heed they marry no wives before baptism,
neither enter into the state of honest marriage, but let them give themselves to
all impurities: only let them take heed of the name of marriage, least after
they shall believe in Christ, this may prejudice them, that sometimes they had
not concubines, nor Harlots, but lawful vviues. Zonaras in his exposition of
the Canons of the Apostles, follows the Opinion of Hierome, and so does
Sedulius, Scotus, and Anselme, as Bibliothecae Sanctae. lib. 6. annot. 318. and
325.
Sixtus, Senensis reports. And this opinion was very general, as it
appears by Lib. 10. Epist 82.
Ambrose, who though he disliketh it, yet says exceeding many did approve it.

So that to resolve this point: we see some understood the words of the
Apostle as meant against Polygamie only, or the having of many wives at once,
and not successively: and that accordingly many were permitted to govern the
Church that hadbin twice married: and that of them that understood the words of
the Apostle, as meant of the not having of more wives then one successively:
some excluded only such as had more the^ one wife after baptism: others, all
that had bin twice married, either before or after. But we shall find that they
who generally excluded all them, that had bin twice married fr^ entering into the
Ministry, had no good reason leading them so to do. For neither is he always
better, that has been but once married, then he that has been twice married,
as I have showed out of Hierome; neither can he always better exhort to
continence; for how can he exhort others to live continently, and not to
marry the second time, or after the death of their wives, that himself in his
widow-hood committed Adultery, or lived as a whore-monger? seeing the Apostle
wills both men and women, rather to marry the second, third, or fourth time,
then to burn in lust, and to commit adultery or fornication. There is
therefore a third reason yielded of this pretended prohibition of marying a
second wife, after the death of the first: which is mystical and taken from a
kind of Sacramental signification, which must be found in them, that are to
be admitted into the holy Ministry of the Church. And surely either this
reason must prevail, or none: for if it were some moral defect and
imperfection, that debarreth men twice married from entering into the Ministry;
or for that it is a sign of incontinency to have been twice married; it might
be washed away in Baptism, as well as Whoredom, and other Crimes, which yet
these men deny. Let us see therefore what force there is in this Reason of
mystical signification. August. de bono Coniugali.
The marriage of the Fathers in the time of the old Law (says Saint Augustine)
by their many wives, expressed and figured those Churches, out of the many
Nations, People and Kinreds, of the world, that were to join themselves unto
Christ in Spiritual marriage at his coming: but the marriage of Christians,
figureth specially that perfect unity that shall be in Heaven, of all
faithful and holy ones, both with Christ, and amongst themselves. This is
Augustines reason, and this the Bonauentura in 4. sent. did. 25. quaest. 3.
Schoolmen urge. But it is strange that men of Learning should stand so
confidently upon so weak a ground. For if the expressing of the unity between
Christ and the Church his Spou^e, by the undivided unity that is between one
man and one woman, be necessarily required in him that is to be chosen a Bishop
or Presbyter; then of necessity, every one that desires to be a Bishop or
Presbyter, must marry a wife, that so his marriage may express the Spiritual
marriage between Christ, and the Church. Nay, seeing Christ never withdraws
himself from his Church, but daily begets sons and daughters of her unto
God; each Bishop must have a wife, and company with her continually; that so by
the matrimonial unity that is between him and his wife, he may express the
unity, that is between Christ and the Church. Their answer hereunto is, that
as Christ is a Husband, so he is a Virgin; and that therefore a man may bear
an express resemblance and representation of Christ, by Virginity, as well as
by Marriage, So that it suffices if either he be a Virgin, or have been but
once married, that is to be thought capable of Ecclesiastical honor. But this
answer will not serve the turn: For though a man be no Virgin, (as In duab.
Epist. Citat. ab Erasmo in vita Hieronymi.
Hierome professed of himself, that he was not; and as it is evident
Augustine was not, in that Aug. confess. lib. 4. cap. 2. and lib. 6. cap. 15.
he had children borne unto him:) yet it is not necessary, in the judgment of
our Adversaries, that such a one should marry a wife, to make himself capable
of Ecclesiastical honor. Whence it follows, that there is no necessity of
Representing either the Virginity of Christ, or his matrimonial Conjunction
with the Church, by the Virginity or marriage of such, as are to be admitted
into the holy Ministry. Besides this, it is not enough to express the Unity
between Christ and the Church, that a man marry but one wife; but it is
required also, that he defile not himself, by being joined unto harlots; but
that he keep himself entirely to his own wife. For so it is, between
Christ and his Church; who not only has no other wife or spouse, but the
Church of the faithful; but also so entirely loves her, that he gives no
part of his love to any stranger. So that he, that marying but once, has
either before or after such marriage, committed adultery or fornication, does
not express the unity that is between Christ and the Church. And yet our
Adversaries, that are so peremptory against such as have been more then once
married, set open the doors to let in both Whoremongers and Adulterers into the
Church, and house of God. And therefore the words of Hieron. ad ^num.
Hierome may rightly be applied unto them. That they tithe Mint and Annisseed,
and omit the weightier things of the Law; and that they strain at a Gnat and
swallow a Camel, rejecting them as unworthy that have not offended, and
admitting such as have; justifying the sinner, and condemning the Innocent. But
that we may perceive the weakness of this mystical Reason, we must observe
that our adversaries admit none into the Ministry that have been married,
unless either their wives be dead, or by consent of their wives they resolve
to contain, renouncing that power and interest the man has over the body of
his wife; and so (indeed) ceasing to be husbands. So that if their Presbyters,
and other Cleargy-men have resemblance of CHRIST'S marriage with the Church in
respect of their marriage, it is while they are no Cleargy-men, but mere
Laymen. Now how-soeuer it may be required of them that are to be admitted into
the Ministry, that they have not been scandalous before their entrance: yet
I think it is not required, that they have been clear representations or
figures of CHRIST; but this is to be looked for afterward, when they supply
his place. Wherefore we may assure our selves that this was not the reason
that moved those to debar men twice married, from entering into the Ministry
that so did: but partly a misunderstanding of the Apostles words; partly for
that as De sacr. eccl. minist. and Ben. l. 4. c. 8.
Duarenus notes, though often marying be permitted, both by Gods Law and man's
Law: yet the old Fathers did not greatly like it, as arguing immoderate
incontinency in them that so do.

Whereupon we shall find that in ancient times they were all put to penance
that married the 2d time, though Laymen, and never intending to enter into the
Ministry. The words of the Can. 3. and 7.
Council of Neocaesarea are these: Concerning such as often take them wives,
and such as are often married, it is ordered that they shall observe and
fulfill the time of the penance which is prescribed unto them: yet so as that
their conversation and faith may shorten the time. And the same Council
forbids a Presbyter to be present at the mariage-feast of them that are the
second time married; seeing it is prescribed, that they must be put to Penance
that marry the second time. And asks what Presbyter that is, that will for a
mariage-feast consent to such marriages. And Referente Ambrosio in 7. c. 1. ad
Cor. and in 3. 1. ad Tim. Aug. sermon. 243. de temp. Isid. l. 2. de Divin*
officiis c. 19
another Canon forbids such marriages to be blessed in the Church. Can 1.
The council of Laodicea provideth in this sort, touching them that marry the
second time: Concerning them that (according to the Ecclesiastical Rule) are
freely and lawfully joined in the second marriage, and have not secretly so
joined themselves: It is fit that for some short time they give themselves to
prayer and fasting: which being past, by a kind of Indulgence, they may be
restored to the Communion. The Apud Gratian. part. 2. cause. 31. q. 1
Author of the imperfect work, that goes under the name of Chrysostom,
proceeds a little farther in this sort: The Apostles (says he) commanded to
enter into the second marriage for the avoiding of fornication. For according to
the precept of the Apostle, it is lawful to take a second wife: but according
to the rule and prescription of Truth it is (indeed) Fornication. This
conceit grew so far, that the Council of Can. 8.
Nice was forced to make a Canon that the Catharists should not be received
into the fellowship of the Church, unless they would communicate with such as
fell in the time of persecution, and with such as had been twice married:
whereby it appears that some rejected them, as though they might not have
been received into the Church; no not after Penance.

So that to conclude this point touching Digamie, it is not the having of more
wives than one successively, that the Apostle condemns: but the having of
more wives at once. Three reasons are brought by our Adversaries to prove the
contrary: but they will be found too weak if we examine them. The first is,
that Polygamie, or the having of many wives at once, was not in use in the
Apostles time, and that therefore the Apostle had no reason to forbid it: but
this may easily be refuted by good authorities, Your Masters (says In Triphone.
Iustine Martyr speaking to the Jews) even to this day, suffer every one of
you to have four or five wives: and in his In Apol. post.
Apology he understands by Digamie, the having of more wives then one at one
time, and not successively: for he says, they which according to man's Law do
enter into Digamie or second marriages, are sinners, according to the Doctrine
of our Teacher and Master. And Theodoret says: In loc. Tim.
In former times both Jews and Gentiles took unto them in marriage many wives.
Their second reason is this. The Apostle requires that a widow must have
been the wife of one husband: and his meaning must needs be, that she must
not have had more husbands then one successively. Therefore when he
prescribes, that a Bishop must be the husband of one wife, his meaning is,
that he must not have had more then one wife successively, the form of speech
being the same. That when he speaks of widows he means that they must
not have had more husbands then one successively, they prove, because howsoever
Men have sometimes had more wives then one, at the same time; yet Women never
had more husbands: and Rhemenses in locum Titi.
hereupon they charge us, with intolerable impudency, violent wresting of the
Scriptures; and bringing such an interpretation of the Apostles words, as never
came into any wisemans cogitation before, when we say, he repelleth such from
entering into the order of widows, as have had two husbands at once, and not
such as have been twice married. But if it please them to give us leave, we
will show them, that they are too violent, and say they know not what. For we
think, nay we know it has been heard of, that a woman should have two
husbands at one time: yea that both amongst Jews and Gentiles in former times
women forsaking their husbands, or forsaken of them without just cause, have
married again: which the Apostle might justly condemn, and debar such as
had so done, from entering into the order, and rank of sacred Widows. Neither
is it hard to show, that our interpretation has been thought of, and
approved, more then a thousand years ago, by men of as great wisdom, as our
great masters that thus insult over us. For Theodoret upon these very words of
the Apostle, writes thus. Hereof also, it is manifest that he rejects not
second marriages, but decrees that they live chastely in matrimony: for he
which before has established the second marriage by law, has not here
forbidden her which has bin twice married to obtain bodily relief. And In
hunc locum.
Theophilact likewise says: The Apostle requires Monogamie of her, that is to
be admitted into the company of widows: that is, that she have been coupled
but to one husband at once, as a sign of honesty, chastity and good manners.
Concerning these Widows, two things are to be considered. First, how and in
what sort they were employed by the Church. Secondly, how far fortth they
were tied not to leave the Church-seruice and to marryagaine. Touching their
service, it was first and principally, about women that were to be baptized,
for their instruction and the addressing of themselves to that Sacrament and
the sacred Rites of the Church accompanying the same: as appears by the Lib.
3. cap. 15.
Constitutions of Clemens, it being more fit for them, to have private and
often access unto them, then for men. Which thing also Haeresi. 79.
Epiphanius shows, calling them by the name of Diaconesses. Secondly, the
attending, and taking care of the sick and impotent. Touching the second
point, we suppose that these widows, (being of great Age, destitute of all
outward supportes, seeking relief of the Church, and dedicating themselves to
the service thereof) did by this very act, profess and make known their
purpose of continuing in that estate of Widdowhood, and performing such
service, as to them any way appertained. And therefore the Apostle condemns
them, that after such profession made, waxed wanton against Christ, sought to
put themselves out of the holy Ministry and service they had dedicated
themselves unto, and to return to Secular courses of life again. These
according to the judgment of Haeresi. 61.
Epiphanius were subject to (...), that is, just dislike and blame, and were to
be condemned for their leuity, and inconstancy; but not to (...), that is to
the condemnation of eternal death and destruction, if declining adultery and
other like uncleanness, they choose rather to marry, then to defile
themselves with such impurities. And De Bono viduitatis.
Augustine resolves that their marriage, (notwithhanding any profession they
seem to have made to the contrary) is not to be condemned as evil, or to be
dissolved: but that only their breach of promise made to God and his Church
and their falling from their purpose, is to be disliked and condemned. Thus do
these learned and holy Fathers resolve, touching such widows as the Apostle
speaks of. And Peter Lumbard upon these words of the Apostle in like sort,
adding: that they break their first faith even that they professed in
baptism, in that violating so solemn a promise, and turning away so
scandalously from the calling they had voluntarily put themselves into, they
seem to forget and cast from them the very faith and profession of Christians.
So that it is clear, and not denied by us, that these widows made a kind
of promise and profession of continuing in widdow-hood, when they were admitted
to the Alms and service of the Church: and that it was a fault not to be
excused, to show themselves inconstant in this respect: yet such was the
tenderness of the Church in ancient times, knowing the weakness of the
sex, as not to cast any snares upon them or to tie them by the bond of any
solemn benediction or consecration to a necessity of continuing in such an
estate. but she thought good to leave them to their own diliberations and
resolutions: so that, though they were wont to put a kind of sacred veil on
such virgins, as voluntarily devoted themselves to God; yet Epist. 9. ad Episc.
Lucaniae.
Gelasius forbids any Bishop to attempt any such thing, as the vailing of
a widow: If widows (says he) out of the mutability of their minds, having
made a kind of profession of not marrying again, shall return to marriage,
it shall be at their peril in what sort they will seek to pacify God: seeing
(according to the saying of the Apostle) they have broken their first faith.
For as (if happily they could not contain, according to the Apostle) they were
no way forbidden to marry; so having deliberated with themselves so to do, they
ought to keep their promise of continent living made to God, but we ought not
to cast any snare upon such, but only to exhort them to do that which is fit,
by the consideration of the eternal rewards and punishments, that God has
prepared for men, according to their works, that so we may clear our selves
and make known what we think, and they may be left to give an account of
that they do, knowing best their own intention. This was the Decree of this
Pope, and some other were of the same judgment who admitted widows to no
benediction, but that of Penitencie: nor suffered no other veil but the veil
of penitents to be put upon them. But it Vide Binnium tomo 2. Council. page
115. annot. in Toletan. 4.
seems this course was not holden afterward: succeeding Bishops degenerating
from the wise and discreet moderation of their Godly predecessors, and laying
heavier burdens on men's shoulders then was fit.

CHAP. 59.
Of the maintenance of Ministers.

Having briefly run through all those things that concern the different
degrees, orders and callings of them Almighty God employeth in the Ministry of
holy things: it remains, that in the last place I come to speak of the
maintenance of them. That an honorable intertainement is due to the Ministers
of God, and disposers of his heavenly Treasures, there neithes is, nor can be
any doubt: The light of Nature, the sense of Piety and the Presidents of the
Jews and Gentiles before Christ, and all Christian Kingdoms, Nations, and
People since, most clearly conuincing it. 1. Cor. 9. (...).
Who goes a warre-fare at any time (says the Apostle) at his own charge? who
dresseth a Vineyard and tastes not of the fruit of it? Who attends and
feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of it? It is an Axiom most
clear and evident in the light of Nature, that The labourer is worthy of his
hire, and the detaining of his wages is one of the sins that cry so loud,
that he that sits in heaven hears them. If this be true in them that are
employed in any service, business or work in the world, for the good of men;
how much more in respect of them, that labor to procure their Spiritual and
eternal good? Ibid. verse. 11.
It is a small thing (says the Apostle) that we should reap your carnal
things that have sown unto you spiritual things: Galat. 6. 6.
therefore let him that is instructed in the word, make him that instructed him
partaker of all his goods The Galathians thought themselves so much bound to
the blessed Apostle Saint PAVLE (by whose ministry they were converted from
Idolatry to serve the true and living GOD) that Galat. 4. 15.
they would have plucked out their eyes, to have done him good: persuading
themselves, they were noe way able to make recompense unto him, for all the
good he had done unto them. And the Apostle is bold to tell Philemon, ^ that
he owes himself unto him. This thing is so clear and (...) Philem. 29
evident, that I suppose no man will contradict any Part of that which has
been said: yet notwithstanding it is not to be dissembled, that Wickliffe and
some others, let fall some inconsiderate speeches, out of an immoderate dislike
of the abuse of things in the Roman Church: wherein all piety, care of
Religion, and performance of pastoral duties being neglected by the most part
of men: nothing was sought after, but riches, honor, and greatness,
accompanied with excessive and riotous expenses, to the great scandal of the
World. For the opinion of In Trialogo.
Wickliffe was, that the Ministers of the Church ought to make no such claim
to tithes, possessions, or lands, or any other reward of their labors, as may
be pleadable in any temporal court of Justice, as each man does to the things
that are come to him by inheritance from his Fathers, or by his own purchase,
but that they should content themselves with the title of original Justice; by
virtue whereof, that is due to every good man that is fitting to him, and
answerableto his condition, merit, and worthiness. This opinion of Wickliffe
proceeded from a dislike of something he conceived to be amiss, but knew not
how to reform. And the censure of Gerson upon this and the like Articles was
right and good, that they who proposed them, had cause of offense at many
abuses, by them reprehended: but that to go about to reform things out of
order by such a course as those Articles imported, was to east out one Devil
by another: whereupon he shows, that a golden mean is to be followed,
between that immoderate flattery, that gave too much to the Pope and his
Clergy, and caused them to forget that they were men, and to encroach upon the
right and possession of all other men; and that vile detraction, that
diminishes the honor and reputation; and takes away the reward of worth and
learning, to the ruin of the Church, and bringing in of all Barbarism and
confusion. We say therefore, that this position is to be rejected, as contrary
to the clear evidence of Heavenly Truth, the light of Nature, and the
practice and Judgment of all the world; whether we respect Jews, Pagans, or
Christians. For is it so, (the Apostle himself disputing and determining the
case) that the Ministers of God, by the rules of the Law of Nature, and that
given by Moses, have more right to a maintenance, fitting to their worth and
callings, than the labourer has to his hyre? And are not all Christian Princes
and Magistrates bound, to force by their Laws such as with-holde that which is
thus due? Nay, may not the Church by her censures make them that are instructed
to minister out of their temporal goods to such as instruct them? Surely there
is no doubt but they may. Which duty being done, the Minister has as good
right by Positive Law, to that maintenance that is fitting for him; and may as
lawfully sue for it in any court of Mundane Justice, as any other may for that
which by any right of this World pertains to him. This (I ihinke) will not
be much gainsaide: For all men will grant, that a competencie of maintenance
is due by the prescript of Gods Law, and the Law of Nature: and that Princes
must take order that it be yielded. But the only thing that is questionable*
is, whether God have determined of this competencie, or left the judgment and
determining thereof unto men.

In the Old Law, himself from Heaven declared what he thought to be a fit
allowance for his servants the Priests and Levites; which we shall find not
to have been sparing, but very liberal. For, besides the Tenths of all the
things that the rest of the Tribes possessed and enjoyed, he gave them Cities
to dwell in, and fields adjoining to the same. Touching Tithes in the book of
Leviticus it is thus written; Leuit. 27. 30.
All the Tithe of the Land, both of the seed of the ground, and of the fruit
of the Trees, is the Lords, it is holy to the Lord: and of every Tithe of
Bullock, and of Sheep, and of all that goes under the rod, the Tenth shall
be holy unto the Lord. And as God prescribed and commanded this Rent of the
Tenth to be paid unto him out of all that men possessed by any right derived
from him; so by his Prophets he did exact it when it was unpaid. Malach. 3. 10.
Bring (says the Lord of Hosts by his Prophet Malachie) all the tithes into
the storehouse, that there may be meat in my house, and prove me now herewith,
if I will not open the windows of Heaven unto you, and power you out a
blessing without measure: I will rebuke the deuourer for your sakes, and he
shall not destroy the fruit of the ground, neither shall your vine be barren
in the field, says the Lord of Hosts; and all Nations shall call you blessed,
for you shall be a pleasant Land. And touching Cities for the Priests and
Levites to dwell in; God spoke unto Moses his servant in this sort: Numb. 35.
2. etc.
Command the children of Israel, that they give unto the Levites of the
Inheritance of their possession, Cities to dwell in: Ye shall give also to the
Levites, the Suburbs of the Cities round about them; so they shall have Cities
to dwell in, and their Suburbs shall be for their Cattle, ana for their
substance, and for all their Beasts: and the Suburbs of the Cities which ye
shall give unto the Levites, from the wall of the City outward, shall be a
thousand Cubits round about: These Cities, by Gods own appointment, were
forty and eight. Besides this standing Rent of Tithes, which God commanded
his people to pay unto the Priests and Levites, and these Cities, which they
were to give them to dwell in; he made them yet a more plentiful and ample
allowance out of his own immediate Revenue, and the presents that were daily
brought unto him. For whereas the people (after they were entered into the land
of Promise) stood bound to make some acknowledgment, that they had received all
of Gods hands, and therefore were to give unto him, the best, first, and
principal of all that they were blessed with, even the first of the fruits
they gathered; The Levites by Gods appointment had their parts in these
first fruits: Nay, as we may read in the book of Numbers, God gave these
first fruits which the people offered to him, to the Priests, saying unto
Aaron, and his sons, Numb. 18. 12.
All the fat of the oil, and all the fat of the wine, and of the wheat, which
they shall offer unto the Lord for their first fruits, I have given them unto
thee: and the first ripe of all that is in their Land, which they shall bring
unto the Lord, shall be thine. This Allowance did God make them, out of his set
Revenue of first fruits; and yet was not unmindful of them, when any other
presents were brought unto him. So that they, 1. Cor. 9. 13
Who attended at the Altar, were (indeed) partakers of the Altar. Thus we see
in what sort God did provide for his servants the Priests and Levites, in the
time of the Law.

Wherefore now it remains, that, passing by that Addition, that was out of
those Offerings, which were proper to those times, we come to see, whether the
same kind of provision by Tithes (which GOD then prescribed) remain still in
force, by Virtue of any Law of GOD, or not. Here we shall find a great and
maine Controversy between the Schoolmen and the Canonists. For the
Schoolmen (for the most part, nay all, if we may believe De Clericis lib. 1.
cap. 25.
Bellarmine) do think, that Tithes are not due since the coming of CHRIST,
by any Law of GOD or Nature. The Canonists resolve the contrary, and are so
peremptory in their opinion, that they do (almost) condemn such of Heresy,
as think otherwise. Secunda secundae. quaest: 87. art. 1.
Aquinas one of the greatest Rabbis amongst the Schoolmen, determines the
Question in this sort. The Precept concerning the paying of Tithes in the time
of the old Law, was partly Moral, Natural, and Perpetual; and partly
Judicial, applied to the condition of that people, and so to continue no
longer by force of Gods prescription, then that state should continue. In that
it prescribed a sufficient, large, and honorable maintenance, to be yielded
to them that attended the holy things of God, it was Natural and Moral, and
is to continue for ever; but in that it prescribed such a proportion, as a fit
and competent maintenance, namely the Tenth part out of every man's increase, it
was not Natural, but Judicial, applied and fitted to the condition of that
people. For the whole Nation of the Jews being divided into thirteen Tribes,
and the Tribe of Leui, that served at the Altar and in the Temple, having no
Inheritance or Possession amongst the rest, but God himself being the
inheritance of them of that Tribe, that they might have in some proportionable
sort, as good an estate of maintenance as any of the rest, he gave unto them
the Tenth of all that the rest had. If it be said, they were not the Tenth
part of the people, but the Thirteenth; and that therefore to make them equal
with the rest, GOD should have given them the Thirteenth part only, and not
the Tenth: he answers, that therefore GOD gave them something more then each
of the rest of the Tribes had; First, for that he knew all that he allowed them
would not be duly and exactly paid unto them, but that they should loose some
part of that which he meant unto the^: which by this overplus of Allowance, he
would make up unto them again. Secondly, for that he would have their
allowance to be something better then that which others had, they being more
near unto him then the rest. Thus does he make the particular determination of
the tenth, to be judicial, fitted to the condition of that people; and
neither Moral nor Ceremonial: and yet says, that as all things that were
done in that state, and by that people, figured some thing that was afterward
to come to pass: so this paying of the tenth of that each man possessed,
though it were a judicial constitution, and not ceremonial, yet figured the
perfecting of all things by Christ the Son of God. For in that the number of
ten, is the uttermost extent and perfection of numbers, beyond which no man
goes in numbering; by giving the tenth part (that signifies perfection) to
God, and keeping nine (expressing imperfection) to themselves, they professed
their own wants, defects, and imperfections, and the desire, hope and
expectation they had, that God, (in whom only perfection is found) would in
his good time perfect all things by Christ his Son. How aptly these things
are delivered by THOMAS let the Reader judge. There are other that likewise
insist on the number of ten, as being the uttermost extent of number, but to
another purpose. For they say, in that the people of God gave unto him the
tenth of all that they possessed, which is the uttermost bound, and extent of
all the things they had, they did thereby express the desire they had, that
this tenth part, as being the bound and limit of all the rest, (in a sort
included within it,) should sanctify the rest; and that in respect of the
blessing, which God has promised unto that, which is given unto him, it should
be as a wall of defense, for the safekeeping of the rest. And yet neither
Thomas, nor these, make the paying of the tenth to be Ceremonial, in respect
of these significations, for then no such custom might be used amongst
Christians, as some ignorant men have taught in our age, out of this false
conceit. But Thomas supposes the paying of the tenth, in the particular
determination to be judicial, and the other think it Natural and perpetual.
For (say they) seeing something is to be yielded to GOD out of that which we
have, and the number of ten is the bound of all the things we have, or can
have, at least one of ten is to be paid unto God, for an acknowledgment of
our obligation unto him, and for the maintenance of his service, and those that
attend the same. For if we may pass the number of ten, which is the bound of
our possessions, and yield no one part thereof as an acknowledgment to God, we
need not to pay any thing to him at all.

This opinion is strongly confirmed, in that Genesis 14. 20,
Abraham paid tithe to Melchizedech, (who was a Priest of the high God, and
blessed him in the name of the Lord) of all that he possessed, before any law
written, or any particular prescriptio^that we read of touching the same.
Whereby he showed (as it may more then probably be concluded) that tithes are
due by the Law of nature. Neither did Abraham only by his fact, show the
natural duty of paying tithe, but Jacob also confirmed the same by the vow
he made; That if God would prosper his journey, and bring him back in safety,
the Lord should be his God, and Genesis 18. 22.
he would offer unto him the tenth of all that he should give him. But some
man perhaps will say, that this vow of Jacob, proves rather the contrary:
namely, that he was not bound to pay tithes: for men do vow such things as
they are not bound unto, by any general law of God or Nature. And therefore
Cardinal De Clericis lib. 1. cap. 25.
Bellarmine says, It had bin an impious thing, for Jacob in this conditional
sort; to have vowed the paying of tithe, if by the general law of GOD, and
Nature, he had been bound thereunto. But surely this saying of the Cardinal
is impious, and injurious to the holy Patriarch, who never was charged with any
Impiety, in respect of this his vow; neither can be (as I suppose) and yet
necessarily must be, if this inference of the Cardinal be good. For it is
the first commandment in the law Natural and Moral; Thou shall have no other
Gods but me and the holy Patriarch was bound by a general Obligation of the
law of Nature, to take the Lord for his God, and yet he voweth conditionally,
That if the Lod will be with him, keep him in his journey, and bring him safe
back again, Ver. 21.
he shall be his God, and he will serve him: which if the Cardinal say true,
he could not do without Impiety.

But less us pass by this ouer-sight, and see what is to be resolved
touching this point. It seems by the fact of Abraham, and vow of Jacob,
before the Law, by the prescription of the same in the time of the Law, and by
the judgment and practice of Christians since the time of the Gospel: that
the duty of paying Tithes is natural and perpetual. Orig. Hom. 1^ in Numeros.
How does our Righteousness (says Origin) exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, if whereas they do not taste of the fruits of the
earth, before they offer the first-fruites to God, and set out the Tithe for
the Levites, we do no such thing, but so use, or rather abuse the things
which God has given us, Vt Sacerdos nesciat, Levita ignoret, Altar non
sentiat; That is, in such sort, that the Priest shall not know of it, the
Levite shall never hear of it, and the Altar of God never feel it, or have
any sense of it. Saint In Malach. 3.
Hierome says, Quod de Decimis, Primitiisque diximus, quae olim dabantur a
populo Sacerdotibus and Levitis, in Ecclesiae quoque populis, intelligite
quibus praeceptum est, non solum Decimas and Primitias dare, sed and vendere
omnia quae habent, and dare pauperibus: quod si facere nolumus, saltem
Iudaeorum imitemur exordia, and pauperibus partem demus ex toto, and
Sacerdotibus and Levitis honorem debitum deferamus: quod qui non fecerit, Deum
fraudare, and supplantare convincitur. That is, Understand that which I said
of Tithes and first-fruites, which of old were given by the people to the
Priests and Levites, concerning the people of the church also, who are
commanded not only to give Tithes and first-fruites, but to sell away all
that they have, and to give to the poor: which if we will not do, at the
least let us imitate those beginnings of the Jews, that we may give a part of
all to the poor, and yield due honor to the Priests and Levites: which who so
does not, is convinced to defraude and deceive God. Here we see Hierome is of
opinion, that Christians stand bound at least to perform as much touching the
matter of tithes and first fruits as the Jews: and that he makes the not
paying of tithes to be a sinful defrauding of God: but that which he adds
of selling all and giving to the poor, is not to be understood as meant
generally, but only in some cases that may fall out. With Hierome, Augustine,
or the Author of the Sermons De tempore, whosoever he was, agrees, saying,
De tempore* sermon. 219.
Audi indevota mortalitas, nosti quia Dei sunt cuncta quae percipis, et de suo
non accommodas omnium Conditori? That is: Hear O mortal man, void of
devotion, thou know that all the things that thou enioyest are Gods, and
will thou present him with nothing that made all, etc. He vouchsafes to
require only the Tenth, and the First-fruites, and thou denyest him: what
would thou do if he should challenge nine parts, and leave thee but the
Tenth? For why might not God say, the men that serve thee are mine, I made
them: the Earth that thou tillest is mine, the seed thou sowest is mine, the
Oxen are mine that thou weariest in thy work: yea, the showers of rain, the
blasts of wind, and the heat of the Sun is mine: all the things which cause
thy increase are mine: and thou only put to thy hand: therefore the Tenth
only is due unto thee, and the rest is mine? but God (who is rich in
goodness) has not given thee so sparing a reward of thy labor; for behold
he is content thou shall have nine parts, and exacteth only the Tenth: and
thou most vnthakefully, perfidiously, and falsely with-holdest it from him, and
therefore in his wrath he often depriueth thee of those nine parts that thou
might have had, destroying and bringing to nothing all that which thou
hopedst to reap, by immoderate drougth or rain, by hail, frost, or some
other means, as seems best unto him. But whatsoever we think of the Author
of these Sermons, it is certain Saint Augustine did urge a necessity of paying
the Tenth at least of all that men possess. Aug. in Psalm. 146.
Set out (says he) some certain thing out of thy revenewes, increase, or gain,
if thou will the Tenth, though this be too little: for the Pharisees paid
tithes of all that they possessed: and yet, If our Righteousness exceed not
theirs, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And if we urge you to the
paying hereof, says he, think not that we seek your wealth, but your
well-doing. With Augustine agrees In Math. 23
Chrysostom. The first Council of Hispalis (as we read in Iuo: part. 2. c.
^74. in 2. tom. council. p. 954. apud Bin.
Iuo) urges the paying of tithes as commavnded by God, and pronounces that he
makes a prey of things holy unto God, and is as a thief and a robber, that
pays not tithe of all that he possesses; and that all the curses which God
powered out on Caine, that made no good division, but gave the worst to God, and
kept the best to himself, shall be powered upon him. The first Ca. 17.
Council of Orleance shows that tithes were paid at that time: and the
second Can. 5.
Council of Matiscon says, The law of God providing for the Priests and
Ministers of the Churches, commanded the people to bring into the holy places,
the Tenth of their increase, for an hereditary portion; that so being hindered
by no labor, they might in due sort attend the work of the holy Ministry:
which law the whole multitude and heap of Christians, has kept inuiolablely
for a long time. The Fathers assembled in the Can. 14.
Council of Forum Iulii, after they have alleged the mandate of Almighty God
in the third of Malachie, add, that God himself pronounces, that his wrath
and indignation abides upon the Nation or People, which fulfilleth not this
his commandment with an entire heart, and a good will: and after recital of
the blessings and curses that follow them that keep or break this
commandment; If ye believe not us, or despise us (say they) because we are
men, believe God himself in his threats and promises; and whosoever thou art,
that professest thy self a Christian, De suis, non d^is, da Domino; quia omne
quod sumus, viuimus, and habemus, eius est, and de ipsius benignitatis
suscepimus manu: that is, give unto God of his own, not of thine; seeing all
that we are, live and have, is his, and we have received it at the hand of his
goodness. The Fourth Canone. 9.
Council of Arle decrees thus; let every one offer to God the Tenth and First
fruits of all the increase of his labor, as it is written, Thou shall not be
slow to offer thy Tithes and first fruits unto God. The Council of Mentz under
Charles the Great, prescribes in this sort: Cap. 38.
We admonish and command that no man neglect to pay Tithes unto God, which
God himself appointed to be given, because it is to be feared, least as each
man shall withold from God that which is due unto him; so God for his sin
should take from him those things that are necessary, and which he would
otherwise suffer him to enjoy. Which agrees with that of Augustine in his
book of his 50. Homilies, where he says: Homil. 48.
Our Ancestors did therefore abound in wealth, and had plenty of all things,
because they gave Tithe to God, and Tribute to Caesar: Modo autem, quia
discessit deuotio Dei, accessit indictio fisci, nolumus partiri cum Deo
Decimas, modo autemtotum tollitur, hoc tollit Fiscus, quod non accipit
Christus. That is, But now because devotion gives nothing to God, the Officers
of Princes call for our Treasure, to fill their Coafers; we will not so part
and divide with God, as to give him the Tenth, and therefore all is taken from
us by men, the Exchequer seazeth on that, which Christ could have no part of.
The Council of Tribur alleges and allows the saying of the Author of the
sermons de tempore before cited, and adds these words. Canone. 13.
If any man ask why Tithes are paid, let him know that they are therefore
paid, that God being pleased with this devotion, may give more largely the
things we have need of. The persuasion of the necessity of paying Tithes,
was so deeply imprinted in the minds of our Forefathers, that when they were
ready to die, there was no account concerning things in this world, they more
carefully sought to perfect, than this; and therefore, after they had taken
order for satisfying all that they could any way find to be behind, in this
kind; they were wont, (lest happily something there might be that came not to
their mind) to appoint that the second best of those moveable things they
had, should be brought after them to the Church when they went to be buried, as
a Recompense, if in any thing they had done wrong in paying their Tithes; and
this thing thus brought after them, was named a Linwood Provincial. lib. 1. de
consuetudine.
Mortuarie.

Thus we see, the fact of Abraham, and Vow of Jacob before the giving of the
Law; the prescription of Almighty God in the time of the Law; the Resolution of
learned and worthy men, and the practice of the Church since the coming of
Christ, prove strongly, That Tithes are perpetually and for ever due; yet the
Schoolmen, and such as follow them, are of another opinion. De Clericis lib.
1. cap. 25.
Bellarmine goes about to prove that Tithes are not due by Gods law, in this
sort. They are neither prescribed in the old Law, nor in the new (says he)
therefore they are not due by Gods Law. That they are not prescribed in the new
(he says) it is clear, but proves it not. But that tithes are to be paid,
may be proved by necessary consequence out of that which is prescribed in the
new Testament. That they are not prescribed in the old, he cannot say; all the
books of the old Testament being full of Mandates, Threats, Promises, and
Encouragements to move men to pay Tithes. But he says, the precepts that are
found in the old Testament, requiring and urging men to pay Tithes, were
Judicial, not Moral and Perpetual. That they were not moral, he
endeavors to prove, because there was no Law concerning the paying Tithes
before the time of Moses. If he speak of a written Law, it is true there was
no such before Moses, neither touching Tithes, nor any thing else: but if he
speak of a Law simply, we say there was a Law before Moses, which moved
Abraham to pay Tithe; and that as (presupposing the knowledge of the Creation
of the world in six days, and Gods rest in the seventh) Reason conuinceth us,
that one day in seven must be a day of Rest from our own works, affairs,
and businesses, that we may spend it in divine thoughts, meditations, prayers,
and praises of God: So in like sort, the number of Ten, being the uttermost
extent, limit, and bound of all numbers, it being presupposed, that something
is to be given to God, out of that we possess, the very light of Reason will
make us know, that we ought not to pass the number of Ten, but that one of
ten (at the least) is to be yielded unto God out of all that we possess;
and that not the worst, (for we do not so deal with mortal Princes) but the
best, the first and principal. Which is confirmed unto us, in that the
Gentiles and people that knew not God, but by the light of Nature, and such
Traditions as they had received from the Patriarchs, did pay tithes as well as
the Jews did, and the Christians do. The proof hereof, the Reader may find
at large out of diverse Authors in a M. Carleton of Tithes.
Treatise of Tithes, written not long since, and in Comment. in Concord. Euang.
cap. 84.
Iansenius. But some man (perhaps) will say, that this confirmation is too
weak; for that many among the Gentiles were Circumcised as well as the Jews,
and that yet it follows not from thence, that Circumcision was prescribed and
imposed by the Law of Nature; so that the custom; practice, and observation of
the Gentiles paying Tithes, will not prove that it is a natural duty to pay
Tithes. But they who bring this Objection, should know, that there is a great
difference between these two Observations of the Gentiles; For the one was but
in some certain parts of the world only, and among such people as were
descended of Abraham, or by Leagues, Compacts, and Persuasions, were induced by
them to be Circumcised. But the paying, vowing, and offering of Tithes to their
supposed gods, was general amongst all the Gentiles, Romans, Grecians, and
Barbarians. Wherefore we may resolve, that the prescription of Tithe, was not
merely Judicial, and fitted to the State of the people of the Jews (as
Bellarmine out of Aquinas would have it) but that it was Natural, and from the
beginning. And surely it is worth the noting, how strangely he forgets
himself, and so runs into gross contradictions in this point. For first,
to make it seem probable, that this prescription was but merely Judicial,
he says: De Clericis, li: 1. cap. 25.
The intendment of God, in prescribing Tithe was, that there should be a
certain equality amongst the parts and Tribes of his people; and that
therefore he allotted the Tenth to the Levites, who were almost the tenth part
of his people; and yet after he says, Eod. capite, Dubio. 4.
The Levites were not the sixtieth part of the people: and proves the same out
of the first and third of Numbers. So that it cannot be imagined that the
reason of allowing this proportion to the Levites, was for that they were
little less than the tenth part of the people, that so they might have at
least as much as the rest, if not a little more: especially seeing it may
easily be proved, that the Cities and Suburbs that were allowed unto them, by
God himself, besides the First Fruits, and that part of the Sacrifices which
they had, was as much as the possessions of any Tribe, though they had had no
Tithes at all. So that the possessions of the Levites and Priests being more
than the thirteenth part of the whole land, (whereas they were not the sixtieth
part) and all the Tithes, First Fruits, and a part of the Sacrifices, being
assigned unto them besides, it is most clear and evident, the Intendement of
God in allowing Tithes unto the Levites, was not the equalling of them and the
rest. But to conclude this point, if we had neither the fact of Abraham, the
vow of Jacob, the custom of the Gentiles before CHRIST, nor any other reason
to persuade us, that Tithes are due by Gods Law; yet this very prescription in
the time of Moses Law, would prove sufficiently, that Christians must yield the
Tenth (at the least) of all their increase toward the maintenance of the
Ministers. For seeing the Ministry of the Gospel is much more glorious then
that of the Law, and the Obligation of the people unto them stronger, there can
be no doubt made, but that Christians are bound to give the Tenthe of their
increase (at the least) toward the maintenance of them that attend the service
of God: and consequently, that God has not left it to men to determine what is
a competent allowance for his servants (as some think:) which thing may easily
be proved, if any man shall make any question of it. For seeing they of Levies
Tribe had so large an allowance, whereas yet the most part of them were but
ordinary Levites, and employed in mean services, the Priests being (in
comparison) but a few, and attending but by courses once in 24 weeks: there is
far greater reason, that the Ministers of the Church that attend more holy
things, and that continually, (whose Education out of their own Patrimony
has been chargeable unto them, and whose profession of Learning and Knowledge
is such, that the very furnishing of them with Books, is a matter of great
expense) should have a more plentiful allowance made unto them than the
Levites. Neither is there any kind of Provision for Ministers fitter than this
by Tithes. For if they have their allowance in money, the prices of things
often rising, it may be too short; neither will they have so sensible a
fellowfeeling of the blessings of God, or his punishments the people taste of,
if they have their allowance certain, and no way subject to those different
courses of Times that others have. And therefore we shall find, that howsoever
in the very first Times, Christians were forced to supply the necessities of
their Ministers by other means, before things were settled; yet so soon as
there was any quiet establishment of things, they embraced this course of
providing for Ministers by Tithes, as of all other the best.

These Tithes (before there was that perfect distinction and division of
Parochial Churches that now is) they paid to the Bishop and Clergy jointly.
Whereupon we shall find, that at first, as all Lands, so all Money, Tithe,
First Fruits, and other Contributions made to the Church, were in the hands of
the Bishop and Clergy jointly, but of the Bishop principally, as more
eminent than the rest; and that he was bound to Gelas. cp. 9. ad Episc.
Lucaniae. Vide Gratian. part. 2. decreti cause 12. q. 2
divide all into four parts, whereof one served for his own maintenance,
another for the Clergy, the third for the Reparations of the buildings and
houses belonging to the Church, and a fourth for the Relief of the Poor, and
the entertainment of Strangers. And therefore at the first the Clergy was
maintained out of a common dividend, and the portion allowed to each man was
named This word imported no base but an honorable allowance.
Sportula, and they that lived by these allowances, Sportulantes. In which
sense Cyprian writing of some that he had designed to be Presbyters, has
these words: Cypr cp. 66. and 34.
Presbyterii honorem designasse nos illis iam sciatis, and ut sportulis iisdem
cum Presbyteris honorentur, and divisiones mensurnas aequatis quantitatibus
partiantur sessuri nobiscum provectis and corroboratis annis suis.

But this course continued but a while: for afterward as there was a division
of Parochial Churches, with particular assignation of several Presbyters to
take care of them; so likewise of the tithes of the increase of the lands and
possessions of such as were within those Limits, the Bishop and Clergy of the
city, or of the chief church, living in common of such lands, revenewes and
possessions as had been given to the church, and the tithes and offerings of
them that received Sacraments, and resorted ordinarily to be taught in the
Cathedral church; till in the end, as the Inhabitants of the country abroad,
so they of the Cities likewise were put to Parochial divisions, and none but
the Bishop, Clergy, and such as pertained to them, resorted ordinarily to the
Cathedral or great Church, but to other divided from it; and then was there no
more tithe paid to the Bishop and Clergy of the Cathedral or chief church,
but to the inferior Churches only, the Bishop and his Clergy, of the Mother
Church, living of such lands as were given unto them: which also in process of
time they divided. So that the Bishop had his distinct possessions, lands, and
revenues, proper to himself; and likewise they of the Cathedral Church.

So that to conclude this matter, as tithes are payable by the laws of God,
and men, for the maintenance of Gods service, and them that attend the same: so
before there was any particular division of Parochial Churches, and while each
city and the places adjoining made but one Church, they were due, and of right
to be paid, by men living within those limits, to the Bishop and Clergy
jointly, who by a joint care, were to govern and teach the people of such
places. But after Parochial Churches were divided, each man was, and is to pay
the tithes of the things he possesses, within each parish, to that particular
Presbyter that rules the same. And therefore it is an error to think as some
do, that before the council of Lateran, men might pay their tithes to what
places and persons they pleased; and that by the decrees of that Council, they
were first limited to the place of their habitation. For the thing that was
ordered in the Council of Lateran, was not the limiting of the duty of paying
tith to one certain and definite place, as if men had bin free before to pay
them to whom and where they listed, but whereas men dwelling in one place, and
having lands, livings, and possessions in another, thought they might pay the
tenth of the increase of such things as they had in other places, to the
Minister of the place where they dwelt, and of whom they received the
Sacraments: The In indice in appendicem Council. Lateranens. 3. de Pactionib.
39. and 40.
Council decreed that the Tithes of such lands, as men had lying elsewhere,
should not be paid by them, in the places of their habitation, but where the
land lies; and personal tithes in the place of their abode, where they are
partakers of the holy things of God, and not elsewhere: Then which nothing
could be more just and reasonable. Neither did the Council of Lateran alone,
take order for this matter, but the Council of Mentz cited by Part. 2. causa.
16. qu. 42. 1. c.
Gratian provides likewise, that if any man give away such places, as he had
propriety in, or other things, the tyth shall not be alienated from the
Church, it did formerly belong unto.

But that men were always bound to pay their Tithes of such things as they
possess, within the place of their habitation, to the Ministers of the same,
it may easily be proved, in that, very Ancient Councels do provide, that no
man shall pay the tithes of such things as he has within the limits of any
place, but to that Church, to which all they that inhabit there resort for
Baptism, and spiritual instruction. We decree (says) Citatus. part. 2
causa. 16. qu. 1. cap. 55.
Anastasius, Bishop of Rome, that if any man seek to withold the Oblations,
and Tithes, which the people ought to yield unto the Church, or give them away
from that Church, where they of the places, where such Tithes arise, do
usually receive the Sacrament of Baptism, to any other without the Bishops
consent, let him be accursed. It has seemed good, not only to us, but to aur
Ancestors, (says Ibid. cap. 45.
Leo the Fourth) that the people shall pay their Tithes, where they and their
children are baptized, and no where else. The Canone. 47.
Council of Worms provides, that if any man with the Bishops consent build
a new Church within his own land, the Ancient Church shall not be
prejudiced, but all accustomed Tithes shall be still paid unto it. The Habetur.
Tomo. 3. Council. apud Binnium. page 65^.
Council of Ticin says, there are certain Laymen, who having Churches or
Oratories within the compass of their own lands and possessions, pay not the
tithes to those Churches, where they are partakers of the benefit of Baptism,
Preaching, Imposition of hands, and other Sacraments of Christ: but give them
to their own Churches, or their own Clearkes, as they list: which is contrary
to the Law of God, and the sacred Canons. And therefore the Council of Cap. 13.
Mentz in the time of Arnulphus, decreed, That ^ Ancient Churches shall not be
deprived of their tithes, or other possessions, and that the things that
formerly did belong unto them, shall not be given to new Chapels, or Oratories.

The first wrong that was offered unto Churches, in depriving them of their
tithes, that prevailed, was in favor of Monks, who having their Mansion
houses within the precincts of parishes, and lands belonging to the same,
which for their provision they held in their own hands, and used for their
own benefit, rested not till they obtained of the Pope and other Bishops to
have them Tithe-free. The Council of Lateran under Alexander the Third
ordayneth, Indice in appendicem.
That religious men shall pay no Tithes out of such their lands as they tille
themselves. But if they shall rent any, they shall pay Tithe as other do: and
likewise if they let any lands out unto Contrymen to be tilled, they shall
pay Tithes out of them; yea if they shall get new lands, after their
foundation and confirmation of their Privileges, they shall pay Tithes, though
they keep them in their own hands. But this exemption of Religious men,
(though very prejudicial to the Church) staid not here, but prevailed yet
further, to the great hurt of the Church: and therefore we read, that some
sought to exempt their Farmers also from paying Tithes: which the Bishops
assembled in the Council of Cabilonens. 2. Canone 19.
Cabilon disliked, and commanded that both Bishops and Abbots should permit
their Tenants to pay Tithes in the places where they received the Sacraments:
and that they should keep the Tithes of such fields and Vineyardes, as they
held in their own occupation, to themselves. Thus we shall find that this
Monkish generation first robbed the parochial Churches, within the bounds
whereof their houses and possessions were, of a great portion of Tithes due
unto them, by their privileges and exemptions: and that after they had tasted
the sweetness of this robbery, they went forward, till they had subjected
those Ministers and their Churches to themselves, to whose Jurisdiction they
were formerly subject; And got the Tithes that others paid to parochial
Churches, to be appropriated to themselves, that at first by privilege
exempted themselves from paying Tithes; forgetting that of Saint Hier. ad
Heliodorum de laud vitae solitariae.
Hierome; Alia Monachorum est causa, alia Clericorum, Clerici pascunt oues, ego
pascor, illi de Altari vivunt, mihi quasi infructuosae arbori securis ponitur
ad radicem, si munus ad Altar non defero; nec possum obtendere paupertatem cum
in Evangelio anum viduam, duo quae sola sibi supererant era, mittentem
laudauerit Dominus, mihi ante Presbyterum sedere non licet; illi si peccauero,
licet tradere me Satanae in interitum carnis, vt Spiritus salvus sit. That is,
the condition of Monks and the condition of Cleargy-men differ very much.
Cleargy-men feed the Sheep of CHRIST, but I am fed; they live by the Altar,
but if I bring not my gift to the Altar, the Axe is laid unto me, as to an
unfruitful Tree; neither ^nne I pretend Poverty, seeing the Lord in the
Gospel, praised the Widow, that cast in two Mites, which was all that she
had; I may not sit in the presence of a Presbyter, but if I offend, he may
deliver me to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh that the spirit may be
saved.

But as these idle bellies, and evil beasts, by the favor of Popes and
Prelates, got into their hands the portion which God appointed for his servants
the Ministers of his Churches; so in the end growing odious to the world, for
that professing mortification, and a voluntary penitential course of life,
they abounded in wealth and surfetted upon pleasures, more then any secular men
in the world, they were devoured of others, who seized upon their houses, took
from them their revenues, and together with their other livings, led captive
that portion of tithes, they found in their possessions; and hold it (in sort)
as the former usurpers did, even to this day. So that we may truly pronounce,
that the Cloisters of Monks are guilty of all that horrible Sacrilege, that
has laid wast so many Churches, spoiled so many Christians of the comfort of
Godly Pastors, that otherwise they might have enjoyed; and brought the Clergy
into that mean estate, that now it is come unto. For it is not to be imagined,
that ever any Layman would once have entertained a thought of receiving
tithes, that (as consecrated things to God, and holy unto him) were to be put
into the Storehouse of his Temple, if they had not found them, (who by the
original of their order, and institution, were to pay, and not to receive
tithes) possessed of them and spending them in most vile and shameful manner.
Neither shall we ever find (as I think) that Laymen inherited this portion
of the Lord, in sort as now they do, till the suppressing of the houses of
these irreligious Monks; which were become cages of unclean Birds, and dens
of thieves and robbers. It is true indeed that De Sacris (...). minist. and
benef. l. 7. c. 1.
Duarenus has, that the right of receiving sacred tithe, Clientela titulo, was
by certain Princes, with the consent of the whole Clergy, made over to
Knights and Marshall men for defending the Church and people of CHRIST against
the enemies of Religion. But this was for the good and benefit of the Clergy,
and in their right; and not as now it is, by absolute Title of Inheritance, and
Fee-simple, or Freehold. The beginner of this kind of assignation of tithes to
Laymen for defense of the Church, was Charles Martell: as Duarenus says, and
the third Council of Laterane reversed and voydedit more then four hundred
years since.

From tithes, (which the Lord God, possessor of Heaven and earth, appropriated
to himself, as his own particular portion from the beginning, though all were
his) let us proceed to see what the devotion of men gave unto him since the
appearing of CHRIST his Son in the world. Touching which point, first we shall
find in the sacred story of the Evangelists, that many ministered unto CHRIST
out of their substance, and that he had a Bag wherein he kept the things
which the faithful ministered unto him; and out of the same supplied his own
necessities, and the wants of others, as Saint In Johan. 13.
Augustine observes. So that he did not live so as to have nothing, or to
beg, (as some here-tofore have thought) whose error Pope John the two and
twentieth long since condemned. Here was the first pattern of Church-goods,
and treasure, as Augustine notes. After the death, resurrection, and return
of CHRIST into Heaven, such was the devotion of the believers in the beginning,
that many of the^ Acts 4. 34. 35.
sold their possessions, and brought the price thereof, and laid it down at
the Apostles feet. Which communication of the goods of the first Christians,
though it extended to the benefit of all, yet was there a special respect
therein had to the Apostles; to whom they would have nothing to be wanting, and
to whose disposition all was committed. The reason why they rather sold their
possessions, and turned their lands into money, then gave them to the Apostles
for the relief and maintenance of themselves, and others, was, (as Decr. part.
2. cause. ^2. q. 1. c. 15
some think) for that the Church was soon after to be removed from those
parts, and to be dispersed amongst the Gentiles, which made them little regard
to have lands and possessions in Iudaea.

But after these times when the Christians were dispersed throughout the world,
and Churches established amongst the Gentiles, they thought it better to give
lands unto the Churches, for the maintenance of the Ministry, relief of the
Poor, and entertainment of Strangers, then money; as being a more sure,
certain, and settled Indowment, and consequently fitter forchurches
established. Of which change we may read in the epistle attributed to Ibid. c.
16
Vrbanus Bishop of Rome about the year two hundred twenty six. And though the
first course of giving all that men possessed to the common benefit, soon
ceased, and was never practiced (for ought we read) amongst the Gentiles: yet
great was the devotion of Christians, turning from Gentilisme, in those first
Ages of the Church, while the blood of CHRIST lately shed, was yet warm in
men's hearts: so that they gave many goodly and ample Indowments and Possessions
to the Church. Where-upon we shall find, that the church had very anciently
goods and lands, as well as treasure. For the council of Canon. 15.
Ancyra holden in the year 314, voydeth the sale of such things, as the church
made by Presbyters when there was no Bishop; and leaves it in the choice of
the Bishop when he is chosen, if he please, to resume the things themselves
again. The Canon. 25.
council of Antioch in the year 340, makes mention of the Fields, lands, and
possessions of the church, and takes order how they shall be disposed. Agri
Ecclesiae (says Ambrose) solvunt tributa: that is, the fields and lands of
the church pay tribute. Duaren. de sacr. eccl. min. and benef. l 2. c. r
Constantine the Emperor made a Law, that it might be lawful for such as
pleased, to leave their goods unto the church. And Ibid.
Licinia a rich and wealthy Matron, gave her goods by will unto the church of
Rome, when Marcellus was Bishop. Hilary Bishop of Arle (as Devit a
contemplativa. l. 2. c. 9.
Prosper reports) not only possessed such things as the church had formerly
but greatly increased the possessions of it, receiving the inheritances of
many, who gave that they had to the church. Thus did the devout Christians of
the Primitive church religiously give, and the godly Bishops take such
temporalties as were given unto them. And therefore the conceit of Wickliffe
(if that be true that is imputed to him) and some other, cannot well be
excused, who thought that Constantine, and other Christian Emperors sinned in
giving, and Syluester and other Bishops in receiving temporal goods and
possessions.

It is true, that great was the superfluity of Churchmen in latter times, and
their state such as made them forgette the things that most concerned them:
whence grew that saying Religiopeperit diuitias, and filia deuorauit Matrem:
That is; religion brought forth riches, and the daughter has devoured the
mother. Vol, 2. generat. 11. pa. 505.
Nauclere reports, that there was a common conceit amongst many, that when
Constantine first began to endow the Churches, with lands and possessions, a
voice was heard from Heaven saying, Hodie venenum Ecclesiae estimmissum, that
is, This day is poison powered into the Church: and in process of time,
temporal Princes (finding that the indiscreet devotion of men, giving more
then was fit to the Church, prejudiced the state of their Kingdoms, and
commonwealths) made statutes of Mortmaine, to stay men from putting any more
of their lands and possessions into such dead hands, as would do them no
service. But such is the infelicity of the sons of men, that commonly they
run out of one extremity into another: and while they seek to avoid one evil
they fall into another as bad or worse. The abuse of the riches and wealth the
Church had in the time wherein Wickliffe lived, made him so far dislike the
present state of things: that he thought the contrary would right all again:
as the manner of men is, when they goabout to straighten a thing that is
crooked, to bow it as much the other way. But De potest Eccle^ast. considerat.
^2.
Gerson, a right good religious and wise man brings in an even and just
moderation, to interpose it self between these extremities, that neither men
give so much to the Church, as to make her set her feet on the necks of
Emperors, nor yet bring her to want and contempt which has been the course
of some men in our times, the unhappy sequells of whose proceedings, we see
already in part; and it is to be feared, that posterity shall feel the smart
of it in more grievous sort then we do.

But to return to the matter whence we are a little digressed. These Lands,
which devout and good people gave unto the Church, were at first possessed
jointly by the Bishop and Clergy: but in process of time, a division was made
and either knew distinctly their own, and had power to dispose of it; so that
they did nothing prejudicial to the inheritance of their Churches, or tending
to the hurt of them that were to succeed them. For (to restrain them from
doing any such thing) the Bishop was forbidden by the laws of the Church, to
let any thing belonging to his See, without the confirmation of his Clergy,
and the Ministers abroad, to alienate, exchange, or demise any thing without
the consent of the Bishop, and Patrons, or founders of the Churches. Otherwise,
both the Bishop might dispose of himself alone, of that portion that belonged
unto him, and the Ministers of their Tithes, Oblations, Obuentions, and
Glebe-landes, without the Bishops intermedling with them. Only three things
were due to the Bishop out of the livings of inferior Ministers. For first, as
De sacris Eccles. minist. and Benef. lib. 7. cap. 5.
Duarenus notes, the Ministers of inferior Churches, were to give yearly a
certain tribute or pension unto the Bishop; which Tribute or Pension was
called Cathedraticum, quod Cathedrae, id est honori Episcopali, debeatur.
Secondly, when the Bishop goes to visit his Diocese, and the parishes
abroad, the inferior Ministers are to give him entertainment, and provide for
him: which is called Procuratio; Quia Ecclesiae Episcopum procurant, (...).
curant, alunt and tuentur, sicut pueri dicuntur procurari a nutricibus: That
is, Procurations, because the Churches abroad, must take care, provide and
procure, all things necessary for the Bishops lodging, diet and entertainment.
But because in these visitations some Bishops grew too chargeable, therefore
the Council of Sub. Alexand. 3. cap. 4.
Lateran limiteth what company a Bishop shall have with him, when he goes to
visit. Thirdly, in former times, the fourth part of the Tithes due to inferior
Churches, and the fourth part of such things, as by Will men gave to them, was
by the Ministers of these Churches, to be paid unto the Bishop, which thing is
now grown out of use. Neither is there any other thing payable, and due to the
Bishop, from inferior Ministers, but Procurations only.

Thus were Church Lands, and tithes, (which at first were enjoyed by the Bishop
and Clergy jointly) in time divided, and either of them had an entire power to
dispose of the same, as seemed good unto the^, without the intermedling of the
other: yet was there a difference made between such things as they had by
right of inheritance or by the gift of their friends, and those things which
they gained and gathered upon their Ecclesiastical livings. For sundry Canons
provided, that Bishops and other Cleargy-men, might make their last Will and
Testament, and give to whom they pleased, that which came to them by
inheritance, the gift of their friends, or which they gained upon the same.
But that which they gained upon their Church-liuings, they should leave to
their Churches. But the Church of England, had a different custom: neither
were these Canons ever of force in our Church: And therefore, her Bishops and
Ministers might ever at their pleasure bequeath to whom they would, whatsoever
they had gained, either upon their Church livings, or otherwise. And surely
there was great reason it should be so, for seeing, The labourer is worthy of
his hire, why should not they have power to give that which was yielded unto
them as due recompense and reward of their labors, to whom they please. And
how can it be excused from injustice and wrong, that men (spending a great
part of their own Patrimony, in fitting themselves for the Ministry of the
Church, which converted to the best advantage and benefitte, might greatly have
enriched them) should not have right and power to dispose of such things, as
they have lawfully gained, out of those livings which are assigned to the^, as
the due reward of their worthy pains? Yet are there some* that are much more
injurious to the holy Ministry. For Doctr. fideili. 4. art. 3. cap. 42.
Waldensis out of a Monkish humor, thinks that Cleargy-men are bound to give
away, whatsoever comes to the^, by inheritan ce, or by any other means; and
that they ought not to possess any thing in private, and as their own. And
alleges to this purpose the saying of Origin, Hierome, and Bernard: that the
Cleargy-man that has any part or portion on earth, cannot have the Lord for
his portion, nor any part in heaven. But Cardinal De Clericis. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Bellarmine answers to these authorities, That these Fathers speak of such
as content not themselves with that which is sufficient, but immoderately seek
the things of this world; and proves, that Cleargy-men may have, and keep
lands and possessions as their own. First because the Apostle prescribes that
such a one should be chosena Bishop 1. Tim. 3. 4.
As governs his own house well, and has children in Obedience; which
presupposes that he has something in private, and that is his own. Secondly,
he cofirmeth the same, by the Can. 40.
Canons of the Apostles, the Council of Can. 48.
Agatha, Martinus Bracharensis in his Canon. 15.
Decrees, and the first Council of Canon. 1.
Hispalis; and further adds, that a man having Lands, Possessions and
Inheritance of his own, may spare his own living, and receive maintenance
from the Church: for proof whereof he alleges the Gloss, and John de In
cap. Clericos. 1. qu. 2.
Turrecremata, a Cardinal in his time of great esteem; and confirms the
same by that saying of Christ, Math. 10. 10.
The Labourer is worthy of his hyre: and that of the Apostle Saint Paul, 1.
Cor. 9. 7.
Who goes to warfare at any time, at his own charge?

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX CONTAINING A DEFENSE OF SVCH PARTS AND PASSAGES OF THE FORMER
four books, as have bin either excepted against, or wrested to the
maintenance of Romish errors.

Divided into three parts.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
SINCE the time I presumed (good Christian Reader) to offer to thy view, what I
had long before for my private satisfaction observed touching certain points,
concerning the nature, definition, notes, visibility, and authority of the
Church much questioned in our times: first there came forth a Pamphlet;
entitled; The first part of Protestant proofs for Catholic Religion and
recusancie: After that a larger discourse bearing the name of, A Treatise of
the grounds of the old and new religion: and thirdly, the first motive of one
Theophilus Higgons, lately minister, to suspect the integrity of his Religion.
The Author of the first of these worthy works, undertakes to prove out of the
writings of Protestant Divines, published since the beginning of his Majesty's
reign over this Kingdom, that his Romish faith and profession is Catholic.
The second endeavors to make the world believe, that Protestants have no
sure grounds of Religion. And the third, having made shipwreck of the faith,
and forsaken his calling, labors to justify and make good that he has
done. Every of these has been pleased for the advantage of the Romish cause,
amonst the Works of many worthy men, to make use of that which I have written;
the first seeking to draw me into the defense of that he knows I impugn:
and the other two taking exceptions to certain parts and passages scattered
here and there. Such is the insufficiency and weakness of the idle and
empty discourses of these men, that I almost resolved to take no notice of
them: But finding that the last of these good Authors fronteth his book with
an odious title of Detection of falsehood in Doctor Humfrey, Doctor Field, and
other learned Protestants, and adds an Appendix, wherein he undertakes to
discover some notable untruths of Doctor Field, and D. Morton, pretending
that the consideration thereof moved him to be come a Papist; I thought it not
amiss to take a little pains in showing the folly of these vain men, who
care not what they write so they write something; and are in hope, that no man
will trouble himself, so much as once to examine what they say: yet not
intending to answer all that every of these has said (for who would mispend
his time, and weary himself in so fruitless a labor?) but that which
concerns my self, against whom they bend themselves in more special sort,
then any other; as it seems because I have treatised as Master Higgons
speaks, of that subject, which is the center and circumference in all
religious disputes. And because Mr Higgons is pleased to let us know his name,
whereas the other co^ceale theirs (it being no small comfort for a man to know
his Adversary) I will do him all the kindness I can, and first begin with him,
though he showed himself last, and from him proceed to the rest. What it is
that makes him so much offended with me, I cannot tell; but sure it is, he
has a good will to offend me: for he charge me with trifeling, egregious
falsehood, collusion, unfaithful dealing, abusing the holy Fathers, and I know
not what else. But such is the shameless, and apparent untruth of these
horrible imputations, that it is altogether needelesse to spend time, and
bestow labor in the refutation of them. Yet because in the suspicion of
heresy, falsehood and vfaithfull dealing in matters of faith, and religion, no
man ought to be patient; I will briefly take a view of his whole book. And
though his beginning be abrupt, and absurd, his whole discourse confused, and
perplexed, and all that he does, without order, or method; yet to give
satisfaction to all, I will follow him the same way he goes. I was unwilling
(good Christian Reader) to trouble thee with such discourses; but the restless
importunity of our adversaries, setting every one a work to say something
against us, forces me thereunto. Read without partiality, and Judge between
us, as God shall direct thee.

THE FIRST PART, Containing a discovery of the vanity of such silly exceptions
as have been taken against the former four Books, by one Theophilus Higgons.
. 1.
THE first exception Master Higgons is pleased to take against me, is, that in
all my four Books I have not graced any Father with the glorious title of
Saint: his words are these. Page 4*
I am bold to entreat D Feildes leave to honor Augustine with the name of
Saint, howsoever he has not once vouchsafed in his four Books to grace him
or any Father with this glorious title. It is strange that such a novice as he
is, should dare to begin in so scornful a manner, with so shameless an
untruth, as if he had been anold practitioner in the faculty of lying; but his
desire (it seems) was to give as good proof at first as possibly he might,
of the good service he is like to do, if his new Masters will be pleased to
make use of him, and employ him as they do others. For otherwise he could not
but know he might easily be convinced of a lie; for I have given the title of
Saint to Augustine, that worthy and renowned Father, more then once, twice, or
thrice; and I call Leo, blessed Leo, and so give him a title aequivalent to
that of Saint, and more often found in the writings of the Ancient. If happily
it offend him, that every time I name any Father, I give him not the title of
Saint, let him take the pains to peruse the writings of Alexander of Hales,
Tho. Aquinas, Scotus, Durandus, Waldensis, Sixtus Senensis, and other of that
sort, and I doubt not but he will soon perceive his folly, and cease to be
angry with me any longer, unless he be resolved to condemn them also. This
surely is a childish and a bad beginning, and may make us justly fear he will
perform little in that which follows.

. 2.
THat which he has in the next place, that Page 12. and. 13
D Humphrey, and I, admit try all by the Fathers, is true, but to no purpose;
for he and his consorts know right well, that the Fathers make nothing for
them, and therefore they are soon weary of this course of trial, as often as
they are brought to it, as it appeared by Hardinges writing against Bishop
Jewel. For whereas the challenge was made by that worthy Bishop, to try the
matter of difference between the Romanists and us, not only by discourse of
reason, or testimonies of Scripture, wherein all the world kn^w our Adversaries
to be too weak; but by authorities of the Ancient, wherein they were thought
to have more strength. And whereas to that purpose he brought out against them
all the renowned Fathers, and Bishops that lined in ancient times, the
decrees of Councels then holden, and the report of Historians: Harding could
find none to speak for him, but Martialis, Abdias, Amphilochius, and such
branded counterfeits, nor no other proofs of his cause, but the feigned
Epistles of the ancient Popes, and shameless forgeries under the honorable
names of holy Fathers, with other-like base stuff. The thing that offends
Master Higgons in Doctor Humphrey, is, that he says the Romanistes are like
Thrasilaus, who, in a mad humor, took all the ships in the Atticke haven
to be his own, though he possessed not one vessel: or rather makes the
degree of their frenzy greater, because they see, and yet seeing dissemble,
that they are destitute of all defense from the Fathers. Which saying of the
worthy and renowned Doctor, is most true, and shall be defended against a
far better man, then Theophilus Higgons, though childishly he charge him
with Notable, and vast untruth in this behalf. Neither shall he, nor any of
his great Masters ever prove, that I have untruly alleged the cause why
Luther, Zuinglius, and other, at the first seemed to decline the trial by the
Fathers: for the true cause was indeed, as I have alleged, the fear of the
corruptions of the Fathers works, and writings; and not any imagination, that
the Fathers generally from the beginning were in error: which is so barbarous
a conceit, that it cannot enter into the heart of any reasonable man. Neither
was it any folly in them (as this wise man is pleased to censure the matter) to
decline the trial by the Fathers in those times after barbarism,
superstition, and tyranny had so long prevayled, and almost laid waste all
learning, religion, and liberty of the Church, seeing Vincentius Lyrinensis
prescribes, that after Heresies have long prevailed, and grown inueterate,
we Contra profanas hae^corum nouitat^s.
should fly to the Scriptures alone.

SECT. 3.
IN the third place (he says) Page 14. and 15.
He was desirous to understand, why, amongst other particulars, I should
esteem it a folly, and inconstancy in the Romanistes to say that Purgatory is
holden by Tradition and yet proved by Scripture. Which argues, that the man is
either very weak in understanding, or else makes himself more simple, then
indeed he is. For having showed, that the name of Tradition, sometime
signifies every part of Christian Doctrine, delivered from one to another,
either by lively voice only, or by writing: sometimes such parts there of
only, as were not written by them, to whom they were first delivered; and that
our Adversaries, so understand the word in the controversies between them, and
us. I note it as a contradiction amongst Papists, that some of them say,
Purgatory is holden by Tradition, in that latter sense, and other, that it is
proved by Scripture: as likewise that some of them allege for proof of
unwritten Traditions the article of the consubstantiality of the Son of God
with the Father, and the proceeding of the holy Ghost from them both; and
others constantly affirm that those Articles may be proved out of Scripture.
Now if to be written, and not to be written, to be holden by unwritten
Tradition, or Tradition opposite to writing, and to be proved out of
Scripture, be not contradictory in Master Higgons his apprehension; it is no
great matter of what side he be.

4.
IN the Fourth place he says: Page 17. and 18.
I accept the rule of Saint Augustine, that whatsoever is frequented by the
universal Church, and was not instituted by Councels; but was always holden,
that is believed most rightly to be an Apostolical tradition. And that
liberally I add, that whatsoever all, or the most famous and renowned in all
ages, (or at the least is diverse ages) have constantly delivered, as received
from them that went before them, no man doubting, or contradicting it, may be
thought to be an Apostolical tradition. Whence he thinks he may conclude
ineuitably by my allowance, that prayer for the dead may be thought to be an
Apostolical tradition, many famous and renowned Fathers in diverse ages
mentioning prayer for the dead, and none disliking or reproving it. For answer
whereunto I say; that prayer for the resurrection, public acquittall in the
day of Judgment, and perfect consummation, and bliss of them that are fallen
asleep, in the sleep of death, is an Apostolical tradition, and so proved by
the rule of Saint Augustine, and that other added by me; as likewise prayer
made respectively to the passage hence, and entrance into the other World: and
hereof there is no controversy between us, and our Adversaries. But prayer to
ease, mittigate, suspend, or wholly take away the pains of any of them that are
in hell, or to deliver men out of the supposed Purgatory of Papists, has no
proof from either of these rules, as shall appear by that which follows:
and therefore, this poor nouice has not yet learned his lesson aright, nor
knows what it is he is to prove. But if he will be content to be informed by
me, the thing he must prove (if he desire to gratify his new masters, and to
maintain the Romish cause) is, that all the Fathers, or the most famous
amongst them, from the beginning of Christianity, did in the several Ages
wherein they lived, teach men to pray for the deliverance of their friends and
brethren out of the pains of purgatory; which if he will undertake to do,
he must bring some better proofs, then such as are taken from the mutual
dependence and conjunction of Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, which yet
principally he seems to urge. For many Catholic Christians (whom this
Gentleman must not condemn) made prayers for such, as they never deemed to be
in Purgatory. Neither did the ancient Catholic Church (as he fondly
imagines) in her prayers, and oblations for the dead, intend to relieve souls
temporally afflicted in a penal estate; but in her general intention
(whatsoever private conceits particular men had) desired only the
resurrection, public acquitall, and perfect consummation, and blessedness of
the departed, and respectively to the passage hence, and entrance into the
other world, the utter deletion, and full remission of their sins, the
perfect purging out of sin, being in, or immediately upon the dissolution in
the last instant of this life, and the first of the next, and not while the
soul and body remain conjoined. This is strongly proved, because the most
ancient amongst the Fathers, make but two sorts of men dying, and departing
out of this world, the one sinners, the other righteous; the one profane, the
other holy: so Dionysius in his Hierarchy; so Epiphanius against Aerius; so
Ambrose in his book De bono mortis: and Cyrill of Jerusalem in his
Catechism; and all of them teach, that the souls of the Just are in a
joyful, happy, and good estate, and present with God in an excellent sort,
immediately upon their dissolution ^nima^ departure hence. Ecclesiast. Hierarch.
c. 7. patt 1.
Obdormitio sanctorum (says Dionysius) est in laetitia, and spe immobili, quia
peruenerunt ad finem certaminum, and norunt se totos percepturos Christi-formem
requiem: that is, The falling a sleep of the holy ones, is in joy and
gladness, and immovable hope, because they are come to the end of their
combats; and again, they know they shall altogether be partakers of the rest
of Christ, being come to the end and bound of this life: so that they are
filled with holy joy and gladness, and with great delight and pleasure, enter
the way of the most happy regeneration. Whereupon the friends, and kinsmen of
any faithful man departed, when they carry him to his bed of rest, pronounce
him blessed, as indeed he is, having obtained the wished end of victory; and
send forth Hymns of gratulation to GOD, that has made him a conqueror, and
praying that they also may be admitted into the like rest, carry him to the
Bishop to be crowned with garlandes, who Eodem cap. part. 3.
prayseth the departed as being in a most happy condition; and amongst other,
the party presently dead as being a companion of Saints, and partaker of like
happiness with them. After this his body is laid up with other already fallen
a sleep in the Lord; comfortable places of Scripture are read, touching the
resurrection, and blessed hope of the just; and the Bishop prays GGD to
forgive unto him all his sins committed through humane infirmity, and to
place him in the land of the living in the bosoms of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
Thus does Dionysius teach, that the souls of all faithful ones are at rest
with GOD immediately upon their departure hence; and yet shows, that the
Bishop was wont to pray for the departed at the time he was brought to his
bed of rest; which things seeming not well to agree together; he demands
what good the prayer of the Bishop does the dead; seeing every one shall
receive the rewards of the things he did in this life, whether good, or bad;
and prayers have no force to put any man after death, into any other estate
then that he is worthy of, when he dies. Whereunto he answers, that by
desiring and wishing that good to the departed which GOD has promised, and of
his mercy undoubtedly will do unto them, he accompanies them to the presence
of GOD, and the place of rest which he has appointed for them; solemnly
convaying them thither with his desires, and as having the power of binding and
loosing, and discerning between the holy and profane, separateth in a sort
(by the solemn good wishes he sends after them) such as GOD has adjudged
to eternal happiness, from other not partakers of like precious hope with
them: admitting the one (as dear unto GOD) by way of declaration, and convoy,
into their resting place, and rejecting the other. So that the prayers
Dionysius speaks of; were made respectively to the departure hence, and first
entrance into the other world, and were nothing else, but an acco^panying of
the faithful departed to the Throne of God, with desire of that utter deletion
of sin, and full remission of the same, which is not to be found but in the
dissolution of soul and body, and in the first entrance into the other world;
but of any relieuing men temporally afflicted in a penal estate after this
life, he never dreamed. In fide lib. 5.
Irenaeus is of opinion, that the souls of the faithful go into a certain
invisible place, and are there stayed till the Resurrection: but of Purgatory
(as In argumento lib. (...).
Erasmus notes) he makes no mention. In respons. ad quaest. Orthod. quaest.
7.
Iustine Martyr teaches, that after the departure out of the body, there is
presently a separation made between the souls of the just, and the unjust,
and that they are carried into places worthy of them, and fit for them: that
is to say, the souls of the just into Paradise, where they enjoy the company
of Angels and Archangels, as also the sight of our Savior JESUS CHRIST: but
those of the unjust and wicked, into infernal places. De Trinit. in initio.
Tertullian says, There is a place whether the souls of good and evil men
are carried, and where they have a kind of fore-judging and discerning of that
which shall be adjudged to them in the last judgment. And Lib. de (...) cap.
33. and 34.
again he says, That every soul immediately upon the departure hence, is in
this appointed invisible place, having there either pain, or ease, and
refreshing: that there the rich man is in pain, and the poor in a comfortable
estate: for, says he, why should we not think, that the souls are
tormented, or refreshed in this invisible place appointed for them in
expectation of the future Judgment? In quadam vsurpatione and candida eius.
The Judgment doubtless is begun there: So that neither is good altogether
wanting to the innocent, nor the sense and freling of evil to the nocent.
Here we see Tertullian makes but two sorts of men departing hence: and that
he thinks, that presently after their departure hence, the good are in a
kind of imperfect possession or enjoying of that good they look for
hereafter: and the evil and wicked in a kind of state wherein they already
begin to taste of those everlasting miseries that shall swallowe them up,
in the day of judgment. So that according to his opinion, there is no
Purgatory nor state of temporal pain and affliction after this life, out of
which there is hope of escape or deliverance. Gregory Nazianzen in his Oration
made in the praise of Caesarius after many comforts against the sorrows
conceived for the loss of so worthy a man: adds this as the chiefest of all
other. Verbis sapientum adducor vt credam generosam omnem, Deoque charam
animam; posteaquam corporis vinculis soluta hinc excesserit, protinus, bonum
quod eam manet, persentientem, and contemplantem, (vtpote eo quod mentem
caligine obducebat, vel purgato, vel abiecto, vel quo verbo ears appellanda
sit nescio) mirabili quadam voluptate affici, and exultare, atque hac vita
veluti gra^issimo quodam ergastulo relicta, excussisque compedibus, quibus
animi penna deprimi solebat, hilarem ad Dominum suum conuolare, beatitudinem
recondita Imaginatione quadam iam percipere. That is, I am induced and inoued
by the sayings of the wise to believe, that every generous soul, and such as
is beloved of GOD, presently after the loosing from the bonds of the body, and
departure hence, (that which darkened the mind, being either purged out, or
cast from it, or done away in what sort I cannot well express) begins
sensibly to discern and behold that good, which remains for it, to be
filled with wonderful delights, and to leap for joy: and that leaving this
life as a most grievous prison, and having cast off those fetters, that
depressed and held her down, desiring to mount upon high with her silver
wings, she flies joy fully to her Lord and presently in a certain
apprehension, begins to taste of that hidden happiness, that shall be
revealed. Haeres. 75.
Epiphanius speaking of the Godly departed, remembered in the prayers of the
Church, says, they are and live with God. De bono mortis cap. 10. 11.
Ambrose is more full to this purpose then any of the former, for in his book
de bono mortis, first he says, all souls remain in certain habitations till
the day of Judgment, whence they shall be called forth in that great day of
resurrection. Secondly, that till the fullness of time appointed, they all are
holden in an expectation of the reward due unto them, and are not in full
possession of it. Thirdly, that in the mean time neither the souls of the
wicked are without some present sense of evil, nor the other without some
enjoying of good. The joy of the good and righteous he shows to be in
respect of the victory which they have obtained over the flesh, the divine
testimony which they have in their consciences of their former walking in the
ways of God, making them not to fear the future judgment: their escape out of
the prison of the body of death, the liberty they are come to, and the
possessing of the promised inheritance etc. Hear we see plainly, that Ambrose
makes but two sorts of men, two sorts of souls separated from the body, and
two estates, assuring us that all good faithfull-ones ordained to eternal life
are presently after their separation in a state of happiness, boldly hastening
to the view and and sight of that God whom they have so carefully served, to
which purpose he alleges that of the Prophet to the Angel: shall there be
given a time to souls after they are separated that they may see the thing
thou have spoken of? and the Angels answer. Seven days shall their liberty
Esdr. 4.
endure, that in those seven days they may see the things, that have been
spoken, and after they shall be gathered into their dwelling places: out of
which (as I noted before) he thinks they shall not be called till the
resurrection, so that according to the opinion of Saint Ambrose there is no
place of temporal pain and punishment after this life appointed for the
souls of men dying in state of Grace.

Neither was this the opinion of Dionysius, Irenaeus, Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, Nazianzen, Epiphanius and Ambrose only, but all the ancient were
of the same judgment, touching the state of the faithful departed: and
therefore never any of them made any prayers for the delivering of them out of
temporal pain and punishment; but as it has been before observed, they made
prayers for them respectively to their passage out of this world, and the
entrance into the other; as also for their resurrection, public acquitall in
the day of judgment, and perfect consummation. This the Masse-booke and all the
prayers that are found in any ancient books of Ecclesiastical prayers, do
clearly show. George Cassander has published a book of Ecclesiastical
prayers, gathered out of the old Liturgies and Books of divine service that
he could meet with: amongst which there are many, pro commendatione animae:
some few of them I will produce for example. The first. We beseech thy
clemency, O God, mercifully to receive the soul of thy servant, returning unto
thee; Let Michaell the Angel of thy covenant be present with it, and vouchsafe
to place it amongst thy Saints and holy ones in the bosom of Abraham, Isaacke,
and Jacob, that being freed and delivered from the Princes of darkness, and
the places of punishment, he may be confounded with no errors of his first
birth, of ignorance, or of his own iniquity, and frailty, but that rather he
may be acknowledged of thine, and enjoy the rest of holy blessedness, and
that when the day of the great Judgment shall come, being raised up amongst thy
Saints and chosen ones, he may be satisfied with the glory of the clear
beholding of thee. The 2d* Vouchsafe O Lord to give to thy servant a lightsome
place. a place of refreshing, and quiet; Let him pass by the gates of hell, and
the punishments of darkness; let him remain in the mansions of the Saints,
and in holy light, which of old thou promisedst to Abraham, and to his seed:
let his spirit sustain no hurt; but when the great day of resurrection and
reward shall come, vouchsafe to raise him, together with thy Saints and chosen
ones: blot out and do away his sins even to the uttermost farthing, and let
him attain the life of immortality with thee. The 3^; Receive the soul of thy
servant which thou leadest out of the dirty and miry gulf of this world, to
the heavenly country: receive it into the bosom of Abraham. be-dew it with the
dew of refreshing: and let it be kept apart from the cruel burning of the
fiery and flaming hell. The 4^: Grant that thy servant may escape the place of
punishment, the fire of hell, and the flames af the lowest gulf. The like may
be showed in the rest, for they are all framed to the same purpose, forth
escaping of hell, the power of the Prince of darkness, and the devouring gulf of
eternal condemnation: al which things, in the judgment of our Adversaries
themselves, are granted unto men dying in the faith of Christ, and state of
grace, in the very entrance into the other world, and the first instant of the
next life: so that all the prayers that we find in the ancient, were made
respectively to the passing hence and entrance into the other world, with
desire of the Resurrection, and perfect consummation which we expect in the
last day: and because this passage is often past, and they that are departed,
already entered into their rest, before their friends whom they leave behind
them, can send so many good wishes after them as they desire; it was an
ordinary thing with the Ancient, in their prayers to acknowledge and profess
they were persuaded the thing was already granted and performed, which they
desired: and to beseech GOD notwithstanding, to accept their voluntary
devotions, and good affections. In this sort Confess. lib. 9. cap. 13.
Augustine prays for Monica, his Mother, That God will keep her from the
powers and Princes of darkness, and remit her sins: And yet says, He
believes it is already done that he asks. So Vbi supra.
Nazianzen professes his assured persuasion, that Caesarius is with God, and
yet commends him to God. And the like we find in Tomo. 3. in orat. de obitu
Valentiniani.
Ambrose touching Valentinian. By all which it is evident, that the Ancient
prayed not to deliver the departed out of Purgatory, or any estate of
temporal affliction; but on their obite days, acknowledged the goodness of
God toward them, preventing all desires of men, declared their readiness to
entreat for them, if they were in need or danger, and not past before they
could send their good wishes after them, and expressed their desires of the
perfecting and accomplishing of all that which is yet wanting to them. And as
the Ancient were wont to pray for their brethren and friends on the days of
their obites, and the deposition of their bodies, respectively to their passage
hence, and the escaping of the dangers of hell, and eternal death in the
same: so in like sort Bellarm. de Purgato^io. lib 2. cap. 5.
in process of time, in those days wherein their obites were remembered and by
return of times represented to them, they used the same form of prayer
again, as if they had been but even then in the passage hence, and in danger
of hell, and the powers of darkness. But as on the days of the birth,
circumcision, apparition, passion, resurrection, and ascension of Christ, (for
so we call the days answering to these, and representing them to us, signs
and remembrances, carrying the names of the things themselves,) men so speak,
asif God did then send his Son into the world to be borne of a woman, to be
made under the Law, to suffer, overcome, and triumph over death, and by
ascending into Heaven, to take possession thereof for us: and yet mean not (as
the words may seem to import) that Christ does newly take flesh, and is borne
of the Virgin, etc. But that he is borne unto us, and we made partakers of the
benefits of his birth circumcision, passion, etc. So in the days wherein they
remembered the obites of their brethren and friends as then present, and prayed
for them as then in passage hence, and in danger to be swallowed up of hell and
destruction; they desired not that which the words may seem to import, (for
that was granted to them on their dying days, or else they are incapable of it
for ever:) but that which is yet wanting to them. In which sense the words of
that prayer in the Masse-booke must be understood: Offic. pro defunctis in
Anni-uersarijs.
Lord Jesus, King of glory, deliver the souls of all faithful ones departed,
from the hand of hell, and from the deep lake: deliver them from the mouth of
the Lion, that the lowest hell swallow them not up, and that they fall not into
the dungeons of utter darkness: but let thy Standard Bearer, holy Michael,
present them into the place of holy Light, which of old thou did promise to
Abraham and to his seed. For these dangers of falling into the deep lake, the
mouth of the Lion, the dungeons of utter darkness, and being swallowed up of
the lowest Hell, the dead in Christ escaped in the day and time of their
dissolution: neither is there any thing to be wished farther unto them in this
behalf, but that public acquitall, and full and perfect escape in the day of
Judgment, according to that other prayer found in the Missall: Vbi supra.
O gracious God, which calledst back the first man to eternal glory; O good
shepherd, which broughtest back the lost sheep upon thy shoulder to the
fold; Righteous Judge, when thou shall come to Judge, deliver from death the
souls of them whom thou have redeemed: Deliver not the souls of them which
confess unto thee, unto the beasts, forsake them not for ever. In all these
prayers there is no word of petition for the deliverance of the dead out of any
pains or punishments, but for their escaping, avoiding, declining, and not
falling into hell, eternal condemnation, the power of Satan, and the mouth of
the Lion.

It is true, that some long since began to pray to deliver men out of pains
and punishments; or to suspend, mitigate, and ease their pains: but in such
sort, as the Romanists dare not pray. It was an opinion of many,
whootherwisewere right believers, that all Christians professing the truth in
Christ, how ill soever they live, shall be saved in the end. Frustra nonnulli
(says S. Augustine) immo quamplurimi, aeternam damnatoru^ poenam, r Aug. in
Ench. ad Laur. c. 111.
and cruciatus sine intermissione perpetuos, humano miserantur affectu: atque
ita futurumesse non credunt: that is; there are some, nay, there are exceeding
many, who out of an humane affection commiserate the eternal punishments of
the damned, and their torments that are without ceasing: these men thought the
sayings of CHRIST and his Apostles concerning the eternal punishments of the
wicked, were uttered rather minaciter, then veraciter: and that they rather
show what men according to their deserving should suffer, then what indeed
they shall suffer. Hence it came, that many did pray for the deliverance of men
out of hell, that died in mortal sin. This opinion De dormientibus.
Damascene followed, and whereas the Prophet asks, Who shall confess unto
thee O Lord in hell? he answers, that the threats of the Judge are terrible,
but his unspeakable mercy exceeds all: and is of opinion, that Christ when he
went down to hell, delivered such as had lived honestly; though without the
knowledge of God, preaching unto them, and persuading them to believe in him:
which he says, is not to contradict the Prophet, but to show that God is
overcome of his mercy, as he was in the case of the inhabitants of Niniue,
Ezechias, and Achab, to whom that was threatened, which yet mercy staide that it
should not be executed. This mercy he thinks shall prevail and overcome,
till the time of retribution come, and the time of negotiation be past; so that
till the day of Judgment, we may help them that are in hell, but that
afterward there shall be no place left for the relieuing of any there; or the
delivering of any thence. The same Vbi supra.
Damascene teaches, that all men when they depart hence, are weighed in the
balance, and that if their well-doings and virtues in the right skale* weigh
down the other, they shall be brought into a place of refreshing: that if the
skales be equal, mercy carries it; if the evil doings in the left skale be
too heavy, mercy supplyeth that which is wanting to the weight of the right
skale: yea, that though their evil doings do much exceed their virtues; when
they are waighed, yet the exceeding goodness and mercy of GOD shall sway the
matter for their good: and pronounces, that in whomsoever any conscience of
good at any time appeared, GOD will stir up the hearts of men to pray for
them, that they may be delivered, and that none shall perish everlastingly, but
such as lived so vilely, that no man sends a good wish after them when they
are gone. Hereupon he brings forth sundry examples of men delivered out of
the hell of the damned by the prayers of the living: for first, he says, that
all the East and West know, that Gregory the Great, prayed for Traian an
Infidel, and a persecutor of Christians in the time wherein he lived, almost
five hundred years after his death, moved so to do, by the consideration of
some virtues that were in him: and received this comfortable answer from God,
I have heard thy prayers, and do pardon Traian, but see hereafter thou offer
no more sacrifice unto me for any godless, unbelieving, and profane person.
Secondly, he reports that Tecla the Protomartyr, by the prayers which she
powered forth to God while she lived, delivered Falconilla out of hell, who was
a worshipper of Idols, and averse from Christian religion as long as she lived.
Another Tale he tells of a dissolute man, continuing in a wicked course of
life even till his end: who appeared to a good Father after his death, in
flaming fire, first up to the neck, afterward upon the prayers that were made
for him, up to the girdle only: so finding ease and deliverance out of his
torments. This opinion was very prevailing in Augustines time, and therefore
with all modesty he opposes himself against it, and shows himself willing
to yield as much to them that were so minded, as possibly he might; and says,
Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 67.
if they would only have the pains of the damned to be mitigated, or wholly
suspended till the day of judgment, and acknowledge them to be eternal, he
would not greatly strive with them. Upon this conceit of the mitigation or
suspension of the pains of such as are in hell, many in former times made
prayers for the damned in hell. Vbi supra.
Damascene reports, out of the sacred history of Palladius to Lausus, that
Macharius the Great, praying oftentimes for the dead, and carefully seeking to
know, whether his prayers did help or profit them any thing or not, a certain
dry skull of a dead man, who had been an Idolater, which by chance lay in the
way, by the commandment of God, brake forth into the lively voice of a man,
saying: O Macharius, when thou offerest up thy prayers for the dead, we for
the time find some ease. Sixtus Sen^sis Bilioth. Sanctae. lib. 6. annotat. 47.
Praepositi^us Presbyter of the Church of Leoden, was of opinion, that prayers
for the damned may be multiplied in such sort, that in process of time they
may be freed from all pain and punishment, though not perpetually, as Origin
thought: yet till the time of the general resurrection, at what time (their
bodies resumed) they shall be cast into everlasting punishments, without all
hope of any refreshing or comfort. Ibid.
Gilbertus Pictauiensis supposed, that there is something continually taken
away from the pains of the damned, by the prayers and oblations of the
faithful, without any consumption of them, or utter taking of them away: as
infinite proportionable parts may be taken from a Line, without consuming of
it, though it self be finite. Ibld.
Gulielmus Antisiodorensis thinks, that prayers be available and helpefull
to the damned, not to diminish or interrupt rheir torments, but to strengthen
the sufferers, that so the burden, that lies on them, may be borne by them
with the less pain: as, if a man give meat to him that is ready to faint
under his burden, or wine that cheereth his heart, he makes him the better
able to bear it, though he no whit diminish the weight of it.

Thus we see, there is no such Book 1. part, 1. Chap. 4. Sect. 3.
mutual dependence and connection of Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, as
Theophilus Higgons childishly imagines: and that many prayed for the dead,
that never dreamed of Purgatory, some praying only for the resurrection,
public acquitall, and perfect consummation of the dead, and respectively to
their passage hence, and entrance into the other world, for the remission of
their sins, and their escaping of hell, and everlasting destruction: other,
out of an erroneous conceit, for the deliverance of men dead in mortal sin,
out of the hell of the damned, or for mitigation of their pains, or at least,
the suspension of them for a time, as Damascene and sundry others before
mentioned: and therefore the poor nouice is to be put in mind, that he
grossly abuses himself, and others, when so sadly he cites Saint John Page
59.
Damascen, for proof of the deliverance of men out of purgatory, that speaks
no word of any such thing, but of the deliverance out of hell, or the
mitigation of the pains of them that be there; which he should not do that
talks of nothing but falsehood, notable untruths and collusion in our
writers, especially seeing De Purgato. rio. lib. 2. c. 8.
Bellarmines grace tells him, that the author of the book under the name of
Damascen, writes so absurdly, that we may assure our selves Damascen was not
the author of i^ Having thus out of the writings of the Fathers delivered the
sense and purpose of the ancient Church in praying for the dead, it is strange
that this shameless companion should charge me Page 31.
with collusion, there being no part of that I have said, that he or any other
can except against, nor any thing concealed by me that is found in the
Ancient, touching this point. I would desire him therefore to tell me if he
can, wherein I informed him amiss, as he says I did? for first I showed that
there was an Ancient custom of commemorating the departed, of rehearsing
their names and offering the sacrifice of praise for them, to express the
assurance Christian men have of the immortality of the soul, and their hope of
the resurrection. Secondly, that this sacrifice of the Eucharist, that is of
praise and thanksgiving, was offered for the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, and the blessed Mother of Christ, and every soul at rest in the
faith of Christ: for proof whereof I produce the Liturgy that goes under the
name of Chrysostom. Thirdly, that the Ancient prayed for the souls of men in
their passage hence, and entrance into the other world. Fourthly, that they
prayed for the resurrection; public acquitall in the day of judgment, and
perfect consummation of the departed: all which customs and observations I
allow and approve. Fifthly, that some prayed for the remission, or mitigation of
the pains of men in hell. Sixthly, that some other out of a conceit that there
is noe judgment yet passed, and that none of the just enter into heaven till
the resurrection, prayed for their admittance into those Heavenly Palaces, and
into the presence of God: but that none of the Ancient ever prayed to deliver
men out of purgatory. What collusion or what unfaithful dealing does Master
Higgons find in any of these passages? yet the faithless and perfidious
Apostata having Page 32.
as he says, experience of my unfaithful dealing, directed himself to four
considerations; whereof the first is, that it is vanity in us Protestants to
accept and refuse the Liturgy of Chrysostom at our pleasure; the second, that
Chrysostom did pray for the dead; the third, that it was by way of
thanksgiving, and not of petition, that the Church offered sacrifice to God
for the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, etc. the fourth, that in the Liturgy
of Chrysostom there is prayer for the dead: To the first of these wise
considerations I answer, that we do not accept and refuse the Liturgy of
Chrysostom at our pleasures, but that we admit it so far forth only, as
we find the things it has in it confirmed out of the indubitate writings of
the Ancient, and in other things rely not much upon the credit of it. Now
that which I allege it for, has proof out of Epiphanius, and others; and
therefore I might rightly allege it as I did, and doubt of the credit and
authority of it in some other things. To the second we say, Chrysostom did
pray for the dead, not to deliver them out of Purgatory, whereof he never
dreamed, nor any Greek Father that ever lived, but in such a sort as Master
Higgons dares not pray; namely, for the ease of men in hell. Chrysostom,
says Biblioth. Sanct. lib. 6. annot. 47.
Sixtus Senensis, in his three and thirtieth Homily upon Matthew, interpreting
these words, The damsel is not dead but sleeps, treating of the care that is
to be taken for the dead, fell in a sort, into the opinion of them, who think
that the suffrages and prayers that are made here in the Church, do profit as
well those that are damned in hell, as those that enjoy eternal glory. For
there he has these words: If many barbarous nations do use to consume in
fire, together with the dead, the things that pertain to them; how much more
ought thou to deliver to thy son departed, such things as he possessed,
not to be burnt to ashes, but that they may make him more glorious! Supposest
thou that he went hence defiled with spots and stains? give unto him the
things he had when he lived, that he may wash away those spots. Supposest thou,
that he departed in righteousness? give them to him for the increase of his
reward. And again, that prayers and oblations do bring some refreshing to
them that departed hence without repentance; the same Chrysostom seems to
show in his third Homily upon the Epistle to the Philippians; where he speaks
to them that bewail the dead, more then is seemly, in this sort: Bewail them
that died in the midst of great riches, and procured with their riches, no
consolation to their souls, who when they had power to wash away their sins,
would not so do: let us weep for those, but with seemly modesty: let us help
them what we can, let us procure unto them some help, though small: yet let
us help them: but how, or in what sort? let us pray, and exhort others to pray
for them: let us without ceasing give alms to the poor for them: this thing
has some comfort doubtless, etc. To the third consideration, I say, that the
Ancient offered for the Patriarchs, Prophets; Apostles, etc. by way of
thanksgiving principally, but in a sort also by way of petition: which this
good man also Par. 33.
confesses, and brings Gersons authority to prove they might do so: who
Part. 1. lect. 2. super Marcum.
says, that as it is not absurdly delivered by the learned Divines, that there
is an addition or increase of accidental felicity in the Saints: so it is not
inconvenient, if in this respect also we recommend them to God in our
Devotions. To which purpose it seems to be, that In lib. Sacrament. citat.
(...) Sixto Senens.
Gregory ordains, that men shall pray in this sort, in the sacred mysteries l
6. Biblioth. Sanctae annotat. 47.
of the Eucharist: We have received, O Lord, the divine mysteries, which as
they profit thy Saints for their glory, so we beseech thee that they may
profit us for our health. And Chrysostom wills the living parents to give
something out of their substance to their children departed, though they
suppose they are departed in the state of righteousness, for the increase of
their reward. Touching the fourth and last consideration of this considerate
and advised young man, we confess that Chrysostom, or the Author of the
Liturgy, that goes under his name, whosoever he was, teaches men to pray
unto God, to remember all them that are fallen asleep in the hope of the
resurrection of eternal life, and to make them to be at rest, where the light
of his countenance is seen: But that this form of prayer must be understood
in the same sense that the other in the Missal is, wherein men are taught to
pray to God, to deliver the souls of all faithful ones departed from the hand
of hell, from the deep lake, and from the mouth of the Lion, that the lowest
hell swallow them not up, and that they fall not into the dungeons of utter
darkness: or else as proceeding from that opinion that Bibliothec. sanctae.
lib. 6. annot. 345.
Sixtus Senensis speaks of, that the souls of the Just are not in
heauen-happinesse, till the resurrection: and not of any deliverance out of
Purgatory. For there is not any the least signification of the desire of easing
men temporally afflicted in another world, expressed in any prayer found in
Chrysostomes Liturgy. Neither does it any way contrary any thing that we
profess that he teaches men to pray to God, to grant; what is yet wanting
to the faithful departed, or to such as are alive, at the suite and
supplication of the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, etc. For seeing it is
confessed by us, that the Saints in heaven do pray for us in a generality, we
may desire of God the granting of such things as we or others need, not only
upon our own suite, but much more for that there are so many supplyants to him
for us, not in earth alone, but in heaven also, though without sense or
knowledge of our particular wantes. So that there is nothing found in
Chrysostom, either touching prayer for the dead, or invocation of Saints, that
makes any thing for the confirmation of popish errors. For neither does
Chrysostom in that Liturgy, pray for the ease of men in Purgatory; neither
does he invoke any Saint, but calls upon God only, though not without hope
of being heard the rather, for that not only the faithful on earth, but the
Saints in heaven also make petition for him. But Master Higgons asks Page 33.
why I concealed these things? To whom I answer that I did not conceal any of
them: For, howsoever citing some other parts of Chrysostomes Liturgy, to
another purpose, I had no reason to bring in these passages, being altogether
impertinent to my purpose, and the matter in hand; yet in other places, I have
showed at large the ancient practice in all these things: and therefore this
seduced runnagate, whom Satan the tempter has beguiled, had no reason to
compare me to the Tempter, leaving out certain words in the text he alleged
unto Christ.

. 5.
IN the next place he Page 34.
obiecteth to us the heresy of Aerius, condemned by Augustine, amongst many
other impious heresies; and Augustines conclusion, that whosoever maintains
any of the heretical opinions condemned by him, is no Catholic Christian:
and tells us, that this censure touches us very near: but that I demean my
self plausibly, and artificially, to avoid the pressure of that difficulty
which is too heavy for me to bear. Whereunto I briefly answer, that I demean
not my self artificially, to avoid the force of any truth, which I esteem and
value above all treasures in the world, but in all sincerity unfold those
things which Papists seek to wrap up in perplexed and intricate disputes, to
the entangling of the Readers: For I show that the naming of the names of the
departed, the offering of the sacrifice of praise for them, the praying for
their resurrection, public acquitall, and perfect consummation and bliss in
the day of Christ; yea the praying for their deliverance from the hand of hell,
and the mouth of the Lion, and the utter deletion and remission of their sins,
respectively to their passage hence, and first entrance into the other world,
are not disliked by us: and that thus far the general intention of the Church
extended: but that, to pray for the deliverance of me^ out of hell, or for the
mitigation or suspension of the punishments, that are in hell, was but the
private devotion of some particular men, doubtfully and eroneously extending the
public prayers of the Church; farther then they were meant and intended by
her; and that in this particular they fell from the truth: which, if M.
Theophilus Higgons shall deny, and justify such kind of prayers for the dead,
we will be bold to call him by his new name Theomisus. But he is desirous Page
3.
to know of me, or any other, without lies, obscurities, and circuitions,
whether Cyrill of Jerusalem, concurring absolutely with the Papists in this
point of prayer for the dead, and Augustine agreeing with him, fell away from
the truth or not? That he professes himself an enemy to lies, obscurities,
and circuitions, the best sanctuaries of their evil cause, I greatly marvel,
and fear, that if he give over the advantage, which he and his companions are
wont to make thereof, this his first book will be his last. But in that he
says, Cyrill of Jerusalem concurreth absolutely with the Papists, in the
matter of prayer for the dead, and Augustine with him, he does as beseems
him: for he utters lies, and untruths, which before unadvisedly he
condemned. For first, it is most certain, that Cateches^.
Cyrill makes but two sorts of men departing out of this life: sinners, and
righteous: and that he thinks, as Chrysostom also does, and after them
Damascene, and many other; that wicked and sinful men in hell, may find some
ease, and be relieved, by the prayers of the living; but of Purgatory he
speaks not. Touching Augustine, he dissenteth altogether from this opinion of
Chrysostom, Cyrill, and Damascene, and August. Enchir. ad Laur. cap. 110.
thinks, that the prayers of the Church, for such as excelled in goodness, are
thanksgiuings to God: for such as died impenitently in grievous sins, comforts
of the living, but no helps of the dead: for those that were neith^ exceeding
good, nor exceeding evil, propitiations and means to obtain favor and
remission. But whether they of this middle sort be in any penal estate after
death, or whether by the mercy of God, and working of his grace, the prayers of
the living accompanying them, they be freed from sin, and the punishment of
it, in the first entrance into the other world, he resolves nothing: and
therefore there was no cause, why this good man, Page 113.
reflecting, as he says, upon my assertion, should be amazed to behold such a
repugnancie between these things, to wit, Augustine ran doubtingly into the
opinion of Purgatory: and yet he affirms, there is no doubt but that some
sins are remitted in the other world, and that some souls may be relieved by
prayer. For in the judgment of wiser men then Mast^r Higgons, these things
imply no contradiction; and therefore the Grecians admit the latter of them,
and yet deny Purgatory. Yea, in their Apology touching Purgatory, they say, if
there be remission of sins after this life, there is no enduring of the
punishments due to sin, it being one thing to have remission of a sin, or
fault, and another to suffer the extremity of punishment it deserves. That
there is therefore remission of sins of a middle sort of men, after this
life, in the entrance into the other world, Augustine made no doubt; and to
that purpose he alleged the saying of Christ, concerning the sin that is
neither remitted in this world, nor the other: from thence to infer, that
some sins are remitted after this life. But whether there be any
Purgatory-punishments after this life, or not, he was ever doubtful: as
appears by sundry places in his works, where he says, Enchrid. ad Laurent.
c. 69.
Perhaps there is some such thing: it is not incredible that there is some such
thing: and whether there be or not, it may be found out, or it may be hid:
neither will it follow, that because he makes three estates of men dying,
whereof some are so good, that we have rather cause to give God thanks for
them, then to pray: others so ill, that they cannot be relieved: and a third
sort, that need our prayers, and may be relieved by them; that therefore there
is a third place, wherein they are to be temporally afflicted. For all this may
be in the passage hence, and entrance into the other world; the prayers of the
living accompanying them, and God purging out that which is impure, and
remitting that which offends him, in this middle sort of men, even in that
first entrance into the state of the other world. And surely Augustine
himself, in his own Confess. li^ 9. cap, 13.
prayer for Monicha, his mother, never speaks one word of releasing her out
of pain or punishment; but prays God not to enter into judgment with her, to
suffer none to divide her from him, and take her out of his protection, to
keep her, that neither the lion, nor dragon, by force, or subtilty, interpose
himself, for that she will not plead that she has not trespassed, lest she
should be convinced and the accuser should prevail against her, and get her
to himself: but that her trespasses are remitted to her by Christ: so showing
that he made his prayer for her respectively to the state she was in, in her
passage and while she stood to be judged: and because this might seem to be
already past, and the things he asked performed, when he prayed, he says, he
thinks God has already done that he prays for, but beseeches him to
accept his voluntary devotions. Two places there are found in Augustines
works, where he seems peremptorily to affirm, that there is a penal state,
and purging fire after this life: the first is in his one and twentieth book
De h Cap. 24.
ciuitate Dei: where he says, When the dead shall rise again, there shall
some be found to whom after they have suffered punishments, mercy shall be
showed, that they be not cast into eternal fire. But the words (as Viues
notes upon the same place) are not found in some ancient manuscripts, nor in
that printed at Friburge. The other place is in his Cap. 20.
second book De Genesi, against the Manichees. The words are these. He who
happily shall not till his field, but shall suffer it to be ouer-growne with
thorns and briars, has in this life the curse of his life in all his works:
and, after this life, he shall have either the fire of Purgation or eternal
punishment: which words being spoken of them that till not their field, that
suffer it to be ouer-growne with thorns and briars, whose whole life is
accursed in all they do, and not of such good men to whom some imperfection
cleaves, are uttered according to that opinion then preuayling of deliverance
out of hell; which Augustine in that place would not stand to discuss, but
elsewhere refuteth at large. So that the things t^ are found in Augustine
clearly resolved on, are only these, First, that some sins are remitted
after this life: which we grant, understanding that remission to be in the
first entrance into the other world. Secondly, that they are only the lesser
sins that are thus remitted after this life, and not those more grievous
wherein men dye without repentance, for these exclude from the Kingdom of
Heaven. Thirdly, that prayers do help men dying in those lesser sins. Which
likewise we acknowledge to be true, if such prayers be conceived, and
understood as made respectively to the entrance into the other world.
Fourthly, that there is no deliverance of men dying in the state of mortal
sin out of hell, and that noe prayers can benefit them in this behalf. In
all these points his resolution is full and clear, but whether the pains of
men damned in hell may be eased, mitigated or suspended for a time by the
prayers of the living, he Ench^id ad Lau^entium. cap. 112.
professes he will not strive, so that the wrath of God be acknowledged to
remain eternally upon them. Neither is this contradictory to that which he
has Ibid. cap. 110.
elsewhere, that the prayers of the living are no helps of such as are
damned, but only comforts of the living: For he means that they are no
helps able to free and deliver them out of that state of punishment, wherein
they are: but whether they may some way ease them, or not, he will not much
contend: and therefore he says, that whom prayers profit, either they profit
them for full remission, as they do men dying in the lesser sins: or that
their damnation may be the more tolerable, and easy. The Papists Higgons.
page 29.
applying these latter words of more tolerable damnation, to the state of
souls in their supposed Purgatory, is absurd: for they cannot in any proper
sense be said to be damned. These things being thus distinguished, we see
there is nothing found in Augustine for confirmation of the Popish error,
touching Purgatory: that no testimonies of Augustine could seal up M. Higgons
his heart in this idle conceit of Purgatory, as untruly he Page 30.
says they did: that we no way oppose our selves against the universal
resolution and practice of the whole Church, which to do, Augustine pronounces
insolent madness: that we no way contradict this worthy Father, reporting to
us the doctrine and tradition of the Church: and consequently that Higgons
ridiculously, and idly; Page 36.
asks whether Augustine, or I, know better the sense and judgment of
Anti^uity? thereupon childishly Page 37.
making a comparison between him and me: for I make no question, but he knew
the sense of Antiquity right well; neither do I dissent from him in any thing
that he constantly delivers; and for the comparison, confess my self
unworthy to be named the same day: but whereas he Ibid.
says, he found sincetity in him, and unfaithfulness in me, I defy the
faithles Apostata, and challenge him, or any of the proudest of his consorts,
to tell me truly wherein I have showed the least unfaithfulness? It seems
he measures other men by himself, and his companions; but we are not like
them, making merchandise of the word of GOD. After these idle discourses, he
Page 38
passes from me to that reverend, renowned, and worthy Divine, Doctor Humfrey,
in his time, the light and ornament of the University that bred him, whom such
a silly novice as M. Theophilus, durst not have looked in the face while he
lived. But it is easier to insult upon a dead lion; then a living dog; and that
makes him bark against him; but such was his great reading, variety of
learning in all kinds, profound science, and mature judgment, as made him so
highly esteemed at home and abroad by all that knew how to judge of things
aright; that the scornful speeches of this Renegado, concerning his
Rhetorical flourishes, will never be able to diminish or lessen the good
opinion, that most deservedly all wise and good men hold of him. Yet let us
see what it is that this grave censurer reprehendeth in D. Humfrey: surely he
knows not what himself. D. Humfrey speaking of the ancient commemoration or
commendation of the dead, says, We retain it in our Colleges; which is most
true: but he has spied, as he supposes three differences: for first, as he
says, the commendation and commemoration then used, was at the Altar: but we
have no al^: 2. in the holy sacrifice, but we admit no sacrifice: 3. with
intention to relieve the dead, but we have no such intention. For answer
whereunto, I say briefly, (for he deserves no large answer) that we have
altars in the same sort the Fathers had, though we have thrown down Popish
Altars: that we admit the Eucharist to be rightly named a sacrifice; though
we detest the blasphemous construction the Papists make of it. And lastly, that
the Fathers did not intend to relieve all them they remembered at the Altar; no
more do we: that they accompanied their friends souls going out of their
bodies, to stand before God with their prayers and good wishes; that they
prayed for their resurrection, public acquitall in the day of CHRIST, and
perfect consummation, and so do we: that they never knew any thing of
Purgatory, nor never prayed to deliver any one from thence, no more do we: and
that therefore D. Humphrey might well impute frenzy to the Romanists, as
challenging the Fathers in this and other points, whereas they are destitute of
all defense from them. That which he Page 39
interlaceth of froathy volumes, in which we silly men, for lack of his
direction, spend our time, is less to be esteemed then any bubble or froath
upon the water: for all men know that this Church never wanted worthy men,
matchable with the proudest of the adverse Faction in the study of the Fathers,
Councels, Histories, and Schoolmen: neither is there any decay of these kinds
of study now, thanks be given to God, as both our friends and enemies (I
think) will bear us witness. Thus does this Champion end the first part of
his first book, having plaide his prizes very handsomely as you see.

. 1.
IN the second part, first he indeavoureth to prove the perpetual visibility
of the Church, which he says, Page 44.
I teach sincerely and effectually: though with some mixture of corruption in
my Discourse concerning the same: but tells us not what those corruptions be:
and therefore I know not what to say to him till I hear farther from him.
Secondly, he labors to show that the visible Church is free from damnable
error, which we willingly yield unto; but that which he adds Page 45.
touching the not erring of General Councels, is not so clear: as it
appears by that which I have In the fifth book of the Church. Chap. 51:
elsewhere noted out of Picus Mirandula, and Waldensis. There is extant an
excellent conference between Nicholas Clemangis and a certain Parisian
Schooleman, touching this point, wherein he wills him co^sideratly to think
upon it, lest as he thinks it to be a matter of rashness to affirm that
General councils may e^re, so likewise it be not altogether free from
temerity and rashness, pertinaciously to defend, that general councils cannot
err, unless it were proved by most strong authorities, or certain reasons: and
farther adds, that though it were most certainly proved, that councels
cannot err: yet it were not fit for them that meet in councels to rely upon
this persvvasio^, lest under the shadovv, and upon the occasion of this
confidence, they might proceed with less consideration, and more lightly then
they should: but to make us doubt that Councels may err sometimes in their
determinations he brings sundry reasons; whereof one is, that the most part
of men that are in the Church (He speaks of the Church in his time) are
merely carnal, seeking the things of the world, and no way sauouring the
things of God, or regarding the good of the Church: that these men are reputed
the wisest, and most sufficient to manage the affairs of the Church: that when
Counsels are to be holden, either they are chosen, or put themselves into
such employments. And consequently, that things being carried in Councels by
voices, there is little reason to expect any great good, either for the due
settling of the persuasion of men in matters of faith, or the reformation of
such things as are amiss in matters of Discipline and manners. Whereupon he
tells of the ill success of the Council of Pisa, and of another called at
Rome by Balthazar then Pope: Into the midst whereof an owl came flying, making
an horrible noise, and satte upon a beam in the midst of the room where the
Synod was holden as she had been President of the assembly; and could not
be made to give place, till she was beaten down dead: yea concerning the
Council of Constance, wherein the long-continued Schism, by reason of the
Anti-p^pes was ended, and the peace of the Church restored: he says that many
things fell out in it, which were not fruits of the spirit, but works of the
flesh, as contentions, emulations, dissentions, sects, clamours, outcries,
mockings, and the like. But of the erring of Councels, I have elsewhere
treated at large, and therefore will not insist upon the repetition of the same
things in this place. Only, let us hear what master Higgons can say for
their not erring. He thinks to strike the matter dead with the resolution of
Gerson, a man, as he says, highly advanced by me. It is true that I esteem
of Gerson as of a most learned, judicious and godly man, that mourned for the
confusions he saw in the Church in his time, that reproved many abuses, gave
testimony to many parts of heavenly truth, then contradicted by those carnal
men of whom Clemangis speaks, who counted gain to be godliness, and
scorned all that lived as beseems Christians, traducing them as hypocrites,
and I know not what else. Yet I think no man will infer, upon any
commendation that I have given him, that I must of necessity embrace as true
whatsoever he says. Waldensis is a man highly esteemed by our Romanistes, yet
will they not allow his opinion, that Counsels may err. Alphonsus a castro,
Adrian the Pope, and other, who teach that the Pope may papally err, are
highly prized by them: yet will they not grant that the Pope may err as they
teach: but what is it that Gerson says? surely, that Part. 4. de Vnitate
Graeeorum Consid. 6.
Whatsoever the Pope and a General Council of the whole Church determine,
must be received as true. It is true indeed that he says so, but it
appears by the words immediately following, that he speaks not of a
General Council consisting of the Bishops of the West only, such as was
the Council of Trent in our time; But of a General Council consisting both
of Greeks and Latins; and therefore he says, if the Grecians dissenting from
the Latins in the article of the proceeding of the holy Ghost, and not
admitting the determination of the West Church, shall say, that the Council
that defined, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the son, was
not truly General; that they were not duly called to the same, and
consequently, that notwithstanding their dissenting they are not to be judged
pertinacious, obstinate and subject to the curse; it were diligently to be
considered what they would say; or some fitting means were to be found out,
that all things might be brought to an agreement, without persisting in a
peremptory proof of the same article against them: for that, men disposed to
resist, would hardly ever be convinced in this point. And further he wishes
men to think upon it, whether, as some determinations of doubts and questions
passed and agreed on in Paris are said to bind none but those that are within
the Diocese of Paris, so it may not be said in like sort that the
determinations of the Latin Church bind the Latins only: and secondly,
whether that which is defined and holden as an article of faith, ^ay not be
made to be no article, by bringing things to the same state they were in
before any determination passed. Which thing he exemplifieth in a Decree of
Bonifacius, voyded by one of his successors. To what purpose Master Higgons
alleges the opinion of Gerson touching the not erring of General Councels,
I cannot tell: for I am well assured never any such Council as yet approved
Purgatory and Prayer to deliver men out of it, nor I think ever will. But
whatsoever we think of Counsels, there is no question to be made but that
the Church is free from damnable error, as master Higgons in the title of his
chapter undertakes to prove. But whether it be free from all ignorance and
error as he seems in the discourse following to enforce, it is not so
clear: neitheir does that text of Saint Paul touching the House of God, 1. Tim
3. 15.
which is the Church of the living GOD, the pillar and ground of truth, nor
any other authority or reason brought to that purpose, prove the same; and
particularly, touching that place of Saint Paul to Timothy, it is evident the
Apostles words are to be originally understood of the Church of Ephesus; and
that he makes the glorious title, of pillar and ground of truth, common to
that particular Church, with that which is universal; and consequently, that
this title proves not every Church or society of Christians to which it
agrees, to be free from error: unless we will privilege all particular
Churches from danger of erring. If any man doubt whether the Apostle give the
title of pillar and ground of truth to the Church of Ephesus, it is easily
proved by unanswerable reasons. For (as Lyra writing upon the words of the
Apostle rightly notes): The Apostle writes to Timothy, and gives him
directions, that he may know how to behave himself in the Church of God: that
is, how to order and govern it. Now the Church which Timothy was to order and
govern, was not the universal Church, but the Church of Ephesus: therefore
the Church, wherein he was wisely to behave himself; was but a particular
Church; and the same Church in which the Apostle directs him how to behave
himself, he calls the Church of the living God, the pillar, and ground of
truth, therefore he gives this title to a particular Church: though he
restrain it not to it, as master Higgons untruly Page 46.
says I do: so that I have not eluded the gravity of this testimony, as he
is pleased unjustly to charge me, but I give the right sense of it: whence it
follows, that seeing particular Churches may be said to be pillars of
truth, this title does not prove that society of Christian men to which it
agrees, to be free from all error.

From the reprehension of our opinion, in that we think the Church subject to
some kind of error, he falls into a discourse touching Page 47.
the confusions of Protestants, admitting innumerable sectaries into one vast
and incongruous Church; which he says is a mere Chymera, thrust together and
fashioned in specificall disproportions; and hence, he says, it is Page 46
that I laying the foundation of my Babell, fear not to say, that the Churches
of Russia, Armenia, Syria, Aethiopia and Greece, are and continue parts of the
true Catholic Church: For answer whereunto I say, that we do not admit
any Sectaries into the Communion of the true Catholic Church, much less
innumerable Sectaries: for we admit none into the Communion of our Churches,
but such as receive all the lawful General Counsels, that ever were holden
touching any question of faith, the three Creedes, of the Apostles, of Nice,
and Athanasius; and whatsoever is found to have been believed and practiced by
all not noted for singularity and nouelty at all times and in all places. So
rejecting Arrians, Zuenchfeldians, Anabaptists, Familistes and all other like
monsters. Touching the differences between the Churches of England, Denmark,
Zueden, Germany, France, etc. They are not specificall, as this bad Logician
fancieth; but imaginary, or merely accidental. And for the Churches of
Greece, Russia, Armenia, Syria and Aethiopia, agreeing in all the things
before mentioned; it is most strange that this Schismatic fugitive should
dare utterly to reject them from the unity of the Catholic Church, and to
cast into hell so many millions of souls of poor distressed Christians, for
so many hundred years, enduring so many bitter things for Christ's sake in the
midst of the proudest enemies that ever the name of Christ had. That all these
admit the Doctrine of faith agreed on in all the lawful general councels;
that ever were holden, the three Creeds, and the whole form of Christian
doctrine catholickely consented on, and that they reject and condemn all the
heresies condemned by Augustine and Epiphanius, it shall be proved if Higgons
or any other smatterer of that side, shall go about to improve it. It is true
indeed, that the Armenians refused to admit the Council of Chalcedon; but
it was upon a false suggestion, as I have elsewhere showed: 13. Book of the
Church cap. 1.
And it is most certain that they condemn the heresy of Eutiches, as
likewise those other, that were condemned in the Fifth and Sixth counsels, and
though the Grecians seek to avoid the evidence of that part of Athanasius
Creed, touching the proceeding of the holy Ghost, yet do they not deny the
Creed it self; and my Part. 4. de vnit^te Graeco rum.
Gerson (as Master Higgons is pleased to call him) thinks it were better to
desist from the strict urging of the allowance of tha^ determination of the
Latins, touching the proceeding of the holy Ghost, that both the Churches
might be reduced to unity, then peremptorily to insist upon the proof of it,
seeing men disposed to resist, will very hardly ever be convinced; so that he
does not think as Master Higgons does, that the not admitting of this Article
as defined and determined by Athanasius, casts men into hell; for then Saint
John Damascene should be damned, De fide Orthodox. lib. 1. cap. 11.
who denies the proceeding of the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son
after the publishing of Athanasius Creed. Thus do we moderate our censures
not daring to cast all into hell that dissent from us in some particular
points, not fundamental, as the Romanists do: yet do we not think that
every one may be saved in his own sect and error, whatsoever it be: for we
exclude all such out of the communion of the true Catholic Church as admit
not all the things before specified: so that I lay no foundation of Babell, as
this Babylonian is pleased to say I do, but pitying the breaches of Sion,
endeavor as much as in me lies, to make them up, that Jerusalem may be as a
city at unity wit hin it self. But the Romanistes indeed build Babell and
their tongues are confounded, every one almost, dissenting from other, and that
in most material and essential points. De peccato originis Controuers. 1.
Pighius and In lib. de Originali peccato.
Catharinu^ have a strange fancy touching original sin, contrary to the
Doctrine of other Papists: De fide and iustificatione. Controu. 2.
Pighius is of Caluins opinion touching justification. Apolog. contra Dominicum
a Soto.
Catharinus defends against the common tenent that men in ordinary course
(without special revelation) may be certain by the certainty of Faith that
they are in the state of grace: yea M* Higgons himself says, Page 48.
Our faith in Christ must be trustfull, lively, and active by a special
application of his merits unto our selves, as he was wont to preach in Saint
Dunstans Church. So urging a necessity of special Faith: which the Romanists
condemn as heretical in the Doctrine of our Church: and innumerable like
differences they have: yet all these are of one Church, Faith, and Communion:
nothing, it seems, being necessary to the unity of their Church, but the
acknowledging of the Supremacy of the Pope. And yet, which is most strange,
they that think he may err, and they that think he cannot err; they that
make him to be but Prime Bishop, and they that make him universal Bishop* they
that attribute to him power to depose Princes, and dispose of their states, and
they that deny that he bath any such power, are of one and the same Church:
But it is a Babylonicall Church.

. 2.
FRom the perpetual visibilitie and undoubted assurance the Church has of
holding the true Faith, he proceeds Page 50.
to show our zeal in impugning and condemning the opinion of Purgatory: and
that yet notwithstanding the whole universal Church received it. And thervpo^
says ^he was misinformed by me and others, that the Greeks never s Page 53.
entertained this doctrine. and that now he finds that we err, not knowing
or (...) t Page 54
the truth: assuring himself that howsoever some Greeks did not, or do not
admit the doctrine of Purgatory precisely under this name, and with some other
circumstances,, yet the church of Greece generally does retain the th^ig it
self. But whatsoever this goodfellow say to the contrary, we know the Greek
(...) never (...) the (...) thing. There is extant a most excellent: and
learned Apollogy of the (...), (...) ^o the counsel of Florence, or Basil, as
it is thought. In this apology, first (...) clearly (...) that there is no
purging after this life by ^e, especially material etc (...) the Papists
imagine. Secondly, they ins^te that some a longst (...), that such as are of a
middle condition, and so depart hence, are after death in a certain obscurity,
without enjoying the light of Gods countenance, or holden as it were in a
prison or in a state of sorrow, till by the goodness of God and the prayers of
the Church they be delivered: and thus much some professed in the Council of
Florence; for there was a division amongst them. Thirdly, they incline to an
opinion that the lesser sins of men dying in the state of grace, are remitted
after death without any punishment at all, either by fire or in any other kind,
by the mere mercy and goodness of God. And whereas some bring proofs of
remission of sins after this life, thereby to confirm their conceit of
Purgatory, they say there is no agreement between remission, and purging by
fire and punishment: for that either punishment or remission is needful, and
not both: and again they confidently pronounce that neither Scripture, nor the
fifth General Council delivered unto us a double punishment or a double fire
after this life. This judgment and resolution they confirm, and prove by very
excellent reasons and authorities: for first, thus they argue. It more
beseems the goodness of God, to suffer no good though never so little to pass
away unrespected and unrewarded, the^ to punish small sins and offenses: but
some little good in them that have great sins has no reward, because of the
preuayling of the evil that is found in the^, therefore small evils in them that
have great works of virtue, are not to be punished, the better things
ouercomming. Secondly, as is a little good in those that are mainely evil, so
is a little evil in those that are otherwise mainely good. But a little good
in those that are otherwise evil, can procure no reward, but only causes a
difference in the degree of punishment, making it the less: therefore a little
evil causes no punishment but a difference in the degree of glory and
happiness, which it makes to be less then otherwise it would be; whence it
follows that there is no Purgatory. Thirdly, either the wills of men departed
hence are mutable, or immutable: if they be mutable, then they that are good
may become evil; and they that are evil, may become good: whence it will
follow (according to Origens opinion) that neither the good are unchangeably
happy, nor the the evil unchangeably miserable: but that men may fall from
happiness to misery, and rise from misery to the height of all happiness.
And so we shall make the punishments of all cast-awaies, even of the devils
themselves, to be temporary: as endeed, supposing the mutability of the Will to
continue after death justly they may: for the reason why in Justice the
punishment of sin in the damned is to be eternal, is, because they are
immutably, unchangeably, and et^nally evil; if they be immutable, then are
they not capable of any correction; for he who is corrected, is set right, by
being brought to just dislike, and forsaking of that he formerly affected ill;
which change from love to hate, from liking to disliking, from pursuing and
following, to forsaking and flying from, cannot be found in a Will that is
immutable. In 4. Sentent. did. 21. qu. (...).
Bonauentura disputes the matter, how afflicting fire purges the soul; and
answers that some think, that this fire, besides the punishing virtue, and
power it has, has also a spirttuall purging virtue, such as sacraments have,
which he thinks to be absurd: especially seeing Gregory out of visions and
apparitions of the dead, shows, that souls are purged in diverse places and
by diverse other means, as well as by fire: and therefore there are other, who
think, that what this purging fire works, it works by punishing and
afflicting, which helps and strengthens grace, that it may be able to purge
out sin. Now punishment and affliction can noe way help grace or
strengthen it, to the expulsion of sin, but in that by the bitterness of it,
it makes us know how much it offends GOD and hurts us: and thereby causes
a dislike of it, or at least an increase of the dislike of it: which dislike
the Will cannot newly grow unto, if it be immutable. For, to dislike that
which before we did not dislike, or to dislike a thing more then formerly we
did, upon farther and better consideration, argues a mutability in the Will: so
that if the Will be immutable in those that are departed hence, immediately upon
their dissolution, as our Adversaries think it is, the fire of purgatory can no
way help to the purging out of sin. To these reasons they add another, taken
from the story or parable of the rich man and Lazarus in the Gospel: where
Christ shows that the poor man Lazarus, as soon as he was dead, was
carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, and that the rich man's soul as
soon as he was dead, was found in the torments of hell. By the bosom of
Abraham expressing a most excellent estate in the blessed rest of such as are
beloved of God: and by hell, and the torments thereof, the utter most
condemnation, and the everlasting punishment of sinners: and no way leaving any
other place between these, having temporal affliction and pain; but making
between them a great and vnpasseable gulf, separating the one from the other,
and establishing an extreme and immediate opposition between them; then
which, what could be more clearly spoken against Purgatory and for our
opinion? For if there be no middle place of temporal torment, as the Authors
of this Apology say there is not; if there be but two sorts of men, the one
expressed by the condition of the rich man, the other of Lazarus: and if the
one of these go immediately, upon death, into a place of torment everlasting,
the other into a place of rest, and into the bosom of Abraham: where is the
Purgatory of Papists either in the name, or in the thing, in substance, or in
circumstance? To these reasons for farther confirmation, they add two most
excellent testimonies out of In orat. de Paschate.
Gregory Nazianzen, who upon these words touching the Passover, We shall
carry out nothing nor leave nothing till the morning: says expressly and
clearly, that beyond or after this Night, there is no purging; calling the
life of each man here, the Night: and yielding no purging to be after it: and
elsewhere has these words. Sermon. de plaga grandin.
I omit to speak of the torments, to which impunity does deliver men in the
other world: for they are such, that it were better for a man to be chastised,
and purged here, then to be reserved and delivered over to that punishment
that is after this life, when as there is a time of punishment but not of
purgation: so expressly defining, that there is no purging after the departure
out of this life, and that there remains nothing but eternal punishment, for
such as must there be punished. Elias Cretensis, a learned Grecian, writing
upon that place of Nazianzen, where he says, Orat. 7. dc composit^ disserendi
ratione page 210.
He is a poor and a mean Pastor, and not liked of other Pastors, whether
because he defends the truth, or for what other cause he knows not, but
God knows, and (as the Apostle says) that day of revelation and last fire
shall clearly manifest it, whereby all our works are either judged or purged,
has these words: The word judged, Gregory Nazianzen put for tried; and
purged, for revealed or manifested: for that fire does make the works of just
men to shine, and burns up the works of sinners, and, that I may speak
plainly and simply, manifests of what sort each man's works are, those
things being taken away, that in this world did hide them, and suffered them
not to appear to be such as indeed they are. For here oftentimes as well the
works of a virtuous man, as of an evil man are hid: but there they are
revealed, and made manifest: therefore there judgment is passed upon all; that
is, all are tried: and again, all things are purged, that is, manifested: and
not by any means, according to the fooleries of those men, who think that
there shall be an end of punishment, after a thousand years, and that, after
they are purged, men shall cease to be punished. Thus does this worthy
Bishop of Candie contradict the Papists in their fancy of Purgatory, and
agree with the Authors of the Apology.

In the writings of Quaest. Armenio^um lib. 13. cap. 1.
Armacanus I find, that one Athanasius, a Grecian, proposed sundry excellent
reasons against the imagined Purgatory of the Latins, which Armachanus goes
about to answer, but indeed cannot answer: the first is this: It is no way
just that the Soul alone should be punished for the sins of the whole man;
or that the body should have part and fellowship in Sin, and glory after
remission of Sin, and not in the punishment, that purges out sin. The
second is this; It is more proper to God to reward good things then to punish
evil: So that, if it were necessary, that the souls of such as are truly
penitent, should after death go into Purgatory punishments, it were much more
necessary, that the souls of such as have kept the commandments of GOD all
their life long, and at last falling into sin, die in such an estate, without
repentance, should go first into a place of refreshing, to receive the
rewards of their well doings, before they should be cast out into eternal
punishments: but this is not to be granted by any means; therefore much less
the other. Thirdly, whereas some go about to prove Purgatory by the custom of
praying for the dead, he shows by an unanswerable reason, that if we
admit Purgatory, we may not pray for the dead; his reason is this. Whosoever
causes another to be afflicted, does it in one of these three sorts; either
only out of unreasonable passion and desire of tormenting and afflicting; or
for the upholding of the course of justice, and the example and good of others,
as when murderers are put to death: or thirdly in mercy, for the good and
benefit of him that is punished, as the Physician afflict^h the sick patient.
And in this third sort it is, that God is supposed to afflict souls in
Purgatory. As therefore the Physician and Surgeon delight not in afflicting
their sick patients, but deal as tenderly with them as possibly they may, due
respect had to the recovering of their health and former estate: so God will
afflict no more then is precisely necessary for the purging out of sin: so
that as it were vain, if not hurtful, to entreat the good and skillful
Physician, tendering his patient, and no way afflicting him more then is
precisely necessary for the recovering of his health, either wholly to withdraw
his hand, or to remitte any thing of that he intends to do; for that, if so
he should do, the patient could not recover; so in like sort, it were not
only vain, but hurtful, for the souls of men departed, to entreat GOD any
way to lessen their afflictions, which otherwise he would lay upon them: seeing
he intends to afflict them no more, then is precisely necessary for the
purging out of the impurity that is found in them: and if he remitte any thing
of it, he must leave it in them still. In this life God may work men to a
judging of themselves, so that they shall not need to be so chastised and
judged of him, as otherwise they should be, and so we may pray God to ease
their afflictions: but after this life, when there is no more time, nor place
left for repentance, or conversion to God, it is not so. If it be said that the
punishments of them that are in Purgatory; in that they are medicinal, and for
the purging out of sin, are not to be diminished, but that something may be
remitted of the extremity of them, in that they are satisfactory, he answers
as we also do; that after the remission of sin repented of, there is no
satisfaction needful for the pacifying of Gods wrath, and that all punishments
that are inflicted, are but to make us know thoroughly what it is to offend God,
to pluck up the root, take away the remainders, prevent the occasions, and
to stop the re-enterance of it again.

By this which has been said, we may see how advisedly and truly Master
Higgons says, that Page 5^.
the Greek Church generally does believe Purgatory: but he will prove it does
by the censure of the Oriental Church, upon the Augustane confession.
Concerning this censure, the Author of it was, Hieremias Patriarch of
Constantinople, who has written many things very prejudicial to the state of
the Romish Religion: for he denies the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, and
Cap. 13.
makes the Church of Constantinople the chief of all Churches: he Cap. 21.
in Epilogo de abusibus.
defends the lawfulness of Ministers marriage: he Ibid.
condemns the communicating in one kind alone, and the Ibid.
consecration of unleavened bread; He Cap. 21.
denies that the Saints hear our prayers; besides some other things of like
nature: But touching Purgatory, he has no word. It is true indeed that he
allows prayer for the dead, but to another purpose, and not to deliver men
out of Purgatory, as this seduced Nouice has been misinformed. For he
seems in part to be of the same mind that In ^2. Lucae.
Theophylacte is of; who thinks that they who die sinners, are not always
cast into hell, but that they are in the power of God, that he may cast them
into hell or keep them from it, and deliver them if he please. Whereupon he
notes that Christ does not say, fear him who after he has killed the body
does cast into hell: but, can cast into hell: and this he says, as he
professes, because of the oblations and alms given for the dead; which
greatly profit even them also that die in grievous sins: For though this
Hieremias Cap. 21.
deny that the Saints in heaven pray for men dying in mortal sin, God having
excluded them from his mercy, and in a sort pronounced that though Noah, Job,
or Daniell should entreat for them, they should not deliver them, yet he says,
such as i Ibid.
dye in the middle course of penitencie, and not having fully purged out their
sins may be relieved by prayer and mediation: if such prayers, and entreaty
be made for them, while the judgment yet continues, and before the sentence be
pronounced: for so soon as the solemn sitting shall be dissolved, and every
one carried into the place of punishment, designed and appointed for him, there
neither is nor never shall be any mediation for him. Whereby it appears, he
extends the benefitte of these prayers, only to the keeping of men out of
hell, that might be cast into it, and no way to the releeuing of souls
afflicted with temporal pains, as Master Higgons untruly reports. So that
he agrees with Theophylacte, in that he thinks me^ who otherwise might
justly be cast into hell, may be stayed from coming thither, if request be made
for them in time, and seems to dissent from him, in that he will not extend
this mercy of God to any dying without some beginnings of repentance, whereof
the other makes noe mention: in which restraint, yet he dissenteth from
himself, who Cap. 12.
produces and allows the testimony of Damascene, reporting Gregory's
delivering Traian, who dyed in infidelity, our of hell: Teclaes delivering of
Falconilla, who dyed an Idolatresse: and sundry other things of the same kind.

Thus we see, the Graecians, being a great and principal part of the Church of
God, deny Purgatory, not in respect of the name, or some circumstance alone;
but even in respect of the thing it self, notwithstanding any thing Master
Higgons can say to the contrary: and therefore it was more then ordinary
impudency in him to say that Page 5^.
none but Aerians Henricians, and Waldensians, did ever simply and absolutely
deny Purgatory: and all his discourse grounded upon this false surmise is vain
and idle. For let the Aerians, Henricians and Waldensians, be what they will,
it little concerns us, for we derive not our denial of Purgatory from them,
but from the Fathers, and the principal parts of Gods Church in all ages. That
which he has Page 62.
against Luthers marrying a professed Nun, and Saint Augustines dislike of
such marriages, does but argue the distemper of his idle brain. For first, it
is besides the purpose, and makes nothing to the matter in hand. Secondly, it
clearly confuteth the error of the Romanistes who think marriages after vows
made to the contrary to be void, which false conceit De bono viduitatis. cap.
11.
Augustine largely refuteth. Thirdly, he belyeth Augustine, for he does not
say, the marriage of such as have vowed the contrary is evil, much less that
it is worse then Adultery; but that the falling from the good purpose and
resolution they were entered into, is worse then adultery: which falling is
found amongst the Romish Votaries, more then any where else in the world, their
houses of Nuns (as De corrupto Eccles. ^atu.
Clemangis, who knew the state of those Cages well enough, testifies) being
for the most part nothing else but stews of filthy harlots. Now, though it be
worse then simple adultery to break a vow, and burning in lust to wallow in
all impurity, yet is it no way ill for men or women thus surprised to betake
themselves to the remedy of lawful mmariage. And therefore I Page 62.
mince not the matter, as this mincing Fugitive is pleased to say I do, but
truly report the judgment of Augustine, who indeed misliketh and reproves rash
vowing, without full purpose and due care of performing the same afterward, as
a grievous evil: and yet allows ensuing marriage, as lawful honorable, and
good, contrary to the impious conceit of the Romanists, condemning the same.
What is to be thought of Luther and such other as married after vows of single
life, I have Fifth book of the Church. chap. 57.
elsewhere showed; whether I refer the Reader. I have Book 3. chap. 39.
likewise proved at large the lawfulness of Luthers ministry, notwithstanding
all the corruption that was in the Church, wherein he received it, and the
tyranny of Antichrist endeavoring to lay all waste: and therefore the idle
glaunces of this silly fellow are to be contemned as words of vanity,
especially seeing such as are ordained by Heretics, are truly ordained in the
judgment of our Bonauent. in 4 Sentent. did. 25. quaest. 2.
Adversaries themselves: but if all fail, he will go back to prayer for the
dead, which has made him dead, while he is alive, and will prove that Page 70.
Bernard confuted Henricus impugning prayer for the dead, with a miracle, and
that therefore the impugning of prayer for the dead is pronounced impious by
Gods own voice from heaven: surely if it could be proved, that God gave
testimony by a miracle against Henricus his impugning of prayer for the dead,
to deliver them out of Purgatory, it were something: but neither he, nor all
the rabble of Romanistes shall ever prove that. Henricus is reported to have
holden many damnable opinions, in confutation whereof Bernard might work a
miracle without any respect to his denying prayers for the dead: for he
contemned the Sacraments, denied reconciliation to penitents, and the comfort
of the holy Eucharist to such as in their greatest distresses desired the same.
And feared not to exclude infants from the benefitte of the Sacrament of
regeneration. Epist. 24^
Bernard himself describing him, and the good effects that followed his
preaching, shows, that having been a Monk, he became an Apostata, that he
gave himself to all impurity, and that what he got by his preaching, he
played away at dice, or spent it amongst harlots: that his preaching wrought so
good effects, that Churches were forsaken, and left without People, People
without Priests, priests without due reverence, and Christians without
Christ: Churches were reputed Synagogues, the Sanctuaries of God denied to be
holy, Sacraments accounted unholy, Festival days deprived of Festival
solemnities, men dyed in their sins, and their souls were every where
caught up, and brought to the terrible iudgement-seate, neither reconciled by
penitential reconciliation, nor guarded with the Sacrament and holy Communion;
that the way of the life of Christ was shut up against infants, whiles the
grace of Baptism was denied unto them: and that they were hindered from
drawing near to salvation, though the Savior himself cried out aloud for
them, saying Suffer little children to come unto me. This is all that Bernard
imputes to him, neither does Willielmus Abbas (as Master Page 72.
Higgons untruly reports) charge him with denying of prayer for the dead, but
one Vitae Bernardi lib. 1. cap. 5.
Gotefrey a Monk of Clarauallis, whose report is not greatly to be regarded,
because what he adds above that before alleged by us, touching prayer for
the dead, invocation of Saints, excommunications of Priests, Pilgrimages,
building of Churches, and the like, he adds as out of Bernards Epistle
before mentioned, wherein there is no such thing. So that it is very probable
that he mistook the matter and imputed such things to Henricus as were
taught by the Apostolici, or some other such like. Hitherto we find no great
proof of the confirmation of prayer for the dead, or any other point of popish
error, by miracles: so that my Peremptory denial, that ever any miracle was
done by any man in times past, or in our times, to comfirme any of the things
controuersed between the Papists and us, stands as yet uncontrolled.
Wherefore Master Higgons rises from Henricus to Gregory the first, and
Augustine, whom he sent into England for the conversion of our Nation, who,
he Page 82.
says, were Papists, and yet wrought many miracles for the confirmation of the
doctrine they preached. A more trifling fellow I think never adventured to put
pen to paper; for we confidently deny that either Gregory or Augustine were
Papists, and say with Bishop Jewel in his worthy challenge, that all the
learned Papists in the world cannot prove they either of them held any of those
twenty seven Articles of popish religion mentioned by him. If some
superstition began in their times to grow in, it is not to be maruayled at:
neither will it follow, that if Augustine and his Colleagues, sent hither to
sing the Lords song in a strange land, did miracles for the confirmation of the
Christian faith taught by them, that the same miracles confirmed every
superstitious opinion, which any of them held. For then Cyprian and the African
Bishops teaching rebaptization, the Oriental Bishops thitking it necessary
to keep the feast of Easter with the Jews; Papias, and all the worthy Fathers
that taught, that Christ raising up the Saints from the dead, shall reign
with them on earth a thousand years in all earthly felicity, that there are
two resurrections, the one of the just, the other of the wicked, and that there
are a thousand years between: Lactantius, Irenaeus, and others, excluding the
souls of the faithful departed out of heaven, till the resurrection; such as
held that men may be delivered out of hell: such as held it necessary to
minister the Communion to infantes: and other like Catholic Christians erring
in some point of Doctrine, could do no miracles, for the confirmation of the
Christian faith amongst infidels or mis-belieuers; but that the same must be
confirmations of their errors: and God must concur with the^ by confusion, as
this confused companion Page 83.
speaks: but if this instance serve not the turn, he has another evidence
more potent and perswasiue, which served as a Key to unlock his understanding,
and that is this. Page 85.
Transubstantiation is affirmed by me to be one of the greatest mysteries of
Popish Religion. Gerson is highly approved by me, and yet he affirms Part.
4. sermon. in festo corp. Christi.
that Transubstantiation is confirmed by a thousand and a thousand miracles.
For answer whereunto we say with Cassander, Cassand. in consult art. 10. de
transubst.
that the names of conversion, transmutation, trans-formation, and
trans-elementation, are found among the Ancient, and that the word
Transubstantiation was used some hundreds of years since: but touching the
manner of this conversion there is great variety of opinions, yet so that all
agree in this, that they understand such a mutation or change to be made,
that that which before was earthly and common bread, by the words of
Institution, the invocation of GODS Name, and Divine virtue is made a Sacrament
of the true Body and Blood of CHRIST, visibly sitting at the right hand of GOD
in Heaven, and yet after an invisible and incomprehensible manner present in
the Church. And that the Body and Blood of CHRIST are in the Sacrament, and
exhibited and given as spiritual meat and drink for the salvation and
everlasting life of them that are worthy partakers of the same. Thus much we
doubt not but a thousand and a thousand miracles may confirm, and more, Gerson
does not say is confirmed by miracle. For whereas there is almost infinite
variety of opinions touching the manner of this conversion amongst such as
admit it in generality, it would be very hard for Master Higgons, or a wiser
man then he is, to say, which of them any miracle ever confirmed. All admit,
says In 3 part. sum. quaest. 75. a^. 1.
Caietan, the conversion of the bread and wine into the Body and Blood of
Christ, but in truth many deny that which the word Transubstantiation indeed
imports; and therefore are diversely divided; some understanding that the
bread is therefore said to be made the body of Christ, because where the Bread
is, the Body of Christ becomes present: others understanding nothing but the
order of succession, whereby the body succeeds, and is under the vailes of
those accidents, under which the Bread (which they suppose to be annihilated)
was before: which opinion in substance Scotus follows, though in the manner
of his speech he seem to decline it, some admitting both the word and thing
not wholly, but in part, as Durandus, who thinks the matter of the bread and
wine remains, the form only changed: and some thinking the form to
remain, and the matter to cease. Centil. conclu^. 39
Ockam says there are 3 opinions touching Transubstantiation, of which the
first supposes a conversion of the Sacramental Elements: the second an
annihilation: the third makes the Bread to be so turned into the Body of
Christ, that it is no way changed in substance, or substantially converted
into Christ's body; but that only the body of Christ becomes present in every
part of the bread. In 4. sent. q. 6.
Cameracensis, Gersons master, professes, that for ought he can see, the
substantial conversion of the Sacramental elements into the body and blood of
Christ, cannot be proved either out of Scripture, or any determination of the
Universal Church, and makes it but a matter of opinion, inclining rather to
the other opinion of Con-substantiation. And therefore in his judgment it was
not witnessed by a thousand and a thousand persons of most holy life and
profound knowledge, testifying the truth thereof unto death, by a thousand and
a thousand miracles. So that the thing which Gerson says has bin proved by
miracles, is the true presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament, the
exhibition of the^ to be the food of oursoules, and such a change of the
elements in virtue, grace and power of containing in the^, and communicating to
us Christ's body and blood, as the nature of so excellent a Sacrament requires.
This is the Page 83.
key which M. Higgons found to unlock his understanding that it might run
riot into all idle and childish discourses. But see the infelicitie of the man!
He was no sooner at liberty, but presently again he was encompassed and
brought into such a strait, that either he must disclaim my book, or his
Protestanticall belief. Yet Page 86
did he not suffer himself long to be so enclosed, but full wisely chose
rather to forsake the Religion he was bredde in, and which as a public
Preacher he had taught others, then to disclaim my book. Because as he
says, that Religion cannot be good, that is so falsely and absurdly defended
by me, and all the chief Authors that ever applied their pains unto that
service. Surely the poor fugitive is greatly to be pitied, as weak in
understanding, and meddling with things not fit for him, if he do that he
does in simplicity: or exceedingly to be detested as a graceless person, if
he do it, as it is to be feared, out of malice. For what is it in my Book
that is so false and absurd, as that the consideration thereof should make a
man forsake his religion? is not Transubstantiation one of the greatest
mysteries of Popish religion, as I have said? is that falsely delivered by me?
No: but I say no miracle was ever done to confirm any thing defended by the
Romanistes against us, and yet Gerson, highly commended by me, says, many
Miracles have been wrought for proof and confirmation of that
Transubstantiation which the Papists at this day believe, and this is the
falsitie and absurdity he speaks of. That no miracle was ever wrought to
prove the monstrous conceit of Popish Transubstantiation, or any other Popish
error, shall stand good when heaven and earth shall be no more. And if ten
thousand Gersons, nay, if so many Angels from heaven should affirm the
contrary, I would not believe them; much less Gerson, a single witness in
such a case. This is then the absurdity that made him become a Papist, that I
commend Gerson, and yet believe not euerything he says. Truly this absurdity
would never move any but an absurd smatterer to alter his Religion. For does
not Higgons himself admire Pighius, Catharinus; Contarenus, and sundry other
from whom he dissenteth in the matter of justification, original sin, and
the certainty of grace? Does he not highly commend many that thought the Pope
may err, that he is subject to General Counsels, and may be deposed by them,
not for Heresy alone, but for other enormous crimes also? and yet I think he
will not be of their opinion. So that though Gerson should think that the
Transubstantiation which we deny, was proved by miracles, it were no such
intolerable absurdity to commend him for much piety, devotion, learning, and
virtue, and yet to dissent from him in this point. In the matter controuersed
in former times in the Roman Church touching the conception of the blessed
virgin, were there not whorthy men on both sides? did not the Patrons of her
spotless conception pretend and allege sundry miracles and visions for
confirmation thereof? yet was it no absurdity for Opusc. tomo. 2. tract. 1. De
conceptione virginis. cap. 1.
Cardinal Caietan following the current of Antiquity, to dissent from them,
how many and worthy soever they were, and to call all their pretended miracles
in question. But indeed here is no such matter; for Gerson is not so ill
advised, as to dissent from his worthy Master, and confidently to affirm that
a thousand, and a thousand, renowned for piety and learning, by a thousand, and
a thousand miracles, gave testimony to the opinion of the substantial
conversion of the Sacramental elements into the body and blood of Christ
(which the Lib. 4. did. 11.
Master of the Sentences, and the Author of the In 1. ad Corint. 11.
Ordinary gloss, profess to be doubtful, and Caietan says so many admitted
not even in his time.) But the only thing he affirms to have been
confirmed by Miracles is, that Christ's body and blood are truly present in the
Sacrament, that they are given to be the food of our souls, and that the
outward elements are changed to become the body and blood of Christ; which we
deny not, though we dissent from the Papists touching the manner of the
conversion, which they imagine to be substantial; to which opinion happily
Gerson might consent, as Cameracensis also did, though he professed he could
not see the deduction of it from Scripture, or any determination of the Church,
and inclined rather to think that the substance of bread and wine remain, and
that the body and blood of Christ become present together with them, according
to that of Cusanus, Excitationum. lib. 6. page ^25.
who says, certain ancient Divines are found to have been of opinion, that
the Bread is not substantially changed, but that it is clothed upon with a
more noble substance, as we hope to be clothed upon with the light of glory,
our substance remaining the same it was: and seems not much to dislike their
opinion. Thus we see, poor runnagate Higgons has made a great outcry, when
there was no cause; for here is neither falsehood nor absurdity, but in
himself, who to wrecke his anger has sold himself to be an absurd Patron of
error and untruth. The rest of his frivolous discourse following, being but a
reflection, as he calls it, upon these premises, I will not trouble my self
nor the reader with.

The Second Book.
. 1.
I Come to his Second Book, in the first part whereof he challenges me for
traducing the four Doctors of the Church, beginning with Gregory, and from him
proceeding to the rest. To make it appear that I have wronged Gregory, First
Page 101.
he notes, that the principal drift of my discourse touching the Church, is
to prove that the opinions wherein the Papists dissent from the Protestants at
this day, were not the doctrines of the Church wherein our Fathers lived and
died, but of a faction only, predominating in the same. Secondly, page 102.
that to this purpose I frame an appendix, wherein I produce the testimonies of
sundry Fathers and Schoole-authors, to justify the foresaid position. Thirdly,
that Ibid.
descending into the controversy, whether any sins be remitted after this
life, or not, I use this pretense; to wit, that whereas Lombard and other do
say, that some venial sins are remitted after this life, we must so
understand their sayings, that therefore they are said to be remitted after
this life, because they are taken away in the very moment of dissolution, the
last instant of life being the first after life. That this is the sum of that
Exposition I make of Lombards, and other men's opinion, concerning the remission
of sins after this life wherein, how sincerely, and exactly I deal, he will not
dispute. 4ly, Ibid.
That to corroborate this my Exposition, I bring a testimony of S. Gregory, not
without great wrong done unto him.

To these his observations I briefly answer: First, that it is true that the
doctrines wherein the Papists and We dissent at this day, were not the
doctrines of that Church, wherein our Fathers lived and dyed; but that I have
in any part untruly set down the differences between them and us, this false
runnagate shall never be able to prove: though, if his credit would reach unto
it, he would gladly make men believe so. 2ly, That I have indeed framed and
added such an Appendix as he speaks of, to my Third book, wherein I have
produced sundry learned men, and Schoole-authors, for proof of that my former
position; calling them, as they well deserve, worthy and learned men: but, that
they are mine enemies, or that I speak honorably of them for mine own
advantage; is but the saying of a silly fellow, that cares not much what he
says, so he may be thought to say something. Thirdly, that this good fellow,
that complains so much of falsehood and bad dealing, has in his third
observation wholly mistaken the matter, and shamefully belied me; for I make not
that costruction of the sayings of Lombard and others, which he speaks of,
but it is the construction of Alexander of Ales, the irrefragable Doctor, and
first of all the Schoolmen. But that the Reader may the better perceive how
he peruerteth all that comes in his way, I will lay down the matter at
large. In the twentieth Chapter of that Appendix he speaks of I produce the
judgment and resolution of Scotus, Durandus, and Alexander of Ales, that all
sinfulness is utterly abolished in the very moment of dissolution, and that
there is no remission of any sin, in respect of the fault and stain after
death. The words of these Authors I set down at large. The words of Alexander
of Ales are these. Sum. lib. 4. qu. 25. memb. (...) art 3.
Final grace takes away all sinfulness out of the soul, because when the
soul parts from the body, all pronenesse to ill, and all perturbations which
were found in it, by reason of the conjunction with the flesh, do cease, the
powers thereof are quieted, and perfectly subjected to grace, and by that
means, all venial sins removed: so that no venial sin is remitted after this
life; but in that instant wherein grace may be said to be final grace, it has
full dominion and absolute command, and expels all sin. Whereunto he adds,
that whereas the Mr of Sentences, and some other do say, that some venial sins
are remitted after this life; some answer that they speak of a full remission,
both in respect of the fault and stain, and the punishment also: but that
others more narrowly and piercingly looking into the thing, do say, that they
are to be understood to say, sins are remitted after this life, because (it
being the same moment or instant that does continuate the time of life, and
that after life, so that the last instant of life, is the first after life)
they are remitted in the very moment of dissolution, grace more fully infusing,
and pouring it self into the soul at that time, then before, to the utter
abolishing of all sin, all impediment formerly hindering her working, now
ceasing. So that these are the words of Alexander of Ales, delivering the
opinio^of many worthy men in the church, and not mine: and therefore whether he
and they do aptly expound the sayings of the Master of Sentences, and others,
or not, it is nothing to me; for I do not so interpret the sayings of these
men, nor cite him to prove they are to be so interpreted: but cite him only
to show, that many learned men, in former times, did think all sinfulnes to be
purged out of the souls of men, departing hence in the state of grace, even in
the very moment of dissolution: which he clearly shows, and besides tells
us how they sought to construe the sayings of them that seemed to be of
another judgment, that they might not be thought to be contrary hereunto. The
same may be confirmed out of In 4. sent. d. 24 q. 1.
Bonaventura, who says, it was the opinion of certain Doctors, who were of
good understanding, that no sin is remitted after death, because the force of
Free Will, in respect of merit, or demerite, does altogether cease. These, as
he says, thought, that venial sins are wholly remitted and taken away,
either by repentance, or by final grace, if there be no time and place for
repentance: as when a just and good man is suddenly seized upon by death. The
Author of the book called Part, 3. de effectu peccati venialis.
Regimen Animarum, a manuscript copy whereof I have, who lived about the year
1343, has these words. Delet gratia finalis veniale peccatum, in ipsa
dissolutione corporis, and animae, ex virtute completionis sui status, quamvis
motus contritionis non sit ad illud directus, and hoc ab antiquis dictum est;
sed modo communiter tenetur, quod peccatum veniale hinc deferatur a multis,
etiam quoad culpam. That is, final grace does abolish and utterly take away
venial sin in the very dissolution and parting of the soul and body, in
that she grows to be in a full and perfect estate, though no motion of
contrition be directed to the putting of it away: and this was said by the
Ancient, but now it is commonly holden, that many carry venial sins with
them out of this world. even in respect of the stain and fault. Caietan
agrees with those Ancient Divines, that this Author speaks of: his words
are these: Caiet. opus. tom. l. tract. 23. q. 1.
Patet quod nec pro fomite purgando, qui etiam in baptizatis remanet, nec pro
reliquis quibuscunque, nisi satisfactione debit a pro commissis velomissis,
poenae sunt purgatoriae; sicut nihil acquirit grave ex remotione prohibentis,
sed iuxta pristinam gravitatem tendit ad proprium locum: it a anima ex
remotlone prohibentis, iuxta sortitam prius charitatem, in coelestis patriae
mansionem sibi paratam intrat. That is; It is evident, that Purgatory pains
serve neither for the purging out of the remains of concupiscence, which still
abides even in the Baptized; nor for the taking away of any other thing
whatsoever: but only for the satisfying for the sins of omission and
commision that are past: and therefore if that be once performed, as a heavy
thing, when that is taken away which hindered, gets no new quality or
virtue, but by force of that weight and heaviness it formerly had, goes to
the proper place where nature has appointed it to rest: so the soul so soon
as that is taken away which hindered, by force and virtue of that charity it
formerly had, enters into the mansion of the Heavenly Country provided for
it. Further he adds, that, as after death, charity is, extra statum
merendi, that is, in a state wherein there is no farther meriting: so likewise
it is in a state, wherein it is capable of no increase, the increase of
charity being the bound of the merit of it: whence it follows, that there
is no purging out of any sin after death; for if after death there be no new
increasing of that grace and charity which during life stood together with
venial sin, there is no purging out of any such sin after death; seeing it
is charity stirred up, and enkindled, that consumes sin, as the burning
Furnace does a drop of water, and nothing else. This is the resolution, not
of a few or mean men, but of many, and those the greatest and best esteemed of
in the Churches, wherein our Fathers lived and died. To these I say, Gregory
seems to agree, saying, That the very fear that is found in men dying,
purges out the lesser sins. But here Master Higgons has noted Page 103.
three points of fraudulencie, as he says, committed by me in a few words:
First by an omission: in that, whereas Saint Gregory says, plerunque, for the
most part it is so, I omit and leave out this particle: Secondly, by a
reddition in that whereas Gregory says the Smallest, I say the Lesser.
Thirdly, by an extension, in that whereas Gregory says the Souls of the just
are purged, I say in a more general sort, the souls of men dying are purged.
For answer hereunto I say, I have no way misalledged Gregory, nor derived any
conclusion out of any words of his, contrary to his purpose and Doctrine in
other places; for Dialog. li: 4. cap: 46.
Gregory seems to be of opinion, that the fear, that is found in the souls
of good men dying, does always purge out the lesser sins, so often as it is
found in them: but, that it is not always found in them, but for the most
part; whereas I have only said, it does purge out such sins, without adding
always, or for the most part. And that he adds the particle for the most
part, to show that this fear is not always found in good men, when they are
to die, and not to deny the effect of purging out the smaller sins unto it,
wheresoever it is found, appears, in that immediately after; by way of
opposition he says, that, nonnunquam, that is sometimes, God strengthens and
confirms the minds of men ready to die, that otherwise would fear, so that
they do not fear at all: but if we take the words as Higgons would have us,
yet am I no whit disaduantaged: for if the fear of Gods judgments alone, do
for the most part purge out the lesser sins, it is likely that other good
motions, and the strengthening of grace, and putting of it into a state of
perfection, by the subtraction of impediments, should take away the rest: which
is all that I have said. For I do not say, that he does agree with those that
think all sinfulness is purged out in the very moment of dissolution; but
that he seems to agree with them, or that in consequence of reason he
should agree with them. Neither is his next exception of least, and lesser, any
better then this: For Gregory himself in the thirty ninth chapter of the same
book speaking of those sins, that are compared to timber, hay, and stubble,
and are to be purged out by the fire, the Apostle speaks of to the
Corinthians; calls them indifferently peccata parua, and minima, le^ia, and
leuissima, minuta, atque leuissima, that is small and smallest, light and
lightest sins: so that small or light sins in the positive degree, are the
same with him that least or lightest: and therefore it was no fraudulencie in
me, not translating any sentence of Gregory, but reporting his opinion
touching venial sins, indifferently and freely to name them, small, lesser,
or smallest, and lightest sins; seeing in his meaning and phrase of speech,
and truth of the thing it self they are all one. The last exception is more
frivolous then the two former, for speaking only of the souls of the just,
and the purging out of such sins as are found in them till death, in my whole
discourse, what need was there, that I should add just, seeing no man could
possibly understand me to speak of any other? but it seems the pooreman
knows not well what he says, for he will have Gregory to mean by just
men, men of singular s^ctity, and not generally all that are in the state of
grace: and yet denies that all the sins of these, are purged out in death, so
casting into purgatory, not only those of the middle sort, but the best and
perfittest also, contrary to the opinions of his own Divines. So that we see
here is much a do about nothing: and as the poor man said, when he shore his
Sow: here is a great cry and a little woolle. For I do not absolutely say,
that Gregory fully agrees with these worthy Divines before mentioned, who
think all sinnefullnesse to be utterly abolished and removed out of the soul,
in the very moment of dissolution; but that he seems to agree unto them; or
that in consequence of reason he should agree unto them, in that he makes
the very fear, that is found in men dying, to purge out their lesser sins,
when it is found in them, though always it be not found in them: which is not
my private conceit, but the Grecians in their Apology touching Purgatory, long
before delivered the very same more peremptorily; namely, that Gregory by this
saying, and some other found in him, does utterly ouerthow that Purgatory which
he is thought to teach: And if he will be pleased to peruse the Schoolmen,
he shall find in Summae. lib. 4. q. 1^. memb. 3. ^t. 3.
Alexander of Ales, that the best of them thought Gregory to be of opinion,
as they also were, that all sin in respect of the stain, or fault, is purged
out in death: some interpreting his words, where he speaks of remission of
sins after this life, of that remission which is in the last instant of this
life, and the first of the next: and ^her ^herwise. And therefore Master
Higgons might well have spared his taxation of me, and omitted his marginall
note, Page 103.
that many such tricks were found by the Bishop of Eureux in the writings of
the Lord Plessis Mornay. For in all that which I have written touching this
point, there is not so much as the least shadow of any ill dealing: and for
that worthy Gentleman, against whom that Bishop so^ght advantage, by
cauilling against some parts of his allegations; it will be found, that he
has more sincerely handled the controversies of religion, then ever any
Romanist did. That if any mistaking be found in him; there are many more, and
more material in far less compass, in the writings of Cardinal Bellarmine
himself: and that in his anatomy of the Mass, the book excepted against by
the Bishop of Eureux, he has in such sort cut in sunder the sinews, not
only of the Mass, but of the whole mass of Romish religion; that all the
rabble of Romanists will never be able orderly to answer that whole book,
howsoever it is easy to cavil against some parts of any thing never so well
written.

But to return to the matter in hand: whatsoever we think of Gregory, of
whom I say only, that he seems to agree unto the opinion of those Divines,
who think all sinnefulnesse to be purged out of the souls of men dying in the
state of grace, in the moment of dissolution: it is certain, that exceeding
many of best esteem in the Roman Church informer times, were of that opinion:
and the same is proved by unanswerable reasons. Whence it will follow
ineuitably, that there remains no punishment to be suffered after death, by
men dying in the state of grace. For they are propositions of Saint Bernard,
that all the world cannot except against; Bern: in Psalm. qui habitat. Sermon. 10.
that when all sin shall be wholly taken out of the way, no effect of it
shall remain: that the cause being altogether removed, the effect shall be
no more: and, that all punishment shall he as far from the outward man, as
all fault shall be from the inward. Now that all sinfulness is purged out in
the very dissolution of soul and body, is confirmed, as I said, by
unanswerable reasons; for seeing the remains of natural concupiscence, the
pronenesse to evil, difficulty to do good, and contrariety between the
better and meaner faculties of the soul, are wholly taken out of the souls of
all them that die in the state of grace, in the moment of dissolution, even in
the judgment of our adversaries themselves, (there being nothing in the fault
or stain of sin, but the act, desire, and purpose; which cannot remain,
where concupiscence, the fountain thereof, is dried up: or the habitual
liking, and affecting of such things as were formerly desired, purposed, or
done ill; which cannot be found in a soul, out of which, all natural
concupiscence, inclining to the desiring of things inordinately, is wholly
taken away, and it self turned to the entire desiring of God alone, and
nothing, but in, and for him; as is every soul, out of which, concupiscence,
inclining to affect finite things inordinately, is wholly taken away.) It is
more then evident, that all sinnefulnesse is wholly taken out of the soul of
each good man, in the very moment of his death, dissolution, and departure
hence. See then the absurdity of Romish Religion! the soul of a good man, in
the moment of death, is wholly freed from all sinnefulnesse* there is nothing
found in it, that displeases God: charity, and grace, making those in whom it
is, acceptable to GOD, is perfect in it: and yet it must be punished, to
satisfy the justice of GOD, because it was sometimes sinful. Truly Ieuer
thought, whereas there are two things in sin, the fault, deformity, or
stain; and the punishment; that Christ, who is the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world, by the working of his sanctifying grace, purges
out the one; and by virtue of his satisfactory sufferings, freeth such as he
purges from the impuritie of sin, from the punishment due unto it; and that
in proportionable sort he purges out the one; and, by virtue of his
satisfactory sufferings, freeth us from the other. So that when sin is only
so purged out, that it is no more predominant, there remains no condemnation,
but yet some punishment, as in the case of David; and when it is wholly taken
away, there remains no punishment at all: which whosoever contradicts, is
injurious to the sufferings of Christ, and the Justice of God, who will not
require one debt to be twice paid. For it is most certain, that Christ suffered
the punishments, not only of those sins, that men commit in the time of
ignorance, (...), and the state of Nature, before Baptism and Regeneration,
but of all sins: and that the reason, why notwithstanding godless men are
subject to all kinds of punishments, as before; is, because they do not
become one with CHRIST; nor are made partakers of his sanctifying Spirit,
purging out the sinfulness that is in them; that they might enjoy the benefit
of his satisfaction: as likewise the reason, why good men, such as Da^id,
turning to God by repentance, are still subject to some punishments in this
life, notwithstanding their union with CHRIST, is, because they are not so
fully conjoined to CHRIST, and made partakers of his Spirit, as to be purged
from all sin. For if they were, they should be freed from all punishment by
his sufferings: he having suffered for all them, that become one with him, all
that the Justice of God requires. This is that heresy of the Papists, which I
speak of, namely that, to satisfy Gods Justice, the souls of men dying in
the state of grace, must suffer punishments answereable to the sins they
sometimes committed, though now pure from all sin. This conceit never any
of the Ancient had: howsoever some of them supposed, that sinful men in hell,
may be eased or delivered thence; and some other (as Augustine, and such as
followed him in the Latin Church) were doubtful whether some impuritie might
not remain to be purged out of the souls of men dying in the state of grace,
by afflictions and chastisements after this life. And therefore it is untrue
that M Higgons says, Page 108.
This imputation of heresy cleaves as fast to the Fathers, whom we pretend to
honor and reverence, as to any Papist at this day. If Gerson, or any other
whom I honor, held this heresy, they held it not heretically, as the
Romanists now do: even as Cyprian held the heresy of rebaptization, and
sundry of the Ancient the heresy of the Millenaries, but not heretically: so
that Vincentius Lyrinensis says, Contra prof. Hae ^t. novit c. 9
The Fathers were saved, and the children condemned: the authors of errors
acquitted, and the followers of them in the same, cast into the pit of hell. But
Mr Higgons says, Bernard (whose sayings touching the not punishing of such as
are freed from the impurity of sin I allege; thereby to overthrow the
erroneous conceit of Papists touching Purgatory) admits Purgatory: and
therefore Page 105.
I traduce the Testaments of the dead, to establish such doctrines as they
impugn. For answer whereunto I say, that whether Bernard admit Purgatory or
not: yet may he have a sentence, which supposing all sinfulnes to be purged
out in the moment of dissolution, proves that there is no Purgatory, to which
purpose I allege him, and therefore traduce not the testaments of the dead to
establish any Doctrines they impugned; as M^ Higgons untruly and unjustly
charge me. For my Page 107
distilling our Church out of the writings of learned men living under the
Papacy, I shall have a sitter place to answer him, when I come to his
Appendix: where I will make it appear, that the Israel of God has not
binforced (as he untruly says it has) to seek to the Philistines as the
distressed Israelites did for the sharpening of their tools, when there was no
Smith in Israel: but that the Israel in Canaan deriueth it self from that
Israel that sometimes was in Egypt in misarable bondage, enjoys the jewels
and treasures, and fights against the enemies of God, with the weapons
brought from thence. And thus much touching Gregory.

. 2.
IN the next place he comes to Augustine, whom he says; I have likewise
abused. The words wherein the supposed abuse is offered unto him, are these.
The Romish manner of praying for the dead has no certain testimony of
antiquity, for no man ever thought of Purgatory till Augustine, to avoid a
worse error, did doubtingly run (...): after whom many in the Latin Church
embraced the same opinion; but the Greek Church never received it to this day.
(...) inwhich words he says: I note the temerity; irresolution, and folly of
Augustine: the Reader, I doubt not, will note his temerity and folly, in s Page
108.
censuring me thus without a cause: for I note not Saint Augustine for
temerity, nor make him the Author of a new fancy, as he falsely charge me*
but show, that, whereas there were very dangerous opinions in the Church in his
time; touching the state of the departed, (many of great esteem thinking that
men dying in mortal sin, and adjudged to hell, shall in the end come out
thence and be saved* he sought to qualify the matter in the best sort he
could, with least offense unto them, and to bring them from that error, and
therefore says, Enchirid. ad Laurentium. cap. 67.
If they would acknowledge the punishments of such to be eternal, and think
only that they may be mitigated or suspended for a time, or that men dying in
the state of grace, yet in some lesser sins are afflicted for a time in the
other world, (though he know not whether these things be so or not) yet he
would not strive with them. This is not to be the author of a new fancy; but,
in hope to reclaim men from a great extremity, to leave something less
dangerous in the same kind, doubtful: and this is all that I say of Saint
Augustine; neither is this my private fancy: but the Graecians, in that learned
Apology before mentioned, have the same observation, to wit, that he wrote not
those things which he has touching Purgatory, out of a certain persuasion,
and as undoubtedly holding them to be true: but as it were in a sort enforced,
and for the avoiding of a greater evil, which was this, that there is a
purging of all sins after death, as some then thought. So that as it seems,
thinking it something a violent course, directly to go against the opinion of
many; and fearing, his words would not seem probable, if whereas others
thought all sins may be purged out after death, he on the contrary side should
say none may be purged, he chose rather to go in a middle way not
contradicting that which is less absurd, and inconvenient: (that so he might
more easily bring them he had to deal with from that which was far more
inconvenient,) then too much to exasperate the^. This was the apprehension the
Grecians had of Augustines writings touching this point: which whosoever shall
without any sinister affection peruse, will find to be right and true.
Touching irresolution, it was far from Augustine in matters pertaining to the
rule of faith: but in other things, wherein men may be ignorant and doubtful,
and dissent one from another; without danger of eternal damnation: no man was
more slow to resolve; no man more inclined to leave things doubtful. But
howsoever, that he was doubtful and unresolved in the points concerning the
state of the dead, it is evident in that he says: Vbi supr.
If they, whose merciful error he refuteth, would only think, the pains of
them that are in hell to be mittigated, or suspended: he would not greatly
strive about it: though, I am well assured, he would not willingly have
resolved, that these things are so. The like may be said touching the temporal
affliction of good men dying in the state of grace, but yet with some lesser
sins: for he was ever doubtful concerning the same: and never resolved that
they are undoubtedly in a state of temporal afflictions, as Master Higgons
untruly Page 113.
reports, and thence infers many things childishly against me: but that
they are in a state wherein prayers may avail the^: which two things are very
different. For the Graecians in their Apology, before cited, admit remission of
sins after this life, and yet deny that there is any estate of temporal
affliction. And I have showed before, how sins may be said to be remitted
after this life in the entrance into the other world, without admitting
Purgatory-punishme^ts. But it cannot be excused that I say, Augustine
fearfully opposed himself against the error of the^, who thought all
right-beleeuing Christians, how wickedly soever they lived, shall in the end
be saved. Surely the Graecians said as much before, and are in good hope to be
excused: and therefore I am in some hope that I may be also: for I do not say
that he so feared any thing, as to conceal any truth he was thoroughly resolved
of, and which he held necessary to be known of all: but that he feared to
offend them he dealt with, farther than of necessity he must: and therefore
resolved to yield to them as far as possibly he might, without impugning
known and resolved truths, they being many and of great esteem, that were
otherwise minded, then he was. Thus have I no way wronged St Augustine, but
done him the the greatest right I could: for I have showed, that he impugned
not only the error of Origin, touching the salvation of all, even the Devil
and his Angels, and of such as thought that all men, or at least all Christian
men though Heretics and Schismatickes, shall in the end be saved: but of them
also that thought only that all right-beleeuing Christians shall be saved how
wickedly soever they live: affirming, that noe such thing may be yielded, and
yet professing himself doubtful touching the mitigation and suspension of
their pains for a time, as also whether men dying in the state of grace, and
yet with some lesser sins, be afflicted for a time, and after delivered. So
that he brought the conceit concerning the salvation by fire and punishment,
of men departing hence in the state of sin, from that exceeding large extent,
to this strait: assuring himself more might not be yielded, and professing he
knew not whether so much might or not. And therefore he was the author of this
limitation, that the error should not be so dangerous; but not of the error
it self, touching the salvation of men dying in the state of sin: which no
way tends to his disgrace; but to his commendation.

But Master Higgons will prove Page 110.
that he was not the first that fell into the opinion of this Purgatory, of
men dying in the state of grace; first out of the Magdeburgians, and secondly
out of the testimonies of sundry Fathers, teaching the same Purgatory before
Augustine, as he pretends: To the Magdeburgians it may be answered in a word,
that they speak of the Purgatory of such as depart hence in mortal sin,
when they attribute the error of Purgatory, to Origin and others before
Augustines time. For Origin made all punishments, even those of the Devil and
Damned ones, to be but Purgatory-punishments: and therefore that they say is
nothing to our purpose. Wherefore let us see what testimonies of Fathers,
before Augustine, Master Higgons can produce, for confirmation of his
supposed Purgatory. The first he brings is Saint Basil. in Esaiae. 9.
Basil, who writing upon those words of Esaias, Iniquity shall ^ee burned as
fire, and devoured of the fire as any grass, and burned up in the thickness
of the wood, and again, all the earth shall be set on fire in the furious and
fierce wrath of the Lord; and all the people shall be as it were burned by
fire: First shows, that iniquity may fitly be compared unto grass, the
generation whereof is infinite, in that sin begets and succeeds it
self, fornication, fornication, lying, lying: and so in the rest. Secondly,
that if we reveal and make bare our sin by confessing and acknowledging it,
we make it like dry grass, fit to be devoured and consumed by the purging
fire: but that, if it become not like dry grass, it shall not be devoured by
the fire. Thirdly he interprets the thickness of the wood to be men
darkened in their cogitations, and keeping many evils in the secret of their
hearts. Fourthly, whereas it is said, the earth is set on fire by the fierce
wrath of the Lord, he says the Prophet means, that earthly things are
delivered to the punishing fire, for the good of the soul: according to that
of the Lord, I come to send fire into the earth, and my desire is, that it be
kindled as soon as may be. Fifthly, he shows, that whereas the Prophet
says, The people shall be burned as with fire, he threatens not destruction,
but promises purgation: according to that of the Apostle, If any man's work
burn, etc. Here indeed mention is made of purging-fire; but it is the fire
of tribulation in this world, and of divine affections which it kindles, for
the consuming and burning up of the sins of them, that acknowledge them,
and make them bare by feeling and confessing how displeasing they are to God:
whereas otherwise it works no such effect. But here is no word, nor
circumstance, whence it may be collected, that Basil speaks of any Purgatory
after this life; nay it is plain, he speaks of that fire, which Christ came
to bring into the world, and to cast out upon the earth, and which he desired
to be kindled, as soon as might be: which things, I think are not appliable
to Popish Purgatory. Nazianz. Orat. 40. in sanctum Baptisma.
The Scripture, says Gregory Nazianzene, mentions a purging-fire, which
CHRIST came to send into the earth, and himself anagogically is called fire:
the nature of this fire, is to waste and consume away the grosser matter, and
vicious disposition of the mind: and therefore CHRIST desires to have it
kindled as soon as may be, that we may have the benefit of it: which I
think can hardly be understood of Purgatory, unless we suppose CHRIST
wishes us all to be in those torments with speed. Nicetas writing upon
Nazianzene, expounds the purging-fire he speaks of, to be love, and faith
toward God, which purge our souls from sin, and ignorance, and divide the
godly, from the ungodly and unbelievers. Another fire Nazianzene says there
is, which is not a purging, but a revenging fire; whether it be that
Sodomiticall fire, which, mixed with brimstone and tempest, God powers on the
heads of sinners: or that which goes before the face of the Lord, and burns
up his enemies on every side: or lastly, that which is more horrible then all
these, which is joined with the restless worm, and which never goes out. So
that we see neither Gregory, nor Nicetas, knew any thing of the Papists
Purgatory-fire after this life, mentioning all the kinds of fire that are
spoken of in Scripture, and omitting it clean. To Basil Mr Higgons adds,
Hom. 3. de Epiph.
Eusebius Emissenus, who was more ancient then he. But his own Sixtus
Senensi^ Bibl. sanct. l. 4. Baron. tom. 3. 341. 11.
friends will tell him, these Homilies which he cites, that go under his
name, are none of his: but that they were collected out of the Latin Fathers
by Beda or some other: the sentence doubtless which he cites, is found word
for word in Augustines Homily upon the Epiphanie. But howsoever the Author of
these Homilies seems to speak of a trying fire, through which all must
pass, and not of the Papists imagined Purgatory. The next testimony he
brings, is out of Gregory Nyssen; but as the Graecians in their Apology
note, they are not well advised that allege Gregory Nyssen to (...) Sermon. de
defunctis.
this purpose; seeing he speaks not of a particular purging of some, but of a
general restoring of all: of which opinion also Didymus and Euagrius were.
This his gross error they excuse: first, for that happily these things might
be rois^ed into his works by Heretics: And secondly, for that he wrote
before the time of the Fifth General Council, wherein the error of Origin
was condemned. From these Greek Fathers, Master Higgons Page 11^
proceeds to the Latin: And first produces Ruffinus upon the Psalms: and
then Ambrose. That Ruffinus wrote upon the Psalms was never heard of, before
that of late one Antonius de Albone Archbishop of Lions, found out an unknown
work, in a certain ruinated Abbey, and put it out under the name of Ruffinus,
though as himself confesses, it seemed strange to many that such a work had
lain hid so long; and more strange, that so often the same sentences and
periods should be found in Augustine that are in this supposed Ruffinus;
seeing he could not take them from Augustine; and Augustine in all likelihood
would not borrow them from him, never using to be beholding to any man in this
kind: so that it may be thought this work had a latter Author then either of
these: and surely, the words Mr Higgons cites are the words of Augustine, and
therefore ill alleged to show that others before him thought as he did
touching the purging of men dying in an imperfit state of grace. Wherefore let
us come to Ambrose, out of whom he cites two places: the first is upon the
hundred and eighteen Psalm, the second upon the thirty six Psalm. Touching
the first of these places Cardinal De Purga^. l. 1. c. 4.
Bellarmine will tell him, that it is not to be understood of the fire of
Purgatory, but of the fire of Gods Judgment: which is not a purging or an
afflicting fire, but a trying and examining fire. I will set down the words at
large, that the Reader may judge of them. All must be proved by fire that
desire to return to Paradise, for it is not idly written, that when Adam and
Eve were cast out of Paradise, God set in the entrance into it, a fiery
two-edged, or turning-sword: for all must pass by slaming fire, whether it be
John the Evangelist whom the LORD so loved that he said of him to Peter: if I
will have him to abide, what is that to thee? follow thou me, (Of his death
some have doubted, of his passage through the fire we may not doubt, because he
is in Paradise, and is not separated from CHRIST,) or Peter that received the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and walked upon the Sea, he must be forced to
say, we have passed by fire and water, and thou have brought us into a place of
refreshing: but when John comes, the fiery sword shall soon be turned away,
because iniquity is not found in him, who^ equity loved. If there were any
fault found in him, as a man, the love of God wasted it away. For the wings
thereof are as the wings of fire: he that here has the fire of charity,
shall not there fear the fire of the sword, Christ shall say unto Peter, that
so often offered to die for him, pass and be at rest: but he shall say, he has
tried us in the fire, as silver is tried. etc, He shall be tried as silver,
but I shall be tried as lead. I shall burn till the lead melt away: if no
silver be found in me, woe is me, I shall be cast into the lowest hell, or
wholly burnt up as stubble: if any gold or silver be found in me, not by mine
own works, but by the mercy and grace of CHRIST, and by the ministry of my
Priesthood, happily I say, They that trust in thee, shall not be confounded.
Therefore iniquity shall be burned out by the fiery sword, that fitteth upon
the talent of Lead. He alone could not feel that fire, who is the justice of
God even Christ, who did no finne: for the fire found nothing in him, that it
could burn; but concerning others, even he that thinks himself Gold, has
lead: and he that thinks himself to be a grain of corn, has chafe, that
may be burned. Many here seem to themselves to be gold, I do not envy them,
but even the gold shall be tried: it shall burn in fire, that it may be
proved: for so it is written, I will prove them as gold in the fire: therefore
seeing we are to be tried, let us so behave our selves, that we may deserve to
be approved by the judgment of God; let us, while we are here, hold humility,
that when every of us shall come to the judgment of God, he may say, See my
humility, and deliver me. And upon the thirty sixth Psalm, he has these
words: We shall all be tried by fire: and Ezechiel says, Behold, the Lord
Almighty comes, and who shall abide the day of his coming? or who shall
endure it, when he shall appear unto us? for he shall come as purging fire,
and as Fullers soape, and he shall sit down to try and fine the gold and
the silver, he shall fine the sons of Levy, and power them out like gold and
silver, and they shall offer sacrifice to the Lord in righteousness. Therefore
the sons of Levy shall be fined by fire: Ezechiel shall be fined by the
fire: and Daniel shall be fined by the fire: but these, though they shall be
tried by the sire, yet they shall say: we have passed by fire and water: others
shall abide in the fire; to them the fire shall be as a moist dew, as it was
to the Hebrew children, that were cast into the hot burning furnace; but the
revenging fire shall burn up the Ministers of iniquity. Woe is me, if my
work shall burn, and I suffer loss of my labor! and if the Lord do save his
sernants, we shall be saved by faith, yet as by fire; and though we be not
burned up, yet we shall be burned: but how some remain in the fire, and
other pass thorough it, let the Scripture in another place teach us. The
people of Egypt were drowned in the Red sea: the people of the Hebrews passed
through it: Moses passed, Pharaoh was ouer-whelmed because his grievous sins
did drown him: in like sort sacrilegious persons shall be cast headlong into
the lake of burning fire: etc. Here we see Ambrose speaks of the trial of
Gods severe and righteous judgment expressing the same by the name of fire:
because even our God is a consuming fire. And a fire shall go before him, when
he comes to judge the world: but of the Papists Purgatoryfire he has no
word. The fire he speaks of, is the fiery trial of Gods judgment, through
which he thinks all must pass, though never so holy, and be burned in it,
though not burned up, as the wicked shall. Of the same fire, not of Purgatory,
but of the judgment of God, does Hillary speak upon the same words of the
118. Psalm. and upon the second of Matthew, where expounding these words, He
shall Baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire, he says, it remains,
that they that have bin Baptized with the Holy Ghost should be comsummate and
made perfect in the fire of judgment. And before these Lactantius, Lib. 4. cap.
21. inst. Chr.
his words are these: therefore the Divine fire by one and the same virtue and
power shall burn the wicked etc. And also when the Lord shall judge the
righteous, he shall try them by fire: Then they whose sins shall prevail
either in weight or number, shall be burned up in the fire: but they whom full
and perfect righteousness and the maturity of virtue shall have thoroughly
seasoned, shall not feel that fire, because they have something of God in
them, to repel and reject the force of the flame, and so great is the force of
innocence, that that harmless fire does fly from it, having received power
from God to burn the ungodly, and to do service to the righteous. Many things
are found in Basil upon Esaias, which (as Biblioth. Sanct. lib. 5. annot. 17 1.
Sixtus Senensis says) may seem to tend to the same purpose, as In 4. Esaiae.
when upon those words he shall purge Jerusalem in the spirit of judgment and
in the spirit of burning:: he says, this is to be referred to the trial and
examination which shall be in fire in the world to come. Thus do none of those
Fathers, that Master Higgons alleges, say any thing for the imagined
Purgatory of Papists: but the same is clearly refuted by that which they say:
and therefore the Reader may be well assured, that it is most true, that I
have said: that Augustine was the first that ever spoke any thing of that
Purgatory, wherein men dying in an imperfect state of grace, are supposed to be
purged after this life by fire. These things being so, I doubt not but all men
of any indifferency will easily see that this idle Prater, which ran away
upon coffeehouse, had little reason to say page 109,
that he grew to a detestation of his religion, because he found my dealing to
be corrupt, and incapable of defense. His vain and childish Ibid.
retorting of that I say of Bellarmines impudency in another case and upon
another occasion, I little regard: seeing he gave me just cause to say that I
said, and I had good advantage against him; whereas this prating Fugitive has
none against me.

. 3.
THe next Father, which he says I have abused, is S. Hierome: the supposed
abuse offered to him, is, that I say, he was of opinion, that howsoever devils
and impious ones shall never be saved; yet all right-beleeuing Christians, how
wickedly soever they live, shall, after punishments suffered and endured, be
saved in the end. It was my hard hap to fall into the hands of this severe
censurer, that brandeth all that come in his way, with the note of ill dealing,
and abuse of Fathers: and therefore I think I must be forced to appeal from
him. And because Bellarmine is by him pronounced worthy of immortal honor,
let us hear what he will pronounce: De purgatorio, lib. 2. cap. 1.
There are, says he, who think, that blessed Hierom was in this error: yet it
seems he was not. Here is a more advised, and temperate censure, then that of
hot-spurre Higgons. Some think he was in this error, but it seems he was
not. So that it is not certain that he erred not in this point, but doubtful:
and my dealing is not so bad, as Master Higgons would make it to be. But let
us appeal yet farther, and make Hierome himself, even good Saint Hierome, as
this smatterer is pleased to style him, judge between us: If I make it not as
clear as the sun at noone day, that he was in this error, out of his own
indubitate writing, let Higgons insult upon me at his pleasure: but if I do, I
would entreat his superiors to teach him better manners.

In his first book against the Pelagians, he distinguishes unrighteous men,
and sinners, from ungodly, or impious: defining them to be ungodly, or impious,
that either never knew God, or after they had the knowledge of God, corrupted
and changed it; and then pronounces, that the unrighteous and sinners, that
have the right knowledge of God, shall not perish everlastingly. His words are
these. Who can endure that you have in the Chapter following? that the
unrighteous and sinners shall not be spared in the day of judgment, but be
burned up in those eternal fires? that you go about to stop the course of
Gods mercy, and to judge of the sentence of the judge, before the day of
judgment? so that although he would, he may not spare the unrighteous and
sinners, because you prescribe the contrary; for you say, it is written in the
Psalm, Let the sinners fail from the earth, and the unrighteous, that they
be noe more. And again in Esaias, The unrighteous and sinners shall be burned
together, and they that forsake God shall be destroyed, and do you not
understand that the threats of God have sometimes a sound of mercy? for he
does not say, they shall be burned up in everlasting fire; but that they shall
fail from the earth, and that the unrighteous shall cease: for it is one thing
for them to cease from sin, and iniquity: and another thing for them to
perish for ever, and to be burnt up in everlasting fire. To conclude, Esaias,
whose testimony you bring, says, the sinners and unrighteous shall be burned
together: and adds not, for ever: And they that forsake God shall be utterly
destroyed. This he speaks properly of heretics, who unless they convert
from their errors, shall perish: but what rashness is it to match and join
together unrighteous men and sinners, with such as are impious and ungodly? who
are thus defined by us. Every impious and ungodly man is an unrighteous man and
a sinner, but there is no reciprocation: neither may we say every sinner and
unrighteous man is also an impious and ungodly man: for impiety properly
pertains to them, that have not the knowledge of God, or having had the
knowledge of God, have corrupted and changed the same, etc. The Apostle to the
Romans says, who-soeuer have sinned without the Law shall perish without the
Law; and whosoever have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law. He
that is without the Law, is the godless or impious man, who shall perish
everlastingly: but he that is in the Law, is the sinner that believes in God,
who shall be judged by the Law, and not perish. And afterward he adds
these words: If Origin do say, that no reasonable Creature shall perish, and
attribute repentance to the devil; what is that to us, who say that the Devil
and his Angels, and all impious men and prevaricators shall perish for ever,
and that Christians if they shall be prevented and taken in sin, shall be saved
after punishment? Here we see the difference made not between one degree of
sinners, and another, but between sinners that profess rightly, and impious
and ungodly men, that have not the knowledge of God, or by heresy have
perverted the same: between men sinning without the Law, and so perishing, and
men sinning in the Law, that is, having the true knowledge of the Law, and so
judged by it, and yet not perishing everlastingly. Whence it follows
necessarily, that he thinks all right believers shall be saved. Which is
farther confirmed, in that, having excluded impious men, he speaks generally
of Christians, as in a state of salvation notwithstanding sin, though after
grievous punishments to be endured.

In his Commentaries upon Esaias, having spoken of their conceit, who think,
that all that have sinned and offended God, shall in the end find mercy, and
that no torments b In ultima verba Esaiae.
shall be eternal, he concludes in this sort: ^ As we believe that the
torments of the devil, of such as deny God, and of impious men, which have said
in their hearts, there is no God, are eternal: so we think, that the sentence
of the Judge, that shall be pronounced upon sinners and ungodly men, who yet
are Christians, whose works are to be tried and purged in the fire, shall be
moderate and mixed with clemency. Where we see again, he makes not the
difference between the degrees of sin, as the Romanists do, but between
impious men, that say in their hearts there is no God, that deny God and his
truth; and Christians that are unrighteous and sinners. Neither are those
words, whose works are to be tried and purged in the fire, to be taken
distinctiuely, to note forth unto us one certain degree of Christians, who
shall suffer a temporal punishment in fire, as M. Higgons would have them: but
explicatiuely, to signify the condition of all Christians. Which appears,
because otherwise he would not have said of sinners, and yet Christians; but of
sinners, and yet such Christians, whose works are to be tried in the fire. This
explication is added to put a difference between Christians, and such as are no
Christians; because the works of Christians only, and of all Christians, shall
come to be tried in the fire of Gods judgment, others being judged already, as
Hierome speaks, and adjudged to eternal perdition. These circumstances of
the words of Hierome considered, I think there is no indifferent reader, but
will conceive his opinion to have bin, as I have delivered it: and that I have
no way wronged him, but that Higgons has causelessly wronged Me.

Some places there are in Hierome that are brought to prove, that he was of
another opinion, but they prove nothing. The first is out of his Commentaries
upon Hosea, where he says, In cap. 4. Hos.
When heretics see men offend against God, they say, God seeks nothing of
them but the verity of faith: for this cause the people are not humbled, but
they rejoice in their sins; and go forward with a stiff neck: wherefore
the People and Priest, Master and Scholars, are bound up in the same judgment.
This place is alleged to no purpose: For here Hierome shows only, that
Heretics teaching falsely that God requires not good works; and such as
believing them, shall rejoice in evil doing, shall perish: which is no way
contrary to the other conceit, that right believing Christians, living ill,
shall in the end be saved. The next place they bring, is out of his
Commentaries upon Matthew: the words are these: In cap. 25 Math.
Mark prudent Reader, that both punishments are eternal, and that everlasting
life has no more fear of any fallings away: which no way contraryeth the
opinion of Hierome beforementioned. For he is resolved, that the punishments
of the Devil, his Angels and all impious ones, are eternal: but thinks
right believers, though living wickedly, shall be punished but for a time.
That out of his Commentaries upon the Galathians, In 5 ad Gal.
That enmity, contention, wrath, brawling, dissension, drunkenness, and
other-like, which we esteem to be but small evils, exclude us from the
Kingdom of GOD; If it be understood of right believers, accorcording to
Hieromes opinion, shows only what these deserve, namely exclusion from the
Kingdom of God, but prejudice not the riches of his mercy toward them that
do such things. Here by the way I would have the reader to observe a gross
oversight in M. Higgons; who says, Page 123.
it may as well be inferred out of the writings of Hierome, that he thought all
Christians shall in the end be saved, how damnably soever erring in matters of
faith, as right believers: Whereas, distinguishing the godless or impious man
that never knew God, or corrupts the knowledge he had of God, as heretics,
from a sinner or unrighteous man, he expressly pronounces the one to perish
everlastingly and not the other. Having thus cleared my self from the
suspicion of wrong offered to Hierome, which M. Higgons would willingly fasten
on me, I will persuade my self to contemn the wrongs he does me: As namely,
Page 121 122. and 12^.
that I use the testimonies of this Saint at my pleasure, that I vainly elude
the truth, and unconscionably entreat the Fathers; that I craftily convey
words into Saint Augustine: that I sort my terms wisely for my advantage, and
that I seek to dazzle the understanding of my readers: If Master Higgons were a
man of any worth, and should entreat me thus ill without all cause as he
does, I would let him know more of my mind: but I have resolved not to
turn back to every Curre that barketh at me.

SECT. 4.
WHerefore from Hierome I will pass to Ambrose, whom this profane Esau (who
has sold his birthright for a mess of pottage, for more I think he will
not have for it) brings in as he says, Page 125.
to make up the mess. In this idle discourse touching Ambrose, the poor
fellow is to be pitied, or laughed at, accordingly as men are disposed: so
ridiculously does he behave himself. The circumstances of the matter are
these. In the place cited by him, first, Third book of the Church. cap. 17.
I show in what sort men prayed lawfully for the dead, without any conceit of
Purgatory, namely respectively to their passage hence, and entrance into the
other world, and for their resurrection, public acquitall in the day of
judgment, and perfect consummation and bliss. Secondly, I show first, what
erroneous conceits some particular men in former times had, touching the
possibility of helping men dying in mortal sin, whereupon they prayed for
the dead, in such sort as the Romanistes dare not do: as for the deliverance
of men out of hell, or at least the suspension or mitigation of their pains,
and secondly, that they thought that there is no judgment to pass upon men,
till the last day; that in the mean while, all men are holden either in some
place under the earth, or else in some other place appointed for that purpose;
so that they come not into heaven, nor receive the reward of their labors till
the general judgment; and that out of this conceit that prayer in James his
Liturgy grew, that God would remember all the faithful that are fallen
asleep in the sleep of death, since Abell the just till this present day: and
that he would place them in the land of the living, as also many other like.
Of this opinion I report Iustine Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens Romanus,
Lactantius, Victorinus Martyr, Pope John the two and twentieth, and Ambrose to
have been, besides sundry other.

All that which I have said touching the lawful and unlawful forms of
praying for the dead, used amongst the Ancient, no way importing any conceit
in them of Purgatory, he passes over in silence, as no way able to refute any
part of it; and likewise by his silence yields that Iustine Martyr,
Tertullian, Clement Bishop of Rome, Lactantius, Victorinus Martyr, and Pope
John the two and twentieth were of the opinion I speak of; to whom I might have
added Irenaeus, Bernard, Theophylact, and many more. That all these should be
charged with this opinion, or with this folly, as he will have it, it never
troubles him: only he is much moved that Ambrose should be charged with any
such thing: It seems he is not of the Gregorian, but of the Ambrosian Church,
in that he is careless what becomes of his Popes, Clement, and John, so all
be well with Ambrose. Page 1^.
He was tormented (he says) with a necessary suspicion rather of my
unfaithfulness in this report, then of Saint Ambrose his folly in this matter.
Surely, if he were as wise as he is wilful, he would not pass his
censures, as he does; for it is no such folly, but that as wise a man, as S.
Ambrose, might fall into it, to think as so many learned, worthy and renowned
Divines did; and therefore Lib. 3. aduersus Haereses.
Alfonsus a Castro, having charged the Graecians and Armenians with this error,
says, that after these, John the two and twentieth rose up, and embraced the
same opinion: and least any man might give less credit to his words, he says
he will report the words of Pope Adrian, who writes thus: Last of all it is
reported of John the 22, that he publicly taught, declared and commanded all
to hold that souls though purged from sin, have not that stole, which is the
clear vision of God face to face, before the last judgment, and it is said,
that he brought the university of Paris to that point, that no man could take
any degree in Divinity there, unless first he did swear to defend this
error, and to adhere to it for ever: thus far Pope Adrian. Besides these there
are other Patrons of this error, men of renown and famous both for sanctity
and science; to wit, the most blessed Martyr of Christ, Irenaeus, Theophylact
Bishop of Bulgaria and blessed Bernard. Neither should any man marvel that
so great men fell into so pestilent an error; seeing as blessed James the
Apostle says, He that offends not in words, is a perfect man.
Notwithstanding the Reader is here to be admonished, that he think not, that
this error detracteth any thing from the holiness or learning of so great men
(so that it is no such imputation of folly to attribute this opinion to Ambrose
as wise M Higgons makes it:) for whereas at that time the Church had defined
nothing touching that matter, neither had it ever bin called in question, and
the testimonies of Scripture for that which is now defined, were not so
express, but that they might be wrested into another sense: they might teach
the one, or the other, without note of heresy: especially seeing there wanted
not testimonies of Scripture, that seemed in some sort to favor them. Thus
far Alfonsus a Castro. But let us see how Master Higgons will convince me,
that I have wronged Ambrose, which in so clamorous manner he undertakes to
do: Surely this is the ground of his quarrel against me: that having imputed
this opinion to Iustine Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens Romanus, Lactantius,
Victorinus, and Ambrose; in the margent I refer the reader to Sixtus
Senensis, who yet excused Ambrose from this error. But the silly Nouice should
know, that I do not say Sixtus Senensis attributes that opinion to Ambrose,
and that I put not his name in the margent, as if I grounded my imputation
upon his authority: For if I would have done so, I could have mustered
together a far greater number then I have done. But because it had bin
tedious to have set down the words of all those I mention, wherein they
express their opinion, in the margent I refer the reader to Sixtus Senensis,
who reports their words at large; according to the course of times wherein
they flourished, that the reader within the compass of one page may see what
they say, without turning over their large volumes: and among other, the words
of Ambrose, which I think, will strongly persuade him, he was of that
opinion, which I impute unto him, howsoever Sixtus Senensis by a favorable
construction labor to excuse him. Let us see therefore if Ambrose will not
witness for me, that I have done him no wrong, but truly reported his opinion.

The first thing I imputed unto him is, that he thinks, as many other did
before and after him, that there is no judgment to pass upon men till the
last day; If this be not clearly proved out of Ambrose his own words, let
the Reader think I have wronged him. In his second book of Caine and Abell,
he has these words. The Master of a Ship, when he has brought his Ship
into the haven, scarce thinks he has ended his labor, before he begin
to seek the beginning of a new: Soluitur corpore anima and post finem vitae
huius, adhuc tamen futu^ judicijambiguo sulpenditur.
the soul is loosed from the body, and after the end of this life it is still
holden in suspense, upon the uncertainty and doubtfulnesse of the future
judgment; so is there no end where there is thought to be an end.

The second thing I attribute to Ambrose, is, that he thinks the souls of
men are kept in some place appointed for that purpose, so that they come not
into heaven till the general judgment. Let us hear him speak himself, and
then let the Reader judge, whether he say not all that I impute unto him. In
his book Cap. 10.
de bo^ mortis, he has these words. In the books of Esdras we read, that
when the day of judgment shall come, the earth shall restore the bodies of the
dead, and the dust shall restore those relics and remains of the dead which
rest in the graves, and the secret habitations shall restore the souls which
have been committed to them, and the most High shall be revealed upon the
Seat of Judgment. From hence he says, the Gentiles took those things which
they admire in the books of Philosophers: and (blaming them that they mingled
superfluous and unprofitable things with those that are true, as the
demigration of souls into bees, birds, and the like fancies) says, it had
been sufficient for them to have said, that souls delivered out of mortal
bodies, petunt Haden, that is, go into an invisible place: which place in
Latin is called Infernus; and farther adds, that the Scripture calls these
secret habitations of souls, Storehouses. Here we see Ambrose says, there
are certain secret habitations of souls, which though they be higher then the
receptacles of dead bodies, yet are rightly called (...) in Greek, and Infernus
in Latin: and that these are Storehouses, keeping those souls that are
committed to them till the Resurrection, and then restoring them. If M. Higgons
do think that Infernus is Heaven, then I have no more to say to him:
otherwise I think the evidence of this place cannot be avoided.

The third thing I impute to Ambrose, is, that the souls of the Just receive
not the reward of their labors till the General Judgment. Touching which
point he has these words, Vbi sup^,
The Scripture meeting with the complaints of men which they doc or may make,
for that the Just which went before, seem to be defrauded of the reward due
unto them for a long time, even till the day of Judgment, wonderfully says,
that the day of Judgment is like unto a ring or crown, wherein as there is no
slacknesse of the last, so is there no swiftness of the first: for the day of
crowning is expected by all; that within it they that are overcome may be
ashamed, and they that are conquerours may attain the palm of victory: and,
after some other things inserted, he adds, that so long as the fullness of
time is expected, the souls expect their due reward: though neither the one
sort be without all sense of evil, nor the other of good. Thus if it had
pleased M. Higgons to look into Ambrose himself, and not to the opinion of
Senensis (to which I refer not the Reader, as he untruly says I do: but to
the words of Ambrose cited by him) he might have found that I dealt faithfully
and sincerely in this matter, and so have spared a great number of reproachful
terms he now bestows very liberally on me.

Some man happily will say, that elsewhere Ambrose seems to place the souls
of Just men in Heaven before the Resurrection, and that this place de bono
mortis, is to be interpreted by them. Whereunto I answer, that places where
things are but spoken of in passage, and not purposely, are rather to be
interpreted by those, wherein they are purposely handled, then otherwise: and
therefore this place de bono mortis; wherein he goes about to describe at
large the state of the dead, must be a rule to interpret other places by. The
most pregnant proof that is brought to the contrary out of his indubitate
works, is out of his Ep. l. 7. ep. 55.
Fpistle to the Thessalonians. where, speaking of Acholius, of whose death he
had lately heard, he faith, He is now an inhabitant of the higher world, a
possessor of the eternal city of Jerusalem, that is in Heaven, that he sees
there the unmeasurable measure of that City the pure gold, the precious stone,
perpetual light without any sun; and these things truly were well known to
him before, but now seeing face to face he says as we have heard, so have
we seen in the City of the Lord of hoastes, in the City of our God: and out
of the last of his Epistles, where, speaking of certain Martyrs, he says,
Lib. 10. ep. vl.
their souls are in Heautn, their bodies on Earth: but the answer hereunto
for the reconciling of the seeming contradictions of Ambrose, is easy; for in
the former place Cap. 11.
De bono mortis he shows, that he thinks that the souls of the Just, by
seven several degrees, as it were by the space of seven days, are led
along to take a view of the things they shall enjoy after the judgment: and
that afterward they are gathered into their habitations, there to enjoy the
benefit of their quiet congregating, or gathering together: seven days
liberty they have to see the former things, and then they are gathered into
their habitations. The seven degrees by which they are led those seven days;
are 1 the consideration of their victory, which they have obtained over the
flesh and other like enemies. 2 The quiet they find in themselves, from these
perturbations, and tormentings of conscience, which the wicked are subject
unto. Thirdly, the Divine testimony which they have in themselves, that they
have kept the Law, making them not to fear the uncertain event of the future
judgment. Fourthly, their beginning to discern their rest and future glory.
Fifthly, triumphant joy, in that they are come out of the prison of a
corruptible body, into light and liberty, and to possess the inheritance
promised to them. 6. The brightness of their countenances, beginning to shine
as the sun. 7. Their confident hastening to see the face and countenance of
God. Having been thus led along, they are brought into their habitations,
where they comfort themselves, in the foresight of that which shall be, and
rest peaceably, guarded by the Angels, in a place, as he describes it, above
the earth and places of dead bodies, and yet below the highest heaven, the
place of perfect happiness. And so Acholius might be said by Ambrose to be an
inhabitant of the higher places, and to see the glory of the Jerusalem that is
above, and yet not be in the highest heaven. But, he says, Acholius is a
possessor of that eternal City, and that the Martyrs bodies are on earth, and
their souls in heaven; therefore he thought the spirits of the just, to be in
the highest heaven, before the resurrection. This consequence, I fear, will
hardly be made good: for In festo omnium Sanctorum Sermon 3.
Bernard (who is confessed to have holden the opinion which I impute to
Ambrose) makes three estates of souls: the first, in Tabernaculis, the
second, in Atriis: and the third, in Domo interiori: That is, the first in
Tents or Tabernacles, while they remain in the corruptible bodies of men that
are in the warfare of Christ in the world: the second, in the outward Courts
of the Lords house: and the third, in the inner rooms of the house of God: so
sorting these things, that both the latter states of souls of men may be
said and thought to be in a sort in heaven, and to have possession of the
eternal Jerusalem, that is in Heaven, and yet but one of them be in the
highest heaven, where the perfection of the happy vision of God is: to which
purpose it is, that Saint Augustine says: In Psalm. 36.
after this life thou shall not be there where the Saints shall be, to whom it
shall be said, come ye blessed of my father, receive the Kingdom which was
prepared for you from the beginning of the world; but thou may be where the
proud rich man in the midst of torments saw a far off the poor man,
sometimes full of ulcers, resting: in that rest thou shall securely expect the
day of judgment. Here he denies directly the souls of the just to be in
heaven, where they shall be after the resurrection, and general judgment. In
his Lib. 9. cap. 3.
Confessions he says, Now Nebridius lives in the bosom of Abraham,
whatsoever that it is that is signified by that bosom; there lives my
Nebridius, my sweet friend. Here we see he is doubtful what the bosom of
Abraham is. Upon Genesis he doubts, whether the souls of the just be in the
third heaven, or n Li: 12, ca: 34.
not: which peremptorily in the place before cited he denied. Neither does he
speak thus doubtfully touching the place only, but touching the state of
happiness also: for in his Retractations thus he writes: Retract. l. 1. c. 14.
That makes us most happy, whereof the Apostle speaks, saying, then shall I
see him face to face; and then shall I know as I am known: they that have
found this, are to be said to be in the possession of blessedness; but who
these most blessed ones are who are in that possession, it is a great question:
that the holy Angels are, there is no question, but concerning holy men
departed, whether they may be said to be now already in that possession, it is
doubtful, etc. Surely it is marvel if Saint Augustine escape the censure of
Master Higgons, who pronounces it folly to doubt of these things. Lib. 6.
Annotat. 345.
Sixtus Senensis says, we must ciuilly interpret Saint Augustine in these his
sayings; but De Sanctoru^ beatitud. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Bellarmine says directly, he sometimes doubted of the place where the souls
of the just are after death: and that upon the 36. Psalm he denies them to be
there, where after the judgment they shall be: This is that Augustine, that
Master Higgons, in his scurrill and ruffian-like phrase, says, Page 121.
was not so easily to be iaded by me, as Ambrose; Thinking them all Iades as
it seems, and unfit for such a horseman as he is to ride on, that have
been doubtful or found to err in this point; if he do, I would desire to
know of him what he thinks of Irenaus, Aduersu. he^. 5. in fine.
who says, that the souls of men dying shall go into an invisible place
appointed for them by God, and shall abide there till the resurrection,
attending and waiting for it; and that after, receiving their bodies and
perfitly rising again, that is, corporally, as Christ rose, they shall come
into the sight of God. Of Iustine Martyr, who says, Lib. quaest. (...) Gentib.
propositarum. quaest. 76.
no man receives the reward of the things he did in this life, till the
resurrection: that the soul of the good thief, that was crucified with
Christ, entered into Paradise, and is kept there till the day of resurrection,
and reward; that there the souls of good men do see the humanity of Christ,
themselves, the things that are under them, and besides, the Angels and
Devils. Of Tertullian who says: Nulli patet coelum, terra adhuc salva, ne
dixer im clausa: that is, heaven is open to none; while the earth remains
safe and whole, that I say not shut up: and u Aduersus Marcionem. l. 4
again, Ibid.
thou have our book of Paradise, wherein we determine that every soul is
sequestered, apud inferos, with them that are in the lower dwellings, till the
day of the Lord. Of Lactantius, Diuinar. Instit. li. 7. ca. 21.
who will have no man think that souls are judged presently after death, but
that they are all detayned and kept in one common custody, till the time come
when the greatest judge shall examine their works. Of Victorinus Martyr, who
upon those words of John in the Revelation, I saw the souls of the slain
under the Altar of God, observes, that in the time of the Law, there were two
Altars, one of Gold, within; another of brass, without; that as heaven is
understood by that golden Altar, that was within, to which the Priests entered
only once in the year; so by the brazen Altar, the earth is understood, under
which is Infernus, a region removed from pains and fire, and the resting place
of the Saints; in which the just are seen and heard of the ungodly, and yet
they cannot pass one to another. Of Bernard, whose opinion Li. 3. Aduersu
Hereses.
Alphonsus a Castro confesses to be, as I have said; and Vbi supra.
Sixtus Senensis likewise; but thinks that he is to be excused with a
benign affection, because of the exceeding great number of renowned Fathers of
the Church, which seemed to give authority to this opinion by their testimony,
amongst whom he reckons Ambrose for one. Lastly, of Pope John the 22. who was
violent in the maintenance of this opinion? These premises considered, let the
Reader judge, whether Master Higgons had any cause to complain of want of
faithfulness and exactness in me, in that I say, that many of the Fathers
thought there is no judgment to pass upon men till the last day, that all men
are holde^ either in some place under the earth, or else in some other place
appointed for that purpose, so that they come not into heaven, nor receive the
reward of their labors till the general judgment: and that many made prayers
for the dead out of this conceit, such as that is in James his Liturgy: that
God would remember all the faithful that are fallen a sleep in the sleep of
death since Abel the Just till this present time. For I do not make this the
ground of the general practice, and intention of the Church, in her prayers,
as this shameless companion would make men believe.

SECT. 5.
FRom the four Doctors of the Church, and the supposed wrongs offered to
them; he proceeds to show that I Page 134.
calumniate a worthy person, to defend the inexcusable folly of our Geneuian
Apostle; his meaning is that I wrong Bellarmine, to justify Calvine: but what
is the wrong done to the Cardinal? Page 130.
Doctor Field, says he, accuses Bellarmine unjustly of trifeling and
senseless foolery in the question of prayer for the dead: Let the reader take
the pains to peruse the Third book of the Church chap. 17.
place cited by Master Higgons out of my book, and he shall find him to be a
very false, dishonest, and trifeling fellow in so saying. For first, I do not
accuse Bellarmine of senseless foolery in the matter of prayer for the dead,
(as he untruly reports against his own knowledge,) but in that he seeks
to calumniate Master Calvin, worthy of eternal honor, in very childish sort,
about the name of Merit. Calvin says, the Fathers were far from the Popish
error touching merit, and that yet they used the word, whence men have since
taken occasion of error; therefore says Bellarm: he dissenteth from all
antiquity, and acknowledges the Roman faith to be the ancient faith and
religion. This is Bellarmines form of reasoning against Calvin, if he say any
thing: which whether it be full of senceles foolery, or not, I will refer it to
the judgment of any one that has his senses. Yet notwithstanding M. Higgons
goes on, and makes a consolatory conclusion, Page 130.
that Bell: needs not to be discontented, that I have thus wronged him;
seeing I have likewise unjustly accused the Fathers. But if he may be as
justly charged with foolery in his manner of reasoning against Calvin, as the
Fathers are truly reported to have holden the opinion imputed to them by me,
as there is no question but he may, I think this comfortable conclusion will
not be very cordial unto him. Secondly, I do not say that Bellarmine does
trifle in the question of prayer for the dead; as he likewise, adding one lie
to another, says I do; but in proving the doctrine of the Roman Church that
now is, to be the same with that which was of old. And therefore silly Master
Higgons knows not what he writes. But that Bellarmine does indeed
(whatsoever this trifler says to the contrary) egregiously trifle, I will
demonstrate to the Reader in such sort, that neither Higgons, nor any of his
new masters shall be able to avoyde it. Thus therefore the case stands.
Bellarmine in his Lib. 4. de notis eccles. c. 9
discourse of the notes of the Church, (not in the particular question of
prayer for the dead) undertakes to prove the conspiring of the present Roman
Church with the true Catholic Church that was of old: this he says, may be
proved by producing the sayings and sentences of the Fathers touching every
particular controversy, now on foot: but because this would be a tedious
course, he says there is another shorter and certainer way, by demonstrating
out of the confession of Protestant Writers, first, that the points now
defended by Papists, are the doctrines of all the Ancient: secondly, that the
doctrine of the Protestants was condemned by the Ancient Church. Touching the
first, he goes about to prove, that Protestants confess the points of Popish
doctrine to be the doctrine of the Ancient, because Calvin in his
Institutions, when he oppugneth the assertions of Papists, confesses, that in
so doing he opposes himself against all Antiquity. Amongst other particulars
he gives instance of prayer for the dead. So that the thing which the
Cardinal is to prove, is this: that Calvin impugning the Popish manner of
prayer for the dead, to deliver men out of Purgatory, confesses himself in so
doing, to be opposite to all Antiquity; and consequently, that all Antiquity
believed Purgatory, and admitted a necessity of praying for the deliverance of
men out of it. This he does not but is forced to confess, that Calvin
affirms, that the doctrine of Purgatory, and prayer to deliver men thence,
was unknown to all Antiquity: whence it follows vnavoydably, that the
Cardinal does nothing but trifle; for if to talk idly, and not to conclude
the thing intended be to trifle, he is found to do so most grossly. Neither
does it help the matter, that Calvin confesses, that many of the Fathers
were led into error in the matter of prayer for the dead, as namely such as
thought they might suspend, mitigate, or wholly take away the pains or
punishments of men in hell; for these errors the Romanists condemn, and
dislike as much as we: but says Master Higgons, Page 133:
Master Calvin confesses the action of praying for the dead was performed by
the Ancient, howsoever he litigate about the intention. It is true, he does
so, but his confession makes neither hot nor cold to any thing now in
controversy and question between Us and the Papists. Whereforeto silence this
pratler, that multiplyeth vain words without all sense or reason: first we
say, that neither Calvine, or any of us, did ever simply condemn all prayer
for the dead: for we all pray for the resurrection, public acquitall in the
day of CHRIST, and perfect consummation of them that are dead in the LORD; and
therefore the general practice and intention of the Ancient in praying for the
dead, is not condemned by us. Secondly, we say, that some of the Ancient
prayed for the dead in such sort, as neither we nor the Romanists dare allow,
as for the suspension, mitigation, or releasing of the pains of such as are in
hell, and so were carried into error as Calvine rightly notes. Thirdly, we
say, that never any man amongst the Ancients, knew any thing of Purgatory, or
the Popish manner of praying to deliver men thence. So that I trifle not in
accusing Bellarmine, and defending Calvine, as he is pleased to tell me I
do, in the front and title of his next ensuing Chapter, but he talks idly
as his manner is.

. 6.
HIs next challenge is, that page 134.
I make an untrue construction of the Heresy of Aerius, condemning the
commendations of the dead, used in the Church at that time. For the clearing
whereof, we must make a difference between the general practice and
intention of the Church, and the private opinion and conceit of some
particular men in the Church. The general practice of the Church was, first,
to name the names of the dead, and to keep a commemoration of them, to
signify and express the assurance that rests in the living, that they are
not extinct, but that they are and live with God, that their spirits and souls
are immortal, and that their bodies shall rise again. Secondly to offer the
sacrifice of the Eucharist, that is, of praise and thanksgiving for them, to
desire of God the destroying of the last enemy, which is death, the raising of
them up again in the last day, the public remission of their sins in the
judgment of that great day, and their perfect consummation and bliss: which
Aerius could not condemn without just note of heretical temerity and
rashness: and all these things are excellently delivered by Haeres. 75.
Epiphanius, and rightly justified by him as right and good. Some there were
that extended these prayers farther, supposing that men dying in the state of
sin, may be relieved by the piety and devotion of the living; whose erroneous
conceit Aerius having an eye unto, rather then to the general practice and
intention of the Church, inferred, that if it be so, men may do what evils
they will, and be freed from the punishments of them, by the means of such
friends as they think good to procure and assure to the^ in the end, to make
prayers for them after they are gone. To which objection Epiphanius answers,
that though the prayers of the living cut not off the whole punishment of
sin, yet some mercy is obtained for sinners by them, at the least for some
mitigation or suspension of their punishments: of which opinion, as I have
showed before, many other were as well as Epiphanius: and Enchirid. ad
Laurentium. cap. 67.
Saint Augustine seems not much to dislike it, saying; if the merciful men
of his time would have contented themselves with an opinion of the only
mitigation or suspension of the punishment of the damned, he would not have
striued much with them about the matter: so that if Aerius his reprehension had
reached only to this erroneous conceit, he had never been condemned for his
censure: but, in that upon the consideration of the error of some particular
men, he presumed to condemn a general custom, that was lawful and good,
he was justly condemned himself, as rash and inconsiderate: which things
considered, the Page 138. and 140.
contradiction which this simple fellow would feign force upon us, is easily
avoided: for his reprehension of the particular erroneous conceit, and
sinister intention of some men, misunderstanding the Churches prayers, is
rightly justified by Doctor Humphrey and the rest named by him: and his
reprehension of the general practice and intention of the Church is rightly
condemned by me and others: and the Church of that time defended against his
rash and inconsiderate censure. Neither let this foolish Fugitive think that
he can blow up all with the breath of his mouth, and put away this distinction
by the sound of his bare word, and by only saying, I vainly excuse the folly
of Protestants, which shows it self in the diversity of their censures
touching the heresy of Aerius: nor by sporting himself with the sovereign
plaster applied by me: for it will be found to have virtue to heal a greater
wound then he can cause.

. 7.
But it is time for me to look about me, for I hear a horrible outcry as if
Hanniball were at the gates of the city. Theophilus Higgons causes it to be
proclaimed with sound of Trumpet, that Page 153.
I have showed my self a notable trifler in the question of Purgatory, and
prayer for the dead, to the utter confusion of my book and the Protestanticall
Church. When Moses came down from the Mount, and heard the noise in the
Camp, he said, Exodus 32. ^8.
It was not the noise of them that overcome in battle, nor of them that are
overcome but of singing. So is this hideous clamor, but the venting of the
boyish vanity of a foolish youth, in sporting sort, calling company to come
and play with him; for all that he says, will be found to be less then
nothing. The occasion of this strange out-crie is this.

In the Appendix to the third book, I show, that there was nothing constantly
resolved on in the Roman Church in the days of our Fathers, before Luther
began, touching that Purgatory that is denied by us, and defended by the
Papists: which I have demonstrated in such sort, that this fellow has nothing
to oppose against it, but flourishes of his youthful Rhetoric. For the more
clear and perfect understanding whereof, the Reader must observe, that we all
acknowledge a purging out of sin, in the dissolution of soul and body, and
in the first entrance of the soul into the state of the other world: But all
the question is of the nature, kind, and quality of it. Luther (says De
purgatorio. li: 2: cap: 9.
Bellarmine) admits, a kind of Purgatory, but of most short continuance: For
he supposes that all sins are purged out by the dolours of death, or by the
very separation of soul and body, wrought by death. Which opinion of Luther
we all follow; and the same was embraced by many in the Roman Church in the
days of our Fathers, before Luther was borne, who taught then, as we do now,
that all venial sins are done away and purged out in the moment of
dissolution, and in the first entrance into the other world, as I have showed
In Appendice. cap. 20.
before. So that concerning Purgatory, properly, as it serves to purge out
the impuritie of sin, there was nothing resolved on in the days of our
Fathers, but that which we willingly admit. But the Papists at this day
deny, that all venial sins are purged out in the dissolution of soul and
body, and the first entrance into the state of the other world. They imagine
that they are long in purging out, that they are purged in material fire, and
that the place of their purging out is below in the earth, nearely bordering
upon the Hell of the damned. This is the true difference between Protestants
and Papists, and rightly delivered by me, howsoever it please Master Higgons to
say, Page 155.
I yield not the true difference in this matter, nor propose the question as in
learning and honesty it became me. It is true, that he says, that we must
distinguish matter of substance from matter of circumstance, and that it is
sufficient to have fundamental unity in the first, howsoever there may be
accidental diversity in the second. But it is a matter of substance whether
all sinnefulnesse be purged out in the moment of dissolution; they deny it;
we affirm it; and are well assured they can never prove that all our
fathers agreed with them in this matter of substance; and therefore Master
Higgons may soon be answered, when he asks, Page 158.
where that man is, who in the time of our fathers denied Purgatory, or showed
any doubtfulnesse therein against the essential Doctrine in which the true
difference betwixt Papists and Protestants does stand most eminently at this
day; seeing there were found very many, as I have showed before, who not only
doubted of the circumstances of material fire, place, and instruments of
punishment, but taught as we do against the Papists, in the most substantial
point of all other, that all sinnefulnesse is purged out of the souls of men
departing hence in the state of grace, not by material fire, in a place of
Purgation, under the earth, or near Hell: nor by being afflicted by the
ministry of Devils, or otherwise; but by the completion of the state of
grace, getting full dominion in the soul, upon her dividing from the body, in
the moment of dissolution. Now if all impurity and stain of sin be purged
out in the moment of dissolution by the taking away of impediments, and leaving
grace to her self, that she may fill all with her divine effects, as many of
our forefathers believed, and taught; there is no such Purgatory, as the
Papists at this day imagine. If it be said, that though all sin be purged out
by death, in respect of the stain or sinful impurity, yet the punishment
remains, and so there is a kind of Purgatory, wherein men are to suffer the
punishments due to sins past, though now perfectly blotted out: It will
easily be answered, that whatsoever is of force to do away all impurity of
sin offending God, is likewise able to reconcile God unto us, so perfectly,
as that no guilt of punishments shall remain. For, seeing it is the nature of
grace to expel sin, offending God, and to make men acceptable to God, that
stood in terms of disfavor before: where grace is so perfect, as that it
expels all sinfulness, there it must needs work and procure a perfect
reconciliation; with which, guilt of punishment cannot stand. Besides, charity
implies a dislike of all that which is displeasing to God, whom we love, and a
sorrow that we have offended him: therefore charity in such perfection as is
able to purge out all impuritie of sin, implies dislike of that which in
sinning was ill affected and desired before, and sorrow for the same,
aequivalent to the pleasure and delight taken in sinning; and consequently does
satisfy God in such sort, as that no punishment shall come upon him that so
sorroweth. Thirdly, the punishments of men, pure and clean from sin, for
such sins as they formerly committed: if any such be imagined, cannot be
named Purgatory punishments, but satisfactory only. So that if all sinfulness
be purged our, there remains afterward no Purgatory properly so named.
Lastly, if it were doubtful in the days of our Fathers, as Master Higgons
Page 154
confesses it was, whether the fire be material, or not, in which men are to
satisfy GODS displeasure: what kind of suffering it is that is to satisfy,
whether of sorrow only, or some thing inflicted from without, and likewise how
long it does continue: it is evident, that notwithstanding any thing resolved
on in former times, God may be so satisfied by the first conversion of the
soul upon her separation, turning unto him in mislike of her former misdeeds,
as that all guilt of punishments may be utterly taken away in the very moment
of dissolution. Whence it will follow, that nothing was constantly, certainly,
and genelally resolved on in the days of our Fathers, touching the condition
of such as dyed in an imperfect state of grace, contrary to any thing holden by
us at this day. These premises considered, and every of these things being
confessed by Master Higgons or proved abundantly by Me, it seems the poor
man is beside himself, and that his discontentments have made him mad. For
otherwise what should move him, like a mad man, to cry out in such sort, as
he does, Page 15^
That I have disabled my book, and overthrown the Protestanticall Church:
that Papists may triumph in the victory, which their chiefest enemies have
wrought in their behalf, and joyfully applaud the excellency of their cause,
which enforces her greatest adversaries to prostitute themselves to such base
and dishonest courses.

Let the base Runnagate look to himself, and his conscience will tell him
that his courses have been base, dishonest, perfidious, and unnatural, (that
I say not monstrous) but our cause is such as shall ever be able to uphold it
self against all opposers, without any such shifting devices as they of the
adverse faction are forced to use, for the staying of that from falling for a
little while, that must fall and come to nothing, in despite of all that
Devils or devilish men by lying, slaundering, murdering, and all hellish
practices can do to sustain it.

. 8.
THus have I breefely run thorough his two books: and answered whatsoever
concerns my self in the same, and so might pass presently to his Appendix:
but that toward the end of the 2d part ofhis second book, he once again
wrongeth that renowned Divine Dr Humphrey, in such sort as is not to be
endured* For he charge him with unfaithfulness in his relations, digressions
from the matter, a general imbecility a Page 167. 168 169. 170. 171. 172.
of his whole discourse, obscurity, uncertainty, notorious deprauing of Saint
Augustine, and other unfaithful practices against the same Father: and says,
the detection of his falsehood ministered the first occasion of his change. If
Master Higgons were not better known then trusted, some man happily would be
moved to think that some very gross and inexcusable ouer-sights are found in
Doctor Humphrey, against whom he so clamorously inveigheth: but seeing all
the world takes notice what manner of man he is, by that description of him
which is found in a letter of a worthy Knight lately written to him, and
another of his own father written to the same Knight, I think there is no man
of any sense, that will regard his words any more then the braying of an Ass,
or the bellowing of an Ox when he lacks fodder: yet to make it appear, that
he has calumniated and wronged a worthy person without all cause or show of
cause, I will breefely set down the sum of D. Humphrey his discourse.
Whereas Rat. 3.
Campian obiecteth to us that we have begged certain fragments of opinions
from Aerius, and others condemned as heretics, first he answers, that we
have not received our faith from Heretics, but from the Apostles and their
successors. Secondly he says, that we condemn all the heretical positions
of Aerius, and yet admit whatsoever he held rightly, and agreably to the holy
Scripture: in which saying, Master Higgons tells us the Papists will
concur with him. Thirdly, he allows a commemoration of the Saints and holy
ones departed, and consequently disliketh Aerius for condemning the same.
Fourthly he condemns that abuse in praying for the dead which Aerius
condemned, Fifthly, he says, the commemoration of the departed is not
commanded in Scripture, but holden by custom of the Church. Sixthly, that if
we dye not in a true and lively faith, all the prayers in the world cannot
help us, contrary to the error of those men, who thought that not only a
suspension or mitigation, but a total release of the punishments of men dying
in mortal sins, may be procured: which error De cura promortuis.
Augustine refuteth by the evidence of the words of the Apostle, that unless
we here sow unto the spirit, we cannot reap immortality. And again, that we
must all stand before the Tribunal seat of Christ, that every one may receive
according to the things he did in this body, whether good or ill. Whence he
says is inferred, that unless men depart hence in state of grace, all the
world cannot relieve them afterward. These being the principal and most
material parts and circumstances of D. Humphrey his discourse touching
Aerius, let us see what are the exceptions that Master Higgons take against
him. The first is, that he says there is no Scripture for that prayer for the
dead that was ancienily used in the Church, and that Augustine seems to
confess as much, which he Page 169.
goes about to improve, because Augustine alleges the book of Machabees for
the practice of praying for the dead. But for answer hereunto, 1. we say
that D. Humphrey denies, that there is any precept requiring us to pray for
the dead, found in Scripture, and speaks nothing of examples: And therefore
the allegation of the book of Machabees is impertinent. 2. that the prayer of
Judas Machabaeus mentioned in that book, was not for the relief of the dead,
but for the remission or not imputing of their sins to the living, least God
should have smitten them for the trespass committed by those wicked ones that
displeased God and perished in their sin, though the author of that book make
another construction of it. 3. that the book of Machabees is not Canonical;
and though Augustine seem to incline to an opinion that it is, yet Contra
Gaudentij. Epist. li. 2 cap. 23.
he is not resolved that it is so: yea Caietan.
some are of opinion that he thought it Canonical only in respect of the Canon
of manners and not of faith: but Mr Higgons will prove, that in the judgment
of Augustine, prayer for the dead is plainly expressed, or sufficiently
deduced from the Scriptures of the new Testament; in that S. Augustine having
alleged the books of Machabees, to prove that prayer was made for the dead,
says, if this were no where read in the old Scriptures, the authority of the
Church were greatly to be regarded, which shines in this custom: which is a
very silly infere^ce. For neither does it follow, that if it be not in the old,
it must be in the new: neither would Augustine have presently urged the
authority of the Church, upon the supposition of not finding it in the old
Scriptures, but the books of the new Testament, if he had thought it to be
found in the new: seeing he seeks first and principally to prove it by
Scripture. His second exception is, that Augustine urges the custom of the
Universal Church, for the commendation of the dead, and pronounces, that
without intolerable insolency and madness, this authority cannot be rejected:
whence he infers that both these must ineuitably fall upon D. Humphrey and
his Church: but the poor fellow that charge other men with madness, if he
were in his right wits, might easily have found, that Doctor Humphrey does
not condemn the commemoration, and commendation of the dead: for he says
expressly: We retain it in our Colleges. I observed before that we must
carefully distinguish the general practice and intention of the whole Church
from private conceits: the whole Church commemorated the dead, offered the
sacrifice of praise for them, prayed for them in the passage, and for their
resurrection and consummation: all which things we allow: so that neither
Doctor Humphrey, nor we, condemn the Universal Church, but think it were
madness so to do: but the private fancies of such as extended their prayers
farther, thinking they might ease, mitigate, suspend; or wholly take away the
pains of men damned in hell (for of Purgatory no man thought in the Primitive
Church) we reject. This erroneous conceit and practice Aerius rightly
condemned, and Doctor Humphrey and we all agree with him in the same dislike:
but he did ill to impute this error to the whole Church, and to condemn that
which was good and laudable upon so weak a ground. Of the difference which
Master Higgons would feign make between our commendation of the dead used in
colleges, and that used anciently, whereof Saint Augustine speaks, I have
spoken before: wherefore let us come to his last exception against Doctor
Humphrey, which is that he handles the matter artificially, to make a
credulous reader believe that Saint Augustine himself does conuell the use of
prayer for the dead by those sentences of the Apostle, that Gal. 6. 8.
we cannot reap if we sow not here, and that 2. Cor. 5. 10.
we must all stand before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive according to the things he has done in his body, whether good or
evil. This imputation is nothing else but a malicious and impudent charging of
him with that he never thought of. For the only thing he says Augustine held,
proved by these sentences, is, that unless we depart hence in a true faith,
we cannot be relieved by any devotion of other men after we are gone. Which is
so undoubtedly true, that I think Higgons himself dares not deny it. But
that Augustine thought that men dying in the state of grace and faith of Christ
may be helped by the prayers of the living, he neither made question
himself, nor ever sought to make his reader believe otherwise. Neither do we
dissent from Augustine in this point, if the prayers he speaks of be made
respectively to the passage hence and entrance into the other world, as I have
showed before. The only thing that is questionable between Us and our
Adversaries being, whether prayers may relieve men in a state of temporal
affliction after this life, whereof Augustine never resolved any thing,
what-soeuer this prattling Apostata say to the contrary. These things being so,
let the reader judge whether the detection of falsehood and ill dealing in
Doctor Humphrey could possibly occasion Master Higgons his change, as he
would make the world believe: there being nothing found in his whole discourse,
that is not most true and justifiable, by all course of learning. But because
he is sufficiently chastised by others, and knows too well the true cause of
his running away to be things of a far other nature then those he
pretends, I will prosecute this matter no farther against him.

The Appendix.
. 1.
NOw it remains that I come to the Appendix, which he adds to his book,
which he deuideth into two parts, whereof the first concerns Me, the
second, D. Morton, which he has answered already. In that part which
concerns Me, he undertakes to prove, that I notoriously abuse the name and
authority of Gerson, Grosthead, etc. to defend the reformation made by Princes
and Prelates in our Churches. Wherefore that the reader may perceive I have not
abused these reverend and worthy men, but that he wro^geth both Them and Me, I
will take the pains to examine his whole discourse, though it will be very
tedious so to do, by reason of the co^fused and perplexed manner of handling
of things in the same, without all order and method. In the 1. chapter he does
but lay the fou^datio^ of his intended building: and therefore gathers
together a great number of positio^s and sayings out of my book, miserably
ma^gled, and torn one from another, all which shall be defended when he
comes to say any thing against them, in such sort, as that it shall evidently
appear, that there is no falsehood or collusion in any part of my Discourse, as
this false and treacherous Fugitive is pleased to say there is. Only one thing
there is here that may not be passed over, because it has no farther
prosecution in that which follows. His words are these. Page 2
Whereas Bellarmine does object the intestine divisions, and conflicts of the
pretensed Gospellers, this Doctor turns him off with this answer, we say
that these diversities are to be imputed wholly to our Adversaries; for when
there was a reformation to be made of abuses and disorders in matters of
practice, and manyfold corruption in many points of Christian Doctrine, and in
a Council by a General consent it could not be hoped for, as Gerson long
before out of his experience saw and professed, by reason of the prevailing
faction of Popes flatterers, it was not possible but that some diversity should
grow, while one knew not, nor expected to know what another did. This he says,
is a very admirable devise.

For answer hereunto we must observe, that the divisions of this part of
Christendom are of two sorts: the first is, from the faction of the Pope; the
second among them that have abandoned the usurped Authority of the Pope. That
the Pope and his adherents were the cause of the former of these divisions, and
the consequents of it, is affirmed by better men then Master Higgons. I will
not deny, (says In consult. artic. 7.
Cassander, a man highly esteemed for piety and learning by the Emperors
Ferdinand and Maximilian) that many in the beginning were moved out of a Godly
affection, more sharply to reprehend certain manifest abuses, and that the
chief cause of this calamity and distraction, or rent of the Church, is to be
attributed to them, who, puffed up with the swelling conceits of their
Ecclesiastical power, proudly and disdainfully contemned and repelled them
that admonished them rightly of things amiss. And therefore I do not think
that any firm peace is ever to be hoped for, unless the beginning thereof be
from them that gave the cause of this division; that is, unless they that have
the government of the Church, remit, something of that their too great rigor,
and listening to the desires of many godly ones, correct manifest abuses,
according to the rule of sacred Scripture and the ancient Church, from which
they are departed etc. Touching that, says c Contarenus, which the Lutherans
say in the first, d In consult. artic. Lutheri.
and last place, of manifold and great abuses brought into the Church of
Christ, against which they so exclaim, and concerning which they have made so
many complaints, to express their greiuances, I have nothing to say; but first
of all, to pray unto almighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his
only begotten Son, who continually makes intercession for us, and the holy
Spirit, wherewith we have bin anointed to be Christians by the grace of God,
and the Sacrament of Baptism, that he will respect his Church now tottering,
and in great danger, and that he will move the hearts of the Prelates of the
Church, that at last for a little while putting away this most pernitions self
love, they may be persuaded to correct things manifestly amiss and to reform
themselves. There needs no Council, there need no sillogismes, there needs
no alleging of places of Scripture, for the quieting of these stirs of the
Lutherans: but there is need of good minds of charity toward God and our
neighbor, and of humility, etc. Touching the divisions of the^ that have
abandoned the tyrannical government of the Bishop of Rome, and embraced the
sincere profession of the heavenly truth, whom this Lucian calls pretensed
Gospellers, they are neither such, nor so many as our Adversaries would make
the world believe, as I have showed at large in the Third book of the Church.
c. 42.
place cited by Master Higgons. But be they what they may be, I have truly
said that the Romanists are the causes of them, in that their obstinate
resistance against all peaceable public proceeding in the work of
reformation in a General Council, forced men to take another course, and to
take this work in hand severally, in the several Kingdoms of the world. That
there was no hope of reformation by a General Council, and that several
Kingdoms were to take care for the redressing of things amiss, within their
own compass, I have showed out of Gerson: his words are these. Gers. 3. part.
apologet. de Conc. Constable.
I see that the reformation of the Church will never be brought to pass by a
Council, without the presidencie of a well affected guide, wise, and constant:
let the members therefore provide for themselves thorough all Kingdoms and
Provinces, when they shall be able, and know how to compass this work. Now
that Idem de Concilio vnius obedientiae.
this kind of proceeding must needs be accompanied with differences, though
not of moment, nor real, yet in show greater then were to be wished, every
man I think will confess that has the sense of a man. Against all this M.
Hig. has nothing to say; but, as if he had gone out of his country, and passed
the Seas of purpose to become a jester amongst our melancholy contrymen that
are abroad, to make them merry, makes a jest of it, as he does of all other
things, and so passes from it.

The second part.
1
BUT let us give him leave to sport himself a little: we shall have him in
earnest by and by. For in the next part of this chapter he undertakes to
prove, that Gerson, (whom I bring in as a worthy guide of Gods Church in the
time wherein he lived, and one that wished the reformation of things amiss)
utterly detested the reformation that has been transacted by Luther,
Zuinglius and the rest. But his proofs will be found too weak; for though it
were granted that he erred in the matter of transubstantiation, invocation of
Saints, and some such like things, yet will it never be proved, that he erred
heretically, or that he was not willing to yield to the truth in these or
any other things wherein he was deceived, when it should be made to appear
unto him. Cyprian erred in the matter of rebaptization, Lactantius, and sundry
other were carried into the error of the Millenaries: many Catholics in
Augustines time thought that all Oxthodoxe and right-beleeuing Christians shall
be saved in the end, how wickedly soever they live here: yet were they of one
communion with them that thought otherwise.

If Master Higgons think, that I produce Gerson as a man fully professing in
every point of Doctrine as we do, he wholly mistaketh me; for I was not so
simple, either to think so, or to go about to persuade others so, but this is
that which I said, and still constantly affirm, that God preserved his true
Church in the midst of all the errors and confusions of the Papacy; that the
errors condemned by us, never found general and constant allowance in the
days of our Fathers; and that there were many, who held the foundation, and
according to the light of knowledge which God vouchsafed them, wished the
reformation of such things as were amiss, some of them discerning more of the
errors and abuses that were then found in the Church, and other fewer: of which
number I reckon Gerson to be one of eminent sort and rank. For this worthy
Divine believed as we do, De consolat: Theologiae. l. 4. prosa. 1.
that all our inherent righteousness is imperfit, yea, that it is like the
polluted rags of a menstruous woman, that it cannot endure the trial of Gods
severe judgment: that Ibid. lib. 1. prosa. 3.
we must trust in the only mercy and goodness of God, if we desire to be
surely established against all assaults: Part. 3. tract. de vita. spiritual.
anim. lect. 1.
that all sins are by nature mortal: that Tract. de indulgentijs.
indulgences reach not to the dead: that they are but remissions of enjoined
penance: that De potest. Ecclesiast. considerat. 12.
the Pope has no power to dispose of the Kingdoms of the world; that he is
like the Duke of Venice amongst the great Senators of that State, greater then
each one, but inferior to the whole company of Bishops, that De
auferibilitate Pap.
he is subject to error, and that in case of error or other scandalous
misdemeanour, he may be iudicially deposed: that De consilijs and Statu
perfectionis.
Christian perfection consists neither in poverty nor riches, but in a mind
resolved to regard these things, no farther then they stand with the love of
God, and serve for the advancement of his glory and the good of men. So that
sometimes it is a matter of more perfection to have and possess riches, then
to cast them from us; contrary to the false conceit of the Mendicantes, who
made extreme poverty to be the height of all perfection, and thought that
Christ himself did live by begging, which he rejects as an absurd error:
he teaches that the precept of Almighty GOD requires all the actions of
virtue in the best sort they can be performed, and that therefore they do
not rightly discern between the matter of precepts and counsels, who
imagine that the precept requires the inferior degrees of virtue, and the
counsel the more high and excellent: whereas counsels urge us not to a
higher degree of virtue, or moral goodness, but only show us the means
whereby most easily, if all things be answerable in the parties, we may
attain to the height of virtue the procept prescribes: so ouer-throwing the
opinion of works of supererogation: he Ibid.
teaches that there is no more merit of single life then of marriage unless
the parties living in these different estates, otherwise excel one another in
the works of virtue: that virginity, in that which it adds above coniugal
chastity, is no virtue, nor higher degree of virtue, but a splendor of virtue
only: that the De vita Spiritual, anim Lect. 4.
laws of men bind not the conscience: that they that whip themselves, as some
sectaries amongst the Papists do, are to be condemned: and that the patient
enduring of those crosses Part. 1. tract. contra sectam flagellantium se.
which God lays upon us, is more acceptable to God, then these voluntary
chastisements. See the places cited in the third book of the Church. Chap. 10.
11.
He condemns Monks intermedling with Secular or Ecclesiastical businesses:
the superfluous pomp and Princely state of Cardinals, and Bishops, making
them forget that they are men; that one man holds two or three hundred
Ecclesiastical livings; that the sword of excommunication is so e^ily
drawne-out for trifles, and the Lords of the Clergy use it for the maintenance
of their own state: he disliketh the Popes appointing of strangers to take
cure of souls, the variety of Pictures, and Images in Churches, occasioning
idolatry in the simple: the number and variety of religious orders; the
canonizing of new Saints, there being too many Canonized already: the
Apocryphal Scriptures, Hymns, and Prayers in process of time brought into
the Church, of purpose or ignorance, to the great hurt of the Christian faith:
the diversity of opinions in the Church, as about the conception of the blessed
Virgin, and the like: the intolerable superstition in the worshipping of
Saints; innumerable observations, without all ground of reason; vain credulity
in believing things concerning the Saints reported in the uncertain legends of
their lives: superstitious opinions of obtaining pardon, and remission of
sins, by saying a number of Paternosters in such a Church, before such an
image; the urging of humane devises more then the laws of God, and punishing
more severely the breach of their own laws, then the laws of God: the
contempt of the holy Scripture, which is sufficient for the government of the
Church, and the following of humane inventions, which made the state of the
Church to be merely brutish; the ambition, pride, and covetousness of Popes
subiecting all unto themselves, and suffering no man to say unto them, Why do
you so? though they ouer-turne the course of Nature; their getting all into
their own hands by many crafty and ill means, to the ouer-throwe of that
order that should be in the Church: and therevppon shows that it was the
opinion of men right wise and godly in his time, that there being a Schism in
the Church, and three several pretenders challenging the Papal chair, it
were good to take the advantage of that difference, and never to restore again
to any pope the universal administration of the temporalities of the Church,
and the swaying of the jurisdiction of the same; but that it were best that all
things were brought back to that state they were in, in the times of the
Apostles, or at least in the times of Syluester and Gregory, when each Prelate
within his own jurisdiction was permitted to govern such as were committed to
him, without so many reseruations, and exactions, as have been since brought
in.

These things considered, I suppose it will not seem so strange as Master
Higgons would make it, that I bring in John Gerson as a worthy guide of the
Church in his ^me, and a man wishing the reformation of the same, as far as
it pleased God to enlighten him, though he saw not all, which other did in the
same times, or before, or since. Neither will it ever be proved that he would
have disliked any part of the pre^ reformation, though he condemned the
inconsiderate positions of Wickliffe, and though he held some opinions contrary
to that which we now teach. For as Lib. 1. de Baptis. cap. 18.
Augustine said of Cyprian, and his colleagues, erring in the matter of
rebaptization, that if they ^d bin in his time, when upon full and exact
discussing of things, it was resolved otherwise, they would have been of
another mind: so surely, if Gerson had lived in latter times, when Learning
reviued, and all sorts of ancient authors were brought out of the couerts of
darkness, into the light and view of the world, he would have condemned many
things which he did not, as many other did both before Luther began to preach,
and since, whom yet our Adversaries dare not traduce as Heretics. Which we are
induced to think, because himself professes, that the rent of the Church by
reason of the n De potest. eccl. consid. 10.
three pretenders, challenging the Papal chair, and the calamity that followed
the same, brought many things to light that were not known before, and was the
occasion of much good, and the finding out of many truths fit and necessary to
be known; and in his book Consid. 15 and 19
De auferibilitate Papae, in which he shows many cases wherein the Pope may
be deposed, limited, restrained, o-haue obedience denied unto him; he
professes he has laid down sundry considerations touching this matter, to
open the way to others to enter farther, and to find out more then he did, as
indeed we see Conc. cath. l. (...). c. 13
Cusanus a Cardinal did; who resolves wholly with us, that the Pope is but
only prime Bishop amongst the Bishops of the world, and that he is but only
in order and honor above others.

Yet let us hear what Master Higgons can say to the contrary. Gerson, q says
he, believed p Page 4.
Transubstantiation, approved the Mass, admitted Purgatory, invocation of
Saints, indulgences, and communion under one kind, therefore he could not wish
the reformation that is now wrought by Luther, and the rest. Of
Transubstantiation I have spoken already, and showed that many admitted the
word that yet never believed the thing, which our adversaries now profess; as
also what is to be thought of Gersons opinion touching this point, being the
Scholar of Cameracensis; who professes, that for any thing he can see,
Transubstantiation, properly so named, can neither be proved out of
Scripture, nor any determination of the Universal Church. Touching the Mass,
we must know that the holy Eucharist, and blessed Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ is named missa, miss, or mass, Cassand. in praef, ord Romans
a missis, id est, dimissis publica diaconi voce Catechumenis, iisque qui
Sacramentorum participationiidonei non erant: that is, for that after the
prayers and readings of the Scripture, before the consecration, the
Catechumens, and all such as were not to communicate, were dismissed, and sent
away, the Deacon crying aloude, Ite missa est: that is, Depart, you are
dismissed. And even in Gregory's time the custom was, that the Deacon after
the reading of the Gospel, pronounced those solemn words, Si quis non
communicate, exeat: that is, If there be any that communicates not, let him go
out. So that the Papists have no miss, or mass, if we speak properly, for
with them none are dismissed, but all permitted to be present, and yet none
communicate but the Priest: whereas the name of mass was given to this Holy
Sacrament, for that none were permitted to be present, but such as would
communicate. But to let go this advantage, there is no question, but that
Gerson allowed of the Sacrament of the Lords Body and blood: but I think it
will hardly be proved, that he approved the alteration of the ancient
custom of the peoples communicating with the Priest in the Sacrament into a
private mass; which indeed, if we will speak properly, is no mass: or that
he held it to be a new real sacrificing of CHRIST, as the Iesuited Papists
do at this day. A sacrifice we confess it to be, of praise and
thanksgiving, and a commemoration of the bloody sacrifice of CHRIST upon the
Altar of the Cross: and say, that therefore it may be named a sacrifice,
because signs have the names of the things whereof they are signs: as also
for that there is in this Sacrament, an offering or presenting of CHRIST and
his passion to GOD, by the faith of the Church, that by it we may obtain
grace and remission of sins: but a new real sacrificing of CHRIST we deny,
and think with Luther, that it is a hellish abomination so to do. That Gerson
thought that there is a Purgatory, does no more prejudice his being a worthy
guide of Gods Church, then the error of Cyprian and other beforementioned.
Touching invocation of Saints, though he did not absolutely condemn it, yet
Gers. de direc. cordis consid. 16: and sequ.
he reprehended the abuses and superstitious observations then prevailing in
the worshipping of Saints, very bitterly, as I showed before, and sought to
bring men to a truer sense of piety in that point, then was ordinarily found
amongst men in those times. The like he did for In tract de indulgentiis.
indulgences, restraining them more then was pleasing to the Popes faction; and
for the communion under one kind, howsoever he thought the Church might
lawfully prescribe the communicating in one kind alone, which we cannot
excuse; yet he Tract de communione sub vtraque specie.
acknowledges that the communion in both kinds was aunciently used; and that
when it may be had, with the peace of the Church, it is to be allowed. But to
what purpose does Master Higgons allege these things? shall it be lawful for
him and his to repute John Gerson, a worthy and godly man, notwithstanding that
he held that the Pope may err, that he is subject to General Councels, that
he medleth with things no way pertaining to him, when he takes upon him to
dispose the Kingdoms of the world, that all our inherent righteousness is
imperfit, and as the polluted rags of a menstruous woman, that all sins are
by nature mortal, and the like: and may not we take him to have been a
member of the true Church, a good man, and one that desired the reformation of
things amiss, notwithstanding his error in some things, and his not
discerning all that was amiss?

The insufficiency of this allegation, it seems, Master Higgons himself
perceived, and therefore says, Page 4.
he will come to the supreme difference, to which all other points (as he
conceiueth) are subordinate, and inferior: that is to say, the sovereign
primacy of the Roman Bishop; and brings two very effectual testimonies, as
he thinks, of Gerson, to prove the Popes sovereign primacie. The First is
out of his book, Consid. 8.
De auferibilitate papae: his words are these. The forms of civil government
are subject to mutability and alteration; but it is otherwise in the Church,
for her government is Monarchical, and is so appointed by the institution of
our Lord: if any man will violate this sacred ordinance, and persist
obstinately in his contempt, he is to be judged an Heretic, as Marsilius of
Padua, and some other consorting with his fancy. The second is out of his
tract, Consid. 3.
De vnitate Graecorum, where prescribing many directions for the composing of
the differences between the Greek and Latin Churches, he lays it down as
a foundation, that there must be one head on earth, unto which all men must
be united. Page 5.
In these sayings, Master Higgons says, Gerson showed himself a worthy guide
of Gods Church, and a singular enemy of the Protestanticall reformation, which
violently impugneth the supremacy of the Pope, in so much that Luther
affirms, that a man cannot be saved, unless from his heart he hate the
Pope, and Papacy. These things truly, carry a very fair show, and may
deceive such as cannot or will not thoroughly look into them. But whosoever
knows what Gersons opinion of the Pope is, and what Luther has written
against the Papacy, will soon perceive there is no contradiction between
them, or at least not in any essential and material point. For Gerson was of
opinion, that the Pope is subject to a General Council, and that he is not
free from danger of erring; and this he thought to be a matter of faith
defined in the Council of Constance; and therefore would have detested all
claims of infallible judgment, and uncontrollable power of Popes, as much as
Luther did: and would have accursed his words of blasphemy, if once he should
have heard him say, as we do, and as before the holding of the Council of
Constance he did: All the world cannot judge me: though I ouerturne the whole
course of nature, no man may say unto me, why do you so? I only have power
to make laws, and to void them again: I have authority to dispense with the
Canons of all Councels, as seems good unto me, and, which is more, to
dispose of all the kingdoms of the world: the assurance of finding out the
truth and not erring, is not partly in me, and partly in the Council, but
wholly in me: whatsoever all the world shall consent on, is of no force, if I
allow it not. He would have said doubtless, as I have done, if he had heard
him thus speak, that we are not bound to take the foame of his impure mouth,
and froath of his words of blasphemy, as infallible Oracles. This is that
Pope, and this is that Papacy, which Luther says, every one that will be
saved, must hate from his heart: for otherwise if he would only claim to be
a Bishop in his precinct, a Metropolitan in a province, a Patriarch of the
West, and of Patriarchs the first and most honorable, to whom the rest are to
resort in cases of greatest moment, as to the head and chief of their company,
to whom it specially pertains to have an eye to the preservation of the
Church in the unity of faith and religion, and the acts and exercises of the
same, and with the assistance and concurrence of the other by all due courses
to effect that which pertains thereunto without clayming absolute and
uncontrollable power, infallibility of judgment, and right to dispose the
Kingdoms of the world, and to intermeddle in the administration of the
temporalties of particular Churches, and the immediate swaying of the
jurisdiction thereof, In libro contra Papatum.
Luther himself professes he would never open his mouth against him. This
kind of Primacie the Council. Florenum Sess. vlt.
Grecians likewise professed they would be content to yield unto him, if other
differences between them might be composed. Consult. de Pont. Romano.
Cassander says, He is persuaded there had never been any controversies
about the Popes power, if the Popes had not abused their authority in a Lordly
and ouer-ruling manner, and through covetousness and ambition stretched it
beyond the bounds and limits set and prescribed by Christ and the Church: and
professes that the abuse of the Papal power, which the flatterers of the Pope
amplified, enlarged, and magnified beyond all measure, gave men occasion to
think ill of the Pope, and in the end to depart from him: With whom Gerson
agrees, saying, that the Popes intermedling e De vnitate Graecor, consid. 6.
in some kinds and assuming more then was fit, gave occasion to the Grecians
to depart from the Church of Rome, writing to the Pope at their parting in this
sort, we know thy power, thy covetousness we cannot satisfy, live by thy
self. So that I have truly said (whatsoever Master Higgons blattereth out to
the contrary) that it was the pride of Antichrist, that made all the breaches
in the Christian world.

But, says Master Higgons, Gerson makes the form of the Churches government
to be Monarchical, which thing is mainely opposite to the opinion of
Protestants, who will not admit the Pope to be a Monarch in the Church. It is
true that Gerson makes the government of the Church to be Monarchical, but no
otherwise, but as the government of the state of Venice is Monarchical;
wherein the Duke is greater then any one Senator, but subject to the Senate,
and has neither absolute negative, nor affirmative; and therefore it is in
truth and indeed, according to his opinion, rather Aristocratical, the^
Monarchical: though he make it to be so, in that amongst all the Bs of the
world, one is first, and in order and honor before all other. A head he makes
the Pope to be, as a president of a company, not as an absolute commander.
Whereas says In Sent. prolog^. qu: 10. art. 2.
John Bachon, the denying the Pope to have an illimited power was condemned as
heretical in Marsilius of Padua, and Io. de Ianduno, some say they were
condemned because they denied him to have an illimited power, as head or chief
of all Bishops, and with the college of them: and that it is not there defined
that absolutely, in, and of himself, he has illimited power of making laws;
and governing according to the same, without the concurrence of his brethren.
But Gerson says, it is schismatical not to acknowledge with aldue respect the
true Pope undoubtedly known g De vnitate Graec. consid. 3.
to be so: therefore he must needs be an enemy to the Protestanticall
reformation. We say no, for, let the Pope as Gerson teaches him to do,
disclaim the claim of absolute and uncontrollable power, infallibility of
judgment, right to dispose the Kingdoms of the world, let him without
particular intermedling suffer other Bishops to govern their own diocesses,
as they did in the Primitive Church, without so many reseruations, preuentions,
and appeals received from all parts of the world, and we will think, as
Gerson does, that, as it is Schismatic to impugn the government of
Bishops within their own diocesses, the superiorities of Metropolitans in
their Provinces, and of Patriarchs in their larger circuites; so it is
Schismatic to deny the Bishop of Rome, contenting himself therewith, a
primacie of order and honor, and a special interest in swaying the government
of the whole Church, and managing the affairs thereof, as first amongst the
Bishops of the world. Wherefore let us hearken to Master Higgons his suite:
he beseeches us, Page 3.
to consider the resemblance and similitude of these things: he that
rejects the Pope shall not be saved; and he that does not hate him and the
Popedom from his heart, shall not be saved; the one of these sayings is
Gersons, and the other Luthers: and thus, says Higgons, they damn themselves
mutually in a capital point, and exclude each other from possibility of
salvation. We have according to Master Higgons his request, diligently
considered these things, and do find that between these sayings in show so
opposite, there is in truth and indeed no contradictions; and that Luther and
Gerson are far from damning one another in this point, as he falsely says
they do: for it is true, as Luther says, that men are bound to hate the
Papacy, that is, the claim of uncontrollable and absolute power of
infallible judgment, and interest to dispose of the Kingdoms of the world,
even in the judgment of Gerson himself; and they both agree, that for the
preservation of order and peace, men are bound to acknowledge the Papacy, that
is, to yield to the Bishop of Rome a Primacie of order and honor; if there be
no other matter of difference, nor no father claim made by him. Neither is it
communion with the Pope as prime Bishop, that makes a man a formal Papist, as
this formalist speaks; but with the unjust claims of the Pope. So that
Gersons communion with the Pope, proves him not a formal Papist: and
therefore though Master Powels judgment be of value, M^ Higgons may not
undoubtedly pronounce, that Gerson is damned to the nethermost hell, as he
fondly says he may: neither can he show any good reason. why we may not
truly say, that Luther has accomplished that reformation which Gerson desired;
c Page (...)
and therefore he might well have spared his Risum teneatis amici? and instead
thereof entreated men to weep for his pitiful ouer-sight, and folly, which
he bewrays in the words immediately following, Ibid.
I will knit up, says he, this matter with the counsel of Gerson, which he
gives to the spouse of Christ, saying, the Church must entreat the Pope, the
Vicegerent of Christ, with all honor, and call him Father, for he is her Lord
and head: that she must not expose him to detractions: etc.

Mr Higgons is wont to compare them to the Devil, who allege any sayings of
Fathers, or Scriptures, in show making for them, and leave out that which
follows, e Page 33.
making against them: if this course be right and good, as no doubt it is, I
will soon make the Reader know to whom Master Higgons is like, in citing
Gersons testimony against us. For Gerson speaking of the respect that is due to
CHRIST the Husband of the Church, and his Vicegerent, from her, as his Spouse
and Wife, has these words. De (...) Christi and Eccl.
I deliver this first unto thee, that for the honor of CHRIST her husband, the
Church Synodally assembled, or not so assembled, ought to carry herself
toward the chief Bishop with reverence and due respect in all loving sort,
if he behave himself toward her laudably, nay, if his entreating of her be
tolerable; because in many things we offend all: and the judicial sentence
of Divorce is to be expected before he be cast off, as hitherto the
discretion of our Forefathers has observed toward inferior Bishops. In
the next place I deliver unto thee, that the Church, for the reverence of
CHRIST her husband, ought to name his Vicegerent, and him whom he has
appointed her keeper, Father; and both in her self and her children, to be
most ready to give all honor, and to yield all obedience to him, as to her
Lord and head: and likewise to show all due respect to the Roman Church, as
joined to her in a special degree of fellowshippe. Neither is it fit to
expose such a Father to detractions, and wrongs, but to hide his turpitude as
much as may be. Notwithstanding in the third place I deliver unto thee, that
if this Vicegerent, thorough frigiditie, or other impediment, become unfit
for the spiritual generation of children, he may not be esteemed a fit
husband for the Church, nor Vicegerent for her husband. Now the seed of this
generation, is the holy word of God, and not the variable traditions of the
sons of this world. Again, I deliver, that the Church, if this Vicegerent of
her husband become a Fornicator, or Adulterer, marrying a widow, a woman put
away from her husband, a woman of vile and base condition, and a Harlotte,
contrary to the commandment of Almighty God in Leviticus: If he hardly
entreat the Church, if he spoil and rob her of her Roabes by Dilapidation,
or go about to abuse her by Symonie, if he smother her children either in the
womb, or after they are come out of the womb by ill example, if he slay them
with the sword of scandalous Doctrine, and such as kills the soul, or
pestiferous wicked courses of life, or hurtful dissembling and winking at
faults, and heresies, that should be suppressed: that the Church, I say, in
these cases, may give him a bill of Divorce, especially if he add
incorrigibility to his fault, least the keeping of him still, turn to the
disgrace and dishonor of her husband, and the hurt of her children.

If it had pleased Master Higgons to suffer John Gerson thus fully to utter
his mind, his Superiors I think would never have permitted him to produce a
witness, to depose so directly against them in Print; for what could Luther
say more then Gerson does? if the Pope, who is the chief Bishop of the world,
will do his duty, he is to be honored, as chief of all Bishops: but if he
become scandalous, if he be unable to perform the duty of teaching the people
of God, if he teach false doctrine, or wilfully neglect to reform things
amiss, and show himself incorrigible: he may, nay he must be rejected by the
Church, and a bill of Divorce must be given unto him. This I think will be
censured as heretical by our Romanistes. But howsoever, Master Higgons had no
cause to exclaim as he does, Page (...).
that Luther, whom he calls the Cham of Saxony, did not demean himself
toward the Pope as he ought to have done, and thereupon to compare him to
furious Aerius, and to say, that I likewise approximate to them both, when I
say, we have not received the mark of the Antichrist, and child of perdition
in our foreheads, nor sworn to take the foame of his impure mouth, and the
froath of his words of blasphemy, for infallible Oracles of heavenly truth.
For Luther did hide the the turpitude and shame of this holy Father, as long as
it was lawful so to do: but when the turpitude of this Noah, neither could
nor would be hid any longer, when he became unfit to beget sons unto God,
when he became a Fornicatour, and an adulterer, when he married a woman refused
by her husband, a base woman, nay a harlotte: when he choked and smothered
the children of the Church before, and after they came out of her womb: when
he slew them with the sword of scandalous doctrine, and such as kills the
soul, when he spoiled the Church, and stripped her out of all her Roabes, when
he abused and wronged her in most shameful and vile manner, to the dishonor
of Christ her husband, what remained for Luther and such other sons of the
Church, as had any care of their Mothers welfare, to do, but to cast him off
with disgrace, that in so shameful manner dishonored the son of God their
Father, and wronged the Church their Mother?

But if this testimony of Gerson serve not the turn, Master Higgons produces
another, that will better satisfy us touching the opinion he held of the
Pope: his words are these: Nolo de sanctissimo Domino nostro, and Christo
Domini, velut os in coelum ponendo, loqui: that is, I will not speak of our
most holy Lord, and the Lords anointed, as it were setting my face against
heaven. These words follow not in the same place where the other are found. And
Master Higgons directs us to no other pla^, as if they were found there; who
yet is wont to complain against me, for that I cite in the^ same page,
things found in diverse parts of Gersons works, and not all together: the
Reader may find them in the third part of his works, in his Apologeticall
Dialogue. The occasion of these his words is this: he complains in that
Apology, of the partialities and sinister courses he saw to be holden in the
Council of Constance, by reason whereofthe French King, and other Christian
Princes, with their Bishops and Divines, could not obtain, nor procure the
condemning of certain wicked and scandalous assertions of Johannes Paruus, and
some other prejudicial to the state of Princes, and more pestilent and
dangerous, as he says, whether we respect the prosperity of the Kingdoms of
the world, or the good manners and honest conversation of men, then those of
Wickliffe and the Bohemians, that were condemned in that Council. After this
complaint, one of the speakers in that Apologeticall Dialogue asks, if things
went not better in that Council, after a Pope was chosen, and the Schism
ended, then before? whereunto the other speaker answers in this sort: I I
will not speak of our most holy Lord, and the Lords anointed, as it were
setting my face against Heaven; not-withstanding he had some sitting by his
side, who; some say, proceeded not with that due care and diligence which they
should have used, in the matter concerning the state of Princes, and the things
concerning the Lordsof Polonia: and these men fear not to say, that they were
so backward, that they could not be stirred up sufficiently to the zeal and
favoring of Catholic verity, nor be moved either by words of exhortation or
writing, to determine such things as were proposed unto them. Thus does he in
mannerly sort decline the direct taxing of the Pope, which might have bin
something offensive to some at that time; and yet spares him not, but
condemns his negligence, and want of zeal, in suppressing heresy, and
defending and maintaining Catholic verity, and adds, that he would have
them that are zealous of Christian Religion, the honor of the Pope, and the
holy Council, to consider, whether if care be not had for the extirpation of
heresies, especially in matters solemnly denounced, prosecuted, and handled,
some will not impute it to negligence, other to ignorance, other to a direct
refusal to do right, other to the covetousness of Prelates seeking their own
things, and not those of Christ, other to the contempt of the Princes and
Universities, that sought the condemnation of such errors, others to the
weakness of the Ecclesiastical power, in rooting out heresies, and the
notorious negligence of the Court of Rome, in omitting to do that which is
fit, other to base corruption? and thereupon shows, that an appeal was put
in on the behalf of the Lords of Polonia, to the next General Council,
against which exception was taken, that it was not lawful to appeal from the
Pope in any case, or to decline his judgment in matters of faith, contrary to
the laws of God, and the decrees of the same Conncell, and to the utter
overthrowing of all those things that were done in the Council of Pisa, and
Constance, in rejecting the pretenders, and electing a new Pope, professing
that he is well assured there will never be any reformation of the Church by a
Council, without the presidency of a guide well affected, and prudent, stout,
and constant, of which sort he insinuates the Pope then being was not. Thus
we see Gerson thought it no impiety in modest sort to tax the Popes
negligence, and in most resolute manner to condemn as impious and against the
Laws of God and man, his pride in denying appeals from himself, as if no man
might decline his judgment in matters of faith: Which things being so, let the
reader judge, whether that one poor sentence of Gerson, mangled, and rent from
that which went before, and follows after, do bring more advantage to Master
Higgons his cause, then it does prejudice the same, when it is joined with the
other parts of his discourse in the same place. But thus do these Judge. 7. 22.
Madianites slay themselves with their own swords, and turn their weapons
upon themselves to the utter overthrow of their bad cause.

From this particular of the Popes supremacy, wherein Master Higgons has
foiled himself, and hurt his cause, he Page 9.
proceeds to some general evidences, whence, as he says, it may be proved
that Gerson never favored the Protestanticall reformation. The first is, for
that speaking of the Romish Church, he says: Part. 1. Sermon. coram. Alex. Papa.
5.
We must r^ue the certainty of our faith from it: The second, for that he
Part. 3. Dialog. Apologet, de Concilio Constantiensi.
preached zealously at Constance, against the articles of Wicklife and the
Bohemians.

For answer to the first of these allegations, the reader must remember that
Gerson does clearly resolve, that the Pope may err, not only personally, but
Episcopally and iudicially also; and consequently, that we must not ground our
faith upon his resolutions, as certain and undoubted. The like may be said of
the Roman Church, that is the Roman Diocese, Province, or Patriarchship: for
if it have any more infallibility of judgment then other particular Churches,
it has it from the Bishop, which it cannot have, seeing he is not free from
error himself; the meaning therefore of Gerson is not, that we may or must
take whatsoever the Roman Diocese, Province, or Patriarchship delivers unto
us, to be undoubtedly true; but speaking of the Indians, who are Christians,
and yet doubting whether they hold the faith of Christians sincerely or not,
he says, it may be feared least they do not, seeing ^ey are divided from the
Roman Church, from which the certainty of faith is to ^e sought: to show that
the truth and certainty of faith is to be sought in the unity of the universal
or Catholic Church, the beginning being taken from that which of all others
is the first and chiefest, and hathhitherto been most free from damnable
heresies. For otherwise, that he is no way resolved that the determinations of
the particular Roman Church Diocesan, Provincial, or Patriarchicall, do
absolutely bind all to receive them, it is most clear and evident; in that in
his discourse of the means of procuring unity between the Greeks and
Latins, (one special cause of the breach between them, being the
determination passed by the Latins touching the proceeding of the Holy Ghost,
without the consent of the Greeks) De vnitat^ Graecorum consid 6
he wishes men to consider, whether, as we are wont to say of the Articles of
Paris, that they bind none but such as are within the Diocese of Paris, so it
may not be said that the determinations of the Latin Church bind none but
those that are within the compass of the same? which he could not, nor would
not do, if he thought the infallible direction of all the rest, to be in the
Roman Church alone; and that all euery-where were bound to receive as
undoubtedly true, whatsoever it delivers, as the Romanists at this day do
think. Besides this, it is to be observed, that by the name of the Roman
Church, the person of the Pope, whom the Romanists name the Virtuall Church, is
not meant, nor the Diocese, or Province of Rome alone, but the whole Latin or
West Church, subject to the Bishop of Rome, as Patriarch of the West, which we
are persuaded never yet erred from the Faith, but had always in it many worthy
men professing and maintaining the truth of Religion, howsoever some erred
damnably in the midst of it, and a separation be now grown between the true
members of that Church, and such as were but a faction in the same. So that
that which Gerson has of fetching the certainty of our faith from the Church
of Rome, proves not that he would have been an enemy to the Protestanticall
reformation: for he speaks not of our fetching the certainty of our Faith
from the Pope, or Court, or Diocese of Rome, but of the Indians fetching the
certainty of their Faith from the Roman, that is the Western Church. But that
he never thought that all Christians, and Churches of the West, are to fetch
the certainty of their Faith from the Pope, or Court of Rome, it is evident, In
that Sermon. in Paschate part. 4.
he commends the French King, that condemned the heresy of John the two and
twentieth, touching the souls not seeing God till the Resurrection, with sound
of trumpets (the Nobles and Prelates of France being present,) and believed
rather the University of Paris then the Court of Rome.

Neither is the next proof of Gersons preaching against the Articles of
Wickliff, and the Bohemians, any better then this: for he preached against
such Articles as were brought to the Council of Constance, by the English and
Bohemians: now those Articles were many of them impious and heretical, nay
hellish and blasphemous, in such sort as they were proposed by them, that
brought them; as Council. Constant. Sess. 8.
that God must obey the Devil, that Kings or Bishops, if they be reprobates, or
if they fall into mortal sin, cease to be Kings or Bishops any longer, and
that all they do is merely void: whereas Wickliffe, never delivered any such
thing, nor had any such impious conceit, as they sought to fasten on him:
neither is it to be maruailed at, that impious things were falsely and
slanderously imputed to him; seeing we are wronged in like sort at this day.
For there are who shame not to write, (...) letter of a Catholic to his
Protestant friend: or certain Articles or sorcible reasors printed at Antwerpe.
that we affirm God to be the author of fin, that we teach, that God does sin,
that man sins not that God only sins, and that God is worse then the
devil, with many other like hellish blasphemies, which we accurse to the pit
of hell: many things no doubt were written by Wickliff in a good and godly
sense, which as they were wrested by his Adversaries, were heretical and
damnable. For example, it is a damnable heresy to think that Kings and Bishops
cease to be that they were, if they fall into mortal sin: or that reprobats
cannot be truly Kings or Bishops: neither did Wickliff ever hold any such
opinion; but as John Hus showed, he thought that godles persons, howsoever
officio, in office and place, they be Kings and Bishops; yet merito; that is in
merit, they are neither; because they are unworthy to be either: and are of
such quality, as that if GOD would take the forfeiture, they might justly be
deprived, not of dignity alone, but of life and being also. Now then this is
the goodly Argument which Master Higgons frames: Gerson condemned such
heretical and impious Articles, as were presented to him and other assembled
in the Council of Constance, as taken out of the writings of Wickliffe, and
disliked some other that were indeed his, and might have a good sense, because
they were delivered in a dangerous form of speech, as likewise such as rather
bewrayed his too passionate dislike of things amiss, carrying him too far
into contrary extremities, then an advised and wise consideration of the
means, whereby they might be amended: therefore he would never have allowed
that reformation of religion, that now is. This Argument I think will not
hold: because we also condemn many of the Articles attributed to Wickliffe,
noe less then Gerson: and yet are no enemies to the Protestanticall
reformation, as Master Higgons calls it. But Master Higgons says, Page 19.
I must needs be found contrary to my self, in that I acknowledge Wickliffe,
Husse, Hierome of Prage, and the like, to have been the worthy servants of
Christ, and holy Martyrs, and confessors: and yet praise Gerson, as a worthy
guide of Gods Church, and one that desired the present reformation, who
consented to the condemnation of Wickliffes Articles. We are wont to say:
Distinguish times, and the Scriptures will soon be accorded: so let Master
Higgons distinguish aright things that differ one from another; and this
seeming contrariety will be found to be none at all. For Wickliffe and Husse
might be worthy servants of God, in that they reproved the intolerable abuses
of those times which Gerson never approved: and yet Gerson, though as zealous
and religious as either of them, might condemn, as impious, some positions
falsely imputed to Wickliffe, not knowing but that they were his, and dislike
other that indeed were his, as not delivered in such sort, and such forms of
words as was fit, or sauouring of too much passion and violence, and
therefore like a right wise and moderate man, he De potestate Ecclesiast.
Consider. 12.
interposed himself between Wickliffe, and such as he was opposite to,
disliking the one sort, as attributing too much to the Clergy, and the other
as detracting too much from it. Touching John Husse, and Hierome of Prage, I
could never yet find, in what point of faith they dissented from the Doctrine
of the Church, then constantly resolved on, but they bitterly inueighed against
the ambition, pride, covetousness, and negligence of the Clergy; they urged
the necessity of oftener preaching then was usual in those times, and desired
to have the Communion in both kinds, according to the ancient custom of the
Primitive Church, and could not be induced simply and absolutely to condemn
the articles of Wickliffe, but thought many of them might carry a good sense:
and that the author of them was a man, that carried a good mind, how-soeuer
he might fail in some things: Neither was there any matter worthy of death
proved against them, but they were unjustly charged with things they never
thought of: so that In an Epistle to the Earl of Passun, prefixed before his
book against Henry the Eighth.
Luther, said truly that they were Murderers and seven times Heretics, that
condemned the innocent men, John Husse and Hierome of Prague: For it is most
evident to any one, that will consider the acts of that Council, that things
were carried in it, in a most violent and tumultuous manner, with clamours and
outcries, against those poor men standing in their just defense, and clearing
themselves from any thing their Adversaries themselves accounted to be
heretical. And particularly concerning Hierome of Prage, it appears the
Cardinals that were chief Presidents of that Council, sought all possible
means to let him go free, as Pilate did to acquit Christ; but the cry of
the multitude prevailed: And therefore I think it will not be easily proved
by Master Higgons, that Gerson had any hand in the turbulent and furious
proceeding against the persons of these men, howsoever he might mislike some
things which they were charged with. So that he is neither pronounced to be an
Heretic, nor a murderer by Luther, as Master Higgons untruly says he is.
What manner of proceeding there was in the Council In Dialog. Apologet. de
Concilio Constantiensi.
Gerson himself reports, showing his dislike of the courses holden in it,
and confessing that many intolerable things were done there, which neither
could nor would have been endured, if men had not been content to endure any
thing in hope of unity, and peace, after so many calamities of the Church,
most pitifully torn and rent in sunder by the former Schisms.

There is only one thing more remaining in this chapter that touches Me: and
that is, that speaking of the tyranny of the Sea of Rome, and such as withheld
the truth of God in unrighteousness, and being named Christians served
Antichrist, I add, as Bernard complained of some in his time, in which
addition Master Higgons Page 11.
charge Me with fraudulency; saying, that I go about to make the world
believe, that they, against whom John Husse, Hierome of Prage, and the rest
opposed themselves, served Antichrist even by the verdit of Saint Bernard
himself. If Bernard say not expressly, that many, even exceeding many, so that
they were without number, of the pretended friends and lovers of the Church of
Rome, and such as possessed high places of rule and government in the same,
served Antichrist, let him charge Me with ill dealing at his pleasure; but
if he do, let Master Higgons know he has wronged Me in a very high degree.
Let us hear therefore what Bernard will say, Woe Sermon. 33. in Cantica.
says he, to this generation because of the leaven of the Pharizees, which is
hypocrisy: if yet it may be named hypocrisy, which in respect of the
greatness of it, cannot; and in respect of the impudency it is grown unto,
seeks not to be hid. A filthy, rotten, running soar, secretly passes along
thorough all parts of the body of the Church; the more largely, the more
desperately it spreads it self: and the more inwardly, the more dangerously:
for if an open ene^ by professed heresy opposing himself, should rise up, he
would be cast out: an^ ^iolent enemy should seek to oppress the Church, Men
would hide themselves from him; but now whom should the Church cast out? or
from whom should she fly? all are friends, and all are enemies: all are tied
unto her in a bond of amity, and yet all are her adversaries: all are of her
household, and yet none are at peace with her: all are neighbors, and yet all
seek their own: they are the Ministers of Christ, and they serve Antichrist:
so that nothing remains, but that the devil, that fears not to walk at
noone day, should be revealed to seduce such as remain in Christ, still
abiding in their simplicity; for he has already swallowed up the rivers of
the wise, and the floudes of the mighty, and has hope to draw in Jordan into
his mouth, that is the simple and lowly in heart, that are in the Church. What
is therefore the frandulency Master Higgons so much complains of? Surely he
says, it was only wickedness of life Bernard complayneth of, and I seem to
extend his complaint farther. For answer whereunto, first I say, that I no way
extend the words of Bernard to any particular kind of evil of life, doctrine,
or violation of discipline: but cite them in such general sort, as they are
found in him. Secondly, I say it is untrue, that Higgons says, that Bernard
complained only of the evil lives of men in his time: for in his books of
Consideration to Eugenius the Pope, he blames him for meddling with things
more properly pertaining to men of another rank and sort, asking of him Lib.
de consideratione ad Eugenium.
Quid fines alienos inuaditis? quid falcem vestram ad alienam messem
extenditis? that is why do you incroach upon the bounds of other men? and why
do you reach forth your sicle, and thrust it into the harvest of other men?
adding, that, if the days were not evil, he would speak many other things.
Likewise he complains of the confusion, and abuse of appeals to Rome in this
sort: Lib. 3. de consideratione.
Praeter fas and ius, praeter morem and ordinem fiunt: non locus, non modus,
non tempus, non causa discernitur, aut persona. That is, appeals are made and
admitted, besides law, and right, besides custom, and order: no difference is
made of place, manner, time, or cause: so that the Bishops in all parts of
the world are hindered that they cannot do their duties: as also of the
spoiling of the guides and governors of the Church of their authority, by
exemptions and privileges, freeing such as are under them from their
subjection, Ibid.
Murmur loquor, says he and querimoniam ecclesiarum truncari se clamitant,
and demembrari: vel nullae, vel paucae admodum sunt quae plagam istam aut non
doleant, aut non timeant. Quaeris quam? Subtrahuntur Abbates Episcopis,
Episcopi Archiepiscopis, Archiepiscopi Patriarchis sieve Primatibus. That is: I
utter the murmuring and complaint of the Churches: they cry out, that they are
mangled, and dismembered; there are either none, or very few, which either feel
not, or fear not this plague: if you ask what plague? Abbots are exempted
from the jurisdiction of their Bishops, Bishops of their Arch-bishoppes,
they of their Primates. But he dissented not from the Papists in matter of
doctrine. Surely this is no truer then the rest: for it will be found that
Bernard has written that which will not please our Adversaries very well,
touching special faith, imperfection and impurity of inherent righteousness,
merits, power of free will, the conception of the blessed Virgin, and the
keeping of the Feast of her Conception. For I would willingly learn of them
whether they will grant, that Bern. sermon. 5. de verb. Esaiae.
all our righteousness is as the polluted rags of a menstruous woman? that
Sermon 1. de annunc. Dom.
we must believe particularly that our sins are remitted to us? that Trac. de
gratia and lib. arb. in fine.
our works are via regni, not causa regnandi; that is, the way that leads to
the Kingdom, but not the cause why we reign? that Ep. 175. ad Canon. Lugd.
the blessed Virgin was conceived in sin, and that the feast of her conception
ought not to be kept? In all these things doubtless Bernard dissented from the
Papists at this day: neither did he know or understand any thing of their
transubstantiation, local presence, private masses, half Communions,
indulgences, and the like, which are matters of difference between us and our
Adversaries at this day: so that there might be good conformity in substance
between Bernard and Wickliff, and his followers, though many Articles falsely
attributed to him are damned and heretical, and some things were uttered
unadvisedly by him: and therefore that which follows, of Page 12
Falsehood, Inflexions, Pretenses, and subtilties, is but the bewraying the
distemper of Higgons h^e brain; who having confounded himself in his own
intricate conceits, would ^ke men believe, other are like unto him; how
orderly, plainly, and sincerely soever they handle things.

The Third Part.
. 1.
IN the third part of this Chapter, he reflecteth (to use his own words) upon
four passages of mine; and professes, Page 12.
that he will detect sundry untruths, and vanities, wilfully committed in the
same. Wherein the Reader shall find him as false, and as vain a man as ever
he met with. The four passages he speaks of are these: the first, that
Gerson reports, that sundry lewd assertions, prejudicial to the states of
Kings and Princes, were brought into the Council of Constance, and that the
Council could not be induced to condemn them. Secondly, that they made no
stay to condemn the positions of Wickliff and Hus. Thirdly, that they
condemned the positions of Wickliff and Hus, seeming to derogate from the state
of the Clergy. Fourthly, that they condemned the said positions, though many
of them might carry a good and Catholic sense, if they might have found a
favorable construction. In which of these passages is my falsehood and untruth?
Does not Dial. Apolog.
Gerson report, that sundry lewd positions, prejudicial to the state of
Princes were brought to the Council of Constance to be condemned: and that by
no exhortations, or entreaties, by word or writing, the Fathers assembled in it
could be brought to condemn them? Does he not say, that they condemned the
positions of Wickliff and Hus, that they imprisoned some for those errors in
the beginning of the Council, and burnt them afterward? Does he not say, the
positions prejudicial to the states of Princes, which he speaks of, were
more pestiferous in the life and conversation of men, and in the state of
Commonweals, then those they condemned? Does he not complain of partiality
and respect of persons, and the Cleargies seeking their own, rather then that
which is Christ Jesus? Does he not say, Part. 1. sermon. pro viagio Regis Roman.
2. part. principali. direct. 3.
many of the positions of Wickliff might have had a good sense, if they might
have been favorably construed? Does he not protest that he has no hope of
reformation by a General Council, things standing as he found them to do?
if there be any untruth in any of these passages, let the Reader censure me as
he pleases. But if all these things be most undoubtedly true, let him account
of Higgons, as of an impudent young man, that has strangely hardened his
forehead, as if he had been a scholar in the school of impudency, a far
longer time then yet he has been. But happily he may find vanity in these
passages of mine, though no untruth.

Let us see therefore, what he says: Page 14.
what advantage, says he, can Doctor Field gain from Gersons improbation of
the aforesaid lewd assertions, prejudicial to the states of Kings and
Princes? why does he press the authority of Gerson, whose medicine he
knows to be very sharp, against the disease of all such Princes, as by the
infection of Heretics are seduced from the integrity of the Catholic faith:
to wit, persecution by fire and sword. Surely here Theomisus Higgons bewrays
more then vanity: for, as if he meant presently to become a traitor against his
Sovereign, whom he and his consortes suppose to be seduced from the Catholic
verity, he begins at the very first to talk of sharp medicines against
such Princes; and those prescribed by Gerson, as he tells us, but he will be
found a lying and cogging mate: for Gerson, in the Part. 4. december considerat.
contra adulatores Principum.
place cited by him, has nothing for the Popes deposing Princes for heresy,
or any thing else, which yet is that medicine he means: nay we are assured
he never held any such traiterous position; but; writing against the
flatterers of Princes, he wishes Princes to take heed they listen not to such
men, as will instill into them many false opinions, touching their power and
absoluteness, contrary to the faith and truth of God; whereby, in the end,
they may make themselves so odious as to be pursued by fire and sword by their
subjects, So that, whereas Gerson speaks of errors in faith, concerning the
state of Princes, bringing them to do things so odious, as to be persecuted
with fire and sword; this good fellow turns his words to another sense; as if
he had meant, that for error in faith, the Pope were to depose Princes; and
whereas, to meet with certain false and foolish suggestions, made to some
Princes, contrary to the doctrine of faith, he sets down certain
propositions, whereof the first is, that Princes must not justify themselves,
and think they offend not, whatsoever they do; and, that the Laws
Ecclesiastical and Civil will avail for the furtherance of this
consideration; he turns the words into this sense, that these Laws, are
auailable for the deposing of Kings: so treacherous and traiterous is this
Fugitive become already.

From this first observation he proceeds to a second, saying, that Page 14.
if the reformation wished for by Gerson, consisted only, or principally, or
at all, in the redress of lewd assertions, prejudicial to the states of
Kings, the Protestants have not effected that, which he desired, their
positions being dangerous likewise; and thereupon breaks out into a long and
large discourse concerning the positions of Protestants, touching the state and
power of Princes. But surely he is like a Spaniell not acquainted with his
game, that runs after every bird that rises before him; and is to be
taught better before there will be any great use of him. For I bring not the
report of Gerson touching hese assertions, so much to show what he would have
reformed, as to make it appear how strangely things were carried in former
times, and how little hope he and other good men had of any reformation by a
Council, seeing these positions so dangerous and apparently false could not be
condemned in the Council of Constance, by reason of a mighty faction
prevayling in the same; and so all that he says upon this false ground, is
nothing to the purpose: notwithstanding if the man were worth the meddling with,
or the matter required it, it were easy to show, that Protestants are far
from holding any such traiterous opinions as Papists defend. But I have
resolved to confine my self to the defense of my self against his childish
exceptions, and no way to follow him into any other of his idle discourses.

Touching Gersons condemning certaine-positions attributed to Wickliff and Hus;
and Husses suffering in the cause of CHRIST, against Antichrist, and the
idleness of Higgons, in charging Me with contradiction, in that I grant the
one, and affirm the other, I have spoken already. But so plentiful he is in
objections, that nine things more remain in this chapter, not objected
before, which he obiecteth to me. The first is, the extenuation of the
turbulent and impious positions of Wickliff, in that I say they seemed to
derogate from the Clergy. Secondly, that I conceal the impiety of Wickliff in
other things. Thirdly, that I cite in one place, things found in diverse
places. Fourthly, that I exaggerate the severity of the Council of Constance
against Wickliff, etc. and make as if Gerson had disliked it, whereas he did
not. Fifthly, that I say Gerson desired a reformation, and thought that it was
to be assayed severally in the particular Kingdoms of the world, there being
little or no hope of doing any good by a General Council. Sixthly, that the
proceeding in this work of reformation severally in diverse parts of the
world, without a common deliberation, was the cause of those differences, that
now appear in the reformed Churches, according as Gerson feared it would fall
out. 7ly That I say Gerson, Grosthead, and others, were of the true Church, who
yet were members of the Church of Rome. Eigthly, that I misalleage a saying of
Gerson. And the nineth, that whereas Gerson says the Popes sought to be adored
as God, I say they sought to be adored and worshipped as God. To every one of
these I will answer in a word.

To the first, that I extenuate not the impious positions falsely and
maliciously gathered out of Wickliffes works, as that, God must obey the
Devil, and if there be any other like, but accurse them to the pit of hell:
but, speaking of those which, in Gersons judgment, were not so hurtful,
neither to the conversation of men, nor the state of commonweals, as those
against Princes, which the Council of Constance could not be induced to
condemn: I say of them, they seemed to derogate from the Clergy; because I
know not certainly, upon what ground, or in what sense, many of them, were
uttered by him. To the second I answer that I concealed not the impiety of any
articles wherewith Wickliffe was charged, but having no occasion to speak of
any other but such only as were not so bad in Gersons judgment, as some they
in the counsel could not be induced to condemn; I had no reason to censure
the^ any otherwise then I did: for had they been so bad, as Master Higgons
would make them to be, the Pope and Council were not very good, that could by
no means be induced to condemn such as were far worse, as Gerson tells
us. To the third I say, that it is lawful for a man to cite in one place out
of one author, things found in him in diverse places: or else Master Higgons
is too blame Page 8 He alleges two sayings of Gerson found in two several
places, as if they were in one: without specifying whence the latter of them is
taken.
who does so. To the fourth I say, that I exaggerate not the severity of the
Council against Wickliffe simply, but in comparison: and so does Gerson, and
disliketh it as much as I do, condemning it of partiality. To the fifth, and
sixth, I say, that Gerson affirmed the one, to wit, that no good was to be
expected by a general Council; that the several parts of the Christian world
were to reform themselves: and feared the other, namely that too great
diversity would follow upon such divided reformations; as it will easily
appear, to any one that will take the pains to peruse the places cited by
Me. Neither was it have and precipitation, as Master Higgons is pleased to
censure it, but necessity, that made our men to do as they did, having no
means to meet for common deliberation. To the seventh I answer, that
Gerson, Grosthead, and the rest, were members of the Church that was under the
Papacy: but that they were not of the papal faction, nor vassals of the man
of sin; but men of a better spirit. To the eighth I answer breefely, that I
have most sincerely and truly alleged the testimony of Gerson, and noe way
varied from his intention; which that the reader may the better be able to
discern, I will first set down what my allegation is, and then what
exceptions Higgons takes to it. My words are these. Third book of the Church.
chap. 11.
Touching the second cause of the Churches ruin, which is the ambition, pride,
and covetousness of the Bishop, and Court of Rome, Gerson boldly affirms:
that whereas the Bishops of Rome, challenging the greatest place in the
Church should have sought the good of Gods people, they contrarily sought only
to advance themselves: his words are these: In imitation of Lucifer, they will
be adored and worshipped as Gods: neither do they think themselves subject
to any, but are as the sons of Belial, that have cast off the yoke, not
enduring, whatsoever they do, that a man should ask them why they do so: they
neither fear God nor reverence men. This is my allegation: now let us see what
it is that Master Higgons excepteth against in it: Are not these the words of
Gerson? He cannot deny but that they are: but he Page 28. and 29.
says, Gerson uttered them, when there was a Schism in the Church: It is true
he did so; but what then? Did not the true Pope, whosoever he was, amongst
those pretenders, take as much on him as the rest: and is not this note of
disgrace fastened upon all? but that Master Higgons may know, that Gerson spoke
as much of the Pope simply, as I have cited out of him, without any reference
to pretenders, (as he would feign avoyde the evidence of his heavy sentence)
let him consider what Gerson has written in his Tract de potestate Ecclesiae:
where he goes about to stop the mouth of flattery, giving too much to the
Clergy: and vile Detraction, taking too much from it: and brings in
flattery, speaking in this sort to them of the Clergy, especially the Pope. De
potest. Eccl. consid. 1^.
O how great, how great is the height of thy Ecclesiastical power? O sacred
Clergy! how is secular power nothing, if it be compared unto thine! Seeing as
all power both in Heaven and Earth was given to CHRIST, so CHRIST left it all
to Peter, and his successors: so that Constantine gave nothing to Pope
Sylvester, that was not his before, but restored to him that which had bin
unjustly withheld: and there is no power temporal, or Ecclesiastical,
imperial or regal; but from the Pope: in whose thigh CHRIST did write: King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords: of whose power to dispute, it is sacrilegious: to
whom no man may say, why do you so? though he ouer-turne, tear in sunder, and
ouer-throw all states, possessions and dominions, temporal and
Ecclesiastical: let Me be reputed a liar, says he, if these things be not
found written by them that are wise in their own eyes: and if they be not
found to have been believed by some Popes: He adds, notum est illud
satyrici: -- Nihil est, quod credere de se;
Non possit, cum laudatur diis aequa potestas:
That is, according to that known saying of the Satyricall Poet: what should
not he persuade himself of himself, that is magnified, as equal to God in
power. For that of the Comicall Poet, is true of the flatterer: that he makes
fools to be stark mad. These are the sayings of Gerson, which I have laid
down at large, that the Reader may judge whether I have depraved the intention
of Gerson, or not: and whether Higgons had any cause to traduce Me in such
sort as he does. It seems the poor fellow was hired to say something against
Me, or else he would never have adventured to vent such fooleries: yet the
last accusation against Me is not to be passed over. Gerson says, the Popes
will be adored as God, and I fear not to add, that the English Reader may
understand Me, that they will be adored and worshipped as God out of these
premises he makes an excellent conclusion, Page 30.
comparing Gerson to David, that commanded Ioab to save the life of Absalom:
and Luther to Ioab, that had no pity on traiterous Absalom, in that the one
would have the Pope well dealt withal, though he disliked his faults: and the
other sought to tread him under his feet. But let the Reader know, that as
Gerson, so Luther was willing to give all due honor to the Pope, contenting
himself with that which of right pertains to him: but if he dishonor God,
wrong the Church, suffocate and kill her children, and heretically refuse to be
subject to the Church, and Council: if he challenge infallibility of
judgment, from which no man may appeal; Gerson will tread him under feet,
and reject him as an Heretic as well as Luther.

The Fourth Part.
. 1.
IN the fourth part of this Chapter Master Higgons undertakes to prove that I
have abused the name and authority of Grosthead, to justify the Lutheran
reformation: which he performs full wisely in this sort: Page 32
Grosthead was judged a Catholic, and a good man by some Cardinals in Rome:
therefore he could not desire that reformation of things amiss, that now is
wrought. If the consequence of this Argument be denied, he knows not how to
prove it: but Page 33.
wills his reader to demand of Me, whether these Cardinals, which judged
Grosthead to be a Catholic, and of the same Religion with themselves, were
not real members of the Antichristian Synagogue? proud Romanists? factious
Papists? etc. which question is soon answered. For I have distinguished, as he
knows right well, the Church in which the Pope tyrannized, and the faction of
Papists, that flattered him, and applied themselves to set forward his proud
and unjust claims, till they lifted him up into the throne and seat of
Antichrist; the members of the Church, and of the faction: and though both
these lived for a time in the same outward Communion, as did the right
believers and they that denied the resurrection of the dead, amongst the
Corinthians: yet did they differ as much in judgment, as we do from the
Papists at this day: so that these Cardinals that opposed themselves against
the furious purposes of the Pope, intending to proceed against Grosthead for
resisting his tyrannical usurpations, and justified Grosthead as a good man,
and the things he stood upon, as right and just, and told the Pope of a
departure from him, which he must look for, and by these ill courses,
intended by him, he might hasten, may be thought not to have been members of
the Antichristian faction, but of the poor Church oppressed and wronged by the
same: as Grosthead also was. Neither is it so strange, that Cardinals, who are
so near the Pope, should be auerse from his Antichristian courses: For
Cameracensis, then whom that age had not a worthier man, either for life or
learning, and Cusanus no way inferior to him, howsoever they were not free
from all errors of Papisme, yet wholly condemned the Papacy, as we do at
this day; denying the Popes universality of jurisdiction, uncontrollable power,
infallible judgment, and right to meddle with Princes states; making him
nothing but the first Bishop in order, and honor, amongst the Bishops of the
Christian Church. And De Praedestinatione.
Contarenus, as all men know, condemned sundry errors of the Papisme, and
seemed no less to dislike the Papists wilful and obstinate maintayning of
gross errors, abuses, and confusions, then the temerity of those that
disorderedly, as he thought, sought to have an alteration. Thus is Master
Higgons his great demand easily answered: Only one great and inexcusable
fault I have committed; in that I say these Cardinals opposed themselves
against the Pope, when he intended to proceed violently against Bishop
Grosthead: whereas I should have said, Page 34.
they interposed themselves. The poor man it seems is very weak in his
conceit, and therefore says he knows not what: for did not the interposing
of themselves, in such sort, as they did, imply a contrariety of judgment in
them, opposite to that of the Pope? and was not their hindering, crossing, and
stopping of him by all the means it was fit for them to use, an opposing
against his rash purpose and resolution? Surely Master Higgons in this passage
shows himself as very a babe as ever sucked a bottle. For all men know, that
one may oppose himself unto another, as well by way of persuasion and
entreaty, as of authority or violence.

But to leave these trifleling fooleries, and to come to matter of substance,
because he says, Page 3^.
I express not the matters of quarrel, and differences between the Pope and
Bishop Grosthead particularly enough; and that I conceal the correspondence
he held with the Roman Church in matters of faith; I will relate the whole
story at large, of such things as fell out between the Pope and this worthy
Bishop, whereby I doubt not but it will appear, that if Grosthead were now
alive, he would detest such smattering companions as Higgons is, that labor so
carefully to reconcile him to that Antichrist, with whom he had war both
while he lived and after he was dead.

The Popes in the time wherein Grosthead lived, not contenting themselves with
the pre-eminence of being Patriarchs of the West, which stood in confirming
Metropolitanes, by imposition of hands, or by mission of the Pall, and in
calling Patriarchicall Synodes, in certain cases, to hear and determine
matters of greater consequence, then could be ended in Provincial Synodes: but
taking upon them, as if the fullness of all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction had
rested in them alone, admitted appeals out of all parts of the West, not of
Bishops only, but of Presbyters, inferior Cleargy-men, and Laymen also;
reserved a great number of cases to their own cognizance, debarring the
Bishops and Metropolitanes from meddling with them: exempted whom they pleased
from the ordinary jurisdiction of their Bishops, and challenged the right to
confer all kind of dignities Ecclesiastical, whether presentatiue, or
elective, not only when they were void, but before: whence came their
expectatiue graces, and provisions; and, which much offended and grieved all
good men, bestowed the dignities of the Churches abroad in England and other
places upon strangers, that never came to those Churches they were entitled to;
so that at one time, a survay being taken, it was found that strangers carried
yearly more then threescore thousand Marks out of England, which was more
then the bare reuenew of the Crown at that time. Math. Paris. in Henrico. 3.
Amongst others, Bishop Grosthead received the Popes letters for the placing
of certain strangers in his Church of Lincoln; which he refused to do, and
wrote back to the Pope, to let him know he was opposite to Christ, a
murderer of souls, and an Heretic in these his courses: Upon the receipt of
which letters; the Pope was half mad with anger, and calling his Cardinals
together, swear by Peter and Paul, that if it were not that he were overcome by
the goodness of his nature, he would cast down this Bishop into the pit
of all confusion, which thing he said he could easily do, for that the King
of England was his Vassal and Slave; and he could command him, under pain
of his high displeasure, to cast him into prison, or otherwise to proceed
against him: but that howsoever he would make him an example to all such as
should dare in like sort to disobey his Mandates. Some of the Cardinals, more
advised then the Pope, sought to pacify him what they could, and to stop
these his intended violent courses: telling him; Bishop Grosthead was in
faith a Catholic, in life a most holy man, of great learning, and every where
much respected: that the things he stood upon, were just and right; and that
therefore it was not safe for him to proceed against him, least some tumult
should follow: which they besought him the rather to think of, for that there
must be a departure from the Church of Rome, which they would not have him to
hasten by this means. These persuasions prevailed so far, that Grosthead was
not accursed, nor deposed, but dyed Bishop of Lincoln; yet after his death,
(it being easier to insult upon a dead Lion then a living dog) the Pope took
heart, and was resolved to accurse him, and to command his dead body to be
taken up, and to be buried in a dunghill. But the night before this vile act
should have bin done, Bishop Grosthead did appear unto him with his crosier
staff in his hand; and so rebuked the wicked Pope, for favoring the wicked,
and persecuting the righteous; and besides struck him in such sort with his
crosier staff, that he never enjoyed his Papal dignity after it. This
apparition happily was nothing else but the apprehension of his guilty
conscience, representing to him the person of him whom he intended to wrong,
and terrifying him even unto the death. Howsoever it appears by Matthew Paris,
that this worthy Bishop: (for so will I call him, not-with-standing any thing
prating Higgons can say to the contrary) finding that the Pope sought to
overthrow the order of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, to encroach upon all
Bishops and guides of the Church, and to usurp such an illimited,
universal, and absolute authority, as no way pertained to him, feared not to
call him Antichrist: to compare him and his Courtiers to that Behemoth that
puts his mouth to the River of Jordan, thinking he can drink it up; to
pronounce that it is most true, that before his time, was said of him, and his
execrable Court. Eius avaritiae totus non sufficit orbis:
Eius luxuria meretrix non sufficit omnis.
That the Church was holden in Babylonicall captivity by this Antichrist, and
that her deliverance would never be wrought but by the edge of the sword, that
must be bathed in blood.

This is the true report concerning Grosthead: in all which there are neither
fictions, nor exaggerations, as Higgons pretends, by which it is evident that
there was as little Communion between the Pope, challenging as he did then, and
does now, infallibility of judgment, universality of illimited and
uncontrollable power, and right to dispose the Kingdoms of the World, as
there is between light, and darkness, the Temple of God, and Idols, CHRIST
and Antichrist. So that he was no Papist, seeing he ouer-threw the Papacy; and
if in any thing he erred, as living in corrupttimes, it is not to be marvayled
at; neither did his error in some particular thing, so much prejudice his
piety and sanctity, as that he may not be called a worthy and renowned Bishop
seeing he held the foundation, and strove for the truth, as far as he knew
it, even to death. And therefore the exceptions of the Author of the book of
the Three Conversions against Master Fox, touching this Bishop, and some
other mentioned by him, and recorded in the number of Martyrs and Confessors,
are little to be regarded: for that men might be members of that true Church
whereof we are, holding the foundation, and carefully seeking out and
maintaining the truth, as far as they knew it, though they were otherwise
persuaded in some things, then either Master Fox, or we are; which need not to
seem strange to Master Higgons, nor any other of that side: seeing they think
many to have been members of their Church, and Catholics that dissented from
them in all the questions concerning the Pope, to which Page 4
all other, as Master Higgons tells us, are subordinate: and besides in the
questions of original sin, free will, justification, merit, satisfaction, the
number of the Sacraments, and sundry other like things.

Thus we see how zealously Grosthead, the worthy and renowned Bishop of
Lincoln, opposed himself against the tyrannical usurpations and
encroachments of the Pope, and feared not to call him Antichrist for the same.
Neither was he alone in this opposition, but we shall find that the whole
state of England after many complaints against the Popes encroachments,
usurpations, and tyrannical intermedling in things no way pertaining to him to
the overthrow of the Hierarchy of the Church; told him in the end, that if
these courses were continued, they should be forced to do that which would
make his heart to ache. Thus, faith Matthew Paris, at last the poor Church of
England, that had bin long used as an Ass to carry the Popes burdens, in the
end grew weary, and opened her mouth as Balaams Ass did, to reprove the folly
of the Prophet: and that not without just cause, in the judgment of all the
world: for howsoever the church of Rome challenged to be the Mother of all
churches, and the Popeto be the Father of all Christians, yet the one proved a
cruel stepmother, and the other an unkind and unnatural Father: so that they
both lost the hearts of all men. But what did the Pope upon the complaints of
so great a church and nation as this of England? did he ease her burdens, or
any way listen to her most reasonable suits? no verily; but was so unmerciful;
as the same Paris testifies, that having so sore beaten us, he beat us again
in more cruel sort then ever before, only because we cried and therefore let
him not be angry with us, because we have kept our word with him, that never
kept any with us; and have indeed done that which makes his heart to ache, as
our forefathers threatened him long before: these groans of our wro^ged
Mother, and her often renewed bitter complaints, before any was found to work
her deliverance, do justify that which we have done to be no more then in
duty we stood bound to do: neither is there any better proof of the goodness of
our cause, then that, that which we have done in the reformation of the church,
was long before wished for, expected, and fore-tolde by the best men that lived
in former times in the corrupt state of the church.

But because Mr Higgons is pleased to tell us, Lib. 1. page 84
that if there be no better proof, the cause is bad, and the patrons worse:
because these best men we speak of, will not speak for us: I will take a little
pains to show the goodness of this proof, which I doubt not but the Reader
will find to be better, then that Mr Higgons or any other of his Romanists
shall ever be able to weaken it. All that which we have done in the
reformation of the church, consists in 3 things; the first is, the condemning
of certain erroneous opinions in matters of doctrine: the 2d, the shaking off
of the yoke of Papal tyranny: and the 3, the removing of abuses and
superstitious observatio^s. Now then if it be proved that the best and best
learned in former times, thought as we do in matters doctrinall: that they
complained of the heavy yoke which the Pope laid on them, and desired the
remoouing of such abuses as we have removed, I think this proof will be
found very strong and good: I will therefore first beg^ with matters of
doctrine; and so proceed to the other points, not intending to run through all
the controversed points of doctrine, but some only for example: and because
the question is only of the judgment of men living in latter times in the
corrupt state of the Church under the Papacy, I will pass by the Fathers, and
speak of such as lived since their time. Touching the Canon of Scripture,
which is the rule of our faith: we deny the books of Tobit, Judith,
Ecelesiasticus, Wisdom, Machabees, the song of the three Children, and the
story of Bell and the Dragon, to be Canonical Scriptures: So did See the
pla^es cited in the 4. book of the Church: chap. 23.
Hugo de Sancto Victore, Richardus de Sancto Victore, Petrus Cluniacensis,
Lyranus, Dionysius Carthusianus, Hugo Cardinalis, Thomas Aquinas, Waldensis,
Richardus Armachanus, Picus Mirandula, Ockam, Caietan, and Driedo: to say
nothing of Melito Bishop of Sardis, Origin, Athanasius, Hilarious, Nazianzen,
Cyrill of Jerusalem, Epiphanius, Ruffinus, Hierome, Gregory and Damascen. Here
we see a cloud of witnesses, deposing for us. And what better proof of the
goodness of our cause can there be, then that so many worthies of the world,
in so diverse places, and at so diverse times give testimony to our opinion?
Touching the creation, fall, and state of original sin, there were some, and
they excellently learned, who thought as we do, that man must either be lifted
above himself by grace, or fall below himself by sin, that there is no
middle estate of pure nature, that original righteousness was required to the
integrity of nature, and consequently, that being lost; nature is corrupted,
and deprived of all natural and moral rectitude, so that a man, after the
fall of Adam, till grace restore him, can do nothing morally good, or that is
not sin. These men defined original sin to be, a privation of original
righteousness, that is, of that grace, without which a man can neither fear,
love, nor serve God aright. And consequently, do teach, that after Adams fall,
without grace renewing us, we cannot keep the commandments of God, do the
works of moral virtue, or any way dispose our selves to a true conversion and
turning unto God. This opinion is l^rnedly defended by De causa Dei contra
Pelagianos.
Thomas Bradwardin, in his discourses against the Pelagians of his time, and
confirmed by him out of the Scriptures, and Fathers: and likewise by (...) 2.
Sentent. Dict. 26. quest. 1. art. 1. and did. 30. quest. 3.
Gregorius Ariminensis; as it was before them, by Augustine and Prosper. Many
there were who thought otherwise; whom Cardinal In lib. de praedestinatione.
Contaren blames, as inclining too much to the Pelagian heresy; but the best
men concurred in judgment with these. For proof whereof Cassander cites an
excellent saying of Bonauentura: Hoc, inquit, piarum mentium est, vt nil sibi
tribuant, sed totum gratiae Dei; vnde quantumcunque aliquis det gratiae dei, a
pietate non recedit: etiamsi multa tribuendo gratiae Dei, aliquid subtrahit
potestati naturae, vel liberi arbitrij: cum vero aliquid gratiae dei
subtrahitur, and naturae tribuitur, quod gratiae est: ibi n Consultat, art. 18.
potest periculum interuenire. That is, it is the property of pious and good
minds, to attribute nothing to themselves, but to ascribe all unto the grace
of God: for how much soever a man gives to the grace of God, he offends
against no rule of piety, noe though by giving much to the grace of God, he
subtract something from the power of nature, or free will: but when any thing
that pertains to grace is denied unto it, and given to nature, there may be
some danger.

Concerning justification, there is a very maine difference between the
Papists, and us: for though we deny not, but that there is a donation and
giving of the spirit to all them that are justified: changing and altering them
in such sort as that they begin to do the works of righteousness: yet we
teach, that justification consists in such sort in the remission of sins,
and the imputation of Christ's righteousness, that the faithful soul must
trust to no other righteousness but that which is imputed: the other being
imperfect, and not enduring the trial of GODS severe judgment: Now that this
was the faith of the best and worthiest men in the Church, in former times, it
will easily appear unto us. Epistola 190.
The righteousness of another (says Bernard) is assigned to man, because he
had none of his own: and upon the Canticles he says; sermon. 61. in Cantica.
I also will sing the mercies of the Lord for ever. Shall I sing of mine own
righteousness? noe Lord, I will remember thy righteousness only: for that is
mine seeing thou art made unto me of God righteousness. Is there any cause
for me to fear, least it should not suffice us both? it is no short cloak,
which according to the Prophet, cannot cover two. With Bernard all other good
men agreed, who in respect of the imperfection of our inherent righteousness,
pronounced it to be as the polluted rags of a menstruous woman. Lib. 4. de
consolatione Theologiae prosa 1.
Who is there, says Gerson, that shall dare to boast that he has a clean
heart? and who shall say I am innocent? and I am clean? who is he that will
not quake for fear, when he shall stand before God to be judged? who is
fearful in his counsels. Hence Job in his affliction says unto God, I feared
all my works, knowing that thou sparest not the sinner: and again, if he will
contend with me, I cannot answer him one of a thousand. Whereunto the prayer
of the Prophet agrees; enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for
no living man shall be justified in thy sight: And again, if thou shall
observe iniquities, O Lord, Lord who shall endure it? Furthermore we read,
that Esaias wrapping up himself with other, and waxing vile in his own eyes, in
all humility professed, that all our righteousness is as the polluted rags
of a menstruous woman. Who therefore in boasting sort shall dare to show his
righteousness to God, more then a woman dares show the rags of her
confusion and shame to her husband? There are two kinds of justice, to which
faith leads us, says De iustific.
Cardinal Contarenus; the one inherent, the other imputed: it remains that
we enquire upon which of them we are to stay our selves, and by which we are
to think that we are justified before God, that is, accounted just and holy,
as having that justice that pleases God, and answers to that his law
requires, I truly, says he, think that a man very piously and Christianly
may say, that we ought to stay, to stay I say, as upon a firm and stable
thing able undoubtedly to sustain us, upon the justice of Christ given and
imputed to us, and not upon the holiness and grace that is inherent in us. For
this our righteousness is but imperfit, and such as cannot defend us, seeing
in many things we offend all, etc. But the justice of Christ, which is given
unto us is true and perfect justice, which altogether pleases the eyes of God,
and in which there is nothing that offends God: Upon this therefore as most
certain and stable we must stay our selves, and believe that we are
justified by it, as the cause of our acceptance with God: this is that
precious treasure of Christians which whosoever finds, sells all that he
has to buy it. With Contarenus agree the Authors of the Enchiridion of
Christian religion, published in the provincial Synod of Collen, in the year
of our Lord 1536. Which, as Consult. art. 4.
Cassander says, the more learned divines, in Italy and France approved: the
authors of the book called De iustific.
Antididagma Coloniense, Contro. 2. de fide and iustif catione.
Albertus Pighius, and sundry other; who if they were now a live, and should
thus teach, our Iesuited Papists would soon condemn them as Heretics.

Touching merits; I have showed In appendice. cap. 12.
elsewhere that Scotus, Cameracensis, Ariminensis, and Waldensis; do think
there is no merit properly so named. With whom agrees. Adrian the Pope, upon
the fourth of the sentences, writing thus, like a y Citatus a Cassandro in
Consult. art. 6.
Protestant as I think. Our merits are as a staff of reed, upon which if a
man stay himself, it will break and pierce the hand of him that stays on
it: and our righteousness is as the rags of a menstruous woman, etc, Citat.
a Cassandro. Ibid.
Clicthouaeus upon the Canon of the Mass, upon these words, not waying our
merits, but pardoning our offenses, asks, what merit we can plead with God;
to whom we owe all things? according to that, When ye have done all, say
that ye are unprofitable servants: and how we can applaud our selves in our
good works, whereas all our righteousness is as the polluted rags of a
menstruous woman before the Lord? Whereunto Bernard agrees. a Sermon. 1. in
festo omnium Sanctorum.
There is extant an excellent Epistle of Cardinal Epist. ad Cardinalem Farne
sium, de actis Ratisbon.
Contarenus, wherein he shows what reasons moved him, and the other of his
side, to yield so far to the Protestants, as to leave out the name of merit,
and to acknowledge that there is no meritte of works properly so named. And as
these Catholic Divines thought thus of justification, by imputation of
Christ's righteousness, the imperfection of our inherent righteousness, and
our not meriting any thing with the merit of condignity; so they taught
likewise that Christ's righteousness is to be apprehended by a lively faith,
and defined a lively faith to be that motion of the spirit, whereby men truly
repenting of their former life, are raised and lifted up to God, and do truly
apprehend the mercy of God promised in Christ, so that they do indeed feel
in themselves that they have received remission of sins and reconciliation by
Gods goodness, and by the merit of CHRIST, and do cry Abba, Father. Thus much
was expressly delivered in the Cit. a Cassan consult. art. 4
book exhibited by the Emperor Charles to the Divines of both sides, whom he
appointed to confer together for the composing of the controversies of
Religion: and the Divines agreed unto it. Likewise in the Enchiridion d Ibid.
of Christian Religion, so much approved by all the more learned Divines of
Italy and France, thus we read. We confess that it is true, that it is
altogether required to the justification of a man, that he certainly believe
not only in a generality, that for CHRIST'S sake sins are remitted to such
as truly repent, but that particularly they are remitted to himself by faith
for Christ's sake. With whom Contarenus agrees in his Tract of Justification,
the most reverend Canons of the Metropoliticall Church of Colein, Authors of
the book called De duplicl fiducia.
Antididagma, and sundry other. And before them all, Bernard delivered the very
same: his words are these. Sermon. 1. de annunc. Dom.
If thou beleeuest that thy sins cannot be done away, but by him against whom
only thou have sinned, and who cannot sin, thou do well: but add this
moreover, to believe that thy sins are remitted thee: this is the testimony
which the holy Spirit gives in our hearts, saying: Thy sins are remitted
thee. For so the Apostle supposes, that a man is justified freely by faith.
That the Pope may err not personally only, but iudicially also, we have the
opinion of Hi omnes citantur a Stapletono. Relect. contro. (...). q 4 and Bell.
l. 4 de Pont. c. 2.
Ockam, Michael Caesenas, Cameracensis, Cusanus, Almain, Gerson, Waldensis,
Picus Mirandula, Pope Adria^the 6. almost all the Parisians, all them that
think the Council to be above the Pope, the Fathers in the Councels of
Constance and Basil, Alphonsus a Castro: and as some think, Durandus; Bell.
ibid. c. 7.
Cyprian, and his colleagues, who resisted against the determination of the
Bishop of Rome, and all the Christians of the East at this day. This might
seem to be a good proof: yet Vbi supra.
Stapleton is so far from yielding to it, that he condemns them all that
thus thought, as ignorant and rash, especially the latter of them. That the
Pope is only first amongst Bishops, equal with him in power, not of order
only, but of jurisdiction also, De concord. cath l. 2. c. 13
Cusanus proves at large, as Dial. l. 4. primi tract. tertiae part. c. 2.
Ockam, Ib. c. 3
Michael Caesenas, and their consorts did before: and with these in effect
(though they express not the same so well,) Cameracensis, Gerson, Almaine, and
all the rest agree, who think the Council to be greater in authority, and in
the power of jurisdiction, then the Pope: and make him to be amongst Bishops,
as the Duke of Venice is amongst the great Senators of that state, greater then
each one, but inferior to the whole company of Bishops. Sup. sent. prolog. q.
10 art. 2.
John Bacon our Countryman notes, that many in his time were of the same
opinion, who thought the Pope, as Head or President of the College and company
of Bishops, and with them; to have an illimited authority, reaching to all
persons and causes Ecclesiastical; but not as in, of, and by himself. This
opinion, De sac. eccl. minist. and benef. l. 3 c. 2.
Duarenus follows, and shows, that anciently the Pope took no more on him.
The same opinion do all the Christians of the East hold: and the practice and
resolution of antiquity confirms the same. Touching the unlawfulness of the
Popes meddling with Princes and their affairs, we have the testimonies of In
Chron. an. 1088.
Sigebertus, De concord. cath. l. 3. c. 41.
Cusanus, and many more, whom I would produce, but that M Blackwell the
Archpriest in his examination, has already produced a world of witnesses,
deposing against the Pope in this behalf, to whom I refer the Reader.

The like might be showed in other points; but because I will not be tedious, I
will leave these points of doctrine, and come to show what complaints were
euery-where heard in the Christian world, before we were borne, against the
pope and court of Rome. Of Bishop Grosthead, and our English, I have spoken
already: and have sufficiently showed how they multiplied complaints against
the pope: let us therefore come to other: The popes, says Nicholaus De
corrupto Eccles. statu.
Clemangis, as they saw themselves to be greater then other prelates, so they
lifted up themselves above other in desire of ruling, and ouer-ruling all: and
finding that Peter's patrimony, though exceeding any one Kingdom of the world,
would not suffice to maintain their state, which they would have to be greater
then that of Emperors, Kings and Princes: they entered into those sheepfolds of
other men, which they found to abound with milk and wool: for they took to
the^ the power to confer benefices and church-liuings, which ^ould fall void
in any part of the christian world, ouerthrovving al those electio^s which
the ancient by so many Canons carefully sought to uphold: and hereby drew to
them an infinite mass of money: neither did they so stay, but took away from
Bishops and patrons all right of collation and presentation; forbidding them to
place any till such should be provided for, as they had given the expectatiue
hope of benefices not void. Of these men there was an infinite number, not
coming from the Universities and schools of learning, but from the plough or
base trades, not knowing Alpha from Beta: who lived most wickedly, and
dissolutely, and brought the holy Ministry into so great contempt, that
whereas anciently nothing was more honorable, now nothing is more abject, and
contemptible. Besides these grieuances, upon every vacancy, they exacted the
benefit of a whole year out of every living, according to a taxation set by
them, which sometimes three years profit would not answer: and yet not
content herewith, they oftentimes imposed tenthes, and such like extraordinary
taxes upon the poor Clergy: And as if nothing would suffice, overthrew all
the jurisdiction of other Bishops: brought all matters of suite to the Court of
Rome: and thereby also filled their coffers: and, that nothing might be
wanting to make the Church most miserable, the proud spirits of Cardinals, the
Popes Assessors, their swelling words, and their insolent gestures were such,
that if a man would draw a perfect picture of pride, the best way to express
the same were to paint a Cardinal. For though these men at the first were but
of the inferior Clergy, yet in time they so enlarged their Phylacteries, that
they do not only despise Bishops, whom in contempt they call Episcopellos; but
also Patriarchs, Primates, and Archbishops as their inferiors: and almost
suffer themselves to be adored of them. Yea they think themselves to be Kings
fellows: neither did they content themselves thus proudly and insolently to
advance themselves above these, under whom they should have bin, but to
maintain their state, the unmeasurable and inextricable gulf of their
covetousness was such, that no words can express it. For they got diverse
kinds of livings, that do not well stand together: they became Monks and
Canons, Regulars and Seculars: and under one habit, possessed the livings of
all religious orders, and professions: not 2. or 3. 10. or 20. but a hundred,
2. hundred, yea sometimes 4. hundred or more: and those not small and poor,
but the best and fattest that could be gotten. Gerson speaking of the
incroaching of the Court of Rome, writes in this sort: De Concilio vnius
Obedientiae.
In process of time the Pope drew many things to himself: so that in the end,
upon occasion given and taken (which it is not needful here to rehearse)
almost the whole collation of livings and jurisdiction of the Church, rested in
the Pope and his Court, in such sort, that scarce was there any Prelate found,
that had power to give any the least benefice. Together with these things
concurred many fold exactions, to maintain the state of the Pope and
Cardinals: and whether there were not many frauds, abuses, and symonies
committed, I refer to the judgment of such as are of experience. These things
I have therefore insisted upon; because happily it may seem to some more
expedient for the Universal Church, that all things should be brought back
to their ancient estate, wherein they were in that Church that was in the
Apostles times, as much as conveniently might be, the greater part of these
jurisdictions being rejected, which have made the Church merely brutish, and
carnal, sauouring almost nothing of the things that concern the salvation of
souls, (not of themselves but thorough the fault of such as abuse them) or at
the least that things should be brought to the state they were in, in the time
of Syluester or Gregory, when every Prelate was left to himself in his own
jurisdiction, and that part of the Church that was committed to his charge, and
the Pope held that which was his own, without so many reseruations and so
many great exactions, for the maintenance of that Court and Head, growing
happily too great for the other states and parts of the body to bear. So that,
as there were worthy men that, conspiring with us in matter of faith, opposed
themselves against errors, and false opinions, so there wanted not, that
disliked and reproved the Popes incroaching, tending to the dissoluing of the
whole frame of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and the overthrow of the form
of government, settled by Christ, which is no less hurtful, then the bringing
in of heresy and false Doctrine. And this is that Babylonicall captivity, of
which Grosthead complained: and in respect of these confusions, and not only
in respect of ill life, as Master Higgons untruly tells us, Bernard and
other complained, that the servants of Christ served Antichrist.

From the tyranny and usurpations of the Pope, so much complained of in the
days of our Fathers, let us come to abuses and superstitious observations
removed by us, and see whether they that went before us, will not give
testimony to that which we have done. And first to begin with the Sacrament
of the Lords body and blood: the first abuse in the celebration of that
Sacrament, disliked by us, is the mangling of it, and giving it to the Lay
people only in one kind. Touching the ministration of the holy Sacrament of
the Eucharist, it is evident, says Consultat. art. 22.
Cassander, that all other Churches of the World even unto this day, and that
the Roman or West Church for more then a thousand years, in the solemn,
public, and ordinary dispensation of this Sacrament, gave both kinds to all
the members of the Church. The same does Annot. in lib. de Corona militis.
Rhenanus prove at large, writing upon Tertullian; and shows, that, for
fear of shedding, the Challices, wherein the consecrated wine was, and out of
which the people were to drink the blood of CHRIST, had certain pipes of
silver. Afterward in process of time, the consecrated bread was dipped into
the wine and so given to the people that they might receive the whole
Sacrament. But this kind of dipping De officio missae. cap. 19.
Micrologus says, Ordo Romanus condemns: and therefore prescribes, that on
Good friday, when there is no consecrating, but a receiving of the mystical
bread, that was consecrated the day before, they should by saying the Lords
Prayer, and dipping the body of our Lord into Wine, not consecrated, consecrate
the same: that so the people might be partakers of the whole Communion: which
thing were superfluous, if the body of our Lord, kept from the day before, and
so dipped, might suffice for a full and entire Communion: and he shows, that
Julius the Pope, writing to the Bishops of Egypt, condemned this kind of
dipping, and commanded them to give the bread and wine apart, as Christ did
institute: yet in time they proceeded farther, and gave the Sacrament only in
one kind to the people: which custom when some condemned; the Councels of
Constance and Basil, thought good to confirm and allow; yet so, that the
Bohemians, upon certain agreements, were permitted to have the communion in
both kinds: and Lyndan. Panopliae Euangelicae lib. 4. cap. 56.
it is reported of Pope Martin, chosen in the Council of Constance, that he
went home from the Council, and ministered the communion in both kinds, to
diverse, not of the Clergy only, but of the Laity also. Doctrinal. Fidei
tom. 2. de Sacramento Eucharistiae. cap. 94.
Waldensis also testifies, that here in England, some devout men of the
Laity were permitted to communicate in both kinds in his time: and Consultat.
art. 22.
Cassander assures us, that all the best men that professed themselves to be
Catholics, especially such as were conversant in reading the ancient writers,
and monuments of antiquity, upon great reason desired to have the Communion in
both kinds.

The next abuse was that of private Masses. I have showed already that the name
of Mass was given to the holy Sacrament, for that all non-communicants were
dismissed, and all that staid were to communicate. And, as In prefat. O^d.
Romani.
Cassander fitly notes, the whole composition and form of the sacred prayer,
called the Canon, agrees only to a public ministration: there being often
mention made in it of the people standing round about, offering and
communicating; so that some ancient expositors of the Roman order, think the
Canon ought not to be used, but in a public ministration. To which purpose De
officio Missae. cap. 19.
Micrologus observes that the prayers used after the communion are appliable
only to such as have communicated; and therefore wills them not to neglect
to communicate, that desire to enjoy the blessing of these prayers. Citat. a
Cas. in praefat. ord. Romani.
Clichthoueus upon the Canon of the Mass says, that which some note, that
the Priest, so often as he celebrateth, should give the Sacrament to all that
stand by, is Ancient and agreeable to the custom of the Primitive Church,
when the faithful did every day receive the Sacrament according to that
Sanction of Calixtus the Pope; After the consecration let all communicate: and
that of Anacletus, who wills them to be excommunicated, that being present
at the consecration, communicate not: which Defens. fid. Trid. l. 2. fol. 239.
Andradius will not have to be restrained to the Ministers assisting, but
extended to all the people, and that by the authority of Dionysius, and Iustine
Martyr. Cit. a Cassandro ubi supra.
Cochlaeus against Musculus de sacrificio missae has these words: In old
time both Priest and people, as many as were present at the sacrifice of the
Mass, after the oblation was ended, communicated with the Priest, as it is
evident by the Canons of the Apostles, and the Epistles of the most ancient
Doctors, etc. Afterward the devotion of the people decayed, yet the Clergy
and Ministers communicated still; and when all they did not communicate, yet at
least the Deacons, and Subdeacons communicated, as the Author of the Roman
Breviary testifies. Whereupon, says Cassander, some godly and learned men do
wish, that this ancient custom were restored, that at least the Ministers
might communicate with him that celebrateth, as agreeable to the practice of
the Primitive Church, and making much for the dignity and gravitie of this
Mystery. Damian. a Coes de morib. AEthiopum.
In the Churches of Aethiopia all communicate in both kinds, twice every week
to this day. Cit. a Cassandro cons. art. 24. De solitariis Missis.
John Hofmeister, expounding certain prayers of the Mass, has these words:
the thing it self proclaims it, that as well in the Greek, as Latin
Church, not the Priest that celebrateth only, but the rest of the Presbyters
and Deacons, and the whole people, or at least some part of the people, was
wont to communicate: which custom how it ceased, and grew out of use, may
seem strange; but it were greatly to be wished that it were restored again:
which thing might easily be effected, if the Pastors of the Churches would do
their duty: for the Priests themselves are in fault, that few or none of the
people are found to communicate, in that they do not invite and stir them up
to communicate more often: as appears by the writing of a certain Divine,
not unlearned, in the former age, in which he reprehendeth certain Pastors of
that age wherein he lived, who took it ill, that some of their Parishioners,
though living very laudably, desired to communicate every Sunday. That the
Sacrament was ministered in former times in loaf bread, as we minister it at
this day, it is evident by the book called Ordo Romanus, by In rational.
Divinorum. l. 4 rub^ic a d^ pacis osculo. p. 70
Durandus, and sundry other authorities. In ancient times the manner was to
give the holy Sacrament into the hands of the communicants, as we do, and not
to put it into their mouths, as the Papists do. What shall I speak, says
Defens fid. Trid. l. 2. fol. 239
Andradius, of the use of the holy Eucharist, which now no man may lawfully
touch but the Priests, whereas it was wont to be carried by the Deacons, to
such as were absent, and to be given to Laymen into their hands: whence
proceeded that exhortation of Cyrill of Jerusalem, full of piety and religion,
that each communicant should fasten his eyes upon those hands that received the
holy Eucharist, and kiss them with the kisses of his mouth, that so he might
communicate to the rest of the members the holiness of the Eucharist. The
custom of circumgestation, says Consul. art. 22
Cassander, is contrary to the manner of the Ancient, and would never have
been liked of them, who held this mystery in so great respect, that they
admitted none to the sight of it, but such as they thought worthy to be
partakers of it: whereupon all such as might not communicate, were ejected
before the consecration: and therefore it seems that this circumgestation
might be omitted. Crantzius praises Cusanus, who being the Popes Legate in
Germany, took it away, unless it were within the Octaues of the feast of
Corpus Christi, the Sacrament being instituted for use, and not for
ostentation. Touching the honor of Saints, De directione cordis consid. 16.
and seqq.
Gerson, In consut. art. Lutheri.
Contarenus, and others reprehend sundry superstitious observations, and wish
they were wisely abolished. Whether the Saints particularly know our estate,
and hear our cries and groans, not only De Cura pro mortuis.
Augustine, and the In Esaiae 63.
Author of the Interlineall Gloss, but Erud. Theol. de sacr. fid. l. 2. part.
16. c. 11
Hugo de sancto Victore also will tell us, it is altogether uncertain, and
cannot be known: whence it follows, that howsoever being assured they pray
for us in a generality, we may safely desire to be respected of God the
rather for their sakes, yet it is not safe to pray to them. Neither is this a
new conceit of ours, but In 4. sent. l. 3. ^ract. 8. c. 5. q. 6.
Guilielmus Altisiodorensis says, it was a common opinion in his time, that
neither we do properly pray to Saints, nor they in particular pray for us, but
that improperly we are said to pray to the^, in that we pray unto God that the
rather for their sakes, and at their suite we may find favor and acceptance
with him. Touching the abuse of Images, and how much it was disliked in former
time, let the Reader see In Consult. artic. 21. de Imaginibus.
Cassander. How great complaints were made long since against the forced single
life of the Clergy, and how many and great men desired the abrogation of the
law, that forced men so to live, I have showed at large 5. Book of the Church
Chap. 57.
elsewhere. That in the Primitive Church they had their prayers in the vulgar
tongue, In 1. ad Corinth. 14.
Lyra confesses; and In Respons ad articulos Parisienses.
Caietane professes, that he thinks it would be more for edification, if
they were so now; and confirms his opinion out of the Apostle Saint Paul.
Thus have I given the Reader a taste of the judgment of those that lived in
former times, both concerning matters of doctrine now controuersed, the Popes
encroachments now by us restrained, and also such abuses as we have removed, by
which I think it will appear to be most true, that amongst many good proofs
of the equity of our cause, there can no better be desired, then that, what
we have done in the reformation of things amiss, the worthiest men in the
Church wished to be done, before we were borne. And therefore Master Higgons
has little cause to say, Page 84.
Our cause is bad, and the Patrons worse. That which he adds: (that Page 507.
it is to be maruailed at, that I distill the religion and profession of
Protestants, out of Catholics,) is to be laughed at as most ridiculous: for
out of whom else should I distill it? but if he think they were all Papists,
whom I cite for proof of our cause, because they lived under the Papacy, he
is deceived: for a great difference is to be put between the Church, and
faction in the Church, we deriuing our selves from the one, and they from the
other.

The second Chapter.
. 1.
WHerefore now let us return to see, what Master Higgons has further to say;
Page 36.
he will convince Me, he says, of singular vanity, in that I say there is no
material difference between those, whom he and his consorts call Lutherans,
and Zuinglians. That the reader may the better be able to discern, how
ignorantly Higgons excepteth against Me, I will set down at large what I have
written touching this matter. Answering the calumniation of Papists, traducing
us for our divisions, my words are these: Book. 3. cap. 4^
I dare confidently pronounce, that after due and full examination of each
others meaning, there shall be no difference found touching the matter of the
Sacrament, the Vbiquitary presence, or the like, between the Churches reformed
by Luthers Ministry in Germany, and other places, and those whom some men's
malice called Sacramentaries. And in my third book, answering the objection of
Bellarmine, charging the Germane Divines with the heresy of Eutiches, in that
they say the humanity of Christ is every where, Vbiquity being an
incommunicable property of the Deity, that cannot be communicated to the
humane nature of Christ without confusion of the Divine and Humane natures, I
have these words: Ibid. c. 35.
he should remember, that they, whom he thus odiously traduceth, are not so
ignorant as to think, that the body of Christ, which is a finite and limited
nature, is every where by actual position, or local extension; but personally
only, in respect of the conjunction and union it has with God, by reason
whereof it is no where severed from God, who is every where. This is it then,
which they teach, that the body of Christ does remain in nature and essence
finite, limited and bounded; and is locally but in one place: but that there is
no place, where it is not united personally to that God, that is every where:
In which sense they think it may truly be said to be every where. This
construction of their sayings, who defend the Vbiquitary presence, is no
private or singular device of mine, as Master Higgons would make men believe;
but Ecclesiastical. policy, book, 5.
Master Hooker, a man so far excelling Theophilus Higgons in learning and
judgment, that he is not worthy to be named the same day, has the same
precisely in the very same words, and allows it as Catholic and good; and
indeed, who but an ignorant Nouice that has not learned the principles of the
Catechism would impugn it? Yet Master Higgons says, Page 37.
I have failed exceedingly in two points: the first in saying, there is no
place, where the body of Christ is not united personally unto that God that is
every where, and that it does subsist every where: the second, in saying the
humane nature of Christ may rightly be said to be every where, in as much as it
is united personally to that which is every where. This second saying is none
of mine; for I have no such words; as the reader will soon perceive if he
peruse the place; but my words are these: The body of Christ is not every where
by local extension, but personally only in respect of the union it has with
God, by reason whereof it is no way severed from God, who is every where: and
again, there is noe place where it is not united personally to that God, that
is every where: in which sense the Germane Divines think it may be said to be
every where.

Wherefore let us see what Master Higgons can say against any thing delivered
by Me, touching this point: he says I have failed, for that, though the
Divine person wherein the humane nature subsisteth, be every where; yet the
humane nature subsisteth therein finitely and in one determinate place, the
Union it self being a created thing. For the better clearing of this point,
and the understanding of the Doctrine of the Church, resolved on by the best
learned in the Schools, we must observe, that there is a being of essence,
and a being of existence, or subsistence: the being of essence, which the
humane nature of Christ has, is finite and limited, as is the essence of all
other men: but being of existence it has none of it own, but that of the
Son of God communicated to it, which is infinite and Divine. In Apologia
quast. 9. de accidentib. in Sacramento.
Deus in incarnatione verbi (says Picus Mirandula) fecit essentiam humanitatis
sine suo esse, vt dicitur a multis Doctoribus: That is, Almighty God in the
incarnation of the eternal word, produced the essence of the humanity, without
that finite and created actual existence, which, left to it self, it would
have had, as many Doctors do affirm; and Apologia quest. 5.
the person of the Son of God, having in it the fullness of all being, drew
the nature of man to the unity of that infinite being it had in it self, and
communicated the same unto it: so that the humanity of Christ never had any
other being of actual existence or subsistence, but that of the Son of God
communicated to it. And farther the same Apolog. quaest. 9.
Picus says, Esse corporis Christi substantiale est increatum, Diuinum, quod
est suppositi Diuini, cum in Christo non sit nisi vnum esse actualis
existentiae substantialis. That is, the substantial, actual being of the
body of CHRIST, is the increated being of the Son of GOD: seeing in CHRIST
there is but one being of actual existence. This which Picus Mirandula has
delivered, is the resolution of Thomas Aquinas, Caietan, and all the best
learned in the Roman Schools: whence it follows ineuitably, that the
humanity of Christ, in the being of actual existence, and subsistence, which
it has, is not limited or contained within any bounds of place, but is every
where; howsoever in respect of the being of essence, which is created and
finite, it be shut up within the straites of one place, at one time: and
therefore it is noe better then Heresy, that Higgons has, Page 37.
that the humanity of Christ subsisteth finitely in the person of the Son of
God: for if it subsist finitely, the subsistence it has is finite: and if it
have a finite subsistence, then are there two subsistences in Christ, the one
finite, the other infinite; and consequently, two persons: which is flat
Nestorianisme. But, says Higgons, the union it self in Christ, is a created
thing: therefore the being of actual existence, or subsistence, which the
humanity has, is finite. Truly it had been fit the poor Nouice had been
set to School for a time, before he had been permitted to write: for he
bewrays gross ignorance in those things, which every one that has saluted
the Schools does know. The union of the natures of God and man in Christ,
says Cardinal In 3. part. summae. quaest. 2. art. 6.
Caietan, is to be considered, vel quantum ad relationem quam significat, vel
quantu^ ad coniunctionem in persona, ad quam consequitur: quoniam plus
differunt haec duo quam caelum and terra; Vnio enim pro relatione, est ens
reale creatum: Vnio antem pro coniunctione naturae humanae in persona diuina,
cum consistat in vnitate, que est inter naturam humanam and personam filij Dei,
est in genere seu ordine Substantia; and non est aliquid Creatum, sed Creator;
quod ex eo constat, quod Vnum non addit supra Ens naturam aliquam, and
vnumquodque per illudmet, per quod est Ens, est and Vnum, etc. Bc per hoc,
natura humana in Christo, quia per esse substantiale subsistentia filii Dei est
iuncta naturae divinae, oportet quod illud unum esse, in quo indivisae sunt
natura diuina and humana in Christo, sit esse unum substantiale divinum; and
vere sic est, quia esse subsistentiae filii Dei, in quo non distinguuntur ambae
naturae, Substantia est; Deus est, quia verbum Dei est. Vna and eadem quippe
Subsistentia subsistit filius Dei in natura Divina and in natura humana, and
consequenter natura divina et humana in Christo sunt indivisae in illa
subsistentiautrique communi, quamvis inter se valde distinguantur. The sum of
that he says, is this: (for I will not stand exactly to English his words:)
that the union between the nature of God and Man in CHRIST, in respect of that
being, of actual existence, and subsistence, wherein they are conjoined,
(which is the same and common to them both, to wit, the subsistence of the
Son of God, communicated to the nature of man, prevented that it should not
have any created or finite subsistence of it own) is no finite or created
thing, but infinite and divine; but in respect of the attaining of the same, in
time, and the relation of dependence the humane nature has upon the Eternal
Word, it is finite: and therefore, whereas there are two kinds of grace in
Christ, the one of union, the other habitual; the latter is absolutely a
finite and created thing, but the former, in respect of the thing given, which
is the personal subsistence of the Son of God, bestowed upon the nature of
man, is infinite, though the passive mutatio^ of the nature of man, lifted up
to the personal being of the Son of God, and the relation of dependence it has
on it, be finite, and in the number of created things. From that which has
been said, it may be concluded vnavoydably, that the humanity of Christ in
respect of personal union, and in that being of actual existence or
subsistence which it has, which is infinite and divine, is euery-where, as God
himself is euery-where. But says Higgons, there is an union Hypostatical
between the soul and body, and all the parts of it: yet is not the foot or
hand every where, where the soul is, which is whole and entire in every part,
because it is not in the head. The poor fellow, I see, has yet learned but a
little Divinity, and that makes him thus to talk at random. For howsoever
the comparison of the soul and body be brought to express the personal union
in Christ, yet it is very defective, as De incarn. l. 3. c. 8
Bellarmine himself confesses. First because the body and soul are imperfit
natures. Secondly, because they concur to make one nature. Thirdly, because
neither of them draws the other into the subsistence it has, but both depend
on a third subsistence, which is that of the whole: but in the mystery of the
Incarnation, the Eternal Word subsisting perfitly in it self, draws unto it
the nature of man; so that the humanity of Christ, having the same actual
existence that the Eternal Word has, must needs be, in respect of the same
being, whore-soeuer the Word is: But there is no necessity that each part of
the body should be where-soeuer the soul is, which is entirely in the whole
body, and entirely in every part, because the body, and the parts of it, have
neither the same being of essence nor existence that the soul has. But, says
Higgons, Page 38.
the properties of the divine nature are by virtue of the personal union,
attributed to the person in concreto, and not to the humane nature, in
abstracto: so that though the Man Christ may be said to be euery-where, yet the
humanity cannot. For answer to this objection we must note, that the
communication of properties is of two sorts: the first is, the attributing of
the properties of either nature to the person, from which nature soever it be
denominated. The second, is the real communication of the properties of the
Deity to the nature of man, not formally and in it self, but in supposito, in
the person of the Son of GOD, bestowed on it: in which sense De incarn. l. 3.
c. 56.
Bellarmine confesses, that the glory of GOD, and all power both in Heaven and
in earth, are given to the humane nature of CHRIST: Non in ipsa, sed in
supposito, id est, per gratiam unionis, And so the Divines of Germany do say,
the humanity of CHRIST is euery-where, in the being of subsistence communicated
to it, and the Man CHRIST properly and formally. By this which has been said,
the intelligent reader, I doubt not, will easily perceive the folly of silly
Higgons, who being ignorant of the very principles and rudiments of Christian
Doctrine, traduceth that as a pseudo-theologicall determination and heresy,
which is the resolved determination of all the principal Schoolmen and best
Divines, that ever treated distinctly of the personal union of the two natures
in Christ.

Yet as if all were clear for him, and against Me, encouraged by his good
success in this particular, he proceeds to the matter of the Sacrament,
persuading himself, he shall be able to find such and so many essential
differences therein, as neither I, nor any man else shall ever be able to
reconcile: whereas notwithstanding, if he had been so much conversant in the
works of Zanchius, as he pretends, he might have found in him 'Iudicium de
dissidio Caenae Dominicae in fine Miscellan.
a most godly and learned discourse touching this point, wherein all that he
or any of his companions can say, is answered already, and the Divines of
Germany and those other, in show opposite, in such sort reconciled, that our
Adversaries, if any thing would satisfy them, might lay their hands on their
mouths and be silent. In this discourse, first, he shows that there is no
question touching the preparation of them, that desire to be worthy partakers
of this heavenly banquet, neither concerning the use of this blessed Sacrament.
Secondly that it is agreed, that the very body and blood of Christ are to be
received by such as desire to be made partakers of the life of grace, or being
already partakers of it, to be strengthened, confirmed, and continued in the
same. Thirdly, that the elements of bread and wine, presenting to our
consideration the spiritual nourishing force, that is in the body and blood of
Christ, are not a bolished in their substances, as the Patrons of
Transubstantiation imagine, but only changed in use, in that they do not
only signify, but exhibit and communicate unto us the very body and blood of
Christ, with all the gracious working of the same. Fourthly, that the meaning
of Christ's words, when he said, this is my body, this is my blood, is, This,
which outwardly and visibly I give unto you, is in substance, bread and wine,
and in mystery and exhibitiue signification my body and blood; but this which
invisibly, together with the visible element, I give unto you, is, my very body
that was crucified, and my blood that was shed for the remission of your
sins. Fifthly, that the body and blood of Christ, which the Sacraments do
not signify only, but exhibit also, and whereof the faithful are to be
partakers, are truly present in the blessed Sacrament; but the one part
denies that they are present, secundum suum esse natural, that is, in the
natural being, or being of essence, because the body of Christ being finite,
and having finite dimensions, cannot be in many places at one time; the other
part on the contrary side answers, that the body of Christ is finite indeed;
but that, because it is personally joined to the Deity, it is wheresoever the
Deity is; yet do not they of this part say it is every where, localiter, but
repletiue and personaliter; that is, not locally, but repletiuely and
personally: which distinction Zanchius professes he does not well understand;
but says, if their meaning be, that the body of Christ is present, secundum
esse personale, that is, in that being of divine subsistence communicated to
it, whereof I have spoken before, they say true, and contradict not the other,
who speak of the natural being of Christ's body, or being of essence, and
not of existence or subsistence, which is infinite and Divine. And though
Christ's body be every where in that personal being, as well as in the
Sacrament, yet is it not any where else presented unto us in the nature of
spiritual food. So that there is no difference between these men, touching the
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament; neither will there be any found
touching the eating of it: for whereas in eating there is implied a chewing or
mastication of that which is eaten, a traiection from the mouth into the
stomach, and a turning of the substance of the meat into the substance of the
eater; a bodily eating of Christ's body there cannot be, seeing it is
impassible, and admits no such division, as is made in chewing: and besides,
if it should be swallowed whole, it cannot be turned into the substance of
our bodies, but rather turns us into the substance of it self: so that there
is only a spiritual eating of Christ, consisting in that chewing, that is, by
meditation upon the several and distinct things, that are found in his
natures, powers, actions and sufferings; a traiection from the understanding
part to the heart, and an incorporation of the believer into him. Yet it is not
to be denied, but that Luther and some other did teach, that even the wicked
do in a sort eat the flesh of Christ, not as if they did corporally touch his
sacred body, much less tear, rent, or divide it with their teeth, or turn it
into their substance; but for that they may be said, in a sort, to eat the
flesh of Christ, though unprofitably, and to their condemnation, in that they
truly receive the body of Christ; eating that outward substance of bread, with
which it is truly present, though not locally: and to this purpose the same
Zanchius reports, that a man of no vulgar note amongst the followers of
Luther, did not fear to tell him, that he, and his, do not say that we eat
the body of Christ corporally, in such sort, as that our mouth and body should
touch his sacred body, which is not locally present, but that the body of
Christ is eaten bodily, only in respect of the Sacramental union, attributing
that to the body of Christ, that properly agrees to the bread, with which the
body is present. These things are found in a discourse of Zanchius entitled:
Iudicium Hieronymi Zanchii de dissidio caenae dominicae: written by him for the
satisfaction of a Bishop of Italy, at the request and entreaty of Paulus
Vergerius, and Sturmius.

By that which has been said, we see there is no difference in judgment
between them, who out of humane frailty are too much divided in affection:
Luther uttered many things very passionately against Zuinglius, and others,
conceauing that they made the Sacraments to be nothing, but only notes
distinctiue, serving to put difference between Christians, and such as are no
Christians, as a Monks Cowle distinguishes a Monk from him that is no Monk,
or empty signs, without all presence of grace, and exhibition of the things
they signify. But if he had fully understood the meaning of them, he was so
violently opposite unto, he would not have censured them so hardly as he did.
If Master Higgons had ever read this Tract of Zanchius, he would not have
willed Me to excogitate, or scanne out any reconciliation betwixt Lutherans,
and Sacramentaries in the matter of the Sacrament.

The second part of the Chapter.
. 1.
WHerefore let us come to the next part of this Chapter; wherein Page 43.
he undertakes to demonstrate, that the things alleged by Me, to take away
the offense and scandal of the seeming differences amongst Protestants, are
but false and empty pretenses. The first thing that Book 3. chap. 52.
I allege is, that it is not to be marvailed at, that the Tigurins, Gesnerus,
and others disliked the distempered passions of Luther, or that some difference
were amongst them, seeing the like were in former times between Epiphanius and
Chrysostom, Hierome, Ruffinus, Augustine, and others. The second, that the
Papists have their differences also, and those far more material and
unreconcilable, then any are amongst us. The third, that our differences, grow
not out of the nature and quality of our doctrine, and that we want not a
certain rule, by the direction whereof all controversies may be ended.

Against the first of these my allegations, first he opposes a devilish
untruth, affirming, that Gesnerus, and the Tigurins, did not only dislike the
distempered passions of Luther, but hate him with mortal hatred, and accurse
and execrate him, as possessed of a legion of Devils; which neither Higgons,
into whom a lying spirit is entered, nor any of those devils he is grown so
familiar with, shall ever prove. So that there is no cause of trembling, but at
the fearful judgment of God, against such as Master Higgons is, that forsake
the love of the Truth, whom he gives up into a reprobate sense. Secondly, in
opposition to that which I allege, he undertakes to prove there were no
such differences between the Ancient, as those between the followers of
Luther and Zuinglius: but demeaneth himself like a false gamester; for whereas
I place the differences and conflictes between Epiphanius and Chrysostom in
the front as hottest and most violent; the one of them refusing to pray with
the other; the one challenging the other for manifold breaches of Canons, and
the one professing, he hoped the other should never die a Bishop; the other,
that he should never return to his country alive (both which things fell out
according to their uncharitable wishes and desires, Epiphanius dying by the
way, as he was returning home, and Chrysostom being cast out of his
Bishopric, and dying in banishment) he scarce takes any notice hereof, but
says only, the differences between Luther and Zuinglius, exceeded the
conflicts between Chrysostom, and Epiphanius: which yet I think he will
hardly prove. Touching Ruffinus and Hierome, it is certain, the one of them
charged the other with heresy, and used most bitter speeches one against
another, to the great scandal of the world. The differences between Augustine
and Hierome were carried more temperately: neither do I say, they exceeded in
passion, as Luther and Zuinglius did; yet did Augustine charge Hierome with
taking on him the Patronage of lying, and affirming that the Authors of
Canonical Scriptures lied in some passages of the same, the consequence
whereof he thinks to be most dangerous and damnable. Besides this, they
differed about the ceasing of the legal observations, so that their
differences were greater then those of Luther and Zuinglius if they had rightly
understood one another. Yet will Master Higgons show Page 34. 35.
a great difference between the differences of the Ancient, and those of
Luther, and Zuinglius: First, because Chrysostom and Epiphanius, Hierome and
Ruffinus, had an ordinary vocation, whereas Luther and Zuinglius are supposed
to have been raised up extraordinarily. Secondly, for that they quarrelled
only about the books of Origin, and the improbation thereof; but the
differences between Luther and Zuinglius, were founded originally in matters
of faith, pertaining to the necssity of salvation. Thirdly in respect of
extent; in that their differences were not the differences of whole Churches,
as these are; and of duration, in that their divisions were soon extinguished,
but these are propagated in succession, and increased with continual addition.
To every of these pretended differences I will briefly answer; and first to
the first; that we never thought that Luther and Zuinglius had an extraordinary
calling as the Apostles, and other sent immediately of God had, but that God
stirred and moved them extraordinarily with Heroical resolution, to use that
ordinary ministerial power, which they had received in the corrupt state of
the Church, for the reprehending and reforming abuses in the same; and
therefore they might be subject to errors, and infirmity, as Chrysostom and
Epiphanius were, notwithstanding any thing we say or conceive of them. To the
second we say, Master Higgons shows himself in it, either faithless, or
ignorant. For we know See these things at large in the 5. book of the Church.
chap. 35.
Epiphanius was an Anthropomorphite, and that he was willing for that cause to
condemn the books of Origin, wherein this gross error is condemned, and
besides took part with Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, who though he were of
another mind, yet fained himself to be an Anthropomorphite, and to condemn
the books of Origin, as contrary to that conceit, and deposed Chrysostom;
for which his temerity he was anathematized by the Church of Rome, if we may
believe Nicephorus. Neither were these the private differences of particular
men, but of the greatest Churches of the world, as Chrysostom confesses in
his Epistle to the Bishop of Rome, saying, that all the Churches euery-where by
reason hereof were brought upon their knees. Touching Ruffinus it is evident,
that he was challenged for favoring the heresies of Origin, whose works he
translated: so that it was no matter of circumstance, but of substance, in
highest degree, about which Hierome and he calumniated one the other: and for
proof hereof, Anastasius Bishop of Rome, writing to the Bishop of Jerusalem
touching Ruffinus, says he had so translated the books of Origin out of Greek
into Latin, as that he approved the errors contained in them, and was like a
man that consents to the vices and faults of other men. Yea Vide Apolog. Hier
contra Ruffin.
Hierome feared not directly to pronounce him to be an Heretic, and more
blind then a Mole.

We read, Vide Acta Conc. Ephesians.
that in the time of the first Council of Ephesus, called for the suppressing
of the heresy of Nestorius, there grew most bitter contentions between Cyrill
of Alexandria, and John of Antioch, so that the Churches subject to them were
divided one from another, in such sort, that they Anathematised one the other,
imputing heresy each to other: yet were they in truth and indeed of the same
judgment, and in the end it was found, that these contentions grew out of
dislikes, mistakings, and mis-constructions of things well meant, but not so
taken. The like may be said of Theodoret, who notwithstanding all the conflicts
between him and Cyrill, and the condemnation passed upon him, as if he had
been an Heretic, was in the end found to be an Orthodox by Leo, and the
Bishops of the West; and upon a full and clear declaration and profession
of his faith, received as a Catholic Bishop into the Council of Action 1.
and 8.
Chalcedon. Gregory Nazianzen, in his oration made in the praise of Athanasius,
shows, that there was a maine division of the Christians of the East, and the
Romans, or those of the West: the one part suspecting the other of heresy,
upon a mere not understanding one another: the Romans professed to believe,
that there are three persons in the blessed Trinity, but could not be induced
to acknowledge three Hypostases; whence the Oriental Christians thought them
to be Sabellians, who thought that there is but one person in the Godhead,
called by three names: on the otherside, the oriental Christians professed
that they believed three Hypostases in the Godhead, but would not admit
three persons; whence they of Rome thought them to be Arrians, who believed,
that there are three distinct substances in the God-heade: the word Hypostasis
in the Schools of secular learning, importing substance, as Hierome notes:
but Athanasius perceiving that they differed not in judgment, and that the
Greeks meant the same by their Hypostases, that the Latins did by their name
of Persons, left them free for the manner and form of speech, and made a peace
between them, by letting them know, they all meant one thing, though they
expressed the same differently; whereas otherwise it was to be feared, they
would have been divided with endless divisions, about these few Syllables.
About this matter Hierome living in the East parts, wrote to Damasus, Bishop
of Rome: his words are these. Tomo 2. operum Hieronymi.
They urge us to acknowledge three Hypostases: we ask them what they mean by
the Hypostases they speak of, and they tell us three persons subsisting: we
answer, that we believe so, but the sense satisfies them not; they urge us
to use the word it self, some poison lying hid in the very syllables, etc. Let
it be sufficient for us to say, there is one substance in God, and three
subsisting Persons, perfect, equal, and coeternall: if it seem good unto you,
let us speak no more of three Hypostases, but let us acknowledge one only:
there is some ill to be suspected, when in one sense diversity of words is
found; let it suffice us, to believe as I have said: or, if you think it
right, that we admit three Hypostases, with their interpretation we will not
refuse so to do: but believe me, there lies some poison hid under their
words: the Angel of Satan has transfigured himself into an Angel of light.

By this which has been said, it is evident, that there have bin as great and
hot contentions in former times, amongst right believers as are now between the
professors of the reformed religion, and that those divisions were not about
matters of circumstance, or personal only, as Higgons falsely pretends, but
of whole Churches, disliking, condemning, and refusing to communicate one with
another, upon supposed differences in mattersof faith and religion. Wherefore
to draw to a conclusion, we deny not, but that Luther, and some other adhering
to him, upon some misconstruction of the opinion of Zuinglius, and the rest,
were carried too far with the violence of their ill-guided zeal: but we say
also, that there were as fiery conflicts in former times between Cyrill and
Theodoret: between Cyrill and John of Antioch: between Chrysostom and
Epiphanius: who yet were Catholic Christians all of them, as I take it,
notwithstanding the unkindness that passed between them; and as John of
Antioch, and Theodoret were reconciled to Cyrill, and those of that side, upon
a more full explication of their positio^s formerly disliked; so it is See
touching this report of Melanchthon, the Admonition of the Divines of the
County Palatine concerning the book, entitled Liber Concordiae.
reported by Melanchthon, that Luther a little before his death, confessed unto
him, that he had exceeded and gone too far in the controversies between him and
his opposits about the Sacrament: and that thereupon being wished to publish
some qualification of his former writings that were too violent and bitter, he
said he had thought upon that matter, and would so do, but that he feared
the scandal that might grow upon such his retractation, and that therefore he
was resolved to refer all to God, and to leave the matter to Melanchthon, who
might do something in it, after his death. This conference between Luther and
him, Melanchthon made known to many, and ever constantly showed himself a
most godly, peaceable, and religious man, careful to hold the unity of the
spirit, in the bond of peace; howsoever it pleases prattling Higgons to wrong
him, and to compare him to the Page 45.
Moon in mutability.

Wherefore leaving my first allegation, let us come to the second; which is,
that there are more, and more material differences amongst Papists, then
amongst us, which Higgons says is a poor recrimination. For that Page 46.
the eye being judge, there is a comfortable Harmony in the Roman Church; the
same Doctrine preached, the same Sacraments ministered, and the same Government
established: whereas Protestants are divided in judgment, touching matters of
faith, and have a distinct government in England, Scotland, Heluetia, and
Saxony. This exception consists of two parts: the first, clearing the
Papists from the differences and divisions, they are charged with: The second,
charging Protestants with divisions and differences both in matters of faith
and government. For answer to the former part of this exception, first I say,
if there be no contradiction between these assertions, the Pope is above
General Councels; the Pope is not above General Councels: the Pope has the
universality of all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in himself, the Pope is but
only prime Bishop in order and honor before other, equal in commission
with him, and at the most, but as the Duke of Venice amongst the senators of
that state: the Pope may err iudicially; the Pope cannot err iudicially: the
Pope is temporal Lord of all the world; the Pope is not temporal Lord of all
the world: the Pope, if not as temporal Lord of the world, yet, in ordine ad
spiritualia may dispose the Kingdoms of the world: the Pope may not meddle
with Princes states in any case; men are justified by imputed righteousness;
men are not justified by imputed righteousness: men are justified by special
faith; men are not justified by special faith: men may be certain, by the
certainety of faith, that they are in state of grace: men cannot be so
certain; there is merit of condignity, properly so named; there is no merit of
condignity: the blessed Virgin was conceived in sin; the blessed Virgin was
not conceived in sin: then doubtless all the Pastors and Bishops of the
Roman Church, preach the same Doctrine; otherwise let the reader assure
himself, Master Higgons has stretched his style, to use his own words, till
he forced it to break into a vast and notable untruth. Secondly, I say the
form of ministering the Sacraments, has not been always the same in the
Roman Church. For, (as Cassander notes in his preface before the book called
Ordo Romanus, published by him) the ancient forms of divine service were
abolished and new imposed, and prescribed violently, so that all that resisted,
were sent into banishment: and since that first alteration, as In vita Gregorij
primi.
Platina notes, a number of Tautologies, and Barbarismes are crept in, making
ingenuous men abhor from the celebration of the holy mysteries. Thirdly, I
think it will easily appear, there was no such sweet harmony in the Roman
Church touching matters of government, as Master Higgons speaks of, when the
Pope was not only resisted, but called Antichrist, in respect of his infinite
reseruations, admittances of appeals, his provisions, and granting of
expectatiue graces, and the like usurpations, prejudicial to the right of all
other Bishops, and the liberty of the Church. For answer to the second part
of his exception, first, I confidently affirm, and the proudest Papist under
heaven shall never prove the contrary, that Protestants have no real and
essential differences in matters of faith and doctrine. Secondly, I say, that
their differences in the form of government, are not such as our Adversaries
pretend. For D. Bilson. of the perpetual government of the Church. Page 307
they that admit government by Bishops, make their authority to be
fatherly, not princely, directing the rest, not excluding their advise and
assistance: subordinate to Provincial Synodes, wherein no one has a negative
voice, but the mayor part of the voices of the Bishops and Presbyters
determines all doubts, questions, and controversies: and Bezade Ministrorum
Evangelij gradibus.
they that retain not the name of Bishops, yet have a president in each
company of Presbyters, and think it a part of Gods ordinance, that there
should be such a one to go before the rest, and to be in a sort over them;
who, though they give not the name of Bishops, nor so much authority to these
Presidents, as Antiquity did, yet is not their error in this point matchable
with the errors that are amongst Papists, contradicting one another, touching
the Pope and his government, in things most essentially concerning the power
and authority of that supposed Ministerial head of the Church.

Wherefore, let us come to my last allegation, excepted against by Master
Higgons; which is, that we want not a most certain rule to end all
controversies by, which is the written word of God, interpreted according to
the rule of faith, the practice of the Saints from the beginning, the
conference of places, and all light of direction, that either knowledge of
tongues, or any parts of good learning can yield. In excepting against this
rule, Master Higgons shows the weakness of his brain: for what if Luther,
Zuinglius, and other, complained against such as they thought to be opposite
to them in opinion, touching some particular points, that they had not due
regard to this rule, or that they used it not aright? What if all be not
presently of one mind and judgment in all things? will that improve the rule
of judging, which we propose? and not rather argue the imperfection of such as
should judge according to it? But he Page 47.
craves leave to except against the rule proposed by Me, for three respects:
first, because the principles of our religion exclude the means of
reconciliation, to wit, the gravity of Councels, the dignity of Fathers, and
the authority of the Church. For answer whereunto we say, that we exclude not
the gravity of Councels: for we absolutely, without all restriction, receive
all the lawful General Counsels, that ever were holden touching matters of
faith; and though we make God, speaking in his word, to be the only judge
authentically defining, and prescribing, what men shall believe, under pain of
condemnation; yet we think Counsels have a judgment of jurisdiction, and
that they may subject all gaine-sayers to excommunication, and like censures.
Neither does it any way derogate from the authority of Bishops assembled in
Councels, that we make them judges to determine according to the word of God,
and the resolutions of the Church from the beginning, and not the rule it
self: for what man in his right wits, will attribute any more unto them, and
make them judges at liberty, tied to the following of no rule of direction? or
like God, that is a rule to himself in all his actions, and has no Law
prescribed to him by any other? Yet because Master Higgons wills the reader
to compare Campians fourth reason with my assertion, I will likewise entreat
him to see a worthy Disputatio Nichol. Clema^gis habita per scriptum super
materia concilii generalis, cum quodam Scholastico Parisierisi.
discourse of Clemangis, wherein he proves at large that Bishops assembled
in General Councels must prove and confirm their determinations by other
arguments, then by their own authority; and gives many reasons, by which a man
may reasonably persuade himself, that such Councels are not absolutely and
generally free from danger of erring: whence it follows, that they neither
are the rule, that is to be followed in determining controversies, nor after
they are determined. Touching the dignity of Fathers, and authority of the
Church, we esteem them both as beseems us: for whatsoever the Fathers
generally, and with one consent deliver in matters of faith, we admit and
receive as true without father examination: as likewise, whatsoever the Church
consisting of all Christians, not noted for heresy or singularity, that are
and have been since the Apostles times: but of particular Fathers, and parts
of the Church, we judge according to the rule of Gods word, and the general
resolution of the Fathers, and the whole Church that has been since the
Apostles times.

His next exception against our rule, is, Page 48.
because we admit not the Pope to be judge of all controversies in CHRIST'S
steed, which he must frame in this sort: The Pope is supreme judge of
controversies in religion: therefore the Word of GOD interpreted in sort
before expressed, is not the rule that is to be followed in determining
things doubtful: and then the consequence will be naught and the antecedent
false: for, though we should grant the Pope to be appointed judge of
controversies in Christ's stead, yet I hope his Holiness is bound to follow
some rule of direction in judging: and if any, what other then that mentioned
by Me, I cannot conceive. But whatsoever become of the consequence, the
antecedent is false: for he shall never prove, while his name is Higgons, that
the Pope is supreme judge of controversies. And the ignorance, or impudency
of the man deserves just reproof, in that he fears not to abuse the
authority of Cyprian to that purpose; who was so far from taking the Pope for
his judge, that he Cyprian lib. 2. Epist. 1.
freely disseted from him, and professed that Council. Car thag. inter opera
Cypriani.
one Bishop is not to judge another, but that they are to be judged of God
only, and the whole company of Bishops: neither does the place produced by
him out of Cyprians Epistles, prove any such thing, as he would enforce: for
it is most evident, that Cyprian speaks of one Bishop in each Diocese, and
not of one Bishop in the whole Christian Church, when he says, Lib. 1. Epist.
3.
Heresies arise from no other cause, then that the Priest of God is not obeyed,
and that men think not of one Priest and judge in Christ's steed: as it will
easily appear, to any one, that will take the pains to see the place. But
says Higgons, Page 48.
the Lutherans seek to predominate, and the Caluinistes will not obey:
therefore, there must be an vmpier between them, and consequently, the Pope
must end the quarrel. Whereunto I answer in a word, that howsoever the violent
humors of some men make a rent in the Church, yet there is no difference in
judgment amongst those whom he calls Lutherans and Caluinists, in any matter
of faith: and therefore the mediation of moderate men, interposing themselves,
or the authority of Princes, professing the reformed Religion, may in that good
time that God shall think fit, easily make an end of these contentions,
without seeking to the Romish Babilonicall Monarch.

His third exception is a mere begging of that which is in controversy, which
shall never be granted him. For, I say confidently as before, that the matters
wherein the followers of Luther, and the rest, professing the reformed
religion, seem to differ, are neither many in number, real in evidence, nor
substantial in weight: as he vainly Page 49.
braggeth he can prove out of Luther, Hunnius, and Conradus on the one part,
and Zuinglius, Sturmius, Clebitius, etc. on the other part. And therefore here
is noe reproof of that I have said of the reconciling of these differences,
but a proof of his vanity in bragging of that, which he will never be able to
perform. That which I have written touching the reconciling of these men, in
show so opposite, in the matter of the Vbiquitary presence, and the Sacrament,
which I am well assured this Fugitive cannot improve, nor any of his great
Masters, who have the schooling of him, will satisfy the Reader, I doubt not,
touching the possibility of a general reconciliation. The lies, scoffs, and
fooleries of Higgons, in these passages, touching my pretending, that the
Sacramentaries subscribe to the Augustan confession, my art of reconciling, and
the like, I pass by, as not worth the thinking of, and conclude this point,
with this confident asseueration, that the differences between those whom the
Papists malice, and other men's passion, calls Lutherans, and Sacramentaries;
are either not real, or not so material but that they may be of one Church,
Faith and Religion.

The Third Chapter.
. I.
IN the next chapter he charge Me with falsehood and inciuility, in traducing
Bellarmine, and says I have devised three criminations against him. The first
supposed crimination, joined with falsehood; as he says is this; Bellarmine
says: Bellat. de Notis Ecclesiae. lib. 4 cap. 10.
Videmus omnes illas Ecclesias, quae ab isto Capite se diuiserunt, tanquam
ramos praecisos a radice, continuo aruisse: and Book 3. chap. 41.
I say he affirms: that all Churches of the world, that ever divided
themselves from the fellowship of the Roman Church, like boughs broken from a
tree, and deprived of the nourishment they formerly received from the root,
presently withered away and decayed. Surely it is a grievous crime that I have
committed: yet I hope if I meet with merciful men, it will be forgiven Me:
for I think that boughs broken from a tree will wither away. But, says M.
Higgons, Cardinal Bellarmine meant nothing, but tha the divided Churches lost
their glory, and splendour, and so withered, but withered not away. This I think
the poor fellow will not stand unto; for these Churches, by the very act of
their separation, in his judgment, became, heretical and schismatic; and so
lost, not only their glory and splendour, but their being also, and the life
they formerly had, and consequently, like boughs broken from a tree, withered
away; which yet, neither he, nor the Cardinal can ever prove. For there
appeared still all signs of life in them, after their separation as before;
and some of them hold a more sincere profession of Christian verity to this
day, then the Romanists do: and we would rather join our selves to the
Grecians then to them, as neither erring so dangerously, nor so pertinaciously,
as they do. For that which he Page 52.
brings out of Iustus Caluinus, concerning Hieremy the Patriarch of
Constantinople his renouncing our society, and alleging the Counsel of S.
Paul for his warrant, where he says, reject an Heretic after the first or
second admonition, is a lie; as many other sayings of the same Author are
likewise.

The second crimination he speaks of, he says, is contrived in this manner.
3. Book chap. 41.
Bellarmine says, that none of the Churches divided from Rome, had ever any
learned men after their separation: but here he shows plainly that his
impudency is greater then his learning, for what will he say of Oecumenius,
Theophylactus, Damascen, Zonaras, Cedrenus, Elias Cretensis, Nilus, Cabasilas
and innumerable more living in the Greek Churches, after their separation from
the Church of Rome? Surely these were more then match-able with the greatest
Rabbis of the Romish Synogogue. M. Higgons should put a difference between a
crimination, and a just defense of men wronged by the unjust criminations of
Bellarmine, from which I endeavor to clear them. But let it be as he will
have it, what has he to say unto it? much surely, if he could prove what he
says: for he says, Page 53.
there are 3. untruths found in it; the 1. is, that, whereas I charge
Bellarmine to affirm, that none of the Churches divided from Rome had any
learned men after their separation, he says only, that none of the Churches of
Asia or Africa had any. How great a vexation it is for a man to be matched
with such Triflers as this is, the reader may easily judge by this particular.
For if never any of the Churches of Asia, and Africa had any learned men, after
their separation from Rome, neither the Ethiopian, Armenian, Nestorian, nor
Greek Churches had any: The Ethiopian, and Nestorian Churches being wholly in
those parts, and the greater part of the Greek Church also: now if none of
these had any, I think none had. But that these had, I show by naming sundry
particular men of great worth, in the Greek Churches. This M. Higgons found to
touch his Cardinal too near, and therefore he says, he purposely declined
the naming of the Greek Church, by restraining himself to the Churches of
Asia, and Africa, whereas he should have said he purposely enlarged himself
to all the Churches of Asia and Africa, that he might draw into the generality
of his speech, not the Graecians only, whose greatest number of Churches are in
Asia, but the Armenians, Nestorians, and Aethiopians also. Now then, see what
Mr Higgons has done? he has confessed that the Greek Churches, which all
men know to be principally in Asia, and reckoned among the Churches of Asia,
though some parts of them be in Europe, to have had learned men since their
separation; whence it follows, that the Cardinal without shame denied that
any of the Churches of Asia had any, so that in reason he should not be angry
with Me, in that knowing his Cardinals learning to be very great, yet to
magnify his impudency in this point, I prefer it before his learning. The
2. untruth that M. Higgons would fasten upon Me, is, that I say, Damascen lived
after the separation of the Greeks from the Latins: which thing I still affirm
to be most true, and Higgons himself in a sort confesses as much: for Page 54.
he says out of Bellarmine that Damascen lived about the year of our Lord
740. and that the violent separation of the Greeks from the Latins was
occasioned principally about the year 766. 26. years after. Now, as I think,
in that he says the violent separation was then, he insinuates that there was
a separation before: which thing if he deny I will easily prove against him.
For it appears that the separation between the Greeks and the Latins began
not in the year 766, but before: in that in the year 766. a great Council
was called at Gentiliacum, to compose the differences between them, as we
read in Rhegino. Chron. l. 2.
Rhegino, Sigebert. in chro. anni 766.
Sigebertus, and others; and the matter came to a public disputation between
them, before Pipin the father of Charles the Great; but that Damascen lived
after the separation between the Greeks and Latins, it is evident, in that the
separation between the^, being occasioned specially by the different opinion
which they held, concerning the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, as Higgons
tells us, Damascen was opposite to the Latins in that point: in so much that
he says expressly, that Damas. l. 1. de fide orthod. c. 11.
the spirit is by the son, but not from the son. The third imagined untruth
is, that I say Damascen, Oecumenius, Theophylact, and the rest, were more then
matchable with the greatest Rabbis of the Romish Synagogue, whereas Bernard and
some other were matchable with them. For answer whereunto, let the reader
observe, that I never call the whole Latin Church by the name of the Romish
Synagogue, out the faction that prevailed in it; and therefore I mean not all
the Doctors of the Latin Church, by the name of the Rabbis of the Romish
Synagogue, but such only as served as vile instruments to advance Papal
tyranny, superstition, and error. So that though Bernard, Alexander of Hales,
Bonaventura, Scotus, Lyranus, Gerson and some other should be granted to have
bin matchable with Damascen, Theophylact, and Oecumenius, yet will it not
follow that I have uttered any untruth: for I deny that any of these were of
the Papal faction.

The next supposed crimination, is a most just reproof of the gross
ouer-sight of Bellarmine, where he says, none of the Churches separated from
Rome, or none of the Churches of Asia and Africa, as Higgons restrains his
words, could ever hold any council after their separation; which cannot be
avoided by Higgons, though it seems he would willingly do the Cardinal some
good service, that he might become fellow Chaplain with Matthew Tortus. For, if
the Cardinal mean General Councels, it is not to be marvailed at, seeing
they are but a part: if National, or Provincial, it is too childish, and may
be refuted by sundry instances. Whereunto Higgons has nothing to say, but that
if Bellarmines words be extended to the Greek Church, his fault is
inexcusable: seeing that Church has holden Provincial Councels, since her
separation, whereof, as Master Higgons thinks, he speaks, and not of
General: but that his words are restrained to the Churches of Asia, and
Africa, which could never hold any such after their separation. In this Apology
of Master Higgons there are more absurdities, then words. For first, he can
give no reason why the supposed Schismatic Churches of Asia and Africa
should be less able to hold National, or Provincial Synodes then those of
Europe. Secondly the Greek Church is principally in Asia: so that if the
Greek Church had the power of convocating Provincial Synodes, some of the
Churches of Asia were not excluded from partaking in it. Thirdly, if this were
not the common misery of all divided Churches, this infelicity grew not from
their separation, but from some other cause, and then it makes nothing for
proof of the necessity of adhering to the Church of Rome, as to an head, to
which purpose Bellarmine brings it. Fourthly, that other Churches may hold
Provincial Synodes, and namely those of Asia and Africa, it is most evident.
For first touching the Ethiopian Christians, h Damianus a Goes, out of the
report of a learned Bishop of those parts, shows, that they have Councels,
and that they make Laws in them. Of (...) D^ moribus A Ethiopum.
a Synod holden by the Nestorians, we read in In addit. ad Platinam.
Onuphrius in the life of Julius the Third. In the Council of Florence we
read of certain Orators sent thither from the Armenians, in the name of the
Patriarch of Armenia and his Clergy; which could not be done without some
Synodall meeting. Lastly, seeing many Councels were holden in ancient times,
in show General, by such as were Heretics: what reason can Higgons give, why
these Churches having a subordination of inferior Cleargy-men, Bishops, and
Metropolitans, cannot so much as call a poor Provincial Synod? If this be not
childish trisling to say no more, let the reader judge, how partial soever he
be. And therefore, I say now again, as at first, that if Bell. mean general
councils when he says, the divided churches could hold none after their
separation, it is not to be marvailed at, seeing they are but a part; if
National or Provincial, it is childish; seeing it is most evide^t they might
hold such Councels: neither can his years, dignity, or other ornaments, Master
Higgons speaks of, privilege him so far, but that we may and will tax
his wilful ouersights, as they deserve, notwithstanding the boyish prattling of
Theophilus Higgons. The conclusion of this chapter, touching our want of good
manners toward Bellarmines grace, and other such lights of the world, as
shine in the darkness of Popish blindness, and superstition, sorteth so well
with the next part of this chapter, which is concerning my inciuility toward
the Cardinal, that one answer may suffice for both. That I have not wronged
him by imputation of false crimes, I hope the Reader will bear Me witness,
upon view of that I have answered in my own defense.

The 2. part of the third Chapter.
. 1.
WHerefore let us see wherein my inciuility consists. It is forsooth in
aggeration of base, odious, and unworthy names, as Cardinal Heretic,
Heretical Romanist, Impious Idolater, Shameless Jesuit, Shameless
Companion, with his idle brain, and senseless fooleries. This is Master
Higgons proof of my inciuility. If I make it not appear to all men that have
their senses, that I have reason to phrase the Jesuit, as Higgons speaks, so
as I have done, let Me be condemned of inciuility; But if I had just cause to
use him as I did, let this foolish flatterer hold his peace. Wherefore to begin
with the first. Shall he Lib 4. de notis Ecclesiae. c, 9.
charge us with twenty execrable and damnable Heresies, all which he knows we
accurse to the bottomless pit of Hell, and may not I call him a Cardinal
Heretic, or Heretical Romanist, without note of inciuility? Shall he at his
pleasure, because he wears a red Hat, Ibid.
charge us with Heresy and Impiety, for impugning the adoration of Images,
forbidden by Almighty God; and may not I call him an impious Idolater? Shall it
be lawful for him to say, Ibid.
that Elizabeth, our late Queen of blessed memory, took upon her, and was
reputed to be chief Priest in these her dominions; and shall it not be
lawful for me, in reproof of so impudent a slander, and defense of my late
dread Sovereign, the Lords anointed, and the wonder of the world, to tell the
Jesuitical Friar, that he is a shameless Jesuit that durst so say? Shall he
without conscience or fear of God, against his own knowledge, Ibid.
charge us with the hellish Heresies of the Maniches touching two original
causes of things, the one good, of things good, the other evil, of things
evil; and shall it not be lawful for me to ask the question, whether he be
not a shameless companion in so charging us? Shall a Jesuitical Friar be
freely permitted in so vile sort to wrong so many mighty Monarchs, States, and
people of the world, as profess the reformed religion, and may a man say
nothing to him without incurring the note of inciuility, and want of good
manners? Shall he De notis Ecclesiae. li: 4. c. 11.
charge us with palpable, gross and senseless absurdities; and may not we
tell him, the gross absurdities which he untruly imputes unto us, are but
the fancies of his own idle brain? Shall he be suffered to utter senseless
fooleries in Ibid. ca: 9.
wronging Calvin, and other men as good as himself; and may we not tell him,
he does so? Shall it be lawful for Theoph Higgons to use al words of disgrace
that he can devise against Luther and Calvin, men of as good worth as the
Cardinal; and may no man say any thing to the Cardinal, because he is a
Cardinal? How much soever he forget himself, truly I am not ignorant, that
these ministers of Antichrist take very much upon them. For as De corrupto
Eccles. statu.
Clemangis long since feared not to write, their spirits are so high and lofty,
their words so swelling, and their behavior so insolent, that if a Painter
would paint pride, he could not do it better then by representing to the
beholders the form and figure of a Cardinal: which kind of men, though they
were originally of the inferior clergy, yet together with the increase of the
pomp of the Sea of Rome, grew so great, and enlarged and spread out their
Phylacteries in such sort, that they despise, as far inferior to them and
much below them, not Bishops alone, whom in contempt they use to call petit
Bishops, but Patriarchs, Primates, and Archbishops also; almost suffering
themselves to be adored and worshipped of them: and yet not content therewith,
See that which Bellarmine has lately written to this purpose.
seek to be kings fellows: for the maintenance of which their imagined and
fained greatness, like wild Boares, they made havoc of the Vineyards of the
Lord of hoastes. Thus wrote he almost 200. years since: but Gods name be
blessed for it, these wild Boares have been well hunted out of many parts of
Christendom since that time. But Master Higgons, as if he meant to make an
oration in the praise of his Cardinal (to reprove as he says, the temerity of
such, as steep these pens in gall and wormwood, to vent malicious untruths
against this happy man) commends him for his intellectual and moral parts,
setting them out at large in the particulars, and (as his manner is to cast in
things suddenly without all cause or reason that are no way pertine^nt) he
tells of a crime which I lay unto him, and though I pardon him, yet so
discourteous he is, that he says I do it in malice. The crime, as he will
have it called, is this. I charge Bellarmine that he forgets himself very
strangely in his discourse touching the notes of the Church, in that in the
former part of it, he Cap. 2.
denies truth of profession or Doctrine to be a note of the Church, and in the
latter Cap. 11.
makes Sanctity of doctrine or profession, (which he defines to be the not
containing of any untruth in matter of faith, or unjust thing in matter of
manners and conversation) to be a note of the Church. Between which two
assertions, as I think, there is a manifest contradiction. For if truth of
doctrine and profession, and Sanctity of doctrine or profession be all one, as
I think they will be found to be; then to say, truth of doctrine and
profession is no note of the Church, and to say, Sanctity of doctrine or
profession is a note of the Church, as Bellarmine does, is to utter manifest
contradictions. This is the want of memory I find in Bellarmine: for which
Master Higgons (who amongst other good natural parts Page 57.
commends him highly for tenaciousnesse of memory) is offended with Me. But
because he is become so jealous of his Cardinals Honor, I will show him
another Escape or two in this kind. In the former part of his discourse touching
the notes of the Church, he Cap: 2.
denies Sanctity or purity of doctrine, free from error, to be a note of the
Church, because it may be found in a false Church, for that Schismatickes, who
are only Schismatickes, pertain not to the true Church, whose profession
notwithstanding is free from all error, as was the profession of the Donatists
and Luciferians in the beginning: and yet in his latter part he makes this
Cap. 11.
purity from error, a note of the Church. In the former part he denies it to
be a note, because it agrees not inseperably to the true Church, as notes
should do, seeing the Churches of the Corinthians had it not: and yet in the
latter part he makes this purity of doctrine to be a note of the Church. In
the former part he will have nothing to be a note of the Church, that may be
claimed or pretended by any but the true Church, and thereby excludes purity
of profession, which is claymed by all mis-beleeuers: and yet in the later
admits it, notwithstanding any challenge, Heretics, or Mis-beleeuers make
unto it. By this which has been said, I hope it does appear that Master
Higgons had little reason to charge Me with want of conscience in accusing
Bellarmine: But for want of ciuilility of manners, and respective demeanor
toward his person, whereof he complains; let him know, that if he inuolue
himself in infinite contradictions, as he does: if he wrong us and the
Princes, People, and States of our profession by hellish and diabolical
slanders, as he does: if he basely abuse Luther, Calvin, Bucer, Melachthon,
and others, his equals in merit and esteem: if he set his face against
heaven, and open his mouth to the dishonor of our late Sovereign of famous
memory and his most excellent Majesty now regnant, as he does; we will be bold
to cast this dirt into his face again, if he were a better man then all Master
Higgons his base and slauering commendation of him can make to be.

. 2.
HEre Master Higgons leaves me, and passes to D. Morton: yet so good a will
he has to say something against Me, though never so idly, that within two or
three pages he returns to Me again, and Page 6^. and 64.
charge Me full wisely, with perplexing and involving my self in manifest
contradictions. The first contradiction he would force upon Me, is this. The
Elect notwithstanding any degree of sin which they run into, retain that
grace which can and will procure pardon for all their offenses: and yet:
sometime^ there is nothing found in the Elect, that can or does cry to God for
pardon. It is strange truly, that such as Higgons is, should be permitted to
play the fools in print as they do. But our Adversaries know it is good to
keep men busied in any sort; and that the greatest part of their Adherents
will applaud any thing, though never so senselesly written against us: For
otherwise I know they cannot but laugh at the serious folly of this their
Novice in this passage. For Ineuer say, the Elect have always in the^ that
grace that can and will procure them pardon for all their sins and offenses,
as he charge Me, but that the Elect called according to purpose, have that
Grace that excludes sin from reigning, and that this Grace once had by them,
is never totally nor finally lost. Now what contradiction is there between
these propositions? The Elect at sometimes (to wit before they be called) have
nothing in them that cries for pardon and remission of their sins: and the
Elect after they are once called according to the purpose of Gods will, do
ever retain that grace that can and will procure pardon and remission of all
their sins. Surely even as much as there is between these: Paul sometimes was
an enemy to Christ and Christians, and a Persecutor; And Paul after his
calling, was never an enemy to Christ nor Christians, nor never persecuted any
of them, but suffered persecution himself together with them. The second
supposed contradiction is this. All sins done with full consent exclude grace.
David, who was an elect and chosen servant of God, sinned with full consent
after his calling, and yet David never fell totally from grace. Here truly
there is a real and true contradiction, but one of these assertions is none of
mine: for I deny that David ever sinned with full consent after his calling,
though his sins were very grievous and highly displeasing to Almighty God.
For the better clearing whereof we must observe, that there are three degrees
of sin. The first is of those motions to evil that arise in men, and solicit
them to the doing of that which is displeasing unto God: yet so, that no
consent is yielded to them. The second is, when the violence and impo^nity of
those ill motions is such, that men choose rather to give way unto them, then to
be any longer disquieted and tormented by them, and yet wish they were free
from such solicitations and provocations. In those that thus sin, there is a
deliberate consent, but it is not absolute and full, but mixed; Such was the
sin of Peter denying his Master, which proceeded from fear, and whereunto
he so consented, that he still retained the good opinion he formerly had of
him, and love toward him, and wished, no doubt from the depth of his Soul,
there might never any such thing have fallen out, that might draw him to do
that he did. And such was the sin of David, who chose rather to commit that
vile act with the wife of Vriah, then to be tormented any longer with the
importunity of those burning and inflamed desires that violently seized on him,
though he wished in his heart that never any such motions might in such violent
sort have arisen in him. The third degree of sin is in the^ that absolutely and
fully consent to the motions of evil, as making the^ their cheef delights and
contentments. In them who sin only in the first degree, grace not only
remains, but keeps her standing, resisting against evil, and entreating
for pardon of that which it cannot avoid. In the^ that sin in the 2d degree, it
remains, but carried into captivity. In the 3d it has no place at all. To
the same purpose it is, that some worthy Divines of our profession, make three
kinds of the being of sin in us: for first it is inhabiting only: 2dly, it is
regnant, yet not as a king who rules and reigns with the love and liking of
his subjects; but as a Tyrant, that they hate and would depose if they knew
how: 3dly, it is regnant as a king, welcomed and joyfully received into all the
powers and faculties of the soul. In the first sort it is in the^ that give no
consent to the motions of evil that arise in them. In the second, in them that
give consent, but not free and absolute, but mixed. In the third, in them that
give it the whole heart. In the first, it neither excludes grace, nor drives
it from the standing and command it should have in the soul of a good man. In
the second, though it exclude it not, yet i^ ^eth and hurts it sore,
scattering the forces of it, leaving it but disseuered desires, and no entire
good affections: so that they are never able to recover themselves again
without foreign help: But when such succor comes, these remains of good
begin to recollect themselves again, to take heart, and to join with the
same; as we see in David, reproved by Nathan.

The third contradiction, that Master Higgons would fasten on me, is, between
that saying of mine; The elect and chosen Servants of God do carefully
endeavor, that no sins may have dominion over them; and therefore
notwithstanding any degree of sin they run into, they retain that grace,
that can and will procure pardon: and that in the Articles of religion, agreed
on in the beginning of her late Majesty's reign, that Art. 16.
after we have received the holy Ghost, we may depart from grace given, and by
the grace of God rise again. Which is no contradiction in truth and in deed,
but in the misconstruction Master Higgons makes of things well meant. For when
the Article faith, we may depart from grace, the meaning of it is, that the
elect of God, called according to purpose, may swerue from the directions of
grace, in some particular things, and fall into grievous sins, out of which
they are to be raised by repentance, and not that they may totally fall from
it. Neither do I deny, but that the elect may commit sin, yea grievous sins,
and such as are in their own nature mortal, though not mortal in that (not
obtaining full consent) they cannot bring death upon the doers of them.
Wherefore to conclude this point, into which Master Higgons digresseth, after
his idle manner, and to send him back to the matter he has in hand; I say,
that there is no contradiction between any assertion of mine, and the Articles
of Religion, agreed on in the convocation: and farther add, that there is no
Papist of judgment, and consideration, that can possibly dissent from us in
this point, touching the constant perseverance of the elect and chosen servants
of God called according to purpose, and their never wholly falling from grace.
For first, they all agree together with us, that they cannot finally depart
away. Secondly, Hugo de Sa. Victore de Sacrament. sidei l: 2. part. 13. c. 12.
that some good motions and affections will ever remain in them, after they
have been once seasoned with the liquor ofrenuing and sanctifying grace.
Thirdly, that they loose not their right to the rewards which God in the
covenant of mercy promised to their former virtuous and good endeauours, nor
the benefit of their repenting from dead works formerly repented of, when they
fall into sin, though they can make no use thereof, while they continue in
such an estate of sin. For, says In quartum Sen. did. 22. qu, 1. art. 2.
Scotus, as a man that has much owing unto him upon good assurances, and is
possessed of things of good value, being excommunicated or outlawed, still
retains the interest and right to all things that formerly he had, though he
can make no use thereof, nor by course of law force them to do him right, that
go about to do him wrong, nor recover that which is due unto him, if it be
detained from him; but all prosecution of his right is suspended, till he
procure himself to be freed from the sentence of excommunication or
out-lawry: So the remission of original sin, the right to eternal life
obtained in Baptism, the force and virtue of former repentance and conversion
from sins past, and the right to the rewards of actions of virtue formerly
done, remain still in the elect and chosen, called according to purpose, when
they fall into grievous sins tyrannizing over them, though during the time of
their being in such grievous sins, the actual claim to the benefit of these
things, and the enjoying of them be suspended; which upon their repentance for
those particular sins that caused such suspension, is revived and set afoote
again, in such sort, that the repentance past suffices for remission of
former sins, and the good actions past shall have their rewards. So that a
man elect and chosen of God, and called according to purpose, that has done
good and virtuous actions, though they be deaded in him, for the present, by
some grievous Sin, yet still they remain in divine acceptance, and he still
retains the right and title he had to the reward of eternal life, promised
to those works of virtue done by him, though he can make no actual claim to
the same, while he remains in such an estate of sin: but after that such
sin shall cease and be repented of, he recouereth not a n^w right or title,
but a new claim by virtue of the old title. Wherefore if it be demanded
whether David and (...) ^hen they fell into those grievous sins of
uncleanness, and abnegation of Christ, continued in a state of justification?
We answer, that they did in respect of the remission of their sins, and the
title they go^ to eternal life in their first conversion, which they lost not
by those their sins committed afterward: For the remission of all their
former sins, whereof before they had repented, remained still, and Gods
acceptance of them to eternal life, notwithstanding these sins, upon the
condition of leaving them, together with his purpose of rewarding their
well-doings: but in respect of the actual claim to eternal good things they
were not, as men once justified are, notwithstanding lesser sins, w^h though
they cause a dislike, yet neither extinguish the right, nor suspend the claim
to eternal life. Thus, having run through all those passages of Master
Higgons his book, that any way concern Me, I leave him to be-thinke hims^fe.
whether he had any reason to traduc^ Me in such sort as he has done; and
remitte the wrongs he has done Me without cause, to the righteous judgment
of God, to whom he must stand or fall.

The end of the first part.
THE SECOND PART, Concerning the Author of the Treatise of the grounds of the
Old and New Religion, and such exceptions as have been taken by him against
the former Books.
Having answered the frivolous objections of Master Higgons, I will leave him;
and pass from him to his friend and colleague, the Author of the Treatise of
the grounds of the Old and New Religion; who also is pleased in his idle
discourses, to take some exceptio^s against that which I have written. But
because he is a very obscure Author, and such a one as the world takes little
notice of, I will not much trouble my self about him, nor take so much pains
in discovering his weakness, as I have done in dismasking the new convert, a
man, as it seems, of more esteem. Yet that the world may see what goodly
stuff it is, that these namelesse and Apocryphal Booke-makers daily vent
amongst our seduced countrymen, I will briefly and cursorily take a view of all
such passages ofhis Treatise as any way concern me. Among^ which, the first
that offers it self to our view, is in his Preface to the Reader, Page (...)
where he cites with great allowance and approbation, that which I have in my
Epistle Dedicatory: That all men must carefully seek out which is the true
Church, that so they may embrace her communion, follow her directions, and rest
in her judgment: but Page 5.
presently charge Me, that in my fourth Book following, I bereave her of
almost all such prerogatives as I formerly yielded unto her; so that men may
not safely follow her directions, nor rest in her judgment, in that I say,
that General Councels may err in matters of greatest consequence, and free
the Church her self from error, only in certain principal points and
Articles of Christian Religion, and not generally in all. This is a bad
beginning, being a most shameless untruth. For in the places cited by him, I
lay down these propositions: First, that the Church including in it all
faithful ones since CHRIST appeared in the flesh, is absolutely free from all
error and ignorance of divine things. Secondly, that the Church including all
those believers that are, and hauebeene since the Apostles times, is simply
free from all error, though happily not from all ignorance. Thirdly, that the
Church including only the believers living at one time in the world, is free
not only from error in such things as men are precisely bound expressly to
know and believe, but from pertinaciously erring in any thing that any way
pertains to Christian faith and religion. Fourthly, that we must simply and
absolutely, without all doubt or question follow the directions, and rest in
the judgment of the Church, in either of the two former senses. Fifthly, that
we must listen to the determinations of the present Church, as to the
instructions of our Elders, and fatherly admonitions and directions: but not so
as to the things contained in Scripture, or believed by the whole Universal
Church that has bin ever since the Apostles times. Because, as Waldensis
notes, the Church, whose faith never fails, is not any particular Church, as
that of Africa, or Rome, but the Universal Church: neither that Universal
Church, which may be gathered together in a general Council, which is found
sometimes to have erred, but that which dispersed through the world from the
Baptism of John continues to our times. Sixthly, that in the judgment of
Doctrinal. fid. lib. 2. art. 2. cap. 19.
Waldensis, the fathers successively are more certain judges in matters of
faith, then a general Council of Bishops, though it be in a sort the highest
Court of the Church, as the Treatiser says. All these propositions are found
in Waldensis, who wrote with good allowance of Pope Martin the Fifth, and the
whole consistory of Cardinals; so that the Treatiser cannot charge Me with any
wrong offered to the Church, in bereauing her of her due prerogatives, but he
must condemn him also, and blame the Pope and his Cardinals for commending the
writings of such a man to the world as good, profitable, and containing nothing
contrary to the Catholic verity, that forgotte himself so far as to bereave
the Church of almost all her prerogatives: which he cannot do, but he must
condemn Vincentius Lyrinensts likewise, a man beyond all exception, who
absolutely concurreth in judgment with Waldensis touching these points: Contra
H^, nouat. cap. 6.
assuring us, that the state of the present Church, at sometimes may be such,
as that we must be forced to fly to the judgment of Antiquity, if we desire to
find any certaiue direction. A judgment of right discerning, says Dialog.
lib. 5. part. 1. cap. 28.
Ocka^, there is ever found in the Church, seeing there are always some
right-beleeuers; but a right judgment of men, by their power of jurisdiction
maintaining truth, and suppressing error, may be wanting. Nay, that sometimes
there was no such judgment in the Church, it is most evident. For Vincentius
Lyrinensis says, the Arian heresy infected not some part only, but almost
the whole Christian world, so that almost all the Bishops of the Latin
Church were misled by force or fraud. Yea Athanas. in Epist. ad solitar. vit.
agent. Hier. in Catal. script. Ecclesiast. in Fortunatiano.
Athanasius and Hierome report, that Liberius Bishop of ROME was carried away
in that tempestuous whirlewinde, and subscribed to heresy: so that there was
noe set Tribunal on earth in those days, to the determinations whereof it
was safe to stand.

. 2.
IN the next place, the Treatiler charge Me, that whereas Luther defends
that infants in Baptism actually believe, I endeavor to wrest his words to
habitual faith; which sense, he says Luthers discourses will not admit; and
for proof hereof refers the reader to certain places in Luther, and to the
positions of his followers: but as Festus said unto Paul, Act. 25. 1^.
thou have appealed to Caesar, to Caesar shall thou go; so seeing this
Treatiser refers the Reader to Luthers discourses, and the doctrine of his
Disciples, to these I will send him, which will turn greatly to the Treatisers
disadvantage. For the reader cannot but find by Luthers discourses, and the
doctrine of his Scholars, that I have rightly delivered his opinion to be,
that infants are filled with habitual faith when they are regenerate, and not
that they have any such acts of faith, or knowledge of God, as men of years
have. Let us therefore hear what Luther himself will say: some men, says De
captiuit. Bab. cap. de baptismo.
he, will object against that which I have said touching the necessity of
faith in such as are to receive the Sacrame^rs with profit, that infants have
no faith, nor apprehension of Gods mercies, and that therefore either faith is
not so necessarily required to the due receiving of the sacrament, or that
infants are Baptized in vain. Here I say, that which all say, that other men's
faith, even the faith of such as present the^ to Baptism, steedeth little
children. For as the word of God is mighty when the sound thereof is heard,
even to the changing of the heart of a wicked man, which is no less unapt to
hear the voice of God, and to listen unto it, the^ any little babe; so by the
prayer of the Church, which out of faith (to which all things are possible)
presents it to baptism, the child is changed, cleansed and renewed by the
infusion of faith, or by faith, which is infused and powered into it. Thus does
Luther express his own meaning touching this point. Now let us hear what his
followers will say. It was agreed upon, says Chem: in exam: Conc: Trident: de
Baptis. can: 13:
Chemnitius, amongst the Form: concord: inter Theolog. Sax: and superior.
German.
followers of Luther, that when we say infants believe or have faith, we must
not imagine that they do understand or feel the motions of faith. But their
error is rejected, who suppose that infants baptized please God, and are saved
without any operation or working of the holy spirit in them; whereas Christ
pronounces, that unless a man be borne a new of water and of the spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. So that this is all that Luther and
the rest meant, that children cannot be made partakers of those benefits that
God offers to men in Baptism, nor inherit eternal life, by virtue of the
faith of the Church, without some change wrought in them by the spirit, fitting
them to be joined to God, which change or alteration in them they call faith:
not meaning to attribute unto them an actual apprehension of Gods mercies; for
they constantly deny, that they feel any such motions of faith; but a kind of
habitual faith only, there being nothing in faith, but such an act of
believing, as they deny; or the seed, root, and habit, whence actual motions
in due time do flow. With whom Instit: li: 4: cap: 16: sect: 17: and 19:
Calvine agrees; for whereas the Anabaptists object against him, defending
that infants are capable of regeneration, that the Scripture mentions no
regeneration but by the incorruptible seed of the word of God, which infants
cannot hear: he answers, that God by his divine power may renew and change
them by some other means. Secondly he adds, that it is not absurd to
think, that God does shine into the hearts of those infants, which in infancy
he calls out of this world to himself, and that he does make himself
known unto them in some sort; seeing they are presently after to be received
and admitted to the clear and open view, and sight of his glorious face and
countenance, and yet says, he will not rashly affirm that they are endued
with the same faith, which we find in our selves, or that they have knowledge
like unto that of faith. And in the next section, speaking more generally, and
not restraining himself to such as die in infancy, he says, that they are
Baptized into future repentance, and faith: which virtues though they be not
presently formed in them, yet a seed of either of them lies hid in them. The
Papists are distracted into contrary opinions touching this point: For some
think that grace the root of faith, and other virtues, is infused into
children in Baptism, but not faith; other, that not only grace, but the habit
of faith, hope, and charity is powered into them likewise; which opinion as more
probable was admitted in the Council of Vienna, and is embraced by us as true.
Wherefore let the Reader judge whether I have wrested the words of Luther, or
the Treatiser wronged Me.

SECT. 3.
IN the third place, he labors to demonstrate and prove, that there is a
contradiction Page: 22: 23:
between the reverend Bishop of Lincoln, and Doctor Morton, and my self,
touching the power of ordination, which that learned Bishop appropriateth
unto Bishops, and we communicate in some cases to Presbyters. But this silly
objection is easily answered, for his meaning is, that none but Bishops
regularly may ordain, which we confess to be true; as likewise none but they
only may confirm the baptized by imposition of hands; and yet think, that in
case of necessity, Presbyters may perform both these things, though of
ordinary right belonging to Bishops only.

Part. 1.
Sect. 1.
LEt us pass therefore from the preface to the book it self, the first thing
that he objecteth in the book it self, is, that I give Apostolic power to
the present Page: 50: 51:
Church; whence he thinks it may be inferred, that the Church cannot err in
matters of faith or ceremonies. That I give Apostolic power to the present
church, he endeavors to prove, because I say, She has authority to dispense
with some constitutions of the Apostles, touching order and comeliness; which
he thinks She might not do if she had not the same Authority, by force
whereof they were made: but he could not but know that this proof is too
weak, if he were not very weak in understanding. For the Apostles made these
constitutions not precisely in that they were Apostles, as they reported the
precepts of CHRIST, and delivered the Doctrine of faith; but by virtue of their
pastoral power in general, common to them with other Pastors of the Church:
though in that they were no ordinary Pastors but Apostles, they had absolute
infallibility, and could make no laws or constitutions but good and
profitable, in which respect no other are equal to them. So that the Pastors
of the Church now have that power by which the Apostles made their
Ecclesiastical constitutions touching order and comeliness, but not with like
assurance of not erring, in making or reversing such laws: and therefore the
Treatiser cannot from hence infer, that the present Church, and the guides of
it, have infallible judgment touching matters of faith or ceremonies.

. 2,
IN the next place, first he produces my distinction of the Church, considered
as it comprehends all the faithful that are and have been since Christ
appeared in the Page 52.
flesh, or only such as are and have been since the Apostles times, or such
alone as are at one time in the world. Secondly an assertion, that the present
Church may be said at all times to be the pillar of truth, and not to err,
because it ever retains a saving profession of heavenly truth, that is true
doctrine, concerning all such principal points as are of the substance of
Faith, and needful to be known and believed expressly by every man. Thirdly,
he adds, that we deny so much as the virtuall belief of other things to be
necessary; which he pronounces to be an absurd opinion. For the confutation of
my distinction of the Church considered in those three different sorts, he
asks if there be now presently any Church in the world including in it all
the faithful that are and have been since CHRIST appeared in the flesh, or at
least since the Apostles times; which is a most childish and senseless
demand. For it will easily be answered, that the Church that includes in it
all these faithful ones, is now extant in the world, as he is pleased to
speak, in that some of her parts, between which and the rest there is a
connection, are now in the world, though all be not; as time, whereof the parts
are present, past, and to come, is now, though all parts of it be not now. But
his inference upon supposall of our answer is more strange then the question.
For if it be granted, that the Church including in it all these holy ones,
has not all her parts in the world at one time, he infers from thence, that
the promises of Christ cannot be verified of it. As if Christ's promises were
verified of the church, only in respect of those parts that it has in the
world at one time: whereas Bell. Tom. (...). contro. 4. l. 4 c. 7.
Bellarmine himself teaches, that the promise of the churches being in all
parts of the world, is not verified of it at one time, but successively: in
that though it be not in all parts and Provinces of the world at one time, yet
at one time or other it spreads it self into every part of it. And Relect.
contro. 1. de Eccl. in se q. 4. art. 5.
Stapleton defines the church according to the state of the New Testament, to
be a collectiue multitude of men, professing the name of Christ, beginning at
Jerusalem, and from thence dispersed throughout the world, increasing and
spreading it self through all nations, always visible and manifest, mixed of
good and bad, elect and reprobate, in respect of faith and Sacraments holy, in
respect of origin and succession Apostolic, in extent catholic, in
co^nexion and order of parts one, in duratio^ and continuance perpetual,
expressing unto us that church that includes all faithful ones since Christ
till now, nay till the end of the world. Which is no doubt a real body, and
has many excellent promises made unto it, though all the parts of it be not in
the world at one time. But let us go forward, and we shall see how this silly
Treatiser forgets himself. For first he confesses, that the diverse
considerations of the church proposed by me, Page 53. 54.
may be in our understanding, and yet presently adds, that we cannot
distinguish them really one from another: which he goes about to prove,
because the Church in the first consideration includes in it the same Church
as it is taken in the second and third: but the proof is to weak; for every
child will tell him, that these considerations may be really distinguished one
from another, because though the former includes the latter, yet the latter
includes not the former. For as every man is a living thing, but every living
thing is not a man; so the Church consisting of all faithful ones, that are
and have been since Christ appeared in the flesh, includes in it all those
that now presently are in the world: but the Church consisting of those only
that are at one time, includes not the other, but is included in it as a part
in the whole, and consequently cannot challenge all the privileges belonging
to it, more then the part of a thing may challenge all that pertains to the
whole: so that the Church in the former consideration may be free from error,
though not in the latter. But the Treatiser will prove it cannot: seeing if the
Church including in it all faithful ones, that are or have been since Christ,
be free from error; every part of it must Page 54. 55.
be free, and consequently the present Church; as a man cannot be said to be
free from sickness, unless every part of him be free. For answer whereunto
we say that the Church being a collectiue body, may be said to be free from
error in another sort then a man is said to be free from sickness, for a man
cannot be said to be free from sickness unless every part be free; but the
Church may rightly be said to be free from error, if all her parts err not,
though some do: for otherwise I would ask of this Treatiser, whether the
Church were free from error in the days of Athanasius, when, as Aduersus
Prophanas here seon nouation^. cap. 6.
Vincentius Lyrinensis says, almost all the Bishops of the Latin Church were
misled by force or fraud, and when Liberius Bishop of Rome subscribed to
heresy, as Epist: ad solitariam vitam agentes.
Athanasius and Catal. script. Eccles. in Fortunatiano.
Hierome testify, If the Church were not free from error at that time, where
is the privilege of never erring? If it were, it was but in respect of some
few parts: whence it will follow, that the Church may be said to be free from
error, though many parts be not, if any continue sound; for here the greater
and more principal parts did err. But that the Church may be said to be free
from error, though all parts be not, it is evident, in that they who most
stiffly maintain the not erring of the present Church, yet confess, that some
parts of it do err. For Relect. con. 3. quaest. 4.
Stapleton and Bellarmine, who both think the present Roman Church to be free
from error, yet deny that she is free in all her parts, and tell us, there are
some who are parts of this Church and Catholics, that think the Pope may
iudicially err, unless a general Council concur with him, which in their
opinion is an error and near to heresy. Yea the same De Roman. Pontif. lib.
4. cap. 4.
Bellarmine says, that the particular Roman Church, that is, the clergy and
people of Rome, subject to the Pope, cannot err, because though some of them
may, yet all cannot. It is true therefore which I have delivered, not
withstanding any thing the Treatiser can say to the contrary, that the Church
including all the faithful that are and have been since the Apostles, may be
said to be free from error, because in respect of her total universality she
is so: it being impossible, that any error should be found in all her parts,
at all times, though in respect of her several parts she be not. For
sometimes and in some parts she has erred, and in this sense can no more be
said to be free from error, then a man may be said to be free from sickness,
that in some parts is ill affected. But as a man that has not been always,
nor in all parts ill, may be said to be free from perpetual and universal
sickness; so the Church is free from perpetual and universal error. This the
Treatiser says is a weak privilege, and not answerable to the great and
ample promises made by Christ: whereas the Fathers knew no other, whatsoever,
this good man imagines. For Contr. haeres. cap. 6.
Vincentius Lyrinensis confesses, that error may infect some parts of the
Church, yea that it may sometimes infect almost the whole Church: so that he
freeth it only from universal and perpetual error. But, says the Treatiser,
what are poor Christians the nearer for this privilege? how shall such a
Church be the director of their faith? and how shall they know what faith was
preached by the Apostles, what parts taught true doctrine, and when and which
erred in subsequent ages? Surely this question is easily answered. For they may
know what the Apostles taught by their writings: and they may know what parts
of the Church teach true doctrine, by comparing the doctrine each part
teaches, with the written word of God, and by observing who they are that
bring in private and strange opinions, contrary to the resolution of the rest.
But if happily some new contagion, endeavor to commaculate the whole Church
together, they must look up into Antiquity; and if in Antiquity they find
that some followed private and strange opinions, they must carefully observe
what all, not noted for singularity or heresy in diverse places and times,
constantly delivered, as undoubtedly true, and received from such as went
before them. This course Vincentius Lyrinensis prescribes. But the Treatiser
disclaimeth it, not liking that all should be brought Part 1. 56.
to the letter of holy Scripture, and the works of Antiquity; which setting
aside the authority of the present Church, he thinks, yield no certain and
divine argument. So that, according to his conceit, we must rest on the bare
censure and judgment of the Pope: for he is the present Church, and Antiquity
is to be conte^ued as little or nothing worth. Having justified the distinction
of the diverse considerations of the Church impugned by the Treatiser, that
which he has touching the two assertions annexed to it, will easily be
answered For the one of them is most true, his addition of not erring, being
taken away: and the other is but his idle imagination, for we never delivered
any such thing.

. 3.
IN the third place he excepteth against Me, because I say the words of the
Apostle in the Epistle to Timothy, touching the house and Church of God, are
originally understood Page ^6.
of the Church of Ephesus, wherein Paul directs Tymothy how to demean and
behave himself: but because I have cleared this exception in my answer to
Higgons, I will say nothing to him in this place, but refer him thither.

. 4.
FRom the Apostle, the Treatiser passes to Saint Augustine, and charge Me th
I wrest his words, when he says, he would not believe the Gospel, if the
authority of the Church did not move him, to a sense never meant by him. These
words of S. Augustine Page 6^.
are usually alleged by the Papists, to prove that the authority of the
Church is the ground of our faith, and reason of believing: in answer
whereunto I show that the Divines give two explications of them. For Ockam and
some other, understand them not of the multitude of believers, that now are in
the world, but of the whole number of them that are and have been since Christ
appeared in the flesh, so including the Apostles; and in this sense they
confess that the Church, because it includes the writers of the books of the
new Testament, is of greater authority then the books themselves. Other
understand by the name of the Church, only the multitude of believers living
in the world at one time: and think the meaning of Augustine is, that the
authority of this Church was an introduction unto him, but not the ground of
his faith, and principal or sole reason of believing. The former of these
explications, this grave censurer pronounces to be frivolous. First, because
if we may believe him, Saint Augustine never used these words, Catholic
Church, after this sort in Page 66.
that sense. Secondly, because he speaks of that Church, which commanded him
not to believe Manicheus, which undoubtedly was the present Church. Thirdly,
because, as he supposes, I can allege no Divine, that so interpreted the
words of Augustine; that which I cite out of Ockam being impertinent. To every
of these reasons I will briefly answer. And first that Augustine does use the
words, Catholic Church, in the sense specified by Me, it is evident. For
writing against Manicheus, he has these words. Palam est quantu^ in re dubia
ad fidem and certitudinem valent Catholicae Ecclesiae authoritas, quae ab ipsis
fundatissimis sedibus Apostoloru^, vsque ad hodiernu^ diem succede^tibus a
Contra Faustum Ma^chaeum. lib. 11. ca. 2.
sibimet Episcopis, and tot populoru^ co^sensione firmatur; that is, it is
apparent, what great force the authority of that Church has, to settle the
persuasion of faith, and cause certainty in things doubtful, that from the
most surely established seats of the Apostles, by succession of Bishops even
till this present, and consent of people is most firmly settled. To the second
reason we answer, that the Church including the Apostles, and all faithful
ones that have been since, comprehends in it the present Church, and so
might command Augustine not to listen to Manicheus. So that this commanding
proves not that he speaks precisely of the present Church. To the third I
say, that the Treatiser is either strangely ignorant, or strangely impudent,
when he affirms, that I can allege no Divine that understands the words
of Augustine of the Church, including in it the Apostles, and such as lived in
their times. For first Durandus understands them of the Primitive Church,
including the Apostles. Secondly Part. 3. lect. (...). de vita spirituali
animae. corol. 7.
Gerson will tell him, that when Augustine says, he would not believe the
Gospel, if the authority of the Church did not move him, he understands by
the name of the Church, the Primitive congregation of those Faithful ones which
saw and heard Christ, and were his witnesses. Thirdly De dogmatibus extra
canonem Scripturae constit l. 4. c. 4.
Driedo writes thus: when Augustine says, he would not believe the Gospel,
if the authority of the Church did not move him, he understands that Church
which has been ever since the beginning of the Christian Faith, having her
Bishops in orderly sort succeeding one another, and growing and increasing till
our times, which Church truly comprehends in it the blessed company of the
Holy Apostles, who having seen Christ and his miracles, and learned from his
mouth the Doctrine of Faith, delivered unto us the Evangelicall Scriptures. And
again the same ^ Driedo says, that the authority of the Scripture is greater
then the d De via investigandae verae intelligentiae sacrae scripturae l. 2. c.
7.
authority of the Church that now is in the world, in it self considered. But
if we speak of the universal Church, including all Faithful ones that are
and have been, the authority of the Church is in a sort greater then the
Scripture, and in a sort equal. For explication whereof he adds, that as
touching things that cannot be seen, nor known by us, we believe the sayings
and writings of men, not, as if they had in them, in themselves considered a
sufficient force to move us to believe; but because by some reasons we are
persuaded of them who deliver such things unto us, and think them worthy to
be believed. So S. Augustine might rightly say, he would not believe the
books of the Gospel, if the authority of the Church did not move him,
understanding the universal Church; of which he speaks against Manicheus,
which, including the Apostles, has had in it an orderly course of succession
of Bishops till our time. For the faithfulness, truth, and credit of this
Church was more evident, then the Truth of the books of the New Testament,
which are therefore received as sacred and true, because written by those
Apostles to who^ Christ so many ways gave testimony both by word and work:
and the Scriptures are to be proved by the authority of that Church which
included the Apostles; but in the Church that now is, or that includes only
such as are now living, God does not so manifest himself as he formerly did:
so that this Church must demo^strat herself to be Orthodox, by proving her
faith out of the Scripture. With Driedo Dial. l. 1. part. 2. c. 4.
Ockam co^curreth, his words are these: sometimes the name of the Church
co^prehendeth not only the whole congregation of Catholics living, but the
Faithful departed also; and in this sense blessed Augustine uses the name of
the Church in his book against the Manichees, cited in the Decrees, 2. did. c.
palam: where the Catholic Church imports the Bishops that have succeeded
one another from the Apostles times, and the people subject to the^. And in the
same sense Augustine uses the name of the Church, when he says, he would not
believe the Gospel, if the authority of the Church did not move him: for this
Church comprehends in it the Writers of the books of the Gospel, and all
the Apostles: so that from the authority of Augustine, rightly understood, it
cannot be inferred, that the Pope the maker of the Canons, is rather and more
to be believed then the Gospel: yet it may be granted, that we must more and
rather believe the Church which has been from the times of the Prophets and
Apostles till now, then the Gospel: not for that men may any way doubt of the
Gospel, but because the whole is greater then the part. So that the Church
which is of greater authority then the Gospel, is, that whereof the Writer of
the Gospel is a part. Neither is it strange, that the whole should be of more
authority then the parts. These are the words of Ockam in the place cited by
me. Wherefore let the Reader judge whether that I cite out of Ockam be
impertinent, as the Treatiser says, or not. To Durandus, Gerson, Driedo, and
Ockam, we may add Doctrine fid. l. 2. art. 2. c. 21
Waldensis, who fully agrees with the^, showing at large, that it pertayned to
the Church only in her first, best, and primitive state and age, to deliver a
perfect direction touching the Canon of the Scripture; so that she has no
power or authority now, to add any more books to the Canon already received,
as out of her own immediate knowledge. But it suffices to the magnifying of
her authority in her present estate, that even now, no other books may be
received, but such only as in her first and best estate she proposed. Farther
adding, that the saying of Augustine, that he would not believe the Gospel,
if the authority of the Church did not move him, is to be understood of the
Church, including the primitive Fathers and Pastors, the Apostles Scholars. By
this which has bin said, it is evident, as I think, that the former of those
two constructions which I make of Augustines words, has bin approved by far
better men then this Treatiser. And that therefore he shows himself more bold
then wise; when he pronounces it to be frivolous. And surely, if we consider
well the discourse of Contra epist. Manichei ca: 4.
S. Augustine, I think it may be proved unanswerably, out of the circumstances
of the fame, that he speaks not precisely of the present Church. For it is
that authority of the catholic church he urges, that was begun by miracles,
nourished by hope, increased by charity, and confirmed and strengthened by long
continuance. And of that Church he speaks, wherein there had bin a succession
of Bishops from Peter till that present time. So that he must needs mean the
Church, including not only such faithful ones as were then living when he
wrote, but all that either then were, or had bin from the Apostles times.
Wherefore let us pass to the other construction of Augustines words, which is,
that the authority of the present church, was the ground and reason of an
acquisit faith, and an introduction leading him to a more sure stay, but not
the reason or ground of that faith, whereby principally he did believe. This
constructio^ the Treatiser says, cannot stand, because Aug: says, if the
authority he speaks of be weakened, he will believe no longer. Whence it
seems to be consequent, that it was the cause of all the^ persuasion of faith
that he had, then when he wrote, and not only of an acquisit faith, preparing
and fitting him to a stronger, more excellent, and farther degree or kind of
faith. For the clearing of this point, we must note, that there are 3. Hugo de
sancto victore in sententiis.
sorts of such me^ as believe: for there are some that believe out of piety
only, not discerning by reason, whether the things they believe, be to be
believed as true or not: the 2d. have a light of divine reason shining in them,
and causing an approbation of that they believe: the 3d. sort, having a pure
heart and conscience, begin already inwardly to taste, that which hereafter
more fully shall be enjoyed. Resting in the first degree, as the authority of
the Church moves us to believe, so if it be weakened, that kind and degree of
faith, that stays on it, falls to the ground, having no other sufficient
stay: But if we speak of faith in respect of her two other degrees, she has
a more sure and firm ground and stay to rest upon. And therefore Vbi supra.
August: affirms, that the truth, clearly manifesting it self unto us, is to
be preferred before all those things that commend unto us the authority of the
church; and that there are certain spiritually minded men, who in this life
attain to the knowledge of heavenly truth, and sincere wisdom, without all
doubt discerning it, though but in part and weakly, in that they are men. Of
which number there is no question, but that Aug: was one; so that the authority
of the Church, could not be the sole or principal motive or reason, at that
time, when he wrote of his present persuasion of the truth of heavenly
mysteries, contained in the Gospel of Christ, as the Treatiser would make us
believe: but having to do with the Manichees, who promised the evident and
clear knowledge of truth; but failing to perform that they promised, urged
him to believe that, which they could not make him know to be true; he
professes, that if he must believe without discerning the truth of that he
believes, he must rest on the authority of the catholic church: For the
Manichees had no authority sufficient to move a man to believe in this sort.
Now the Catholic Church commanded him not to listen to Manicheus, in which
behalf, if they would and could weaken the authority thereof, he professes
he neither can, nor will believe any more, with such a kind of faith as they
urged him to; which is, without all discerning of the truth of the things that
are to be believed. Thus we see the discourse of S. Augustine no way proves,
that the authority of the Church was the fool or principal ground of the
highest degree, or kind of faith, he had; but it is most evident out of the
same, that it served only as an introduction to lead to a more sure persuasion
then it self could cause.

. 5. and 6.
THe next thing the Treatiser has, that concerns Me, is, that I acknowledge
in Page 78.
the Church a rule of faith, descending by tradition from the Apostles,
according to which the Scriptures are to be expounded. Whereunto I briefly
answer; that indeed I admit such a rule so descending unto us; but that the
rule I speak of, is nothing else but a summary comprehension of the chief
heads of Christian doctrine, every part whereof is found in Scripture, and from
them easily to be collected and proved, delivered unto us by the guides of the
Church, from hand to hand as from the Apostles. So that my words make nothing
for proof of the papists supposed unwritten traditions: wherefore let us pass
to that which follows, which is the Sophistical circulation, which I say
Papists run into, in that they believe that the Church is infallibly lead
into all truth, because it is so contained in the Scripture; and that the
Scripture is the word of God, because the Church infallibly led into all truth,
tells them it is. In this passage he says I wrong Stapleton, in that I
charge him, that in his triplication against Whitaker, he affirms other
matters to be believed, because they are contained in Scripture, and the
Scripture, because it is the word of God: and Page 81.
that it is the word of God, because the Church delivers it to be so: and the
Church, because it is lead by the spirit: and that it is lead by the spirit,
because it is so contained in the Scripture and the Creed. For that, as he
says, Stapleton in the last place makes no mention of the Scripture, but of
the Creed only. Wherefore let us hear Stapleton himself speak. Whereas D.
Whitaker obiecteth, that Papists according to Stapletons opinion, believe
whatsoever they believe, not only by, but for the Church: and that ingenuously
he had confessed so much: he Triplication. page 188.
answers, that indeed he had so professed, and that he ever would so
profess: and in Page 179.
another place, whereas D. Whitaker says: Papists believe the Church, because
God commands them to do so: and that God does so command them, because the
Church, whose authority is sacred, tells them so: he answers, that they do
not believe that God commands them to believe the Church, either properly,
or only, because the Church tells them so: but partly, because of the most
manifest authorities of Scriptures, sending men to the Church to be taught by
it: partly moved so to do by the Creed of the Apostles, wherein we profess,
that we believe the Catholic Church: that is, not only that there is such a
Church, but that we are members of it; and that God does teach us by it. Is
here noe mention of the Scripture, but of the Creed only? Doubtless the
Treatiser has a very hard forehead, for otherwise he could not but blush, and
acknowledge that he wrongeth Me, and not I Stapleton. But to make good that
which I have written: that Papists either fall into a Sophistical circulation,
or resolve the persuasion of their faith finally into humane motives, and
inducements; first, it is to be observed, that noe man persuades himself of
the truth of any thing, but because it is evident unto him in it self, to be
as he persuades himself, either in abstractiue knowledge, or intuitiue,
intellectual or experimental, or of affection; or else because it is so
delivered to be, by some such as he is well persuaded of, both in respect of
their understanding discerning aright, and will to deliver nothing, but that
they apprehend to be true. In the former kind, the inducement, motive, or
formal cause of men's assent to such propositions as they assent unto, is the
evidence of them in themselves, which either they have originally as the first
principles, or by necessary deduction from things so evident, as conclusions
thence inferred; In the latter, the authority and credit of the reporter. The
former kind of assent, is named assensus euidens, the latter ineuidens, of
which latter sort faith is, which is named a firm assent without evidence,
because many of the things which we are to believe, are not, nor cannot be
evident unto us originally in themselves, as the first principles of humane
knowledge, nor by deduction, from, and out of things so evident, in such sort
as conclusions in sciences are. Yet is not this assent without all evidence.
For though the things believed be not evident in themselves, yet the medium, by
virtue whereof we believe them, must be evident: and the proof of them by
virtue of that medium. Now the medium, by virtue whereof we believe things no
way evident unto us in themselves, can be nothing else but the report of
another: neither is every report of another a sufficient medium or inducement
to make us believe things we know not, but it must be the report of such an one
as we know cannot be deceived, nor will not deceive. It must therefore be
evident to every one, that firmly and without doubting believes things not
known unto him upon the report of another, that he that reports them unto
him, neither is deceived, nor can deceive. Whence it follows necessarily,
that things are as he reports. These things presupposed, I demand of this
Treatiser, whether he and his consorts assent to the Articles of the Christian
Faith, induced so to do by the evidence of the things in themselves, or by the
report of another. That they assent not unto the^, induced so to do by the
evidence of the things in themselves they all profess, but by the report of
another. I demand therefore, who that other is? whether God, or man? if man,
then have they nothing but anhumane persuasion, very weakly grounded, and
wherein they may be deceived, for every man is a liar. If God, let them tell me
whether it be evident in it self, that God delivers these things unto the^,
and pronounces them to be as they believe, or not: If not, but believed only,
then, as before, by reason of authority: and that either of God, or man. Not of
God, for it is not evident in it self, that God delivers any thing unto the^,
not of men, for their report is not of such credit asthat we may certainly and
undoubtedly stay upon it: seeing they may be deceived, and deceive other. They
answer therefore, that it is no way evident unto them in it self, that God
delivers the things they believe: but that they persuade themselves, he
delivered such things vpo^the report of men; but such men as are infallibly led
into all truth. See then if they do not run round in a circle, finding no
stay. They believe the resurrection of the dead, and the like things, because
God revealed it; they believe that God revealed it, because it is so contained
in the Scripture: and the Scripture, because it is the Word of God: and that it
is the Word of God, because the Church so delivers: and the Church because it
is a multitude of men, infallibly led into all truth: and that there is a
Church infallibly led into all truth, because it is so contained in Scripture:
and the Scripture because it is the word of God: and so round without ever
finding any end. Out of this circle they cannot get, unless they either ground
their Faith upon the mere report of men, as men, and humane probabilities: or
confess that it is evident unto them, in it self, that God speaks in the
Scripture, and reveals those things which they believe: which if they do, it
must be in respect either of the manner, matter there uttered, or consequent
effects. In respect of the manner, there being a certain divine virtue, force,
and majesty, in the very form of the words of him that speaks, in the
Scripture: in respect of the matter, which being suggested and proposed to us,
finds approbation of reason, enlightened by the light of grace: in respect of
the consequent effects, in that we find a strange and wonderful change wrought
in us, assuring us the doctrine is of God that has such effects, which is that
we say, and which they condemn in us. The Treatiser would make us believe that
there are two opinions amongst them touching this point: whereof the one is, as
he tells us, that we believe the Church, because the Scripture teaches us,
that she is to be believed: and the Scripture, because the Church delivers
it to us to be the word of God. And the other, that by the assistance of God
together with the concurrence of our natural understanding, we produce an act
of supernatural Faith; by which we firmly believe the Articles of Christian
Faith, not for any humane inducements, but for that they are revealed by
Almighty God, without seeking any further: which if it be so, it must be
evident in it self to the^ that follow this opinion: that God has revealed and
delivered the things they believe, and that by one of the 3 ways before
mentioned, and the^ they fall into our opinion: for if it be not evide^t to the^
in it self, that God speaks in the scriptures, and reveals the things they
are to believe, they must go further, to be assured that he does so speak and
reveal the things that are to be believed, either to proof of reason, or
authority. For no man persuades himself of any thing, but upon some
inducements. Proof of reason demonstratiue, I think they will not seek; and
probable inducements they may not rest in; therefore they must proceed to some
proofeby authority, which can be no other but that of the Church, and then
they join with them that follow the other opinion, and believe the articles of
Christian faith, contained in Scripture, because God has revealed them; and
that God has revealed them, because the Church tells them so; and the
Church, because the Scripture testifies of it that it is led into all truth,
which is a very gross sophistical circulation. This the Treatiser did well
perceive, and therefore to help the matter, he distinguishes the cause of
believing, and the condition necessarily requisite, that the cause may have her
working, in show, making the Divine Revelation, the reason or cause that we
believe, and the Churches proposing to us the things to be believed, a
condition only, and not a cause: in sort, as the fire alone is the cause of the
burning of the wood, but the putting of one of them to another, is a necessary
condition, without which that cause can produce no such effect: but this shift
will not serve the turn. For it is the fire only that burns the wood,
though it cannot burn unless it be put unto it: so that in like sort, if the
comparison hold, the Divine Revelation must, of and by it self alone, move,
induce, and incline us to believe the things proposed by the Church, as being
evident unto us, to be a Divine Revelation, though without the Churches
proposing, we could take no notice of it. Even as in natural knowledge, it is
the evidence of truth, appearing unto us, originally found in the first
principles, and secondarily in the conclusions from thence deduced, that is the
sole and only cause or reason of our assent to such principles and
conclusions, though without the help of some men of knowledge, proposing them
to us, and leading us from the apprehension of one of them to another, happily
we should not at all attain such knowledge. But this evidence of the Divine
Revelation in it self, the Treatiser will not admit. For it is no way evident
in it self, to him, that God has revealed any of the things he believes; but
the only proof, besides humane motives or reasons, (which are too weak to
be the ground of Faith) that he has, is the authority of the Church. So that
the Ministry of the Church, is not only a condition, but a cause of that
persuasion of faith which they have: yea the authority of the Church is the
formal cause of all that faith, seduced Papists have. And therefore the
distinction of a cause and condition helps them not: It is true indeed that
the Ministry of the Church, proposing to men things to be believed, is
only a condition requisite to the producing of a supernatural act of faith,
in respect of them that have some other thing to persuade them, that that is
true which the Church proposes, besides the authority of the Church; but in
respect of such as have no other proof of the truth thereof it is a formal
cause. Now this is the condition of all Papists: For let them tell Me whether
they believe the Scripture to be the Word of God, without any motive at all or
not? and if they do not, as it is most certain they do not, whether besides
such as are humane they have any other then the authority of the Church? if
they have not, as doubtless they have not, they make the authority of the
Church the formal cause of their faith, and fall into that sophistical
circulation they are charged with. For they believe the articles of religion,
because revealed; and that they were revealed, because it is so contained in
the Scripture; and the Scripture, because it is the Word of God; and that it is
the Word of God, because the Church tells them it is; and the Church, because
it is guided by the spirit; and that it is so guided, because it is so
contained in the Scripture: this is such a maze as no wise man will willingly
enter into: and yet the Treatiser commends the treading of these intricate
paths, and tells us that two causes may be causes one of another. That the
cause may be proved by the effect, and the effect by the cause; and that such
a kind of argumentation, is not a circulation, but a demonstratiue regresse:
that two causes may be causes either of other, in diverse respects we make no
question. For the end of each thing, as it is desired, sets the efficient
cause a work, and the efficient causes the same to be actually enjoyed.
Likewise, we doubt not, but that the cause may be proved by the effect, and the
effect by the cause in a demonstratiue regresse. For the effect, as better
known unto us then the cause, may make us know the cause; and the cause being
found out by us, may make us more perfitly, and in a better sort to know the
effect, then before; not only that, and what it is, but why it is also. So the
death of little infants proves them sinners, and their being sinners proves
them mortal. The bigness of the footstep in the dust or sand, shows the
bigness of his foot that made that impression: And the bigness of his foot
will show how big the impression is that he makes: but this makes nothing
for the justifying of the Romish circulations. For here the effect being
known in a sort in itself, makes us know the cause; and the cause being
found out and known, makes us more perfectly to know the effect then at
first we did; but the case is otherwise with the Papists; for with them the
Scripture, which in it self has no credit with them, but such only as it is
to receive from the Church, gives the Church credit; and the Church, which
has no credit but such as it is to receive from the Scripture, gives the
Scripture credit by her testimony. And they endeavor to prove the
infallibility of the Churches judgment out of the Scripture, and the truth of
the Scripture out of the determination and judgment of the Church. Much like,
as if when question is made touching the quality and condition of two men,
utterly unknown, a man to commend them to such as doubt of them, should bring
no other testimony of their good and honest disposition, but the testimony of
each of them of the other. It is true then which I have said, that to a man
admitting the Old Testament, and doubting of the New, a man may urge the
authority of the Old; and to a man doubting of the Old, and admitting the New,
the authority of the New; but to him that doubts of both, a man must allege
neither of them, but must bring some other authority or proof: so likewise, to
him that admits the Scripture, and doubts of the Church, a man may urge
the authority of the Scripture; but to him that doubts of both, as all do
when they begin to believe, a man must allege some other proof; or else he
shall cause him to run round in a Circle for ever, and never to find any way
out. Wherefore to conclude this point, let our Adversaries know, that we
admit and require humane motives and inducements, and amongst them a good
opinion of them that teach us, as preparing and fitting us to faith. Secondly,
that we require a supernatural aid, light, and habit, for the producing of
an act of faith. Thirdly, that we require some divine motive and inducement.
Fourthly, that this cannot be the authority of the Church, seeing the authority
of the Church is one of the things we are to be induced to believe. Fifthly,
that we require the ministry of the Church, as a propounder of all heavenly
truth; though her authority can be no proof in general, of all such truth.
Sixthly, that the Church, though not as it includes only the believers that
are in the world, at one time, yet as it comprehends all that are, or have
been, is an infallible propounder of heavenly truth, and so acknowledged to
be, by such as are assured of the truth of the doctrine of Christianity in
general. Seauenthly, that the authority of this Church is a sufficient proof
of the truth of particular things, proposed by her to such as already are by
other divine motives assured of her infallibility.

. 7.
FRom the authority of the Scripture, which he would feign make to be wholly
dependant Page 88. and 89.
on the Church, the Treatiser passes to the fullness and sufficiency of it;
seeking amongst other his discourses, to weaken those proofs which are brought
by Me, for confirmation thereof. Affirming, that though I make show, as if it
were a plain matter, that the Evangelists in their Gospels, Saint Luke in the
Acts of the Apostles, and Saint John in the Apocalypse, meant to deliver a
perfect sum of Christian doctrine, and direction of faith, yet I bring no
reason of any moment to prove it. Whereas yet in the place cited by him, I have
these words, containing in them, as I suppose, a strong proof of the thing
questioned. Who sees not that the Evangelists, writing the history of CHRIST'S
life and death, St Luke in the book of the Acts of the Apostles; describing
the coming of the Holy Ghost, the admirable gifts and graces powered upon the
Apostles and the churches founded and ordered by them, and Saint John writing
the Revelations which he had concerning the future state of things to the end
of the world, meant to deliver a perfect sum of Christian doctrine? if the
proof contained in these words be not sufficient, for my part I know not what
may be, for what can be necessary to be known of Christians, over and above
that which is found in the old Testament, besides the Incarnation of Christ,
his words, actions, and sufferings; the manner of the establishment of churches
in the faith of Christ: and the ordaining and appointing of fit guides to take
care of the government of the same, and the future state of things to the end
of the world? But he says, no one of the Evangelists intended to set down all
that Christ did and suffered, as it appears in that no one of them has so
done; and that it cannot be said that all jointly have so done, seeing that
could not proceed but from some common deliberation, or the disposition and
inspiration of the holy Ghost, moving them to write: neither of which can be
said. For that there was no such deliberation, he says it is evident, in that
no man mentions any such thing, and in that it is known they wrote in diverse
countries at diverse times, upon diverse occasions; and that the inspiration of
the holy spirit did not direct them to the writing of all things necessary, he
says it is likewise most clear, in that I confess there are some things
wanting in their books, which the church believes: which could not be if the
spirit had moved them to write all. This objection will soon be answered. For
first it is certain that some one of the Evangelists intended to write all
things which Christ did and spoke: Act. 1. Luke 2.
S. Luke professing that he had so done, Which yet is not to be understood of
all things simply, but such only as he did and spoke in that time, within the
compass whereof he confined his narration. Neither does this prejudice the
fullness of the Evangelicall history. For as Baronius b Annal. tom. 1. 34. 223.
notes, the later Evangelists taking a view of that the former had written,
for the most part added what things they found omitted by them: So Mark and
Luke write of the ascension of Christ, not mentioned by S. Matthew, because he
ended his story before he came to it. And John finding as Catal. scriptor. in
Iohanne Baron. Annal. tom. (...). 99. 5.
Hierome says, that the other three had written only the history of one
year, after John the Baptist was cast into prison, wherein Christ suffered;
approved that which they had written as true, and omitting that year, because
the things that fell out in it were reported by the^, recorded such things as
fell out before the imprisonment of the Baptist, which they had not written, as
not fetching the beginning of their narration so far off. If it be said by
this Treatiser, that many things that Christ did are so omitted, that they are
found in none of the Evangelists: for that Cap. 20. 30. 31.
John who wrote last of all, and knew well what the rest had written, has
these words: Many other signs also Jesus wrought in the sight of his
Disciples, which are not written in this book, but these things are written
that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the son of God, and that
believing you may have everlasting life through his Name. Cap. 24. 25
And again, there are also many other things which Jesus did, which if they
should be written every one, I suppose the world would not be able to contain
the Books which should be written. Annal. tom. 1. 34. 223.
Baronius will tell him that the Evangelists when they took in hand the
writing of the sacred stories, intended not to write all the things generally
that Christ did: but such and so many only, as might serve to confirm the
Faith, and to demonstrate that JESUS is the Son of GOD: and that the things
which they have written are sufficient to salvation, that men believing may
have eternal life. So that though there were no common deliberation or
consultation amongst the Evangelists, and though they wrote at diverse times and
in diverse places, yet by the sweet disposition of the holy Spirit that moved
them to write, it might, and did so fall out, in that one saw what another had
written, that the later added such things as they found omitted by the former,
and so left unto us a perfect and full narration concerning Christ his
incarnation, life, death, resurrection, and ascension, as also the things he
did and spoke during the time of his conversing amongst men. So that the
Treatiser is not able to prove that the Evangelicall history is imperfect: but
there is one thing wherein he gloryeth, as if he had gotten some great
advantage, which is, that I confess, that there are somethings found in the
Epistles of the Apostles, occasionally written and believed by the Church, that
are not found in the history of the Evangelists, the book of all the Acts of
the Apostles, nor the Revelation of Saint John: whence he thinks he may
infer, that either the Authors of th^se books, meant not to deliver a perfect
sum and direction of Christian faith as I affirm; or that they missed of
their purpose: which may not be granted. But let him know, that there is no
consequence of any such absurdity as he imagines, from any thing I have
written. For the things believed by the Church, and not found in the former
books, but in the Epistles of the Apostles, are nothing else but distinct and
clear determinations of doubts arising touching matters of faith or manners,
out of, and according to the sum of Christian Doctrine, found in the former
books or historical narrations of such things as passed between the
Apostles themselves or between them and the Churches founded by them, or some
particular persons in them, not mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles: or
lastly, Apostolical prescriptions of things pertaining to decency, order and
comeliness in the performance of the acts of Gods worship and service. Now I
think it will not follow, that if there be found in the Apostolical Epistles
some more distinct and clear resolutio^s and determinations of doubts out of
the form and direction of Christian Doctrine, found in the former books, then
are there found, or a prescription of some outward observations, that the
former books contain not a perfect sum and direction of Christian faith:
much less will it be consequent that these books contain not a perfect
direction of Christian faith, because some historical narrations, not found in
them, are believed in the Church: as that Paul left his cloak at Troas, that
he mediated for Onesimus, and sought to reconcile him to his Master, and the
like. The Treatiser therefore passes from this exception, and asks how I
will prove, that all things believed by the Church, and not contained in the
former books are found in the Epistles of the Apostles; to whom I answer, that
when he shall give any instance of things believed by the Church, and not
found in the former books, either it shall be proved that they are not believed
by the Church, or they shall be showed him in those Epistles. Wherefore, let us
see what he has more to say. One of the Apostolical Epistles he says is
lost, namely that which Paul wrote to the Laodiceans, in which there might be
something necessarily to Page 89.
be believed that is not found in any other book of the New Testament.
Therefore it may be thought that there is some want and imperfection in the
books of the New Testament. This truly is a very idle and and silly objection:
for though there was a certain Epistle to the Laodiceans carried about and
read by some in ancient times, yet, as Hierome testifies it was exploded by
all: and In Epist. ad Colos. Homil. 12.
Chrysostom, and In Epist. ad. Colos. in princ. citat. a Baron: Annal. Tom. 1.
60. 13.
Theodoret are of opinion, that Paul never wrote any Epistle to the Laodiceans:
but that the Epistle he g Catal. script. Ecclesiast. in Paulo.
speaks of, was written from Laodicea, or by the Laodiceans, to inform him
of the state of things amongst themselves, or amongst the Colossians, by whom
he would have it read. And Ibid. Page 94.
Cardinal Baronius himself approves their opinion, rather then the other.
That which he has, of my admitting traditions, I will answer when I come to
examine his next section.

. 8.
IN his next section he has these words. Barlow and Field, two famous English
Protestants, admit certain Apostolical traditions. And farther he adds,
that I allow of certain rules for the discerning of Apostolic traditions,
from such as are not such. Whereunto we answer, that we admit sundry kinds
of tradition, and yet deny, that any thing concerning faith, or the necessary
direction and information of men's manners is to be believed and received, that
is not written. For we say, nothing was delivered by tradition, but the books
of Scripture, things in some sort therein contained, and thence deduced; and
certain dispensable observations, not at all, or hardly to be discerned from
Ecclesiastical constitutions. Neither is it new, or strange, that we should
admit some kinds of traditions, For In examine* Concili^ Tridentini decrer.
pri^: se^ 4.
Kemnitiu^ acknowledges all those kinds that I mention; which will no way help
the Papists, For the question between the^ and us, is not whether there be any
traditions or not. For it is most certain that the books of Scripture are
delivered by tradition. But it being ^upposed, that the holy men of God,
taught immediately by Christ his Son, ^ded certain books to posterities,
and agreed on, which those books are; wh^her they contain all things
necessary to be known, and practiced by Christian ^en for the attayning of
everlasting life and salvation, We say they do, they deny it Yet will the
Treatiser prove from hence, contrary to my assertions, that according to my
own grounds, tradition is the very foundation of my faith. For if Protestants
receive the number, names of the Authors, and integrity of the parts of
books, divine, and canonical, as delivered by tradition, as I say they do:
and if without tradition we cannot know such divine books, he thinks it
consequent that tradition is the ground of our faith. But indeed there is no
such consequence as he imagines. For it is one thing to require the tradition
of the church, as a necessary mea^s, whereby the books of Scripture may be
delivered unto us, and made known; and another to make the same tradition the
ground of our faith; seeing in the judgment of the Treatiser himself, every
thing is not the ground of our says, builded upon Scripture, without which we
cannot know the Canonical books of Scripture from such as are not of that
rank. As it is evident, in that he distinguishes the gro^d of our faith, and
Part. 1. page 83. and seqq.
reason of our believing, from the condition required to the producing of such
an act of faith; denying the churches proposing of things to be believed to be
the ground of our faith, and yet requiring it, as a necessary condition,
without which ordinarily men cannot believe. So that though we know the names
of the writers of the books of holy Scripture by tradition, and that there were
no more books, nor no more parts of books, of this kind left to
posterities, by the Apostles, but such as the church delivers to us; yet it
is not consequent, that we have no other ground of our persuasion, that the
books delivered to us, and the parts thereof are canonical, but tradition:
for the evidence of divine power, and majesty, showing it self in them more
then in all humane compo^sitions whatsoever, proves them to have proceeded
from the immediate inspiration of the holy Ghost, breathing in them nothing but
heavenly grace. The words of holy Scripture, says Epist ad Nepotem.
Picus Mirandula, are rude and plain, but full of life and soul; they have
their sting; they pierce and enter in, even to the most secret spirit, and
strangely transform him that with due respect reads them and meditateth on
them. And besides, there are sundry divine and conuincing reasons; that the
sum of Christian doctrine contained in these books, is nothing else but
heavenly truth; and being without the compass of that we naturally
understand, revealed truth. So that the Treatiser does greatly forget
himself, when he pronounces it to be false, that I say, that the Scriptures
win credit of Page 96.
themselves, and yield sufficient satisfaction to all men of their divine
truth. This is the sum of all that he has of traditions. For where he
says, I affirm that without the Creed of the Apostles, we cannot know the
Scriptures to be of God; he shows himself to care little whether that he
writes be true or false. For I no where have any such thing; but where he
says, I affirm that Papists make traditions Ecclesiastical, equal with the
written word of God, and that this is one of my ordinary untruths, he
deserves a sharper censure: For if the Reader be pleased to peruse the place
cited by him, he shall find that I say no such thing, nor any thing that the
Pope himself can possibly dislike. For, delivering the opinion of Papists
Book 4 cap. 20.
touching traditions, their diverse kinds, and the credit that is to be given
unto them, I show; that they make divine traditions equal with the words,
precepts and doctrines of Christ, left unto us in writing, apostolical, with
the written precepts of the Apostles; and ecclesiastical, with the written
precepts of the Pastors of the Church; confessing, that there is no reason why
they should not so do, if they could prove any such unwritten traditions. Is
this to say that Papists make Ecclesiastical traditions equal with the
written Word of God? Is this one of my ordinary untruths? or rather is not
this a bewraying of an extraordinary impudency in him that so says? Surely I
fear the Reader will have a very ill conceit of him, upon the Page 96.
discerning of this his bad dealing. Yet he goes forward, charging Me, that
I make the baptism of Infants to be an unwritten tradition; whereas yet he
knows right well, that howsoever I grant it may be named a tradition, in that
there is no express precept or example of it in Scripture; yet I affirm that
it is no unwritten tradition, in that the grounds, reasons, and causes of the
necessity of it, are there contained, and the benefits that follow it. Neither
does the place alleged by him out of Augustine c De Genesi ad literam. l. 10.
c. 23.
prove the contrary: the words of Augustine as commonly we read them, are
these: the custom of the Church in baptizing infants; which is not to be
despised or lightly regarded, were not to be believed, were it not an
Apostolic tradition. But, whosoever shall consider the place, will soon
perceive that Augustines meaning is, that the custom of the Church in
baptizing Infants, which he says, is not to be despised, or lightly regarded,
is to be believed to be no other but an Apostolical tradition; and not that it
were not to be believed if it were not an Apostolical tradition; howsoever, as
it seems esset in stead of esse is crept into the text. For it is something
harsh to say, the custom of the Church in baptizing infants is not to be
believed, unless it were an Apostolical Tradition. Seeing such a custom
might be believed, though it were not an Apostolical Tradition. And besides,
the drift of Augustine in that place, is to urge the necessity of this
custom, and to have it believed to be Apostolical; and not to weaken it, as
if it had no support, but bare tradition: which can neither stand with the
opinion of Augustine, the truth of the thing it self, nor the judgment and
resolution of our Adversaries themselves, who Bell. de sacr; bapt. l. 1. c. 8.
think that the Baptism of Infants may be proved unanswerably out of
Scripture, in that CHRIST says, the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to little
children, and yet pronounces, that except a man be borne a new of water, and
of the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Wherein yet they
contradict themselves, as they do likewise in some other things, which they
produce as instances of unwritten traditions, and yet go about to prove them
by Scripture. Neither will the Treatisers evasion serve the turn, that they
go not about to prove any thing necessarily out of Scripture, that they
pretend to be holden by unwritten tradition, but probably only; for we know
they bring Paedobaptisme as an instance of unwritten traditions: and yet say,
it may be vnavoydably proved out of Scripture, as they propose the testimonies
of it. The like may be said of the consubstantiality of the Son of God with
the Father, and the proceeding of the Holy Ghost from them both, brought by
them as instances of unwritten verities, and yet proved as strongly by them
out of Scripture, as any other point of Faith. For if they shall say, an
Heretic will not yield himself convinced by such proofs: it will be
answered, that no more he will by any other in any other point; nor by the
tradition of the Church neither; which yet I suppose they will not make to be a
weak proof in that respect.

. 9.
THe next exception taken against Me is, that I have not well said, that a man
may still doubt and refuse to believe a thing defined in a General Council,
without Page 9^.
Heretical pertinacie, and that General Councels may err in matters of
greatest consequence. What I have written, I will make good against the
Treatiser. For it is not so strange a thing, as he would make us believe, to
think, that General Councels may err, and that a man may doubt of things
defined in the^, without heretical pertinacie, seeing not only our Divines
generally so think, but sundry of the best learned in the Roman Church
informer times, were of the same opinion, as I have elsewhere showed at large.
Neither were it hard to answer the authorities he brings to prove, that
General Councels cannot err; if a man would insist upon the particular
examination of them. But this may suffice in a generality, that the Fathers
produced by him, blame and condemn in particular, the calling of things in
question, that had been determined in the Council of Nice, and some other of
that sort: and not generally the doubting of any thing determined in any
Council, how disorderly soever it proceeded, Leo ep. 2^.
In the second Council of Ephesus, there wanted not a sufficient number of
worthy Bishops, yet because he that took on him the Presidentship, used not
accustomed moderation, neither permitted each man, freely to deliver his
opinion, it was not accepted, nor the Decrees of it received. From the not
erring of Councels, the Treatiser passes to the question concerning page 106.
the Churches authority, in making new Articles of faith: and seeks to clear
the Roman Church from the imputation of challe^ging any such authority by my
confession: my words alleged by him to this purpose are these. Our
adversaries confess, that the approbation and determination of the Church,
cannot make that a truth which was not: nor that a Divine or Catholic truth,
that was not so before. But the good man has used this poor sentence of mine,
2. Sam. 10. 4.
as Hanun used the messengers of David, whose garments he cut off in the
middle: a wrong afterward severely, and yet most justly, revenged by David.
For it follows in the same sentence, that Papists do think, that the Church,
by her sole and bare determination may make that verity to be in such sort
Catholic, that every one must expressly believe it, that was not so, and in
such degree Catholic before. Whereby it appears, that they attribute a
power to the Church, in a sort, to make new Articles of faith, in that she may
make things formerly believed, only implicit, to be necessary to be
expressly believed; not by evidence of proof, or apparent deduction, from
things expressly believed, but by her bare and sole authority; which not
only we, but sundry right learned, godly, and wise, in the midst of the
Church of Rome ever denied. Wherefore, let us pass from this imagined
advantage, to consider the rest of his exceptions.

. 10.
IN my third book, and first Chapter, speaking of the Patriarche of
Constantinople, I have these words: In the second general Council holden at
Constantinople, he was preferred before the other Patriarchs of Alexandria and
Antioch, and set in degree of honor next unto the Bishop of Rome; in the
great Council of Chalcedon, he was made equal with him, and to have all
equal rights, privileges, and prerogatives: because he was Bishop of new
Rome, as the other was of old. Hereupon the Treatiser breaks out into these
words: I cannot do otherwise, but marvel, that a man of his place and
learning, does not blush to commit such a notorious Page 73^.
untruth, to the Print and view of the world. For not to speak of the
falsehood of the first part of his affirmation, because it is in some sort
impertinent, that which he says of the Council of Chalcedon, is most untrue,
repugnant to all antiquity, and not only contrary to all proceedings, and the
history of the said Council, but also to the words of the Canon by him
alleged. Who would not think that there were some gross ouersights committed
by Me, in these passages, upon such an outcrie? Wherefore, let us consider
the several parts of this his exception against Me.

First, he says, the Bishop of Constantinople was not preferred before the
other two Patriarchs, of Alexandria and Antioch, and set in degree of honor
next unto the Bishop of Rome, in the first Council of Constantinople, as I
have said; and that I say untruly, when I say he was. Let us therefore, hear
the words of the Canon it self, and then let the Reader judge between us.
The words of the third Canon of that Council are these; Constantinopolitanus
Episcopus obtineat praecipuum honorem ac dignitatem, secundum ac post Episcopum
Romanum, ideo quod Constantinopolis noua Roma est, that is: Let the Bishop of
Constantinople, have the chiefest honor and dignity after the Bishop of
Rome, because Constantinople is new Rome. If the words of the Canon suffice not
to justify my assertion, let us hear the Treatiser himself; in the same page
he cites these words of the Bishops assembled in the Council of Chalcedon,
in their Synodall Epistle to Leo Bishop of Rome: We have confirmed the rule
of the hundred and fifty holy Fathers, which were gathered together at
Constantinople, under Theodosius of happy memory, which commanded, that the Sea of Constantinople which is ordained the second, and to have second honor
after your most holy and Apostolic See, etc. Is not here as much said as I
have written? Did not the holy Fathers, assembled at Constantinople, decree,
that the Bishop of Constantinople, shall be preferred before the Bishops
of Alexandria and Antioch, and set in degree of honor next unto the Bishop
of Rome? and do not the Fathers in the Council of Chalcedon say they decreed
so? Have all these holy Fathers committed notorious untruths to the Print and
view of the world? It is well the Treatiser concealed his name, for otherwise
he must have heard further from Me.

But happily I mis-reported the Council of Chalcedon when I said that in that
Council, the Bishop of Constantinople, was made equal with the Bishop of
Rome, and to have equal rights, privileges, and prerogatives, because he was
Bishop of new Rome, as the other of old. Let us therefore hear the words of
the Bishops assembled in that Council. The Synodus Chalcedon. actio. 16.
Fathers, say the Bishops of that Council, did rightly give preeminences, and
privileges, to the Throne of old Rome, because that ^ittie was Lady and
mistress of the world, and the hundred and fifty Bishops, most dee^ely beloved
of God, moved with the same respect, gave equal preeminences, and privileges
to the most holy throne of New Rome, thinking it reasonable that that City
honored with the inperiall seat, and Senate, and enjoying equal
preeminences, and privileges, with the elder Princely city, should be made
great as the other, in ecclesiastical affairs, being second after it. Out of
this decree, De primatu Papae. lib. 2.
Nilus, in his book of the Primacie of the Pope, observes first, that in the
judgment of these holy Bishops, the Pope has the primacie from the Fathers,
and not from the Apostles. Secondly, that he has it in respect of the
greatness of his City, being the seat of the Empire, and not by reason of
his succeding Peter, which utterly overthrows the Papacy. And therefore this
good man, after all this outery raised against Me, as if I had Page 123.
mis-reported the Council, is forced to deny the authority of the Canon, as
not being confirmed by the Bishop of Rome. See then how he demeaneth
himself. First, he urges, that the Bishop of new Rome, or Constantinople,
could not have equal privileges with the Bishop of old Rome; because he
was to be second, and next after him; where-unto Nilus answers, that if that
reason did hold, the Bishop of Alexandria, could not be equal to the
Bishop of Constantinople in power and authority: nor the Bishop of Antioch
unto him: one of these being after another in order and honor: and thence
concludes, that if the Bishop of Antioch, might be equal to the Bishop of
Alexandria, and the Bishop of Alexandria to the Bishop of Constantinople,
notwithstanding the placing of one of them, in order and honor, before
another, the Bishop of Constantinople might be equal to the Bishop of
Rome, though he were the second and next after him. So that, that which this
Treatiser alleges, that by the confession of these Fathers, the Bishop of
Rome had always the Primacy, is to no purpose; seeing the Primacie he had was
but of order and honor, which may be yielded to one amongst them that are
equal in power; in which sense the Bishops assembled in the Council of
Chalcedon, in their relation to Pope Leo, call him their head. Secondly, he
confesses, it may be gathered out of some Greek copies of this Council (he
might have said, out of all copies, Greek and Latin) that by this Canon, the
Bishop of new Rome, or Constantinople, was so made second, after the Bishop of
old Rome, that equal privileges were given unto him. But adds, that they
were only concerning jurisdiction, to ordain certain Metropolitans of the
East Church, as the Bishop of Rome had the like in the West: which evasion
serves not the turn. For the Bishops in this Council, supposing that the
reason why the Fathers gave the preeminence to the Bishop of Rome, was the
greatness of the City, do the upon give him the like preheminences. So that
they meant to make him equal generally, and not in some particular things
only. Besides, if they did equal him in jurisdiction, and in the ordination
and confirmation of Metropolitans, it will follow, that they equalled him
simply, and absolutely. For in the power of Order, there can be noe
inequality between him and any other Bishop. Thirdly, he says, That the
Canon of this Councellis of no authority: and the like he must say of the
Canons of the first Council of Constantinople, and that in Trulto, and so
bear down all that stands in his way, as In notis in conc. Chalced.
Binnius, and other of his fellows do, who fear not to charge these holy
Fathers and Bishops, with lying and falsehood. But how does he prove that this
Canon is of no authority? Surely, the only reason he brings, is, because the
Legates of the Bishop of Rome, resisted against it, and the Bishop himself
never confirmed it, which is of little force. For we know, that notwithstanding
the long continued resistance of the Roman Bishops, yet in the end they were
forced to give way to this constitution. So that after the time of Novella 100.
Justinian the Emperor, who confirmed the same, they never made any word about
it any more. The words of Justinians confirmation are these. We ordain,
according to the decrees of the holy Councels, that the most holy Bishop of
old Rome, shall be the first of all Bishops: And the most blessed Bishop of
Constantinople, which is new Rome, shall have the second place after the Sea of
old Rome, and shall be before all the rest in order and honor. Neither did
Martian the Emperor, as the Treatiser most untruly avoucheth, void the
Canons of these Councels, which in this sort were confirmed afterward by
Justinian. Wherefore seeing it is evident, that almost the whole Christian
world, in diverse General Councels, feared not to make another Bishop, the
Bishop of Romes Peer: I hope the Reader will easily discern, that I have not
passed the bounds of modesty, nor fallen into any unseemly scoffing and
railing vain, as the Treatiser charge M^, when I tax the Antichristian and
Lucifer-like pride of the Romish Antichrist, who, not-with-standing the
contradiction of the greatest part of the Christian world, sought to subject
all the members of Christ to himself; and pronounced them all to be in the
state of damnation, that bow not down before him as Vice-God, and supreme
commander on earth. But, it seems, he had a great desire, at the least to
seem to say something against Me. For other-wise he would not so shamelesly
be-lye Me, as he does, when he says: I would derive the beginning of the Page
1^9
Popes superiority from Phocas, whereas in the place cited by him, I have no
such thing, but the contrary. For I affirm, that in the first Council of
Constantinople, the Bishop of that city was set in degree of honor next unto
the Bishop of Rome, and before the other two Patriarchs of Alexandria and
Antioche, thereby confessing. that the Bishop of Rome had the first place at
that time: Which when the Constantinopolitan Bishop sought to have, Phocas so
concluded matters between these two Bishops, that the Bishop of Rome should
have the first and chief place in the church of GOD, and Constantinople the
second; so that the praeeminence and chieftie which the Pope claims lawfully,
was ancient, and not derived from Phocas, howsoever he might, and happily did
enlarge and extend it farther then was fit, giving him a kind of universality
of jurisdiction.

. 11.
FRom the Primacie of the Bishop of Rome, the Treatiser passes to the
infallibility of his judgment, and affirms that his Decrees, though he
define without a General Page 1^9
Council, are that firm Rock, and sure ground, upon which our Faith is to
be builded; and that a man may well admit his definitions, as a ground of
supernatural Faith; and prudently build an act of such supernatural Faith
upon it. And yet in the same place confesses, it is not yet authentically
defined, that the Pope, in this sort, cannot err. Which thing also De Romans
Pont. l. 4. c. 2.
Bellarmine, and Relect. contr. (...). q. 4.
Stapleton acknowledge, professing expressly, that it is no matter of faith,
to believe that the Pope cannot err, if he define without a General
Council: In which passages there is, as I suppose, a most gross
contradiction. For how can the infallibility of the Popes judgment be to
them a Rock to build an act of supernatural Faith upon, who neither know nor
believe, that his judgment is infallible, but think so only. Can a man
certainly and undoubtedly build his persuasion of any thing upon his sayings,
whom he neither knows, nor believes to be free from error. Wherefore,
for the clearing of this point: First the Treatiser says; Though the Church
have not authentically defined, that the Pope cannot err, yet the Scriptures,
and other arguments, brought to prove it, are so plain, and there are so many
that think so, that a man may very well admit his definitions to be a ground
of faith. Whence it will follow, that a man may build his faith upon the
Scriptures, and other arguments and reasons, without expecting the resolution
of the Church, for the understanding of the one, and discerning of the force
and validity of the other. ^ Whereas elsewhere he professes, that without
the resolution of the present Church, the letter of holy Scripture, and the
works of Antiquity, yield no certain Part. 1. 56.
and divine argument. Secondly, he contradicts himself, and denies the
supposed infallibility of the Popes judgment, to be the Rock, on which the
Church is builded, and makes that rock to be only the consenting judgment
of the Pope, and other Bishops in a General Council; contrary to the
opinion of almost all learned and pious men, as he tells us himself, who
think that that infallibility of judgment, and assurance of truth, upon which
our faith is to be builded, is not partly in the Pope, and partly in other
Bishops, but altogether in the Pope. Thus seeking to avoid one contradiction,
he runs into many.

The second Part.
. 1.
Having surueyed the first part of the Treatise, and examined such objections
as the Author of it makes against Me, I will pass to the second; wherein
first he goes about to prove out of that which I have, that Bishops assembled
in General Page 35.
Councels may interpret the Scriptures, and by their authority, suppress them
that gainsay such interpretations, as they consent upon, subjecting them to
excommunication, and censures of like nature; that according to the providence
and wisdom of Almighty God, General Councels should not be subject to error,
in such matters; for that otherwise men might be forced according to Gods
ordinance, to obey General Councels, erring and propounding false Doctrine.
Which is a very silly kind of reasoning; for in the very same sort, a man may
prove that particular Bishops are free from erring in their proceedings, and
that they can impose and prescribe nothing unjustly, under pain of
excommunication, for that otherwise men might be forced, and that according to
Gods ordinance, to obey such Bishops, erring in their proceedings, and
commanding unjust things, whereas there is no question to be made, but that
they have power to excommunicate, who may abuse the same; and that sometimes it
is a thing most pleasing unto God, by refusing to obey them that have power to
excommunicate, but abuse the same, to run into the uttermost extremities of
their censures; yea De vera religione, cap: 6.
S. Augustine pronounces, that the patient enduring of wrongs, in this kind,
shall be highly rewarded by almighty God.

Secondly, in the same chapter laboring to prove, that Protestants contemn
and reject the Fathers, and to that purpose wresting some sayings of Doctor
Humfry and others, Page 40.
he objecteth, that I happily may seem to some one, that does not thoroughly look
into my words, to approve the authority of the ancient Fathers, as far forth
as any Catholic; but says, that in truth I do not. For proof whereof he
sets down, what I have written touching this point: Namely, first, that we
must receive as true, whatsoever has been delivered by all the Saints with
one consent, which have left their opinion and judgment in writing; it not
being possible, that they should all have written of any thing, but that which
was generally received in their times, and touches the very life of Christian
faith. Secondly, whatsoever the most famous have constantly and uniformly
delivered, as a matter of faith, no man contradicting them, though many be
found to have said nothing of it. Thirdly, whatsoever the most famous in every
age have constantly delivered, as matter of faith, and received from them that
went before them, in such sort that the gainsayers were in their beginnings
noted for singularity, nouelty, and division, and in process of time if they
persisted in such contradiction, charged with heresy: which is as much as any
Papist does say. And then instead of showing, that I attribute not so much to
the Fathers as I should do, or as Papists do; he turns himself to show,
that such consent of Fathers, as I speak of, is no sure direction for the
finding out of the truth. So ouer-throwing all that which his own Divines
have delivered touching this point. But yet that he may seem to say something
to the purpose, he goes about to prove, that I bereave the Fathers almost of
all authority. First, in that I reject their testimonies touching all other
matters, but only certain principal and substantial points. Secondly, in
that I require such a general consent, as can hardly be found, touching such
principal points. Thirdly, in that I make the whole Church subject to error.
For answer unto these Allegations, I say; The first is a shameless untruth.
For I do not limitte, or restrain, the consent of the Fathers, to certain
principal or substantial points, as he mis-reporteth Me: but make the same
to be a direction in all things that may be clearly deduced from the rule of
faith, and word of divine and heavenly truth, answerably to that of Contra
prophanas haereseon. nouationes cap. 39.
Vincentius Lyrinensis, that the consent of holy Fathers is with great study
and care to be sought out, and followed by us, not in all petite questions,
that may be moved, concerning the Divine law, but only, or at the least
specially, in things pertaining to the rule of Faith; with whom In Genes. lib.
7. quaest. 7.
Pererius agrees. To the second I say, that I require no other consent of
Fathers then Vincentius Lyrinensis does: who will have us only to follow that
doctrine of the Fathers, as certain, which all with one consent have holden,
written, and taught, that have written of such things. Neither does this
worthy Treatiser, admit any other consent then I require, for in this same
chapter, he has these words. They will object that every one of the Fathers
was subject to error. I confess it: but yet God according to his promise, as
I have above declared, was so to direct and govern them, that they should not
all err. This consent of the Fathers we make to be a Rule of direction: but
yet not so generally and absolutely, as if truth could not at any time be found
out without it, but so that we must not neglect the knowledge of it, nor go
against it when we know it. Neither is it necessary for the knowledge hereof,
as the Treatiser obiecteth, to read over all the Fathers: for the constant
concurrence of the principal in all ages, without noted contradiction, does
suffice to assure us of such consent. The third allegation is partly untrue,
and partly inconsequent: it is untrue, in that he says, I think all the
Pastors of the present Church may err in matters of greatest moment. It is
inco^seque^t, because though the whole present Church may err in some things,
not pertaining to the rule of faith, and General Councels, in matters of
greatest consequence; yet it follows not, that the Fathers of all times and
places may be thought to have erred, seeing this succession of Fathers is of
greater authority then the company of Pastors that now are. Neither is it
consequent, that if error may possess the greatest part, or almost all the
present Church, that it may be Catholic also, and so found every where, and
ever. The former, Cap. 6.
Vincentius Lyrinensis yields to be possible, but disclaimeth the latter:
and therefore prescribes, that if error creep into one part of the Church,
we should look unto other; that if it endeavor to stain and defile all, we
should look up higher unto antiquity; and that if some have erred amongst the
Ancient, we should look what all not no^d for singularity, did teach.

. 2.
WHerefore let us proceed to that which follows in the next place: first he
reports what I have written touching the ground of that persuasion, which we
have of the truth of things contained in Scripture, and then takes
exceptions to it. In the report, first he says, that I make the principal
cause of our belief of things contained in the books of holy Scripture, to
be the habit or light of faith. Secondly, that besides the habit or light of
faith, I require reasons or motives, by force whereof the spirit of God may
settle the mind of a man in the persuasion of the truth of things contained in
Scripture, that might otherwise be doubted of. Thirdly, that I make this motive
or reason in some things to be the evidence of the things themselves in the
light of grace: in other not so evident unto us, the authority of God himself,
whom we do most certainly discern to speak in the word of Faith preached
unto us. These things I confess are delivered by Me, and rightly collected by
him out of that which I have written. Yet does he wrong some other of the same
judgment with Me, touching this point, in that he says untruly, they reject
all supernatural habits, and so goes about to make a difference between them
and Me, in this respect, whereas in truth and in deed there is none. But what
is that the good man does or can dislike in this my discourse? First, he
undertakes to prove, that neither the evidence of the things contained in
Scriptures in themselves, presupposing the Page 54.
light of grace, nor the authority of God himself, discerned to speak, can
be sufficient motives whereby the spirit of God may settle us in the persuasion
of the truth of such things as are therein contained. Whereas yet I think, if
he were asked what the motives are, by force whereof the spirit does effect
this work, if these be not, he would not easily give any answer: but how does
he demo^strate the insufficiency of these motives? Surely very weakly, and
insufficiently. For first, thus he reasons against them: if these motives
were of sufficiency, every one enlightened by the light of grace, should by
virtue of them be persuaded of the Heavenly Truth of all such things as are
contained in the books of God: which is a very bad inference. For by the like
kind of reasoning it may be proved, that the evidence of things in the light
of nature, is not the motive or inducement that causes our persuasion touching
such things as are known in natural knowledge, because all that have the
light of natural reason, are not rightly persuaded concerning all such things:
which no wise man will allow. So that as it is not to be imputed to the defect
of evidence in the things that are to be known in natural knowledge, which
should settle the persuasion, that all men are not rightly persuaded of the^;
but to the defect of the light of natural reason found in the^, or the want of
due consideration and right proceeding in the searching out of such things as
are so to be known: so likewise it is not to be imputed to the want of evidence
of the truth of the things, or at least of Gods speaking in the word of
Heavenly Truth, that all men believe not all the books that are divine and
canonical, and the things contained in the^, but to thedefect of spiritual
light in the^ that should discern such things, or the want of due
consideration and right proceeding in the searching out of such things.
Secondly, he labors to prove, that none of the articles Page 5
of faith, or things believed by us, are evident unto us in the light offaith,
whereas yet notwithstanding In sententii^.
Hugo de sancto Victore says expressly, that in some the light of divine reason
causes approbation of that they believe: and that in other the purity of the
heart and conscience causes a fore-tasting of those things which hereafter
more fully shall be enjoyed. And Summae theol. memb. 4. art. 2.
Alexander of Ales pronounces, that the things apprehended by us in divine
knowledge, are more certainly discerned by such as are spiritual in the
certainty of experience, in the certainty, which is in respect of affection,
and by way of spiritual taste and feeling, then any thing is discerned in the
light of natural understanding, according to that of the Prophet, Psalm. 11^.
How sweet are thy words O Lord unto my mouth, they are sweeter then the honey
and the honey comb. Wherefore, that we may the more distinctly conceive these
things, we must observe, that there are some things which though without
revelation we could not know, yet, after they are revealed are evident unto us
in the light of grace. As first, that the defects and evils that are found in
the nature of man, the blindness of his understanding, the way wardnes of his
affections, and perverse inclination of his will, were not from the beginning;
that having been in all the sons of men, the first parents of mankind fell
from their original and primitive estate; and that seeing these evils are
found in all, even in little infants newborn, the propagation of them is
natural, and not by imitation. Secondly, that the very inclinations of our
hearts, being naturally evil, in this corrupt state of nature, nothing can
change them to good, but GOD by a special work, above, and beyond the course
of Nature, which therefore may rightly be named grace. Other things there are,
which are discerned by spiritual taste and feeling, as the remission of
sins, the joy and exultation of heart that is there found where God is
present in grace. And a third sort of things there are, which being not
discerned to be true, either of these two ways, are believed notwithstanding
because delivered unto us by God, whom we discern to speak in the word of
heavenly truth. So that the two former sorts of things are evident in
themselves to them that are spiritual, the latter in respect of that Medium,
by force whereof they are believed, which is Divine authority delivering them
unto us; which thing Erudit. theolog. de sacramentis. fidei. li: 1. part. 3.
ca. 1. 2.
Hugo de Sancto Victore, excellently expresses. Credit fides (says he) quod
non vidit, and non vidit quod credit; vidit tamen aliquid per quod admonita
est, and excitata credere quod non vidit. Deus sic ab initio notitiam sui ab
homine temperauit, vt sicut nunquam quid esset totum poterat comprehendi, sic
quod esset, nunquam prorsus posset ignorari. Oportuit vt proderet se occultum
Deus ne totus celaretur, and propsus nesciretur, and rursum ad aliquid proditum
se and agnitum occultaret ne totus manifestaretur, vt aliquid esset quod cor
hominis enutriret cognitum, and rursus aliquid quod absconditum prouocaret:
That is, Faith believes that it never saw, and it never saw that which it does
believe, yet it saw something, by which it was admonished and stirred up to
believe that which it saw not. God from the beginning did so temper the
revealing of himself to be known of men, that as it could never be wholly
comprehended what he was, so it might never be altogether unknown that he was.
It was fit therefore that God should manifest himself formerly hid, that he
might not be wholly hidden, and no knowledge had of him: and again, that
having in some sort revealed and made himself known, he should so hide
himself, as not wholly to be manifested; that there might be something which
being known, might nourish the heart of man; and again something, which being
hid, might provoke and stir men up to a desire of attayning some farther
thing.

These things, it seems the Treatiser thought not of, and therefore denies
that there is any motive, sufficient to make a man believe the articles of the
faith, setting Page 55.
aside the mean supernatural, by which they are propounded: and thereupon
asks Page 56.
Me, what makes Me believe the articles of the Trinity, the two distinct
natures in Christ in the Unity of the same person, and the resurrection of the
dead? Whereunto I answer that the thing that moves me so to believe, is the
authority of the Scripture, which is the Word of God, and that I believe it to
be the Word of God, because I do most certainly discern him to speak in
the same; and a certain divine force and Majesty to present it self unto Me,
though the profane Treatiser professes Page 56.
he knows not what that authority and Majesty of God is, which is discerned
in the sacred Scriptures, nor how we discern it, which is not to be
marvayled at, seeing blind men cannot discern the difference of colors; but
that there is something more then humane discernable in the Scripture, all
devout and religious men will acknowledge with us. Believe Me, says Picus
Mirandula, there lies hid in the Scripture a secret virtue, strangely
altering and changing them, that in due sort are conversant in the same. So
that the reason that all do not discern the Majesty of God, in all books
that are divine, and that some doubt of such as other admit, is not because
such a divine power is not discernable in them, but because there is some
defect in the parties not discerning the same.

To the former most weak reasons, brought to prove the insufficiency of those
inducements, or reasons, by which we think the Spirit of GOD setleth us in a
persuasion of the truth of things contained in the Scripture. First, he
adds an untruth, to wit, that I deny those parts of Scripture, which
rehearse matters of fact to be known to be divine by the authority of God
himself, discerned to speak in the Word of faith. And secondly, an objection
that men cannot know the Scripture to be divine, by discerning the Majesty of
God, speaking in them, unless they read, or hear every part of them read
over, which is very hard to be done by every one. Whereunto we answer
according to their own grounds, that those parts of divine and canonical
Scripture which particularly we have not read, or considered, are only
implicit and vertually believed of us, as likewise, the things that are
contained in them: neither should this seem strange to the Romanists; for they
think it pertayneth to the faith of each Christian man to believe all the
books of holy Scripture to be undoubtedly true, and indicted by the Spirit of
God. Yet are there many amongst them, that neither know how many, nor which
these books are; but believe them vertually only; as it appertains to the
faith, to believe that Jesus, Mary, and Joseph fled into Egypt, and that
Paul mediated for the reconciling of Onesimus to Philemon; but it is
sufficient, for men that never read or considered these particulars, to believe
them vertually. Thirdly, he charge us with contrariety in our sayings, in
that we make the Scripture to be the ground, and rule of our faith, and yet
make the light of faith a mean whereby we come to the knowledge of Scripture:
because, as he thinks, the Scripture cannot be a rule of our faith, unless
it be certainly known to be divine, before we believe. But the good man
should know that the Scripture may be the rule of our faith, directing us
touching such particular things as we are to believe, though it be not known
to be divine before we believe. For first, God gives us the eyes of faith,
and opens our understandings, that we may see and discern in general,
heavenly truth to be contained in Scripture; and then it becomes a rule of
direction in all particular points of faith. Fourthly, he imputes to us, that
we rely upon illuminations and inspirations in the things Page 61.
we believe, as if we believed them without any other proof or
demonstration, upon bare imagined inspirations; whereas we believe nothing
without such proofs, and motives as all men may take notice of; and yet know
right well, that none do make right use thereof, but such as have their
understandings enlightened. So that his reasoning against the certainty of this
illumination is idle, seeing we do not make illumination or inspiration the
ground of our persuasion touching things to be believed; but a disposition of
the mind making us capable of the apprehension of things that are divine and
heavenly. This illumination is in some more, and in some less; but in all the
chosen servants of God, such as suffices for the discerning of all saving
truth, necessary to be known of each man according to his estate and
condition. Fifthly, besides idle repetition of things going before, to which
he refers himself; and some untruths mingled with the same. First, he
charge Me, that I am contrary to my self, in delivering the opinions of
Papists. The first supposed contradiction is, in that I affirm, that it is the
ordinary opinion of Papists, that the articles of faith are believed, because
God reuealeth them, and yet say in another place, that they make the authority
of the Church the rule of our faith, and reason why we believe. The second, in
that I charge the Papists in one place that they give authority to the Church
to make new articles of faith, and in another place free them from the same.
This latter supposed contrariety I showed before to be none at all but in the
Treatisers imagination only, and touching the first, if he were a man of any
common understanding, or knew what contrariety is, he would not charge Me
with any such thing. For it is true, that all Papists think the articles of
faith are to be believed, because revealed; but they think also that we know
not that they are revealed, but believe so only, and that not by reason of any
divine revelation, testimony, or authority, but because the Church so tells
us, and we have many humane inducements moving us so to persuade our selves.
So that they make the authority of the Church and humane inducements the last
and final reason of believing whatsoever they believe. This the Treatiser knew
well enough, and therefore he requires Me to Page 65.
show how I know that God reuealeth the things believed by Christians; If I
will not fall into the same fault for which I blame them. Whereunto I answer,
that I know the Scriptures to be inspired of God by the divine force and
majesty that shows it self in them; in which sense I say the books of
Scripture win credit of themselves; and yield sufficient satisfaction to all
men of their divine truth. For as the color in each thing makes it visible
and to be seen; so the divine power and virtue that shows it self in the
Scripture makes us to believe that it is of God. But the Treatiser will not
thus leave Me, but still goes on, adding one unjust imputation to another.
For whereas we say only, the Scriptures are not discerned to be divine and
inspired of Page 66
God, unless we be enlightened by grace, and not that they are proved to be
divine by the certainty of that illumination: he makes us whether we will, or
not, to prove the Scriptures by our inspirations, and that we are inspired by
the Scriptures: whereas we prove neither the one nor the other of these things
in any such sort. For touching the Scripture, I have sufficiently showed
before, how we know it to be divine; and for the other, the Treatiser should
know, that we do not prove by Scripture, that we are divinely enlightened and
inspired, but that as natural reason has a direct act whereby she
apprehends things without, and a reflexed act, whereby taking a view of the
former direct acts she finds out her self: so the light of Faith first
discovers Heavenly verities in the Scripture, such as natural reason could
never find out, and then by reflection finds it self to be of another nature
and kind then that rational understanding that was before. Wherefore let us
go forward. Did not mine eyes see, and my hands handle the palpable
absurdities of this Treatiser, I would not believe any man's report, that one so
void of all sense and reason as he every way shows himself to be, should be
permitted to write. For whereas I bring a most clear sentence out of Augustine
to prove, that howsoever the authority of the Church serve as an introduction
to bring us to the spiritual discerning of divine things, yet men rest not in
it: he answers, that Augustine in the chapter cited by Me, affirms only,
that because all men are not capable at first to understand the sincere wisdom
and truth taught in the church, God has ordained in it a motive which may
first move them to seek it; to wit the Page 66.
authority of the Church, which partly through miracles, partly through
multitudes is of force to move: which no way takes any thing from, but rather
adds strength to my proofs: for if these motives be necessary only at the
first before men be purged and made pure in heart, that they may discern and
see the light of heavenly truth, it is evident that in Augustines judgment the
authority of the Church serves but as an introduction, and that the thing
which right believers rest upon, is of a higher nature, to wit the discerning
of heavenly truth. Wherefore finding himself too weak to give any substantial
answer, he betaketh himself to a most silly exception, pretending that I have
not truly translated these words of Augustine: praesto est authoritas, qua^
partim miraculis, partim multitudine valere nemo ambigit; authority is ready
at handwhich stands upon 2 things, the one the greatness of miracles done, the
other multitude. Is this a false translation, has the authority of the church
that force which it has, to move me^ to believe, partly by reason of miracles,
and partly by reason of multitude, and may it not be truly said, that it
stands partly upon the greatness of miracles wrought, and partly upon
multitudes? but valere does not signify to stand upon: it is true, it does
not: yet what boy in the Gra^mer School will not laugh at him for thus
childishly demeaning himself: for what man of understanding would call men to
co^ster every word precisely, as it imports, by it self, without
consideration of the coherence it has with other in the same sentence. Besides
this place of Aug. there is another cited by Me out of Hugo, where he makes 3
sorts of believers, whereof the first are such as are moved out of piety to
believe, which yet discern not by reason whether the things they believe are
to be believed or not. The second, such, who by reason approve that which by
faith they believe. The third sort are such as by reason of the purity of their
heart and conscience, begin inwardly to taste what by faith they believe. This
place makes strongly for the confirmation of that I say, that the evidence of
sundry things in the light of faith and grace, is that formal reason which
assures us of the truth of them. For here Hugo affirms, that the best sort
of believers do approve by reason, or by taste inwardly discern the things
they believe to be true. So that such approbation, or spiritual taste, is the
reason of their persuasion of the truth of these things. To this authority the
Treatiser has nothing to say, but that it makes nothing to the purpose, and
that if I Page 67
meant to translate the words of Hugo, I have not exactly translated the^.
Whether the saying of Hugo be to the purpose or not, I will leave it to the
judgment of the Reader: but as for his other exception, I would have him
know, and any sensible Reader will very easily discern, that I meant not
exactlie to translate his words, but at large to set down the intent and
driftes of them, which I have most truly performed: and therefore he does Me
wrong when he says, I deal corruptly and untruly. In the third place he
endeavors to make his Reader believe there is a contrariety between Me and
Luther and Brentius; in that Luther, with whom Brentius seems to agree,
makes the Scripture to be of it self a most certain, most easy, and most
manifest interpreter of it self, proving, judging, and enlightening all things;
and I acknowledge many difficulties in it. But if the Treatiser had been
pleased to have taken things aright, he could not but have seen that Luther
also acknowledges manifold difficulties in the Scripture (yea he does see it
and acknowledge it, and yet will not see it) and therefore that he be not
contrary to himself, when he affirms that the Scriptures are easy,
interpret themselves, and judge, and enlighten all things, he must be
understood to mean, that notwithstanding some difficulties, they are not so
obscure and hard as that Heretics may wrest and abuse them at their pleasure,
and noe man be able to convince them, out of the evidence of those sacred
writings, as the Romanistes imagine, but that we may be so assured out of the
Scripture it self, and the nature of the things therein contained, that we
have the true meaning of it, that we need not altogether to rest in the
authority of Church: which explication of Luthers words, the Treatiser might
have found in the place cited by him, if he had Luth. praefat. in dissert.
art. a Leone. 10. damnatorum.
been pleased, and so have omitted the urging of this imagined contradiction.

. 3.
The 4. thing that he proposes which concerns me, is that I mention a rule
of faith according Page 82.
to which the Scriptures are to be interpreted, which if we neglect, al other
considerations are insufficient, and the like he alleges out of the Harmony
of confessions, whence he infers that we admit another guide in interpreting
the Scripture, besides the letter of the Scripture. But he should know, that
the rule of faith mentioned by me, delivered to us from hand to hand by the
guides of Gods Church, contains nothing in it but that which is found in
Scripture, either expressly or by necessary implication, so that though we
admit another guide in the interpretation of of Scripture, besides the bare
letter, yet we admit noe other but that form of Christian doctrine, which
all right believing Christians taught by the Apostles, and Apostolic men,
have ever received as contained in the Scripture, and thence collected. To this
he adds an excellent observation, which is, that I seem to confess, page
109.
that Saint Paul sometimes by the works of the Law understands the works of
the Law of Moses, in that I say, that that Apostle pronounces that the
Galathians were bewitched, and that if they still persisted to join
circumcision and the works of the Law with Christ, they were fallen from
grace, and Christ could profit them nothing. But he needed not thus to mince
the matter, for I willingly confess, that Paul not sometimes only, but ever
understands by the works of the Law, the works of Moses Law. Neither can
there any thing be inferred thence for the Papists, or against us. For whereas
by the works of the Law some understand those works which the ceremonial
Law prescribed: other such as the moral Law requires: and and a third sort,
such as by terror it works in men, or causes them to work, without any
change of the heart (which cannot be wrought but only by grace:) and the
Papists think that when the Apostle says we are justified by faith without
works, he excludes not such works as the Moral Law requires, but such as
the ceremonial Law prescribes, and the moral Law works in men: we teach,
that he excludes all these. So that a man repenting and believing, may be
saved, though having never done any good work, he be taken out of this world
before he can do any. It is true indeed, that good works do necessarily
follow justification, if time do serve, and opportunity be offered: yet are
they no meritorious causes of salvation.

But the Treatiser will prove out of that which I have written, that they are
meritorious, and that faith only does not justify: that good works are
meritorious, he endeavors Page 110.
to prove, because I confess, that men justified freely by grace, are crowned
in the world to come, for that new obedience that is found in the^ after
justification. But this consequence I suppose will not be thought good, seeing,
as Consult^i. art. 6.
Cassander rightly notethout of Bucer, God in respect of good works, or having
an eye to the^, or for good works, gives not only temporal but eternal
rewards; not for the worthiness of the works in themselves, but out of his
own grace for the merit of Christ, first working such good works in them that
are his, and then crowning his own works in them, as Augustine long since
aptly observed. Let us see therefore if he can prove any better, that faith
only does not justify; this he undertakes to do out of that which I have
written, that justification implies in it faith, hope, and charity. But for
the clearing of this point, let him be pleased to observe, that by the name of
justification sometimes nothing is meant, but an adiudging of eternal life
unto us: sometimes the whole translation of a man out of the state of sin and
wrath, into a state of righteousness and acceptance with God, which implies
in it sundry things concurring in Vide Antididag. Col^n. de iustificatione and
causis per quas iustificamur.
very different sort, without any prejudice to the singular prerogative of
faith. For first, it implies in it a work of almighty God, as the supreme
and highest cause. Secondly, the merits of Christ, as the means whereby God is
reconciled, and induced to take us into his favor. Thirdly, in him that is to
be justified, a certain persuasion of the truth of such things as are
contained in the holy word of God. Fourthly, motions of fear, contrition, hope
of mercy, and the like works of preparing grace, as causes disposing and
fitting him that is to be justified, that he may be capable of Gods favor.
Fifthly, as the susceptiue cause, an act of faith, by which a man truly
repenting of former evils, and seeking deliverance, without all doubting
firmly believes, that all his sins are remitted him for Christ's sake.
Lastly, an infusion of the habit of divine and heavenly virtues, as a
beginning of that life of God, to which he does adiudge them whom he receives
to favor. So that my saying, that justification thus taken, implies in it,
Faith, Hope, and Charity, contrarieth not our position, Page 113.
that faith only justifies, in sort before expressed: which the Treatiser
knowing right well, insisteth no longer upon this cavil, but passes to an
untruth, charging Me that I say of S. Augustine (whom yet I pronounce to have
been the greatest of all the Fathers, and the worthiest Divine the Church of
God ever had since the Apostles times) that his manner of delivering the
Article of Justification, is not full, perfect, and exact; as if I imputed some
fault to him in not delivering the point of justification as it became him:
whereas I have no such thing, but say only, that his manner of delivering that
Article was not so full, perfect, and exact, as we are forced to require in
these times against the errors of the Romanists; in which saying, I no way
blame that worthy Father, but show that new errors require a more exact manner
of handling of things then was necessary before such errors sprung up;
which I think, no wise man will deny, and am well assured this Treatiser
cannot deny, unless he will be contrary to himself. For he says
expressly, that Saint Augustine, before some articles of Christian Religion
were so thoroughly discussed and defined in the Church, Page 8^.
as afterward upon the rising of new heresies, spoke not so aptly and properly
as was needful in succeeding times, and therefore retracted some things which
he had formerly uttered. So that the Reader will easily find, that in this
passage he has said less then nothing; neither will his next discourse be
found any better, wherein he laboreth to show a contrariety between Me, and
Luther, Calvin, and others, in that I make Page 114.
that act of faith, which obtayneth and procures our justification, to be an
act by way of petition, humbly entreating for acceptance and favor; and not
of comfortable assurance, consisting in a full persuasion, that through Christ's
merits we are the children of God; Whereas Luther, Calvin, and the rest, make
justifying faith to be an assured persuasion, that through Christ's merits we
are the sons of God. But the Treatiser might easily know if he were
disposed, that according to our opinion justifying faith has some acts, as a
cause disposing, preparing, and fitting us to the receipt of that gracious
favor, whereby God does justify us; and other, as a susceptiue cause,
receiving, embracing and enjoying the same; in the former respect neither they
nor I make faith to consist in a persuasion that we are the sons of God; in
the latter we both do, and so agree well enough, though the Treatiser, it
seems, could wish it were otherwise.

. 4.
WHerefore let us go forward, and take a view of that which follows. The
next thing which he has that concerns Me, is, that it may be gathered out
of my assertions in my Third Book of the Church, that I think (as he says,
some other also do) that it is no fundamental point of doctrine, but a thing
indifferent to believe, or not to believe the real, that is, the local
presence of CHRIST'S Body in the Sacrament. But I am well assured there can no
such thing be gathered out of any of the places cited by him, unless it be
lawful for him to reason a baculo ad angulum, as often as he does. For in the
pages 120, and 121, of his second part, because I confess, that in the
Primitive Church the manner of some was to receive the Sacrament in the
public assembly, and not be partakers of it presently, but to carry it home,
that the Sacrament was carried by the Deacons to the sick, that in places
where they communicated every day, there was a reservation of some parts of the
sanctified Elements, and that the sanctified Elements thus reserved in
reference to an ensuing receiving of them, were the body of Christ, to wit, in
mystery and exhibitiue signification: he goes about to conclude, that I must
needs confess the real, that is, the local presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament: which consequence is no better then if a man should go about to
conclude, that this Treatiser has written a good and profitable book, because
he has troubled the world with one, such as it is, full of vain, idle, and
empty discourses: whereof if any man make doubt, let him consider but the very
next words. For, whereas I confessed Calvines dislike of the reservation
aunciently used, and yet said, it cannot be proved that he denied the
Sacramental elements, consecrated and reserved for a time in reference to an
ensuing receiving of them, to be Sacramentally the body of Christ; he says,
I labor in vain; because Calvin does expressly condemn these reseruations,
which I confessed before; but no way goes about to make good the consequence
which I denied, to wit, that therefore he thought the sanctified elements so
reserved, not to be Sacramentally the Body of Christ. For that which he has,
that Calvin, Bucer, Melanchthon, and almost all Protestants hold the
Eucharist to be no permanent thing, but to be the Sacrament only when it is
received, has no more force of proof then the rest of his frivolous
discourses; seeing it is most evident that the Protestants named by him have no
such meaning, that the sanctified elements in the Holy Eucharist, are no
Sacrament, but precisely in the very receiving of them, for then they should
be no Sacrament in the hand of the Minister, and on the Holy Table, but only
in the hand or mouth of the communicant, but that they are no Sacrament but in
reference to the use to which they were appointed by Almighty God, as I have
showed at large in the place against which this Treatiser quarrelleth.

. 5.
LEt us therefore proceed to see what he has more to say. In my Fourth book,
writing of the things required for the attaining of the right understanding of
the Chap. 19
Scripture, I say, some things are required, as making us capable of such
understanding; and other as means whereby we attain unto it. Amongst the
things required, as making us capable of the right understanding of Scripture,
I reckon the illumination of the understanding, and a mind free from the
thought of other things, depending on God as the Fountain of illumination, and
desirous to find out the Truth, with resolution to embrace it, although
contrary to the conceits of natural men. The means whereby we attain to the
right understanding of Holy Scripture, I make to be of two sorts, some
disposing and preparing only, as often reading, meditating, and praying, some
guiding us in the search it self, and these I make to be fi^e. Whereof the
first is the knowledge of the rule of faith, and the practice of the Saints
according to the same. The second, a due consideration what will follow upon
our interpretation agreeing with, or contrary to the things received amongst
Christians. In which consideration the conference of other places of Scripture
is necessary. The third, the consideration of the circumstances of the places
interpreted, the occasion of the words, the things going before, and following
after. The fourth, the knowledge of all those histories, arts, and sciences,
which may help us. The fifth, the knowledge of the original tongues, and the
phrases, and idiotismes of the same. In all these passages, as I think, there
is nothing that the Devil himself dares gainsay; yet as if I had uttered
some strange paradoxes, and things never heard of before, the Treatiser says,
my doctrine is commonly singular, in so much that he professes he Page 149.
thinks, he may very well in some sort liken the platform, or order and
Faith of a Church set down in my books of that argument, to Sir Thomas
Moors Vtopia, and that there neither is, nor ever was any such Church in the
world, as I describe, and thereupon makes show as if he would confute every
word that I have in the place cited by him. Verily I think it will not be
safe for me to write or say that there is a GOD, that GOD made heaven and
earth, or that he sent his son into the world; for he impugneth things as
clear as any of these, as that an illumination of the mind is necessary to the
understanding of the Scripture inspired of God, and the things contained in
it; seeing the natural man perceives not the things of GOD which are
spiritually discerned; whereas yet we shall find that he can say nothing
against the necessity of such divine illumination for the understanding of the
Scripture, but he might say as much against the necessity of the light of
natural reason for the understanding of things naturally discernable. For he
might ask, as now he does, touching this illumination, how a man knows he
has reason, or the use of reason, and is not mad or drunk, seeing such men as
are so distempered, think they have the use of reason as well as any other:
and one kind of answer will serve for both these doubts. For as men know
they have reason by the discerning of such things as are not discernable by the
senses or sensitive faculties, which are organicall: so faithful and
believing men that have their minds enlightened, know they have received such
a new illumination, in that they discern things which before by the dim
sight of nature they could not, and as men that are sober and in their right
wits, do certainly know they are so, though such as are mad or drunk,
think they are when they are not, and so deceive themselves. So men that
have true illumination of grace may certainly know they have it, though some
frantic and braine-sicke men think they have it, when they have it not. The
weakness of this assault, it seems the Treatiser did perceive, and therefore
he assayleth us another way, and undertakes to prove that it is not necessary
a man should be spiritual before he understands the Scriptures, because
then it would be consequent that our faith could not be builded upon Scriptures
as we think it is. But I doubt he will have as bad success as before. For as
there must be a natural light of reason shining in men, before any thing
naturally discernable can evidently appear unto them to be that it is; and
yet the persuasion men have touching the being of such things, builds it
self upon such evidence: so likewise there must be a light of grace shining
in the understanding of men, before they can understand the Scripture, and yet
the persuasion they have of the truth of divine things, may, and does build
it self upon the Scriptures, understood through such light.

Wherefore let us see what he has yet more to say. Whereas besides an
illumination, I require in him that will understand the Scriptures, a mind
free from the thought of other things, depending upon God as the fountain of
illumination, and desirous of truth, with resolution to embrace it, though
contrary to the conceit of natural men; besides his former exception already
answered, he adds these words. I dislike these words, desirous of truth with
resolution to embrace it. The like whereunto, I protest, I never read, nor
heard to come from any man. For is it possible there should any such man be
found, that should dislike it in us, that we require in him that will
understand the Scripture, a mind desirous of truth, with resolution to
embrace it? Surely, it is; for we have met with such an one, but he has taken
order by concealing his name, that noe man shall make him blush by looking on
him. This doubtless is one of the sons of Belial, that have cast off the
yoke, that neither fear God, nor reverence men. But what reason does he give
of his dislike? these words, he says, seem to pretend a kind of doubting, or
staggering, which must not be allowed, especially in such men as are
spiritual. As if a spiritual man might doubt of nothing, nor be ignorant of
nothing, whereas yet all men know S. Augustine S. Hierome, and other holy
Fathers, who as we think were spiritual, doubted of the meaning of sundry
passages of holy scriptures, and left many questions unresolved. If happily he
say, men may not doubt of matters of faith, and that therefore they must not be
said to have minds desirous of truth, with resolution to embrace it: it will
be answered, that noe man professing himself to be a Christian ought to doubt
of such things as all Christians are bound expressly to believe: yet are there
many matters of faith, that is, such as must be believed at least implicit,
that faithful men may doubt of and enquire after. Yea at first when a man
begins to believe, he doubts of all points of faith, and must be settled
in the same by the Scriptures interpreted unto him, the divine illumination of
grace making him understand them.

Thirdly, whereas I reckon the knowledge of the rule of faith; and the practice
of the Saints according to the same, amongst the means which are necessary
for the understanding of the Scripture, and define that rule; First, to be the
summary comprehension of such principal articles of divine knowledge, as are
contained in the Creed of the Apostles, and are the principles whence all
other things are derived. Secondly, all such things as all Christians are bound
to believe expressly, and which have bin ever constantly believed by all such
as have not been noted for singularity, and nouelty. He says, most men will
dislike my doctrine, and pronounces this rule to be very Page 151. Ibidem.
uncertain: and yet presently forgetting himself, adds, that he has
proved in the first part of this Treatise, that in very deed the Scriptures
ought to be interpreted according to the rule of faith, that is, the sum of
Christian Religion, preserved as a depositum in the Church. But some man
happily will say, that howsoever he forgets Page 152.
himself, yet he has good advantage against us. For first he argues, that
if the Scripture, be to be interpreted according to the rule of faith; the
rule of faith it self is not known and believed through the authority of the
Scripture. Secondly, he says, the practice of the Saints from the beginning,
to which I require men to have an eye in interpreting Scripture, can very
hardly be gathered out of the monuments of Antiquity, according to my grounds.
For answer to which objections; First, I say, that the particular and several
parts of Scripture must be interpreted according to the rule of fath, that is,
the sum of Christian Doctrine received in the Church: and that yet the same
sum of Christian doctrine is no otherwise to be received by us, but because
it has been delivered by the Church, as gathered out of the due comparing of
one part of Scripture with another, and from thence confirmed and proved.
Neither must we firmly rest in the direction of it, till the Church make us
see and discern how it is gathered out of several places of Scripture laid
together. Secondly, that the practice of the saints may be known out of the
monuments of antiquity, so far forth, as is necessary for the helping of us
to understand the Scriptures, without any such difficulty as the Treatiser
imagines. For example, when Saint Augustine was to interpret certain places
of Scripture, touching the deriuation of sin from Adam, and to clear the
point, whether it were by natural propagation, or by imitation only, as the
Pelagians thought; it was not hard for him to know, that the Church did ever
most carefully present her newborn infants to Baptism, before they could be
misled and drawn away to evil by following the example of Adams
disobedience; and thence to infer, that she ever believed, that infants are
conceived and borne in sin, and consequently, that the propagation of sin
from Adam is natural, and not by imitation only,

The fourth thing that I require in him that will take upon him to interpret
the Scripture, is a due consideration what will follow upon his interpretation,
agreeing with, or contrary to the things generally received and believed
amongst Christians; against which he has nothing to say, yet that he might
be thought to say something, first he challenges Luther for not observing
this rule. And secondly, affirms, Page 152.
that it is insufficient if at any time almost all Christians may err, as I
teach. But first concerning Luther, the good man should know, that he cannot
justly be charged with the breach of this rule, seeing he broached no new
doctrine in the Church, as the Treatiser untruly affirms, but such as had the
testimony of Antiquity, and the allowance of innumerable Christians in his
time, as well in the West, as in the East. And secondly, that the possibility
of the erring of the greatest part of the Church, prejudiceth not this rule, he
might if he pleased, learn out of Vincentius Lirinensis, who Contra proph.
haeres. novationes. c. 6.
acknowledges, that sometimes error may ouer-spread almost all the present
church, and prescribes that in such a case men should look up higher into
antiquity.

The two other ensuing rules, to wit, consideration of the circumstances of the
places interpreted, the occasion of the words, the things going before, and
following after, and the knowledge of all such histories, arts, and sciences,
as may help us in interpreting the Scripture, he passes over as necessary,
though not sufficient of themselves alone. The knowledge of the original
tongues, he acknowledges to be profitable, but Page 152.
will not admit it to be necessary, especially according to the conceit of the
Romanists. First, because they are sure they have the Scriptures rightly
translated. Secondly, because they make not the Scripture the propounder of
their belief, but expound it according to the rule of Faith delivered and
received. In which passages he bewrays gross ignorance. For first, the
Romanists are not sure that they have the Scripture truly translated, as it
appears by that which Andradius has written: who proves at large, that
though the vulgar translation were allowed of by the Council of Trent, Lib. 4.
desens. rid.
as containing nothing in it whence any heresy or error in faith may be
inferred, yet is it not without many and great mistakings. And secondly, if
they were sure, yet as Melchior 1 (...) theol. l 2
Canus shows, the knowledge of tongues is needful for the finding out of the
meaning of sundry particular places of Scripture, by reason of some ambiguity
or obscurity in the translation. Thirdly, for that though the rule of Faith
serve for direction in generality, so that following the same, we may be sure
not to decline from the truth of doctrine: yet will not that rule secure us
from all erring and swaruing from the meaning of each place in particular, so
that in this respect, the knowledge of the tongues may be, and is most
necessary.

After all these exceptions taken against the helps and rules proposed by me,
for the finding out of the true meaning of Scripture, the Treatiser sets on
me a fresh in fiercer manner then before, and requires me to bring some
divine testimony, proof, Page 153
or argument, or some particular reason of the necessity and sufficiency of
these helps, and rules. Whereunto I briefly answer, that if any Papist under
Heaven, can take any exception against any of these helps and rules proposed
by me, or devise any other, I will justify the necessity and sufficiency of
them: but otherwise, I think it altogether needless, to prove that the Sun
shines at noone, (...) to show by reason or authority, that spiritual things
cannot be discerned but by spiritual men. The Treatiser therefore returns
and takes new exceptions against the helps and rules proposed by me: first
affirming, but most untruly, that the greater part of my brethren will not
allow them: and secondly, laboring to improve them by reason.

For first, that an illumination of the mind is not necessary for the
understanding of the Scripture, he goes about to show, because if such
illumination be necessary, no man can be assured of the truth of another man's
interpretation, seeing no man can tell whether he have an illumination of the
understanding, and a mind disposed in such sort as is required or not.
Whereunto I answer, that it is true, that no man can assure himself that
another man's interpretation is true and good, out of any knowledge of such
personal things in the interpreter: yet may he know it to be true out of the
nature of the thing it self, and thence infer, that either he that so
interprets, or they from whom he received such interpretation, had a divine
illumination. For even as to discourse of the nature of colors, presupposes
that the man that so discourses, has, or had sight; if he speak thereof
with any apprehension of that he speaks, (though a blind man having heard
the discourses of other, may use like words without all sense and apprehension
of that he speaks) So no man can interpret the Scriptures, and discourse of
the things therein contained, with sense and feeling, but such a one whose
mind is enlightened, though profane persons, and such as be void of all
divine illumination, may as from others, interpret the Scripture, and
discourse of such divine things as are therein. And as a man may assure
himself that another man's discourse of colors is good, out of the nature of
the thing it self, though he know not whether he have, or ever had, such
sense of seeing, as is requisite in him that will speak of colors with any
apprehension; so a man may know that another man's interpretation is true,
though he know not whether he have such an illumination of mind, as is
necessary for the understanding of the things contained in the Scripture.

Secondly, he undertakes to show, that no man can either assure himself that
he has the true meaning of Scripture, or convince the gaine-sayers by
following the direction Page 153. 154.
of the former rules, because, as he supposes, a man cannot certainly know,
that he has an illumination of mind; that he has observed those rules;
that he is disposed as he should be, and furnished with learning in such
sort as is requisite. Whereunto first I answer briefly, that it is as possible
for a man to know whether he have an illumination of the mind or not, as it is
whether he have the light of natural reason. Secondly, that the observation of
the rules formerly mentioned, and the disposition of a man's mind resolved to
embrace the truth, may as easily be known, as any other motions, purposes,
and resolutions. Neither is it more hard for a man that is spiritual to know
whether he be sufficiently furnished with learning requisite for the
understanding of the Scripture, then for a natural man to know whether he
have learning enough to understand Aristotle, or any other profane author.

Thirdly, in confutation of the former rules, he alleges that they may not
be admitted as necessary, because if they be, all such as have no illumination
of mind, nor willing disposition to embrace the truth when it shall be
manifested to the^, must be excluded out of the number of faithful ones. Which
if he think to be an absurdity, it is no great matter what he says; but he
adds, that they that are unlearned have not the knowledge of all those arts
and sciences, that are necessary for the understanding of sundry parts of
Scripture, nor of those original tongues wherein they were written, without
the knowledge whereof they cannot be understood; whereas yet they are to build
their faith upon the Scripture rightly understood; whence it will follow, that
all such must be excluded out of the number of the faithful. This indeed is
such a consequence as must not be admitted, neither is there any such thing
consequent upon that which we say. For though all men have not that knowledge
of arts, sciences, and tongues, that is necessary for the exact understanding
of all parts and passages of Scripture, yet may they understand so much of the
same as is necessary to salvation, without the knowledge of arts and sciences:
the things that are so precisely necessary, being delivered in very plain,
easy, and familiar terms. Neither is it necessary that if a man will build
his faith upon the Scripture, that he must understand every part of it. Only
one scruple remains, which is, that an ignorant man can have no certain
ground of his faith, if he build the same upon the Scripture, because lacking
the knowledge of tongues he cannot know whether it be truly translated or not;
but this scruple may easily be removed, seeing an ignorant man, out of the
Scripture it self duly proposed, explayned, and interpreted unto him, may
know it to be divine, heavenly, and inspired of God; and consequently, that in
what tongue soever it was written, it is truly translated touching the
substance, howsoever happily, there may be some accidental aberrations whereof
he cannot judge.

After these exceptions taken against the helps and rules proposed by me, as
necessary for the finding out of the sense and meaning of the Scripture, the
Treatiser observing no order in his writings, addresseth himself to prove that
we have no certain means whereby to know that the Scriptures are of God, or
which they be; and then returns again to prove, that we have no certain
rule whereby to be assured we have the sense of them. But all that he says to
this purpose, may easily be answered. For first, the truth of Christian
doctrine is divinely proved unto us by the satisfaction we find in the same,
touching things wherein natural reason left us unresolved, and the effects we
find to follow upon the receiving of it. Secondly, that Christian doctrine is
revealed, it is evident, because staying within the confines of the light of
natural reason, we can discern no such things as in this heavenly doctrine
are manifested to us. Thirdly, the revelation that is now, being mediate, and
depending on a former, it must of necessity be granted, that there was a
first, and immediate revelation of the things that are believed. Fourthly, that
that immediate revelation was without mixture of error, there being no
imperfection found in any of Gods immediate workings. Fifthly, that whatsoever
books they wrote, to whom that immediate revelation of heavenly truth was
granted, are divine, without mixture of error, and Canonical. Sixthly, that
all such books as are recommended to us by the consenting testimony of all
Christians, not noted for singularity, nouelty, or heresy, as written by those
who first learned the doctrine of heavenly truth from God himself, must be
acknowledged to have bin written by them. Which persuasion is confirmed, in
that when we read and meditate upon the books so commended to us, we find
a majesty, virtue, and power appearing in them more then in all humane
compositions, captiuating us to the the obedience of faith, and making us to
receive them as undoubtedly divine.

These are the grounds which we build upon. Wherefore let the Reader judge
whether the Treatiser had any cause to write as he does, that he cannot
sufficiently Page 155.
marvel, that I, or any man of judgment or learning, should run these
courses, and impugn their doctrine concerning these points, as absurd, which
indeed is most prudent and divine, and yet fall into most gross absurdities
and inconveniences. How prudent and divine their doctrine is touching the
ground of their faith, I have showed before, making it most clear, that if
they did show no more prudence in any thing else, their part would soon be
overthrown. But touching the absurdities into which he supposes we run,
they will be found to be none at all. For as I have showed at large, we
ground our faith in general upon the evidence of heavenly truth, and the
authority of Almighty God, whom we discern to speak in the holy Scriptures,
and yet in such sort listen to the Church, as a Mistress of heavenly truth in
all particular points, that we do not broach any new and strange doctrine
unheard of in the Church, nor impugn any thing that was always constantly
delivered and received in the same. So that it is untrue that the Treatiser
says, that I reject all Page 156.
general authority, and leave every man to follow his own private conceit:
he returns therefore to prove, that supposing we know the letter of
Scripture, yet have we no certain rule to find out the sense of it: and
mustereth some objections to this purpose, which I have sufficiently answered
already in the defense of the rules proposed by me, and impugned by him.
Neither is it so strange as he would make it, that we confess every one
though never so much enlightened, to be subject to error, and yet each of us
assures himself he does not err from the Christian verity, one having no
more assurance of not erring then another. For is it not so that in respect of
things that may be known by the light of natural reason, each one confesses
himself to be subject to error, and yet every one assures himself he does
not err in sundry particular things. Wherefore he leaves this point, and
proceeds to Page 166.
another, where he bewrays the weakness of his brain, laboring seriously
to prove, that he, who builds his faith upon the English Parliament, cannot
firmly and undoubtedly believe, nor have any true fath: because I say, we can
never be so well persuaded of any man or multitude of men, but that we may
justly fear, they are deceived, or will deceive. Truly it had been well that
he had applied himself to some other thing, rather then booke-making unless
he had any greater facility and felicity in it then he has; for who was ever
so senseless as to build his Faith upon the English Parliament? or why does
the Treatiser thus fight with his own shadow? But happily he will be better
toward the end.

. 6.
IN the last place speaking of the supposed divisions and dissentions amongst
Protestants, he says, some amongst us are so bold as to deny, that there is
any great or Page 181
material dissension in our Churches, and that I amongst others write, that it
so fell out by the happy providence of God, when there was a reformation made,
that there was no material or essential difference amongst them that were
actors in it, but such as upon equal scanning will be found rather to consist
in the diverse manner of expressing one thing, and to be but verbal upon
mistaking, through the hasty and inconsiderate humors of some men, then any
thing else. And that further I add, that I dare confidently pronounce, that
after due and full examination of each others meaning, there shall be no
difference found touching the matter of the Sacrament, the vbiquitary presence,
or the like, between the Churches reformed by Luthers ministry in Germany,
and other places, and those whom some men's malice called Sacramentaries: that
none of the differences between Melancthon and Illyricus, except about
certain ceremonies, were real: that Hosiander held no private opinion
touching justification, howsoever his strange manner of speaking, gave occasion
to many so to think and conceive: and that this shall be justified against the
proudest Papist of them all: this my assertion he says, all the world knows
to be untrue, and endeavors to prove it to be so, First, by mine own
sayings elsewhere, and then by some other proofs. Page 182
By mine own sayings, in that I complain of unhappy divisions in the
Christian world, and of infinite distractions of men's minds, not knowing in so
great variety of opinions what to think, or to whom to join themselves: and
that the controversies of Religion in our time are grown in number so many,
and in nature so intricate, that few have time and leisure, fewer strength of
understanding to examine them. But this proof will be found too weak. For
there are many and very material divisions in the Christian world, infinitely
distracting the minds of men, as those of the Greeks and Latins; those of
the Romish Faction, and such as embrace the reformed Religion: and the
controversies that are between these, are in number many, and in nature
intricate: in respect whereof my complaint might be most just, though never
any one Protestant had opened his mouth against an other. And besides,
supposing my complaint of divisions in the Christian World, to reach to the
breaches that are and have been amongst the Professors of the Reformed
Religion, nothing can be inferred from thence contrary to any thing that I
have written touching the agreeing of these men in judgment and opinion. For
there may be great breaches between such men as are of one judgment and
opinion* upon mistaking one another: and therefore Gregory Nazianzene in his
Oration made in the praise of Athanasius, shows, that the whole world in a
sort was divided upon a mere mistaking, and that Athanasius by making either
part rightly to understand the other, procured a reconciliation. Neither need
this to seem strange; for oftentimes controversies are multiplied, and by ill
handling made intricate, that in truth and indeed are no controversies, and
might easily be cleared, if there were a due proceeding in the discussing of
the same. So that the Treatiser had no reason to say, that an indifferent
reader will hardly excuse me from error in this behalf.

Wherefore let us go forward, and see what other proofs he brings to prove
that my assertion cannot be true. First, whereas I say there is no difference
touching the Sacrament, the vbiquitary presence, and the like, between the
Lutherans and Sacrame^taries, as he makes me to speak, he says, I may easily
be co^vinced of untruth; because Instir. l. 4. c. 17 16. and 17
Calvin avoucheth, that by the vbiquitary presence, Marcion an ancient heretic
is raised up out of hell, and a thousand books are written about the same
point, showing how great dissentions there have been in the world touching the
same. But this proof is easily disproued: for though it be true that Calvin
has, that to imagine that the body of Christ has no finite dimensions, but
such as are extended as far as heaven and earth, and that it is every where
by actual position, or local extension, is to make it a fantastical body,
and to raise up the old heretic Marcion out of hell; yet to think that
Christ's body is personally every where, in respect of the conjunction and union
it has with God, by reason whereof it is no where severed from God, who is
every where, neither Calvine nor any other Oxthodoxall Divine ever condemned.
So that the Divines of Germany condemning that kind of vbiquitary presence
that Calvin does, and Calvin allowing that other whereof they speak, they
must of necessity agree together, notwithstanding any thing the Treatiser can
say to the contrary: but because I have largely handled this matter touching
the vbiquitary presence and the Sacrament in my fifth Book of the Church, and
in my answer to Higgons, I will no longer infist upon it, but refer the
Reader to the former places.

Secondly, whereas I affirm, that none of the differences between Melancthon
and Illyricus, except about certain ceremonies, were real, he says,
whosoever reads the acts of the Synod holden by the Lutherans at
Altenberge, and the writings of the Flaccians against the Synergists, and
Adiaphorists, shall find dissentions touching greater matters. For the
clearing of this objection it must be observed, that the supposed differences
between those whom the Treatiser calls Flaccians, and the other whom he
names Synergists, were touching the cooperation of the will of man with the
grace of God, in her first conversion unto GOD, and the necessity of good
works to salvation.

Vide disput. Vinaraehabitam inter Illyricum and Victorinum.
Concerning the former of these two points, it was ever agreed on between both
these sorts of men, that after the first conversion there is a cooperation of
the will of man altered and renewed by the work of Gods Spirit, with grace, in
all ensuing actions of piety and virtue: and in this sense both of them as
defending a Synergy, or cooperation of man's will with Gods grace, might rightly
be named Synergists. 2ly, It was likewise agreed on by both sorts, that man by
the fall of Adam, and in the state of sin, is not only wounded in the powers
of his soul, in respect of things natural, external, and political, so that
he cannot perform any action so well in any of these kinds of things as
before he could; but that he is utterly spoiled of all power, strength, and
ability to do any spiritual and supernatural actions of true virtue and
piety, and is not only half dead, but wholly dead, having no more power of
himself to do any thing that is good, then a dead man has to perform the
works of life. Thirdly, it was agreed on, that there is not left in men
corrupted by Adams fall, the least spark of moral or spiritual good desire,
or inclination, which being blowed upon, and stirred, may concur with Gods
grace for the bringing forth of any good work. So that neither of them were
Synergists in this sense, though Illyricus, Museus, and other, supposed that
Victorinus, and some other, did think so. Fourthly, it was with like unanimous
consent agreed on, that there remains still in man after the fall, a desire of
good, and of that good, wherein there is no defect of good, no mixture of
evil, no mutability, nor fear of being lost, though such be the infelicity of
sinful man, that having his understanding darkened, and his will peruersly
inclined, he seeks and supposes he may find this good where it is not to be
found. So that when God comes to convert and turn a sinful man to himself,
he needs not newly to put a desire of good into him, for that is naturally
found in him, but by inlightning the understanding that it may discern, and
see what true good is, and where it is to be found, and by turning the will
from desiring that as good which is not, or not in such degree as is supposed,
he makes him a good and happy man, that was evil and miserable before.
Neither does he create a will in man, but changes the will he finds in him,
that it may affect that which it did not, and so creates a new will and heart
in him, that is, frames him to the desire of that from which he was most
averse before. There is then no spiritual nor moral good in man, when he is
to be converted unto God; no knowledge of true and spiritual good, nor no
desire of the same, which being stirred up may concur with the grace of God,
and therefore no synergy or cooperation of any such good, knowledge, or desire
of good with the grace of God in our first conversion; but that confused
knowledge of good, and natural inclination to desire it, that is found in man
before his conversion, when good desires are to be raised in him, concurreth
with the grace of God, directing the understanding to seek that good where it
is to be found, and turning, bending, and bowing the heart to the love and
liking of it. For, that man desires that which seems good unto him, he has
of nature; that he desires that which seems and is not, he has from the
corruption of nature, and it argues sinful defect: and that he desires the
true good and rightly, it is of grace, directing the understanding, and turning
the will from affecting that which before peruersly it did desire, to seek
that which it should, and in such sort as it should. And so; in that he does
desire, and pursue that which he thinks to be good, out of the natural
inclination of his will; but that which indeed is, and he should think to be
good, out of the motions of the spirit; there is a kind of Synergy, or
cooperation of the natural powers of man, and Gods grace even in his first
conversion.

Wherefore let us pass from the question touching the cooperation of man's
will with Gods grace, to the other concerning the necessity of good works to
salvation. Where first it is Illyricus de voce and re fidei part. 3. page 61.
and 62.
agreed on, that there is necessarily required in all that will be saved, a
dislike of former evils wherewith God was offended. Secondly, a ceasing to do
evil. Thirdly, a desire of grace that may preserve and keep us from the like.
Fourthly, a desire to do things pleasing unto God in that time that remains.
Decr. synod. Isnatensis anno 1556. celebrat. Epist. Menii ad Melancthonem de
absurditate Maiorismi.
Fifthly, it is acknowledged by all, that in them that are justified, and have
title to eternal salvation, good works are so far forth necessary to
salvation, if they have time, that the not doing of them is sin, which,
without repentance and remission, excludes from salvation. Sixthly, that good
works are necessary as fruits of faith, which all they that are justified and
look for salvation are bound in duty to bring forth. Seauenthly, that they are
not so absolutely necessary, that no man can be saved without them; for a man
may be saved that in the last moment disliketh sin, and desires pardon for
it, and grace that he may not fall into it again, without the actual doing of
any good works. So that I protest I cannot see wherein there could be any
real difference between these men; neither will the Treatiser, I think, be
able to show me any such difference, either out of the acts of the Synod of
Altenberge, or by any other means. For that men are bound in duty to do good
works, that they necessarily follow faith, and that no man can be saved
without dislike of sin, desire of avoiding it, and purpose of doing that
which is pleasing unto God, Illyricus made no question; and so disliked not the
saying of his opposites, that good works are necessary to salvation, as
thinking them in no sort necessary; but because he thought their words did
import, that no man in any case can be saved without the actual doing of good
works, no, though he have them in desire: and that no man may assure himself
farther of the favor and mercy of God toward him, then he finds the
presence of the works of virtue in him; which things undoubtedly they never
meant.

Treatis. part. 2. cap. 1. page 10.
Another opinion there is that is attributed to Illyricus touching the nature
of original sin, which is greatly condemned by many. For first, he is
charged to have taught, that the substance of man's soul was changed and
corrupted by Adams fall whence it will follow, that it is mortal. Secondly,
that sin is a substance, and sundry other like things, whence the impious
positions of the Manichees may be inferred. For the clearing of Illyricus from
these impieties, first we must observe, that he Quarundam impiarum
sententiarum resutatio. page 133. De essentia imaginis Dei and diaboli, page
313. and 318.
distinguishes two sorts of corruption, naming the one natural, and the other
spiritual; the one consisting in the abolition of the thing corrupted, the
other in a transformation of it. Secondly, that this transformation of the
soul is not in respect of her essence and being simply, but of her essential
and substantial powers and faculties. Thirdly, that this transformation of the
soul in her faculties, is not in respect of all her faculties, but the best
and principal only, to wit, reason and the will Fourthly, that there is not
any transformation or transuersion of these faculties simply in respect of all
objects: for the soul by the light of natural reason judges rightly of many
things still, though with some imperfections; but in respect of her principal
object, to wit, God, his worship, and Law. So that this is all that Illyricus
says, that the soul of man since Adams fall is so transformed and changed in
the best and principal of her essential and substantial faculties, that they
are not only turned away from their principal object, and from tending to the
right end whither they should look, but converted also to the desiring of such
things as they should not, or in such sort as they should not; but of the
extinguishing or abolishing of any of the essential and natural faculties of
the soul, much less of the essence and being of it simply, he has no word.
Wherefore let us come to the other part of the accusation framed against him,
which is, that he makes sin to be a substance, and let us hear what he will
say unto it himself. There are, says Quorundam thematum originalem iustitiam
and iniustitiam, simul and beneficia Christi extenuantium, refutatio p. 99
Illyricus, certain absurd sayings maliciously attributed unto me; as that sin
is a substance, that it is in the predicament of substance; that it is the
reasonable soul of man, and that on the contrary side, the soul is sin: but I
never used any such speeches, neither did I ever say any more, but that some
part of original sin is the souls essential faculty of reason and the will
corrupted, in that they are averted and turned away from their right object and
end. But for the more full clearing of him from that impious opinion which is
imputed to him, we must take notice of certain good observations found in
him. As first, that we may speak of sin concretiuely or abstractiuely.
Secondly, that if we speak of sin abstractiuely, that is, sinfulness it is
nothing but an inconformitie with the Law of GOD. Thirdly, that that to which
such inconformitie immediately cleaves, and wherein want of conformity with
Gods Law is found, may rightly be named sin concretiuely. So that if such
inconformitie be found in any action, we may safely pronounce it to be sin; if
in any habit, we may pronounce, that that habit is sin: if in any inclination
or desire, that that is sin also: if in any the essential and substantial
faculties of the soul, as being turned from the right object and end, and
converted to such object and end as they should not, we may safely pronounce
that these faculties disordered and put out of course, are sin, even that
original and birth sin, which is the fountain whence all other do flow. So
that to conclude this point, according to the opinion of Illyricus, if we
speak formally, and abstractiuely, original sin is the disordering of the
essential and substantial Faculties of the soul, consisting in an aversion
from the principal object, and a conversion to other in stead of it. But if
we speak concretiuely, and materially, original sin is the substantial
faculty of the soul, which we call Free Will, turned from seeking God, to
oppose it self against him: in which passages, there is no impiety, nothing
unsound, or that does not stand with the truth which we profess; but his
manner of speaking was such as might give occasion of dislike, and therefore
himself confesses, that he qualified some forms of words which he had
formerly used, upon the advice of Simon Museus, that his meaning might be the
better known, and no misconstruction made of that he meant well. So that it
will be found, that there was no real difference between Melancthon and
Illyricus about original sin, or any other matter of faith: and therefore I
may be as good as my word, and justify it against the proudest Papist living,
that none of the differences between Melancthon and Illyricus, except about
certain ceremonies were real.

Wherefore the Treatiser leaves Illyricus, and comes to Hosiander, whom he
will prove to have holden a private opinion touching justification, because
Calvine in his Institutions spends almost one whole Chapter in the
confutation of his conceit touching the same Article, which in the very
entrance he calls he wores not what monster of essential righteousness:
and Conradus Schlusselburge places him and his followers in the Catalogue of
heretics. But this objection will easily be answered, For it is not to be
doubted, but Calvin and the rest justly disliked that which they apprehended
to be his opinion, and condemned it as a monster. For they conceived that he^
made Justification to be nothing else, but a transfusion of the essential
righteousness of Christ into us, and a mixture and confusion of it with us.
But Smidelinus shows at large, that he never had any such conceit, but that,
distinguishing three kinds of righteousness in Christ, whereof we are made
partakers, to wit, active, passive, and essential, in that he was the Son
of God; he taught that justification is not only an acceptance and receiving
of us to favor upon the imputation of the active and passive righteousness of
Christ; but an admission of us also to the right of the participation of the
divine nature, as Peter speaks, and of that essential righteousness that
was in him, in that he was the son of God; that so receiving of his fullness,
we may be filled with all divine qualities and graces. The reason why he thus
urged the implying of the communication of the essential righteousness of
Christ in our justification, was not as the same Smidelinus tells us, for
that he thought justification to consist wholly therein, or for that he meant
to exclude the imputation of the merit and satisfaction of Christ from being
causes of our justification, or receiving favor with God: but because he saw
many mistook and abused the doctrine of free justification by the imputation
of Christ's righteousness, to the careless neglecting of al righteousness in
themselves; therefore he taught, there is no remission of sin, no receiving of
any man to favor, by virtue of the imputation of the active and passive
righteousness of Christ, unless out of dislike of sin, and desire of grace to
avoid it, he be admitted to the right of the participation of that essential
righteousness that dwelt in him in all fullness, that so it may dwell in him
that is to be justified also, in some degree and sort. Neither is this
construction of Hosianders words made by Smidelinus only, but by sundry other.
For Stapleton says, the followers of Brentius defended the opinion of
Hosiander: whereas yet neither Brentius, nor any of his followers ever dreamed
of any transfusion of the essential righteousness of Christ into us, any
mixture or confusion of it with us, or any other communication of it to us, or
in any other sort, then is before expressed. So that the Treatiser had no
reason to write as he does, that my proceedings are rare and singular, and that
I fear not to affirm things apparently false, and confessed untrue by all my
brethren: much less to say, that every man may easily perceive by these my
proceedinges, that I had a good opinion of mine own wit and learning. For what
have I done that sauoureth of pride? or, wherein have I bewrayed such vanity
as he speaks of? Is it a matter of pride not to condemn hastily other
opinions, to make the fairest and best construction of other men's words,
especially such as are of the same profession with us? Wherefore if the
Treatiser be able to say any thing against this my defense of Illyricus and
Hosiander, I will hear him; otherwise let him not tell me of my school
distinctions, for I am not ashamed of them. Neither do I use them as the
Roman sophisters do, to avoid the evidence of that truth that is too mighty
for them to encounter: but to clear that which the Romanistes desire to have
wrapped up in perplexed and intricate disputes.

But, it seems, the Treatiser will not accept of this condition, and
therefore he passes from the supposed divisions of our Churches, and
differences of our Divines, and proceeds to show their inconstancy
instancing particularly in Luther. And whereas in my former books I have
answered the objections of Papists touching this supposed inconstancy, he
goes about to refute that my answer, which consists of two parts. Whereof
the first is, that in sundry points of greatest moment, as of the power of
nature, of free will, justification, the difference of the Law and the Gospel,
faith and works, Christian liberty and the like, Luther was ever constant. The
second, that it is not so strange as our Adversaries would make it, that Luther
proceeded by degrees in discerning sundry Popish errors; seeing Augustine and
their Angelical Doctor altered their judgment in diverse things, and, upon
better consideration, disliked what they had formerly approved. The former part
of this my answer he pronounces to contain a manifest untruth; for, that
amongst other things mentioned by me, Luther was not ever constant, and of one
judgment touching freewil, he endeavors to prove, because in the defense of
his Articles condemned by the Pope, he says; Freewil is a forged or fained
thing, and a title without a substance, it being Article 36. Luther in visit*
Saxon.
in no man's power to think any thing good or evil, but all things falling out
of absolute necessity: and elsewhere he says, men of their own proper
strength have free will to do, or not to do external works, so that they
may attain to secular and civil honesty. But M. Treatiser should know, that
between these sayings of Luther, there is no contradiction in truth and in
deed, but in his fancy only; for in the former place two things are delivered
by Luther. The first, that no man by nature has power to turn himself to God
without grace, or so much as to prepare himself to the receipt of grace, which
in the latter place, speaking only of external works and civil or secular
honesty, he does not contradict. The second, that though men in outward
things, and things that are below, have a kind of freedom of will, and
choice, and power to do, or not to do them; yet not so free, but that they
are subject to the providence, and disposition of Almighty God, bowing,
bending, and turning them whither he pleases, and having them in such sort in
his hand, as that they can will nothing, unless he permit them, which no way
preiudiceth that liberty which elsewhere he attributes to the will. For the
will of man is said to be free, because it does nothing but on liking and
choice, and because God permitting, it has power to do what pleases it best;
and not because it is free and not subject to divine disposition and ordering,
or as if it could do any thing without Gods permission and concurrence. And
this is all that Luther has in the former or latter of the two places,
alleged by the Treatiser: for he has no word of absolute necessity, but of
Gods most wise and provident direction of our wills, in all their choices,
desires and actions. And though elsewhere he approve the saying of Wickliffe,
that all things fall out by a kind of absolute necessity, yet he interprets
himself to mean neither natural necessity, nor coaction, but infallibility
of event, in that all things fall out most certainly, as God thinks good to
dispose and order them. Wherefore seeing the Treatiser can fasten no
contradiction upon Luther, touching free will, let us proceed to see what
exceptions he takes to that defense I make of his altering of his judgment
in some other things. My defense is, that it was not strange for him, to alter
his judgment in some points of good moment, seeing Saint Augustine, the
greatest of all the Fathers, and the Angelical Doctor did so before him. His
exception against this my defense Page 186. 187.
consists of two parts; whereof the first is, that Luthers changing of his
opinion, argues, he was not extraordinarily and immediately taught of God,
(which we easily grant) and that he built his faith upon his own
unconstant reason, which the Treatiser will never prove to be consequent upon
the alteration of his judgment in some points of religion; for that otherwise
Augustine might be convinced to have so builded his faith likewise, who altered
his judgment touching as great matters as ever Luther did. For whereas
formerly he attributed the election of such as were chosen to eternal life,
to the foresight of their future faith; after he entered into the conflict with
the Pelagians, he disclaymed it as a mere Pelagian conceit. The second, that
Saint Augustine vvriting, when he was yet a nouice in Christian religion, and
not fully instructed, erred in some points, which errors, having received
better instruction, he disclaimed; and that before some articles of Christian
religion were so thoroughly discussed and defined in the Church, as afterward
upon the rising of new heresies, he spoke not so aptly and properly as was
needful in succeeding times, and therefore retracted what he had uttered; but
that it was not therefore lawful for Luther to leap up and down, hither and
thither, and to change his faith accordingly as his fancy led him. For
answer whereunto, I say, that Luther changed not his faith according to
fancy, nor altered his judgment in any point of Christian doctrine generally
and constantly agreed on in that Church wherein he lived. For, as I have
elsewhere proved at large, none of the things wherein we at this day
dissent from the present Church of Rome, were generally and constantly
believed and received as articles of faith in the days of our Fathers, in that
Church wherein they lived and died; so that in this respect there will be no
difference between the case of Luther and Augustine, or Aquinas, who, as the
Treatiser confesses, altered and corrected their former opinions touching
sundry points of doctrine not determined by the Church, without any note of
inconstancy, or building their faith upon their own unconstant reason. And
thus have I run through both parts of the Treatise of the grounds of the old
and new Religion, so that I might here end; but that the Author thereof adds
in the end an Appendix in confutation of a book written by M. Crashaw,
concerning Romish Page 22^
forgeries and falsifications; wherein among other things be endeavors to
prove, there could be no such corruption of the Fathers Writings in former
times, as M. Crashaw conceiueth, because I say, the Papists were only a
faction in the Church, and that there were ever diverse in the midst of all
the confusions of the Papacy, agreeing with us, who always opposed themselves
against such as sought to advance Papal tyranny and Popish superstition, who,
he thinks, if there were any such, were careful to preserve the Fathers
Works from corruption. For answer whereunto, we must note, that the
corruptions of the Fathers Writings are of three sorts; either by putting out
base and counterfeit stuff under their honorable names; or by putting in some
things into their true and indubitate Works, not well sorting with the same;
or by taking something out of them. That many absurd things have been
published under the names of holy Fathers, no man can make any doubt that
looks into the Works of Augustine, Hicrome, and others, with which, many
things censured and judged to be Apocryphal by our Adversaries themselves,
are mingled. Now if in their judgment this first kind of corruption of the
Fathers Works might be in former times, notwithstanding such good men, as they
think, were ever in the Church; who willingly and wittingly would give no
consent to any such corruption; why may not we say, that some things might be
added or detracted from the indubitate writings of the Fathers, notwithstanding
any thing they could do to the contrary, whom we suppose in the midst of
Papal confusions to have opposed themselves against error, idolatry, and
superstition then by some brought into the Church, and to have given testimony
to that truth which we now maintain? so that this objection is easily
answered. What he has against others, I doubt not but they will take notice
of, and that he shall hear from them in due time, to whom I leave him.

The end of the second part.
THE THIRD PART, CONTAINING A BRIEF EXAMINATION OF SVCH PRETENDED PROOFS for
Romish Religion and Recusancie, as are produced and violently wrested by a late
Pamphleter out of the former books.
IN the Epistle to the Lords of the Council, he first complains of the In
that Watson, Clerk, and the hellish contriuers of the powder treason, with
some few of their adherents have suffered death, and others have not been
permitted to warm themselves at the fires in Smithfield, as they were wont to
do.
long, and manifold supposed miseries of English Pseudo-Catholiques. Secondly,
he imputes the same to the Puritanes, as if they had been procured
principally by them, and for their cause. Thirdly, he proves, that not only
those Puritanes, that refuse external conformity, but such also as for a
fashion follow it, are guilty of the proceedings against the Romanists; because
the greatest number of Protestant Writers do teach that there is noe such
essential and substantial difference between Protestants and Puritanes, but
that they are of one Church, Faith and Religion. A strange kind of proof; yet
these are his words: The pens and pulpits of Puritanes, and their Printers
will sufficiently write, preach, and publish to the world, by whom, and to what
purpose, no small part of these afflictions have been urged and incited
against us, not only by those few which refuse your external conformity, but
such as for a fashion follow it, to retain themselves in authority. For proof
whereof, the greatest number of the present Protestant Writers, D. Sutcliffe,
D. Dove, D. Field, M. Willet, Wootton, Middleton, etc. do teach, there is no
substantial, essential, or material point of difference in religion between
Protestants and Puritanes, but they are of one Church, Faith and Religion. His
meaning, it seems, is, that all Protestants acknowledging Puritanes to be
of one Church with them, are Puritanes: and therefore he would have all to
know, that howsoever he make show of blaming Puritanes only, or principally;
yet in truth he equally condemns all; and that therefore he does but
dissemble, or say he knows not what. But do all these Protestant writers
named by him, teach, that there is no material difference between protestants
and Puritanes? Surely no. For touching my self, I never wrote any such thing,
neither in the place cited by him, nor any where else; so that he begins
with a manifest and shameless untruth. But I do the more willingly pardon him
this fault, for that it seems he does not consider what he writes. For in
the title of his book he professes that he will take the proofs of his
Catholic religion and Recusancy, only from the writings of such Protestant
Divines, as have been published since the reign of his Majesty over this
kingdom: for that, as he says, they often change their opinions, at the
least, at the coming of every new Prince. And yet page 30. he cites the
Bishop of Winchesters The difference, etc. edit. anno 1^86.
book written many years ago, and Doctor Couell his book in defense of
Master Hooker, as often as any other; which yet was written in her late
Majesty's time. But what if I had written, that howsoever there are some
material differences between Protestants and Puritanes, as it pleases him to
style them, yet not so essential or substantial, but that they may be of one
Church, faith, and religion? What absurdity would have followed? Would it be
consequent from hence, as he infers, that it is not material with us,
whether men be of a true or false religion, of any or none at all? Have there
not been, nay are there not greater differences betwixt Papists, who yet will
be angry, if they be not esteemed to be all of one Church, faith, and religion?
Did not Gerson Sermon. in festo Paschae.
Pope John the two and twentieth think, that the souls of the just shall not
see God till the general resurrection? and did not the French King that then
was, with the whole university of Paris condemn the same opinion as
heretical, with sound of trumpet? Did not Soto contra Ambros.
Ambrosius Catharinus teach, that a man may be certain with the certainty of
faith, that he is in state of grace; and Soto the contrary? Did not Pighius de
iustificat.
Pighius, Contaren. de iustificatione.
Contarenus, and the Authors of the book called Antididagma Coloniense, defend
imputative justice; and other Papists reject it? Did not some amongst them
teach the merit of condignity? do not Answer to Bell his downfall. etc. Vega.
quaest. 5. de meritis gloriae ex co^digno.
others moved with a sober moderation, think there is no such merit? Do not
some think the Pope is universal Bishop? Cusan. concord. Cathol. li. 2. c. 13.
others that he is not, but prime Bishop only? Bellar. lib. 4. de Roman.
Pontif. ca. 22.
Do not some teach, that all Bishops receive their jurisdiction from the Pope,
others the contrary? Stapleton. relect. controu. 3. de prim. subject. pot.
Eccles. q. 4.
Do not some think the Pope may papally err, and others that he cannot?
Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 1.
Do not some of them think he is temporal Lord of all the world, and others
the contrary? Do not so (...) them think he may depose Princes, and Walden.
doct. fid. li: 2. art. 3. quaest. 78. Gerson. de Pot. Eccles. consid. 12.
Sigebert. in Chronic. anno 1088.
others, that he may not? is there not a very material point of difference
amongst Papists touching predestination? Let them show us, if they can, so many
and material differences between Protestants and Puritanes. And yet these
were all of one Church in their judgment; yea Idem. in Chro^.
Pope Stephen, who reuersed all the acts of Formosus his predecessor,
pronounced the ordinations of all those to be void whom he had ordained,
brought his dead body out of the grave into the Council, stripped it out of the
Papal vesture, put upon it a lay habit, and cutting off two fingers of his
right hand, cast it into Tyber: Pope John his successor, who called a Council
of 74. Bishops to confirm the ordinations of Formosus, the Arch-bishoppes of
France, and the King being present at Rauenna, and burned the acts of the Synod
which Stephen had called to condemn Formosus: and Sergius, who again
condemned Formosus, and pronounced all his ordinations to be void, reuersing
the acts of Pope John and his Synod, were all of one Church, of one communion,
faith and religion. Nay which is more strange, when there were three Anti-popes
sitting in diverse places, accursing one another with all their Adherents, and
that for many years, yet still they were of one Church, of one communion,
faith, and religion. Yet may not we infer from hence against them, as they
do against us, that it is not material with them, whether men be of a true or
false religion, of any or none at all. Surely they are more privileged then
other men; for Example of Blackvvell.
some of them may take the Oath of Allegiance, and disclaim the Popes power
and right to intermeddle with Princes states; and other refuse it, and yet
still be Catholic brethren in the communion of the same Church: Yea a D^y.
Priest may like of this Oath, and persuade others to take it, and afterward
go over the Sea, and alter his judgment, and returning, choose rather to
suffer death, then to take it again, yet no man must take notice of it. But if
a Minister subscribe, and afterward upon ill advice refuse to do the same
again, then all the courses of our Religion are such, that by no outward
signs, communion, profession, protestation, or subscription, a man can tell
who is of what religion amongst us. But let us pass from the Epistle to the
book it self.

CHAP. I.
IN the first chapter, which is of the supreme, and most preeminent authority
of the true church, and how necessary it is to find it, follow the directions,
and rest in the judgment of it, he has these words. Doctor Field a late
Protestant writer, begins his Dedicatory Epistle to the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, before his Books of the church in this manner: There is no part
of heavenly doctrine more necessary in these days of so many intricate
controversies of Religion, then diligently to search out, which, amongst all
the societies of men in the world, is that blessed company of holy ones, that
household of Faith, that spouse of Christ, and church of the living God, which
is the pillar and ground of truth, that so we may embrace her communion, follow
her directions, and rest in her judgment. And after some other things cited
out of others, he adds, the joining with the true church is so needful a
thing, that D. Field concludes: There is no salvation, remission of sins, or
hope of eternal life out of the church. To what purpose this allegation
serves, I cannot conceive: for there is nothing in any of these speeches of
mine that ever any protestant doubted of, or from which any thing may be
concluded against us, or for the papists. Calv. instit. l. 4. c. 1. sect. 4
The church of God (says Master Calvin) is named the Mother of the Faithful:
neither is there any entrance into eternal life, unless she conceive us in
her womb, unless she bring us forth, unless her pappes do give us suck,
and unless she keep us under her custody and government, till having put
off this more flesh, we become like the Angels in Heaven. Add hereunto (says
he) that ou^ ^r lap and bosom there is no remission of sins, nor salvation
to be looked for, as both Esaias and Joel testify* to whom Ezekiel
subscribeth, when he denounces, they shall not be reckoned amongst the
people of God, whom he excludes from eternal life. The only thing that is
any way doubtful, is, how far we are bound to rest in the judgment of the
church. For the clearing whereof, the Author of these proofs having taken so
much pains to read over my books of the church, to take some advantage by
them against the truth of Religion professed amongst us, might have been
pleased to remember those different degrees of obedience, which we are to
yield to them that command and teach us in the church of God: Which I have
noted in the Fourth Book, and fifth chapter, out of Waldensis, excellently
described and set down by him in this sort, Wald. doct. fid. l. 2. art. 2. c.
27.
We must (says he) reverence and respect the authority of all Catholic
Doctors, whose doctrine and writings the church allows. We must more regard
the authority of Catholic Bishops; more then these, the authority of
Apostolic churches; amongst them, more specially the church of Rome; of a
general council, more then all these: yet must we not so listen to the
determinations of any of these, nor so certainly assent unto them, as to the
things contained in Scripture, or believed and taught by the whole universal
church, that has been ever since the Apostles times; but as, to the
instructions of our elders, and fatherly admonitions, and directions, we must
obey without scrupulous questioning, with all modesty of mind, with all good
allowance, acceptance, and repose in the words of them that teach us, unless
they teach any thing which the higher and superior controlleth. And yet if
they do, the humble and obedient children of the church, must not insolently
insult upon them, from whom they are forced to dissent; but they must dissent
with a reverent child-like, and respectfull shamefastness. And elsewhere he
says: The church whose Faith never fails, according to the promise made to
Peter (who bare the figure of the church, when CHRIST said unto him, I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not) is not any particular church, as the
church of Africa, within the bounds whereof Donatus did include the whole, nor
the particular Roman church, but the universal church, not gathered together
in a general council, which has sometimes erred, as that at Ariminum under
Taurus the governor, and that at Constantinople under Justinian the younger:
but it is the catholic church dispersed through the whole world, from the
baptism of CHRIST unto our times; which does undoubtedly hold the true
faith, and faithful testimony of Jesus. Yea the same author is of opinion,
that though it argue great contumacy for a man to dissent from a general
Council without conuincing reason, yet not perfidious impiety, unless he know
or might know, if the fault were not in himself, that in so dissenting, he
dissenteth from the Scripture, or the determination of the universal Church,
that has been since the Apostles times, which only is absolutely privileged
from erring. Thus then I hope the indifferent Reader will easily discern, that
hitherto the author of Protestant proofs has found no proof for Romish
religion in any thing that I have written; let us come therefore to the second
chapter.

CHAP. 2.
IN the second chapter, wherein he endeavors to prove by the testimonies of
Protestants, that the Roman Church ever was, and still is the true Church of
Christ, he cites four things as written by me. The first is touching the
supreme binding and commanding authority that is in the Church. His words are
these. Doctor Field writes, that the supreme, binding and commanding
authority is only in Bishops in a general Council. The second, is touching
the definition of the church set down in the Articles of religion, Art. 19.
that it is the congregation of faithful ones, in the which the pure word of
God is preached, and the Sacraments duly administered, according to Christ's
institution in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same,
whereunto he says I agree. The third is, that the true Church of God is
subject unto errors of doctrine, which are not fundamental. The fourth, that
the Roman Church is the true Church of God. His words are these. I think no
man will deny the Church of Rome to be the same it was at the coming of
Luther, and long before; and Doctor Field writes, that the Roman and Latin
Church continued the true Church of God even till our time. And again, We doubt
not but the Church, in which the Bishop of Rome exalted himself with more then
Lucifer- like pride, was notwithstanding the true Church of God, that it held a
saving profession of the truth in Christ, and by force thereof converted many
countries from error to the way of truth: and he farther acknowledges with
Doctor Couel and others, that Luther and the rest of his religion were
baptized, received their Christianity, ordination and power of ministry, in
that Church, as the true visible and apparent Church of Christ. He tells
farther, that diverse of the Roman Church, not only of the ignorant, but of the
best learned, were saved, and are Saints in heaven.

These are his allegations. Now let us see what is to be said unto them.
Touching the first, it is most undoubtedly true, that the supreme, and highest
external binding and commanding authority is only in Bishops and others
assembled in a general Council; but what will he infer from hence? All men,
says he, do know, and Doctor Sutcliffe with others acknowledge, that the
Protestants have had no such council: and what then? therefore they are not
the Churches of God. O impious and wicked conclusion! For hereby all the
churches of the world 300. years after Christ; are proved not to have been
the true churches of Christ; seeing, as it is evident, there was no general
Council all that while; so that Christianity was rent into factions for want
of this remedy, as Ibid. praefat* Council.
Isidorus testifies. But, says he, the Protestant Relatour of religion
teaches, that this pre-eminence, means, and remedy, is only in the Church of
Rome. This is most false; for howsoever he thinks it not impossible for the
Romanists to have a general Council of those of their own faction; yet he
knows it lies not in them to procure a Council absolutely general or
Oecumenicall: Nay we see that for many hundred years there has not been any
general Council of all Christians, wherein a perfect consent and agreement
might be settled; but the greatest parts of the Christian world have remained
divided from the Roman Church for the space of 6. or 7. hundred years. If the
Author of these proofs shall say, they have all been heretics, and
schismatickes, and that they have lived and died in state of damnation, that
have lived and died in those churches ever since their separation; and that
therefore a general Council of the Christians of the West, adhering to the
Pope, is absolutely general and Oecumenicall, representing the whole universal
Church; we detest so unchristian and devilish a censure: and therefore we
willingly confess, that the Protestants being but a part of the Christian
church, cannot have any Council absolutely general, but in a sort only in
respect of those of their own profession. Such a general Council of
Protestants to settle and compose their differences, the Protestant Relator of
religion wishes for: neither does he ever deny the possibility thereof, as
this Pamphleter mis-reporteth him, but says only that as things now stand,
there being no better correspondence among Christian Princes, nor greater
desire of making up the breaches of the Christian Church, there is little hope
of any such general meeting of those of the reformed religion.

Out of the two next allegations nothing can be concluded; for the errors of
the present Roman Church are fundamental; neither does it preach the pure
word of God, and duly administer the Sacraments, according to Christ's
institution, in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same.
But he says, he hops no man will deny the Church of Rome to be the same now,
it was when Luther began, and long before; and that I confess, the Latin
Church continued the true Church of God even till our times. Because some man
perhaps will think, that we yield more unto our Adversaries now, then formerly
we did, in that we acknowledge the Latin or Western Churches subject to Romish
tyranny before God raised up Luther, to have bin the true Churches of God, in
which a saving profession of the truth in Christ was found, and wherein Luther
himself received his christianity, ordination, and power of ministry; I will
first show, that all our best and most renowned Divines did ever acknowledge as
much as I have written. 2ly, That the Roman church is not the same now, it was
when Luther began. And 3l, that we have not departed from the church wherein
our Fathers lived and died, but only from the faction that was in it. Touching
the first, Lib. contra Anabaptist.
M. Luther confesses, that much good, nay that all good, and the very marrow
and kernel of faith, piety, and christian belief, was by the happy providence
of God, preserved even in the midst of all the confusions of the Papacy.
Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 2. sect. 11.
M. Calvin in like sort, shows, that the true Church remained under the
Papacy, Cum Dominus foedus suum (says he) in Gallia, Italia, Germania,
Hispania, and Anglia deposuerit, vbi illae prouinciae Antichristi tyrannide
oppressae sunt; quo tamen foedus suum inuiolabile maneret, Baptismum primo
illic conseruauit, qui eius ore consecratus inuita humana impietate, vim
sua^retinet. deinde sua prouidentia effecit, vt aliae quoque reliquiae
extarent, ne Ecclesia prorsus interiret: ac quemadmod^ ita saepe diruuntur
aedificia, vt fundame^ta and ruinae maneant; ita non passus est Ecclesia^ suam
ab Antichristo vel a fundame^to subuerti, vel solo aequari, vtcunque ad
punienda^ hominu^ ingratitudinem, horribile^ quassationem ac disjectione^ fieri
permiserit; sed ab ipsa quoque vastatione semirutum aedificiu^ superesse
voluit: That is, the Lord having made his covenant with the people of France,
Italy, Germany, Spain, and England, when these provinces were oppressed by the
tyranny of Antichrist, that yet still his covenant might remain muiolable,
first he preserved the Sacrament of Baptism amongst the^, which being
consecrated by his own mouth, retains his force in despite of man's impiety;
and besides carefully provided, that there should be found some other
remainders also, that the Church might not altogether perish. And even as
oftentimes buildings are so thrown down that the foundations and some ruins do
remain; so God suffered not his church to be subverted and ouerthrown by
Antichrist from the very foundation, or be laid even with the ground, but
howsoever to punish the ingratitude of men, he suffered it to be horribly
shaken, torn and rent, yet his pleasure was, that the building should remain
after all this waste and decay, though half thrown down. Of the same opinion
is Bucer, Melancthon, and Beza, who says: Bez. quaest.
The Church was under the Papacy, but the Papacy was not the Church. Morn. of
the Church. c. 9.
We say, (says Philip Mornay) that among that poor people, that was so long
time deceived under the darkness of Antichrist, there was a part of the body
of the visible Church; but that the Pope, and his maintayners were the bane of
it, who stifled and choked this poor people, as much as lay in them. We say,
that this was the Church of Christ, but that Antichrist held it by the throat,
to the end that the salvation and life that flows from Christ might not pass
unto it. To be short (says he) we say, that the people were of the Christian
commo^-wealth, but the Pope with his faction, was a proud seditious Catiline,
seeking to destroy it, and set all on fire; and so ever he most aptly puts a
difference between the^ that were under the Papacy, and the vpholders of the
Papacy, the Christian Church, and the faction that was in it. M. Deering in
his Lectures, speaking of the orders of the Popish Church, has these words.
Lect. 23. in 5. ad Heb.
If any man will here object, that notwithstanding all the abuses, yet the
Priest had that which was principal, liberty to preach and minister
Sacraments, and that therefore their ministry ought not to be neglected. I
answer; In this was the great goodness of God, that in time to come his
children might assuredly know, he reserved to himself a Church even in the
midst of all desolation, and that he called them by his word, and confirmed
them by his Sacraments even as at this day. For seeing there can be no sin so
great, but faith in Jesus Christ scatters it all away, it was impossible that
the man of sin should so much adulterate, either the Word of God, but that it
should be to the faithful a Gospel of salvation; or the Sacraments of God,
but that they should be pledges of eternal life to those that did believe:
and he adds, that notwithstanding all the prophanations in those times, in
respect whereof we have justly separated our selves from the pertinacious
maintainers of such confusions, yet God of his infinite goodness, who calls
things that are not, as though they were, even in that ministry gave grace
unto his Saints. Thus do these Worthies write, touching the state of the
Christian Church in former times, tyrannically oppressed by Antichrist, neither
is there any of our Divines of worth and learning, for ought I know, that
dissenteth from them.

Wherefore I will now proceed to show, that the Roman Church is not the same
now that it was when Luther began. Here first that we be not deceived, we
must observe, that by the name of the Roman Church, sometimes we understand
the Pope, y Cameracens. quaest. vesperiarum.
his Clergy, and other Christians of the Roman Diocese: sometimes all
Churches subject to the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome. In this latter sense we
speak of the Roman Church at this time, and will make it most clear and
evident, that it is not the same now that it was when Luther began. For first
the Roman Church that then was, was the whole number of Christians subject to
Papal tyranny, whereof Illyr. in Catal. testium veritatis. Carolus Miltitius
being sent from Pope Leo to Frederick, prosessed, that all the way as he came,
having sounded men's affections, he found three to favor Luther for one that
favored the Pope, and Luther professes, that the applause of the world did
support him much, all men being weary of the frauds, extorti^ns, and wicked
practices of the Romanists. Praefat. oper. Lutheri.
a great part desired nothing more then to shake off that yoke, which as soon
as he began to oppose himself, they presently did, accounting those that
attributed that to the Pope, which is now attributed unto him, to be but
flatterers: but the Roman Church that now is, is the multitude of such only
as thus magnify, admire, and adore the plenitude of Papal power, or at least
are contented to be under the yoke of it still. Secondly, the Church of Rome
that then was consisted of men not having means of instruction and
information, like unto those which have been since; and therefore not erring
pertiuaciously in things wherein they were deceived: But the Church that now
is, consists of such only as pertinaciously resist against the clear
manifestation of the truth, and with all fury and madness pursue unto death
those that defend and maintain the same, or at least of such as consent in
outward communion with them that so do. So that they that lived heretofore
might in their simplicity be saved, and yet these that now are, perish in
their contradiction and wilful resistance against the truth. Neither need this
to seem strange, seeing Vincentius Lirinensis says (speaking of the error of
rebaptization) that the authors, devisers, and beginners of it, are crowned in
Heaven, that is, Cyprian and the African Bishops of his time: for that
notwithanding this error they held the unity of the Church, and condemned not,
but communicated with them that were otherwise minded; and the followers of the
same error, that is, the Donatists for their schism and pertinacy were
condemned into hell. Thirdly, the Roman Church that then was, had in it all
the abuses and superstitious a Contra prof. haeres. novitat.
observations it now has, and such as erred in all the points of doctrine,
wherein b See the Appendix to the third Book of the Church, and the 12 Chapter
of the same book.
they of the Roman church now err, in which respect it may seem to have
been the same, as the Author of these pretended proofs urges; but it had
also others that disliked and desired the removing of all those abuses, and
superstitious observations which we have removed and thought right in all those
points of doctrine wherein the rest erred; in which respect it was not the same,
but very different from that faction of Romanists that resists that
reformation of religion which so many famous states of Christendom have
willingly embraced. So that the Roman Church that then was, consisted of two
sorts of men: of the one as true living members: of the other, as pertaining to
her unity in respect of Baptism, power of Ministry, and profession of some
parts of heavenly truth; though not partaking in that degree of unity which
the principal parts thereof had amongst themselves, but divided from them,
being a dangerous faction in the midst of her, seeking her destruction, which
she could neither fly from, nor drive from her; as Bernard somewhere
speaks: Sermon. 33. in Cantica.
Omnes amici, omnes inimici, omnes domestici, nulli pacifici, serui Christi,
seruiunt Antichristo: All these were in some general sort the Church, in
respect of Baptism, the profession of some parts of heavenly truth, and the
power of ministry; but principally, and in special sort, they only that
believed rightly touching the most material points of Christian religion, and
wished for the reformation of superstitious abuses. In respect of the former of
these, the Roman Church was vere Ecclesia, truly a Church, that is, a
multitude of men professing Christ, and baptized; but not vera Ecclesia, a true
Church, that is, a multitude of men holding a saving profession of the truth in
Christ, as Morn of the Church, cap. 2.
Mornay fitly notes, for which Stapleton unjustly reprehendeth him: but in
respect of the latter, it was vera Ecclesia, a true Church, that is, a
multitude of men holding a saving profession of the truth in Christ. The
Church of the Jews at the coming of Christ, had in it the Scribes, Pharisees,
and Saduces, as well as Zachary, Elizabeth, Simeon, and Anna; in respect of the
former it was vere Ecclesia, but not vera Ecclesia; in respect of the later, it
was vera Ecclesia. Neither should this seem strange to any man, that the same
society of Christian men should in respect of some parts, whereof it
consists, be the true Church of Christ, and in respect of some other, not
so; seeing all men confess, that the same visible church and society of
Christians may be named a garden enclosed, an orchard of pome granates, a well
sealed up, a fountain of living waters, a paradise with all precious and
desirable fruit, a holy nation, a peculiar people, a roy all Priesthood, the
spouse of Christ, and wife of the Lamb, the love of Christ, all fair,
undefiled, and without spot, in respect of herbest and principal parts, though
not in respect of other. The former ofthese two sorts of men that were found in
the Roman Church, we name a faction. First, because they had no part in that
degree of unity, which the best parts thereof had amongst themselves, but
wandered into bypath of error, to their own destruction, and sought the
ruin of that mother, which by baptism had sacramentally regenerated them to
be the sons of God. Secondly, for that they brought in new and strange
errors, and a new kind of tyrannical government, prejudicial to the purity
of the faith once delivered, and the ancient liberty of the people of God. For
hereby we are to judge who are of the faction in the Church, and who not; and
not by multitude or paucity, as some fondly imagine. The disguised Arrians, and
others misled by them to the condemning of Athanasius, were but a faction in
the Church at that time, yet were they many, so that Hierome says, the whole
world was become an Arrian; and they that adhered to Athanasius were few in
number, and contemptible in respect of the rest. And all they that hold and
defend errors in matters of doctrine, and observations in matters of practice
and laws, prejudicial to the ancient liberties in the society of the
Christian Church, are rightly said to be a faction in the same, whether they
be many, or few; and they that retain the faith once delivered, are most
properly the Church. Lastly, the errors that we condemn, were taught in the
Roman Church that was when Luther began, but they were not the doctrines of
that Church; but these errors are of the doctrines of the present Roman
Church. For the clearing of the former part, to wit, that the errors condemned
by us, were not the doctrines of that ancient Roman church, wherein our
Fathers lived and died, we must observe, that the doctrines taught in that
Church, were of three sorts. The first, such as were delivered with so full
consent of all that lived in the same, that whosoever offered to teach
otherwise, was rejected as a damnable heretic; such was the doctrine of the
Triuity, the creation, fall, original sin, incarnation of the Son of God,
the unity of his person, and diversity of the natures subsisting in the same.
The second, such errors as were taught by many, in the midst of the same
Church, as, that the Pope cannot err, and the like. The third, such contrary
true assertions as were by other opposed against those errors. The first, were
absolutely the doctrines of that Church. The third, may be said to have been
the doctrines of the Church, though al received them not; because they were the
doctrines of such as were so in the church that they were the Church, according
to that of Augustine: Aug. de Baptism. li: 7. c. 51.
Some are in such sort in the house of God, that they also are the house of
GOD; and some are so in the house, that they pertain not to the frame and
fabric of it, nor to the society and fellowship of fruitful and peaceable
righteousness. The second kind of doctrines, were not at all the doctrines of
that church, because they neither were taught with full consent of all that
lived in it, nor by them that were so in the church and house of God, that they
were the church and house of God; but by such as though they pertained to the
church in respect of the profession of some parts of heavenly truth, yet in
respect of many other wherein they were departed from the same, seeking to
subvert the faith once delivered, were but a faction in it.

Hence it follows (which is the third thing I promised to show) that
howsoever we have forsaken the communion of the Roman Diocese, yet we have
not departed from the Roman Church in the later sense before expressed,
wherein our Fathers lived and died, but only from the faction that was in it.
First, because See the Appendix to the third book of the Church.
we have brought in no doctrine, then generally and constantly condemned, nor
rejected any thing, then generally and constantly consented on. Secondly,
because we have done nothing in that alteration of things that now appears,
but removed abuses then disliked, and shaken off the yoke of tyranny, which
that Church in her best parts did ever desire to be freed from, howsoever she
had brought forth and nourished other children that conspired against her, that
taught otherwise then we now do, and would willingly for their advantage have
retained many things which we have removed. Thus then (I hope) it does
appear, that howsoever I confess, that the Latin or West Churches oppressed
with Romish tyranny, continued the true Churches of God, held a saving
profession of heavenly truth, turned many to God, and had many Saints that died
in their communion even till the time that Luther began; yet I neither dissent
from Luther, Calvin, Beza, or any other Protestant of judgment, nor any way
acknowledge the present Romish Church to be that true Church of God, whose
communion we must embrace, whose directions we must follow, and in whose
judgment we must rest. But will some man say, is the Roman Church at this day
no part of the Church of God? Surely, as Aug. de Baptism. contra Donatist. li:
1. ca: 8: and 10.
Augustine notes, that the societies of heretics, in that they retain the
profession of many parts of heavenly truth, and the ministration of the
Sacrament of Baptism, are so far forth still conjoined with the Catholic
Church of God, and the Catholic Church in and by them, brings forth children
unto God: so the present Roman church, is still in some sort a part of the
visible Church of God, but no otherwise then other societies of heretics are,
in that it retayneth the profession of some parts of heavenly truth, and
ministers the true Sacrament of Baptism to the salvation of the souls of
many thousand infants that die after they are baptized, before she have
poisoned them with her errors. Thus having spoken sufficiently for the
clearing of my self touching this point, I will pass from this chapter to the
next.

CHAP. 3.
IN the third chapter he endeavors to show, that the Protestants do now
teach the necessity of one supreme Spiritual head, and commander in the
Church of Christ. His words are these. Whereas heretofore some unchristian
Sermons and Books have termed the Bishop of Rome to be the great Antichrist,
we shall now receive a better doctrine and more religious answer. That there
ever was and must be, one chief and supreme spiritual Head and Commander of
the Church of Christ on earth, etc. D Field cites and approves this as a
general and infallible rule: Ecclesiae salus in summi sacerdotis dignitate
pendet, etc. The health of the Church depends on the dignity of the high
Priest, whose eminent authority if it be denied, there will be as many schisms
in the Church as there be Priests. Then of necessity one chief supreme and
high Priest must be assigned in his judgment. These are his words. The place
he means is not page one hundred thirty eight, as he quoteth it, but page 80.
Let the Reader how partial soever peruse it, and if he find that I have
written any thing whence it may be concluded, that I acknowledge there ever was
and must be one chief and supreme spiritual Head and Commander of the whole
Church of Christ in earth, I will fall prostrate at the Popes feet, and be of
the Romish religion for ever. But if it appear unto him that the author of
these pretended proofs has cited this place to prove that which in his
conscience he knew it did not, let him beware of such false and cozening
companions. My words are: The unity of each particvlar Church, depends on the
unity of the Pastor, who is one, to whom an eminent and particular power is
given, and whom all must obey. Here is no word of one chief Pastor of the
whole universal church of Christ upon earth, but of one chief Pastor in each
particular Church. Who would not detest the impudency and false dealing of
these Romish writers. But he says, I approve the saying of Hierome before
mentioned, therefore I must assign one chief Pastor of the whole Church of
Christ on earth. How will he make good this consequence? Does Hierome speak in
that place cited and approved by me, of one supreme Pastor of the whole
Church of Christ on earth? Surely this Pamphletter knows he does not, but of
the Bishop of each particular Church or Diocese. Hier. contra Luciferianos.
If (says Hierome) thou shall ask why he that is baptized in the church does
not receive the Holy Ghost, but by the hands of the Bishop, which we say, is
given in baptism: know that this observation comes from that authority, that
the Spirit descended upon the Apostles: and in many places we find the same to
have been done rather for the honor of Priesthood, then the necessity of any
Law* otherwise if the Spirit descend not, but only at the prayer of the
Bishop, they are to be lamented, who in villages, castles, and remote places,
baptized by Priests or Deacons, dye before they are visited by the Bishop: and
then follow these words: The safety of the Church depends on the dignity of
the chief Priest, to whom if an eminent power be not given, there will be as
many schisms in the Church as there are Priests. So that this is that which he
says, that it is rather for the honor of the Bishop or chief Priest of each
Church, that the imposition of hands upon the baptized is reserved unto him
alone, then the necessity of any law; because if he had no such preeminences
and things peculiarly reserved unto him, in respect whereof he might be greater
then the rest of the Priests and Ministers in the Church, there would be as
many schisms as Priests: and hence he says, it comes, that without the
command of the Bishop or chief Priest, neither Priest nor Deacon have right to
baptize. So that it is manifest, the chief Priest he speaks of, whose power
is eminent and peerless, is so named in respect of other Priests in the same
church, that may not so much as baptize without his mandate, and not in respect
of the pastors of the whole universal church. Wherefore if this pamphleter
would have dealt truly and honestly, he should have said: Whereas heretofore
some unchristian Sermons and books termed the Bishop of Rome the great
Antichrist, we shall now receive a better doctrine, and more religious answer,
that there must be one chief Priest or Bishop in every Diocese, having a more
eminent authority then the rest; and then whereas men now detest his falsehood,
they would but only have laughed at his folly: But let us come to his second
allegation, and see if there be any more truth in that, then in this. His
words are these. Doctor Field tells us from Scripture, that Christ promised
to build his Church upon Saint Peter, then no Christian will doubt, unless he
will doubt of Christ's, truth and promises, but it was so performed. Let the
reader peruse the Page 344
place, and he shall find that I do not tell them from Scripture., that CHRIST
promised to build his Church upon Peter, as this man adding one falsehood to
another, most untruly says I do, but only cite a place of Tertullian, to
prove that nothing was hid from the Apostles, that was to be revealed to
after-commers, where he has these words: What was hidden and concealed from
Peter, upon whom Christ promised to build his Church? from John the Disciple
he so dearly loved? that leaned on his breast at the mystical supper? and
the rest of that blessed company, that should be after manifested to succeeding
generations? But he will say that I approve the saying of Tertullian, and
therefore think the Church was built upon Peter. Truly so I do; but I think
also as Hierome does, that it was built no more upon him, then upon all the
rest, and therefore the supremacy of Peter's pretended successor, will not be
concluded from thence. Dicis (says Hierome) super Petrum fundatur Ecclesia,
licet idipsum in alio loco super omnes Apostolos fiat: Super omnes ex aequo
Ecclesiae fortitudo solidatur: that is, Thou will say, the Church was built
upon Peter; It is true, it was so, but we shall find k Hier. li. 1. contra
Iouinian.
in another place, that it was builded upon all the Apostles. Surely the
firmness of the Church does equally stay and settle it self upon them all.
This is so clear and evident, that Lib. 1. de Pont Romans c. 11.
Bellarmine himself confesses, that all the Apostles may be said to have
been foundations of the Church, and that the Church may be truly said to
have been built upon them all. First, because they preached Christ to such as
had not heard of him before, and were the first that founded Christian
Churches. Secondly, in respect of their doctrine which they learned by
immediate revelation from the Son of God, in which the Church is to rest as
in the ground and rule of her faith. Thirdly, in respect of government, in that
they were all heads and rulers of the universal Church. Thus we see, if I had
told them out of Scripture, that Christ promised to build his Church on Peter,
our Adversaries could not from thence have inferred the supremacy of the Pope,
his pretended Successor..

Wherefore let us come to his next allegation. His words are: Doctor Field, and
the rest, do ordinarily yield, that the Roman Church continued the true
Church of God till the year of Christ six hundredth and seven, when
Bonifacius the Pope there claimed, as they say, supremacy first in the Church.
This is a mere imagination of his own; for I no where speak of the
Churchco^tinuing till the time of Bonifacius the Pope, or till the year six
hundred and seven, as if it had then ceased, and therefore he does not here
cite any page of my book, as in other places, but cites it at large. But
(says he) Doctor Field plainly acknowledges, that the supremacy belonged to
the Popes of Rome before the first Nicene Council, and then by the rules which
he gives to know true traditions (custom of the Church, consent of Fathers,
or an Apostolical Churches testimony) this must needs be of that first
kind, and then of equal authority with Scripture, as he acknowledges of
such traditions. Such is the intolerable impudency of this man, that I protest
I can scarce believe mine own eyes, or persuade my self that he writes
that which I see he does. For, do I any where acknowledge, the supremacy
belonged to the Popes of Rome before the Nicene Council? Nay, do I not in the
Lib. 3. cap. 1
place cited by him, say, that before the Nicene Council, there were three
principal Bishops or Patriarchs of the Christian Church, to wit, the
Bishops of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioche, as appears by the acts of the
Council limiting their bounds? Had these their bounds limited and set unto
them, and was there one of them an universal commander? If he say I
acknowledge the Bishop of Rome was in order and honor the first amongst the
Patriarchs, before the Nicene Council, and thereupon infer, that I
acknowledge his supremacy and commanding power over the rest, he may as well
infer, that I give to the Bishop of Alexandria a commanding authority over
the Bishop of Antioche, because before the Nicene Council he was before him
in order and honor. That which he adds as a Corollary, that by the rules I
give to know true traditions, this must be of that kind, and consequently of
equal authority with Scripture, argues in him a greater desire of saying
something, then care what he says. For first, it no way appears out of any
thing that I have said touching the primacy of the Pope, before the time of the
Nicene Counsel, that either custom of the Church, consent of Fathers, or the
testimony of an Apostolical Church, give the supremacy to the Popes. 2ly, It
is false that he says, that I make custom of the Church, or the testimony of
an Apostolical Church, rules whereby to find out which are true traditions,
and which are not. For first, I do not say, that custom of the church
observing a thing, is a proof that that thing which is so observed, was
delivered from the Apostles, but such a custom, whereby a thing has been
observed from the beginning. So that though the Popes had been supreme in
power and command before the Nicene Council, which all the Papists and
devils in hell shall never prove, yet would it not follow, that this their
supremacy were by tradition from the Apostles. Secondly, I do not make the
testimony of an Apostolical church to be a rule whereby to know true
traditions from false, as he is pleased to belly me, but I disclaim it in the
very place cited by him. My words are these. The third rule whereby true
traditions may be known from false, is the constant testimony of the Pastors
of an Apostolical church successively delivered; to which some add the
present testimony of any Apostolical Church; but this none of the Fathers
admit, neither do I: The Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, and Rome, are
Apostolical Churches, and whatsoever their Pastors have successively
delivered, as received from the Apostles, is undoubtedly Apostolical; but not
every thing, that the Pastors of those Churches that now presently are shall
so deliver, seeing they are contrary the one to the other in things of great
importance. Thirdly, whereas he says, I acknowledge unwritten traditions to
be of equal authority with the Scriptures, he is like himself: For I never
acknowledge, that there is any matter of faith, of which nature the Popes
supremacy is supposed to be, delivered by bare tradition, and not written; but
say only, if any thing may be proved to have been delivered by lively voice
by them that wrote the Scriptures, there is no reason but it should be of as
great authority, as if it had been written.

Two more allegations there are yet behind in this chapter that concern me.
The first, that I say, and Protestants generally agree with me, that the
Regiment of the West Churches (among which this nation is,) belonged to the
Pope of Rome. It seems this man has a great desire I should say so, and some
hope I will say so. But I protest as yet I never wrote any such thing, and
therefore here again, he refers his Reader to no page of my Book, as in
other places, but cites it at large, wherein he shows more wit then honesty;
for it is good to put a man to seek far for that, which can no where be
found. But what if I had said the Bishop of Rome was Patriarch of the West?
would that prove an universal power over the whole Church, or such a kind of
absolute authority over the Churches of the West, as in latter times by
usurpation he exercised over them? Surely I think not. But (says he)
Doctor Downame says, before the grant of Phocas, the Church of Rome had the
superiority, and preeminence over all other Churches excepting that of
Constantinople; and Doctor Field tells him absolutely that the title of
Constantinople was but intruded and usurped, and when the first Nicene Council
gave such honor to the Roman Church, there was not so much as the name of
Constantinople. This is the last allegation that concerns me in this
chapter. The place that he cites is neither to be found in the first book
of the Church quoted by him, nor any where else. For I no where ever say that
the council of Nice gave supreme commanding authority over all the Churches
to the Bishop of Rome, but only that it confirmed the distinct jurisdictions of
the three Patriarchs of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioche. And touching the title
of Constantinople, where of he speaks; if he mean the title of being
universal Bishop, it is most true that it was intruded and usurped, as also
the like is at this day, by the Bishops of Rome, which Greg. l. 4. Epi. 38.
Gregory their predecessor disclaimed, thinking it intolerable that one man
should subject to himself all the members of the body of Christ, which is his
Church. But if he mean the title of being a Patriarch in order the second,
having equal privileges with the Bishop of Rome, far be it from me to
think it was intruded or usurped, or to condemn the acts of the Councels of
Constantinople and Chalcedon (two of those four which Saint Greg. li. 1.
epist. 24.
Gregory received as the four Gospels) as the Romanists do, because they
Council. Chalced. act. 16.
gave privileges to the Bishop of Constantinople, equal to those of the
Bishop of Rome. Nay, hereby it appears to be true that S. Hierome was wont to
say, Hieromy. ad Enagrium.
Orbis mayor est vrbe. For after that Constantinople, before named Byzantium;
was enlarged by Constantine, named after his name, and made the seat of the
Emperors, though the very name of it was not at all heard of in the time of
the Nicene Council, yet in the second general Council holden at
Constantinople, the Bishop thereof was made a Patriarch, and set in order and
degree of honor before the other two of Alexandria and Antioche; and in the
great Council of Chalcedon, where there were more then 600 Bishops assembled,
he was again confirmed in the dignity of a Patriarch, and to have equal
privileges with the Bishop of Rome. Against this decree they that supplied the
place of Leo in the council, resisted; and Leo ep. 53. and 54.
Leo himself would by no means admit, that the Bishops of Alexandria and
Antioche claiming from Peter, the one because Mark was there placed by him,
the other for that in person he abode there for a time, should be put lower,
and the Bishop of Constantinople who had not like pretense, to sit above them.
Yet the Fathers of the council, not so much respecting the claim from Peter,
as the greatness of the city, and thinking it was the greatness of the city
of Rome during the Emperors presence there that caused the Fathers formerly to
give honor to the Bishop of that city, supposed they might now for the same
cause give like honor to the Bishop of Constantinople, being become equal in
state and magnificence to old Rome, and named new Rome, as every way matching
it: and howsoever the succeeding Bishops of Rome strove a long while about this
matter; Onuph. annot. in vit. Bonif. 3. apud Platinam.
yet in the end they were forced to yield, and to take the Bishops of
Constantinople for Patriarchs in degree of honor set before the other two.

CHAP. 4.
IN this chapter he endeavors to prove by testimonies of Protestants, that
all books received for Scripture by the Roman church, are canonical: and
herein are two things that concern me: The first, that the Roman church being
the spouse of Christ, his true church and pillar of truth, whose communion we
must embrace, follow her directions, rest in her judgment, living and dying
therein to have eternal life, men might here by my censure and advice confine
themselves, and wade no further in so many intricate controversies of religion:
the second, that I am or must be of opinion, that all those books which the
church of Rome received for canonical, are indeed canonical. For answer to
the former of these allegations. First, I profess before God, men, and Angels,
that I neither do, nor ever did think the present Roman church to be the true
church, whose communion we are bound to embrace: but an heretical church,
with which we may not communicate. Secondly, I profess in like sort, that
though I did and do acknowledge the church wherein our Fathers lived before
Luthers time, to have been the true church of God in respect of the best, and
indeed the principal parts thereof, which held a saving profession of the
truth in Christ (howsoever many, and they greatly prevailing, erred damnably:)
yet I never thought it to be that church, in whose judgment we are to rest
without any farther doubt or question: nor that it was safe to follow the
greater part of the guides and rulers of it: but the church in whose judgment
we must absolutely and finally rest, is that whole and entire society of Holy
ones, which beginning at Jerusalem, and filling the world, continues unto
this day. To refuse the judgment of this church, or to resist against any
thing delivered ab omnibus, ubique, semper, in all places, at all times, by all
Christian pastors and people not noted for heresy or singularity, were
extreme folly and madness: so that, as I noted in answer to the first chapter
out of Waldensis, it is not any particular church, as the church of Africa, nor
the particular Roman church, but the universal church, not gathered together
in a general council, which has sometimes erred: but the whole catholic
church dispersed through the world from the baptism of Christ unto our times,
which does undoubtedly hold the true faith, and faithful testimony of JESUS,
and in whose judgment we must absolutely rest without any farther question o^
doubting; and hereunto agrees t Vincentius Lirinensis, prescribing this course
to be followed in (...) Contra prof. haeret. novitat
matters questioned, touching faith and religion. If error creep into one
part of the Church, we must look unto other that still are sound and pure; if
into almost the whole present church, we must look up higher into former
times, and the resolutions of them that have been since the Apostles times.
Thus I hope the Reader will easily perceive that this first allegation is
frivolous: For I do not think the present Church of Rome to be the true
church of God, whose communion we must embrace, nor that the particular Roman
church, when it was at the best, was that church in the judgment whereof we
are absolutely to rest: and therefore let no man confine himself here without
farther wading into particular controversies, but let every man as he tendreth
the salvation of his own soul, look to the judgment of other churches also,
and to the resolutions of former times.

Now let us proceed to his second allegation concerning canonical and
apocryphal books of Scripture. His words are; The Protestant surueyor of the
Communionbooke affirms plainly, that the Protestants of England must approve
for Canonical all those books which the Roman Church does: and Doctor Field
is of the same opinion, or must be; for thus he writes: The ancient and
true-beleeuing Jews before the coming of Christ (especially such as lived in
Greece and nations out of Jury, commonly called Hellenists) received those
books for canonical Scripture. It is well he says not absolutely that I am
of that opinion, but that I am, or must be; for he is well assured I am not;
but he knows how to force me to be, whether I will or not, by falsely
reporting my words, and making me say that I never thought nor said. For do I
any where say, the ancient, and true ^euing Jews before the coming of Christ
received those books for canonical, especially such as were dispersed among
the Gentiles? No surely; but the contrary: namely, that the ancient church of
the Jews did receive those only as divine and canonical which we do, and not
those other in question. I am verily persuaded these men think lying to be no
sin; for otherwise, it were not likely that bragging so much of their good
works, and trusting to the merit thereof, they would wittingly run so often
into such a sin, as we silly men think it to be, and as the spirit of God
assures us it is, being of the number of those that shut men out of the
kingdom of God and Christ, according to that in the Revelation, Revel. 22. 15.
Without shall be dogs and inchanters, and whore-mongers, and murderers, and
idolaters, and whosoever loves or makes lies. But let us see if he deal not
better in that which follows: Surely no, he is constant and ever like
himself; for he says, Doctor Field writes thus. The ancient and
true-beleeuing Jews before the coming of Christ (especially such as lived in
Greece and nations out of Jury, commonly called Hellenists) received those
books for canonical Scripture; and to use his own words, Hence it came that
the Jews delivered a double canon of Scripture to the Christian Churches.
Surely this is not to use, but to abuse my words: For I was not so senseless,
as to say, the ancient and true-beleeuing Jews received the books in
question for Canonical, and that thence it came that they delivered a double
Canon of Scripture to the Christian Churches. For if the Jews generally had
received all these books for canonical, but especially the Hellenists; then
they could not have delivered a double canon of Scripture, but one only.
Wherefore my words are not as he reports them, but having spoken of the 22
books of the old Testament, I add, Page. 380.
These only did the ancient Church of the Jews receive as divine and
Canonical; and that other books were added unto these, whose authority not
being certain and known, are named Apocryphal, fell out in this sort. The
Jews in their latter times, before, and at the coming of Christ, were of two
sorts; some properly named Hebrews commorant at Jerusalem and in the holy
land; other named Hellenists, Jews of the dispersion, mingled with the
Grecians: these had written sundry books in Greek, which they made use of
together with other parts of the old Testament, which they had of the
translation of the Septuagint; but the Hebrews received only the 22 books
before mentioned: Hence it came that the Jews delivered a double Canon of the
Scripture to the Christian Church; the one pure, indubitate and divine, which
is the Hebrew Canon; the other in Greek enriched with, or rather adulterated
by the addition of certain other books written in those days, when God
raised up no more Prophets among his people. So that the Jews being of two
sorts, Hebrews and Hellenistes: The Hebrews delivered to the Christian church
only the 22 books of the old Testament, whereof there is no question, to be
the absolute rule and Canon of our faith, and took no notice of the books now
in question: But the Hellenists delivered with them these also that are
questioned, if not to be the canon of our faith, yet to be a canon and rule of
direction for matters of conversation and manners, and to be read at least ad
aedificationem plebis, for the edification of the people, though not for
confirmation of matters of doctrine. And truly I am persuaded, it cannot be
proved that the Hellenists ever received these books in question, as any part
of the canon of faith, or absolutely canonical, but in a sort only, in that
they contain a good direction of men's manners: But, says he, D. Field
speaking of this volume of the Hellenists, adds. These books which are
doubted of, joined in one volume with those 22, whereof there is no question,
were translated out of Greek into Latin, and read by the Latin Church in
that translation; and entreating of Saint Augustine and the Latin Fathers,
especially in Africa, and the third Carthaginian Council, writes thus. They
reckon the books of Scripture according as they found them in use in the
Latin Church: then Doctor Field has absolutely granted that in the Latin
Church (under which England is) these Scriptures were ever esteemed as
Canonical. They seem greatly to desire to end the controversies between them
and us by public disputation, and challenge us in such sort, as if we durst
not show our selves where they should appear: but surely if they perform no
more when they come to disputing then they do when they write, nor bring no
better arguments when they oppose in our schools, then they publish in their
books, the very boys in our Universities will hiss them out. For how will
this consequence ever be made good. Augustine and the Africanes in the third
Council of Carthage reckon the books of Scripture as they found them joined
in one volume translated out of Greek into Latin, not exactly noting the
difference that is between them, and so seem to admit into the canon those
books which we reject: therefore the books which we reject were ever
esteemed to be canonical in the Latin church? seeing Hierome at the same
time translating the Scriptures out of Hebrew, and exactly learning which
books pertained to the Hebrew canon, rejected all besides the 22 Hebrew
books, as the Grecians did before him, and as after him almost all men of note
in the Latin church did. But he will say, Augustine and the Africanes found
the books rejected by us in use in the Latin church, as well as the other
which we admit to be canonical; therefore they were ever esteemed to be
canonical in the Latin Church, under which England is. This proof is too
weak; for as I have noted in the place cited by him, the prayer of Manasses
confessed by our Adversaries to be Apocryphal, the third and fourth of
Esdras, and the book called Pastor, were likewise in use in the Latin Church,
that is, read by them of the Latin church, cited by them in their writings,
and many things translated out of them into the public prayers and liturgy
of the church; yet will it not follow that these books were ever esteemed as
canonical in the Latin church, under which England was. It is true indeed
that Augustine when he was blamed for citing some testimonies out of the
books rejected by. us, defended his so doing by the practice of the church
which had anciently read the same in her public assemblies, but not much
pressing the authority of them, says, he can prove the things, for proof
whereof he alleged those books, out of other that are not doubted of. So that
Caietanes opinion is not improbable, that Augustine did not think these books
to be absolutely canonical, but in a sort only, in that they contain many
godly instructions, and a good direction for men's manners. That which he
adds in the last place, that these controuersed books being translated out
of Greek into Latin, with the other originally written in Hebrew, were in
likelihood first delivered by the Hellenists, or Jews of the dispersion, to
the Greek Churches, as being in Greek amongst them, is to no purpose: For
though we should grant they were so delivered all together, yet they of the
Greek Church having an eye to the Canon of the Hebrews, put a difference
between the one and the other; and never accounted these to be canonical, as
Page 3^.
I have largely proved out of the testimonies of Melito, Origin, Athanasius,
Nazianzen, Cyrill, Epiphanius, and Damascene. Thus have we examined the
allegations of this chapter, and found them very weak and frivolous.

CHAP. 5.
IN the fifth chapter, he undertakes to prove, that Protestants confess the
vulgar translation to be the best, and their own the worst. But because he
alleges nothing to this purpose out of any thing that I have written, I will
pass from this to the next, not doubting but they who are wronged by him, will
make him know that he undertakes much, and proves little.

CHAP. 6.
IN the sixth chapter, wherein he undertakes to prove by the confession of
Protestants, that the true, lawful, and iuridicall exposition of Scriptures is
in the Roman Church, and not with the Protestants, he endeavors to show
that I confess so much: His words are these. D. Field confesses, that Page
372.
neither conference of places, nor consideration of the Antecedentia and
Consequentia, nor looking into the originals, are of any force, unless we
find the things which we conceive to be understood and meant in the places
interpreted, to be consonant to the rule of faith: therefore he confesses,
that the warranted exposition of Scripture belongs to the Roman church. This
consequence I deny as strange and absurd: wherefore let us see if he make any
show of proving it. He adds, that I teach, the rule of faith must be tried
either by the general practice of the Church, the renowned of all ages, or the
Pastors of an Apostolical Church, which, as the world can witness, no
Protestant can make claim unto: as if from hence it would follow (which is the
thing he goes about to prove, or else he does nothing) that all warranted
exposition of Scripture belongs to the Roman Church. Whatsoever become of
the consequence of this argument, there are many exceptions to be taken to the
antecedent of it. For first, I do not give these three rules whereof he
speaks, whereby to know the rule of faith, but to know true traditions from
false. Secondly, I do not say, the general practice of the Church, the
renowned of all ages, and the Pastors of an Apostolical church, are the rules
whereby true traditions may be known from false; but the general practice of
the church from the beginning, the report, and testimony of the most renowned
and famous in all ages, and the testimony of the Pastors of an Apostolic
church, successively delivered from the beginning, not the present testimony of
an Apostolical church. Thirdly, we will never admit any pretended traditions,
unless they may be confirmed unto us by one of these rules: and if our
Adversaries can prove any of their supposed traditions by these rules, we will
willingly acknowledge them, and therefore I know no reason why we may not make
claim unto them.

He adds, that I condemn private interpretations; as if ever any Protestant
had allowed any private interpretation in that sense that I dislike it, or as
if our Religion were grounded upon private interpretations. But the good man
might have been pleased to remember, that in the Page 566
place cited by him, I distinguish three kinds of private interpretations:
whereof one is named private, for that they that so interpret, neglect the
common rules of direction, rely upon secret revelations known to none but
themselves, and despise the judgment of other men. Another, because the person
so interpreting is private, and yet presumptuously takes upon him to force all
others to embrace the same, having no authority so to do. The 3d is, when, as
the person is of private condition, so he seeks only to satisfy himself in
it, and no way presumes to prescribe to others to follow that he resolves on,
farther then by reason and higher authority he can enforce the same. The first
kind of private interpretations we detest and accurse. The 2. we condemn as
presumptuous. The 3d we approve, and so do our Adversaries, for ought I know:
and therefore I know not to what purpose he cites this saying of mine, that
private men may not so propose their interpretations, as if they would bind all
other men to embrace and receive them.

That which follows, that I make three kinds of interpretation, and affirm,
that none have authority so to interpret Scripture, as that they may subject
all that dissent from the same to excommunication and censures of like nature,
but Bishops assembled in a general Council, is so true, that neither he, nor
any other in his right wits will ever deny it. For who has authority so to
interpret Scripture, as to subject them to excommunication that dissent, but
the governors of the church? and who so, as to subject all that dissent, but
they that are the governors of the whole, as are the Bishops of the whole
Christian church, assembled in a general Council? But, says he, Protestants
have never had any general Council; therefore they have no warranted
interpretations of Scripture. If this consequence be good, the Christians for
the space of 300 years after Christ had no warranted interpretations of
Scripture, for till the reign of Constantine there was no general council.
But the Protestants can have no general council, therefore they have not
amongst them the highest and supreme binding authority and judgment. Surely we
confess, that being but a part of the Christian church, they cannot have a
Council absolutely general out of themselves alone; and therefore not having
the highest binding authority amongst them, it being found only in the whole
universal church, they do not take upon the^ so to interpret Scriptures, as
to subject all to excommunication that refuse their interpretations, but such
particular churches and persons only as are under their jurisdiction. The
Papists indeed in the height of their pride being but a part, contemning all
other interessed in the supreme binding judgment as well as themselves,
assume and appropriate it to themselves alone, in which claim we may rather
see the height of their pride, the^ the cleernesse of their right: and
therefore the Orat. de cause. dissens. Eccles. apud Nilum.
Grecians impute all the divisions and breaches of the Christian world unto
them, in that they presumed of themselves without them to interpret the
Scriptures, and to define certain questions touching the faith, in such sort
that they subjected them to Anathema and excommunication, so casting them all
into hell as much as lay in them. These inconsiderate proceedings, and rash
censures did such harm, that the Gerson. part. 4 sermon. de pace and vnitate
Graecorum.
wisest, most religious, and moderate in the Latin Church, wished they had
never been passed, or that they were reuersed and called back again. But,
says he, let any man enter into a serious consideration of Protestant doctrine
in this point; that under pain of damnation we are bound to find and follow
the truth; that general Councels as before, may subject every man disobeying
their determinations to excommunication and censures of like nature, the most
terrible and fearful punishment of this world; and all judgments
Ecclesiastical, even general Councels may err and have erred even in things
pertaining to God, as is defined in their Articles, and is commonly taught and
believed with them: this consideration is able to put men not regardlesse of
salvation, into more then a quaking palsy. What the meaning of the good man is
in this passage, I do not well conceive: For I see not but all these
considerations may well stand together; that the truth is to be found out and
followed upon pain of damnation, that Councels may err, and yet have power to
subject such as disobey their determinations to excommunication, the most
terrible and fearful punishment of this world, without any danger of causing
men to fall into a quaking palsy. For are they all in state of damnation that
are excommunicated, whether justly or vniusty? or may no man subject men to
excommunication but he that cannot err? Surely all men know Turecrem. lib.
2. de eccles. c. 93. Bellar. de Pont. Romans lib. 4. cap. 11.
that not only Popes and particular Bishops, but even general Councels may
err in matters of fact, and excommunicate a man unjustly for resisting their
determinations. And does not Saint Augustine show that by the means of
prevailing factions, men may be unjustly excommunicated, and never restored to
the outward communion of the e August. de vera Relig. c. 6
church again, and yet die in state of salvation? nay, be rewarded for the
patient enduring of the wrongs offered them, by them by whom they were
excommunicate? It is no such absurd thing then, that they may err, who have
authority to excommunicate. But perhaps his meaning is, that if Councils may
err, there is no certain way to find out the truth, which yet every man is
bound upon peril of damnation to find and follow: and that it is the
consideration hereof, that is able to put a man into a quaking palsy. Surely
this man seems to fear where there is no fear: for are there no other
means to find out the truth, when questions and doubts trouble the church, and
distract the minds of men, but general Councels? How did the Fathers in the
Primitive Church, during the time of the first three hundred years, satisfy
themselves, and such as depended of them, in the midst of so many, so horrible
and damnable heresies as then rose up? Does not Lib. 1. de council. c. 10.
Bellarmine from hence infer, that though general Counsels be a very fit
and good means to end controversies, and settle the differences that may arise
in the church, and so much to be desired, yet if they cannot be had, the truth
may be found out by other means? yea have not the Fathers in factious times
complained, that they never saw good end of any council? and yet were resolved
in matters of the faith, and able to settle others also.

CHAP. 7.
IN this chapter, wherein he indeauoureth to show that traditions are of equal
authority with Scripture, and yet prove the Roman Religion, he has these
words. The dignity and authority of unwritten and Apostolical traditions
being lawfully proved, was ever esteemed such, that M. Wootton affirms, out
of all question we are bound to keep them, and tells, that M. Perkins was of
the same mind. This is an ill beginning, for whereas he should prove, that the
Apostles delivered some matters of faith by bare tradition without writing, he
brings forth some that say, if it could be proved that any thing was so
delivered, it were to be received with no less regard then if it had been
written; which is, as if a man should undertake to prove out of Paul's
Epistles, that the Angels in Heaven, and the Apostles of CHRIST are to be
anathematized and accursed, because he says, Gal. 1.
If we, or an Angel from heaven preach any other doctrine then that ye have
received, hold him accursed. Wherefore to help the matter, and to make some
show at the least: whereas we say, If any thing could be proved to have been
delivered by the Apostles, by tradition, it were no less to be esteemed then
things of the same nature written by them; he cites our words as if we
confessed there were certain unwritten Apostolical traditions, which were
ever esteemed equal with the Scripture, but not before they were proved to be
such. D. Field, says he, speaks of such traditions in these words; There is
no reason but these should be equal with Scripture: for it is not the writing
that gives these things their authority; but the worth and credit of him
that delivers the^, though but by word, and lively voice only. In this
allegation he wrongeth me no less, then in other before; for these are not my
words, as he untruly affirms against his own knowledge, but speaking of the
diverse kinds of unwritten traditions imagined by the Papists, I say. Page 3.
75.
All these in their several kinds they make equal with the words, precepts
and doctrines of Christ, the Apostles, and Pastors of the Church, left unto us
in writing; neither is there any reason why they should not do so, if they
could prove any such unwritten verities: for it is not the writing that gives
things their authority, but the worth and credit of him that delivers them.
The only doubt is, whether there be any such traditions or not? Is this to
acknowledge that there are unwritten traditions of equal authority with the
Scriptures? If one of his fellows should tell him, if he were Pope he could
not err, would he infer, his fellow were so mad to think he could not err,
that does nothing else but err, and mistake all that he cites? But he says,
I add, that the perpetual virginity of our Lady was a tradition, and only
received by such authority; and so do other Protestants: and that both they and
I acknowledge Heluidius was condemned of heresy, and justly for denial
thereof: which could not be, except to deny the doctrine of true traditions
were to deny the word of God in their judgments. This is an other notable and
shameless falsification. For, I neither say, the perpetual virginity of our
Lady was a tradition, nor that Heluidius was condemned, and that justly for the
denial thereof, but my words are. Page 376.
The Canon of Scripture being admitted as delivered by tradition, though the
Divine truth of it be in it self clear, not depending of the Churches
authority, there is no matter of Faith delivered by bare and only tradition,
as the Romanists imagine. The only clear instance they seem to give, is
touching the perpetual virginity of Mary, which they say cannot be proved by
Scripture, and yet is necessary to be believed. But they should know that
this is no point of Christian faith. That she was a virgin before, in, and
after the birth of Christ, we are bound to believe as an article of our faith,
and so much is delivered in Scripture, and in the Apostles Creed; but that
she continued so ever after is a seemly truth, fitting the sanctity of the
blessed virgin, and is de pietate, but not de necessitate fidei. Neither was
Heluidius condemned of heresy for the denial hereof; but by such as thought
it might be proved out of Scripture, or by such as detested and condemned his
madness and desperate singularity, in pertinaciously urging the denial of it
upon mis-construction of Scripture, as if the denial of it had been a matter
of faith. And surely, whatsoever this man think to the contrary, Loc. Theolog.
lib. 12. fol. 445.
Melchior Canus is of opinion that the perpetual virginity of Marie the mother
of our Lord, is not believed only or principally as delivered by tradition,
but that the very consideration of the respect that was due to so sanctified a
vessel of the incarnation of the Son of God, as was her body, would make us
persuade our selves she never knew man after she was so much honored as to be
the mother of God. This consideration, no doubt, moved the Fathers to be of
this opinion, rather then any tradition.

In the next place he sets down my discourse and division of traditions
approved by Protestants in the twentieth chapter of my fourth book of the
Church, leaving out diverse things in setting down the same for his most
advantage, as the Reader will easily perceive, if he peruse the place. But to
what purpose he produces this discourse and division of mine, I know not. For
first, if he think that I now yield more unto the^ in the matter of
traditions, the^ our Divines heretofore have done, as he seems to do, in
that he says, though untruly, that I prevent and confute the usual objections
of Protestants about the doctrine of traditions, he is greatly deceived. De
tradit. ex 1. decreto 4. sessionis.
For Chemnitius in his Examen of the Tridentine Council admits all those
kinds of traditions which I have delivered. I will set down his discourse in
his own words, that the reader may see he says fully as much as I have done.
Primum genus traditionum est, quod Apostoli tradiderunt doctrinam viua voce,
sed illa postea in scriptura literis consignata est. Secundum genus traditionum
est, quod Libri Scripturae sacrae non interrupt a serie temporum, sicut
Augustinus loquitur, and certa connexionis successione ab Ecclesia custoditi,
and fideliter ad posteros transmissi, nobisque quasi per manus traditi sunt.
Tertium genus traditionum constituimus illud, de quo loquuntur Irenaeus lib. 3.
and Tertullianus de Praescript: Recitant autem quid sit illud quod ex
traditione probant, and sunt illi ipsi articuli fidei, quos symbolum
Apostolicum complectitur. Illos autem in scriptura multis manifestis
testimonijs tradi nullum est dubium. Quartum genus traditionum est, de
expositione, vero sensu, seu natiua sententia scripturae. Quintum genus
traditionum constituimus illud, quod Patres aliquando ita vocant illa dogmata
quae non totidem literis and syllabis in scriptura ponuntur, sed bona, certa,
firma and manifesta Ratiocinatione ex perspicuis scripturae testimoniis
colliguntur. Sextum genus traditionum constituimus illud, quod de Catholico
Patrum consensu dicitur. Septimum genus traditionum est, quod vbi Veteres
mentione^ faciunt traditionu^ non scriptarum, proprie non intelligunt dogmata
fidei, extra and praeter Scripturam recipienda, etiamsi nullo Scripturae
testimonio probare possunt, sed de ritibus and consuetudinibus quibusdam
vetustis loquuntur, quos propter antiquitatem ad Apostolos retulerunt.
Verisimile est quosdam etiam alios externos ritus, qui in scriptura annotati
non sunt, ab Apostolis traditos esse, and nullis quidem certis and firmis
documentis probari potest qui sunt ritus certo ab Apostolis traditi, qui ex
Scriptura ostendi non possunt. These are the words of Chemnitius, whereby it
appears, that he admits all those kinds of tradition which I do, and yet
rejects the imagined traditions of Papists. D. Whit^. disp. de sacra script.
quaest. 6. controu. 2. cap. 6.
Whitakers likewise acknowledges, that the Apostles of Christ ordained and
appointed in the Churches certain rites, and observations for order and
comeliness, which they did not commit to writing, because they were not of
necessity to be perpetually observed in one and the same sort, but
dispenseable according to the circumstance of times and places. This he
proves out of the first to the Corinthians, the 11 and 14 chapters. Secondly,
if he think their erroneous opinion touching traditions, may be inferred from
any thing that I acknowledge, he seems to be too weak in understanding, and
not to know what the state of the question is between them and us; for the
question is not, whether there be any traditions or not, but whether (it being
first supposed, that the Prophets, Apostles, and other holy men of God left
unto posterities divine and sacred books, and it being agreed upon, which they
ate) they contain all things necessary to be known and practiced by Christian
men, for the attaining of ever lasting life and salvation. We say, they do.
Neither can he prove the contrary out of any thing written by me. For I
acknowledge nothing to have been delivered by tradition, but the books of
Scripture, things therein in some sort contained, and certain dispenseable
observations not at all, or hardly to be discerned from Ecclesiastical
constitutions.

Let us see therefore what he can conclude out of any thing that I have
written for the confirmation of the Romish error. To make, says he, a short
reflection upon his doctrine; by his first rule of traditions; he must grant
unto us which I have proved before at large, that all those books which the
Roman church approves for Scripture, together with the special doctrines of
prayer for the dead, to Angels, etc. are traditions. For Doctor Field and his
rules do so assure us. It seems my case is harder then I was ware of, and my
danger greater then I supposed it had been. But what are those rules assigned
by me which assure us that all the books approved by the Roman church are
canonical? Have they been ever holden to be so? Have the most famous in all
ages, or at the least in diverse ages constantly delivered them unto us, as
received by them from those that went before the^, no man doubting of them? Did
the Pastors of any Apostolical church in the world successively deliver them
as canonical to their after-commers? He knows they did not. For as I have
Page 381. and 382. of the 4. book of the Church.
elsewhere proved, Melito Bishop of Sardis, Origin, Athanasius, Hilary,
Nazianzene, Cyrill, Epiphanius, the Council of Laodicea, Ruffinus, Hierome,
Gregory, Damascene, Hugo de sancto Victore, Richardus de Sancto Victore, Petrus
Cluniacensis, Lyranus, Dionysius Carthusianus, Hugo Cardinalis, Thomas Aquinas,
Occham, Picus Mirandula, Waldensis, Armachanus, Driedo, Caietane, and all the
most famous Divines in all ages reject them, save only Augustine, the third
Council of Carthage, and some few other; who yet as Caietane thinks,
received them not as absolutely canonical, but in a sort only, in that they
contain a convenient good direction of manners. The Reader, I doubt not, will
easily see his folly in this point. But it may be, the special doctrines of
prayer for the dead, and to Angels, whereof he speaks, will be found
Apostolical traditions, by those rules that I allow of. Surely no, for
howsoever it was a most ancient and laudable custom of the church to remember
the names of the dead at the holy Altar, and Table of the Lord, with desire of
their and our final consummation and public acquitall in the day of CHRIST,
and some particular men doubtfuly extended the same practice and custom
farther to the mitigating, suspending, or total removing and taking away of
the punishments of Christian men dying in the state of mortal sin: yet the
Popish opinion of Purgatory, and prayer to deliver men from thence, were not
once heard of in the Primitive Church, nor are yet received by the greatest
part of the Christian world. Touching prayer to Angels, it was condemned by the
Apostle Saint Paul, the council of Laodicea, Aug. de vera relig c. 55.
Augustine, and Theod. in ep. ad Col. cit. Synod. Laod.
Theodoret, but that the church did invocate Angels from the beginning, that
the most famous in all ages did teach men so to do, or the Pastors of any
Apostolical church successively one after another, which are my rules he
speaks of, neither he, nor any Papist living can ever prove.

The second thing he would infer out of my words is, that we must of
necessity resort to the Romish church to know and learn the form of
Christian doctrine, the explication of the several parts thereof, and the
obscurities of Scripture, for that I say the Apostles delivered the form of
Christian doctrine as a tradition to posterities, and no posterity of
Protestants can be of this posterity, because both their priorities and
posterities deny traditions. Thus then the good Author reasons. The
Protestants are none of those posterities to which the form of Christian
doctrine has been derived from the Apostles by the line of succession:
therefore we must resort to the Roman church to know it. The antecedent of this
argument he proves, because as he says, both priorities and posterities of
Protestants deny all traditions. Surely the man commits so many faults in
this one silly argument, that I know not well what first to except against: For
neither is it consequent, that if Protestants be not of that posterity to which
the form of Christian doctrine was commended and delivered from the Apostles,
that we must of necessity seek to the Roman church to learn it. Neither do
Protestants deny all traditions, as he untruly affirms, but only the false
imagined and vain traditions of Papists and other heretics. We therefore to
silence this trifler, do profess, that the form of Christian doctrine is not
to be sought in the Roman church alone, or the other Christian churches that
now presently are in the world, but in the consenting voice of Pastors and
people succeeding one another; they that went before ever reporting and
delivering to them that came after them, the things they had learned of their
elders, that so what doctrine the Apostles first delivered, might by their
after-commers be delivered to all posterities. Of these posterities we profess
our selves to be, receiving without any doubt or questioning, whatsoever we
find to have been delivered in all places, at all times, by all Christian men,
not noted for heresy or singularity, and rejecting those things that have no
testimony of antiquity: as the Popes not erring, his universality of
jurisdiction, his power and right to dispose the kingdoms of the world,
private Masses, half communions, Papal indulgences, and all such things as
any way carry the mark of noveltie and singularity. But, says he, D. Field
in the fourth and fifth kinds of traditions speaks of them in the plural
number, and yet gives no example of the fourth, but the baptism of infants,
nor of the fifth and last, but the observation of Lent, and Sunday, or the
Lords day: therefore he must seek for more then he remembers, and
consequently, in all equal judgment, as many articles of Catholic religion,
as we claim by tradition. The answer hereunto is easy; for touching the
fourth kind of tradition I define it to be the continued practice of such
things, as are neither contained in Scripture expressly, nor the example of
such practice there clearly and expressly delivered, though the grounds,
reasons, and causes of the necessity of such practice be there contained, and
the benefit or good that follows of it. The only example I give of this
kind of tradition, is the baptism of infants: yet may I speak in the plural
number, as I do, because not only the baptism of infants is of this sort,
but many very material things belonging thereunto; as that in time of danger
of death, they are to be baptized with all possible speed, lest we seem to
contemn or neglect the Sacrament: that this may be done in private houses,
either by dipping, or sprinkling, as well before as after the eighth day. If
this Author can tell us of any more examples of things of this kind, the
necessity whereof may be proved out of Scripture, though the practice of them
be not there expressed, we will admit them, but they will make nothing for the
confirmation of Popish unwritten traditions, seeing such things are written in
respect of the causes and grounds of the necessity of observing them, though
not by way of express precept, or report of practice: and therefore it will
not follow from any thing that I have said in the judgment of any man, though
not indifferent, nor equal, that I must admit so many Articles of Religion, as
Papists shall be pleased to claim by tradition. Of the fifth and last kind of
traditions, which he divides into two, though I make but one, I give but only
one example: which is the observation of the Lords day, which yet appears by
Revel. 1. 10
Scripture to have been in use even in the Apostles times. For touching the
Lent Fast, I do not give it for an example, as he untruly reports, but only
having described the fifth kind of traditions, say, that some think the Lent
Fast, and the Fast of the fourth and sixth days of the week, to be of this
kind.

The next thing which he urges in his reflection upon my doctrine, as he
terms it, is, that if the traditions of the last kind be confounded with
Ecclesiastical constitutions, as I say they are, that we might the more
reverence the constitutions of the Church, we must at last recant our contempt
and dislike against them. For answer hereunto, I will first show that the
traditions of the last sort, are so confounded with Ecclesiastical
constitutions, that it can hardly be certainly known which they are.
Secondly, that we never disliked the ancient constitutions of the primitive
and first Church, and therefore need not recant any such dislike. That
Apostolical traditions of the last kind are confounded with Ecclesiastical
constitutions, it is most clear and evident, in that some reckon one thing,
and some another; and our Adversaries dare not peremptorily say, which amongst
those traditions diuersely and differently mentioned by the Fathers, are
Apostolical, and which not. Tertul. de corona militis.
Tertullian accounts all these following to be Apostolical traditions;
thrice dipping of them that are baptized; the interrogatories, respondes, and
words of sacred stipulation used in Baptism; the renouncing of the Devil, his
Angels, and the pomp of the world when we come to the water of Baptism; and
before in the presence of the Bishop; the fore-tasting of milk and honey, and
the abstaining from bathing and washing a whole week after; the taking, or
receiving of the holy Sacrament in the time of ordinary repast, oblations for
the dead, and for their birth-dayes every year the same day they dyed,
standing at prayers on the Lords day, and from Easter to Whitsontide, and the
signing of men's foreheads with the sign of the cross, Harum, says he, and
aliarum ciusmodi disciplinarum si legem expostules Scripturarum, nullam
inuenies: traditio tibi praetendetur auctrix, consuetudo confirmatrix, fides
obseruatrix: that is, Of these and the like observations if thou seek for any
written law or precept, thou shall find none. Tradition will be alleged unto
thee, as author of them, custom as the confirmer, and faith as the obseruer.
Hereunto some Basil. de Spiritu Sancto, c. 27.
add, praying toward the East, Leo epist. 4. universe. Episc. per Siciliam.
baptising at Easter and Whitsontide only; Hierome accounts the Lent-fast
amongst traditions of this sort. His words are. Hieronym. ad Marcell. aduers.
Montan.
Nos vnam quadragesimam secundum traditionem Apostolorum toto anno, tempore
nobis congruo, ieiunamus: We fast one Lent according to the tradition of the
Apostles in the whole year, at a fit and seasonable time; to whom In concord
Evang. ca: 15.
Iansenius agrees, saying, that the observation of the Lent-fast seems to
have proceeded from the tradition of the Apostles, which though perhaps it did
not bind all by any express precept from the beginning; yet being kept in all
ages, and in all parts of the world, had the strength and force of a law. I
think there is no Papist will say certainly that all these were Apostolical
traditions, but whether they do or not, it is most certain they think
themselves no more bound to keep them then mere Ecclesiastical
constitutions, which are established by the authority of the church, and may be
the same be abrogated and reuersed again, in that the most part of all these
are out of use in the Roman Church. For they think not thrice dipping
necessary, following therein the authority of Saint Gregory; they fore-taste
not milk and honey, Greg. l. 1. epist. 41.
nor milk and wine when they are baptized; they abstain not from bathing a
whole week after baptism; they stand not at their prayers from Easter to
Whitsontide, nor on the Lords days; they keep not the Lent fast, as the
Primitive Church did, and as all other Churches of Greece, Armenia and
Aethiopia do to this day by eating nothing till night, and by abstaining from
wine, strong drink, and whatsoever is pleasing; but they make a mere mock of
God and men in their observation of Lent, and other fasts, in saying a part of
their Euen-song in the morning, that so after the ending thereof, at dinner
time men may be thought to go to supper, and to do as the Fathers did, that
did eat nothing on their fasting days, till the evening; they fast not the
Wednesday, which in the primitive Church was fasted as precisely as Friday, but
in steed hereof they fast on Saturday, which aunciently was not fasted in
many churches, nor yet is in the Churches of the East; they baptize at any time
in the year; If they have disused and left off these observations, as no doubt
they will profess they have, let them not think that we contemn or condemn
all those ancient customs which we use not, but have a due respect to
circumstances of times, and the different states of things. Tertullian and the
ancient, thought it Nefas, an unlawful thing to kneel at prayers on the Lords
day: we think it very lawful, fit, and seemly; yet are we not contrary to
the Fathers. They suffered none to be baptized, but only at Easter and
Whitsontide, we admit men to baptize at all times; they dipped those who^ they
baptized, thrice; we but once: they signed themselves with the sign of the
cross, when they went out, and when they came in, when they put on, and when
they put off their apparel; we by reason of the abuse of this harmless
ceremony, in that it was used by the Romanists, not as an outward profession of
their faith in him that was crucified, or a silent invocation of his name, but
to drive away devils, still tempests, cure diseases, and remit venial sins
ex opere operato, use this ceremony more sparingly, yet do we not wholly
neglect it, but sign our new baptized infants with this glorious mark and
character of the crucified Savior of the world: they mingled water with that
wine which they consecrated in the blessed Sacrament, because even in ordinary
use their wines being hot, were wont so to be allayed: we not having the like
reason of mixture, mingle not water with wine in the Sacrament, as likewise the
Armenians do not, yet are we not contrary to the ancient Christians, nor
contemners of old observations. So that to conclude this point, we approve the
saying of Hierome, answering the question whether it were lawful to fast on
the Saturday, or not. His words are: Hier. ad Lucinium.
Ego illud te breviter admonendum puto, traditiones Ecclesiasticas, praesertim
quae fidei non officiant, it a observandas ut a maioribus traditae sunt, nec
aliorum consuetudinem, aliorum contrario more subverti: atque utinam omni
tempore ieiunare possem us, quod in Actibus Apostolorum diebus Pentecostes and
die Dominico Apostolum Paulum, and cum eo credentes fecisse legimus: nec tamen
Manichaeae haereseos accusandi sunt, cum carnalis cibus praeferrinon debeat
spirituali, nec hoc dico quod Dominicis diebus ieiunandum putem, and contextas
sexaginta Diebus ferias auferam, sed unaquaeque provincia abundet in sensu suo,
and praecepta maiorum leges Apostolicas arbitretur. Wherefore let us proceed to
see if he have any thing else to say in this hisreflection, as he calls it,
upon my doctrine.

His fourth allegation is, that the rules I assign, cannot tell of any
traditions to advantage Protestants which deny traditions: but that both
traditions and rules to know them, must of necessity belong to the church
Apostolic of Rome, being in this question a rule of it self, as I have
declared, Surely it seems the good man knows not what he says: for in the
beginning of this chapter he affirms, though falsely, that I acknowledge the
perpetual virginity of our Lady to be a tradition, and only received by such
authority, and other Protestants do so likewise. And in the end of the
chapter, he brings in his Majesty, the Bishop of Winchester, and Doctor
Couell, admitting diverse traditions: and yet here he says, Protestants
admit no traditions. If he say, that they now admit them, but formerly did
not, he is refuted by Brentius and Chemnitius before cited: who though they
deny, as we do, that there is any article of Faith, or material and
substantial point of Christian doctrine delivered by bare tradition, and not
written, yet acknowledge all those kinds of traditions that we now do. In
that which he has, that the rules assigned by me, can tell of no traditions
that advantage Protestants, and that therefore both traditions and rules to
know them, must of necessity belong to the church Apostolic of Rome, there
are not a few, but very many and gross faults committed: For first, the
consequence is naught the rules to know true traditions from false, can tell of
none to advantage Protestants therefore they belong to the Romish church: and
is no less absurd, then if a man should conclude in this sort. Parsons the
Jesuit is not a Cardinal, though he had once skarlet brought to his lodging
in Rome to make his robes, as Watson testifies: therefore the Author of these
pretended proofs has right to put on those robes. For as there are others fit
to be Cardinals, though neither Parsons nor this good Author be: so there are
other societies of Christians in the world besides the Romanists and
Protestants, to which traditions and rules to know them may pertain, if
Protestants have no claim to them. But the Roman Church is an Apostolical
Church, planted by the Apostles of Christ, and receiving an Epistle from
blessed Paul, wherein she is commended: therefore in my judgment she has not
only claim to traditions, is a rule to know them by. This consequence is as
bad as the former: for I do not make the present profession, testimony, or
judgment of every Apostolical church to be a rule to know true traditions
by, seeing there would be no certainty in such a rule: the present profession
of the Apostolical churches of Rome, Ephesus, Sardis, and Philadelphia, being
contrary the one to the other; but the constant testimony that the Pastors of
such a church have given from the beginning. But his Majesty in open
Parliament acknowledged, the Roman Church to be our mother Church; therefore
we must believe in all things as she does, and by no means forsake her, or
depart from her. For the clearing of the meaning of this speech of his Majesty,
and the silencing of these cauillers, we must note, that the churches of
Christ in the world are of two sorts: for some were planted by the Apostles
themselves, or their coadiutors the Evangelists by their directions, which are
named Apostolical churches; and some other there are, that received not the
faith immediately from the Apostles or their coadiutors, but from the Churches
which the Apostles had planted. The former of these were ever esteemed to be
mother churches, in respect of the latter. So the churches of Alexandria,
Antioche, Ephesus, and the like, were mother churches to many famous churches
in those parts of the world; and so the Roman church is a mother church to
many churches of the West, that received their Christianity and faith from her:
neither may the daughter churches, as his Majesty excellently observed, depart
farther from those mother churches, from which they received the faith, then
they are departed from themselves in their best estate, and first
establishment: but as the Romanists think it lawful for the daughter churches
of the East to depart from those their mother churches, from which they
received their faith, because, as they suppose, they are gone from their first
faith: so we think with his Majesty, that we may justly depart from our
mother church of Rome, because she has forsaken her first faith commended by
the Apostle, and is so far changed, that a man may seek Rome in Rome, and
not find it. That which he adds, that no rules can lead us to the finding
out of any traditions that advantage us, is most untrue: For the certain and
indubitate tradition, whereby the Scriptures are delivered unto us from the
Apostles of Christ, does advantage us so much, that thereby the Papacy is
almost shaken to pieces; and besides, the form of Christian doctrine, and
catholic interpretation of Scripture, brought down unto us from the
Apostles, discovers unto us the novelties and singularities of the Romanists,
to our great advantage, and confirmation in the truth of our profession.

Having thus in his fancy engrossed all traditions, and appropriated them to
the present Roman church, he goes forward and infers out of my admitting
some kind of traditions, and assigning rules to know them, that diverse
particular things which he specifieth, are traditions. The two first
instances that he gives, are the sign of the cross, and the mingling of
water with wine in the holy Sacrament, whereof I have spoken before. The third,
is the reverence of Images, which he says, is by my rules, proved to be an
Apostolical tradition. It is well he dares not say, the worshipping of Images
is proved to be Apostolical, for that by Greg. l. (...). cp. 9.
Saint Gregory and the Fathers, it will be proved to be rather a Diabolical
then an Apostolical tradition. Wherefore let us see what those rules are that
prove the reverence of Images to be Apostolical, seeing it is evident August.
in Ps. 11^.
the church had them not at all for a long time, and Eusebius. l. 7. histor. cap.
17.
Eusebius assures us, the making and having of them, was by imitation of
Heathenish custom. The rules, says he, that prove this, are the Pastors of
the Apostolical Churches in the second Nicene Council, and old custom; but
these are no rules assigned by me: For I never admit the judgment of the
present Pastors of Apostolical churches, or custom to be rules to know true
traditions by, and therefore much less make the Bishops in the second Council
of Nice to be rules of this sort; but the consenting profession of the
Pastors of an Apostolical Church, successively from the beginning, and the
general and perpetual observation of a thing from the time that Christianity
was first known in the world, by neither of which he shall ever prove, either
the worshipping or reuerencing of Images, to be Apostolical. The fourth thing
that he says by my rules is found to be an Apostolical tradition, is
sacrifice, and prayer for the dead; but herein he is deceived, or goes about
to deceive others, as in the rest. For it is true indeed, that the offering of
the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, the naming of the dead, and prayer
for their and our joint consummation and public acquitall in the day of
CHRIST, is such an Apostolical tradition as has ground in Scripture; but, he
can never prove, that the offering of a propitiatory sacrifice for the dead, or
prayer to deliver them out of Purgatory pains, was delivered as a tradition
from the Apostles, by any of my rules, to wit, consent of Fathers from the
beginning, or continued practice from the Apostles times. The like I say of his
fifth instance, for he cannot prove the vow of single life in Priests to have
been from the beginning; but I have largely proved the contrary in my fifth
book of the Church. So that the vow of single life is not proved out of any of
the rules set down by me to be an Apostolical tradition. Wherefore let us
proceed to the rest of his instances. He tells us in the next place, that we
may resolve with the ancient Fathers, that Relics are to be reverenced is a
tradition, because M. Willet tells us, Vigilantius was condemned of heresy
for denying it. Surely it is greatly to be doubted, that he is not a sound and
perfect Romish Catholic, for that he dares not to say the worshipping of
Images and Relics, is a tradition, but minseth the matter, and says only,
the reverencing of them is a tradition. For touching the reverence of Relics,
if he mean nothing else thereby, but the reverent and honorable laying up of
such parts of the bodies of Gods Saints, as come to our hands, it is a
Christian duty that we stand bound unto, so that not only M. Willet, but we
all think Vigilantius was justly condemned, if he either despised, or
contemptuously used the dead bodies of the Saints. Neither need we fly to
unwritten tradition to seek proofs for the necessity of this duty, for they
are plentiously found in Scripture; but if he mean by the reverencing of
Relics, the showing of them to be touched and adored, we think it impiety,
and know it was forbidden by Greg. l. 30. ep. 30.
S, Gregory, who condemns the bringing forth of any parts of the bodies of
Gods Saints departed, into the sight of men, to be seen or handled of them.
That particular and personal absolution from sin after confession, is an
Apostolical and godly ordinance, which is his next instance, we make no doubt;
but deny that it is an unwritten ordinance: neither can this good man prove it
so to be. For does Christ in Scripture give the keys of the kingdom of
heaven to the Apostles and their successors, with power to bind, and power to
loose, with power to remit, and power to retain sins? and is it not a
written verity, that particular absolution is necessary? His Majesty, on whom
he fathereth this tradition, did most learnedly and excellently distinguish in
the conference he mentions, three kinds of absolution from sin, making the
first to be the freeing of men from such punishments of Almighty God, as sin
subiecteth them unto, in that they offend him: and this is proper to God, in
that he only has power not to punish, that has power to punish; and the
Ministers of the Church concur hereunto no otherwise, but only by bringing
men by force of the Word and Sacraments into such an estate, wherein God
finding them, will not punish them. The second kind of absolution, is the
freeing of men from the censures of suspension, excommunication, penitential
corrections, and such punishments as the Church may inflict: and in this kind
the Church may properly be said to absolve. The third kind of absolution, is
the comfortable assuring of men upon the understanding of their estate, that
they shall escape Gods fearful punishments. In these two later sorts the
Ministers of the Church have power to absolve, and personal absolution in
either of these senses is rightly said to be an Apostolical and godly
ordinance: but it is a written ordinance, and not an unwritten tradition, which
is the thing that this man should prove. There is another kind of absolution
imagined by the Papists: which is a Sacramental act, giving grace ex opere
operato, to the remission of sins, which is not an Apostolical ordinance,
but an invention of their own, whereof I have spoken Appendix to ^e 3. book
of the Church. cap. 24
elsewhere. Touching the ministration of baptism by private persons in the
time of necessity, it is not said to be an unwritten tradition by the Bishop
of Winchester, and therefore it is not to this purpose: no more then that
Bishops are said to be Diuinae ordinationis: seeing the distinct degrees of
Bishops and Presbyters are proved out of the Scripture. That confirmation is an
Apostolical tradition, we confess; but it is a written tradition, both in
respect of the first practice of it by the Apostles, who laid their hands on
such as were baptized by others; from which authority, the custom of imposing
hands does come, as Hieron. contra Luciferian.
Hierome testifies; as also in respect of the necessity of the continuance of
it, in that the Apostle to the Chap. 6.
Hebrews, reckons the imposition of hands together with the doctrine of
baptismes, amongst the foundations of Christian religion. We doubt not
therefore, but it is a fitting thing that the Bishop should confirm by
imposition of hands, those that are baptized by others, but it is rather for
the honor of Priesthood, then the necessity of any law, as Hierome
testifies; for that otherwise they were in a woeful case, who in places far
remote, die before the Bishop can come to them, if none could receive the t
Hier. vbi supra.
spirit of God but by the imposition of his hands. It is therefore a
sacramental complement not to be neglected, but not a Sacrament: But this good
man will prove it to be a Sacrament. First, because, as he says, it is so
joined by us with baptism. And secondly, because it has both a visible sign
and grace by the communion-booke reviued. It seems he was never any good
disputer, he brings so many weak and silly arguments, and yet urges them as
if they were unanswerable. Surely these reasons will be found too weak to
prove confirmation a Sacrament, if they fall into the hands of any one that
will take the pains to examine them. For first, if he mean, that it is
joined by us with baptism as a Sacrament, he is greatly deceived, seeing we
join it only as a Sacramental complement. And secondly, though it have an
outward sign, and invisible grace; yet the sign is not so much a sign of
that grace which the Bishop imposing hands by his prayer obtayneth for the
confirmation of the parties he lays his hands upon, as a sign of limitation,
or restraint, specifying and setting out the party on whom he desires God to
power his confirming grace: and therefore it has not the nature of a
Sacrament, wherein there must be a visible sign of that grace that is
conferred. Secondly, because, though the Bishop ouershadowing the party by the
imposition of his hands, do in a sort express and resemble the hand of God
stretched forth for the protecting, assisting, and safe keeping of the party,
which is an invisible grace, yet it follows not that it is a Sacrament: for
the Acts. 2.
fiery and cloven tongues, were a visible sign of that gracious gift of the
spirit which the Apostles received in the day of Pentecost, enabling them with
all fiery zeal to publish the mysteries of Gods kingdom in all the several
languages of the world; yet were they no Sacraments, as Bellar. de Sacram, in
genere.
Bellarmine notes, because the grace whereof these fiery tongues were a sign,
was not given by force of this sign, as a set mean appointed by almighty God:
So in like sort, the imposition of hands is a sign of protecting, assisting,
and safe keeping grace, not given or obtained by the due use of this sign, as
in Sacraments, but to be obtained by the prayers of the Bishop and Church of
God. That which he has out of Basil, is to little purpose; for I hope, he
thinks not the doctrine of the Trinity to be holden by bare and only
tradition, without the warrant of the written word or God. And if Saint Basil
reckon the form of words, wherein we profess our faith in the blessed
Trinity, to be a tradition, it proves nothing against us, seeing the thing so
professed is contained in Scripture. That the ordaining of Bishops in Diocesses
to rule their churches, and Metropolitanes in provinces to call and moderate
Synodes, was an Apostolical tradition, we make no question; but we deny it to
be an unwritten tradition. For whereas in the Acts Acts. 20.
Paul sends for the Presbyters of Ephesus to Miletum, in the Revel. 2.
Revelation it appears by the Epistles of the Spirit of God, directed to the
seven churches of Asia, that amongst many Presbyters feeding the flock of
Christ in Ephesus, there was one chief, who had a kind of eminent power, who
is named the Angel of the Church, and who is commended or reproved for all
things done well or ill within the limits and bounds of the same. That the
Bishop of Winchester says, the Article of Christ's descending into hell, and
the Creed wherein it is contained, is an Apostolical tradition, delivered to
the Church by the direction and agreement of the Apostles, is nothing but that
we all say. Neither is the Popish conceit touching unwritten Articles of
religion, thereby confirmed: for howsoever the Creed of the Apostles may be
said to be a tradition in respect of the orderly collection of the principal
heads of Christian faith into a brief sum and Epitome, which are scattered
here and there in Scripture; yet no Article of this Creed is believed or
received by bare and only tradition, but they are all proved out of Scripture,
as that worthy and learned Bishop does most excellently confirm and prove the
Article of Christ's descending into hell out of the same.

After these particular instances, this author grows to a general
conclusion, and asks why we may not say with the Council of Florence, cited
by M. Willet for general, and the Patriarchs of the Apostolic Sees there
present, with the Council of Constance not of unequal authority, and the
Council of Trent, that Protestancy in all points is false, and Catholic
religion true? It seems the good man is near driven, and has spent all his
strength in this tedious discourse of Traditions, and therefore in the
conclusion he takes a strange course: for instead of proving by the
testimonies of protestants, as he undertook, that Romish religion is true,
and Protestancy false, he asks, why he may not say, with the Counsels of
Florence, Constance, and Trent, that Protestants religion is false, and the
Romish profession true? Touching the Council of Trent, it is of so great
authority with us, that if he had been pleased to let us know his name, and
urge his own authority, we would as soon have listened unto him, as to that
Council in any thing it has defined touching the controversies that are
between us and the Papists: for we know, that howsoever there wanted not
many learned and worthy men in that meeting, that opposed themselves mainely
against many things there questioned, and in conclusion agreed upon, they were
forced to give way to the prevailing faction. I will give one example in steed
of many, Vega. defens. trident. deer. de justif. l. 9. c. 7.
touching the certain knowledge each man has of his own estate, whether he
be in grace or not. There was great opposition in that meeting, many
protesting, Ibid. cap. 46.
that the authors of uncertainty would bring in a worse error, then any was
imputed to Luther; yet the conclusion passed against them, though in some
ambiguity of words and terms, to give them some contentment: the like might be
said touching c Ibid. ca. 8.
the authority of the vulgar translation, and sundry other things, as it
appears by the confession of their own Divines there present. Wherefore to
pass by that Council, and to come to the Councels of Florence and Constance,
I marvel that this man dares say, they are of equal authority, whereas
Cardinal Bellar. de Council. c. 7.
Bellarmine reckons the Florentine Council amongst those that are absolutely
approved, and that of Constance amongst those that are partly approved, and
partly rejected, in which number he does likewise account the Council of
Basil. But it may be he is of the faction of the French, who deny the
Council of Florence to be general, who neither would e Andrad. de Script. and
trad. authorit. lib. 2.
come to it when it was holden, nor receive the decrees of it when it was
concluded. It is true indeed that many Bishops of the Oriental and Greek
Churches were there, and many of them consented with the Latins, in hope of
help from them against their barbarous and cruel enemies, so that it may
carry some show of a general Council; but the Patriarch of Constantinople was
dead before the conclusion. Some protested against the union there agreed on;
the churches of the East would not admit it, as being concluded by their
Bishops that were there without commission from the^, and therefore do not
account it a lawful, free, general council. But (says he) the Patriarchs
of the Apostolic Sees of Alexandria and Antioche, were present with the
Bishop of Rome, and subscribed to the decrees and conclusions of that Council,
therefore it must be accounted general. The antecedent of this argument is
most false and untrue. for the Patriarchs of the Apostolic Sees, were not
there in person, but others supplied their places; neither can he say it was
all one, as if they had been personally present: seeing what their Vicegerents
did in their names, in all likelihood they would have done, if they had bin
present; when themselves confess, that the acts of the Popes Legate, are not
of binding force, unless he ratify them, for that sometimes, as in the
deposition of Ignatius, and setting up of Photius, they may go against his
instructions. This I do the rather insist upon, for that the union agreed on
in this Council, and consented unto by these Vicegerents, was disliked by the
Bishops that remained at home, and so could be of no force; they that were
sent, having no commission to discuss or determine any other points of
difference, but that touching the proceeding of the holy Ghost; and yet
adventuring of themselves to define and determine some other very important
controversies. But to let this pass, these two Councels of Florence and
Constance are ill matched by this Author. For they agree no better together
then fire and water; the one of them defining, that the Pope is head of the
whole universal Church, and the other making him only head over particular
churches, but subject to the whole universal church, and a general council
representing the same. Whereupon Cit. ab Andrad. ibid.
Caietane denies it to be a general Council, and others say, it was a
general Council, but partly approved, and partly rejected. And doubtless,
howsoever this Author make show to the contrary, yet he knows right well,
that this Council did more advantage our cause, and shake the Papacy, in
making the Popes as men, subject to error and vile disorders, inferior to
general Councels, then it helps them, or hurts us, by disliking and
condemning some positions of Wickliffe, partially and corruptly gathered out of
his writings by his adversaries, and taken in the worst sense; which were so
uttered by him, as being rightly understood, might have a good and Catholic
meaning, as Gerson testifies. And therefore, if it were granted, that it was a
lawful general Council, yet it follows not, that I must acknowledge Romish
religion to be true in all points: seeing it is pronounced false by this
Council in the chiefest and most principal of all other, which is touching
the supreme commanding power of the Pope over the whole universal church,
and his infallible judgment from which no man may appeal.

But such is my infelicitie, that I must be forced to acknowledge, that Romish
Religion is true in all points, though this council define the contrary. His
words are. This of necessity Doctor Field with his protestants must
acknowledge, or freely by their recited doctrine confess, that there neither
is, nor can be hereafter, by his rules, any true and certain Scripture,
tradition, or religion in the world. A hard case, and ill choice, if we must
needesrunne into one of these extremities, either to acknowledge that our whole
religion is false, or that there is no certain Scripture, tradition, or
religion in the world. But though the Sea be before us, and Pharaoh and the
Egyptians behind us, yet I hope we shall neither fall into the hands of the
one, nor be swallowed up of the gulfes of the other. Let us see therefore
whether our danger be so great as he would make us believe. If says he, we
neither have Scripture, exposition of the difficulties of it, nor tradition,
but by tradition, as Doctor Field has granted, and those only three rules to
know them: if those rules may propose unto us false Scripture, false
expositions of their obscurities, and false traditions in matters of faith,
faith cannot be certain, and the religion grounded upon it is ouerthrown. If
this be all, I hope the worst is past; for if I should grant as he makes me
absurdly to do, that we have neither Scripture nor tradition, but by
tradition: yet cannot those rules I assign to know true traditions by, propose
unto us false Scriptures or traditions. For what are they, but the constant
practice of the whole Christian church from the beginning, the consent of the
most famous learned in all ages, or at least in diverse ages, no man
contradicting or doubting, and the constant testimony of the pastors of
Apostolical churches, from their first establishment successively witnessing
the same things? Indeed if these rules could propose unto us false traditions,
false Scriptures, or expositions of the difficulties thereof, our faith could
not be certain, and all religion were overthrown: but neither he, nor all the
Devils in hell shall ever force us to acknowledge any such thing, neither is
there any point of Romish superstition proved by any such traditions, as are
found to be true traditions by these rules. But will some man say, does he
make no show of proof, that we acknowledge these rules may propose unto us
false traditions, false Scriptures, and expositions of the difficulties in
them? Doubtless he does. For thus he concludes very terribly against us. The
testimony and judgment of the Patriarchs or Bishops of Apostolical Sees, is
one of the rules assigned to know true traditions by; but we acknowledge, that
the Patriarchs of Apostolic Sees did err in the Council of Florence, and
propose unto us false expositions of Scripture: therefore we must confess
whether we will or not, that the rules we assign, may propose unto us false
Scriptures, and false expositions of Scripture. Unto this concluding argument,
wherein the force of the whole chapter lies, we answer briefly and
peremptorily. First, that the mayor proposition is most false, as he well
knows; for I never make the judgment and opinion of the present Bishops of
Apostolical churches, to be the rule to know true traditions by: but deny it,
and profess the contrary against the Papists, and make only the testimony of
the Pastors of Apostolical churches, successively from the beginning
witnessing the same things, to be a rule in this kind. Secondly, that the
Patriarchs of the Apostolic Sees, he speaks of, were not at the council
of Florence in their own persons, but had others to supply their places, whose
proceedings they disclaimed, and voyded whatsoever they did in their names,
because they presumed to discuss and determine diverse matters of controversy
without directions and instructions from them. But howsoever we think of the
proceedings in this Council, yet he says, no Protestant church can show any
such authority for their cause, as that of the Councels of Florence, Constance,
and Trent. It had been well if he had been better advised before he had so
much disenabled us: for he shall find that we can and will show far greater
authority for our cause then the late Councels of Florence, Constance, and
Trent, and that in the weightiest points of all other. For did not the Bishops
in the great Council of Chalcedon, profess openly, that the reason why the
Fathers gave the preeminence to the Bishop of Rome, was the greatness of his
city, being the seat of the Emperors, and that they thought it fit to give
equal privileges to the Bishop of Constantinople for the same cause, seeing
it was become the seat of the Emperors, and named new Rome? Did not the 6.
general Council in Trullo confirm the same parity of the B. of
Constantinople with the B. of Rome? and do not the decrees of these two
Counsels shake in pieces the whole frame and fabric of the Papacy? Did not
the second, fourth, and sixth Councels, etc. make the B. of Constantinople a
patriarch, and set him in degree of honor before the other two of Alexandria
and Antioche, notwithstanding the resistance of the Roman Bishops, and their
claim from Peter? Did not the sixth general Council blame the Church of Rome
for sundry things, and particularly among other, for forcing married me^
entering into the orders of ministry, to forsake the matrimonial society of
their wives? Did not the Council of Nice refer both Bishops and other
inferior clergymen to be ordered by their own Metropolitanes, and the Conci.
Carthag. 6. and. 7. cap. 105. epist. Council. ad. Celestinum.
Councels of Africa thereupon condemn appeals to Rome? Did not the Council
of Eliberis forbid the lighting of tapers in the Coemiteries, or places of
burial, to the disquieting of the spirits of the Saints departed? and did it
not abolish those pernoctations in the places of burial which Hierome urged so
violently against Vigilantius, and forbid the having of any pictures in
churches: Ne quod colitur, aut adoratur, in parietibus depingatur? Does not the
Canon of the Apostles prescribe, that all the faithful that come together in
the Church, and communicate not in the Sacrament shall be excommunicate, which
also the Council of Antioche reuiveth, and confirms? Does not Gelasius
command all them to be excommunicated, that receiving the Sacrament of the
Lords body, abstain from the participation of the cup? Did not the church of
Rome think it so far necessary that the people should communicate in both
kinds, that Ordo Romanus prescribes on good Friday, when they consecrate not,
but receive that which was reserved being consecrated the day before, they
should take wine and consecrate it by putting or dipping the body of the Lord
into it, with pronouncing the Lords prayer, that so the people might receive
the whole Sacrament? and yet now the half communion is sufficient. Did not the
Mileuitane and Arausicane Councels condemn those errors touching the strength
of nature, and power of free will to perform the works of virtue, without
assistance of special grace? which since have been received in the Roman
Schools, as if they had been catholic verities. The like might be showed
in many other particulars, but these may suffice. Wherefore let us proceed to
his eigth chapter.

CHAP. 8.
IN this chapter, first he shows that general Councels are of highest
authority in the Church of God: and secondly, labors to prove, that they
testify for Romish Religion. To prove that Councels are of highest authority
in the Church of God, which no man denies, he produces the testimonies of the
Bishop of Winchester, Doctor Morton, the Protestant Relator of Religion, and
Doctor Sutcliffe. And lastly adds, that I am clearly of the same opinion,
assuring all men, that the interpretations of Scripture proposed by private
men, are not so proposed and urged by them, as if they would bind all others
to receive them, and that none but Bishops assembled in a General Council may
interpret Scriptures in such sort, as by their authority to suppress all them
that gainsay such interpretations. For so are my words, which he has
altered, to make men think I allow none in any sort to interpret Scriptures,
but general Councels: wherein he wrongeth me, as he well knows, seeing I
profess the contrary, even in the place cited by him. This allegatio^ of my
words might have been spared, seeing there was never any man doubted of the
truth of that for proof whereof he alleges them.

Wherefore let us come to his second part, wherein he endeavors to show,
that general Councels make for the Romish Religion: this he proves, because
when Protestants deny the authority of general Councels, they have no excuse,
but because they were called by the Popes authority. So, says he, Doctor
Field, Doctor Sutcliffe, M. Willet, and the rest. Surely it is a most
shameless kind of dealing to charge men with that they never thought, spoke,
nor wrote: yet so does the honest man use me in this place: and therefore
cites neither book nor page, as he is wont to do, but sends his Reader to
seek that which he shall never find. For I never denied the authority of any
council, only because it was called by the Pope, as he untruly reports: so
that it is vain and foolish that he urges, that in so doing I contradict my
self, in that the rules assigned by me to know true traditions, as the
testimony of the Pastors of Apostolical Churches from the beginning, the
practice and consent of holy Fathers do warrant us, that that privilege ever
belonged to the Sea of Rome, that without the consent thereof no council could
be called, none confirmed. For the clearing of this point, touching the calling
and confirming of councels, we must note, that they are of diverse sorts: some
Diocesan, holden by each Bishop in his Diocese: some Provincial, consisting of
the Bishops of a Province called together, or at least moderated by the
Metropolitan: some Patriarchicall, consisting of the Metropolitans and Bishops
of diverse Provinces under one Patriarch: and some Oecumenicall, consisting of
all the Bishops in the world. The canon he speaks of, must be understood of
Oecumenicall councels only, wherein things concerning the faith and state of
the whole Catholic church are handled; for otherwise each Bishop might hold a
Diocesan Synod, each Metropolitan a Provincial, and each Patriarch a
Patriarchicall, without requiring the consent of the Bishop of Rome: wherefore
let us see how, and in what sort the consent of the Bishop of Rome was required
to the holding of general councels, and to what purpose his confirmation of
their decrees was sought. Cardinal Concord. cathol. l. 2. c. 15
Cusanus handles this matter excellently well, showing at large, that the
meaning of the Canon of the primitive church, was not to give any such
absoluteness to the Bishop of Rome, that his negative should dash all, or his
affirmative establish what he pleases, without the consent and approbation of
the rest: but that being one of the prime Patriarchs and chief Bishops of the
Christian church, nothing should be concluded without seeking, requiring, and
expecting his presence, joint deliberation, and consent: which is not to be
marvailed at, seeing no general council can be of force, wherein the meanest
Bishop in the world is purposely neglected, or refused, offering himself to
such deliberation. As no chapter act can be good, wherein any one having voice
in chapter, is neglected, or excluded: though when he is present, or at least
called, and not excluded nor neglected, things may pass, though he say no;
even so in like sort in a general council, though no such assembly be lawful
and of force, wherein the Bishop of Rome is neglected, or his joint
deliberation and consent not sought: yet a man is rather to adhere to the
Fathers in such a meeting consenting together, then to the person of the Pope
contradicting or refusing to assent to that they resolve on: as not only those
Papists do think, that teach the Pope may err, and is inferior to general
councils in the power of jurisdiction, but they also that are opposite to them
in judgment, as Defens. fidei Trid. l. 2.
Andradius shows out of Cardinal Turrecremata, who professes, that a man
should rather assent to the consenting voice of the Fathers assembled in a
general council, then to the person of the pope dissenting from them, or
refusing to confirm and ratify that they agree upon: and that in the power of
discretiue judgment the council is greater then the pope. Besides this we are
to observe, that when the canon provided no Council should be holden, and be
of force without the Bishop of Rome, the meaning of it was not precisely in
respect of his person, but of him, and the Metropolitanes and Bishops of the
West provinces subject to him as Patriarch of the West, who were a great and
principal part of the Christian Church. For the manner was when a general
council was to be holden in the East, as all the general Councels that have
been were, that the Bishop of Rome as Patriarch of the West, should impart the
occasions of such a general meeting in Council to the several Metropolitanes
subject unto him; and they calling their Bishops together in their several
provinces, should send whom they thought fit to the same general meeting, with
such directions and resolutions, as it pleased them; and as De Council. and
Ecclesia l. 1. c. 17. In council. 2. and 3. nulli suerunt ex occidente sed
Damasus and Caelestinus, concilia illa confirmarunt nomine suo and aliorum
Episcoporum, quos ipsi Romae collegera^t. Constantinus pro 6. Council. scribit
ad Agathonem ut mittat tres personas de sua Ecclesia, and 12 Metropolitanos de
suo concilio, Agatho rescribit, cum uniuersis Synodis ^biacentibus Concilio
Apostolicae Sedis.
Cardinal Bellarmine has rightly observed, it was enough if many Bishops of
the East meeting and coming together, some few came out of the West; yea
sometimes, though none at all came, as appears by the second general
Council holden at Constantinople, if the resolutions which the Bishop of
Rome sent as agreed on in the several Synodes subject to him, as Patriarch,
and the determinations of the Bishops and Fathers assembled, concurred and
consented. And this doubtless was the reason why the confirmation of the
Bishop of Rome with his Western Synodes, was required for the ratifying of
General Councels: because never being present in person, and very few or none
of his Bishops being at those Councels, it was necessary they should confirm
and ratify what the rest in council debated, discussed, and resolved on by
testifying their assent. For what could pass currantly as an act of a general
council, whereunto a great and principal part of the Christian World
consented not? So that it was not the Popes personal confirmation that was
desired in ancient times, as if all the Bishops in the World might err, and
the certainty of truth rested in him only, as some men now teach: but the
consent of those Bishops that were subject to him as Patriarch of the West, as
well as his own: who being absent, were to ratify, strengthen and confirm
the determinations of them that were present, not as being more infallible in
judgment then they, but by a joint concurrence and agreement. This is all that
can be proved out of the consent of Fathers, Historians, and practice of former
times; and therefore this man does but trifle in this as in the rest. Wherefore
to conclude this matter touching Councels, I dare undertake to prove that
Papists deny and reject more councels then any of our Divines do. Touching the
right of calling Councels, and in what cases they may be called without the
consent of the Bishop of Rome, without any breach of the Canon alleged, I have
showed my opinion in the fifth Book of the Church. And therefore seeing the
Author of these proofs proceeds no farther in alleging any thing out of
that which I have written, I will here leave him, not doubting but others whom
he has wronged will make him know he has dealt no better with them then he
has with me, and that therefore the plausible conclusion he makes in the
end, of it self falls to the ground, the premises upon which it should stay
it self, being taken away. For we neither acknowledge thrt Papists holding the
infallibility of the popes judgment, the universality of his jurisdiction,
and power to dispose the kingdoms of the world: believing free will, to
perform and do the actions of virtue, without assistance of special grace;
perfection of inherent righteousness, satisfactions, merit of condignitie,
propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass, and the like, can ever be saved so living
and dying; nor that the present Roman Church is the true church of Christ, nor
that the preeminence they now give to the Pope, was either claimed or practiced
over the whole church, from S. Peter to these our days, as this namelesse and
shameless Author says we do: nor that all the books which the Roman church
now receives for canonical Scriptures were delivered for such by the
Apostles, or received for such by the church; nor that the true and best
translations of holy Scripture, with the lawful supreme binding exposition of
them, together with Apostolical traditions, general Councels, or primitive
Fathers give any testimony that the present Roman church is that company of
holy ones, that household of faith, that Spouse of Christ, and church of the
living God, which is so diligently to be sought after; whose communion we must
embrace, whose directions we must follow, and in whose judgment we must rest;
but contrariwise we are well assured all these do witness against her, that
she is an erring heretical, and apostaticall church; that she has forsaken
her first faith, departed from her primitive sincerity, plunged those that
adhere unto her into many gross and damnable errors, and defiled her self
with intolerable superstition and idolatry, so that as well in respect of her
errors in faith, superstition and idolatry in divine worship; as of her
slanderous, treacherous, bloody, and most horrible and hellish practices, to
overthrow and destrow all that do but open their mouths against her
abominations, we may justly account her to be the Synagogue of Satan, the
faction of Antichrist, and that Babylon out of which we must fly, unless we
will be partakers of her plagues.

FINIS.

