The Epiphanie of the Church. GATHERED OVT OF THE HOLY Scriptures, declaring
and plainly shevving, both the Church that cannot but err, and also the Church
that cannot err. WITH SO EVIDENT NOTES and manifest signs of either of them,
that no man reading it, needs be in doubt which he should believe.

Written by R. P. in the year of our Lord God 1550. And now published in this
year 1590. for the benefit of all such as desire the truth concerning the
church.

LONDON Printed by Roger Ward, dwelling at the sign of the P^^sse in the
Little Old Bailey. 1590.

UNTO THE REVEREND FATHER in God and honorable Lord, Nicholas Ridley, bishop
of London, his humble Richard Phinch the unworthy minister to the small
congregation of ^astham, wishes grace, peace, and health, with increase of
godliness in Jesus the only health and peacemaker, etc.
AFter I perceived (very reverend father) that your good travel amongst us
had not so good success, as the unfaithful and superfluous doings of other
sometimes do obtain, I not only mused with my self what should be the
cause, but also studied with my whole endeavor to do that lay in me, though not
able to help good affairs forward, yet at the least, not to hinder them. For
certain overthwart persons (prete^ding to cleave earnestly unto the faith of
the church, when in very deed they do nothing else but stick unto their own
wills in following evil custom) coueted diverse ways to obscure the praise of
your diligent labor. Being moved thereto partly because you examined the^ by
the scriptures, and partly for that you gave in your visitation injunctions to
take away the principal monuments of superstitions, even the altars of the
popish mass.

Ah God help, to be tried by the Gospel, was a strange matter unto them that
were occupied only in their pie portuase and ordinalles, but more strange unto
them that were wont to hear of nothing at visitations but of paying of money,
and most strange unto them that were never examined before, not so much as
whether they believed in God or no.

This unwont manner and strangeness made your godly endeavors, of some not to be
so thankfully received (albeit of the honest most thankfully taken) as they
woorthely deserved of all: insomuch that for my part I hearkened for nothing
but for some congratulation of my brethren toward you: and the people looked
for reformation of enormities, for the open punishment of great crime, and for
the plain setting forth of Gods word and preaching of the same after your
visitation. But as I have heard nothing of the one (honest persons excepted) so
do the people vvait still for the other. Wherefore (to speak simply) I think
God recompenseth the omission of the one with the loss of the other, for
praise has been wont to follovv virtue, as the shadovv does the body.

Furthermore, that noble king of famous memory, no less prudent then godly
minded, king Henry the 8. put forth unto us in the year of our Lord 1536* a
book of articles, wherein the signification of certain ceremonies (which
before were done) he pl^^^ly declared sensing, kneeling, offering to images,
and worshipping of the same were forbid, and also the name of purgitory was
clean taken away. But how thankefully those things were then of some
received, their setting forth and teaching of the same plainly shevved. I do
well remember that many were as loath then to forgo their purgatory, as they
be now unwilling to take down their altars, the monuments of the same: and
that it was as strange a thing to say on Ashvvednesday Memento homo, etc. in
English (notvvithstanding the said book of articles vvilling the same) as it
is now to be examined in the New testament by a godly bishop. In the same
year also came forth godly injunctions commanding parents and governors to
teach their youth the Lords prayer, the Articles of the faith, and the
commandments of almighty God in English, which themselves had not learned,
and therefore the curats were charged to recite one clause or article one day,
and another on another day of the same, until the whole were learned. This
year likewise by the authority of the same injunctions, the Bible, Gods book
was set up in the quiere, to be read both in Latin and English, which
thither was so well vvelcome, so much regarded, and so diligently studied,
that he had good leave to depart from thence into the body of the church.

For in the year of our Lord God 1538. the magistrates were feign to renew the
same injunctions and speak more plainly, who commanded the said Gods book to
be set up in some convenient place in the Church, and no man to be discouraged
from reading of the same in English. They charged all curates again to teach
the Lords prayer, the articles of the faith, and the commandementes of God,
and that they should examine every person coming to auriculer confession, in
the same, and hear them say the Lords prayer, the articles etc. particularly.
And also make or cause to be made one sermon every quarter in every one of
their cures. O Lord God, what an eye sore and torment of mind was this unto
them that were obstinate and wayward: but what a sweet comfort to the simple
that were willing to disburden their conscience? If god had then, as he has
now, sent us some godly learned Bishops that vvoulde have taken pains to
visit their cures, and to have examined how these matters had gone forward,
they should have perceived many a false cast to have bin played under the
couerlet in the shifting houses. And some simple folk would have said that
their ghostles fathers had given them counsel to stick unto their old primer,
and to beware of the new, and specially of the testament.

Diverse proclamations about this time were also set forth, concerning Gods
matters, but alas they were so unwillingly handled, and so unthankfully
received, that God had almost taken his word from us again. At the length
about the year of our Lord God 1544. the suffrages were put forth in english,
which likewise were so well welcome to some that the kings majesty then was
constrained to write unto certain prelates concerning the same, whom he
advertised, not to be so slack in putting the said prayers in practice, as
they were inserting forth his former articles and injunctions. Thus God has
wrought among us by a little and a little to bring us to knowledge, that at the
length we might willingly embrace his holy word. Again, for so much as of late
Gods book was in some places almost forgot, in some places run out of the
church into the chancel to hide himself amongst the popish books, and of
some so safely laid up, that a man might wright upon him with his finger, Ecce
nunc in puluere dormio. Therefore almighty God moved the heart of our most
natural liege Lord and dearly beloved maiden king, to lift up the same Gods
book once again out of the dust. Who in the year of our Lord God 1547. set
forth by his royal visitation godly homilies, the paraphrase of that learned
father Erasmus, to the great comfort of the simple that be willing to learn,
and also godly injunctions, meaning thereby to root up all superstition, abuse,
and idolatry, and to set up gods word in their place. Wherein he commanded not
only to take away all superstition and idolatry, but to take away, and
utterly to extinguish and destroy all monuments of superstition and idolatry.
cap. 28. But how diligently putoffes have practiced their policy, to hinder
this his godly purpose: it is better to lament it with tears, then to rehearse
it in letters. Last of all, to put all out of doubt, and to make a perfect
concord, we have a book of common prayer with an order in the same for reading
of Gods book set forth in English by the same authority, and stablished by
act of parliament. And least any person would be so foolish and mad to look
for the romish rags again, one statute at the last parliament abolisheth and
condemns for ever all other popish books of the old service. Notwithstanding
some people be yet dased in those Gods matters that they know not what to do.
Marvel not therefore (dear father) though the ungodly sort do misconster,
and evil interpret your godly travail. For they cry for a law, they must
have a law to lead them from every superstition by name, else they will not
obey. But if they loved obedience, quietness, and had but one spark of
reverend fear either toward God or their prince, or any desire of godly
knowledge, there has enough and enough again bin said, concerning matters of
religion, and also set forth, both by order and law.

There be articles enough, injunctions enough, proclamations enough,
commandments enough, exhortations enough, lessons enough, and laws enough,
if they were understood, willingly embraced and reverently obeyed. Albeit
for them that be self willed, froward, contentious, obstinat, and dull hearted,
nothing vvil serve. Therefore to none may be better applied this prophecy of
Esaias, Esaias. 28.
then unto these. Who says, They that be such must have after one lesson,
another lesson: after one commandment, another commandment: after one rule,
another rule: after one instruction, another instruction: there a little, and
there a little. For he that speaks unto this people, is even as one that uses
rudeness of speech, and a strange language. If any man say unto them, lo,
this is the rest wherewith ye may ease him that is weary, this is the
refreshing, they will not harken. Therefore the word of the Lord, lesson upon
lesson, commandment upon commandment, rule upon rule, instruction upon
instruction, there a little, and there a little shall be unto them an occasion of
stumbling that they may go on, and fall backward, be bruised, tangled, and
snared. Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ye mockers, ye that have rule
of this people. O would God I might have ouerleapt this sentence that goes
before, that justly now it might not besaid. They are out of the way by reason
of wine, yea far out of the way are they by reason of strong drink. These
things (my most reverend father) have enforced me to presume to do that
which is above the strength both of my wit and learning, but not above my
good will, that is, to collect out of Gods scriptures, a simple and plain
manifestation of the Church in English, or a manifest opening or shevving of
the Church, naming it the Epiphanie, because that word (albeit borrowed of
the Grecians) is frequented already among us english men in the same
signification. The obscurity, misunderstanding and ignorance only of this
argument and article, has been and also is the cause of much obstinacy,
contention, and disobedience. For until it pleased almighty God to open unto
me by his holy spirit and word, this article: credo ecclesiam etc. with the
right meaning of the same according to the scriptures: I was as stiff in the
popish traditions (taking them for good customs and ceremonies of the fathers)
as I am now earnest in Gods book, and taught them with so good a zeal (but
not according to knowledge) as I do now the Gospel. Wherefore taking of the
same remedy vvherof I took hurt, even of Credo ecclesiam, as they that be hurt
of scorpions be wont to do, I can do no less but write and set forth the
same, unto and for such as be stoong with the same sting, and venomed with
the same poison. Whose nature is, not to hurt but where it finds blood. No
more Credo ecclesiam hurts but such as cleave too much to human reason and
natural wit. I trust they will not mislike that thing that love constrains
me to do for their sakes. If they do, they shall find me as ready to defend
the same by the word of god against all popish bablinges, as I have been to
write it. So that your godly learning misliketh it not, unto whom with all
other godly learned, I humbly submit the same, beseeching you to accept in good
part my small industry, as the first fruits of my pen and judge thereof as
god shall put in your mind, to whom be all thank, praise and glory. Amen.

Your humble, Richard Phinch.

THE EPIPHANIE OF THE CHVRCH.
BEcause I covet rather to profit with homely and plain speech, then to please
with sweet and fair words: I will speak liberally, but yet simply of the
Church, for their sakes, and unto them that be deceived with evil custom,
bewitched with popish iuglings, charmed with men's inventions, and beguiled with
their own wits, which resist the truth of Gods holy word, kick against the
prick, and grope at noone, and cannot see the light for the sun: In whose
mouth is ever Church, Church, whose feet are daily wandering unto the church,
and their eyes gasing continually upon the Church, yet can they neither find
nor see the Church, because themselves be none of the Church.

What is so much alleged of the babbling papists? what so often frequented of
the common people? and so manifest in all men's eyes, as the Church?
Notwithanding for want of teachers of the Scriptures, few do know the Church:
Such is the knowledge among the silly people, in very many Churches now a
days.

Church in the English Bible, Church has diverse significations.
is commonly called congregation, For ecclesia a word borrowed of the Greek
toonge, which may be translated into English, either Church or congregation.

Church with us, is a common word, signifiyng the place, Church signifies the
place of prayer.
as well as congregation, Judith, 6.
whereunto the same assembleth for some honest or godly purpose. It is written
that all the people were gathered together, which made their prayers all the
night long in the Church. Our common places appointed for prayer, preaching,
and administration of the sacraments, be so well known by this name Church,
that there needs no example hereof.

Other whiles Church signifies the whole multitude of people, Church
signifiyng the company of good and bad.
both of good and bad congregate together. Of this we read, that the people
spoke to Moses, saying, Why have you brought the Church of the Lord unto this
wilderness, that both we and our cattle should die in it. Numb. 20.


And Church betokens the elect people of God only, whereof the wise man
says, Church signifiyng the elect of God only.
The children of wisdom are the Church of the righteous, and their exercise
is obedience and love. Holy Paul speaking of this Church says, Eccles 3.
Ye husbands love your wives, Ephesians, 5.
even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it, to sanctify
it, and cleansed it in the fountain of water, through the word to make it unto
himself a glorious congregation without spot or wrinckle or any such thing, but
that it should be holy and without blame.

Also there is a congregation of the wicked, Ecclesia signifiyng the mulitiude
of the wicked.
called by the name of Church, Psalm. 26.
which (for that they outwardly profess the same religion, pretend to have the
same gospel, Esaias. 3.
and to use the same sacraments with the Church) be called in Scripture, Math.
21.
Church, John. 5.
whom God permits sometimes to rule over the people for their sins: For
the ungodliness of the people, Job. 34.
does God make an hypocrite to reign over them. 2 Thessalonians 2.


Wherefore they that cry so much, the Church, the Church, and affirm
stiffely that the Church cannot err, and do not declare what Church they do
mean, do but cast a mist before the simple unlearned peoples eyes, to blind
them withal, to the end themselves might the cleaner convey their iugling
castes. Let them therefore (in Gods holy name) show unto us plainly in simple
words, what Church they do speak of, whether of the Church of Christ, or
else of the Church of Antichrist. So doing men will be out of doubt the
sooner, truth will come to light, and brawling will cease, for very
Christians love not contention.

The Church of Antichrist, Church of Antichrist.
which is worthily called the Church malignant, or the congregation of the
wicked, and may be called the man of sin, child of perdition, hypocrite,
etc. cannot but err, what fair show soever they make.

The Church of Jesus Christ, Church of Jesus Christ.
which is his only dove and spowse, sticking unto the word of truth,
inseperable, and governed by his holy spirit, cannot err damnably, although
she be trod down under feet of the world, and seem to be out of countenance.

These two be contrary the one to the other, between whom there is as much
difference, as is between sower and sweet, darkness and light, evil and
good. Notwithstanding the world (not able to perceive the difference, nor make
distinction between them, but blinded with evil custom and the multitude)
takes them for the other, because here in this life they be mingled together
as the good fishes are mixed with the bad, the goats with the sherpe, and the
chafe with the corn, so that they be not openly known unto men at the first
sight. 2. Cor. 11.
No marvel, for Satan himself is changed into the Angel of light, and his
ministers fashion themselves, as though they were the ministers of
righteousness. Also woolues clothe themselves in Sheep clothing. Math. 7.
Yet is Satan a devil still, and his ministers are deceiptfull workers, and a
woolfe a deuourer of sheep, which at length bewrateth himself by his tail,
and bloudshedding. Whereas the blood of Jesus Christ is known by the spirit
of truth, and by patiently suffering for his word.

Which spirit and word be the sure anchors, guids, and rule of the same, and
not Rome, nor Peter, though Satan pretends never so ancient a title.

If Christ had appointed his Church to any place or creature, for the
establishing of matters of Religion, should Paul (that elect vessel of God, 2.
Cor. 12.
which was rapt up into the third heaven, and into paradise, and heart secret
words which no man can utter) have been ignorant thereof: Paul knew well that
Christ had left his Church unto his holy spirit and word, his word to be an
infallible rule both of their life and doctrine, and his spirit to be a ready
interpreter of the same. Therefore when he should depart from them, Act. 20.
he said. Now brethren I commend you to God, and unto the word of his grace,
which is able to build further, and to give you an inheritance amongst all
them that are sanctified. These words are without guile and sophistical
craft, they are simple and plain, and Gods Scriptures. We must therefore
believe them. They send us unto the port of safeguard, and touchstone that cannot
deceive us, we must needs therefore stick unto the^, otherwise we cannot know
the truth and be saved.

Wherein first let us consider why Paul did send us unto God the holy Ghost For
he says, Now brethren I commend you to God. He commends us not unto John,
Peter, Andrew, or any other of the Apostles, much less unto Rome, the Pope or
Antichristian Bishops, but unto God the holy Ghost, Why? Because he knew well
that Christ himself had so appointed before. For when Christ should depart
from the church, he promised to send them the same holy Ghost, John. 14.
saying. The comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom my father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things unto your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. He comforted them also with the
same spirit, John. 15 16.
Commanded them to tarry in the city of Jerusalem until he had performed
the same his promise: Luke. 24.
which indeed he saythfully kept and fulfilled, for they were all filled with
the holy Ghost, Act. 2.
even the spirit of truth, John. 15.
which could not but teach them all truth, whatsoever he had said unto them,
that was all one, and the same truth.

Secondly let us note, that Paul commended the Church unto the word of grace,
what is this word of grace? Forsooth the same truth which the holy Ghost
taught, is the word of grace, even that word which God the father commanded to
be heard at the m^uth of his son Jesus Christ, saying: Math. 3 17.
This is my well-beloved son, Deuteronomy. 18.
in whom I am well pleased, hear him. And whosoever will not harken unto the
words, which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him: I will be
revenged of him (says God) Of this, witnesses Peter also, laying The time
will come Paul says ( Behold now is the time) that every soul which will
not hear him, Acts. 3.
shall be destroyed from amongst the people. 2. Cor. 6.


It stands us then in hand to search diligently, and know that thing that
God requires so straightly of us, which is to hear his son Jesus Christ,
The neglecting whereof is no less then damnation.

But what shall we hear? verily his holy Gospel confirmed for us by his holy
spirit for the same purpose, Gospel.
which Gospel is the word of grace, Act. 20.
undefiled, converting souls, giving wisdom unto babes, making glad hearts,
giving light unto the eyes, a lantorn unto the feet, Psalm. 18.
and a light unto the paths, Psalm. 119.
proved by the fire and tried more pure then silver vii. Psalm. 11.
times purged, more to be desired then gold or precious stone, Psalm. 18.
and sweeter then honey and honey comb, Psalm. 119.
The embassage of great joy, Luke. 2.
Joyful tidinges of peace, tidinges of good things: Romans 10.
The pour of God unto salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1.
and able to save their souls that embrace it. 1. Cor. 1.
Wherefore lay apart (says the Apostle James) all filthiness and superfluity
of maliciousness, James. 1.
and receive with meekness the word that is grafted in you, which is able to
save your souls.

Thus it appears manifestly unto all them that be willing to see the truth,
that God the father appoynteth us unto the word of his son Jesus Christ our
Lord. Christ refers us unto his holy spirit and truth. The holy Ghost also
taught nothing else but the same truth and word. Therefore the holy Apostle
durst not to appoint us to any other, but straightly commends us to the same
truth that cannot err, and unto the word of grace, which is the self same,
and still one truth, according to the infallible word of God, that says: Thy
righteousness (O Lord) is an everlasting righteousness, Psalm. 119.
and thy law is the truth. So that we have now in this time just cause,
joyfully to say with the prophet. Psalm. 17. 1. 2.
O praise ye the Lord, all ye heathen praise him all ye people. For his mercy
is stablished upon us, and the truth of the Lord endures for ever. Then the
which truth, there can be no surer stay, guide, and rule, for the belief,
life and doctrine of mortal men, in this mortal life, and world of
tribulation.

The Church of Antichrist has no such stay, The Church that cannot Fute^re.
guide, Psalm. 1.
nor rule, but they are like the chafe, which the wind scatters away from
the face of the earth, as the prophet David witnesses, who also calls them
the council of the ungodly, Psalm. 58.
the way of sinners, Psalm. 140.
and the chair of pestilence, Psalm. 59.
or the seat of the scornful, workers of iniquity, Psalm. 140.
wicked men, salm. 81.
bloud-thirstie men, the evil man, the wicked man, the wild boar, the cruel
beast, the slaunderer, blasphemer, enemy, and persecutor, the enemy in the
holy place and adversary, whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their
throat is an open sepulcher, with their toonges they have deceived, Psalm. 4
the poison of aspes is under their lips, Psalm. 6.
their feet are swift to shed blood, destruction and unhappiness is in their
ways, and the way of peace have they not known, there is no fear of God
before their eyes, There were they brought in great fear, Psalm. 14.
even where no fear was. Vain persons and deceiptfull lips, whom ever all
good men abhorred and hated, after the example of the holy prophet, who says,
Psalm. 26.
I have hated the Church of the wicked, and will not sit among the ungodly.

Lo you see the wicked and ungodly have the name of Church, yea they have got
the name of holy Catholic Church. How else have they put on sheep clothing?
How have they fashioned themselves like the ministers of righteousness? And
how has the devil transformed himself into the angel of light? Truly in
this, that his church has got the titles of holy, and Catholic, and his
ministers the names of true shepheardes. Catholic be the right clothing of
the sheep of Christ's fold. Antichrist therefore has robbed Christ's fold of
their right title, holy and catholic, and thereby bleared the eyes of the
simple unlearned multitude, which do seek no further for salvation then they
have been taught (they say) by the holy Catholic Church. Their common
sayings be these. We be not wiser then our fathers before us: We will do as
our fathers have done. Such things they do affirm because they know not
Satan from the angel of light, the wolves from the sheep, the lies from the
word of God, neither Church of Antichrist falsely called holy, and catholic,
from the Church of Jesus Christ, which indeed is both holy and catholic. But
in stead of the holy Catholic church, they do believe the Church of the
wicked, in whose dregs of detestable traditions and ceremonies, they have been
ousted from their youth.

Verily if they would ponder their words with half indifferent judgment, and
behold them but with one of their eyes, I think they would keep silence, or
else blushe for shame. For to say, they will do as their elders and fathers
have done before them, is nothing but to confess themselves to walk wilfully
in error and blindness, when their fathers wandered unawares. And where they
say, they be no wiser then their fathers, they show themselves to be blind,
followers of the blind, But if the blind follow the blind, Luke 6.
they both fall into the ditch. Their fathers took Antichrist, the bishop of
Rome, for head of the Church: they made images and worshipped them: they gadded
on pilgrimage, and trusted in works, pardons, absolutions, dirges, trentalles,
masses, etc. wherein they erred, increased in error, and walked ignorantly into
perdition. The cause whereof was the lack of the word of God, which word is
ever a rule unto the holy catholic church. Therefore their fathers learned
not these things of the holy Catholic Church, but of the Church of Rome
usurping the name of the holy Catholic Church, which abhorred and trod under
feet the word of God, without the which, their fathers doctrine was nothing
else, but old error, against whom God gives a special commandment, saying.
Leuit. 18.
Keep my commandementes: do not those things that other have done before
you: be not defiled in them, I am your Lord your God. Wherefore adds God
these words, Exodus 20.
I am your Lord your God, but to the end he would have his words regarded for
ever? and not his adversaries the man of sin, and child of perdition, as
Paul names him, who deceived their fathers. Whose coming is after the vvorking
of Satan with al lying powers, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
signs and wonders, and with all deceiuablenesse of unrighteousness amongst
them that perish, because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved, And therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that they
might believe lies, that all they might be damned which believed not the truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

In these words has the holy Ghost plainly showed the fashion and coming of
the man of sin, son of perdition, Church of the wicked, and kingdom of
Antichrist.

The Church or kingdom of Antichrist, is called the man of sin, The man of
sin.
because it is builded upon a sinful man, governed by a sinful man,
instructed by evil sinful workmen, and their doctrine defended by the laws
and power of sinful men. Which took authority neither of God, nor of his
word, but of a monstrous beast with many heads, even of the people that
departed from the faith, whereof the same holy spirit of God speaks, and
prophecieth more plainly by the mouth of Paul, saying: The spirit speaks
evidently, 1. Tim. 4.
that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, and shall give
heed unto the spirits of error, and deuilish doctrines of them which speak
false, through hypocrisy, and have their conscience marked with an hot iron,
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats which God has
created to be received with giving of thanks, of them which believe and
knevve the truth.

Now join these two prophecies together, and note diligently the cause, manner,
increase, and force of Antichrists kingdom: and then it shall be the better
perceived.

The cause why God permits the wicked to deceive the people, The cause why
God suffered error to reign, and the wicked to rule.
was for that they did not receive the law of the truth, but loathed Gods word
when they had it. They writ it not in their hearts, neither brought forth the
fruits of the spirit, but of the flesh. To speak all in one word, They had
(as we have) much godly teaching, and brought forth much ungodly living. Of
very duty godly living must follow godly teaching, otherwise Gods plague
and vengeance follows his word, where and when soever it be taught.

But amongst all the plagues of God, The greatest plague of God.
this is the greatest, that he takes away his word from the people, and
suffers them to be fed with lies and Canterbury tales, or fables. After
which sort and manner the wicked have come and entered into the Christian
generation, By lies the wicked have entered into the Church.
yea and have sit in the holy place and seat of Moses, pretending to teach
the holy word of God. They have set (I say) in the seat of Moses, not by
teaching the law and the prophets, but by name and place. whereby the people
not able to discern the true session from presumptuous usurpation have been
deceived with false miracles, lying powers and wonders.

By the which feats they have increased and grown into the greater number. By
false miracles and lying powers, the wicked have increased.
For when by the help of the devil, with their coniurations, charms and
diverse other false fleightes, they wrought miracles and wonders in diverse and
sundry places. Then the people (regarding not the simple word of God) forsook
their faith and ran a gadding from place to place, to gaze upon signs and
wonders. Many believed lies, because many taught lies. Lying powers were on
their side, few durst speak the truth, and the simple lacked good
instruction, some therefore departed from the faith.

The sorce of Antichrists kingdom is well noted of Paul, By force the wicked
have withstood the truth and set forth their own doctrine.
in that he says his coming shall be with all lying power, 1. Tim. 4.
and in that they shall forbid marriages, and command to abstain from meats,
and etc. yt is to say After that the multitude has bin well pampered and fed
with their lies, blinded with their coniurations, and stablished with false
miracles: then shall they be able to make laws in the defense of their
deuilishe doctrines, and openly to withstand and resist the truth and Gospel,
as Iannes and Iambres (Pharaoes coniurers) withstoode Moses. Men they are
(says Paul) of corrupt minds, 2. Tim. 3.
and lewd as concerning faith. 2. Pet. 2.
Peter witnesses with Paul, saying: They shall purely bring in damnable sects
even denieng the Lord that has bought them, and bring upon themselfes swift
damnation, and many shall follow their damnable ways, by whom the way of
truth shall be evil spoken of.

No marvel, Hypocrisy Hindeth the silly multitude.
for hypocrisy and outward show of holiness has seemed so gay in the simple
folks eyes, Math. 24.
yea and yet does to some, so that as the truth says, if it were possible,
the very elect should be deceived. Jude also bears record to the truth with
Paul and Peter, Sure notes of Antichrists generation.
showing that they be deceived with dreams, Jude 1.
defile the flesh, despise rulers, and speak evil of them that be in
authority, murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts, whose
mouths speak proud things. These ( says he) are makers of sects, fleshly,
having no spirit.

Confer these same now together with the popish antichristian church of Rome,
and behold if you can see the kingdom of Antichrist any where so manifest
and plain.

Has any power in all the world, The first note of Antichrist.
since Christ's ascension into heaven lift up it self so high into the temple
of God, and advanced it self as God, like unto this usurped premacie and
tyranny of Rome?

Who has more oppressed Gods book, The second note of antichrist.
resisted the Gospel, The third note of antichrist.
and slandered the way of truth then the pope and his rabble? Who has wrought
with such deceaueable signs and miracles? who has fed us with more lies then
that false prophet of Rome? Read a leaf or two of Legenda aurea, or the book
called Festinale, and you shall find good stuff I warrant you. Which books
were wont to be read and taught us most principally concerning matters of
religion. Yea, almost we had no other in English. I speak that I have known,
heard and seen. Within these xxiii. years they were alleged in Sermons and
read in the church openly, and had in more price amongst us, and better
received then the holy Scriptures be of some. Also they were then better
studied and more willingly taught of curates, in some places then Gods book is
now of many of them.

Forget not I pray you, Antichrists badges.
to call to memory, how we were deceived with images, pilgrimages, relics,
false miracles, iuglinges, charms, witchcraftes, coniurations, iubilies,
stations, holy water, fire, ashes, palms, palm crosses, saint John's Gospel,
images of wax, Walsinghame broches, saint James shelles, saint Priarke his
staff, master John Shornes bat, saint Cornelius horn, pardons, pardon
beads, beads, Ladies Psalters, dyrges, treutals, Requiem Masses, etc. Who
denied the Lord that had bought then more manifestly then they that taught
these romish dreams?

Whosoever denies the death of Jesus Christ to be a whole perfect oblation,
The final end of Antichrists iuglinges.
sufficient for all sin, denies the Lord that has bought them. But they
that taught or believed the aforesaid dragges and such like to be expedient for
the obtaining of Gods favor and remission of sins, denies Christ and his
death to be sufficient. Wherefore so long as men sought remission of sins and
Gods favor in such fantastical devises of men, it cannot be denied, but in
so doing, they denied the Lord that bought them.

To say truth, men little remembered the oblation of Christ by death upon the
cross. For not many years agone, even when Masses satisfactory flourished, to
affirm Christ's oblation by death upon the cross once offered for all, to be
sufficient for remission of sins to all them that believe, was so far out
of memory that it was counted abominable heresy, because Mass and it could
not stand together. In time of anguishe, trouble, or sickness, was Christ's
death sought to for quietness of conscience? No, our Lady of Wilsdon, our Lady
of Walsingham, master John Shorn, and confession to some holy friar, some
holy relic, Mass of Recordare, or mass of the v. wounds: For unto these
masses, bishop Clement, and Bishop Boniface had given great virtue through
pardons and candels, if the devil transforming himself unto Raphael the
archangel, be a true messenger.

Also if death approached, then was Mass of Scala coeli, Trentals,
Aniuersarijs, and mass of Requiem with our Lady Mass ready to be sold for
money, and song to send the soul to the Devil with mirth, because he might be
sure of weeping and gnashing of teeth when he comes there. The fourth note
of Antichrist.
Yet did not the poor silly people selling their own souls to the devil,
and giving their money unto his ministers, perceive that they were made a
merchandise: whereof prophesied Peter, saying. Thorovv covetousness shall they
with fained words, 2. Pet. 2.
make a merchandise of you. The only wifelesse life of the Romish
anointlinges, so bewitched the unlearned peoples eyes, The thing that blinded
the people most.
that they stood in admiration of them (judging them more then men) and
thought all had been well, whatsoever they had said or done.

To keep this their estimation in the peoples opinions, The cause why
Antichrists prelates will not permit the marriages of priests.
they procured their champions to fight manfully with their laws and torments
against the marriages of priests. And now that they do perceive that force
will not serve them, they privily whisper in the ears of the people that
marriage is whoredom and an unclean life: Whereby they do condemn all honest
married persons of adultery, yet do not many foolish people perceive, If
marriage be not a clean life, God is the author of uncleanness, and Christ a
bawd.
how they (that teach such heresy and diuelishe doctrine) go about to lowt
them in their living. For they are not ashamed to make God the author of
uncleanness, to accuse Christ of bawdrie, and to condemn all men of sin, so
that themselves might still be counted angels, and not men.

This do all they that speak thus euilly of matrimony, Whereof God himself
was the author. And Christ honored it both by his corporal presence, Genesis 2.
Math. 19. John. 2.
and first miracle turning water into wine: whereby he declared, that the well
allowed matrimony and condemned adultery.

But these fellows disalowing Gods institution, and aduaunsing their own
invention, turn wine into water contrary unto Christ, that is to say, They
dishonor holy matrimony, Unto God matrimony is sweet, But unto Antichrist
whoredom is holy.
which is sweet and pleasant in the sight of God, and make much of stinking
adultery ever abhorred and condemned of God and all good men. They admit
rather an harlot for money dispensed withal contrary to the commandementes of
God, then a wife according to Gods scriptures, 1. Cor. 7.
which says, If they cannot abstain, let them marry, yea some of them are
not ashamed to say that it is more lawful for a priest to have six whores then
one wife. And some also pretend so good fellowship, that they would sooner lend
their own wives (they say) unto the Priest, then to grant that he should
marry. Also they count it a deed of charity, and a good work to make a
priest a cookold, (as they term it) and in so doing, they think to please God
and do him good service.

Whether a man might believe them in these their sayings without an oath.
Antichrists prelates do hope by the increasing of sin, to bring the word of
God in hatred and them selves in estimation.
I leave it for other men to judge. Of this I am sure, that this their cupshot
doctrine brawled in their conuenticles, and whispered in corners, their
liberal fellowship, and good work that proceeds of their burning
concupiscense, and not of charity, has brought in the contempt and violating
of holy matrimony, and the people to a wonderful looseness of living.
Wherein they joy not a little, thinking it to be a good mean to set them up
again like Gods in men's consciences. But in the mean while they shall be
devils and spirits of error according to the prophecy of Paul before said, 1.
Tim. 4.
in that they do forbid the marriage of priests.

Also, who has brought in so many sects into ye world as these romish
wraklinges have done. The fifth note of Antichrist.
Of which sort be these, Moonks, Chanons, Friars, Prebendaries, Canons, Nuns,
Sisters, Auckars, hermites, brother hoods, bawds, beades-men I should say,
fraternities, craftily naming the^ holy religious. How these have bin deceived
with dreams etc. I appeal to their own consceence. Let them take heed that it
be not marked with the hot iron of burning concupiscence. If it be, I leave
them this also for a token of their masters mark, The carracter of Antichrist.
to make them known by, even that they burn in malice against al them that
speak the truth.

If you ask me to what purpose this rabble serves, and what good they do in
the public weal of the Lord: Forsooth I must desire the prophet to make
answer for me, who says, They are not in the travail of men, neither are
they plagued like other folk. Yes sir, they take great pains in prayer and in
massing. The occupation of Antichrists brood. Psalm. 83. 73.
Of whom therefore it may be more truly spoken, as follows. They stretche
forth their mouth unto heaven, and there toonge goes through the world.
Therefore fall the people unto them: and thereout suck they no small
advantage. Behold these sinful and wealthy men in the world, have obtained
riches. Lo these be the mouths that speak proud things, before rehearsed.

What prouder things can be said, than to affirm that they can with fine
words create their creator of a piece a bread, The sixth note of Antichrist.
and offer him for the sins of the people, when they have done. Whereby they
have sucked no small lucre and game from the people. But their lucre begins
now to decay, and their idle life is perceived to be vnneressary. Which idle
life, the God that they do make has and must maintain, or else they will
perceive their state cannot remain. This makes them to be so stiff necked
against the setting forth of Gods word, and against the right administration
of the sacraments. This makes them to study so diligently to keep up their
altar, and to maintain their good friday mass, with the which they can
beguile the people well enough as they handle it. With their good friday mass,
priests serve both the Pope and Gods people.
Yea, to say the truth, they can do more with this then they could do with
mass of Requiem scala coeli, Recordare, or any other of that sort. Wherefore
I beseech them for the passion of Jesus Christ, If there be any consolation
in Christ, If there be any comfort of love, If there be any fellowship of
the spirit, If there be any compassion and mercy: Let them halt no longer on
both parts: Let them blow no longer hot and cold: But let them make the tree
good and his fruits good, or else make the tree evil and his fruit evil. To
speak plainly unto them, Let them not make a mingle mangle, and hodge podge
of the Lords supper any longer. But let them minister it simply and plainly
at the Lords table, as Christ has left it, and as the book of Scriptures do
truly mean, and not after their old popish fashion as they do, making it a
sacrifice for sins both of quick and dead, offering it at burialles, and
months minds after their old manner, whereby they make it abomination of
desolation. Dan. 9.
For as the sacrifice of the popish mass was the very desolation, departure,
and forsaking of Christ's oblation by death upon the cross once offered for
all: The abomination of desolation in the holy place.
So is this funeral sacrifice, (as they use it) the very abomination of the
same desolation. Therefore let them look better upon holy scriptures written
for our learning, and follow the rules and right meaning of the same, and not
their popish rules, and ceremonies otherwise then is there meant, and contrary
both to the kings majesty's statutes, and injunctions, and also contrary unto
his majesty's proclaimation, made the xxvii. day of December in the first year
of his most gracious reign. Mass forbidden by proclaimation.
Wherein the name of mass is plainly forbidden, if ye same proclaimation be
truly constured, notwithstanding in ye book of common prayer his majesty
somewhat yet bears with the weak learning of the multitude, which commonly
calls the Lords supper by the name of mass after their old wont, which
thing (me thinks) should give no man occasion to stick stiffely to evil
custom.

In a statute made the fourth day of November of the same first year of his
majesty's reign and in the xiiii. Mass for the dead condemned by act of
parliament.
Chapter: the offering of the sacrament for the dead, which is there called
masses satisfactory to be done for them, is plainly condemned as a vain thing
tending to the derogation of Christ's death.

Also by his majesty's injunctions chap. 28. the altar of the same sacrifice
for the dead, The altars taken away by the kings majesty's injunctions.
is taken away, for so much as it is a monument of the superstition of the
popish mass. So that, for any thing I can perceive, they that so feign would
hold up their altars against them that go about to put them down, both by
law and order, mean none other thing but to maintain a monument of
superstition and idolatry in spite both of the kings laws and injunctions.
To the end (I mean) to allure the people the more to their money sacrifice,
The papists deserve nothing but scoffs.
and to make them believe the better in the God that they do make upon their
altar or altarstone. Without the which they (I wot) can make no God. Ah where
was this their God before the altar and altarstone was made? This may well be
that God unto whom they think to do good service in breaking of wedlock and
railing against marriage, but sure I am, that this is not that God that made
both heaven and earth and all things in them, because the altar and the
altar-stone be some things. Albeit, least perhaps they should think that I
would only answer them with scoffs (though their shameless obstinacy
deserves none other) I will rehearse a few words out of Gods book to stop
their mouths withal. And when they have answered and truly confuted them, I
will forsake Gods book and the christian faith, as truly as I have forsaken
them, and all their iugling castes. In the 7. Chapter to the Hebrews, it is
written. The Lord swear and will not repent. Thou art a priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedech. And for that cause was Jesus a stablisher of a
better testament. These words do prove that Jesus Christ our everlasting
Priest and mediator has stablished a better testament then the testament of
the old law. The priests in the old law offered up sacrifice first for their
own sins, and then for the sins of the people. But whereon did they offer
their sacrifice verily? Leuit. 9.
Upon an altar.

Jesus Christ, unto whom God the father swear, The new testament.
Thou art a priest for ever, Heb. 7. 10.
etc. Offered up himself once, Heb. 9.
by his own blood, 1. Pet. 3.
suffering death for our sins, Heb. 10.
and with that his own oblation he has made perfect for ever them that are
sanctified.

This is the better testament that Jesus Christ has stablished for us, Heb. 9.
not by often offering of himself by the hands of sinners, for then must he
have often suffered since the world began. But as it is appointed unto all men,
that they should once die, and then comes the judgment, even so was Christ
once offered. For as touching that he died, Rom 6.
he died once (says Paul) to take away the sins of many. Heb. 9.


By these Scriptures we may conclude that Jesus Christ offering himself by
death upon the cross once for our redemption, Christ made a perfect oblation
for sins once, and that upon the cross, and not upon an altar.
made a full, 1. Pet. 2.
perfect and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of
all them that believe in him. And that this oblation was done upon the cross,
and not upon any altar, witness, Math. 27. Mark 15, Luke 23. John 19. and
Peter in the second of his first Epistle, saying. Christ suffered for us,
leaving us an example that we should follow his steps, which did no sin,
neither was there guile found in his mouth, which when he was reviled, reviled
not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but commits the vengeance to
him that judges righteously. Christ bare our sins on his own body.
Which his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being
delivered from sin should live unto righteousness. Howbeit, he only (says
Esaias) chap. 53. Has taken on him our infirmities, and borne our pains, he
was wounded for our offenses, Christ with his death has wholly healed us.
and smitten for our wickedness, for the chastisement of our peace was laid
upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. What is it to be healed with his
stripes, but that by his death and resurrection he has obtained for us
righteousness, even forgiveness of our sins, Act. 13.
even forgiveness of our sins, Act 10. 43.
according to the sayings of the Apostle Peter, Our covenant with God is to
believe remission of our sins through the death of his son Jesus Christ.
that by him all that believe are justified from all things, And unto him give
all the prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever believes in him
shall receive remission of sins. This is the covenant that is between God
and us, now, even that we believe in his son Jesus Christ, to have remission
of sins in his name through his death and resurrection.

This article has the holy ghost so surely graued in our hearts and written
in our minds that we cannot but say. We believe the remission of sins. Which
also is surely grounded upon Gods holy word, that says: This is the testament
that I will make unto them, Heb. 10. 16. 17. 18.
after those days ( says the Lord) I will put my laws in their hearts, and
in their minds will I write them, and their sins and iniquities will I
remember no more. And where remission of these things is, there is no more
offering for sin.

So long as the sacrifice and offering for sins, How long the altars ought to
have continued.
took not away sins, neither brought perfect remission of sins, there
remained in the Church of God altars, and continual sacrifice or oblation for
sins.

But when Christ had once offered himself upon the cross by death, and by
that his one oblation once offered, had obtained remission of sins, and
finished all things that was due for man to pay: saying, It is finished, John
19. 30.
giving up the Ghost, thorough the which eternal spirit he gave himself to
God without spot, Heb. 9
in a sweet savor. Ephesians. 5.
Then was finished (according to his own saying) a perfect sacrifice for
sin, The final end of all sacrifice for sins.
and all things due for the same. And also all sacrifice and oblations for
sins totally ended, as it is aforesaid. Where remission of sins and
iniquities is, there is no more offering for sin: if no offering for sins,
then no altar to offer upon. Therefore either let them prove Gods word to be
false, that says, Where remission of, etc. the Holy ghost a liar, that
promised to write the same in our hearts, etc. and take away this article of
our faith, I believe the remission of sins: or else away with their altars
and oblations upon the same: I mean their money sacrifice, the mass.

Which altar and sacrifice be nothing else but witnesses of their infidelity,
What the altars and sacrifice for sin now do testify.
idolatry, and Jewish hearts. Of their infidelity, in that they do not
believe remission of sins, through the only oblation of Christ once offered
upon the cross. Of their idolatry, in that they set up another sacrifice and
propitiation for sins then God has appointed, Wherein surely they show
themselves to be more than Jewish. For in their sacrificing and massing they
deny Christ's death and reprove God of perjury. The prophecy of Christ's
death is this: Esaias. 53.
With his stripes we are healed. By his pains and merits our pains are taken
away (as touching damnation) and our sins covered. Or by his death we are
healed from eternal death. By his oblation our sins are healed, for he has
purchased us perfect remission of the same. But this has he not done, if there
be any sins taken away by the mass, The which sins at the least he left
unhealed. And therefore he has not (if this be true) as yet suffered. For
heaven and earth shall fail, before these words be false. With his stripes we
are healed. Or by his death our sins are forgiven. Ergo he has suffered, and
we wholly healed. Or else if we be not wholly healed, he has not yet suffered.

Again, almighty God promised with an oath unto his son Jesus Christ, Heb.
7. 17.
saying: Thou art a priest for ever. Psalm. 10. 4.
That is to say, Jesus Christ has offered himself upon the cross by death
unto God the father once. And by that one oblation once offered, he has made
perfect for ever them that are sanctified, as it is before by the scriptures
evidently proved. For this one oblation once offered perfect for ever. Jesus
Christ is called and is indeed a Priest for ever. Whose sweet oblation
remains in the bosom of God to our great comfort for ever. But he himself
now offers no more, for he denies no more, but lives for ever on the right
hand of God the father, making intercession for us. Heb. 7. 8.
Seeing then his oblation is perfect for ever, serves for ever, and he
himself making intercession for us, lives for ever: He is therefore
(according to the oath of God) Priest for ever. But this he were not, if it
could be proved that his oblation were imperfect, as it must needs be, if
money sacrifice, the mass obtains remission of sins or any part thereof.

By these few Scriptures and sayings grounded upon the same, it madifestly
appears how blasphemous the money sacrifice, the mass is. Namely, it
robs us of our most comfortable articles of our faith, which is, I believe
the remission of sins: it takes away the verity of Gods Scriptures, which
do prove Christ's oblation upon the Cross to be perfect, whole, and
sufficient, it makes Christ a liar when he said, It is finished. It
adnihillateth his merits, To maintain the mass and altars is great
blasphemy and abominable heresy.
and takes away his passion from us, and it condemns God of perjury. If
there can be any great blasphemous, and more abominable heresies then these,
let all the world judge. Of all the which, the popish altar is a monument, and
(as it were) an hand to lead the people unto, from Christ and his merits:
wherefore all good men having but one spark of grace with knowledge, will not
only be content with the taking down of them, but also will (I trow) help
the best they can, every one according to his vocation, to the same.

Moreover, if the money sacrifice, the mass, had been so necessary, and unto
God so acceptable, as the people have believed it to be, would Christ have
given no commandment thereof, no example of it, no word concerning it, what
not one word?

Of preaching he gave a special commandment saying: Feed, John 21. 15.
Feed, Mark 16. 15.
feed my lambs. Mat. 28. 19.
And again, Go ye in to all the world and preach the Gospel to al creatures,

Yet this office of preaching is counted amongst many scant necessary, and the
messengers thereof so well looked to, that they may study their break fast,
pray (yea beg) for their dinner, and weep out their supper, as many other
poor souls do: which thing God will shortly plague, if speedy remedy be
not provided, or else his word is not true, which says, Psalm. 12.
For the miserable calamity of the poor oppressed, and for the sighing and
weeping of the poor that do lack, I will up, says the Lord.

Many are sore offended thorough the outragiousnesse of vice, slime, and
iniquity increasing on every side, a few (I mean) do study for amendment,
and some wonder what should be the cause thereof. At whom I do not a little
marvel. For if the plough man fallowing his ground turns it up, and lets
it lie: and neither stirs, haroweth, nor sows it: what marvel is it
though it bring him no corn, but weeds? England is but yet fallowed with the
plough of Gods word, yet scant fallowed, what marvel is it then, that weeds
grow faster then the corn? It must needs be so, unless Gods word be better
sown. For many that should will not: A few would and cannot: and some that
can, may not, because they that should will not. To remedy it, albeit I know:
I cannot, but this I know and am sure of. Where the word of God is not
preached, Proverb. 29.
the people perish.

Of mass, we have not so much as one tote or title of God, Christ, or his
Apostles given us. Notwithstanding how have the people cared for Mass, Mass,
Mass, only with Mass they have been satisfied. Why do they not cry now as
much for preaching of the word of God: without the which, they perish? Nay,
why do they cry so much against it? Oh what murmuringes and complaininges
have they made since their mass decayed? what lies have these idle brains
invented, what slanders have they imagined, and what false rumors have they
sprinkled abroad in the world, against them that have sincerely preached the
Gospel? How conspire they against good Christian ministers which according to
their vocation attend their flocks. What tumultes, vprores, and rebellions
have they raised against their superiors, to the great hinderance of Gods holy
word? May not a man manifestly behold in them the monstrous beast that
fights against the lamb and word of God? Revel. 17. 14.


No doubt, as the devil brought up his Church at the beginning and increased
it. So would he now (if he could) uphold, maintain, and defend the same. That
is, not by preaching, but by massing: not by feeding, but by loytering: not by
the regal authority that proceeds from God, but by tyranny, by authority
usurped, even by a monstrous beast. I call it a monstrous beast, that is,
either without an head, or else has many heads. A monstrous
Subjects usurping the sword of justice, and executing vengeance upon their
superiors, be a body without an head, or else with many heads, and therefore a
monstrous beast. This monstrous beast has lift up, borne, and maintained the
whore of Babylon, which is the church of antichrist. Revel. 17.


This monstrous beast has put up her horns here in England against the word
of God, and feign would rule the same again, if the devil could bring it to
pass: whose labor is in vain, for we know the truth of Gods word proceeds
ever from God, and therefore has God set it forth amongst us, by his own
vicegerent, a maiden king our liege lord and supreme head in his dominions next
under Christ, and that by act of parliament, with the consent of the nobility of
the realm, and the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons of the
same.

Let Satan therefore leave off with all his wicked instruments, which go about
to persuade the silly people that Gods book and this new learning (as they
call it) is heresy: whereby they slander their godly magistrates, and speak
evil of them that be in authority. The seventh note of an.
Which their customable so doing avails them nothing, for when they have
proved it heresy (which thing they shall as easily bring to pass, as to
prove light darkness, and darkness light) then must they also compel all
them that have set it forth, and all them that willingly received the same, to
do open penance for their manifest heresy, as they say.

Thus to speak evil of them that be in authority, is one of their proper
marks whereby they be known to be of Antichrists brood, which has by
conspiracy caused rebellion ever against such governors as have done any thing
against their tyranny, and excommunicated, cursed, and deposed emperors, and
kings that have displeased their hypocrisy, whose authority, The kings
authority is next unto Gods, and l^ft only to his correction.
as it is next unto God, Psalm 109
. so has God left the correction thereof unto himself, and neither unto
priest nor people. God commands, saying: Touch not mine anointed, and do my
prophets no harm. If it be not lawful to touch Gods anointed kings, Gods
officers, Gods lieutenants, Gods vicegerents that be appointed by God to rule
in his sted, let them take heed that do usurp their sword, for undoubtedly
Gods vengeance will fall upon them. Numb. 16.
Example hereof we have in Chorah, Dathan and Abiram, which rose up against
Moses with other men of the children of Israel, even two hundredth and fifty
that were captains of the multitude, great and famous men in the congregation:
Psalm. 54.
but Gods vengeance fell upon them, for the earth opened and swallowed them
down alive. Yet these rebels were not of the base and lower sort of the
people, but captains and famous men. Consider then, if God cannot abide this
rebellion and usurping of the sword of justice in a captain, surely he will
not suffer it in a soldier. If not in a famous or noble man, verily he will
not leave it vnplagued in one of the lower subjects: no he will not let it
escape unpunished in whom and whenever it be, because it is high treason
against himself.

Though they work craftily and secretly, Treason will out,
yet will their false traitourous hearts bewray themselves before they be ware,
Eccles. 10.
if Gods word (as needs it must) be true. This text is after the translation
of the Hebrews by John Camp^^se.
Be not thou so bold as once to think or imagine evil against the king, or
that thou will reprehend the prince although thou be alone in thy privy
chamber, for it will come out, if not otherwise, surely the birds that fly in
the air will not suffer it to be hid.

Hereby it appears that the word of God reproves, yea condemns all manner
of persons, of what state, condition, or degree soever they be, that in word or
thought do arise up, rebel, or resist the kings authority, specially in
setting forth Gods word, Romans 13. 1. 2.
For there is no power but of God, Gods word condemns all them that rebel in
word or thought against the king.
the powers that be are ordained of God: whosoever therefore resists power
resists the ordinance of God: but they that resist shall get unto themselves
damnation. These are Gods words and not mine.

Again, as almighty God would that we should neither hurt nor harm his true
prophets and preachers of his word: so Jesus Christ the son of God, gives us
a special commandment to beware of antichrists prelates, calling them false
prophets, Math. 7. 15.
saying, Beware of false prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves. Wolves are wrapped in sheep clothing, when
tyrants rule in the place of shepherds, under the titles of holy fathers,
worshipful doctors, honorable prelates, Mat. 15. 14.
etc. Mat. 16. 4.
These Christ painteth unto us, Mat. 12. 34.
by the names of Blind guides, Mat. 23. 27.
Froward generation, The 8. note of Antichrist.
Adulterous generation, Pharisees Sadduces, Hypocrites, Generation of vipers,
Serpents, Adders brood, Painted sepulchers, Painted wall, etc. who (says he)
do bind together heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne, and lay them on
men's shoulders, but they themselves will not heave at them with one of their
fingers. The 9. note of Antichrist.
All their works do they for the intent that they may be seen of men.

Also they go in long religious apparel, they must be had in reverence, and
saluted with names and titles of dignity, they shut up the kingdom of heaven
before men, The 10. note of Antichrist.
both by their example and doctrine, condemning the justifying faith for
heresy.

They use long prayers with lip labor for lucres sake, The 11. note.
they be very curious in ceremonies and trifles, The 12. note.
but in great matters, as judgment, mercy and faith, they have little regard,
The 13. note.
they see quickly a moat in another man's eye, The 14. note.
but will not look on the beam in their own, they are great intanglers of
men's consciences with meats, drinks, holy days, Coloss. 2.
and men's traditions: finally, they have (as before has been said) their
consciences marked with the hot iron of burning malice, envy, and hatred
against all them that love Gods word, And the 15. note of Antichrist.
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats which God has
created to be received with giving thanks of them that believe and know the
truth. These and such like be their fruits: these be their works, ye shall
know them (says Christ) by their works.

That those should enter into the Church after that the Gospel was preached by
the apostles, A true prophecy proving Antichrist to be come.
Paul plainly shows, Act. 20. 29.
saying, I am sure of this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter
in among you, not sparing the flock. This is the Church that cannot err.

Furthermore that you may the better perceive and know the Church that cannot
err, from the Church that cannot but err: you shall understand there be but
two ways, The way of the Spirits of truth. Faithful. Godly. Children of God.
Members of Christ. Holy Catholic Church.
The way of the Spirits of error. Unfaithful. Ungodly. Children of the devil.
Members of the devil. Wicked Church of Antichrist.



Call them by what names you will, Christ calls the one The broad way, and
the other The narrow way, saying, Mat. 7. 13, 14.
Enter in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. But strait is
the gate, and narrovv is the way which leads into life, and fevv there be
that find it. Note diligently these words of the truth. He shows here two
gates, two ways, and the end of either of them.

The Strait gate. Narrow way and life.
The Wide gate. Broad way and destruction.

The wide gate opens into the broad way, and leads into destruction, that
is, death, desperation and hell.

The strait gate opens into the narrow way which leads into life, joy, and
eternal felicity. Many do enter in at the wide gate, and walk the vroad way,
whose end is damnation remediless: for it is written of Antichrist, Habac. 2.
5.
He opens his desire wide open as the hell, and is as insatiable as death: all
heathen gathers he unto him, and heapeth unto him all people. But few do
enter the strait gate, because few do find it: for who so finds the gate, he
is in the way. In this gate whosoever stands in a wavering, looking
backward, is neither in the way nor in the gate. No man that puts his hands
to the plough, and looks back, Luke 9.
is apt to the kingdom of God. To stagger therefore in this matter, and to
look back, is to be therewith both out of the gate and the way. He that is in
the gate is in the way, and sure of life: for the gate, way, and life be so
unite in one, that it cannot be, but he that is in them, is in possession of
the other, and he that is out of them, loses the other. The gate is nothing
else, but an opening or door into the way of life. Christ is the door, Christ
is the way, Note.
and Christ is the life, John 10.
which says, I am the door, by me if any man enter in, he shall be sare. And
again, John 14 6,
I am the way, 1. John 5.
the truth, and the life, no man comes to the father but by me. Also S. John
says, God has given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his son: he
that has the son has life, and he that has not the son of God, has not
life, Thus its Christ the gate, way, and life.

But who be they that do enter this gate? Forsooth the prophet shows, saying,
Psalm. 118.
This is the gate of the Lord, the righteous shall enter into it. The righteous
O Lord, who be righteous? Christ only is righteous, we all are sinners. 1.
John 1.
For If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and there is no truth
in us, If we acknowledge our sins he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 1. John. 2.
These things I do write ( says John) unto you, that you sin not: And if
any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he it is that obtains grace for our sins Lo here is our
righteousness, by this advocate, and for this advocates sake so many as
pertain unto faith, be reckoned and called righteous. Of the which
righteousness it is written. Habbak.
The righteous shall live by his own faith: 2. Romans
and if he withdraw himself, 1. Heb. 10.
my soul shall have no pleasure in him. It is not we ( says Paul) that
withdraw our selves unto damnation, but we pertain unto faith, to the winning
of the soul. For by faith the soul wins the righteousness that is in Christ
Jesus our Lord, if he withdraw not himself, that is, if he neither for love of
the world nor fear of torments forsake not the truth received, nor deny it
before men. Which truth says He that denies me before men, Luke 12.
shall be denied before the Angels of God. Mat. 10.
Also, He that endures to the end, shall be saved. Therefore, so many as
pertain unto faith, must hold faith, slicke unto Christ, stand fast, and
walk in the truth, and then they shall be happy, and their sins shall not be
imputed unto them, as witnesses the prophet, saying: Blessed is he whose
unrighteousness is forgiven, Psalm. 32.
and whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes
no sin, and in whose spirit there is no guile. But who is the cause that
sum is not imputed to the faithful? Not our righteousness, but the
righteousness of Jesus Christ. Which of God is made unto us wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.
and righteousness, and sanctifiyng, and redemption. Who has indeed for us
fulfilled all righteousness, Mat. 3.
wherewith we be indewed through faith, according to the word of God that
says, Rom 3.
The righteousness of God comes by the faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and
upon all them that believe on him: And therefore we hold that a man is justified
by faith. To be justified by faith is to be made by faith sure of Christ's
righteousness our justification. For he yt believes in him that justifies
the ungodly, Romans 4.
is his faith counted for righteousness. For this cause is Jesus Christ called,
Emauel, Mat. 1.
which by interpretation is as much to say, as God with us, or whole ours.
This is the gate, this is the way, this is life. John 10.
The holy Ghost opens the gate, Ephesians. 2.
for he is the porter, and says is the gift of God. Faith finds the gate,
faith enters, and faith sets hold on life. Genesis 6.
By faith Noah found and entered this gate, which saved him from drowning. Into
this gate entered Abraham when he forsook his country, nanation and fathers
house, cen. 12.
and obeyed Gods word. This gate found Lot whereby he escaped burning. Genesis
18.
Moses, Aaron, Iosue and diverse of the faithful Jews found this gate, and
thereby were sure of their salvation, Philip had found this gate when he said
unto Nathaniel. John 1.
We have found him of whom Moses in the law and the prophets did write,
Jesus of Nazareth. Whereby it appears yt the fathers in the old law before
the incarnation of Christ, found Christ this gate, way, and life. For Nathaniel
sound this gate by faith before he saw Christ with his corporal eyes, else had
not he been a very Israelite without guile, Of whom Christ said, John 1.
Behold a right Israelite in whom is no guile. Nathaniel knowledged this gate
when he said unto Christ, Master, thou art the son of God, Thou art the king
of Israel. Peter also and the other of the Apostles confessed the same, when
they said, Thou art Christ the son of the living God. Math. 16.
All, even so many as our savior prayed for, found and shall find this gate,
which be but a very few in comparison of them that find it not. They be (as
we might say) but an handful to the world By the which name they be also
called that enter the wide gate and walk the broad way. Christ the son of
God, saying and praying unto the father.

Father, John 17.
I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me, for they
are thine, and all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorif^ed in
them. And Nevertheless I pray not for them alone, but for them also which
shall believe on me thorovv their preaching, that they all may be one, as thou
father art in me, and I in thee, and that they also may be one in us, that the
world may believe that thou have sent me. Jesus Christ knew right well that
the greater number would not enter this gate by faith, and therefore he said, I
pray not for the world. He would have all saved and come to the knowledge of
his truth, but they will not believe the truth, but hate and persecute the
truth. And therefore he knowing the great danger that his small slock were in,
and should be in amongst the wicked, and their small strength also in saving
themselves from their tyranny, prayed for them that they might be one in faith
and love, having the spirit of truth dwelling in them. Whereby they ever have
in possession that precious pearl and hidden treasure that the world can
neither taste nor find, because he that will have and taste it, must in
finding it therewith renounce and give for it all that he has, or else he
loses it. Math. 13,
Which thing only the elect that have the Spirit of truth, Luke 14.
whom the world cannot have, do, and none else. And thereby they have, yea
and feel in their great afflictions that peace of conscience, that Christ gave
unto them, saying, Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as
the world gives, give I unto you. John 14.
Let not your hearts be grieved, neither fear. From the which neither loss of
friends and goods, neither loss of good name and fame, nor shame of the world,
neither threatenings nor prisonment, nor scourginges and torments, nor yet
death it self could separate them that had once entered, felt, and tasted how
sweet the Lord is. This made Peter, Andrew, John, James, and the other
apostles to forsake all things, esteeming it to be more worth then goods,
friends, or life in this world. Paul being in this gate, and tasting the
sweetness thereof with a vehement spirit says, Who shall separate us from the
love of God? Romans 8.
Shall tribulation? or anguish? or persecution? either hunger? either nakedness?
either peril? either sword? Who says, I am sure that neither death nor life,
neither angels, nor rule, nor power, neither things present, nor things to
come, neither high, nor lovv, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord? For this the holy
Catholic Church suffers and ever shall suffer all kinds of torments until
Christ comes again to deliver her, as ever hitherto they have suffered,
whereof some were mocked, some scourged, some prisoned, some hamshed, some
drowned, some sawen, some hewn in pieces, some burned, some racked, and some
stened to death. Which holy Catholic Church may well say, according to the
scriptures, Thou (O God) make us to be rebuked of our neighbors, Psalm. 44.
to be laughed to scorn, and had in derision of them that be round about us.
And For thy sake are we killed all day long, Romans 8.
and are counted as sheep appointed to be slain. These be the few that do
find the narrow gate: these be the righteous that do find and enter the
same: these be they that Christ so lovingly prayed for, whose prayer (without
fail) because of his reverence was heard: these be they that be one in faith
and love. Heb. 5.
even of one heart and one mind, in one house, the holy catholic church,
unite and knit together with one spirit, the spirit of truth that cannot err.

Moreover, every one that is of this holy Catholic church, may say with the
Prophet, Psalm. 119.
Thy word (O Lord) is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. For
they stablish their faith by the word of God, and study to form their life,
and to fashion their manners by the same. who he known by three notable signs,
Three sure signs of the holy catholic church.
by faith, by love, and by the spirit of God. He that lacks any one of these,
is not in the strait gate, but wide gate: he walks not in the narrow way, but
broad way: he is not of the church of Jesus Christ, but of the church of
Antichrist.

Faith is a sure confidence of things which are hoped for, Faith.
and a certainty of things which are not seen. Heb. 11.
This faith brings us the knowledge of God, and makes us to understand our
own sinful nature and weakness: for Paul sath, Heb. 11.
Through faith we understand that the world was ordained by the word of God,
and that things which are seen are made of things which are not seen, etc.
Of our own infirmity by sin, we have example in him that brought his son
unto Jesus to be healed, Mark^ 9.
which with tears said, Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief. This man
undoubtedly saw by faith great imperfections in himself, even his sin, as it
were, ouerwhelming his faith, and therefore he wept, and said, Lord help thou
my unbelief. Luke 17. The first thing that faith works in us.
Likewise the Apostles considering their great burden of sin and frailenesse,
said unto the Lord, Increase our faith. This is the first thing that faith
works in us, it brings us the knowledge of our sin, and vileness of the
same, and makes us to cry to God for help and seek remedy for our sin,
which is Jesus Christ, that gave himself to death upon the cross for our
sin as is aforesaid. Thus wrought faith in the penitent publican that thought
himself unworthy to lift, up his eyes unto heaven, but smote himself upon the
breast, saying, Luke 18.
God be merciful to me a sinner. Thus faith wrought in the Centurien or petie
captain, which judged himself unworthy of Christ's presence, Luke 7.
saying. Lord I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roufe:
wherefore I thought not my self worthy to come unto thee, but say thou the
word and my servant shall be whole, etc. Such a low estimation did faith work
in Peter when he said, Luke 5.
Lord go from me for I am a sinful man. And least any man should contend
herein, yt this faith (which thus brings us knowledge of God and of our own
sinful nature and weakness) should be a feigned faith, a dead faith, or a
devils faith: hear ye praise thereof by him yt cannot flatter nor lie ye truth,
who says, of the same, I say unto you have not found so great a faith, Luke 7.
no not in Israel. Note, Christ calls this a great faith. Verily it so great
that it brings us our justification and peace with God, The second thing that
faith works in us.
which is the second thing that faith works in us. That faith brings us the
righteousness of Christ our justification, is already plainly proved by the
scriptures and writings of Paul, who goes further and says, Romans 5.
Because therefore that we are justified by faith, we are at peace with God.
And to declare the very gate, door and way, whereby we enter into this peace and
favor of God, he adds saying, Through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.
by whom also it chanced unto us, to be brought in through faith unto this
grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of the children of
God. Here you see manifestly faith enters into the strait gate which is
Christ. The third thing that faith works in us.
This faith is not idle, for it makes us to stand, that is to say, to
persevere and walk in the narrow way by love, which is the third thing that
faith works in us, and therefore it follows, Not that only, but also we
rejoice in tribulations, knowing that tribulation brings patience, patience
brings experience, experience brings hope, and hope makes not ashamed,
because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which
is given unto us. No thank then unto our faith, no thank unto our love, but
all thank and praise, and glory be given unto God, whose holy spirit works
faith, love, hope, patience, and altogether in us.

Faith that works by love is much worth before God, Love.
which love is the second note of the holy Catholic church: Gal. 5.
faith fetches this love of the great love of God, which first so loved us,
that he gave his only begotten son Jesus Christ, to the end that all that
believe in him should not perish, but have life everlasting. Of this love
speaks Paul, saying, Ephesians. 5.
Walk in love even as Christ loved us, and gave himself for us an offering
and sacrifice of a sweet savor to God. This love Paul learned of his master
our savior Jesus Christ, commanding and saying, John 13.
A new commandment I do give unto you, that ye love together as I have loved
you. Jesus Christ so loved us, that he gave himself for us, for he was
obedient unto God the father for us unto death, yea unto death upon the cross.
This love so warmeth the heart with hope and assurance of everlasting life (
for we are saved by hope) that it puts away all servile fear: Hope and
fear.
I say not all fear, Romans 8.
for there remains and abides in the heart an holy reverend fear or dread
of displeasing God, or lothnesse to loose God and his holy spirit, which if a
man taste, is rather a reverend joy, and a glad love than fear: therefore is
it truly said, Perfect love casts out fear, 1. John 4.
that is to say, Jesus Christ by his holy spirit possessing the heart of man
through faith, pntteth clean away the fear of shame, loss of goods or
friends, the fear of torments, enemies, and prisonment, yea the fear of
sin, The office of true faith.
death, the devil and hell. So that the office of true faith sets not only
before our eyes the vileness of sin, that caused Christ to die, but it also
brings us Jesus Christ the atonement maker between God and us for our
sin, whereof comes love. In the which love is manifest the third note of
the holy Catholic church, The spirit of Christ.
for now we fear God no more as a terrible judge, but through his holy spirit
we love him as a most gentle and loving father, whereof speaks Paul, saying
thus: Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear any more, but you
have received the spirit of adoption, Romans 8.
whereby we cry, Abba, Father. Abba is as much in English as Dad, or Dear
father: it is the Syrian speech, left untranslated both by the Latin men, and
also English men, to the intent (I suppose) that it should also be English: for
this I know, that the first word that an English Christian child begins to
speak, is Abba, commonly, long before he can speak any thing else, which
Christian babe in his innocence is a witness with Paul that God is a dear
father unto Christians through his holy spirit, by his son Jesus Christ.
Faith, love, and the spirit of God, be together in every true Christian.
Thus you may easily perceive by those scriptures that faith, love, and the
spirit of God do go together, and be together in every true Christian as sure
notes and seals of his salvation. Faith entering the gate of salvation,
sticks to the word of God, and takes it only to be the rule of life and
doctrine. Love cleaves unto Christ, and makes faith known, as the fruits do
the tree, and puts away fear. The spirit of God quieteth the conscience,
and brings with a reverend dread, joy and gladness ineffable. If you know
this, you be a very true member of the holy Catholic church, and in the strait
gate and narrow way unto eternal life. If you know not this, I say no more but
God have mercy upon you: Math. 7.
For wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and
many there be which go in thereat.

Here (me thinks) I do hear an idle brain say, that these signs and notes
be of mine own invention, which do rather confou^d and dim the church, than
make it known. Unto whom I do answer, 2. Cor. 4.
If it be dim and hid, it is hid unto them that perish: but unto the children
of light it is manifest enough. Also these notes be not mine, but rather Gods
books, there I do find them.

Of the first, Christ says, Every tree is known by his fruits. Luke 6.
Which words be made plain by these sayings of Paul: The first note of
Christ's church.
To believe with the heart, Romans 10.
justifies, and to knowledge with the mouth, makes a man safe. Faith then is
not dead in the heart: if it be dead, it is not faith: faith is known by the
mouth, as the tree is known by the fruits, for of the treasure of the heart
the mouth speaks. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings
forth that which is good. Luke 6.


Of the second, The second note of Christ's church.
John says, 1. John 4.
God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.
He then cannot be hid in whom God dwells. And 1. John 2.
He that loves his brother abides in the light, and there is no occasion of
evil in him. The light therefore must needs be seen. Here is to be noted,
that as faith without godly works is a dead faith, and therefore no faith: so
love without the same good weeks also is not love, but natural affection, 1.
John 3.
For who so has these worlds goods, and sees his brother has need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?
Thus is love manifestly known by the good work. Our fauiour Jesus Christ
appointing this to be the notable sign of the church, faith unto them, John 13.
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to
another.

Of the third note, The third note of Christ's church. Romans 8.
which is the spirit of God, Paul writing to the Romans, has these words,
If any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. And a little
after, he speaking of himself and other of the church of Christ, says: The
same spirit certifieth our spirit that we are the children of God. If the
spirit of God certifieth a man's conscience that he is the child of God, then
he may be sure that he is of the church of Christ. Hereby you perceive that
these notes are appointed by Gods book, and not of mine invention, The sure
signs of the holy Catholic church be gathered out of Cods book.
to be infallible signs of the holy Catholic church, and of every member of
the same, which be all of one faith, unite as one by love, and governed with
one and the same spirit of truth.

Finally, if these signs of the holy catholic Church be not yet evident and
plain enough unto you, to know the same, perhaps because you your self be
none of the Church, mark yet diligently the effects that follow.

First, Manifest signs of the church.
the simple and plain setting forth of the word of God, both in writing and
preaching, with the administration of Christ's sacraments according to the
same.

Secondly, the murmuringes, complaininges, conuenticles, vprores, and tumultes
of the wicked against the same.

Thirdly, The first ma^est note of Christ's church.
the persecution, and patiently suffering of the very elect of God for the
same, as the elect of God takes nothing from his holy words, but wholly
sticks unto the same without any of their own addit^ons, So do they
always sincerely open the same unto the world, and have their whole delight
in making it known unto men. Whereof they have of their master Christ a
special commandment so earnestly given unto them, as though he had required
of them that alone, binding them as they loved him, to teach, feed, and
preach unto his sheep. And as he required of them this teaching and preaching
of the Gospel most earnestly, Mat. 10. 28.
so did he most often put them in memory of the same. Mark 6. 6.
This was the principal and great commission that he gave them, John 21.
after his resurrection, saying. All power is given unto me in heaven and in
earth. Math. 28.
Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the
father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all
things, whatsoever I have commanded you. Other thingee then Christ has
commanded to be taught, may not be taught by Christ's commission, who says
also, The holy hhost shall teach you. Luke 12.
What? All things, John 14.
and bring all things unto your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.
Again, that they might be sure of their vndeceaueable rule, Mark 16.
he says. Preach the gospel to all creatures, unto the^ that thus do. He
says further, He that hears you, Luke 10.
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises
me, despises him that sent me. Because the children of perdition walking in
the broad way, despise the narrow way of the Gospel, and teachers of the same,
they do commit high treason against Christ and against God, for that they do
not regard, but contemn the great commission of God, the Gospel of his son
Jesus. Although this Gospel should be for a time troad under feet and sealed
up, The Gospel. is a witness to all the world.
as it was prophesied, Dan. 12.
and as we have seen it, Mat. 24.
yet should it be a witness to all the world. Christ says, This Gospel of the
kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness to all nations, and
then shall the end come. The gospel is a witness of Christ and his Church to
al nations in the world. To the wicked it is a witness, that they love
darkness more then light because their works are evil. John 3.
To the godly it is a sure stay and witness that they are of the holy
Catholic Church, and members of Christ.

This is a plain token of the holy catholic church, A plain token of the
holy catholic Church.
that wheresoever this gospel is set forth in ye mother tongue and country
speech, and sincerlie taught, there be the true members of Christ's Church.
Example hereof we have in the preaching of the same by the Apostles at
Jerusalem, in whom the holy Ghost so wrought that they spoke to every man
(many being there of diverse and strange languages) in their own mother
toonge, and country speech. Acts 2.


The true ministers of the word (in whom the holy Ghost speaks) ever teach
the people in their own language that they understand, and not in a strange
toonge that they know not. We may therefore be glad and joy to have seen and
heard the same Gospel here in England, set forth in our mother toonge preached
according to Christ's promise and sincerely taught.

O it is a world to behold the subtlety of Satan working in these wicked
worldlinges. When he feels by preaching of the Gospel, that his counterfeit
religion is espied, and that his lies and false miracles will serve to blind
and deceive the people no longer: then he bestirreth himself, then he seeks
out his trusty friends and sets them a work, to stir the people to
murmuringes, tumultes, When the devil had men fast by false faith, he cared
not for their evil life. The second manifest note of Christ's Church.
and vprores, to the end that by deuisions, debates, and discordes, he may
either face out the Gospel, or else for that he loses some in their faith, he
might win more by their evil life: Whereby (albeit against their will) both
the devil and his ministers do give an evident testimony of the Gospel. For
Jesus Christ the wisdom of God the father knowing that it would be so, showed
that it should be so, both by his words and example taking upon him, that the
wicked would lay to his charge, saying, Think not that I am come to send peace
into the earth: Math. 10.
I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at a
variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter in law against her mother in law, and a man's foes shall be they that
be of his own household. And he prophecieth also, saying, Suppose ye that I am
come to send peace on the earth. Luke 12.
I tell you nay, but rather division. For from hence forth there shall be five in
one house divided, three against two, and two against three. The father shall be
divided against the son, and the son against the father. The mother against
the daughter, and the daughter against the mother. The mother in law against
her daughter in law, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.
Christ propheciyng of the discord that would be through the preaching of the
gospel, takes upon him the salt of others.
In this phrase of speech Christ showed not himself to be the author and
cause of discord and division, but he rather declared in their own words
their false standers. He knew right well that the wicked would resist the
gospel with lies, staunders and tumultes: and when they had through their own
malice craftily raised such tragedies, then they would (disburdening
themselves) lay it to Christ's charge and to his holy word, or ministers of the
same. Thus has it been in out time. The wicked hating the Gospel, have stirred
vprores and unquietness amongst the people, and then they have burdened the
Gospel and preacher withal. Thus the Scribes and Pharisees with their
Disciples, moved the people against Christ, whereby they made unquietness, and
then they accused Christ of blasphemy, heresy and making of discention, Math.
26.
traitors and blasphemous heretics, Luke 22.
neither true to God nor the Prince. For this cause, Christ knowing before,
vouchsafe to bewray their malice, taking upon himself the person of discord,
when in very deedele is the berie peacemaker, because he knew they would so
judge him and report him to be, as we can witness they have done. wherefore
we must needs believe this his prophecy, now that we have heard it, and seen
it fulfilled.

Truly, The banner of Christ goes ever with his Church, as the shadow goes
with the body.
Truly, Mat. 10.
as the shadow follows the body: so Christ's cross follows the holy
Catslolique church. And as the greater the height of the sun is, the more is
the shadow seen: so, the greater the height of the gospel shinneth by
preaching, the more manifest is the crosie of Christ, who says. He that loves
father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me, and he that loves son
or or daughter more then me, is not vvorthie of me. And he that takes not his
cross and follovveth me, is not vvorthie of me. Also if any man will come
after me, Luke 9.
let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily and follovv me. For
whosoever will save his life, shall lose it. But whosoever does lose his
life sot my sake, the same shall save it. For whosoever is ashamed of me and
my words, of him shall the son of man be ashamed when he comes in his
majesty, and the majesty of his father. It is impossible to stick unto the
Gospel without the cross, without trouble or persecution, 2. Tim. 3.
Paul being witness, saying: All they that will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution. Of the which cross and persecution Christ prophesied
saying, ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. Mat. 10.
But unto this in another place he gives a better comfort, John 15.
saying, If the world hate you, you know it hated me before it hated you. If
ye were of the world, the world would love his own. Howbeit because ye
are not of the world, but I have chose you out of the world, therefore the
world hates you. Remember the word that I said unto you. The servant is
not greater them his Lord: if they have persecuted me they will persecute
you. Seeing the truth has spoken these things, The third manifest note of
Christ's Church.
they must needs come to pass. Wherefore it now remains, that all lovers of
the Gospel and truth, do patiently stick unto the truth in all their
tribulations, and call to memory their masters first promise and blessing,
which is written. Where he says: Blessed are they that suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. To suffer for
righteousness and truths sake (me thinks) must be a sign of the elect of
God. For they verily yt do live immofluely in the world, and charitably with
their neighbors, and notwithstanding be hated, evil spoken of, standered, and
persecuted of the wicked, only for speaking against sin and iniquity, and
for the Gospels sake, have great cause to joy in their trouble and persecution,
as it solloweth.

Blessed are ye when men shall speak evil of you, and persecute you, and shall
speak all evil against you, lying, for my sake. Rejoice ye and be glad, for
plenteous is your reward in heaven Lo this is the Church that cannot err.

Thus I have described before your eyes both the church of Antichrist, which
cannot but err, and also the Church of Jesus Christ that cannot err, plainly,
with their signs and notes: Note them therefore circumspectly. The church of
Antichrist is not stablished upon the verity of Gods word and spirit, which
is the sure foundation of the holy catholic Church, but upon a sinful man,
quia omnis homo mendax, because euerieman is a liar. Christ's Church has one
iustifiyng faith which works by love, for the which Antichrists Church has
many faithes, as, a little faith, a small faith, an imperfect faith, a
deceiving faith, a sick faith, and a dead faith, Dominikes faith, Basils faith
Austens faith, Bennets faith, Bernardes faith, Frances faith, and Devils faith.
All which may enter the wide gates and be admitted into the popes Church, and
pertaker of his money sacrifices. Where note they be the greater number: which
thing makes them bold to persecute the few and small flock that enters the
strait gate of faith, and walks the narrow way of the Gospel, which small
flock never persecuteth. For it is against the nature of a lamb to suck the
blood of a Woolfe. It is the property of the Woolfe to suck blood, devour and
persecute.

The church of Jesus Christ ever suffers, loves, and prays for enemies and
persecutours.

Antichriste brood do murmr, hate, and persecute, with a filthy conscience.

Unto the church of Jesus Christ only Gods book is a perfect rule of belief,
life, and doctrine, in stead whereof Antichrists generation has many books and
rules, as holy decrees and decretals, fathers, coumels, holy doctors,
Festiuale, Legenda aurea, Austens rule, Benets rule, Basils rule, Bernards
rule, Dominiks rule, Francis rule, and now last of all Canterbury tales with a
dung-cart sul also of unwritten verites. These have been brought in, and
taught by the spirits of error, the very guides and stays of Antichrists
church, and therefore they could not but err. But the church of Jesus Christ,
and every member of the same, is governed with one spirit of truth that cannot
lie, therefore cannot they err, even with the spirit of Christ, the holy
ghost, unto whom, with the father, and the some, be all thanks, laud, praise
and glory. Amen.

Written the eleventh day of the month of Iulie. Anno Domini 1550.

