The sermon of John^ the bishop of Rochester made again ye pernicious doctryn
of Martin luther wtin ye octaues of ye asce^syon by ye assingneme^t of ye most
reverend fader i^ god ye lord Thomas Cardinal of York and Legate ex late re
from our holy father the pope.



Quu^ venerit paracletus quem ego mittam vobis spiritu^ veritatis qui a patre
procedit ille testimonium perhibebit de me. These words be ye words of our
savior christ Jesu in ye gospel of John. and red in the service of this
present sunday. thus much to say in english. wha^ the co^forter shall come.
whom I shall send unto you the spyryte of truth yt yssueth from my father.
he shall bear witness of me.
FUll often when the day is clear and ye son shines bright ryseth in some
quarter of ye heaven a thyk blak cloud. yt darketh all the face of ye heaven.
and shadowyth from us the clear light of ye son. and stereth an hydeous
tempest. and makes a great lightnyng. and thonderyth terribly. so yt the
weyke souls. and feeble hertes be put in a great fere and made almost desperate
for lak of comfort.

In like manner it is in the church of christ. when the light of faith (that
shyneth from ye spu^all son almighty god) has been clear and bright a good
season. has risen many a time some blak cloud of heresy. and stered such a
tempest and made such a lyghtnynge and so terribly thonderyd that many a weyke
soul has myscaryed thereby.

Such a cloud loo was Arrius. which stered so great a tempest that many
years after is vexyd the church of christ. And after hy^ came many other like
clouds. as Macedonius. Nestorius. Eutices. Cliuidius. Donatus. Jouinianus.
Pellagius. Joannes wiccliff. with other moo. which sore tempested the church.
every of them for his time. Such heretykes saint Jude in his epistole calls
nubes sine aqua. que a vento circu^feruntur. yt is to say. clouds wtouten ye
moisture of grace. which be moved with the blast of wicked spyrytes. And now
such an other cloud is raised a loft. oon Martyn luther a friar. the which
has stered a mighty storm and tempest in the church. and has shadowed ye
clear light of many scryptures of god. and he makes issue from him a perylous
lyghtnynge. yt is to say a false light of wrong understanding of scriptures.
which passes not from ye spiryt of troth. but from ye spiryt of error. and
from the spiryt of this tempest of his most perilous heresye. Ferthermore he
terribly thonderyth against the poopes authorite. against the general
co^celles. against ye tradicions and ordinances left unto us by ye apostles.
against the doctrine of ye fathers. and doctors of the church.

Our savior christ therefore by his divine providence forseynge. yt such
pestylent clouds and tempests many should arise. to ye great trouble and
vexacyon of his chirch. for the tender love and infinyt charity which he
bears unto our mother holy church. did promise yt after he had ascended
unto his father he would send to her the holy spiryt of god. ye spiryt of
truth. yt should abide with her for ever. to acertayne her fro time to time of
every troth whereunto both she and every child of hyrs. yt is to say every
true christen man should gyfassured faith. and finally to be unto hyri^ all
such storms a very co^forter. according to ye beginning of this gospel above
rehearsed. Quum venerit paracletus. quem ego mittam vobis. spiritum veritatis.
qui a patre procedit. ille testimonium perhibebit de me. This holy gospel
gracyously offers unto us four goodly instruccyo^s against these dangerous
tempests of heresies. when so ever they fortune to arise. but specially
against this most pernicyous tempest that Martyn luther has now stered.

The first.iij. instruccyons by the leave of god and help of this holy spiryt.
shall undermine.iij. great grounds. where upon Martyn does stable in manner all
his articles. and the fourth shall answer to the defense yt is made for hy^ by
his adhere^tes. whereby many a weyke soul is in peril.

But before yt we shall enter ye declaracion of them. we shall make our prayer
unto this holy spyryte of truth. yt in this dangerous storm and perylous
tempest. he will stay our hertes with the testimony of his truth. yt we
floghter not in ye catholic doctrine of our mother holy chirch. but fastly
believe such erudicyons as has been deriuyed unto us. from our savior christ
Jesu by his apostylles. and their successors. ye holy bysshoppes. and fathers
and doctors of the church. For ye which and for grace necessary for you and
for me every person say their devotion.

THe first Instruccyon is offered unto us of these first words of the gospel.
Quum venerit paracletus quem ego mitta^ vobis. spiritu^ veritatis qi a patre
procedit. In ye which words is promest unto us ye spiryt of truth. to be
our comfort in all doutefull opinions yt may rise in christ's church Towching
this instruccion three things I would do. First I would show yt the instruccyons
of this holy gospel perteyneth to ye universal church of christ. Secondly yt
the heed of ye universal church (iure diuino) is the pope. Thyrdly yt Martyn
luther (which deuideth himself from this heed) has not in him ye spiryt of
truth. For ye first Martyn luther can not deny. but this promise is made
unto ye universal church. and there unto we shall bind hy^ by his own
reason. he says in the book de captiuitate babilonica. Quoth si demus vnam
aliqua^ epistola^ Pauli. aut vnu^ alicuius epistole locu^. non ad vniuersalem
ecclesiam pertinere. iam eueacuata est tota Pauli authoritas. yt is to say if
we will afferme that any one epistle of saint Paul. or any one place of his
epistoles. perteyneth not unto the universal church of christ. we take away
all saint Paul's authorite. Now if it be thus of ye words of saint Paul.
much rather this is a truth of ye gospels of christ. and of every place
written in ye same gospels. In the universal church than this holy spirit of
truth rests. and shall co^tynue unto ye worlds end. vt maneat vobiscum
ineternu^. he shall abide in the universal church for ever. et docebit vos
omnem veritatem. And he shall in every doubt teache us ye truth. Thus much
for the first.

Now for the second where I said that the pope iure diuino is ye heed of the
universal church of christ. When ye se a tree stand upright upon ye ground and
his branches spread abroad. full of lefes. and fruit if ye son shine clear.
this tree makes a shadow. in ye which shadow ye may perceive a figure of ye
branches. of ye lefes. and of the fruit. Every thing yt is in the tree.
has somewhat answeringe unto it in the shadow. And contrary wise. every part
of the shadow has some thing answering unto it in the tree. A man's eye may
lead him from eueri part of ye tree. till every part of ye shadow. and
again. from every part of the shadewe till every part of ye tree. answeryng
there unto. Every man may point any certain part of ye shadow. and say this
is ye shadow of such a brau^che. and this is ye shadow of such a lefe and
this is ye shadow of ye bole of the tree. and this is the shadow of ye top of
ye tree. But so it is yt the law of Moses. and ye governance of ye synagoge
of ye Jews was but a shadow of ye governance of ye universal church of
christ. So says saint Paul. vmbram habens lex futurorum bonorum. yt is to say
the law had but a shadewe of ye things for to com. And ad corinthios. omnia
in figura contingebant illis. All their governance was but a figure and shadow
of ye church. Now than to my purpose. In the governance was twain hedes
appointed. one under an other. Moses and Aaron. to co^dith that people through
ye deserte. unto ye country yt was promised unto them. We woot yt that people
of ye Jews was shadow of ye christen people. and yt their Jorney by ye desert.
toward ye country promised unto them was a shadow of our journey. through this
wretched world unto ye country of heaven. But Moses and Aaron which were the
hedes of yt people. whereof than be they shadow? wtouten doubt they must be ye
shadow of christ and of his vycare saint Peter which under christ was also
the head of christen people.

And will ye se this more manyfestly by.iij. lykenesses. First Moses and Aaron
both of them were priests. Moses was made by god. and Aaron made by Moses
at ye co^mau^dment of god. to whom was committed ye cure of ye Jews in ye
absence of Moses. So christ and saint Peter both were priests of ye new
law. Christ made by his father almighty god as it is written of him. Tu es
sacerdos ineternum scdm ordine^ Melchisedech. that is to say thou art a priest
for ever according to ye order of Melchisedech. And Peter was made by christ.
to whom he co^mysed in his absence ye cure of ye christen people saying. pasce
oues meas pasce. pasce. pasce. The second likeness is this. Moses was mean
between almighty god and Aaron for ye causes of the people. and Aaron was mean
between Moses and the people touching the causes of god. So scripture techeth
Exodi.iiij. Almighty god said unto Moses speaking of Aaron. Ipse loquetur
prote ad populum. and erit os tuum. Tu autem eris ei in iis que ad deum
pertinent. yt is to say. he shall speak in thy stead unto the people. and thou
shall be for him again. in thoo causes yt perteyne unto god. Will ye se how
christ was the mouth of Peter toward almighty god. he said to saint peter.
Simon Simon ecce sathanas expetiuit vos. vt cribraret sicut triticum. Ego autem
rogaui pro te vt no^ deficiat fides tua. et tu aliqua^do conuersus confirma
fratres tuos. that is to say. Simon Simon lo Sathanas has coueyted greatly to
syft you as a man syfteth his whete. But I have prayed for the to thentent yt
thy faith do not fail. And thou ones turned to ye stabyll way conferme thy
brethren. Se now here wheder christ was not ye mouth of Peter when he promoted
his cause. before almighty god ye father. and prayed for him that his faith
should not finally perysshe. And contrary wise was not Peter ye mouth of
christ. when he to the true way converted did co^ferme his brethren. here note
well what authoryte was given to Peter upon them to co^ferme all the other of
his brethren in the stabyll way. The third lykenes is this. Moses ascended
unto ye mou^te to speak with almighty god. and Aaron remained behind to
instruct the people. Did not christ likewise ascend unto his father unto the
great mount of heaven? And to what intent I pray you? Saint Paul tells vt
appareat vultui dei pro nobis. to appear before ye face of almighty god for us.
and there to be our advocate as says saint John. And did not Peter remain
behind to teache ye people. the which our savior committed unto his charge.
like as Aaron was left for to do the people of ye Jews. when Moses was above
in the mount with god.

Thus every man may se how yt shadow and this thing agrees and answers
one till an other fully and clerly. But now let us pause here a while. I will
construe this figure yet by an other deed of christ in yt gospel. So it was. ye
the Jews were tributaryes unto ye romans. and for that trybute ye heed of
every household did pay a certain coin called didrachma. So wha^ they yt were
ye gaderers of this trybute came to saint Peter. our savior bad him go unto
the sea. And told him yt in a fysshes belly there he should find staterem.
which was a double didrachma. and bad him pay yt unto ye gaderers. both for
himself and for christ. Mark here yt this trybute was heed money paid for
them yt were heedes and governors of housholdes. and christ commanded this to
be paid for no moo. but only for him and for saint Peter. and thereby quyted
all the resydue. Join this fact of ye gospel unto yt figure before. and what
can be more euydent to show yt Peter under christ was the heed of al ye
household of christ. But yet thyrdly let us here the testimony of some father of
ye church yt this is ye very meaning of ye gospel. Saint Austyn in the book
of questyons of ye new and of ye old testament ye.lxxv. questyon says in
this manner. didrachma capitum solutio intelligitur. the payment of this money
was heed money paid for the heedes. And after follows. Saluator quu^ pro se
et Petro dari iubet. pro omnibus exoluisse videtur quia sicut in saluatore
erant oe^s causa magisterii. ita and post saluatorem in Petro omnes
co^tinentur. ipsum eni^ constituit caput eorum. that is to say. when our
savior commanded this double trybute. to be paid for himself and for Peter.
and in so co^maundynge he did quyte all the resydue of the apostles. for all
they were contained in him. because he was their master. And as al they were
contained in our savior. So after our savior all they were contained in
Peter. for christ made him ye heed of them all. Here note of saint Austyn yt
saint Peter because he was heed of them all. and all they were contained in
him. therefore this trybute yt was paid for him was paid for them al. But yet
by an other scripture which I rehearsed before. Saint Austyn proves yt all the
other apostles were contained in saint Peter. Simon Simon. ecce sathanas
expetiuit vos. vt cribraret sicut triticu^. Ego au^t oraui pro te. vt non
deficiat fides tua. et tu aliqua^do co^uersus co^firmafratres tuos. that is to
say, Simon Simon. loo sathanas has coueted to syft you as a man syfteth
whete. but I have prayed for the yt thy faith shall not fail. and thou ones
converted to ye stable way. do co^ferme thy brethren. Upon ye which words
saint Austyn says. Christ did not pray for James and John and for the other.
but he prayed for saint Peter in whom the resydue was contained.

Co^sydre now how each of these testimonies conferme and strenghte one an
other. First the figure and shadow of ye old law. Secondly ye testymony of
the gospels answeryng unto ye same. Thyrdly ye declaracyo^ tyo^ of saint Austyn
upon ye same. And here I bring but one doctor. whose testimony in the balaunce
of any true christen man's heart. me thinks should wey down Martyn Luther.
But saint Ambrose speaking de didrachmate calls it also capitu^ solutionem.
that is to say heed money. And of saint Peter he says. Petra eni^ dicitur. eo
quod primus in nationibus fidei fundamentu^ posuerit. and tanquam saxum
immobile totius operis christiani co^pagem. molemque contineat. that is to
say. Peter is called petra. because that he first among the gentyles did
establisshe ye ground of our faith. and as a stone not easy to be removed. he
co^teyneth in him and stays all ye frame and gretnes of the work of christ.
And saint Gregory says. Certe Petrus apostolus primu^ membru^ sancte and
vniuersalis ecclesie est. Paulus. Andreas. Joannes quid aliud quam singularium
plebiu^ sunt capita. yt is to say. Peter is ye chief membre of the universal
church. Paul and Andrew. and John. what else be they. but heedes of certain
and syngler people. whereby it appears that as they were chief every man of yt
people ye they had cure of. So saint Peter was chief of the universal church.
Saint Hierome also says spekyng of Peter. Propterea inter duodecim vnus
eligitur. vt capite co^stituto. schismatis tolleretur occasio. that is to say
ye Peter was one chosen out amongst twelfe to thentent that he being their
heed al occasyo^s of schysmatyke diuysyon should be take away. Saint Cypriane
forthermore says. spekyng of Peter wha^ he did confess christ Jesu to be the
sone of god. Loquitur illic Petrus super que^ edifica^da fuerat ecclesia. yt is
to say there speaks Peter upon whom the church was for to be builded. But
how should ye church be builded upon him if he were not the heed and chief
membre of the church.

All these be of the latin church. holy fathers. all men of great learning.
all men of synguler holiness. whose virtuous lyuynges be co^formed by miracles
both done in their lyfes and after their deeth. Of greeks likewise.
Chrysostom after yt he has praised saint Paul speaks of saint Peter saying.
quod ipse quifuit apostolorum caput talis fuit. yt is to say yt saint Peter
which was ye heed of ye apostles was such an other and often he called saint
Peter eximium apostolorum. et os discipulorum ac verticem collegii. that is to
say ye chief of the apostles and mouth of the dyscyples and the top and heed
of all the college. And Oxygene says. Magno illi ecclesie fundame^to petreque
solidissime super qua^ christus fundauit ecclesiam suam. vide quid dicatur a
domino. Modice fidei quare dubitasti. yt is to say. Se what was said of our
lord to that great fou^dament of the church and most stable stone. o man of
little faith why dydest thou doubt. if all these so many testymonyes both of
greeks and latyns shall not cou^terpease against one friar. What reason is
this? I trust there is no true christen man but yt he will be moved with the
testimonye of all these. specially when they be grounded of so plain and
euydent a figure of ye old law. and of so clear a light of the holy gospels.
But here Luther will say that he can not co^ceyue duos summos. Of ye which I
merueyle greatly. Sithen it is manifest that Aaron was called summus in
scripture. and if he were summus sacerdos and Moses was no whit benethe him.
than must they two either of them be summus. one of them under an other in
comparyson of the other people. So as saint Paul makes many hedes saying.
Caput mulieris vir. caput viri christus. christi vero deus. Se here be three
heedes unto a woman. god / christ / and her housband. and yet beside al these
she has an heed of her own. It were a monstrous sight to se a woman
withouten an heed. what comfort should her housbande have upon her. if than
one woman notwithstanding she has an heed of her own to govern her
according to the will and pleasure of her housband. yet she has her housband
to be her heed and christ to be her heed. and god to be her heed, How much
rather our mother holy church which is the spowse of christ. has an heed of
her own. yt is to say the pope. and yet nevertheless christ Jesu her
housbande is her heed. and almighty god is her heed also. But now let us
return to our instruccyo^. Thus than ye understand how that in the universal
church of christ remains the spyryte of truth for ever. and yt the heed
of this chirch the pope is under christ. By this breuely it may appear that
the spirit of christ is not in Martyn luther. The spyryte of every natural
body gives life no forther. but to the members and parts of the same body.
which be naturally joined unto the heed. And so likewise it must be in the
mystycall body of our mother holy church. For asmoche than as this wretched
man has divided himself from the heed of this body. which is the vycare of
christ. how can he have in him the spyryte of this body which is the spyryte
of truth. and specially when he has dyuyded himself with such pride /
arrogancye / and presumpcyon. which is most odyous unto this holy spyryte.
and so dispytyously. so presumptuously. so malicyously contemns and sets
at naught. and all to raggeth the heed of christ's church. to whom as to his
chief spyrytuall father. by the reason of his religyon he has vowed and
promest obedyence. How can this man have in him the spyryte of god this holy
spyryte of truth. And here I make an end of the first instruccyon.

Here follows the second instruccyon against the pernycyous doctrine of
Martyn luther.
FOr the second instruccyon ye next words enseweth. Ille testimonium
perhibebit de me. that is to say. And he shall bear witness or give euydence
of me What merueylous virtue what wonderful operacyon is in ye bemes of the
son^e which as we se this time of ye year spread upon the ground does quycken
and make lyfely many creatures the which before appeered as deed who that vewed
and beheld in the winter season ye trees when they be wydred and their lefes
shaken from them and all the moystour shronke into ye root and no lust of
grenenes nor of life appears outwardly if he had had none experyence of this
matter before he would think it an unlike thing yt the same trees should reuyue
again and be so lustely clad with lefes and flowers as we now se them. And yet
this is done by the subtle operacyon and secret workynge of the son bemes
spread upon the ground. Nevertheless not every beme of ye son has this
virtue. It is a truth ye bemes of ye son^e in winter be light as they be now
this time of the year but yt light is so faint and feeble that it gives no
life. for than we should have herbs and trees to grow as well in winter as
they now do this time of the year. The cause of this weykenes is. for the son
shooreth so low by the ground that his bemes than sklaunteth upon the ground
and does not rebou^de nor double in themself again toward the son. and
this is the cause of this weykenes. they will set tynder or clothe on fire. And
likewise it is of ye bemes of the faith and hope when they be jointly compacte
and unity together. if a man had such a faith and confydence than he might
commau^de a great mountain to remove for his pleasure and this were a mighty
faith. Nevertheless if a man had such a faith yet if he wanted the hete of
charity he were but as a deed tree. For saint Paul says. Si habuero omnem
fidem ita vt mo^tes transferram charitatem au^t non habuero nihil sum. if I
have all faith he yt speaks of all leueth none unspoken of. if I have all
faith he says and so mighty faith yt by my faith I may remove at my
commandment great mountains yet if I want the hete of charity I am nothing
but as a deed stok a tree withouten life. And therefore saint James says. Fides
sine operibus mortua est Faith withouten ye fruit of good works is deed. To
this purpose our instruccyon says. Ille testimoniu^ prohibebit de me. yt is
to say he shall bear witness of me. Of whom? of christ. What is christ?
Luxvera que illuminat omnem hominem venientem in hunc mundum. that is to say
the true light ye which enlyghtneth every creature coming into this world.
who shall bear witness or give euydence of this light? the spyryte of god.
Quia charitas dei diffusa est in cordibus nostris per spiritu^ sanctu^ qui
datus est nobis. That is to say ye hete of the charity of god is spread in our
hertes by the holy spyryte ye which is given unto us. hete of charity gives
euydence that that light is lyfely. Have a man never so much light of faith
unless he have also this hete of charity sterynge his soul and bryngyng
forth lyfely works he is but a deed stock and as a tree withouten life. For
as I said though the natural son shine never so bright upon a tree. if this
tree have in it no grenenes nor puttyng forth of buddes and lefes this tree is
not alive. So when ye bemes of ye spirytuall son^e be spread upon our souls if
we feel not the sterynge hete to fruytfull works our souls be but deed.

But now to what purpose serves this instruccyon? To this. it subuerteth one
great ground of Martyn luther which is this yt faith alone withouten works
does Justifye a syn^er. upon ye which ground he byldeth many other erroneous
artycles and specially yt the sacraments of christ's church does not
Justyfye but only faith. A perylous article able to subuerte all ye order of
the church. but touching these sacraments the kings grace our sovereign
lord in his own person has with his pen so substau^cyally foghten against
Martyn luther yt I doubt not but every true christen man yt shall read his book
shall se those blessed sacraments clered and delivered from ye skalau^derous
mouth and cruel tethe yt Martyn luther has set upon them. wherein al england
may take great comfort and specially al those that love learning. Plato
says. Tu^ beatas fore respublicas quando aut philosophi regnent aut reges
philosophentur, That is to say. than shall Ye se when a bowl is thrown
sklantlynge upon a wall it slydeth forward and rebou^deth not bakward dyrectly
again to him that was the thrower. but when it is dyrectly cast against a wall
with a great vyolence than it does dyrectly rebounde again. In this manner it
is of the son bemes ye more nigh that ye son draws unto us now this time
of the year ye more dyrectly his bemes beat upon ye ground and the more
dyrectly they rebou^de and return again toward ye son^e. And by the reason
of the nyenesse of beme to beme ryseth a greter strength in ye beme and a more
full light. quia om^is virtus vnita fortior est. that is to say. For every
virtue yt is gadred together is more stronger. Asengell threde is nothing so
strong as is a double / nor a syngle beme of the son is nothing so mighty as
wha^ it is doubled and bowghted in it self by rebou^dyng and reflexyon.
Forthermore of these two ryseth an hete and a warmenes the which is ye
pryncypall worker of life in every creature. But for all this we be not yet
sure that any tree is alive to than we se some putting forth of buddes or
lefes out of the same tree. This example if ye perceive it may enduce us to
conceive how wonderfully the spyrytuall son almighty god works by his
spyrytuall and inuysyble bemes of his light spread upon the soul of man or upon
the church. both which is called in scripture a spyrytuall earth. Dominus
dabit benignitatem et terra nostra dabit fructu^ suu^. That is to say. our
lord shall give his gracyous influence and our earth shall yield fruytful
works. The bemes of almighty god spread upon our souls quyckeneth them and
causes this life in us and the fruit of good works. First they cause ye
light of faith but this is a very sklender light wtouten ye reboundynge of
hope and the hete of charity. faith wtouten hope is a sklender beme and of a
little power. But Join unto him hope which reboundeth up to god again ad^^
que non videntur. and tha^ is he much stronger than he whas before. For now
this is doubled and bowghted in it self and gadred more nigh unto himself and
made more valiant and mighty than it was before. Before it was like unto the
faith yt saint Peter had when christ bad him come to him upon ye see. he
believed his master but he had no very fast hope yt he might walk there. He
was not strong in his faith and therefore our savior said unto him. Modice
fidei quare dubitasti. But of ye strong faith yt has a co^fydence and hope
adjoined. thereunto he says i^ an other place. Si habueritis fidem sicut granu^
sinapis dicetis monti huic. transi hinc et transibit. That is to say. if ye had
faith like unto a corn of mustard sede ye should command this mou^tayn to
remove himself and it should by your faith avoid. this is a great faith and
has also co^fydence and hope adjoined therewith. A corn of mustard sede is
very little but it has a great virtue compact and gadred in it. So when the
bemes of faith and hope be joined together in one point than it is of mighty
power. The bemes of the son^e when by reflexyon of a brennyng glass they be
gadred together. they be so mighty yt ^omen welthes be blessed wha^ either those
yt be phi^osophers govern / or else those that govern give them to
philosophy. And scripture exhorts princes to ye same saying. Et nu^c reges
intelligite erudimini qui iudicatis terram. that is to say And now ye yt be
kings study to have understanding. and ye that take upon you ye Judgeme^tes
of ye world inforse you to have learning.

But now let us return to our matter again. For this ground he brings
saint Paul in diverse places saying yt a man is iustyfyed by his faith only
withouten works. Nevertheless saint Austyn says that saint Paul's words
were mysco^ceyued in the beginning of the church for the which as he says
ye other apostles in their epistoles studyeth to the contrary part. But some
here thinks that Martyn luther little regards saint Austyn. And a truth it
is. but yet that is a foul presumpcyon. let him at ye least believe ye other
apostles whom withouten manifest heresye he can not deny. Saint James says.
Ex factis iustificatur homo and no^ ex fide tm^. A man is justified by his
deeds and not by his faith alone. which thing saint James does not only
say but also proves it by diverse ways. One is this. Demones credunt et
contremiscunt. The deuylles he says has faith. and yet no man may say yt
the deuylles be iustyfyed by their faith. How many that live in horrible sin
yt yet have ye faith of christ Jesu and would rather dye or they should renye
their faith. but for all that they be not iustyfyed. But if only faith did
iustifye both they and the deuylles also should be iustyfyed. Second ye same
example yt saint Paul uses unto the Romans to prove yt faith justified a
sinner withouten works. ye same uses saint James to ye contrary. the example
I mean of Abraham as there appears in ye same place. But ye than will say.
Sir be these apostles one contrary to an other. To this saint Austyn says yt
nay forsothe. But yt saint James only contrareth that yt may be construed and
mystaken in saint Paul. For saint Paul means of the works yt gothe before
faith. and saint James means of the works that follow after the faith.
Saint Paul means yt ye work of circu^cysyon or of other works of the law
was not necessary for the iustyfyeng of Abraham to go before his faith but his
faith withouten them did iustyfye him. Saint James means of the fruytfull
works that follow after faith the which give euydence of a lyfely faith and
these iustyfyeth a man. and these he says if Abraham had not had. he had not
ben iustyfyed if Abraham had not ben ready to offer up his sone Isaac at the
commaundynge of god he had not ben iustyfyed. but because he was so ready
therefore he says. Abraham ex operibus iustificatus est. That is to say.
Abraham was justified by his works. wherefore saint James speaks not against
saint Paul but against the mysunderstandynge and mysconceyuynge of him. Of the
which mysconceyuynge saint Peter also speaks in his second epistle saying. In
quibus sunt quedam difficilia intellectu que indocti et instabiles depraua^t
sicut et ceteras scripturas ad suam ipsorum perditionem. That is to say in the
epistoles of our right dear brother Paul be some things hard to be conceived
which the unstable minds does misconstrue like as they do many other
scryptures to their own damnacyon. Thus ye may se that diverse other have
mysconstrued saint Paul before this as now does Martyn luther to his own
peril and damnacyon.

But here one thing I merueyle much of Martyn luther specially that he says
that in all scripture there is no more testymony against him but this one place
of saint James. for it is not to be douted but many moo may be brought. And
first our savior in the gospel of Luce says. Date eleemosynam and ecce
omnia munda sunt vobis. That is to say. give ye alms and all things shall be
clean unto you. what is this clennesse but the iustyfyenge of our souls the
which is promest for ye works of alms. if I believe never so much and if I
releue not the poor in their necessyte I shall not atteyne unto this
clennesse. Ferthermore in ye gospel of Matthew. Si remiseritis hominibus erra
ta sua remittet and vobis pater vester celestis Quod si non remiseritis
hominibus errata sua nec pater remittet vobis errata vestra. That is to say.
if ye do forgive unto them yt has grieved you their offenses your father in
heaven shall do likewise to you. and if ye do not forgive to men which has
grieved you their offenses nor your father shall not forgive to you your
offenses done against him. Over this he says in ye same gospel. Non omnis
qui dicit mihi domine domine intrabit in regnu^ celorum. sed qui facit
voluntatem patris mei. that is to say. if we work not the will of almighty god
ye father we shall not be iustyfyed nor enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Besides these in the same gospel. Nisi abundauerit iusticia vestra plusquam
scribaru^ and phariseorum non intrabitis in regnum celorum. That is to say.
unless your justice or your manner of living be more better and ample than was
ye justice and living of ye Jews and pharysees ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven which is to be understood de iusticia operum. of the
justice of works. as clerly appears of all yt follows. Besides this he
says. Om^is qi audit verba mea hec and non facit ea similis erit viro stulto
qui edificauit domum suam super arenam.That is to say. Al ye hereth these my
words and works not thereafter is like unto an unwise man that buyldeth his
house upon an unsure ground. And saint Paul also says. Non auditores legis
sed tactores iustificabuntur. yt is to say. Such as only be herers of ye
law of god shall not be justified but ye workers thereafter. And saint James
says. Estote factores verbi et non auditores tantum fallentes vosmetipsos. yt
is to say be ye workers of the word of god and not only ye herers for than
ye disceyue yourself. and saint Paul again says. Si secundum carnem
vixeritis morie mini. Si spiritu facta carnis mortificaueritis viuetis. yt is
to say. if ye live after ye works of your flesh ye shall dye. but if ye
mortifye in you by spyryte the works of your flesh ye shall live. And
finally saint Paul says resoluyng his own sentence. fides que per
dilectionem operatur. that is to say. Fay the which is wrought by love.
according to the which saint James says. Uides quoniam fides cooperabatur
operibus illius: ex operibus fides consummata est. That is to say. Thou see
how that faith helped his works and how of the worker his faith was made
perfyt. By all the which testimonies ye may plainly se that not only faith
suffyseth but also love and works be required to ye iustyfyenge of our souls.
And thus much for the second instrucyon.

Here follows the third instruccyon against Martyn luther.
TOwching ye third instruccyo^ it follows in ye gospel. Et vos testimoniu^
prohibebitis. quia ab initio mecu^ estis That is to say. and ye shall bear
witness because ye be conuersaunt with me fro ye beginning. To whom shall
they bear witness. but unto ye universal church of christ? Their witness
tha^ must be allowed of every true christen man Of these words and of ye other
above rehearsed. it shall appear yt more testimony must be admytted for
sufficyent authoryte. than only yt. yt is written in ye bible. Which one
thing if we may establysshe. it will cast down a great nobre of Martyn luthers
artycles. But for this we must co^sydre yt these.iij. persons of whom this
gospel has made mencyon. though al their works be vndiuyded and vndeseuered
one from an other. but jointly go togyders. yet scripture assygneth three
several times unto these.iij. persons. in ye which they have instructs man.
of ye troth necessary to be byleued. First almighty god ye fader istructed our
elders by his prophets: as saint Paul says. Multipharia^ multisque modis
olim deus loque^s patribus i^ prophetis. yt is to say. Almighty god ye first
person i^ ye godhed many diverse ways instructed our fathers by his prophets.
saint Paul means here by our fathers the Jews. of whom we spu^ally
descended. for Abraham yt was their carnal fader is ours also spu^al. Now
almighty god ye father taught them by his prophets. whose prophecyes all be it
they be written in scripture. yet was there many moo things which they spook
unwritten. yt was of as great authoryte. as yt yt was written which ye master
of Jews calls cabala. which is deriuyed fro man to man. by mouth only and
not by writing. After this ye second person ye sone of god our savior christ
Jesu was send by his father into this world to instruct man. both by himself
and by his apostles. ye which were co^uersau^t with him (as ye gospel here says)
fro ye beginning. These blessed apostles left unto us also many things by
mouth. which is not written in ye bible. This thing may appear by saint
paul. which came after them and was not p^sent wha^ christ say these words
unto them i^.ij. epistole ad thessalonice^ses. state and tenete traditio^es q^s
didicistis. sieve per sermone^ sieve per eplam nr^am. yt is to say. be ye
constau^t and keep those i^struccio^s and erudicyo^s yt ye have learned of us.
ather by mouth. or else by writing. if saint paul (yt was latter tha^ ye other
apostles) to whom these words were said of christ. will have his tradicyo^s
observed and kept. as well those yt he told them by mouth. as those yt he wrote
with his pe^ne. why shall not like wise ye traditions of al ye other apostles be
of like strength to make faith and to bear witness of ye truth. Here ye may
se by exp^sse scripture of saint paul yt we be bound to believe many mo
things tha^ be written and put i^ ye bible. We shall co^ferme this by Origene
which is an au^cyent doctor and to whom in this point great faith is to be
given. He in ye book of no^bres omelia.v. says. Sz i^ eccl^iasticis
obseruationibus sunt no^nulla que omnibus facere necesse est. nec tn^ ratio
eoru^ oi^bus patet. Na^ quod verbi gratia genua flectimus orantes. et quod ex
omnibus celi plagis ad sola^ orientis partem conuersi fundimus orationem. no^
facile puto cuiquam ratione compertu^. Sed and eucharistie. seu percipiende seu
quo ritu geritur. explicande vel eoru^ que geru^tur in baptismo. verboru^.
gestoru^que. et ordinum. atque interrogationu^. et responsionu^. quis facile
explicet ratione. Et tamen hec omnia operta licet et velata portamus super
humeros. quu^ implemus ea et exequimur. vt a magno pontifice christo et a
filiis eius tradita et co^mendata suscepimus. That is to say. But in the
obseruancyes of ye church be many things which is necessary for us to do and
yet ye reason why that we so do is not open to al men. As in example. when yt
we make our prayers knelynge and when among all the other plages of heaven we
chose the eest part toward ye which we make our prayer I think not that the
reason of this is lightly known to any man. Of ye obserua^cyes also and rytes
yt we use about ye sacrament of ye alter to be consecrate. or else of ye
sacrament of baptyme to be minystred whoo can express the reason of al those
words. gestures. orders. questyo^s. answers yt there be accustomed. And yet
nevertheless al these we bear couerd and hyd upon our sholders wha^ yt we do
perform and execute them according to ye tradicyo^s and erudycyons which we
have received commended until us by ye great bishop christ and by his
children the holy apostles. Of the which words of Oxigene it clerly does
appear. that many such tradycyo^s were left unto ye christen people by christ
and his apostles. ye which we must follow notwithstanding they be not written
in scripture. To ye which purpose I might also bring the testimonies of
Damascene. Demose. Augustine. Hierome. and other moo.

Thyrdly ye third person in ye trynyte yt is to say ye holy spiryt of troth
was sent fro ye other twain to abide with us for ever. and to be as a co^forter
contynuell in christ's church. when ye storms and te^pestes of heresies do
arise. and against al floghteryng doutfulnes to teache us ye very certain
truth. where unto we should rest. After yt the apostles were departed from us
the holy spyryte did and does remain and shall remain with us unto ye
worlds end. but by whom I pray you speaks he unto us? by whom techeth he
us any truth? by whom else but by ye fathers and doctors of ye church. by
their mouths this holy spyryte techeth us every truth. Non eni^ vos estis
qui loquimini. sed spiritus patris vestri qui loquitur in vobis. yt is to say.
It is not ye that speak. but the holy spyryte of your father which does speak
wtin you. Saint Basyll when he was baptized. a wonderful light was seen about
him. which is not to be douted. but yt it was a sensyble token of ye holy
ghost. And likewise saint Ambrose (whiles he was endytynge of yt.xliij. psalm)
a light was seen above his heed in manner of a shield. which by little and little
entredi^ at his mouth in very token of the spirit of god. And so likewise it
was of the other. Wherefore it is not to be douted but in such holy bisshoppes
and doctors of ye church ye holy ghost does speak. but much rather i^
cou^celles when many of them were assembled together. For ever as the storms
and tempests of heresies did arise. so they were at length oppressed and
co^uynced by this holy spyryte. speaking in ye mouths of ye fathers and
doctors of ye church. Sometime by general cou^celles and assembles of many
bysshoppes together. In ye counsel of Nicene was cccix. bisshoppes in whom the
holy ghost spoke to ye confutacyon of an heresye yt than sore vexed ye church.
After that in the counsel of constanstynoble was assembled.c.l. bisshoppes.
and in them the holy ghost spoke to the destruccyon of an other heresye yt than
rose in the church. In the counsel kept in Epheso in a great cite of Asye so
named were assembled.CCC. bisshoppes in whom than the holy spyryte spoke to
the confoundynge of an other heresye that was alofte. and so co^tynually from
time to time ever as these clouds arose and made any great tempests. and
began to lighten and show a falls light of misconstruyng of scryptures. this
holy spirit was ready by these fathers to inform ye universal church of ye
certain truth. Se than I say what we have to conferme those things that be
taught us by the church. First the prophets that were instructed by ye father
almighty god. and also their Cabala. that is to say their secret erudycyons
not written in the bible. Secondly the apostles. which were instructed by our
fauyour christ Jesu. and also their tradycyons not written in the bible.
Thyrdly the holy fathers and doctors of the church. that were informed by the
holy spyryte of truth. as well in their exposycyons of scripture. as also by
their general assembles and councelles had here to fore.

If there were a fourth person in the trynyte. or an other spyryte to be sent
unto us from almighty god we might yet be in some doubt wheder Martyn luther
had met with this spirit by the way and conveyed him from us. But sythen we
be assured that there is no moo but.iij. persons in the godhede. of whom this
gospel makes mencyon. and that every one of them has done his dylygence to
instruct us of ye truth. And ferthermore. that there is none other holy
spyryt preter spiritum veritatis but this spyryte of trouhe. and he also shall
abide with us for ever and acertayne us of every truth. we may be sure yt
Martyn luther has not this spyryte wha^ he does teache us against the truth
that has be taught us by this spyryte. For he cutteth away the tradycyons of
the apostles. and refuses the general councelles. and contemns the doctrine
of the holy fathers and doctors of the church. and labors to subuerte all
the ordinance of the church. and namely the.vij. sacraments. and takes
away the fredome of man's will. and affermeth that al thing falls by
necessyte contrary to al ye doctrine of christ's chirch. we may be sure
therefore yt he has some other wretched spyryte. some spyryte of error and
not ye spiryt of truth. saint Paul says. In nouissimis tperibus discede^t
quida^ a fide. attende^tes spiritibus erroris. et doctrinis demonioru^. that is
to say. In the latter days of ye church some shall go from ye true faith of
christ's church and give head to ye spirytes of error and to the techynge of
ye devil. And here note this word (discede^t). For saint Paul says in
another place. Erit discessio primum. yt is to say. Before ye coming of
antichryst there shall be a notable discessyon and departing fro ye faith of
ye church. And it is not unlike to be at this same time by ye occasyon of this
most perylous heretyke. Here Martin luther for his shrewed brain will some
thing wrastell against us. He will say that ye councelles sometime err. and that
the doctors full often disagre. And as they err and disagre at one time or in
one place so may they do in an other. and therefore he says he is bou^de^ to
believe none of them all. To this may be answered yt this reason strayneth not.
as it shall well appear in like. The prophets sometime left unto themself did
square from ye truth. Nam prophetie spiritus no^ semper prophetarum mentes
irradiat. That is to say ye spirit of prophecye does not always shine bright
upon the minds of the prophets. As in example king Dauyd purposynge to
build the temple to almighty god councelled with the prophet Nathan wheder he
should perform his purpose ye or nay. And the prophet Nathan bad him goo in
hand with it. and do all that he intended in his heart for to do. Omnia que in
cord tuo sunt fac. dominus tecum est. That is to say. do all that thou
inte^dest in thy heart. for our lord god is with the. yet he was deceived. it
was not so as he said. Shall we now for this disceyte trust none other
thing yt this prophet Nathan said beside this? god forbede. Likewise of the
apostles. saint Peter when he said to christ. Tu es xp^s filius dei viui. yt is
to say. Thou art christ ye sone of the lively god. he spoke this by reuclacyon.
and here our savior praised hy^ and said. Beatus es petrus bariona. yt is to
say. Thou art blessed Peter ye sone of John. wtin a little after he dyssuaded
our savior from his passion and said. Abut a te domine. yt is to say. Not so
good lord. And in this he said wrong. Shall we now because he said wrong this
second time not believe his first saying? yt were not reasonable. Almighty god
suffered ye prophets and the apostles also sometime to err to thentent yt we
might know they were but men. and when they said truth yt that they had of
god. and when they said otherwise tha^ troth yt that came of themself. And so
likewise I say of the doctors. though they sometime erred. because we might
know yt they were men. and that than they were left to themself. we shall not
therefore deny them generally. And ye cou^celles also though some one of ye
last cou^celles which peraue^ture was not gaderd in yt mekenes and charity yt
was expedient though one of them (which thing I will not afferme) in some
article were permysed to goo amysse. Should we therefore damn al ye resydue? It
were no reason. And this may suffyse for ye third instruccion.

Here follows ye fourth instruccyon.
THe fourth a the fynall instruccyon takes away ye defense that may be laid
for Martin luther by his adhere^tes. which defense also may soon overthrow ye
weyke souls when they shall here it. Their defense stands in three points.
First they say that Martyn luther is a man depely learned in scriptures.
grou^dynge all his opinyons upon the same. a man of religious life. and such
one yt for his learning and virtue has many adherentes. Secondly they say yt
he has a fast mind in god. and spares for no man's authoryte to speak the
truth. in so much yt he has excomunicate ye pope for he thinks in his
own conscience yt those yt follow not his doctrine be not of ye church
catholyke. Thyrdly he has a merueylous fervent zeal to god for ye which he
does labor to convert all ye world to his opinyon. thinking assuredly to do
a specyal sacrifyce and pleasure to god thereby. This wha^ a weyke soul hereth
he is in peril anon to give faith unto it. and to mystrust the doctrine of ye
church. For who may think but such a man is i^ ye right way. But herfore to
this the rest of ye gospel yt enseweth does answer clerly. It follows.
heclocutus sum vobis. vt no^ sca^dalizemini absque synagogis facient vos. Sed
venit hora vt om^is qi interficit vos arbitretur obsequiu^ se prestare deo.
That is to say. This I have told you before to ye intent yt ye shall not quale
in your faith. for they shall deuyde you from their synagoges. and ye time shall
come yt every man yt mordereth you shall think yt he does thereby great
service unto god. These words may be taught of some to perteyne only unto ye
time of ye Jews. which did expel ye apostles out of their synagoges. or to ye
time of ye tyrau^tes. which did slay much christen people in ye beginning of
ye church. But if yt were a truth. tha^ these words should be no general
instruccyon for ye universal church. which thing we gaderd against luther
at ye begi^nynge of our sermon. wherefore much rather they perteyn unto ye
time of ye heretics. First because this persecucyon longer continued tha^ ye
other twain. for ye persecucyon of ye Jews was soon at a side. and ye
persecucyon of ye tyrauntes had his course for a season. but ye heretykes has
persecuted ye church from ye ascensyon of christ. and shall do unto ye coming
of antichryst. Forthermore ye persecucyon of ye herytykes is and was evermore
perylous. for as for ye Jews and ye tyrau^tes they were manifest enemies unto
christ and abhorred his scripturs. but these heretykes p^tend a specyal favor
unto christ. and color all their heresies with his scryptures. The Jews and ye
tyrauntes wha^ they had slain ye bodies of christian me^. yet they sent their
souls to everlasting glory. but ye heretykes misco^struyng ye scriptures of
god. by their false doctrine. and erronyous opinyo^s and pestilent heresies.
does slay ye souls of christen people. and send them to everlasting
da^nacion. Wherefore these words must rather be understood of ye persecucyo^
yt was made by ye heretykes. Now than christen man. wha^ you herest yt Martyn
luther is a man of great learning. and has great redynes in scryptures. and is
reputed of virtuous living. and has many great adherentes. think yt many
such has been before him in ye church of christ. yt by their learning and
mistakynge of scriptures has made such tempests in ye church before this
time. How tempested one great heretyke Arrius with his heresye ye church of
christ. how great a murder of souls made he? was not he a man of great
learning. of synguler eloquence. of virtuous life in outward appearance. and
all his opynyons he grounded upon scripture. and so dysceyued many a soul.
Saint Hierome says. Arrius vna scintilla in Alexandria fuit, sed quia no^
cito extincta est totu^ orbe^ populata est fla^ma eius That is to say. In ye
cite of Alexandre Arrius was but one sparkle. but because this sparkle was not
soon quenched ye flam yt rose of it raged thorugh all ye world. and a long
time vexed ye church of christ. and ouerthrewe souls innumerable. till at ye
length by ye holy spirit of truth. which is ye co^forter of christ's
church spekyng as I said before in ye mouths of ye fathers and doctors of ye
chirch this heresye was conuynced and plainly put aside. But after this tempest
rose up an other cloud in cotynent. one called Macedonius. yt vexed ye church
likewise. and after hy^ Nestorius. after him Eutices. and so forth storm
after storm one upon other. so yt as soon as one storm was pacifyed ye wicked
spyrytes raised up another incontinent. Saint Austyn reme^breth.lvij. capital
heresies. yt after ye ascensyon of our savior christ. at sundry times. like so
many clouds and storms rosein ye church. which finally were conuynced by
the holy spiryt of truth. And every of these heretics grounded his heresye
upon scripture. and many of them were men of fell wits. of deep learning. of
mighty reason. and of pretensed virtue. and had ye propre faith to wrye and to
torcasse ye scriptures. to make them appare^t for their erronyous opinyo^s.
Finally their life. learning. and handlyng of scriptures. were such yt they
had many great adhere^tes and fautours. as well of ye bysshoppes. as of ye
emperors. and of other christen pry^ces also. which were abused by them.
Therefore it was necessary yt our savior christ Jesu for ye great inestimable
goodness and for the tender love yt he bears to his church. should leave
instruccyon and warning to all christen people and to his universal church
of this persecucyon and so did he saying. Hec locutus sum vobis vt no^
sca^dalizemini. I have told you says he these things before. because ye
shall not quale in your faith. what has he told us before? This. that ye
spiryt of troth shall remain in ye church for ever, and yt in all such
storms and te^pestes he shall be a co^forter until us. O christen man here this
gracious warnyng of our savior christ. mark well what he says. I have warned
you says he of these things before. because yt wha^ they fall. ye shall not be
overthrown in your souls by them. as though he said. wha^ ye shall se ye
storms arise. wha^ ye shall behold ye thick black clouds aloft. yt shall darken
al ye face of ye heaven. and shadow from you ye clear light of ye son. and
show a false glysteryng light yt yssueth out of ye cloud. from ye spirit of
yt tempest. and ye shall here terryble co^minacyon of their thonderyng. Be ye
tha^ constant in your faith. believe as does your mother holy church. lyfely
and put your trust in ye spirit of truth. which shall be your comforter
unto ye worlds end. Ferthermore when you herest christen man yt Martyn luther
has a fast mind in god ye lets for no man's authoryte to speak ye truth.
and reputeth all them yt follow not his doctrine to be divided from ye chirch
catolyke. in so much that he has excomunycate ye pope. O wonderful
presumpcion. O madness intolerable. know this for certain. yt all ye other
heretykes thus did. they did repute themself and their adhere^tes only to be
of ye church catholyke. and rekeneth all other yt follow not their opinyons to
be divided from the church. So did ye Nonacyanes in Rome exclude ye catholyke
priests and bysshoppes from their chriches. So did ye Arrianes in greece
likewise. So did ye Donatystes in Affrycke. Nevertheless the church of christ
is but one vna. sancta. catholica. et apostolica. this church is one having
one heed ye pope. which is ye vicare of christ. of whom it is called vna. And
though there be in this chriche many sinners. yet for ye holy sacraments yt
renews and repareth sinners daily. and for the holy spyryte yt co^tynually
remains in it. it is called sancta. yt is to say holy. And for because it is
not lymyt to any certain nacyon. but it is comen to all nacyons. therefore it is
called catholica. ye is to say universal. And finally because it is deryuyed
from ye apostles. and specially from ye prince of ye apostles saint Peter.
therefore it is called apostolica. that is to say apostolyke. This only
church is ye spouse of christ. all other sembles yt be not of this church be
synagoges of sathanas and co^cylyables of the devil. And therefore christen man
be not astonyed. though they do excomunicate and deuyde ye true christianes
from their synagoges. For our savior has given us warning here of before
saying as it follows in the gospel. absque synagogis facient vos. yt is to
say. they shall excomunicate you and deuyde you from their synagoges. Thyrdly
christen man when thou herest yt Martyn luther has so great a zeal to god.
and thinks in his conscience yt he is bounden to do this yt he does. and
weneth yt in so doing he pleases god and does a special service unto god.
and all the souls yt by his false doctrine he sleeth and murdereth he
recommytteth them unto almighty god. yet nevertheless be strong in thy faith
and se yt in this point our savior has also warned ye church saying. Sed
venit hora qn^ om^is qi interficit vos arbitret^ obsequiu^ se prestare deo.
That is to say. the time comes when every man yt shall murder you. shall wene
yt he does acceptable service unto god. But if thus the other heretykes did
not before. tha^ think yt Martyn luther is somewhat. Did not thus the Arrianes?
did not they furyously rage against the catholyke bisshoppes and priests.
which did resyste them: and not only by their pestilent errors they infected
ye souls of men but also caused great murders of bodies. Did not thus ye
Donatystes of whom saint Austyn says ad Bonifacium. Quicu^que dura illoru^
verba co^tempsera^t. durioribus verberibus quoth iubeba^t facere cogeba^tur.
innocentiu^ qui eos offenderant derant dontus. aut deponeba^tur ad solu^^ aut
ignibus cremabantur. yt is to say. Whose ever set at naught their hard words.
they were constrained with harder strokes to follow their pleasures ye houses of
ye good christianes. either were throw down to ye ground / or else were
brent with fire. And after follows. quod plurimi cedibus eorum extincti sunt. yt
is to say. and many was slain by their murders. Did not thus ye discyples of
wycclyffe. all be it yt for fere of the temporal laws they durst slay no man.
yet put they up a byll of artycles unto ye te^porall lords in the parliament
season mouyng them to slay their adversaries yt resysted against them. And what
suppose ye Martyn luther and his adhere^tes would do. if he had ye popes holiness
and his favorers. whom he calls so often in derisyon papistas papastors.
and papanos. and papenses in his danger. I fere me yt he would use no more
curtesy with them. than he has done with their books. yt is to say with ye
decretalles which he has brent. And so likewise I fere me that he would bren
them or any other christen man yt he thought might let his opinyons to go
forward. And yet in so doing he would think yt he did great service unto god.

Thus ye may se yt these heretykes. all be it they had great redynes in
scriptures and were fell wytted men. and depely resoned. and had also pretens
of virtuous life. and had a great zeele thynkyng in their conscience yt they
were bounden to do asmoche as they did. yet were they disceyued. and by ye holy
cou^celles and fathers of ye church conuynced of their erroneous opinyons And
why may not likewise Martyn luther be deceived as all they were before him /
and specially sythen he wants the spyryte of troth / the which all they
wanted. For if they had had ye spyryte of truth they should not have erred in
mysco^ceyuynge ye scryptures. I say not but yt they were ready in scryptures /
and could bring the scryptures meruaylously to their purpose and frame them
cursedly to their opynyons. but for lack of the spyryte of truth they
mysconstrued these scryptures / and as saint peter says. Deprauabant / or as
saint Paul says. Inuertebant / they turned the wrong side of the
scryptures outward / following their own brain and phantasye led by the
spyryte of error and ignorance as it follows. Hec omnia facient vobis quia
non nouerunt patrem neque me. yt is to say. All this they shall do unto you /
because they know not my father nor me if they had had the spyryte of
truth / this spyryte should have led them to the true knowledge of the
father and of the sone / that is to say / to ye true knowledge of the prophets
by almighty god ye father spoke / and to the true knowledge also of ye apostles
/ by whom the sone our savior christ Jesu spoke but because they had not this
spyrite of troth which was sent from ye father and from ye sone / therefore
they were ignorant of them both / and by yt ignorance they fell to these in
conuenyentes. And so likewise has now done Martyn luther. Now than here I make
an end. I have remembered unto you according to my promise four instruccyons
yt be offered unto us of this gospel gracyously. First yt the holy spyryte
which is ye third person in ye dyuynyte was sent from the father almighty
god and from his sone our savior christ Jesu / to he the spirit of truth /
resyaunt for ever in ye chirch the chrystand / to be as a co^forter fro time to
time against all storms and tempests of heresies / acertaynynge us in the
time of every doutulnes the very truth where unto we shall hold and keep
us. By the occasyon of this instruccyon I showed.iij. things. First yt this
instruccyon and all ye hole gospel perteyneth to the universal church of
christ / which thing I proved by Luthers own words. Second yt ye heed of
this universal church was ye pope under christ / which one point takes away
one great ground of Marty^ luther and shakes sore many of his erronyous
artycles. Third yt Martyn luther dyuydyng himself from yt heed of this body
can not have in hy^ this spirit of troth. For ye second instruccyon I showed
you yt the hete of charity spread in our hertes by ye holy spryte of god gives
euydence of ye lyfely light of faith / shynynge upon our souls from our
savior christ / by the which instruccyon was undermined an other great ground
of Marty^ luthers / which is yt only faith does iustyfye a syn^er wtouten
works. For the third instruccyon I showed yt ye erudycyons left unto ye
chirch by ye holy apostles / bears unto us testymony of ye faith of christ /
and what thing we shall believe in his church / where also was losed an other
ground of Martyn luther / which will not admyt any other testymony / but only
that yt is written in scripture. Against whom I proved that he must besides ye
scryptures written / receive also the tradycyons of the apostles not written /
over this ye cou^celles general / in whom the holy ghost did speak and ye
interpretacyons of scryptures made by ye holy bysshoppes and doctors of the
church / by whose months the third person in the godhede the spirit of
truth spoke and speaks / enformynge ye church for this time like as did ye
father almighty god by his prophets before / and as did his sone ye second
person by his apostles. For ye fourth instruccyon I showed you yt the defense
which is made for Martyn luther by his adherentes whereby many weyke souls be
overthrown / is clearly take away by ye most loving and most gracyous
forwarnynge of our savior christ as ye have herd in the end of the gospelle.
And yet eftsoon for his most excellent charity he warns all his christen
people saying and repetynge. Hec locutus sum vobis: vt quum venerit hora eorum
reminiseamini / quia hec dixi vobis. That is to say. These things I have
told you to thentent that wha^ ye dangers shall be fall yet ye may remember
yt I before did warn you of them. Who yt thus often warned will yet give
faith to Martyn luther / or to any other such heretyke rather than to christ
Jesu and unto ye spyryte of truth / which is left in ye church of christ
unto the worlds end / specially to inform us of ye troth / this man goethe
fer wide from yt streygth way / and is never like to enter into the port of
everlasting rest / which al we desire and covet to come unto / to the which
he bring us qui cu^ patre et spiritu sancto viuit et regnat deus peroi^a
secula seseculorum. Amen.

Imprynted by Wynkyn de Word.

wynkyn word



