A CAVEAT for Parsons Hovvlet, concerning his untimely flighte, and scriching
in the clear day light of the Gospel, necessary for him and all the rest of
that dark brood, and unclean cage of papists, who with their untimely
books, seek the discredit of the truth, and the disquiet of this Church of
England.

Written by John Field, student in Divinity.

REVEL. 18. 6. Reward her as she has rewarded you, and give her'd^uble
acording to her works, and in the cup that she has filled to you, fill her the
double. Imprinted at London by Robert VValdegraue, for Thomas Man, and Toby
Smith.

To the right honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord Robert Dudley, Earl
of Leicester, Baron of Denbigh, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter,
Master of the Queens Majesty's Horses, and one of her highness most
honorable privy counsel. I. P. wishes grace and constancy in the blessed
truth of (...), in this life, and afterward euer-lasting life by Jesus
Christ our Lord.
Having of late according to my bounden duty (right honorable and my very good
Lord) testified my pore affection to the Church of God, and to your hououre
aprincipall member thereof, by translating that worthy (...) concerning the
Church: I find that one HOVVLET (If I be not deceived) now lying in
Rutlandshire or thereaboutes: one of mine old acquaintance, a scholar in my
time, has taken the matter in great grief, for that to your honor, I have
infinuated the Papists to be enemies to God, and to her royal majesty. This
he says, I have done to excite your honor to persecution. The truth (...), I
did it to your honor, because, that as God has set you in a chief place
over this his church, so you and all the rest of your calling, might vvatch
against such enemies, and discharge that trust he has committed (...) to you,
both to (...) them from farther (...) the Church of God, (...) evermore they
have (...) and also (...) for the preservation of the Q^e^ ne her (...) upon
whom (...) they (...) favor and commodity they have been, are, and shall be,
(...) her most dangerous enemies, such as from time to time, have gone about
to seek her highness (...) subversion. This argument, though I did then but
touch as it were by the (...), yet this enemy has now provoked me to make a
further discourse thereof. Which although it be not don with that gloss and
polishing of words that many times ill matters are colored and pounced with
all, yet it is done truly and faithfully, no one charge being (...) upon
(...), to my knowledge, that is not justifiable in every respect. I grant it
might have been more fully debated, longer stood upon, and with some better
order and method: But this being a common argument, others also having dealt
and dealing in it, who can better, do it then I, And considering against what
adversary it is, whose gifts are known unto me, I have been bold in this simple
and rude sort further to provoke him, not doubting, but by the assistance of
God, to be able from time to time, if he shall take any exception, to give him
his answer. That I use my self otherwise then my manner is, in roughness of
words and charpenes of style, which perhaps some delicate ears will hardly
bear, supposing it not fit for the spirit of the gospel, I have done it I
confess, both advisedly and with just deliberation thinking it to be the
fittest way, to (...) down his hawtie presumption. I think I know the man
and also his gifts. Neither is it amiss, to use sharp medicines Esa. 58. 10.
against impostumous corruptions, and fretting cankers. Ier. 10. 21.
The Scriptures give sufficient warrant, (...) by examples Eze. 22. 25.
confirmed in the Gospel, of round speech against the Mat. 23.
adversaries of Gods everlasting truth. I thank God my Mat. 6. 2.
conscience bears me witness of no hatred toward Luke 11. 42. etc
their person, but I protest unto your honor in the face, and sight of all the
world, that I hate al their idolatrous and abominable superstitions, and if
they shall at any time Psalm. 11. 25. 5.
like the proud Philistian, dare to provoke the host of the Psalm. 30. 7.
Lord in maintenance of their false religion, and shall blaspheme the truth,
let them not think, but to hear their 1. Sam. 17.
own. The Lord has many in Israel, in what contempt soever they hold
them, that shall be able to meet them, and every way to match them, yea with
their own swords to cut off their own heads. I beseech your honor therefore,
cheerfully to go for ward in defense of this truth of God. Beware of the
(...) of these double tongs, their (...). 140. 3.
mouths are full of guile, and the (...) of A pes is under their lips. As low as
they (...), and as fast as they vveep, if they might but creep in and have
opportunity to shevve their nature, you should try (as God forbid) what
Crocadiles they are: Her (...), and all that (...) the glorious Gospel of
Christ, under her gracious government, should feel then the svvord, which
now, they have so anointed with honey. It were much better for us that (...)
the gospel, to fall among Ravens, if necessity should (...), then into the
hads of these me (...), for the one would never light on us, til we were dead,
(...) as the other would devour us vvhilest we are living (...) they have honey
(...) their mouths, and death in their hearts As Doeg the Idumean flattered Saul
in accusing David, who was Saules dear Friend and Son, so do they by
accusing us. I savve the 1. Sam. 22. 9.
Son of (...) (says he) in Nob (...) Achimelech the Son of Achitob the
priest. So the flattering messenger that came 2. Sam. 7. 10.
to inform David of Saules death, received a judgment from his own mouth, a
just (...) fit for all flatterers. So Rechab and Banaah brought (...) head of
Isboseth to David 2. Sam. 4. 8.
in Hebron, with flattering (...), But David a just King, gave them a just
recompense. So Absalon, stealing the hearts of the subjects, made show of great
readiness to execute justice and spoke flatteringly to (...) people. Their mat 2 Samuel 15. (...).
ters were good and righteous, but no man was appointed of the king to hear
them etc. Oh, if he were judge, how he would sit in the gates. No man cold
make so much as a sign of obeizance, to whom his hand was not straight
way stretched ont to take him, and to give him a ludas kiss, so populer he
was But what became of it? The stron gre flatterye is, and the more examples
we have, how it 2. Sam. 16. 7.
has deceived, the more wary had Princes and men of authority 1. Reg. 22.
(...).
need to be (against whom especially this kind of 2. Par. 18. 10.
assault is usually made) how they give credit unto it. Sibah 2. Reg. 22. 12.
(...) man deceived David, So did Sedechias 2. Par. 18. 11. and 10. 10.
that horned Prophet with his iron horns, promising the subversion of Syria.
So did the false Prophets who would have the king to go up into Ramoth
Gilead, against the word of the Lord, and Rheboams councellers in fee ding
the humor of their king, Therefore (good my Lord) As you (...), and have
hitherto ben, so continue, to be circumspect in your place, and look about
you. Trust not fair speech, not fained freendship in them that have alvvaies
shevved themselves so false The devil that Prince of darkness deceives, by
taking upon him the shape of an Angel, (...) appears not in his own ougly
shape, for then we should abhor him. No more do these Synons, these Syrenes
that play so pleasantly, and sing so sweetly. Though they have a goodly shape,
yet they are unnatural monsters. They give titles (as Job says) but they are
enemies to God, and to her highness: The Lord Jesus send these Parasitical
Papists their just revvard, keep her maiestic, and this whole state, (...)
their crafty underminings, continue his Gospel, that we may evermore serve
him, and (...) in the obedience of his name, till we obtain that everlasting
inheritance.

Amen.
August. 30. 1581. Your Lordships bounden and most faithful. I. F.

A Caveat for Howlet, and the rest of his dark brood.
PARSONS HOVVLET, I am much beholding to you for your good remembrance, in
your flattering, fraudulent and presumptuous epistle, dedicated to our most
gracious Soueraign, the Queens most excellent Majesty. Who would have
thought, that after twenty three years, in the clear light of the gospel,
such an obscure owl as your self, whom all the kindly birds of the day must
needs vvonder at, durst ever have fluttered forth in the broad day and
skriched out in her Majesty's ears, such notable untruths and wicked
asseuerations, complaining of the hard case and grievous persecutions, (...)
of your Catholics (as you call In the Epistle dedicatory to her highness,
Page 3. 4. 5. 6. etc.
them:) her highness being a prince of such knowledge, so settled and confirmed in
the truth of Christ's (...), that al your devises, flattering and fawning
speeches, conspiracies and traitorous attempts, shall never Fol. 2.
(I trust,) be able by Gods grace, either to fear or remove, from that glorious
truth, which shec has Howlers causes of dedicating the book to he highness.
Fol 2.
professed to maynteine and continue to the uttermost end of her life. The
causes that moved your dedication, (though the matter were not your own) (...).
was the composition and penning of it, being done (as you say) in great
modestye and humilitye, with all (...) full respect, (...) to her Majesty, her
Counsailors, and whole estate: (...) (you say) to the proceeding of al
Sectaries (his zeal and opinion in religion only (...), erued:) the other, the
waightinesse of importing her (...) soule-health, estate, and Realm, (...) the
salvation of many: thousands (...) for (...), (...) her confident Children,
her highness their mother, and (...) Princess, before a (...) they lay down
their griefs, as before the Substitute and Angel of God, etc. If these causes
were in deed as you pretend, you were the more to be borne with, but being
subtle, slanderous and false, your presumption is intolerable. For first,
for the manner of conceiving and penning that treatise, if it had been done with
such modesty and humility you speak of, you vvoulde not so have betrayed her
majesty Mat. 26. 49.
with a Judas Kiss, crying All hayle and Saund. lib. 7.page.730.
yet putting her into her enemies hands. You vvoulde not bear the world in
hand, as if of her self she (...) your Religion, and yet so slanderously
charge her Majesty's Realm and government with such diuersitye of Sects,
contrary to the truth of God. Pref. Fol. 3.
you vvoulde not have charged the glorious religion of Christ, to be heresy,
and the Church of God, and it to be the Synagogue of Antichrist from which
upon pain of damnation, al your Cateline Catholics must (...), and not
communicate, but must with all their powers resist and avoid. You vvoulde
not have snared and entangled the (...). fol. 5
consciences of the modester sort of your dissembling, timeseruing Hipocrites,
even as your self account them, (who are yet the bane of this land, hated of
you, and to us as pricks and thorns in our sides) charging the^ to sin
against the holy ghost, (vvherin you bewray your slender divinity) Brist.
Moti. 6. fol. (...), and mot. 12. fol. (...)
you vvoulde not so have (...) her Majesty for a Schismatike, her Nobles for
heretics, her whole Saun lib. 70. page 130. and eadem. page 7. 3.
people for departers and sallers away from the faith and true religion. You
kiss her, and yet you smite her. you faune upon her like gentle Spaniels, and
(...) most cruelly you bite her, ( tanquam canes clanculo (...), as the
proverb is, like butchers cutres. Hovvlet epileafe. 4 and the 14. fol. 5.
you praise her clemency and mercy, and yet you charge her majesty's
government with unspeakable outrage and cruelty. And if you meant as you
speak, Hovvl. pres. fol. 6 fol. 15.
calling her The Lords (...), the Angel of God, the Lords substitute your
mother, (...) you lay (...) your (...) concerning religion, and (...) of her,
Seeing in flattery you acknowledge this to do harm, why, do not you and the
rest to do good, acknoweledge it in truth, and so deny the pope his foreign
jurisdiction within this realm? And (...) she be the Lords Angel and
substitute; what has the Pope to do to entermeddle in her territories and
kingdoms? Or have you M. Howlet any special privilege or commission to
speak so directly against one of your own grounds, to charm the Prince
withal, to thend she may lend a listening ear to your unjust complaints?
For that which The prince is (...) chiefest (...) in (...) land, to (...) the
care of Gods matters does specially belong to see Gods (...) established.
you acknowledge in her, calling her the Lords substitute, would be condemned
as rank heresy in us, because it imports that she has authority to hear
and determine in causes of religion (as in deed she has) according to the
word of God. Such as you call at vnvvares Sectaries, more favorably then you
mean, thereby meaning the (...) of the Gospel were never (...) with such
outrage and immodestye of Spirit to the dishonor of their natural prince,
to pronounce her a Schismatique and an heretic, (...). mot. 40 under the
title of obe (...)
laboring to discharge her subjects from their dutiful obedience, too iustle
her out of her seat, and to pluck the Crown from her head, as you (...)
have done. If you think that I speak partially, let the Bull that (...) mot.
15. fol. 72. (...).
Felton set up, sent from your abominable Father of Rome, be remembered, and
the issue that came of it, Let Sanders in his book (...). lib. 2. page 78
of the visible monarchy (...) d. (...).
of the church, be heard to speak, Let (...). lib. 7. page 130. 734.
Harding Dorman and Bristow say for themselves. Let (...) imprin ted of (...) a
table at Paris, and therein sets out the Queen crounle. ie, though in the
(...) amended.
Rosse Mor. Phi. his book of suc cession.
Morgan Phillips, and such like traitors be examined, how they have borne
them selves together with this popeholy papiste of the (...) sort of
Papists, who can abide no communicating with us, nor our religion in any
respect. And as for the vvaightinesse of the matter being Gods cause,
importing her highness salvation, Estate, and Realm, with the safegarde of
Thousands, it is but a shameful asking of that which yet is in question
Hovvlet pre. (...).
betwixt us. This Owl and his Gentleman, should first have proved their
particular church of Rome, to be the (...) Church of Christ. They should
first have set down wherein our Church has departed from the doctrine of
Christ and his (...), in what (...), (...), Nobles; and (...) are (...) set,
and continue in Heresic and (...) the word of God: The papists are (...),
and their service and (...) idolatry to be (...).
and then the consequence had (...) plain, that all Christians must separate
them selves from us, so they had vvonne their cause. For we agree with them,
that there ought to be no dissimulation in the matters of God, that (...) are
to be (...), that their (...) is to be avoided: but we affirm that they are
those heretics in that Apostaticall (...) fallen from that vvholesom (...) of
Christ; and his Apostles: We affirm that (...) and Lordship of Rome, and the
tyrannous (...) thereof over the (...), to be that (...). in (...). (...). p.
(...) in (...).
Babylon, August de (...). (...) lib. 2 cap. 1.
out of which we are commanded to depart, that we be not (...) of the same
destruction together with them. But alack, this is your old (...), (...).
(...) in (...) 18. de (...) dei cap. 22 (...). 17.
Howlet, when you cannot obtain your purpose, (...) by the Popes threatening
thunderboltes of excommunication, or by your (...) and (...) b Excom. Pii
(...). (...) obtained by (...) who was executed in Cornevvall.
books to stir up her (...) to rebellion, then you fall to your (...) and
(...) glosing. You file your tongues, and make them smoother then (...), they
seem sweeter then honye, but the poison of Aspes is under them: then your
compassion (...) out, her highness clemencye and mercy is praised in your
(...) the papists dangerous to rel. gion, and to (...) whole (...).
want of punishment, which yet in deed is her greatest danger, and then she
is a mother, whom notvvithstanding in deed you (...) a stepdame: a sovereign
princessc and yet no Queen of youres, Allen in his Apology of the English
Seminary s. cap. 4.
neither her Tavves any (...), because she is not established by your popes
authority, your Gods vicar, of whom you would have her hold her crown in fee
(...), either as tenant at will, or else as (...) by your treasons king (...)
was compelled to do, that he might take it again (...) your Popc, and pay a
(...) for it, to he deposed or (...) at his (...), Chronica (...) Mathia;
(...). Math. West.
whom you hold not to (...), when (...) Harding in his confutation of the
Apology.
in his Chair, and advisedly he pronounces any sentence. Sun (...). lib. 1.
cap. 4.
Now he has advisedly and (...) pronounced her Majesty a Schismatike Bulla.
paspae. pii (...).
and an here tique, therefore as in your opinion she ought to be deposed:
(...). mot. 40. fol. 154.
so are all her subjects discharged of their duty and allegiance. And yet
(good man,) besides your general and particular crosses lying so hard upon
your pore backs, that you seldom or never, except in the time of your
greatest ruff, lay (...) or fared better: example of your fellows at Wisbech,
in the Marshalsey, and else where, VVood the priest solicited (...) to
whoredom, and gave her money and a comfite to make her mad upon him.
who being idle and living in no calling, are bent to folly and filthiness,
and yet the poorest of them, who might beg, if they were abroad, never had
more plenty of money in their lives nor more ease and leisure to follow all
delights, saving that they are restrained from a little liberty of going
abroad: and yet her majesty's gouernmente is accused, if not in respect of her
self, yet of her counselors, inferior officers and Magistrates, in executing
of her If our laws be unsupportable, that (...) not with life for religion,
what (...) theirs, that (...) none? Fol. 6. pref.
unsupportable laws (as you (...) call the^) through which there is such
cruelty and souadge dealing as the like was never heard of before in any age.
These things are grievous, yet they (...) nothing in (...) of that one (...)
in (...) Epistle dedicatory of (...) of book to the Earl of Leicester has
accused you (...) be (...) to God and to her royal (...). This crabbeth and
nippeth you at the very heart root, And I think in deed not without (...).
For the truth of the matter being so plainly and manifestly (...) out, and
proved in the learned works of, our time, it lies more heavily upon you,
then you are able to remove: and a man need not much to stand upon it. I
will not speak (...) the other points of your (...) Epistle, nor of that
book so highly Hovvlets impudencye and presumption.
commended by (...) grave (...), vvherwith you have taken your (...) into the
light, as with another man's wings, and (...) your self not as an Ovvle in
this point, but as Esops crovve with other (...) feathers: (...) forsooth with
such modesty, that it is fit for none but a Queen: and yet the greatest part
stolen either out of your fellovv Gregory (...) book of Schism has the very
(...) and (...), (...) deficit in (...). but he (...) in his minor.
Gregery Martyns book of Schism, whom you (...) not a little, robbing him of
his glory, or (...) out of a French book, wherein the protestants rendered
reasons why they could not come to your (...) mass, which you foolishly have
turned and (...) to your purpose, I leave that to be answered by one that
vvil stand upon it, and do it more thronghly.

But because it has pleased you to dravv me in aganst my will, specifying my
name, I will by the grace of God. undertake the proof of that which I have set
down in that (...). But before I enter into it, I would have this diligently
marked of al, that you on ly snatch at those bare words of mine, and never
answer any jot of the matter: you mention nothing of those same more general
and particular (...) of treason and (...), plainly set down, in that See the
examples (...) in the epistle.
Epistle, by express examples, which made me to call you papists by your
right names, enemies to God and to her royal majesty: As for your aggrauation
and pelting chafe with that reverend Father and his officers, For letting
pass the book to the print, for that this (...) was not only uttered in
speech, but also let it pass in print to the view of the world, and was
dedicated to a noble man of her (...) priuye counsel, (Whose honor like a
Katife, you labor to blemish, whilste you insinuate, that I stir him up to
cruelty against you) and by such a brar sick fellow, whom (...) possessed
a long time for his fantastical opimous, and yet I think, though he knew your
nest and abiding also, with your, companion Carters, or whether it be Parsons,
that has put your name upon himself, for now you are become such honest me^
that in an evil cause you have names at commandment: yet you scarcely know
him by the face, and are not able for your life to name any of those opinions:
to whom, you farther attribute such pregnancy (upon such honest men's report
as your self) of (...) sing any new religion upon a weeks (...). Fol. 6
Praefat.
etc. These circumstances I would a little consider, before I enter into my
proof.

Concerning the uttering of this matter in speech, being the truth, and
uttered by so many before, it should not so much grieve you, and specially for
setting it out in print to the view of al me^, that it might come even to your
own owlish sight, what proves it else? but that it was done with confide^cie,
and (...), not fearing the light? How would you have complained, if it had
been uttered behind your backs in the dark, as such ovvlish Hovvlets as your
self are wont to do, who cannot abide the light? nether love to come to
trial, what good face soever you set upon the matter but your common guise is
to eat and drink men behind their backs, to slander the truth and as much as
lies in you, to deface it, to rage against it, and to persecute it. When such
as ca^ answer you are driven away by your tyranny, and you (...) the chaires
alone: then you fight with your own shadows, either having them in your
hands and also both svvord and fire at your commandment to maintain your
chalenges: then you are strong enough to enter into disputations with them, or
being abroad, by your truces and safe conductes. you can vvhope and provoke
them by your sweet alluring (...), and fawning till you have them fast,
whose (...) you have burnt to ashes, when they have come to (...) the cause
of God, and to give a reason of their (...) in Conci. Constantiense. (...). 19.
your general Councils. Thus traitorously you hold the^ in your limed spray,
(...) Pata.
and as Mantuan pretily describes. you bring them to Philip. (...).
the spit. John Hus, and Hierom of Prage shall witness Plat. volater.
this to be true to all posterities, to the perpetual shame of al such
faithless traitors and trucebreakers. This the Concill of Constance shall
witness during which there were sometimes at once (...). RomPla (...) Benno.
Bucchingerus.
three Blond. lib. 3.
popes, sometimes two, one, and none: altogether by Mirandensis.
the ears, in which that goodly decree was ratified, Council Constantiense.
(...). 19. Quod non obstantibus saluis conductib. etc.
that faith is not to be kept with here tikes, Nicholas de Clamangis in quadam
colatde fut Council.
where in steed of the holy ghost, (vvho^ they blasphemously said they looked
sor,) Council of Constance was begun at Rome where this owl shevved (...)
self which they have concealed.
an unlucky owl, ( (...)) that same monster of birds, portending some notable
mischief, one of your great ancesters was president that so troubled the Pope
and all the company, that two whole sessions were frustrate and without
effect, saving that they murdered the pore owl, with (...).
(...) and cudgels. Seeing therefore it is in printe, you may answer it, make
what exceptions you can, and take your best advantages.

And as for being done to a noble man, a chief (...) in our Land, what other
thing can it argue. but that you are such dangerous enemies, as they have good
cause under her majesty, chiefly to watch against, to have a diligent eye to
the maintenance of the gospel, and to the preservation of her majesty's royal
person the defender of the same, to whom (as fair shows as you make) I et
(...) v. ordes, one. of Saunders chief (...) be (...) spoken in the parliament
house, anno primo of her (...) reign.
you wish no good.

Concerning that you attribute to my person calling me a brainsick fellow, and
in your popish heat and burning charity, twite (...) with mine imprisonment
in Newgate, I will only say this unto it, the words of a brainsicke man
should not so greatly have rent your catholic heart. But if you call me
brainsick and mad, as the wicked have called the prophets, and the Jews have
called Christ and his Apostles, because by the grace of God I 2. Kin. 9. 11.
have and do stand for the truth, against your Popish Ioh. 10. 20.
Act. 26. 24.
and Antichristian corruptions, I have to rejoice in it, and I consider you do
but your kind: you could do little, if you could not rail, and thanks be
to God, though you grenne, you cannot byte. As for my being in Newgate, the
cause was not such, as should fasten upon me any such vile reproach as you
object. And how Hovvlet fol. 3. pref.
stands this rehearsal of my imprisonment with your complaint made before
where you say, that no punishment in a manner is avvarded those that offend
against the book. As for my pregnancy upon report of sraning new religions:
the veriest Owl in the world vvoulde not so publicly in print have charged a
man with such a heinous crime upon the report of others. In deed this is
common with the papists, whose religion being not grounded upon the
Scriptures, they vary it as every man's brain and fancy leads him. Besides
that, fame is an evil liar, especially when such are blowers of it, as can
breath out nothing but slanders, and reproaches against the truth, and the
true professors of it, yea it deserves no more credit, Popery a religion
patched together of al heresies and variable: A bird of diverse feathers.
then (...) Howlet should (...) and affirm, that the papists are no traitors.
But hereby may plainly appear what light (...), rashness, uncharitableness
and impudency there is in papists, that receive credit, blaze, and utter
without all shame, whatsoever comes into their brainsicke heads, against
the true professors of Christ's gospel. A man would have thought that he who
praised modesty and humility, in the author of this peking letter, vvoulde have
put it in botter practice himself.

Whereas he (...) me Puritan, and to require me, shows the doctrine of two
of my preachers ((...), as pleases him to call them) who preached at an
exercise of The fast at Stamford don orderly, with consent and by authority as
shall appear in the end of this book.
a fast at (...), and that against the B (...), etc. I will not say much in it
in this place, because I have proved that, a lovvde and (...) in the end,
which as slanderous and (...) as it is, is yet the principal and mayn ground
work of his vile (...). This is (...), that whereas it was at first
somevvhat feared that it vvoulde not prove orderly enough: and by the
intymation of some (...) not best affected to such holy exercises, yet was it
afterward procured both by honorable and worshipful, and done by such
consent and authority, and with so good (...), that the whole Church was
comforted by it. The preachers were such, and so well known to be godly,
learned and wise, as vvoulde not utter such positions as this Momus, and his
reporter have spitefully patched together and blazed abroad. The collector
therefore whom he names a minister, must needs either be some such
nightebyrde as himself, not able to abide the light, or else (...) carterly
misreporter, who giving them some little ends, those Spiders have Woven
according to their own humor, to bring the truth of God into hatred (if they
could) with her royal Majesty. But thanks be to God her Majesty is wise,
not to be carried away with such malicious parties. Her highness trusts not;
but with good trial: and where she trusts, she will not be carried away by
(...) In hearing reports she reserueth an ear alwais sor the absent, she is
experienced to know (...) evil, things are made at the second hand, and
specially when they are uttered of malice, by such as are not indifferent but
partial, not sincere but spiteful. And thus much for the circumstances. Now to
the proof of my matter that pincheth you so sore, to wit, first that you are
enemies to God, and then I say not enemies only, but traitors to her royal
Majesty.

That you are enemies to God, the whole truth of God, against which, you
papists do mischiuonslye set your selves, does manifestly prove. For
whosoever is an enemy to his word, (...) himself against his glory, wrestleth
against his will and ordinance, corrupts his religion, robs him of his
greatest honor, and murthereth his people, he must needs be his enemy. That all the papists are such, holding of Anti christ, it shall appear more plainly
hereafter. In the mean while, to prove the pope The pope Antichrist and head
of all papists.
Antichrist, as the captain and head of all this band of enemies, although it be
needles, considering how it is a beaten argument in every book; yet to
satisfy the Reader, I will in a fevve lines speak of it. He is the special
Antichriste that directly (...) him self against, Christ, both in doctrine
and manners. And besides, that Dan. 7. 11. Apo. 17. 1. 18.
Daniel and John in the revelation has huely paynred him out, 2. These. cap. 2
3. 4. 5. 6. 7. etc.
Paul joins with them, declaring by the effects, that it must needs be
he; with whom the Church was threatened so long ago. 2. These. 2. 4.
I am not ignorant that every heretic, who sets himself against the
truth of Christ, is after a sort an Antichrist, but the pope is this great
Antichrist, that must have his seat in the Church of God, must usurp his
place, and must not be in the stie of the heathen, to be sought for among the
This being prophesied of before cannot be intended of any singular man: but of
a company and state of men, because it shall endure till the coming of Christ.
Turks, Jews or Paganes of the world: but must spring and arise amongst his
own, And this is not any one man of the (...) of Dan, as the Papists would
have us to dream: but a company and estate of men, and therefore it is further
called an Apo. 9. 12. 2. Kin. 21.
Apostasy, that is to say, a falling away from the Faith, And though he be
called the man of sin, and the Son of perdition, yet this is not meant of
any singular person, but of the effect or quallity, that shall be in the
whole state and company of that Apostasy, in the continual succession
thereof, which is not only borne in sin, as all other men are, but even
borne and made, to uphold and maintain sin Though this be spoken of al in
respect of original sin, yet by a special privilege, it belongs to this
troop of perdition.
A man of Belial, who will (...) at liberty from all laws and subjection,
who (as Job says) has drunk in ungodliness as the fish has don water who
has sold himself to sin, and is the eldest son of the Devil, that as
Christ the only son God, (who was freely given for the salvation of all that Job. 15.
Ephesians. 4.
believe in him) is the head of the^ to govern them, Romans 1.
to give them laws, and to enriche them with the righteousness of faith
reveled by the Gospel. So he might be the head of all the faithles, giving
(...) laws directly contrary against Christ, leading them all to spiritual
whoredoms, corruptions and al abominations, to their utter (...), as that
apostaticall sea has done.

And though Saunders de visibili monar chia Ecclesiae. lib. 8 cap. 3. etc.
Sanders labor his heart out, to prove Antichrist to be some singular man, and
no succession of men, and reckons up (as he says) many (...) that we hold,
strengthening this fly light, as a Pliny lib. 10. Not (...) cap. 17.
hauk, (because of the old friendship between the Owl and the Hauk;) yet the
apostle Paul shall convince him, who calls it (as I have said) an Apostasy
Auxiliatur Accipiter colegio quodam naturae, bellumque partitur.
a mystery, that albeit it began to work even in his time, yet must be no
otherwise utterly destroyed, the^ by the coming of Jesus Christ: whose
greatness must be built upon the ruins of the Roman empire and Aug. lib. 20.
de ciuitate dei cap. 19.
must give life to that wounded beast in the reedifying Apo. 13. 15. 16.
thereof: which thing besides that, the most ancient writers do plainly
confirm, the practice proves. For the Roman empire fell by little and little,
and this was builded up and erected. For at the first Chris. in epist. ad
These. ca. 2.
it was not so evident, it crept more closely like the yuy bush, till it had
choked the one and gained the Apoc. 17. 18.
top of the other, which ever since it has held and maintained. And though
at the first Rome, was called the chief but of courtesy, because it was the
seat of the Empire, yet afterward by Antichriste, it obtained, to be chief
by tyranny, and this by privilege thereof would also be universal bishop in
despite of Christ and al his poverty, Fot look how Ioh. 14.
God sent his son into the world, for the salvation of his, Phil. 2.
humbling himself even to the death of the cross, so is he sent into the
world, for the destruction and condemnation of mankind,, advancing himself
above all that is called God. These are such (as the Apostle says) that vvithal
other here (...) turn (...) grace of God into wantonness, and deny the Lord
Jesus the only ruler. They are clouds without water, carried hither and
thither by the wind, withered Jude.
trees, vnfruiful, twice dead and plucked up by the roots: this whole body of
Antichrist has an iron forhead, and a brazen brovv, a crooked and a poisoned
tongue. To whom the definition of sin, Ioh. 3. agrees in every point both in
false doctrine and corrupt manners; both being most contrary to the doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles. For vvheras al our actions that must stand acceptable
before god, must flow from a true and lively Romans 10.
faith, without which it was impossible to please God: these men has
overthrown the whole doctrine thereof, resisting that righteousnesle, that
is made Romans 1.
manifest by the gospel, and thrusting in a patched and vveake righteousness,
stilted not upon the law but upon their own devised works. And therefore
they want that same principal effect of faith, which is true love, and have
in the place of it most sauadge and beastly cruelty. Read the spanish (...),
and the stories of France, England, Scotland and other countries.
whose chief head in his members, kills, hangs, burns, drovvneth,
pineth and pincheth Christians with all kind of vnvvonted torments, more
cruelly then ever did Phalaris or Nero, and that without all color of
Justice: which is a plain argument that Satan the great Belsire of the
Roman Antichrist, whose lively image he bears (for a goose can (...) no
Ovvls eggs) has instructed him and (...) him to this office. And therefore
sundry of the Popes, in this seat have (...) familiar conference with the
devil their own damme, and by his means they have had their entrance, (...)
themselves in magical and deuilish arts. Volater in. Polych onic.
For Martine the second in the year of Christ. 882. atteyned to his Popedom
by (...), and Mare histor. Ioh. Marius.
Sergius, that (...) devised candles to be born upon Candlemas day (as they
call it,) and Agnus Dei to be sung twice at mass, after he had (...). lib. 2.
cap. 12 (...).
hegorten John the 12. of that name, of an harlot called Marozia, daughter Anno
928.
also to a Harlot I (...), kept by John the 11.) he was so great with the
devil, that by his power he (...) great miracles, and at length by the help
of this honest vvomans husband; named Guido, her Son John was made pope, and
the other pitifully smothered with a Cushin at Saint John's in the pal lace at
Lateran. What should I speak of Octauian, called by the name of John. Plat
Sabellic Luitprand.
13. who was the son of Albericus, the son of the foresaid vvhoore (...),
who kept such (...), that unless the Devil himself had been in his place,
he could not lightly have gone beyond him; who was a Volater Plat. Ioannes
Mari us Naucieru.
common dicer, a (...), a Thief, a vvhooremaster, whom their own authors
call a (...) of men, accursed man, that put out the eyes of some of his
Cardinals, Chronic. Sigisb. Robert (...).
cut out their tongues, cut off their fingers hands and noses, lay with two
systers one after another, who in playing at dice desired the devil to help
him, deflovvred Stephana his fathers concubine, a widow called Rainer, and
another named Anne: who warred, (...). lib. 6.
burned, brake up doors and windows, drank Capg in catalogo Anglic.
drunk and pledged the devil. Volater. lib. 12. Platina.
This was he that Praemonstratensis.
did homage unto Otto, and crouned him. but afterward played the Traitor with
him: taking part with Albertus Berengatius his adversary. This was he that
was in such a league with Negromancers, that Capg. in Catolo. etc.
Dunston that Familiar of the Devils in England, who could hold the devil by
the nose with pinsons, was dear unto him, whom he made an Archbishop at
length, and yet the devil in the end gave this Pope his (...)? for being taken
in bed with another man's wife he was by her husoa^de thrust to the heart with
a dagger. Of Plattin a seteth out the whole story fully.
(...) second who was a student of Negromancie, and fetched away by the
Devil, I need not to speak, the story is more manifest, then that it can be
denied. Supplementum chronic. mare histor.
(...) the 8. also appeared after his death on a black horse, (whether it
were the devil or no that carried him? (...) tempor.
let Hovvlet and his companions judge) to a Bishop an acquaintance of his, to
whom he said, he was that Ioh. Marius.
Rob Barnes.
unhappy Benedict, being in great torment, and showed the^ of an hidden
treasure, which til it was found he could never be quiet (though he had been
Pope) either in hell or in purgatory. Also Bucchingarus (...).
Benedict the ninth gave himself wholy to this study, and wheresoever he
became, alvvaies he carried a book of (...) about with him, he obtained
his Popeship by this magical art, he sacrificed to devils, and made women to
follow him into desert places by the help of the devil, who vvayted upon him
in e (...) the Cardinal Sigebert volat.
the likeness of a sparravv, There was nothing done in the world (as they
said though they lied) that was hidden from him: and after he had sold his
(...) Carranza.
as he was coniuring in the vvoods, the devil whom he had served, strangled
him for his good service: he was seen (...) his death in the shape of a
bear, saving that his head and (...) were the head and tail of an ass,
because (as (...) yielded the reason) he lived without reason, without law,
without God. This was he who before was called Hildebrand. his life is writ
ten by Benno the Cardinal. Marianus Scotus.
What should I speak of Blondus. Plat Othofr. and others, say that Benedict
was in the palace at Lateran, Syluester and Gregorye, and Clement the second
was elected the 4. Caranza.
Gregory the 7. De (...) and obedientia. Vnam sancta^ in glossa distinc. (...).
(...). (...) in (...).
of Gregory the 12. that bought his popedom (for at this time Benedict,
Syluester and Gregorye were Popes all at once; and I vvonder which (...) the
head of the church) of Ioh. the 21. of Alexander the 6. of Paul the third, and
of all the rest of them, it would make a whole book of a great volume, to set
out all their villanyes and wickedness, whereby they bear the lively
resemblance of their father, whom they serve in that (...) See of desolation.
For they were and so are their successors as proud as the ciuell, liars like
himself, (...) as he is filthy, cruel and tirannicall, enemies to the
glorious truth of God, and to all righteousness.

And though this Antichrist come like an angel of light, that he may the
rather deceive, and his brood in sheep clothing, to the end they may
devour, that their deceit and illusion may be the stronger, putting on most
beautiful titles and glistering vizards, calling themselves Apoc 17. 18.
most holy, most godly, (...) Lords anointed, yet are they the filthiest of
all others, vomiting out Apoc 16. 16.
blasphemies against the most highest. Let their stories be read, published to
the world by their own vvriters, that testefie their (...) abominations.
That this seat might fit Antichrist (as the Scripture (...)) an vvhoore
Virgii. lib. 2.
sitting upon a beast with seven heads and (...) Georgic.
Homes, most lively describing the Roma metro (...).
See and place Hanc olim ve teres. etc (...). (...). (...).
of Antichriste, which usually most interpreters both old and nevve,
expound of Rome having Vrbs, septicolis
seven (...) nate (...) illa (...) Roma.
hills, howsoever that corrupter of the Rabbis commentaries, (...) Aelianus
the Italian has with a kind of vvhiting, blotted such places quite out, in
the last great Venice Bible: as that exposition of Aben Ezra upon the eleventh
of Daniell, verses 36. 37. 38: where Damel mentroning the false God, he (...)
it of the iniquitye of Rome, and so in diverse other places: I say not whether
it be so fitly expounded yea or no, but of the treachery Chryso. hom. 40. in Mat.
of this falsifier, that will have nothing, to sound against Rome, and yet it
is certain, that this state Bernard ad Eugenium.
and city, is that Apoc. 17. 18.
beast, woman and whore, Read Lact. lib. 7. cap. 17.
who comes in, with cruelty and ignorance, with deceaueable and entising
words, with pleasant sleightes and alluring colors, drawing the world to
her spiritual vvhoredomes and idolatries. Polycr. Caxton, Marianus Scotus,
Martinus Polonus Sabellicus (...). 9. lib. 1. page 469
In which seat that whore Pope Joan, as a (...) testification thereof, who
leyde her burden in the open street betvveene the (...) heater Collossae and
S. Clements Church; which street their Popes shun ever since: although
Harding and that (...) Saunders deny it never so impudently against an (...).
tem, Mare historiarum, Plat and a number besides.
whole cloud of their own Historiographers, and a monument of their own
in Rome, that bears (...) of it, besides the, antiquity of their Penes
portam, Petri, Pauli, peperit, Papa, pater, patriae, paruulum puerum.
ten pees, and yet I say nothing of their Porphyrie stone. This is therefore
that Apoc 17. 18. and 18. 9. Ioh. 17.
whore Near the gate of Peter and Paul, the pope the father of the country
brought forth a little child.
sitting upon this beast, compassed with those hills, that by her vvhorish
prouocations must allure those blind princes of the world, who set them
selves against Christ to drink of the cup of her abominations, who must be
bewitched and ravished with (...) braueries. (...) lights, and pompous
shows. This is that ionne of perdition, because he is a lost child and of
such a curssed state as can not be saved. For whom we must not pray, but
ought to cry out against him, till our Savior destroy him by the breath of his
mouth. Such a lost Judas as never returns, that betraith Christ with a
kiss, enters by craft, not as an enemy, but as a friend, by counter set
keys, or else secretly like a thief. He is Active and pas (...) dicitur filius
(...).
said to be the son of perdition it self, from the nature of the (...)
begat him, not only because he is already damned, but because he shall
dravve all his 2. These. 2. 4. 7.
members, of whom he is head, to the same damnation. How should it else ever
have been said, that, albeit he draw an infinite number of souls into hell
with him, yet must not he be (...) of any. Plattina. (...).
His place is not among Paynims and Ethniques, but he shall sit in the church
of God: and albeit this mystery Anno (...).
of iniquity began to work long before, even in Confirmed by a Synod under
(...). 607. by 62. b. shops.
the Apostles times, and fast after yet the time of his manifestation was,
when Boniface the third obtained by the means of Phocas, (who had murdered
(...) and 3 deacons: Synod. (...) under Constance Heracli (...).
his Master Mauritius,) the seat and name of (...) Bishop, which Gregor lib.
40 and 32. 36.
Gregorye his predeessour had pronounced to belong only to the forerunner of
Antichriste, the Father of the Son pride, and to be the name of a very
Lucyser, refusing it him self, which yet this (...) sought, kept and
continued, and so did all his successors, (...). 40 (...). 38. li. 7. (...).
(...). 30
to the end they might make up that whole beast that (...) to be thrown
into that (...). And as before, this mysterye of iniquirye wrought by little
and little in the corruption of true Doctrine, in some points, so (...). from
time (...) time the contrariety, directly both against the Doctrine of Christ
and his manners, shevved it self, that the name might best fit him and agree
unto him. And therefore he is rightly called Antichrist because he (...). in
(...). (...) 3.
shall particularly oppose himself against Christ our only mediator and
savior. And as (...) in composition signifies, For and against, as (...):
Apoc. 16. 13. etc. 17. 3. 4.
(...) is he which is in the Kings steed, or against the King, so both
(...) this agrees of the pope Apoc. 3. 11.
For that (...) is Christ's (...), and yet sets Apoc. (...). 13.
him self (...) Christ both in Doctrine, and manners. And though he do not
this in plain words, because he has two * horns like a Lamb, (...) 4. 10.
and yet a * dragons mouth: yet it is (...); that he counterfayteth, Leo the
tenth said it to (...). (...)
(...) the Gospel but a fable, and using only die name and letter of it. for
his gain and advantage * Christ came to fulfill: the laws which were
ordained of his Father, Luke 22. 42.
the (...), (...) art 2 (...) cause. 15. (...) pope Mar. (...).
pope violateth (...), dispenses (...) them, (...). 2. 8.
and alters them at his pleasure. * (...) submitted Ioh. 18. (...).
him self to the (...) will of his father, * humbled (...) 6. 13.
Luke 12. 13.
him self to the death of the Cross, * declared his Mat, 17. (...).
kingdom not to be of this world, * (...) when they would have made him
king, * refused the decyding of cruill causes, * rendered obedience to (...)
magistrates (...).
the Pelag: did. 21. cap.
Pope challenges of right to be Christ's high and general vicar, (...). Nich.
(...) 21. cap inferior.
(...) him self (...) all soueraigntye and power, Bulla Clementis.
(...) against the very Angels, Did. (...). 3. 40 (...).
iustleth the vvoid of God, out of his Churches, and keeps it locked in a
strange (...) from the understanding of the common people, Non habet papa
superiorem.
demeth al obedience, chalengeth both the (...), and medleth in all (...). All
that hold of him must honor him, for Peter's successor (though (...) be a
(...) tat. 3. Distinc.
Judas and a these, yet he must be the head of (...) 2. in her (...) at, 1370,
Christ's Church, and without (...) Glossa extrauag. de sede vacant. (...).
undergo the government of it, which only (...) to Christ. Marvel it is,
how contrary they be to themselves in so substantial points of their
religion. For at other Decret de translat Episcopi cap.
times they affirm, that the spirit can never depart from him, and then how
can he be a thief Quanto.
and a Judas, and carry souls to hell? Whatsoever 1. (...). 5. ver. vlt.
Christ requires, it makes no matrer, he admits nothing, neither must
they, that is against his prerogative, against his idolatrous Mass,
traditions ceremonies and customs. *Christ will have his children to beware of
Idols: See Carolus magnus, Catharinus in libello de imaginibus.
The Pope will have (...) in ca. 1. ad Romans Sand. de Typhon. and adora imaginum.
them placed and worshipped in every Church. *Christ says, you err not
knowing the scriptures: the Conci. Trid. ses. 4. de canon cis Scrip.
pope and his adherents for him say, The scriptures breed errors, and that
Harding in his answer to the challe^ge.
ignorance is the mother of devotion, Mat. 22. 29.
that Hosius de (...) dei (...).
the people are swine and dogs, and holy things are not to be given unto them,
they are dumb Pighius in lo cis communi. (...). lib. 1. cap. 2.
Judges, Eckius.
dead ynke, a Hosius lib. 4. de tradit, and (...) Dei (...).
black gospel, (...) Roman distinct (...)
ynken divinity, and Cusanus li. 6. excitat vbi ecclesia.
therefore the Church is the lively Prierius contra (...).
breast of Christ. The (...) lus Hos vt (...). (...). Andr. (...). 2. contr.
(...).
Church of Rome may give authority to writings, which neither have it of
themselves, nor of their Authors. The Andra. (...) 2 (...).
fables of Esope, and the comedies of Terence, may (if the Church will) be made
Canonical scriptures. (...) the Pope teaches is the express word of God, and
whosoever leans not to the doctrine of the (...) and of the Bishop of Rome,
as to the (...) rule of God, of which the (...) takes force and (...), he is
an Heretic, (...) the authority of the Church is above the authority of
the Gospel. The Orth. (...). 19.
change of the Churches judgment changes Gods judgment, and Gods
commandment also. Who can without horror and trembling in all his joy nts,
(...) these blasphemies, which this man of sin (...) himself and in his
members, beleheth out against the majesty of the most highest: I mean
Andradius (...), (...), (...), Pighius, (...), (...), Osorius, Melchior Canus,
Harding, Sanders, and such other bottomless locustes. Vaux. Canisius catechism
printed at Antwerp by Plantine.
In deed our new Jesuits, M. Censurer and such like, who has undertaken
Campions defense, and the rest of this new brood, they seem to dislike this
old rotten stuff. For they profess knowledge, they seem to take a course of
Catechizing, and laying forth the principles of Popish religion, auouching the
necessity of being learned and taught, so that Carbonaris fides, fides
ecclcsiae romanae. Fides Romana, id est (...).
Hosius Collyers says, to believe as the Church believes is scarce sufficient
with them And yet all this helps not their cause, for that they refuse, to be
directed 1. Tim. 25.
by the rule of faith, which is the only word of God.

* The doctrine of Christ acknowledges but one mediator, To the virgin Salua
omnes qui (...) glorificant.
the Pope and papists an infinite number, Thomas (...) kets blood is made a
ladder to heaven.
Christ teaches that his doctrine is profitable, full, and absolute, to make
the man of God (...): The pope and his shauelinges say it is not so, and 2.
(...) 2 (...).
(...) Roma (...), nugas dabit, accipit (...), verba dat. (...) Romae, nunc
sola pecunia regnat.
therefore we must receive unwritten verities, traditions, and whatsoever
their idle brains will thrust out unto us. The scripture says, * It is a
more blessed thing to give then to take. The Pope sends out his infinite
svvarmes of begging (...), the very Locustes that came out of the bottomless
pit, that devour up all that grows upon thearth, who take all and give
nothing. The number of Act. 20. 35.
which Sectaries following sundry Sect masters and patrons, was long ago
amounted to Lambert in pre. The (...) of conformities in the beginning.
94. sundry (...), beyond all which the Jesuits now go, who seeming to
profess more learning, (...), and righteousness, are the greatest hipocrites,
confirming their falfe doctrine with wonderful illusions, which S. Clare.
Bridget. S. Kat. and our S. Kath. of Seen with all their goodly revelations
(...).
they call miracles, who yet are as empty of truth, godliness and virtue, as
any of their predecessors, S. Frauncis that in most things was preferred
before Christ: with whom Augustine, S. Clare, and S. Bridget by their
disciples were matched, are now put clean out of countenance, and their
memories in a manner (...) blotted out, by these new repairers of that (...)
church Christ taught that marriage was Ioh 2. 3. 5.
lawful, he consirmed it, both by doctrine and miracle 1. Tim. 4.
1 Cor. 7. (...). 13
with his own presence: the (...) de (...). (...). 82 (...).
Pope and his greasy (...) condemn it as unholy, and rather admitting
whoredoome to their Clearks, and such as have received (...) mark, then this
(...) remedy, they (...). (...). 1. (...). di. 34 cap lector.
give the^ a vvatch word to walk warily. (...) otho licet ad (...) in (...).
(...) non (...), (...) caute. And though they will needs have it a
Sacrament, yet it defiles their Clergy as a profane thing, and is for them
utterly unlawful. And as the Pope in (...), and in an infinite number of other
points, the greatest and vvaightieste (...). did. 82. (...).
of (...) religion, (...) him self flatly against Christ, so do all they who
hold of him, whom for that cause we justly call papists.

The name (...), (...) S.
Such hold this Antichrist the pope to be their only Gods vicar in earth,
they depend upon him (...), (...) Saund. (...). and all the (...) of (...).
as head of the Church, in whom they acknowledge the only direction and
ordering of al Church (...) to (...) throughout the world in all kingdoms
Christus (...) coelo paesidet, papa in terris residet.
and countries, and therefore (...) to the (...) of God, and the wholesome
laws provided in that behalf; they shut out all Princes and (...) from
having any thing to do (...) those cases, they bar them from the (...) of
their own kingdoms, and from the most principal charge *that God has laid
upon (...). 17. 17. 18 19. 20
them (...) I cannot but maruayle at Howlets 3. Reg. 5. 2.
slyp mentioned before, where he acknowledges 2. Par. 1.
the prince to be Hovvlet (...).
Gods (...). But slip I think it was not. For he spoke the truth, with his
tongue and lied in his (...), (...) he sings or rather whopeth in the ears of
our gracious Nightingale, of obedience, and readiness in the papists, to lay
down their (...) in her (...), yet this unhappy owl means nothing less.
For it is to be thought, (...) write, that they join with, (...), alias
Ducket, executed the last of Iulie. 1581. A verve (...) and vvilfull (...)
proves this.
(...) Hauns, (...) this other day, for his wicked treasons. The Lord give her
highness more (...) subjects to rejoice in, or else it were like to be vvrong
with her, and with us all, as it should quickly appear, I am afraid, if
their power were to their hearts, but God hueth and blessed be his name for
that holy persuasion he has given us in his pro tection. And though he
glaueringly calls her the (...) of God, yet the gentleman whom he extolleth
for such rare modesty in the 42 leaf of his discourse, calls this Antichrist
the pope, Christ's substitute, without all warrant and ground from him or his
word.

These are such deadly enemies to God, that maliciously they Jacob (...) trac.
de (...). lib. (...).
vvithstand that doctrine of faith and uation, which the eternal son of God
taught (...). Tim. 2.
here upon earth, inseperably cleaving to that vile Idol of the Mass most
derogatory to his dignity. (...). 7. 10.
For whereas he is our only high and everlasting Romans 6.
bishop ordained of God, who has not spared (...) power out his life and
blood for our santisication, by offering up one (...) sacrifice once for all.
These enemies make it insufficient, without effect and imperfect, and plead
another righteousness to satisfy the wrath of God, They pester the earth
with many Sacrificers and priests, matching them with our savior Christ?
They make them Peers and companions Psalm. 110. 4.
with him, to offer up sacrifices acceptable Heb. 15. 10. and 7. 21.
unto him, as well for the sins of the living as the dead, making the
Apostles and (...) liars, and yet they confess with David, that Jesus Christ
is an everlasting Priest, according to the order of Melchisedech. Wherein they
wholy disadvantage them selves, seeing they must be Priests either according
to the order Aaron and Leui, or according to thorder of Melchisedech. The Heb.
10. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. etc.
order of Aaron and Leui had an end with the ceremonial (...) and sacrifices
thereof. And Christ was only that high Priest who was everlasting, offered
up a perfect sacrifice, stood not at the altar, but having offered up his
own body, being both the priest and Sacrifice, offering not for his own
sins, but for ours, has entered into Heaven, and is set down at the right
hand of the Father for ever, having finished a perfect voorke of this
Priesthood for our full satisfaction and atonement. This whole crowde
therefore, The Pope, Cardinals, Friars, Priests, Jesuits, Massesayers, and
(...), and all that delight in them, and consent unto them: they are horrible
enemies of God, (...) Prophets, wicked (...), Apostataes, Wolves, false
pastors, Idolaters, (...), and execrable (...), murderers of souls,
renouncers of Jesus Christ, and his death and passion, false vvitnesses,
traitors, the (...), (...), and robbers of Gods honor, and most detestable. For
by this * sacrifice of Phil. 4. 18.
Jesus Christ, al outward and visible sacrifices of any Heb. 13. 16.
other priesthood before or after are abolished and made of no effect, except
these sacrifices of * praise Psalm. 51.
and thanksgiving, of alms containing the spiritual worship of the kingly
priesthod which are perpetual amongst al Christians. In deed we must have a
hie * Priest, who must be holy, innocente, and Heb. 4. 4 and 26.
without spotte, who needed not to offer up daily sacrifices, first for his
own sins, and after for the sins of the people, but (...) performed
(...). 10. 12. 14
this * in offering up himself (...) for all. He says once for (...), because
neither it (...) the like should or could be reiterated. And therefore he is
called the * (...) of Heb. (...). 11.
(...) things to come, (...) into the holy place, by his own blood once for
all, where through was wrought everlasting redemption and (...), (...) of
sins. Wherefore unless we vvil renounce Jesus Christ, we have no need of
such sacrifices. * Behold I come, to the end to do thy will O God, by the
which Heb. 10. 7. 12. 15. 16. 17.
will we are (...), (...) the offering up of the body of Christ once for all.
The holy ghost witnesses that in this new covenant, sealed and perfected in
this one only Sacrifice of Christ, that he vvil no more remember (...)
iniquities: and where there is remission of them, there remains no more
oblation for sin, The sacrifices of the old (...) by reason of their
imperfection must be continued and daily renewed, but Christ's offering ces of
the old law by reason of their imperfection must be continued and daily
renewed, but Christ's offering up himself, finished a perfect work, and his
sacrifice was persect. As for their sacrifices, they are imperfect, and
therefore they continue and renew a sacri fice and oblation derogatorie to that
of Christ's, robing God of his glory, and the people of their greatest comfort
in this world. D. Smith of the sacramen. (...). and (...) of the real
presence.
They are such enemies to God, that they overthrow the truth of all religion
and draw us to execrable idolatry, teaching us under bread and wine to worship
whole Christ who^ they affirm in a (...) presence most grossly and contrary to
all the scriptures to be there present, against the truth of a body and
notwithstanding his resurrection and assension they say, that such a
transubstantiation is made, as there remains no substance of bread and
wine, most contrary to the nature of a Sacrament, though the accidents remain:
and as they are enemies to him in these gross and monstrous doctrins, so
their (...) has another end then the supper has. For in the supper the
seruanes of Christ * make public profession of their faith, they hear the
word preached, 1. Cor. 11. 23 26.
they witness their faithful persuasion, and (...) of salvation, keeping an
actual memory of the death and passion of Jesus Christ, and (...) to reme^
brance his vvonderfull and unspeakable love, who has given his life and shed
his blood freely for them, and all eating of one bread, and drinking of one
cup; are admonished of that brotherly love and great unity whereby they are knit
together, and live and die to Jesus Christ, as one body in one and the same
spirit: whereas in the mass the knowledge of Christ is defaced, the
preaching of the gospel is rejected, Durandi rationat. (...) see Gabriel.
Biel. the Pontifical.
and the time is altogether spent in mockinges and movvings, turnings, and
remouinges from one place to another, with an infinite number of fruitless
superstitions and wicked ceremonies, worse then ever those were that were
invented by Numa Pompilius, and drawn from the Paganes. I could vvish in my
heart that some young scholar would take the pains to translate their
Pontifical into English, that al our countrymen might see their more then
hethenish and mad customs and abominations, Alexand. ab Alexandr. lib. Ovid.
de (...).
The making of their holiwater, without doubt, they learned of Ovid, as they
did purgatory of Virgil, and other their mysteries from other profane
Genialio. 40. cap. 17.
Pagans and vvriters.

Such enemies to God they are, that with the gentiles Romans 1. 19. 20. 21. etc.
they have forsaken the living God, and chosen to themselves other foreign Gods,
made of metal, wood, and stone, potearth and bread, before whom they have
(...); to which they have prayed, which they have adored and worshipped,
kissed, crept to, and embraced, making their vile priests creators of their
Creator. For if he be greater that makes and creates, then that which is
made and created, it must follow that their dignity must needs be more
then Gods, that that place of Scripture may iustlye fit them, which says:
That 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
that man of sin, (...) himself (...) all that is called God. And if every
priest be greater then God, what is he that creates such creatures, as can
make God? In deed, if this were true, they are far above the virgin Mary,
who bore Sacerdos est creator sui creatoris. Qui creauit me sine me, iam
creatur mediante me.
him but once, and they make him often. She was his mother as he was man, but
they make him as he is both God and man. which is horrible blasphemy: And
therefore their own massebooke says In the title do dignitate sa cerdotum
in a mass book printed at Paris.
that the priest is the creator of his creator, And he that made me with out me
is now made by the means of me.

Such wretched enemies to God they are, that Ioh. Andreas Innocentius. Ioh. de
turre. cremata, de ec cle Summa.
their says hangs altogether upon Antichriste their God, whom they make
not only a God of the hills, but also of the valleys. They believe nothing
but that which he allows, as for Christ his Evangelists, Apostles, and
teachers, they make no reckoning of them in Lanfr. contra VVicklefum Lepus.
respect of their Popes laws and constitutions: he See their casus (...).
that can dispense with them and against them, must needs be above them. And
Hochstratus. Eckius in his Enchiridion. Hosius de expresso dei. verbo.
therefore their doctors teach that to cleave to the scriptures Laurentius.
Ockam in dia logo par. 1. lib. 5. Joan.
is to be an heretic. Such enemies to God they are, as are marked with
Caynes lying, crucltye and murder, both against the Law of Dreido de
Dogmatib. vari s. lib. 4.
GOD and man, See the stories of their government, the book of martirs,
Spanishe inquisitio. etc.
For they have murdered Christians, without all compassion, they keep no
faith nor promise. No nature or kindness makes them spare where hatred is
(...) against the truth, no age sex or condition, draws any pittye, be
they old or young; halte or blind; with child or without, brother or father,
sister or mother, wife or kinsewoman, husband or friend, at home or abroad,
Son or servant, but they shall be sure to die a cruel death for it. Al
stories are full of examples of their savage and outrageous cruelty, not only
against the professors of the truth, but even one of them against another,
example is yet fresh in memory of July. 18. 1581
Shervvoodes (...) against Hobson; one of his deareste friends: John Diazius
Pantalio in his Chronic. Sleyd an. Chrisp.
much like the wicked Treason of Alphonsus against John Diazius his own
natural brother, besides infinite examples in these murders in France, in the
inquisition of Spain full of hideons torments, which shall witness the
truth hereof to all posterities. This howling owl notwithstanding (by his
bold flight prognosticating some mischief) scricheth in her majesty's ears,
of the hard handling of Catholics, how they Hovvlet. page 5. 6.
are tossed and tumbled, opmrisoned and pined, husbands separated from their
vviues, vviues from their husbands, their houskeeping broken up, and by name,
M. Dimock killed in prison, and one mystresse. Tomson a virgin sent for
religion to (...): (...) what shall I say, In imbre garrula est noctua. This
foolish owl complains of case, slaundering her majesty, to whom he
vvoulde seem so dutiful: and her whole government and state, of barbarous
cruelty: when the trespass in deed is only herein, that they are dealte
with but to gently, considering their continual attempts against her
highness estate, crounc, and dignity. Concerning M. Dimocke his own friends
has testified this to be true.
M. Dimock of whom he speaks he had the choosing of his own prison (which
was no choking dungeon, no Colehouse or (...) tower, (such as they were wont
to stifle men up in) but a friends house, to whom his wife (if he had any)
friends, and other acquaintance repaired, vvhos death was by Gods hand and by
no procurement of those magistrates, that sought his reformation as his own
friends can witness. As for the young woman vvho^ he co^plaineth to be
committed Bridevvell a fit place for M. (...), that behaved her self
immodestly before aucthority.
to bridevvel for her conscience forsooth, if conscience may be without
knowledge she was committed by her highness high comissioners to a place, both
for air and expe^ce, that was thought (...) for her person, and (...), having
behaved her self, over obstinatly and immodestly (...) a sober (...),
howsoever worthy her religion, before them. And yet this perking Parsons or
ovvlishe (...) needs be so, out of his yuie bush might have learned, that
honester then she Diverse that were of the private church were committed to
that place till they were reformed.
and all the pack of them vvil ever be, except they amend and hie them apace,
have been committed to that place, both for religion and other causes, as some
others have been for dishonesty and an il life. There have bin such co^itted
thither, as he complained of before, that they escaped with little or no
punishment for breaking the book. It is not the place but the cause that
puts off or draws on an infamy. But her maiesti may see, and so may all the
honorable, the malepertnes of this ugly ovvl, that is so curious in
co^monvvealth matters, that he prierh into her highness officers doings, and
having so sla^derous a tongue, pretends not vvithstanding such loyalty and
duty toward her highness. But if we had been in their handling, we should
have had little leisure and less opportunity to have opened our griefs before
any Sovereignty in authority. For besides that they were in truth the
practisers of tyranny and cruelty in all other doings, they would have dried up
the best blood in our bodies, and sent us to heaven in fierye chariots: after
unspeakable torments, to have put an end to our wretched lives. Their
consciences forsooth may not be urged, nor their catholics may not be allowed
Conscientia non fine scientia.
to obey their prince in coming to the Church, to hear the word of God
preached, the only ordinary way to reform them, and to bring them to
salvation: tender regard must be had of the sex and birth of their offenders,
(and yet this woman whom he vvil needs make a great gentlevvoman is but a
francklins daughter) though they offend obstinately both against God and their
Sovereign, whom they ought to obey in and for the Lord, and that when they
offend against the word of God, the peace of the church, and the good
laws of this Realm. Not so much as a little imprisonment (in steed of
death, being found obstinate and incorrigible, and lightly joined with
treason against the state) but it must be exclaimed against, as if they had
endured the greatest wrongs in the world: when it is plain, and yet fresh
in memory, Se the lamen table stories of England, France, Ireland etc.
what havoc they made of the lives of noble and unnoble, of blind and lame,
of boys and gitles, even before their counterseite sentence of condemnation
were past, and yet it was for true religion in deed, and but for standing
against their blasphemies and curssed idolatries. your opinion and religion
(Hovvlet) must be reserved, but to them that did with a true knowledge allege
that plea of conscience, you were and are continually ready to abuse that
place of Scripture: Romans 13.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, etc. yea, you vvoulde urge it
in all things with all extremity and without all condition in respect of
your selves when yet it might not bind you nor any of your greasy
generation, and this may appear by the cold exposition found of late by
search in a gentleman's house, in Buckinghamshire, upon this very place,
together with another slanderous, lying, and seditious libel against those
godly learned men, M. Doctor Fulke and M. Charke.

Such enemies they are to God, that they will bring the word of God into
doubt, (...)
affirming the Church to be more ancient then the word. They will ask
how (...) know the word of God to be the word of God. And albeit (God
be thanked for it) concerning the knowledge of those tongs the As Daniel in
the Chaldey, and some other were in Syriake, all the rest in Hebrew and Greek.
Hebrew, Chaldey, Syriack, and Greek, in which the Scriptures were first
delivered, from which they would feign beat us, if they have gained any thing,
they have had it at our hands, (...) their light from ours, yet they will
swear that our (...) are false, and lead us to a translation Read Freder.
Furius de lib. sacris in vernaculum conuertendis.
fathered upon Hierome, which we must receive eue^ as it is, that yet in deed
they can never prove to have been any of his, seeing in his own works, the
The common translation fathered upon Hierom, non of his as may appear in his
own works.
difference is plain in many places, from that of (...), which is full of
Solicismes and imperfect speeches; Notwithstanding even by this, when we have
accepted of it, and have fought with them, their own throtes have been cut, as
with their own svvoord, and the errors See Marcus Marinus in his preface
prefixed before his Hebrew Grammar.
which they maintein have been confuted, when they hane admitted it. I think
they vvil ask shortly, how we know there is a God, as the prophet has said
of the wicked, who though they were ashamed to utter it, yet * thought they
in their hearts that there was no God. But that you may consider further of the
translation, to which that Council. Trid. Ses. 4.
conspiracy of Trent has taken upon them to bind all the world, upon pain of
their Psalm. 14.
black (...), with what good reason, I vvil set down a fevv testimonies and
places. There was a very ancient book in Hebrew, which is entitled without
the authors name, (...) in (...). (...).
Nizahon, who upon that psalm. The heavens declare the glory (...) God.
witnesses that when Hierome did (...) that psalm at Rome he said that he
had turned the Bible with great travel out of the (...) tongue into latin,
neither did I alter any thing (says he) but there arose after him (as the
author says) such as with writing it out, (...) all And in Reuclines library
also, being a great learned man in that tongue, there was found in a very
ancient hebrew copy written, which had these words, Lo Hierome the elder
knew our whole (...), the whole (...) etc. What likelihoode is there, that
(...) being so learned a man in all the tongues, his own translations being
so far different from Read in Calvin (...) in Con cil. (...). (...) 4. Canon.
that common translation, that a little after carried his name, which himself
oftentimes taxes and finds fault with in his works, that ever (...)
should be his, where a man Read (...) in Council.
for his life in sundry places can make neither rhyme nor reason? as far from
the tongue wherein Trident.
it was written, as might be. And this (...) diverse of the Doctors many times
into such (...), who were either altogether ignorant, or but meanly seen in the
tongs, that they knew not which way to turn them, as namely (...) Ciuitate Dei
lib. 18. cap. 44.
Augustine: who doubted whether it were within the space of forty days,
according to the Hebrew, that the Ninevites should be destroyed or within
three days, as that translation fathered upon the Septuaginta had rendered.
And yet, he says, if his opinion should be asked: he rather thinks it to be
forty, as is in the Hebrew. So Hierome in his Epistle to Damasus, justly taxes
Hilarious for interpreting that word Hosianna, which he renders the
redemption of the house of (...). And Ambrose almost after the same manner. In
(...) in the primative Church, the Greek tongue so flourished that it was the
most common tongue thorough out the world, howsoever the Romanistes boast of
the latin, whereupon it came to pass that even the Evangelists and other
ecclesiastical vvriters, living both at Jerusalem and Rome, in the vvritings
of the old testament rather used the greek interpretation, then the hebrew
founteynes themselves. And it cannot be denied howsoever there may be defense
made for that interpretation that goes un der the name of these 70. both for
the antiquitye of it and for their vvonderfull pains, who labored in it, yet
that it is far more safe to have recourse to the The best way evermore to go
to the fountains.
founteines themselves, who ever denied but such obstinate enemies? Is it not
ever safer for men to look with their own eyes, and to go with their own
feet then with other men's? And if any man shall object that they might change
many things by the spirit of prophecy, besides that it was long ago
confuted by Hierom, who affirmed that it was one thing to do the duty of an
enterpreter, another of a prophet; this also is to be considered, that we
must not be over bold with the word of the almighty. For albeit we may and
ought to labor precisely to interpret it, yet it becomes no mortal man to
take upon him, to alter, ad, or deminish any thing in that everlasting word of
God. And if they bear no excuse that drawn with an excessive love of the
greek that then most flourished, and was most generally received, faulted: how
shall they be excused that thruste a Lattine translation upon us that has a
number of wants, which having been often shevved them, yet they would
never vouchsafe to amend any, and is full of imperfections, yea contrary to
their own Decret. Cano 1. (...). 9.
Canons, which show us that the credit of the ancient books is to be
examined from the Hebrew volumes, and the nevve from the Greek. And therefore
Pagninus in (...) gramat. Hebr.
Pagnine a learned Hebritian wishes that they could shevve him Hieroms
translation. For that says he, which is read every where in his name, is
non of that incorrupt translation, and that he has proved by many
vnansvverable arguments in his Epistle to Pope Clement himself. And therefore
another grave man says, that it can not be proved that ever the church of God
ought to be bound to any certain translation. But as the Lord in mercy shall
increase and continue that necessary The gift of toungs necessary in the church.
gift of the knowledge of tongues in his Church, and shall give light and
understanding, so we ought evermore to repair to the founteines, and that we
may be fit for so excellent a work of the ministry of the word it is a
necessary labor to learn to understand it, in it own language, which
vvhilest men have neglected, we see how by the (...) indgement of God, they
have (...) into palpable darkness. I will omit the Psalms as they are sung in
the popish churches, and diverse other places in sundry lessons most absurd, in
every popish pie and ser uice book of theirs yet extant. For to reckon them
all, vvoulde make a just volume, and weary a man. Only let this be marked,
that as Hierome notes the corruption of the Greek interpretation of the
seventy interpretors, which either came through ignorance, or negligence, or
both, so the common translation, done by an un known aucthor, drawn from
them, strayeth further. The Greek I will pass over, and only note some fevv
places out of the lattin, sufficiently co^uincing the translation that is, to
be none of Hieroms, because it differs so much both from the Hebrew and the
Greek, as in the 65 Psalm. ver. 11. where he says thou shall water the rivers,
in sted of the furrows. and in 68. Psalm verse 19 day and daily, in steed of
daily, and in the 87. (...) verse. 6. there is read, Nunquid de Syon, vvheras
(...) is neither in the Hebrew not Greek, and so there he says Many were, For
many were borne in her, and in the 88, Psalm verse. 14. Lord why do thou
reject my prayer, for my soul. The places are infinite and have been found
fault with by many, and yet never me^ded by any, only sometimes, they set the
truth in the margent, but they keep the errors still in the text which
shows their malic, as in the article referred to the seed, and which is
masculine, yet that (...). (...).
they may maintain their error, they keep the article feminine and would
have it understood of the Luke 15.
virgin. So for (...) domum she svvepte the house, they keep euertit domum,
she ouerthrevv the house, and 1. Pet. 4. 23. He committed himself to him that
judges unjustly, referring that unto Pilate, if it have any sense, which the
Apostle means to god For it is contrary. He committed him self or his cause
to, God to him that judges justly. These and a number of such absurdities
there are, some noted also by diverse great learned men, vvherof I make no
mention, and yet forsooth they will have us only bound to this common
translation and no other. We say notvvithstanding, that we are so far from
condemning the labors of those 70. interpreters, vvosocuer they were, that
(...) thank God for them: wherein they have done well, we praise their
industry, and so do we, the labors of him that did that common translation,
and theirs also that since (...) rendered any thing either out of the Hebrew or
Greek, but thervvithall we affirm with Hierome, that if any question arise
amongst the lattines concerning the new (...), or if the copies vary, we must
go to the (...) of the Greek, or if any doubt occure with the Greeks, we
must to the Hebrew, read Augustines council in his book de doctrina Chr
(...). lib. 1. If this course had been held, since God gave increase of
knowledge from the beginning, many (...) had been amended, and the papists
would not have been so obstinat in that which they cannot defend, but it is
the proper nature of these (...) of God, still to uphold errors, never to
acknovvledge their (...) and faults, (...) the children of God are (...) ready
to amend that which is amisle, and to be thankful to them that admonish them.

Such enemies they are to God, that they join and participate vvithal the
heretics that ever were in one point of heresy or other. They have nothing
sound in the whole mass and body of their religion. From Satan the subtle
serpent, whose eldest Euagr. lib. 1. hist. cap. 21.
son this Antichriste is, he carries his fathers resemblaunce in all things.
The Epiphan. lib. 2. tom. 1.
Adamites were beastly, against marriage went naked, used all John (...).
Campegius pighius.
kinds and Sexes in common and (...), as we read the frantique Annabapristes
did likewise, and how (...) off are they from these villainies? Pope Crantius
lib. 4. cap 43.
Leo the 9. and Paschall, the one in the year 1150. the other 1100. join both
together in the condemnation of marriage. Agrip. art. 21 (...). (...). 22. and
(...). 16. vt habetur in cap Si concubina desent excom and gratia. 34. did
(...). 40.
Their own divines teach their priesthood to be defiled with marriage, but
not with harlots, yea, that it is (...) to play the (...) then to marry: It
is (...) for a Christian man, who has not a wise, to have a concubine,
Neither do (...) forsvveare incontinencie but matrimony. This is the cause
that the Pope takes a (...) of his Priests for their concubines, and in (...)
they Ioh (...). 34. Christianos.
have any or no, they pay their (...) for it. And (...) Agrippa Bale (...)
Sixti (...) lib. de Romans Pont. vitis.
Syxtus builded Stevves for both kinds, like an horrible monster, in the
year of Christ 1474. Herein they likewise join with Irenaeus lib. 3.
Tatianus, Montanus, and Carpocrates, for they Tom. 3. (...).
lib. 2. Tom. 1.
(...). confu. 162. and (...).
mayntein the (...), tolerate vvhooredome by (...) lib. 8.
bulls and licenses, yea (...) in Alphonso.
they prefer Sodomitrie (...).
and filthy buggery, before that holy remedy of marriage in their priests,
which God has appointed sor a remedy to all that have not the gift of
(...): and therefore Paul the third, besides, his common Mant. 2. fast.
reuenevve sor forty five thousand whoores, Sipudor in vil (...), (...) pati
(...).
(...) paying forty thousand ducats in Rome, he had also as some report; forty
thousand ruffians (...) iam tota (...) nar. (...) de Clamangis de corrupto
ecclaesiae statu Constitut. Othonis. de con cubinis clericorum remouendis.
Bucer.
kept upon their charges at an hours warning, to do him any kind of
service. For every one of these harlots had a champion to keep her house, and
to be her special desendant, whatsoever other inco^mers there were besides.
And though Parsons, Nichols discouerer defends both the stevvs and the stipends
arising to his unholy holiness for them, under the name of a punishmente, yet
who sees not that it is tolerated upon this condition, and matrimony cannot
be tolerated in priests, upon any condition. Ioh. Filius. vegerius. Ochi
nus. (...), Anselmus.
Mark. 10. 4.
The (...) taught the putting away of men's vviues for any cause, and so in a
manner do they. For the pope will dispense with any, Error, conditio, votum,
co gnatio, crime^: cultus, (...), vis, ordo, ligamen, honestas: si sit affinis,
si forte coire nequibit
and Driander.
there are twelve (...) alleged, such as the scripture (...) aproued off,
why me^ may put away their wives. The (...) vvoulde have the use of oath men's
wives, adultery and sornication to be an indifferent thing, and so Ioh de Tur.
Crem Laurent.
will they, For they teach that simple fornication is no sin, and though M.
(...) slander Luther for pleading the (...) (...) lib. 1. cap 38 (...) de Sanc.
Vict. par. 2. Distinct. 34. (...) qui.
(...) cap 17. (...). de (...).
of marriage, as much as of eating and drinking, yet they say in deed; it is
lawful to have a woman once in a month, Thomas Aquinas. sent. lib. 3.
ad de (...) renes, to purge the reins. I would have seen lusty, Campion to
have been as diligent in (...) the manifest abominations of their (...) and
Canonistes, as he is to corrupt Luthers sayings, and to dub that which before
was dispr oued, and neither coldly nor fearfully defended. But they and their
accomplices have (...) whole books Jason pratensis. printed 1549 by Petrus
Aretinus at venice, upon which book (...) there have been written
commentaries and many filthy pictures printed there.
de ratione (...) liberos: de (...) concubandi, and Ioannes a Casa an
Archbishop, has written a book in the praise of filthy Sodomitrie, calling
it a diuiue work. Horrible were it to read the books of these lecherous
Locustes, to see what questions and Summa Angelica de casibus conscientiae.
cases of plexitie they put and take upon them to handle concerning these
things, were it not the just judgment of God, that they should bewray their
filthy hearts, and leave such dung behind them to infect the world, which
is to be cast in their own faces to choke them, seeing without shame they
will dare to open their mouths against the everlasting truth of God. It
were an infinite work to reckon up all their heresies, but this is certain
Lut. Cortez in lib. 3. sent did. 3. Thomae (...).
that the whole lump of popery is compact of heresy. They are Iudasses with
Judas, whom they worship for betraying Christ. They are Jews with the
Jews, whom they justify for killing Christ, and they plead that they had
sinned deadly, if they had not done it. They worship the (...) upon which
(...) died, the nails, thorns, (...) and instruments where with he was
executed, of which they make as sundry Idols, as they have increased the number
of such (...) relics in sundry countries. And to the cross they have
dcdicated a day, (...) it holy roode day, which they worship (...), the (...)
worship which belongs to (...). With the (...) they agree almost in all
things in (...) separation, apparel, pride, and (...) vvishings, observations,
and ceremonies, doing (...) things like (...), to be seen of men, and (...)
for (...) then to be (...) and justified (...).
of (...). With the Saduces some of them have (...) the (...) of the soul and
the life to come, (...) did (...) hist. (...). c.
John the 23. and Pope Leo the tenth, and as they said, that it was in our
will to do good (...). so do they (...), that a man (...) and (...).
needs not the grace of God to be good. The (...).
Essees, the (...), (...), Melitans, Donatists, (...), (...) and Iusticiaries,
would be saved (...). (...). 2. (...) de (...).
by their own works, and so will they. Simon Magus as they them selves take
him, was one of their first founders, for besides that he was a sorcerer, he
would have bought the gifts of the holy ghost, and so Mant. lib call Read
Platina and your own (...).
would they of whomsoever they learned it. For as (...) Irenaeus lib. (...).
Syluester the second, Ioh. the 19 Ioh the 20. (...) the 4. (...) the 8. Ioh.
21. (...). 9. (...) the 3. (...). lib. 6. (...). (...). (...).
Gregory the 6. and (...) the 7. were sorcerers and co^ (...). multis (...) cis.
(...). so they make no conscience to buy and sell their orders, and (...) all
their places by money f (...).
from the (...) to the lowest hedge priest. With (...) they (...) a new
(...), and (...) de turre (...)
as (...) the (...) and Tatians ho'd that Christ was (...) the virgin Mary: So
they hold that all (...) took flesh of the virgin Mary, and came and (...)
Hell. With (...). (...).
(...) they (...) water, wax, Palms, bread, wine, and many other things, as
may appear by their own Po^tificall, with the Gnostics they maintain
Cliutoueus de venerat.
images, with Montanus they coma^d superstious fastings, and Gaspar Rutla^dus.
forbid meats that God has commanded to be received with thanksgiving, with
Cerinthus they corrupt Saunders de Typ. ador. imag. 1. Tim. 4.
the scriptures, with Marcio^ and apelles they urge vnco^ma^ded ceremonies,
with the Ande ans, and Anthropomorphits, they make God like an old man, and
with the gentiles they make images of al sorts, of foursooted beasts and
creping worms, with Donatists, they tie the universal church not to a part of
the world, as they did to afftick, but to a less place, even to a city, and
both with the^, with the Anabaptists and Pelagians, they maintein free will.
They offer to the virgin Mary and call her the Queen of heaven, as did the
Colliridians, with the Cataphrigians and others who held that Christ ascended
without a body, they The heresies are known and when they show a
difference, they shall receive an answer.
hold that, that body is still in their rouud cake, and in infinite places at
once. And as Seuerus said that a woman was the Devils workmanship, and man
also from the nauill dovvnward. So Pope Innocent the 8. avouched that they that
were married could not please God, aleadging that place Qui in c (...) Deo
placere non possunt. With Manes they make them selves Christ and above him.
With the Catharists they boast of a perfection in this life, and of such
worthincsse as deserves heaven both for them selves and others, agreeing with
Henrye Nicholas that Arch-heritique, that monstrous head of the frantike
Family of Love, who peruerteth all the scriptures, and glories of an
essential righteousness. With the Bullinger aduersus (...).
Anabaptists, they deny maiestrates, by cutting the^ of from the principal
part of their office, and government in their own (...), and countries, making
the^ hogs and swine in comparison of their Pope, and his anointed ones, to
whom no knowledge of god, nor duty in advancing Christian religion does belong.

Such enemies they are to God, as directly set themselves against all the
commandments of God not only breaking them, as all other men do, when they say
notwithstanding they can fulfill them (as other (...) have done) but in the
whole course of their doctrine quite thvvart and ourthrovv them.

In They worship many gods.
steed of one God the sovereign and only Lord, who is only to be worshipped,
called upon, trusted in and praised for all his benefits, they set up a number
Exodus 3. 14. and 20.
of gods exceeding the (...) gentiles, robbing God of his glory, Every disease
must have a several Deuteronomy. 4. 35. and 6. 4.
God both in men and in beasts, and must be called upon with a paternoster for
the cure thereof, beside the abo minable Durand. Innocent de officiis (...).
(...), that was made a salve for all soars, that being first had, must
prosper all the seers, help hu^ters, purge pigges and preserve hogs, cause rain
and Guydon de monte Roch.
fair weather, deliver out of purgatory and direct gene rall councils. What
was it the mass could not do. And yet least there should be lack for any
thing, not so much as the toothake, but it had a saint Apolinari This is
manifestly to be seen through out all their books.
and Valentin was for lovers, S. Lo for smithes: Chrispia^ and Martin, sor
shomakers, Nicholas and Cletus for clearks, George for warriers and for
England, Andrew for Scotland, Denis sor France. James or Iac Saints offices
many, all robbing God of his glory.
ques, for Spain, and Patrike for Ireland. There was no town, (...), private
house or country, but they had a sundry saint patro^ or God, upon who^ they
chiefly depe^ded. Read the Behiue. foi. 252. 253. 254.
Every church and church stepeple must bear the name of one S. or other, or of
al Saints that they might match the old idolaters, who had their Paulus Diac.
Lib. Ceremo, niarum.
Pantheo^ at Rome, and which was more gross, their stinking relics must be
sought to, not so much as Huberts key, but must have the virtue to heal the
biting Legenda aurea Rom Breuiar.
of a mad dog, and upon relic sunday the Parso^s brich must be hanged out at
the top of the steeple. These Pontifical.
detestable idolatries buried in the dark, and scatrered amongst al christians
by the light of the gospel, this Hoc est viris auibus quod noctua. etc.
horsce owl that seems to the birds another won der, and certain other
impudent Jesuits from Rome, that they may entangle many in the lime tvvigges,
Eglog. 9.
and bring them to the spitte of utter destruction, labor to revive, and bring
again from hell, amongst us. (...) it can not be, but portende some notable
mischief, that this Parsons Owl, or rather Alexander ab Alexandro Ob bubonem
aut (...) Cellum Iouis aut Capitolium ingressum Sulphuris and quae lustratione
vr bem and Capitolium expiarunt.
wolf should thus (...) into Jupiters Cell, and into our highest Capitolium
to schriche and howl so ylfauouredly in the ears of our Prince for the
mayntenance of cursed Idolatry against the truth of God. But I trust, though
we have not that old sacrifice of the Romans, neither use brimstone or
holywater from whom those Popish Apes learned such toys, to purge our cities
and temple, yet we shall cleanse it by a better purgation.

Thongh Images forbidden.
God have forbidden Images to be set in the temple, that Idolatry might be
avoided that they might not be as snares to corrupt men, who Exodus 20.
Deuteronomy. 4. 12.
are prone and apt unto it, as being too vile and insufficient Esai. 41.
to set him out by: who is a spirit, almighty, Io. 5. 21.
incomprehensible, full of all majesty and glory: yea, though Christ be God
and man, and must have a spiritual worship, so that no Image can set him out
and bear his resemblaunce, yet rather then they vvil not have *God the father
like an Abac. 2. 18. etc James prayed to (...) staff, and therefore we must
pray to Images.
old man, decaying in nature with a white bearde, and a balde head, and have a
Roode of six foot long in every church, they will quite leave out this
Epist. Adrian Act. 2.
second commandment, and because they Read the trim arguments in that 2.
Nicen Council, and you shall see good stuff.
would not be taken with the manner, all the world knowing that there be ten
commandementes, they are feign to use this bad shift, to chop and slice the
last into two, God having made it but one, yea howsoever the heaven The name
of God holy.
of heavens cannot contein him, neither dwells he in temples made with
hands, yet these enemies of his, vvil bring him into Horrible blasphem ie.
the compass of the earth, they will dream of a See Vauses Catechism and
others that commonly leave it out, One printed at (...) by the commandment of
the King of Spain.
breaden God, wherein when worms breed, they will cruelly burn him with
fire: in despite of God (...) vvil worship these images, with the same worship
that belongs to the holy trinity, whom they feign to speak, to sweat, and
to do great (...). The name of God holy.
Though the name of God be precious, and to be honored of al his children, yet
these enemies will swear in vain by him, and because all their religion is
carnal, and they imagine of God, as they paint Tho. Aquinsuper mandat.
him, and set him out in all respects like a man, so they profane his name in
all their idolatrous worship, Esai. 66. 1.
Act. 7. 19.
they swear also horribly, by soul, body, blood, heart, in their common
talk. For from them not only sprang the dishonor of his name by their
idolatries, George VVicellus in his retection swe reth horribly.
Masses, Dirges, Trentals, will vvoorshippes, devised religion, charmings,
(...) of creatures, magical abusing the scriptures, but also that horrible
Profaning and swearing common with (...) papists.
swearing by all the parts of a body, as if he were a man, which is used of
villains and Ruffianes who are wont to leave no part of a body (...). And
when they have done with him, then they run Esaias. 18. 19. Ier. 12. 16.
to their mass, other idolles and creatures, both of Soph. 15.
(...) own making, and otherwise flatly *against the Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20.
scriptures. This is common I say amongst papists. not only in their
accustomed speeches, but in their Examples of perjury in papists, read Ma
Par. of the (...) of To mulus in the besieging of Auinion a Legate of the popes
in the year 1222.
solemn assemblies and places (...) judgment, and where they should show
greatest faith and truth: which are the very seed of fearful periuries. And
in all these cases their consciences (...) without all touch, because they make
account of some three halpeny satisfaction, which they may obtrude to God,
and he shall not refuse it, as they say, for a just recompense. If they will
charge us with the like, Also before that of the breach of the oath of the
clergy tovvard (...) the first, when they dispossessed his heir, and
crowned king Stephen. And in the (...) of Step.
they cannot, and their own mouths shall witness for us, because, they make
it a mark of an heretic as they account us, if he swear not (...).

As for the The Saboth to be religious ly kept.
(...), they neither know what it is, nor how to keep it by any virtuous or
godly exercises, seeing they have none amongst them. And therefore all the abuses
that have pestred the (...) this long time, have sprung from their idolatries.
Besides: they defiled it with abominable stageplaies and enterludes, with
bayting and tearing, of Gardener, Boner, and the rest that were svvorn against
the Popes supremacy, and yet afterward revolted.
Bulls, Bears, and other beasts, with reuelling and rouing like mad dogs. They
cared not what devise took place, what pastime were used, though therein the
devil himself were served, so they might keep the people quiet and occupied
in ignorance, holding them from the light of Gods word: And therefore their
(...) upon these holiest days, were filthy whoredom, drunkenness, misrule
and dissolute dealing. Nothing was unlawful if once they heard their
abominable mass, wherein their opinion in that point was not so much to be
blamed. For having committed the most horrible sacrilege in the world, why
should they make bones at any other sin whatsoever? True it is, that they
blaspemously The Saboth day most vvic kedly profaned by papists both in their
meetings, by idolatries, and abroad, by licentious and (...) enormities.
charge the gospel with these abuses and corruptions but how unjustly, all the
world may judge, and their own consciences shall convince them, since they (...)
hatched under their own wings, and the Gospel does from time to time
disprove them, reform them and has gained against them. And even as the (...),
and ill favored face of an Ovvle does bewray his kind, and all the birds of
the field know him, as soon as they see him, follovv him and vvonder at him:
So these foul abuses bewray by their fether, that (...) and idolatry hatched
them first forth into the world, which banished the doctrine of faith and
repentance, from amongst the Sons of men, and lulled them (...) in deep
security, so as they were careless how they lived: seeing also that (...)
their death, they might buy out their sins for so small a value. (...) they
deny these things, a day will come when the *judgment of God, which Romans
2. 2.
is according to truth shall convince them of them, and they shall feel the
weight of them.

As for the second table, they who are found such The second Table.
rebels to God, how can they yield the duties that are due to men? As
therefore they (...) God, so they yield no honor to those chief instruments
and preseruers of their life. Their princes, and Magistrates, whom God has
(...) in the highest place that under the shadovv of their vvings, they might
enjoy their vviues, children, goods and lands, might have peace: and be
shadowed from (...) and oppressors, from foreign power and usurpers; they
never regarded. Alvvayes they bedavvbed them Exodus 20.
with terms of reproach: And though God, to put Dan. 7. 6.
both them in mind of theit duties, and us of that Deuteronomy. 17.
reverence we should yield him, vouchsafes to communicate Psalm. 51. 6.
his own names with them, and *they are Prou. 16.
(...). 12. 10.
called Gods, fathers, his ministers and substitutes, yet Romans 13. 1.
they called them the seculer power; layety none of 1. Pet. 2. 3. 17.
the clergy; which term (...) they understand, charge maiestrats to be
none of the Lords inheritance They called them the lay and seculer (...),
swine etc.
As for spiritual fathers and pastors, that brake the bread of life sincerely
and truly unto them; they evermore revvarded them with fire and svvorde, for
their labors. Their natural parents they brake from, 1. (...). 5. 3. Tit. 3.
not to follovv the truth; but to be votaries and folowers (...) sectmasters,
such as Benedict, Bernard, Bruno, Augustine, Albert, Frauncis, Dominicke, and
such like, and if they married; they bestovved themselves most commonly as
pleased themselves. And now, so nevvfangled they are, and (...) in their
professions; of Jesus they vvil be called (...), or of the (...) Jesus; as
though the aunciente name of christians were not holy enough to serve their
turn vvherin they iumpe with such as will he of the Family of Love; (...) to
be of the household of (...), as to (...) a name for their (...) estate. And
though that (...) unlawful Chapter of Trent (...) (...). (...). an. 1215.
(...) this nevve devised order, yer that it may Council. Nicen. 1539.
(...) an evident argument of the constancy of their Councelles, it is against
their own Constitutions In capite (...).
that ordered long before their (...), (...) there (...). de religiosis domibus.
(...) be no more such (...) they found themselves pestred with For they were
weary of the infinite svvarm they had already, and therefore one of their own
Petrus Aliacensis tract. 4. de reformanda ecclesia.
Cardinals 24. years before this blasphemous sect (...) out of the
bottomless pit, having a charge committed unto him, to give notice of things
that were to be reformed, says plainly, that if such beggarly orders were
suffered to increase as they began, it would overthrow all. And in this I
hope he shall prove a true Prophet, And the name of Jesus, being of his
office, this new brood, by taking it upon them, what do they else but auovv
themselves members of Antichrist

Of the price of man's blood, which ought to be precisely kept, and preserved,
they have no regard. They pour it out as water, and the *earth cries for
Exodus 20.
vengeance, for that she has drunk up from their Genesis 4.
hands, such abounda^ce in all places, filling the world Deuteronomy. 5.
full of widows, and pore Orphans, They are so far Leuitic. 29.
off: from preserving life upon which God the author Mat. 5.
of life, has given such special charge, that they Ioh. 8.
will pick occasions and take the least, forcibly to bereue men of them. And
this they will do, not to execute justice, but for hatred of righteousness,
and for professing the truth, without al coulor of justice devising al kind of
torments, least they should die to easily, worse the^ ever did Nero, Dionisius,
Dioclesia^ or the rest of such like tyrants. They co^playn of hard dealing, but
he that shall enter into their tragical stories and see their practices in all
countries, their procedings and executions, shall see plainly, whose children
they are, by their bloody murders, and merciless slaughters. But as this is a
note that (...) and his members, whose kingdom stands by blood, Psalm. 10. 7.
shall have * feet (...) to shed blood, so is it a note Romans 3. 15.
of Christ and his kingdom, to be pursued of these, to be killed and put to
death, (...) we lie before Esaias. 53.
them as sheep, not before the sherers, but as before Matthew. 5.
butchers, and yet open not our mouths and are led John. 1.
to the slaughter, not for our evil and unrighteousness but because we reprove
them of sin, hold out the glory of our Christ, and renounce their false
doctrine. Who knows not that they must needs confess, that they are unable
to keep this sixth commandment, if they did understand that which Christ
delivers Math. 5. that Anger, Cholerike passions Taunts.
collorique passions and reprochful taunts, undeservedly bestowed, were
branches of murder, but (...) Pharasaicall and loose interpretations of the
co^mandments of God, both deceived themselves, and infected the world with
this contagion, that man being able to fulfill the will of god needs not much
to be beholding to Christ but of this I have said before.

As for adultery, where reigned it more, then amongst those contemners of
marriage, Adultery reigns in the Popes kingdom. See Bale de pontif Romans in
the preface.
where were the heads of 6000. children and their bones found in a ponde, and
under Iouianus pon tanus de immanitate ca. 6 Epist. Hulderich ad Nicho. primum.
265. Read that vile epistle of Clem. (...). 4. Tom. 1. Conc. and the did.
cap. (...). causa 12. q. 1.
alters, in caves and dry trenches, in their abominable houses, but amongst
them Were not al their Cloisters, Abbeys, and Nunneries, very stews and
brothelhouses? Despising Gods ordinance it was his just judgment to give them
up as he did the Genriles, not only to spiritual whoredom, but to bodily,
that they should follow the lusts of their own hearts, and defile
themselves one with another through most beastly filthiness, that their
Colleges, Abbeys, Nunneries, and religious houses, should be infected (...)
with unnatural and untimely murders, or with living bastards and dead bones,
or else that they should be filthy Gomorians and sodomites, that *leaving the
Romans 1.
natural use they should commit unspeakable wickedness, The vices in religious
houses.
which contrary to this commandment they nonrished with all kind of
pleasant delights, idleness, pampering of the flesh in their greatest and most
solemn fastes, they made their choysest feasts, with all kind of dainties and
finest (...), drinking al kind of sweet wines, that they might fully feed upon
the pride and lust of the eye, this Epist. Belgar. ad Nico. (...). Auent. lib.
4.
is so common in Rome as I have partly said before, and smells so strong
throughout all Christendom, that it has turned VVo be to the^ by whom
offenses come Mat. 18.
many, that are even but natural men, who otherwise could have favored their
religion, from them: and beeinge won by the Gospel, presently August. contra
(...) lib. 5. c. 3
love the truth, and a great number of others stumbling thereat, have fallen to
irreligion and flat Atheism. Herein also they show themselves most unskillful
of that sincerity Christ speaks of, when he forbids the raunging of the
eye, when by no means they will acknowledge concupiscence to be sin, and in
respect of their false doctrine M (...). Fomes peccati non peccatu.
are feign to deny the definition of sin, to wit, that sin is the
transgression of the law of All the patrimony that the Pope possesses, he
has vvrung and stolen from Emperors and princes. The dukedom of Sicile, and
many (...), Apuleia, etc.
God, yet because it is reproved by Christ himself, they are feign to yield a
little, that it is the (...) of sin, and not sin it self.

As for temporal things, though they be of least accounte, yet they steal
them both from Princes, and all sorts of people. Neither will their pretenced
title of right help, though it be confirmed by old and worm (...)
prescription, to ouervvay the commandment of GOD, who (...) not have one man
to encroch upon another man's possession, and yet they have Read Abbas vip sub.
198.
made a spoil of all callings, getting into their hands the (...) of the
whole world. That they rob fatherless children De cons Did. 5. cap.
Discipulos.
and widows, under the (...) of long prayer, by their (...) and trentals, and
such paltrye robbing devises, yea that they (...) famis excusat. a (...).
maintein (...) committed in time of (...), it is more then apparent

For Lving and (...) witness (...) condemned.
bearing false witness the false papist will not stick to belie the most
blameless Christians Exodus 20. 23.
in the world, and to charge them, though with no Deuteronomy. 5.
color, with most palpable untruths, either to (...). 19.
bring the truth into hatred, or them to the fire. 1. Reg 21.
They will make no conscience falsely to accufe the Mat. 7.
Luke 6.
notablest men, and most singular instruments that ever Ioh. 7.
have been in the church of God, the dust of whose 1. Cor. 4.
shoes they are not worthy to lick up. And herein Iam. 4.
(...). 25.
they shevve themselves like their father the (...), Apoc, 12 10.
who was a lier from the beginning, an accuser of the brethren, malicious and
full of poison. And most (...) amongst the rest, has that notable Apostata
(...) was (...) at Geneua. and troubled the Church, barking against the most
comfortable doctrine of Gods (...), now he is become a (...). See (...), and
(...) also that make mention of (...).
Hieronim Bolsek expressed the image of his father, in that filthy and
slanderous book that he has written of the life of that excellent man of God
John Calvin, whom without all shame being laid up (...) peace, a great while
since, and buried with Honor, he takes out of his grave, and gnavveth upon
his (...) carkase and bones, more barbarously then any tygre or carian Crovve,
the envy of whose honor and (...) of Gods (...), though it have (...) his
serpentine tongue, and (...), eythere upon (...) or slanderous reports, yet
his (...) is (...) confirmed, by so many rare monuments of learned works, and
grave testimonies of those that lamente his lack in the Church of God, that
though he swelt his heart, and burst for anger, he shall never be able
amongst the godly to empaire his credit, the value of the paring of a nail
or one hair, much less hurt the truth of God, which depends upon no man's
person, but have credit and authority from God the only author The ttueth of
God depends upon no man's person, neither do we measure it by men's lives, but
rather their lives by it.
thereof. Let the whole army of these slaunderers, that ly by tradition one
from the credit of another, do what they can, the truth shall stand
inviolable. Howsoever men have their faults, who as they are men have the
infirmities of men, and must plead mercy before that sincere seat, yet this
false witness bearing, reaches not to men, but to the dishonor of God him
self, and thetefore that railing Staphilus, Lindane, VVicellus, Vaquerius,
Cocleus, Frarin, and others, that belche out their malice against Luther,
Beza, and such like instruments of God, do but bark in vain, like dogs
against the Moon, that is far from them and without their reach. Their lies
are so notorious, as that of Luthers and Caluines death, that whole countries
can and are ready to testify the contrary. But admit that some of these things
were to be credited, reported by indifferent men: yet considering these
vvretches to be shameless and (...) enemies, how unequal a thing were it to
accept them for vvitnesses, being of a false and contrary Religion, being
even (...) with malice and (...) against them, whose learning and rare (...)
they could never attain to: and having no conscience in greater matters, vvil
make no conscience to belie them, being adversaries to their falsehoode and
superstition, whom they labor to bring into hatred, that they may win some
credit to them selves, being in deed but monsters in the shape of men, such
liars and slaunderers, backbyters and railers, as are more fit, I am sorry to
speak it, to (...) against VVispes, and to be set upon Cuckingstooles with
scoldes, then to be admitted to give evidence against such godly, grave, and
learned fathers. But this has alvvaies been the propertye of the kingdom of
darkness, to slander the truth, and the true professors thereof. They have
not* spared Mat. 10. 34.
the Prophets, Christ himself, nor his Apostles, Luke 6, 40.
and therefore we must not look that they will Ioh. 13. 16. and 15. 20.
spare us. Truth was alvvaies hated of liars, and John 7. 7.
none find greater friendship in the world then the children thereof. He can
say little, that being corrupt of nature, can not speak ill: but he that
speaks the truth, is of God. This has hene the practice of popish
heretics, when they find themselves too vveake to maintain their wilfulnes,
then they fall to plain railing and lying. Then have at Beza, at Calvin, at
Luther the dutch Bear, whose Mother We stand not upon miracles, but such as
were vvroght by Christ and his Apostles.
was a whore and slept by the Devil. Then Calvin to get credit to his
doctrine, must be made a miracle worker (will he nil he:) though the miracle in
deed (if any such were) be The practice of popish pedling preachers and
pelting writers.
set out to have been attempted by one of their own Jesuits, who This was
printed in the Dutch tongue and re ported to have been done by a Jesuit.
in steed of raysinge a man from death, killed him, and was feign to
entreat the Woman to be contented, and so persuade the people, because he
could not effect it, that it was long of their unbelief. This goodly tale is
set out by Surius, and dubbed since forsooth by that Apostata Bolsecke. Surius
(...). breue. in (...) gest.
But the children of God, they deal by truth, they (...) in vita Ioa. (...).
take no advantage of any envious accusation, nor stand upon vain conjectures,
and ghesses, as they are vvo^t to do: what papist has (...) taught, in expoun
ding this ninth commandment to refrain from vnsea sonable and uncharitable
report of their neighbors faults, (...) or credit? and yet the truth is, and
known to them that scan this commandment (...), that the same God which
forbids us to defame our brother; does therwithal enjoin us to be as
careful over his credit, as over our own, and not to speak of our neighbors
faults, but to the end that they may be amended, and other warned to take
heed of the like, which is well known to be only practiced amongst the
professors of the Gospel, and not amongst them.

Lastly concerning coveting our neighbors house, (...), (...), maid, Ox,
Ass, or any other thing, they think this lust (as before I have partly
mentioned) to be so far from sin, that they will not only possess
whatsoever a Christian man has, but they will never be satisfied, till they
have his life also, (...) his religion please them not. As for concupiscence it
self, flying thoughts and desires, which the * law condemns, they make
no accounte of them, though by them it be manifest, that we Genesis 6.
are in that respect not fully replenished with the Exodus 20.
Deuteronomy. (...).
spirit of GOD, nor free from that corruption, (...). 6.
which we ought daily by nevvnesse of life to 1. (...). 10.
grow unto. Heb. 13.


Such enemies to God are these papists, that they Romans 7.
subvert al religion, teaching for doctrine the unsavory Iam. 1.
* precepts and traditions of men, they mingle their Mat. 15.
Iere. 2.
lead with the Lords gold, and * fill his harvest full of Iere. 3.
darnel They break, as you have heard, all the commandments of God, to
maintein their own ways, and stop from us the springes of the water of life,
that we might drink of their puddles. For their own dreams they make us forget
the name of our God, and lead us from that simplicitye that is in Christ
Jesus, They are unthankful vvretches for all Gods benefits, and to For this
was objected against the waldensis in quodam libr. inquisitorio.
say grace with them, unless it be after some mumbling sort in an unknown
tongue, either before meat or after, is a note of a rank Heretic.

At their tables they neither love to talk, nor to hear any thing of God, of
his word, religion or Reinerius.
Panoplia.
any godliness, but al their delighte is in idle talk, jesting, Lyndani.
scoffing, taunting, mocking and nipping at This is their common practice.
them that be absent, or being present be better disposed then themselves.
They will talk also filthily Ephesians. 5.
and vnshamefastlye, to recreate both them selves, and such fleshly familiars
as themselves be. They naturally hate the word of God, and sit upon thorns,
where the exercises of it are used. And if they lay just accusations and
execute judgments upon (...) offenses, yet they do it not in love, but
devise things that were never heard, nor thought of. If they be of Parsons
Howlets hypocrites, and come of purpose to church to deceive the Though this be
too common a thing among all, yet it specially belongs to the papists.
prince, and delude the (...), and most of all themselves, they are there
without all reverence, either nodding and sleeping in the time of the
exercise, or else vvalking and iangling, or carried away with idle and
unprofitable imaginations, or else occupied in some popish paltry book either
printed at home or brought from beyond the seas, or else they are watching
for some advantage, against the painful and godly minister, evermore lying in
wait, to stir up strife, and to disquiet the Church. They are never merry,
when there is any communication of goodness, then you trouble them, they come
to be merrye, they sweat for anger, when they cannot supresse it. Of
devilish malice and sp ite they hate God, detest their neighbors, and their
own souls (...) al god ines and honesty, to * whom stolen Pro. 9. 17.
waters are sweet, and a whore is more amiable then a spoused wife. Pighius
is commended in an oration Staphi. against (...).
for it, and one Gira^dus against Bucer, a Colen divine, says, it is better
for a priest to have an hundred vvhoores then one wife. Aquinas says, that
marriage is to be avoided of them that tend to per fection: Durand says it is
not expedient. Lighttly they vvil never marry, they will oftentimes be well
whitled, and then they can rail roundly, then we are heretics, Puritanes, and
what not? and a golden day will once come, when we shall burn sor it, or else
they vvil not bestow so much cost on us, a thrust with a svvord, a knock
with a halbert, a pot with a gun or a halfepeny halter shall serve for all. They
vvil whisper from place to place, and from one to another and upon their
ale-bench, what days are these, what wickedness is in the world, All these
goodly tales run amongst them from one to another.
See the lives of these Gospellers, was there ever such covetousness, now al
for their women, whores and bastardes. O the golden world is gone, when we
had 24 eggs for a penny, when we might go to this religious house and
that, and have good chere our bellies full, and no man can say, black is your
eye, or from whence come you. They say the Mass is naught, The common speech
of (...).
but I can not tell, then we had a merry world, and all things plenty, O
since I can remember, what mirth was there in all towns, in our villages and
vvakes, what good fellowship: when no man's wife was in (...), when few men's
daughters were married vyrgins: and as for men's servant, they had more mirth
then in a day, then they have now in a hundredth. Then they sang and sponne,
they meddled with their (...), and (...) by the faith of others: Now they are
so bookishe, become so wise and learned, that they vvil meddle with the
scriptures. It was never merry world since there was so much talk of (...),
since every cobbler and Tinker (...) with it, and a bible must stand in every
vvindovv. Well, the Queen cannot live alvvaies, and when our day comes, we
will be even with them, they shall stand at our receite and (...), and then
our arguments shall make them to stovvpe, or else (...) us a (...) pair of
heels: When they (...) of any overthrow, murder, or cruelty against the
professorus of the Gospel, or that some noble captain that goes with them
is (...), then they banquet one another, they (...) and laugh together, and
look as big upon us as if (...) day were (...) ady come, and they were
already become Lords over us. But he (...) sits in the (...) shall (...) to
(...), for be sees that their (...) Psalm. 37.
(...). The (...) that they have whetted and drawn against us, shall enter
into their own (...), and their bows shall be broken. The Lord (...) the
arms of these wicked ones, and (...) up with his own hand against them.
For they are those false vvoorshippers who vvorshippe (as Ioh. 4.
Christ said to the Woman of Samaria) they wot not what Deceitful Mat. 24.
prophets they are, that tell us here is Christ, there is Christ. The cake
over the altar, the roode in the roode (...), the image upon the cross, and
such like stuff, but we are commanded, not to (...) them. They are such
(besides that general condemnation, that is in Adam upon al flesh) upon whom
the wrath of God is specially declared from heaven, for their ungodliness and
unrighteousness, for they suppress the truth, and hold it unrighteously by an
unjust possession. They * are (...). (...).
without excuse, because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
but became vayn in their reasonings, having their foolish hearts blinded,
thinking them selves to be wise and learned, they became fools, and turned
the glory of the (...) God into the framed image of a mortal man, of birds,
(...) footed beasts and creping worms For they worship a man for S. Matthew, a
byrd for S. Ioh. a calfe for S. Luke, and a Lion for S. Mark. This is the cause
(as I have said before) that they are given up to the lusts of their own
hearts (as the Gentiles were;) that they should from spiritual whoredom fall
to carnal, and commit unspeakable evils, defiling their own bodies amongst
themselves. For they have (...) the (...) of God into a lie, and therefore it
is his righteous judgment, that they should be given up to believe and delight
in lies, that passing over the Creator, who is blessed for ever, they should
worship creatures. All the vices where with the Apostle charge the
Gentiles in the first to the Romans, and the root vvherof he proves to be in
all flesh, are apparently in them, not only by nature, but in a full practice
and execution. For they are wholy given up to follovv them with a full foot.
They are full of * vnrigteousnes, Romans 1. (...).
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, lasciuiousnes, envy, murder, debate,
deceit, evil co^ditioned; they are, whisperers, backbiters, haters of god,
doers of wrong, proud, bosters. They are false * teachers 2. (...). 2.
which bring in damnable sects, denying the Lord that has bought the^, and
through vvho^ the way of truth is evil spoken of. Presumptuous they are and
stubborn, fearing not to speak evil of the^ that are in autho rity. They
count it a pleasure to live here deliciously for a time, and to follow their
own deceiuable ways, fearing one another: amongst themselves and backbiting
the truth. Read that lively description of all the Popish clergy, in that 2.
epistle of Peter and the 2. chapter. They have eyes (...) of adultery, and
cannot cease to sin: they lay bayts for instable minds, having hearts
exercised to covetousness: they are the cursed children of Cain, and have
forsaken the right way: they are gone astray, following the way of Balam, the
son of Boser, who loved the reward of iniquity. They are welles without
water, and clouds carried about with a tempest, to whom the thicknes and
mist of darkness is reserved for ever.

Such enemies of God they are, as exalt the son These. 2.
of perdition above all that is called god, or worshipped for God. They allow
his dispensations against God and his laws, and as for his sake (such
beasts See whether their daily practices prove not this to be true.
they are) they set them selves against God. So do they not care in regard
of him, and in respect of that idol the mass, to betray their own country,
Prince, Parents, kins folks and friends to the veriest strangers and enemies
in the world, yea and to lay down their own lives, Let any come forth and
deny this, if they can with any coulor of truth. Our country has found it too
true, and there is none that have had any dealing in any place of (...) under
her Majesty, but can confirm it by particulars in their continual practice,
not only for casting abroad their (...) lil else, but also for sending into
this realm their pestiferous and traiterous (...) sundry books, Sanders,
Dorman, (...).
books, and bulls against the Queens majesty, and her honorable council,
state and peace, that have been the very sparks and firebrands of rebellion,
and would have been of further flame and greater destruction, had not God in
his great mercy, by the light of the gospel, taught and instructed men, how
they should hold themselves in dutiful loyalty, and true obedience, Put of
this a little more afterward.

Such enemies to God they are, as devour pore widows houses under Sundry (...)
in anno. 1580. very traiterous against the state, and (...) the mi nestery,
scattered through out (...) realm.
color of long prayers, and stick not to compass sea and land, to bring men
to their A common practice amongst them, to be reue^ged by Libelling.
false faith, or else to death, as Alphonsus did by his own brother Ioh. Slei.
li. 17 Cris. in mart.
Ioh. (...) * Blind guides they are, wicked fools, tithers of mint, Anise and
cumin, omitting faith, judgment and (...). Hipocrites they are Math. 23. 14.
that make clean the outside of the cup and platter, but Mar. 12. 40.
within they are full of raven and * (...). They are with the (...); Wolves
in sheep clothing, Mat. 15 14. and 23. 16. 24.
painted sepulchers, outwardly glorious, but within full of rotten and dead
bones. They bear a show of Luke 11. 24.
Christianity, and yet are full of (...) and murder: Mat. 7. 15.
Luke 11. 39. 40. etc.
they * say, if they had been in their fathers days: they would not have
slain the (...) and apostles: and yet mark what they (...) in all Countries
against the christians. Let Queen Mary's time, the continual murders and
(...) that have (...) in France, Flaunders, Spain, Scotland, Ireland, at home
amongst our (...), and abroad, wheresoever (...) has gotten in a foot, beat
witness. Are not these therefore enemies to God? Is not Antichrist the Pope,
of whom all this hellishe rovvt hold, an enemy to God? (...). (...). 33.
Cantic.
(...) not his seat where he (...), the doctrine he tea heth, the manners that
he (...), quite contrary to Christ, and plain Marcel. Palin. in Leon li. 5.
marks of his Apostasy? Is not Rome (as (...). Petra. ep. st 20.
Franciscus Petrarcha calls it) the whore of Babylon, the mother (...): (...)
and (...), from whence all Hier. in Catal. script. eccles. in Ma. co.
shame and (...) is (...)? Does not Peter in the first epistle under the name
of Babylon name (...). lib 3 (...) 537.
Rome, by their own confession, and by Hieromes own interpretation, and as
Campion him self Abb V p 198. Apo. 18.
grants? And herefore, as John * describes it, it is that Roman vvhoore
that sits in her Scarlet robe, full of names of blaphemy, the habitation of
devils, the hold of all soul spirits, the cage of all unclean and hateful
birds: out of whose cup, all the nations in the world have drawn the draught
of the wine of the wrath of her whoredom.

Such enemies they are, as through the * effectual worcester 2. (...) 2. 9. 10. 11.
(...).
king of (...) all (...) the word of (...), to whom God (...) sent (...), that
they should believe lies, and prefer the (...) fables of a lying legend,
before the blessed bible, receiving as a just recompense, the fruits of their
(...) rebellion, to wit, ignorance, blindness, a lewd understanding, and in
the end just demnation.

Such enemies they are, as give heed to spirits * of error, to the devilish
doctrine of such as spea 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3.
false things through hypocrisy, having their conciences branded with an
hot iron, are * grievous Act. 20. 27. 29.
wolves, making no conscience to tear and devour the flock, * concealers of
Gods counsayles, Luke 11. 52.
speakers of perverse things, and dravving disciples after them. For they
would have all the world to follovv them without any examination. They shut
up the kingdom of heaven, and will neither enter themselves, nor suffer
others to enter. They Marcel. Pali. li. 6. de sceler. omnium ordinum.
are Hipocrites and Gomorrians in deed, of the seed of Cain, children of the
devil, blasphemers and bloody persecuters. They hedge in the Catholic Church,
like the Donatists, into a little corner of the world: They cry, they Rome a
parti culer Church, no Catholic Church, to whom the Greek church would not
be subject.
are the catholic church, and yet would dravv us to one that is more particu
lar then many others of the Greek, that were never joined and continued with
them. And none must be of their Catholic church, but such forsooth as
subscribe to their synagogue, much like as if they should affirm, that all
Christendom were to be included in Kent. They Absurdity of
transubstantiation.
confound the humanitye of Christ, making I can not tell how many thousand
bodies, For this point read the fumbling of their own scholemen.
turning the Godhead into the manhood, and the manhood into the Godhead,
agreeing with all the ancient heretics that erred about his divinity and
humanity: for Anno. 425.
with the Futichians and Monothelits, they make him to consist of two
natures, Prisceanns and Cyrus the first authors Anno (...).
but not to have two natures, neither two vvilles: or else they make him to
have a fantastical body, as Niceph. lib. 18 cap. 45.
Marcion Cerdon, and Manes did: to be, in infinite places at once, in heaven and
in earth, denying the truth of the humanity: as Valentinus, they make him to
have a body of an ayrie, insensible, and invisible substance, as also Apelles
did: whereas his * own word teaches us, that we should not believe Lu. 24.
39. 40.
him to be present in body, except by our senses we could perceive a
difference betwixt him and a spirit.

Such enemies they are, as Pope Lucius 24. q. 1. cap. Recta.
believe they cannot be saved, unless they be subject to the Pope, unless
Calixt. did. 12 Non decet Nichol. did 22. omnes Greg. did. 80. cap. 52 qui.
they acknovvledge him to have all authority in heaven, earth, hell,
purgatory, and wheresoever. Do not they herein plainly deny God, from whom
alone is all salvation, as did Hebion, Cerinthus, Basilides, Carpocares,
Photinus, Artemon, Paulus Samosetanus, Mat. 9. 3.
Ennomius, AEtius, and Theodotinus, when they undoubtedly believe that the
Pope can forgive sin? A grosser heresy, then ever the * Scribes In vita Gre.
7.
Bulla Clementis.
and Pharisees were infected with, who deeminge Christ to be only man,
thought it extreme blasphemic Panormit ertra (...) cap. fin.
for him to take upon him to forgive sin. They are persuaded that the Pope
by his Pope Hildeb. ex plar.
Benediction Summa Angelica in dictione Papa. etc.
can make things more holy then cuer God made them in their creation? that he
can dispense with Sigism. Neapo Decisiones rotae in decisionum tertia.
Christ, Peter, Paul, Moses, and all laws both of God and man? Whosoever
kisseth his shoe, though he were excommunicated, yet for so doing he has
clean remission a poena and culpa;, both Ant. Ma^ia in addit. 1. Decis. rotae.
from the punishmente and fault. What shall I say they are such enemies to
God, that they believe Nouas. Ekius l^^or^m communum cap. de ecclesia. 5. q 6.
(...) in glossa. Eckius de consid. Statuta canonum.
undoubtedly, that Glossa in (...). 11. cap (...).
if a priest or one in holy orders know an harlot carnally, he sanctifies
and blesses her in so doing, and as Petrus Rauennus says, Though handling and
kissing be occasions of inconstancy and unchastity in lay persons, yet in
priests and those that are in holy orders, it is far otherwise: a wife he must
disauow and forswear, but not a whore. It is not good to touch a woman,
therefore it is evil.

And seeing every priest makes a God every day, or as often as he
consecrateth, and therefore excels Mant in Alph. Non (...) incont nentia,
sed matrimonium.
the virgin Mary, that did bear him but once, and from whom he only took
flesh and blood: It can not be that they can intend, commit, or perform any
such great evil. And if they do, what great matter is it, seeing This is
like the way that Iulia devised for trial of their mortification, to lay men
and women together, and a crucifix betwixt them Agrip, art 22.
Christ redeemed the whole world with one drop of his blood, and left the rest
to the pope, his vicar general at Rome, and from him to all the other
priests, that they might have the overplus to make pardons vvithall, for
these, either waightye, or petty offenders. It would vvery a man to reckon up
all their abominations. The Non obstantibus constitutionibus, and
ordinationibus Apostolicis caeterisque contrariis quibuscumque c Siluest.
Prierius contra Lutherum.
Pope and his generation are as like unto Christ, as light is unto darkness,
and as Parsons Owl is to a Nightingale: For Christ being God, became very
man, the pope being an abominable man, takes upon him the Clement (...) one
(...) of this blood: vhiche Iuli the their e had at Rome, al England (...) as
pardoned. (...).
office of God, yea and to be above him and his word, Christ humbled himself,
and put him self as it were out of himself: the pope makes himself Alb.
Pighius.
equal with God, and not without rob bery, more then God, Christ never came
amongst the Stanislaus Ecchinius in Chimaera.
multitude upon a barred horse, both with swords and keys, like a Prince and
a Priest, though in deed he were both. But the (...) the (...). and (...)
the (...) Read (...) Sabel.
pope that will needs be his Hierarch lib. 1. cap. 2. 16. q. 1.
Vicar, he has done it. The two swords with Christ, Quicunque in glossa Did
inc (...).
Lector. (...).
Francis Zarabella.
So (...)
(...). (...). (...). (...).
are both jurisdictions civil and ecclesiastical, See the Pontifical and the
book of the (...) of (...), that (...) the emperor, Princes dukes, and earls
their several places. lib. 1. sect 5. ca (...). (...). (...). cap 20.
a Pope in the forenoone, a vvarier in the after, yea Anton. (...) part. (...).
Emperors, kings, princes and dukes serve him wait upon his styrrup, lead
his horse, hold basen and to well, carry in his service, wait upon his cup
kneeling, and all the rest kneeling while this is a doing. They bear his
Canopy over his head, they kiss his foot and whom the Lord has anointed
to bear his image amongst men, they abase themselves and become slaves to this
prond beast of abomination. Christ had conversation with the poor, the pope
Tit 22. ca. 5. 4.
looks at leisure upon the mighty, and he scarcely Cerem. lib. 1. cap. 80.
vouchsafes them his presence: Christ lived sparing ly and porely, they
deliciously and wantonly, Baptista (...).
Pope li (...) sec. 5. c. 4.
July notvvithstanding his gout, vvoulde have his porke in despite of God, and
was in such a rage, also for his pecocke, that he blasphemed God, alleging
that if God were angrye (...) an apple he had greater cause to be angry for
his pecocke, Christ vvashed his disciples (...), the pope treads upon the
Lords anointed with his feet. Marius.
He crouned (...) fol. 13.
Henry the sixth with his foot, and with his foot vncrovvned him again.
Christ (...) to be made a king, the pope gives, disposes, and transposeth
(...). (...).
kingdoms at his pleasure and appoyntmente. He sets princes and Subjects
together by the ears, and maynteineth factions on all sides, to uphold his
proud Hierarchy, (...) Roger us Houedenus.
Gregory the second did irritate the subjects of Leo the Emperor against him.
As (...) assoyled Pypin and the rest of the French, from their oath and
allegiance to Childericke, whom he made to trotte at his horse hecles three
miles together. Pope (...) 1. 15. q. 6. cap Alius.
Phocas (...) and a (...).
murderer is by him lifted up to an Empire, and he again for recompense
aduaunceth him to be Antichrist, by giving him that which the other sought for
to wit to be the universal Bishop, which his predecessors condemned. The
places are quoted before ex gres sus Hildbrand
Hildebrand that firebrand of hell, of whom al stories write shame, made Henry
the fourth with his wife and Sun to cool his feet, the space of three days
at his gate, before he would admit him to his presence, and yet that was by the
(...) of his whore. And Clement li. 2 desent. and re indica. cap. 2.
Clement the (...), who pronounced the empire to belong to him, made Dan dalus
a noble man, and an Ambassador from the vene tia^s, in chains like a dog to
lie under his table. The Pope is the Sun, The Emperor is but the moon.
Auentin Rex venitad fores iurans per vrbis honores. Post homo sit Papae sumit
quo date coronam.
Emperors and princes be his Vassalles and feodaries, and receive their crowns
and dignities from him. They become his men. Every hedge priest is before a
prince, because Priests make God, but al his Princes are the Popes creatures.
Christ * sent his disciples to preach Mat. 28.
the Gospel. The pope and his Cardinals persecute and stop the preaching of the
gospel, and their chiefest business is to practice (...) and (...), that his
Sovereignty may be maintained in all dominions. Read (...) of the practice of
prelates.
Christ Mat. 5. 6. 7.
himself taught the gospel, The pope can fly as well Mat. 27. 32.
as preach. * Christ being both poor and weak was (...). 23. 26. 27.
compelled to bear his own cross: the Cerem. lib. 1. se. 2. fo. 33. 35.
pope being fat and strong is born of others. * Christ wore a crown Mat. 27. 29.
of thorns, the Pope wears a triple crown of gold, Lu 12 13. 14.
(...) with precius stons. * Christ would not take upon him the deciding a
ciuel cause, when two brethren strove for land: pope Innocentius 3. D. (...)
cap. (...) Causa. 2. qu 6. cap ad (...).
The pope vvil meddle with al causes and deal with all persons in heaven,
earth and hell. Christ died to save us and bring us to heaven: the Pope lives
to kill us, and lead us to hell. Christ thorough his death reconciled us to his
father the Pope continually kills us and draws us to his father the devil.
Fire and water are not so (...) as Christ and the pope. Christ was true and
sincere, he Aurea. Leg^. (...). temp.
is false and counterfaite and notvvithstanding all the prerogatives of his
chair, (as has been partly touched before) which as Cusan says, has the
truth cleaving unto it, yet it is evident, that Luit. Vallande donatio. (...)
Leo, Pugosus de inusitat. mortis generibus. (...). q. (...). vino.
Liberius, and (...). (...) 31
Anastasius were Arians. (...) in quadam epist.
Celestinus and Lyra. in Mat. cap 16.
Marcellinus, Nestorians, Sabe. Ennead 9 lib. 3.
Honorius was a Monotholite. (...) decade 2. lib. 3 Benno. Vsperg (...).
Ioh. 13. a cruel villain, the In the accusa. of VV. Plesiuro knight.
14, a tyrant, Hildebrand an helhounde, a coniurer, an incestuous vvretche.
Read his life set out by one of his own Cardinals. Boniface the 8. who
entered as a Wolf, reigned like a Lion; and died like a dog, was so far
from not erring, that he is tainted with all kind of villainies, and is pope
Paschalis Casulanus Platina.
accused to have affirmed whoredom to be no more sin, then the chaffing of
two R d
hands together. No more was Pope Paschall, who set the son of Henry the
fifte against his own father. And made Pope Chroni. vernacul.
Calixte to ride through Rome upon a Camill, with his face tovvard the tail,
and to hold the (...) tail in his hand, (...).
in steed of a bridle, which does no more commend Stella.
his innocenice then this does Pope Si (...) 4.
Innocents, Mat. Paris.
who armed Philippe of France against Pope (...). (...) Plat de vitu (...)
King John sometime our sovereign Prince, to the disturbance, undoing, and
spoil of this Realm. Think you not that Pope (...). Textor.
(...) the fourth also, was a holy Father, who not only himself was given
to that sylthie sin of Sodomitrye, but also dispensed with Peter (...), and
(...) (...) Ma^tuan (...). 4. (...) and oration ad (...).
Hicrome for it, during those three hot months of the year; June, July, and
August. I am Their doctrine is evident, their lives are so horrible that I am a
shamed (...) set them down, see their own stories.
vvearie of speaking of all, the stories are plain, that from that same first
Apostata Bonifacius, to him that now usurps that seat, they have been all
taynted and infected both with corruption of doctrine, and lewdnes of life,
What should I speak of their cruelty, dissension. lives, and death. John the
Praemo^strat.
(...). was begotten in adultery. Ioh Volateran.
the 12. (...) in it. The (...).
13. was slain as he was committing it, the 18. Bucching.
was put to death, and both his eyes put out, by the means and procurement of
Gregory, about it, Pope Capgraue.
Clement poisoned Lodouik Commentarius super Arti (...). Volat.
Syluester the 2. was a notable (...), Praemonstrat Benno Card. Sigeb.
Gregory the iuue^ter of images was given over to al kind of wickedness.
(...). Sabel.
Benedict is said to be the corrupter of Rome with all filthiness, who sold
his popedom for a great sum of money. Nauclerus.
Stephan so raged against Formosus being dead long before, that he disanulled
his decrees, took up his dead carcass, threw it into Tyber, chopped of 3. of his
fingers, and cut of his nose Plat.
Vrbanus dround five of his dearest (...) in sacks. If this be not enough to
prove all these Popes, and those that hold of them, and (...) them, such
wicked ones (which is * alike wickedness) to be (...) to god; let Pro. 17.
their own (...), I say, (...) further searched. Ia al things they are most
contrary to Christ. The whole description of Paul agrees to them in all
points.

Whereas it is further said, that he shall (...) up (...) ab ue (...) that is
called God. It is most evident, he contenteth not himself, with the (...)
and (...) that belong to Angels and men, but wilhaue those that belong to God
himself. And his clavvbakes and flatrerers, not the grossest but the finest
and wittiest, not of those old flattering Ciuilians, but our new oilemouthed
divines, M Harding and such like hold, that after a (...) he may be Hierom in
Daniel cap. 3.
called God. Even (...) Antiochus, Domitian, and Caligula arrogated those
names, so do they, and therefore they make no bones to take it thus (...) Marc.
in Cencil. (...). sess. 4.
Thou art another God on earth. And Cardillus a spaniard vvriting in defense of
that late co^spiracy of Trent, often times caleth the Pope an earthly God. And
Cardillus pro Council Trid.
Cardinal Hostensis says that Quanto (...).
except sin, the Pope has power to do (...) soever God himself can do.
Christ Extra de (...).
and the Pope make but one co^sistory, and Leo (...). 39. Extra in sex to lib 1.
Christ has receiucd Peter into the fellowship of the indivisible unity. And
theresore the Canonists De Consuetudine. Non putamus.
have (...) whole disputations, whether the Pope be God or no: whether he
cannot do (...) God may do: That no appeal can be made from the Popes
consistory to God, because (...). Ioh. 22.
ab uno (...) non (...). And they confess plainly to all the vvorl de that he
is Dominus (...) noster (...) our Lord God the Pope. And albeit the
Ceremoniar. lib. 1. cap. 2.
late qualifiers say, that he is (...) God nor man, but a thing between both,
yet they affirm, that Council. Later sub Leo dec. in (...) Stephani.
kings reign by him, which is spoken only of God that he has all Francis
Zarabella. 15. quaest.
power in himself, above al powers as well of heaven as of earth, therefore he
does what himself (...), yea vnlavvsull things, and he is more then God.
Shall any man check him? are not the scriptures subject unto him, being God,
do they not say truly? that the pope Authoritat. in glossa.
can dispe^ce against the law of nature? against the Did. 82 (...). Ielin.
constitutionibus.
Cannons of the apostles, against the Statuta Canonum 6. qu. Quicunqua in
glossa.
new testament, against all the commandments, (...) de (...) and obedientia
ca. (...).
against Paul's Epistles, In Baptism he may alter the form, Summa Angelica. in
litterapp.
In marriage he dispe^seth with all persons, saving only with father and
mother. A man may marry his own sister, and here of Pope Martin the fist has
left us an example. Nay one says, that the Pope may dispense supra (...) and
of unrighteousness he can make lighteousnes, and of Panorm extra Hostien. de
trans episcop. (...)
no sentence, he can make a sentence, and of Haruaeus de (...) pape
nothing, he can make something. He Card Cus. ad (...) epis. 2.
challenges such authority to expound Qranto.
and declare the scriptures, as it is not lavvsull for any man to hold or
think the contrary. Of the fullness of his power he can do all things. If
this be not the * mouth that Daniel spoke of that Dan. 7. 8.
uttered presumptuous things, let themselves judge if they have any
shamefastness in them. If this be not that beast, before whom the kings and
princes of the earth have fallen down and worshipped: Let master Censurer or
Parsons Hovvlet together with all that dark brood tell me. But this is that
* Beast, to whom they have yielded their power, and (...), 13.
the woman that sits upon this beast, is that filthy (...) of the world,
(as they speak of their stevves which they tolerate) I mean the city of
Rome, to which power is given over every tribe, language and nation: which
all the inhabitants of the earth shall worship, whose names are not written in
the book of life. And howsoever this mo^ster come under the pretense of (...),
and vvil have these De mayor and (...). vnam sanctam. In glosla.
(...) and presumptuous titles of most blessed and holy father, Did 40. Non.
nos.
yea, will be called (...). in Job cap. 34. lib. 25 cap. 14.
(...) it self, and vvil be placed in such absolute and spiritual estate of
holiness as none can be in, but him self, and therefore must not be (...) of
any fault whatsoever without sacrilege, yet herein also he is plainly proved
to be that Antichrist, that being a damnable man and no spirit, Ansel. in 2.
by lying he feigneth himself to be God, and therefore feigneth himself to be
religious; that under These. cap, 1.
the color of godliness he may deceive, yea he calls himself God, and
causes himself to be worshipped. There is nothing belonging to Christ and to
his special office, that he does not take upon him: he forgiueth sins,
changes the nature of things, Eusebius de preparat. (...) 7.
will be head of the Church, an universal by shop, Lord of the world, a
commander of Angels, without error, and what not? This is a plain token that
(...).
he hates God, seeing he will be called by the name Agatho.
of God And being a thief, an Apostata, and a slave will yet be worshipped as
God, and proclaimed as a king. This is he, (...) holds that his Did. 16.
decrees, must be esteemed as spoken by the instincte of the holy Ghost from
Peter himself, who having full authority must Bonif. extrauagant. cap. de
obedient.
conclude, decide and define al things, who is the wonder of the world, and
therefore of (...) in (...).
Papa is called Pope, before whom not only al creatures but the greatest
princes of the world must do homage. God the judge of the whole world
vouchsaueth oftentimes to communicate to us miserable (...) a reason of his
doings, but this monster must yield no reason: No man whatsoever he (...),
must ask him why he does it. The very heavens sweat at his abominations.
And therefore I conclude this first part, that this is the very Antichriste,
that sits in men's consciences: And that whole body the head and members is
that Babylon, Aegipt and Sodom, enemies to Jesus Christ, the true and only
head of his Church, and to all his members.

Now it follows to prove that they are enemies (...) The papists are
enemies to al christian princes.
to Christan princes, and namely the most dangerous and greateste enemies,
that our Sovereign, the Queens Majesty that now by the grace of god
reigns over us, has. Being proved (as they are) (...) to God, how can they
be friends to his ministers and magistrates whom he has appointed under him?
If true christian obedience to princes must necessarily flow from dutiful
obedience to God, how can they obey christian me^, that have no fear of God:
well they may couch and crouch for fear of the whip, yield an outward and civil
reverence, such as M. (...) speaks of, but they can never love truly as
children, but fear as slaves, whom true knowledge has not framed, for in
respect of God, to (...) obedience and duty. That this true obedience has been
taught, advanced and established in the hearts The gospel teaches obedience
(...) al persons the pope resists it.
of men by the gospel, it is apparent to (...) men that will not be vvilfully
blind, and of malice kick against the prick. For where has there been
greater and more godly (...), humble, lowely and faithful loyalty in the
hearts of subjects toward their princes, with the willing bearing of al
burdens and paying of al taxes, impositions, and such like civil duties, but
where the gospel has most flourished? let all the countries in the world,
where it has bin received, speak the truth thereof. Contrari wise, the
troubles that have arisen (as it cannot be denied, but that there have been
great troubles by occasion thereof, in many places of the world) yet they
have al sprung from the unquiet and hammering heads of faythlesse and
traiterous Papists, who in favor of their idolatry have always with a deadly
hatred persecuted the truth, and the true professors of it, And be they what
they might be, of what estate or condition so ever, superiors or equals,
Magistrates This needs no confirmation, for the truth hereof appears in all
stories.
or vassals, Princes or subjects, they have always been set against,
undermined and ouerthrown with out all respect, if once they have made but
show to embrace the Gospel. And hereof have Christian princes found their
troubles, common, weals their vvastinges and ouerthowes; Christian people
pitiful effusion of blood, joined with hideous cruelty, such as was never
exercised amongst heathen Tyrants. And though all the simpler sort of papists
amongst the common people be not to be drawn into this company of (...)
conspiratoures, (...) and (...), but rather are to be deemed as ignorant
deceived, and reduced by the finer sort of heads, yet these greatest and
(...), their captains, and (...) being politiques, have offended of knowledge:
and making that reckoning of the pope that they do, they must needs be enemies
and traitorus to our sovereign prince the Queen, even such as they are to
God. For they being fully persua ded in conscience and in deed, that the pope
is Christ's vicar, that princes must reign by him, must needs deny that those
princes who allow not his (...) and are so (...), off from being (...) by him,
that they are excommunicated and deposed (as much as (...) in him) from their
crowns and dignitye; they must deny, I say, as in deed they do, that such at
(...) princes, and therefore deny them al obedience. And hence it is, that
popery is alvvayes accompanied (...) treason, rebellion and consparacye,
whereof, as our (...) Lad has (...) more then her highness noble progenitors,
in regard that she has more advanced the gospel, and yet God be praised, has
been delivered from the^, so they making but the least show that could be, of
favoring the (...) religion (such as those dark times cold afford the^) which
(...) Henry the second.
very dim; have yet had their hands full, being many times put to their shifts,
and hardly escaping the loss both of their crowns and lives. See our own
stories.
So was Henry (...) 2. dealt withal when his crown was plucked from his head
and he compelled like a private man; to the no small disgrace of the majesty of
a Prince. to creep to the (...) legate, to be restored again, So was king John
King John.
dealt withal, when from the pope; by the means of the (...) and monks, he was
discharged from his govern me^t, his subjects released from their alleagea^ce;
his no (...) in arms and in field against him, and at length finished his
miserable life, by the treason of a monk that poisoned him and himself with
him, as their own stories Mat. Pari. 1211
have delivered unto us. So dealt they with Henry the 8. a famous prince,
stirring up the emperor against him, the french king and others, wherein those
Card. Pol. lib. 3.
same notable traitors, the one a negroma^cer Cardinal Wolsey and Cardinal
Poole, both special dealers; doing as much as lay in them to deprive him of his
kingdom. As for that blessed (...) king Edward, all the In Northfolk,
Devonshire, and other places.
co^motio^s and treaso^s that were stirred up and practiced against him. both
at home and abroad came from the pope and papists at Rome. Let the stories be
searched I speak not so much of those former times, I could show how king
Harrold lost his kingdom, for banishing Capgr. (...). VVestmon.
one Robert, (...) of Canterbury, who flying to the duke of Normandy, was not
only resto (...) to his Archbishopricke again, whether the king would or no,
but the said duke being (...) by the Ansel. VVilli. the second.
pope, got the whole kingdom. So did Anselmus a traitor trouble VVillia^ the 2.
about the election of bishops, which was by his own right, that in spite of
the kings teeth, he brought it to the pope that (...) christ. I could also
show how one Raphe; a pilde and Raze Bishop of Chester.
shorn bishop of Chester, did so iustle with the king, Barus (...).
about a tribute for vvhoores, that he suspended the churches, stopped up the
doors with thorns, and com pelled the king to yield unto him, which he could
never have done, had not the pope and diverse of that traitorous ciue assisted
him. So one Stephan Langto^ Steph. (...)
an archbishop caused the realm to be enterdited, stirred up rebellion in
Ireland, and provoked the pope to co^quer it, til the king became the popes
tenant, and received the crown at his hands; So Thomas Arundell, Tho.
Arundel. All this is (...) in our own chronicles.
being also Archbishop of Canterbury and chauncellor (for then all offices
might (...) in any of their men) in the time of king Henry the second, being
exiled with the earl of Darbye, belike for some treason, when the king was
abient, they deposed Guil. of Malm. Guil. Newbri. Barns.
him, and afterward put him to death. So raged they also against good duke
Hu^frey, the stories show ing that he began to see, and smell out their knavery
the bishop of Winchester set first upon him at London and afterward in a
parliament time, not (...) from Bury they murdered him. What should I Rich.
Scrovvp.
speak of Richard Scrovvpe Archbyshoppe of (...) in the time of Henry the
fouth, who was in the field against the king, and had the reward of a
Traitor. And hence was it that they made such laws against the procuring of
excommunications, Bulls, or ecclesiastical censures, from the pope or See of
Rome, against the king or any of his (...) Ancient presidentes to show what
they were (...) that procured any Bulls or (...) from Rome.
in those days, when popery most flourished (...) the time of Edward the
first, one for (...) an excommunication from Rome, against one of the (...)
subjects, was (...) the realm, and had suffered, as in case of high (...),
had not the Chan cellor and treasurer of England made special suite for him.
Theresore also it was enacted that no foreign Anno. Edw. (...), (...).
power, should hold any plea without the kings protection within this realm
or take any without. Anno 27. Edward. (...).
The pope should give no benefices, nor bishop rickes here. They that procured
cytations or procurations Stat (...) in anno 30.
from Rome, fell into a Praemunire, So did Edw. primi.
they that took letters of Attorney, lormes or administrations An. 25. Edw.
(...).
for benefices, without the kings special An 27. Edw. tertii.
license. It was made death, to (...), procure or cause to be procured any
Summons, excommunications Richardi pri.
or (...) from Rome. If any took upon Anno. 30.
them the (...) of any bishop, sued any process or sentence, excommunication,
Bull or (...), touching the kings crown or regality, brought An. 16. Rich.
them in, or received them, notified them, or made execution of them, within
the Realm or without, both the offenders and mainteiners were out of the
kings protection, their Lands and goods were con fiscate, and Bulls from
Rome for (...) was a (...). An. 2. Henry. 4
I speak not of our late parliamentes and laws, because they will hold
they are (...), as not being ratified by their Pope and themselves. This being
so manifest and plain, I marvel at Campions impudencye that will avouch the
Romish religion, not only by (...), and philosophy, but also by law both civil
and temporal yet in force; and yet herein I (...) appeal to those lawyers that
are his best friends and (...) his (...) most, (the laws standing as they do)
if they would plainly show their judgment. (...) must the trial of Gods
religion, that is always one and perfect, be subject now to the changeable
(...) of men? and yet it may appear in all ages and times, since Antichriste
displayed himself, that he and his members have been the (...) practisers of
treasons that ever (...), and being such evil men have brought forth those
good (...), that has been made against such usurpation, and unnatural treachery
against God, (...) natural prince, state and country. I could (...) that (...)
from their practice, specially when princes began to see some (...) of the
truth, And this was the cause that when king Henry began to banishe the Popes
(...)
authority, he and his land were interdicted And did Polus. (...). 3.
not Cardinal Poole (...) Charles the (...) in an oration, being bent against
the (...), to leave all that business, and to bend his (...) against (...),
encouraging the subjects of the (...) against their sovereign Lord? The
gospel and the (...) thereof, howsoever (...) be charged by viperous, and
(...) tongues, such (...) as Surius, VVicellus, (...), (...) and the rest,
(who seem to have (...) that faculty above the rest) that from it and the
preachers thereof, has sprung (...), blodshed, disobedience, contention, and
(...) in france, Germany and other countries: The truth is, that from
themselves and under their own vvings these (...) of treason and rebellion
have evermore been hatched, or else from such (...) as (...). I mean the
(...), who, howsoever they differ in some heads, yet they are fast tied
together by the (...). For Calvin, Beza, Luther and such other excellent
instruments have bin from time to time, the only oppugners and resisters of
these heretics, and their rebellious proceedinges: when papists have clapped
their hands and laughed in (...) sleeves at them, because hereby truth was
brought into hatred with Christian princes, and they The impudency of Hovvlet
(...) the advantage to set up their (...) I dolatry and heresy: And therefore
I vvonder not a little at this platterfaced ovvle of Parsons, that with his
staring and shameless countenance, dares even to the majesty of a prince,
whom the Pope his master and all the right Papists, such as he calls the
hotter sort of Catholics, condemn as a Sand. lib. 7. 30.
Schismatique and heretic, and therefore think themselves discharged of all
obedience, and her highness to have no (...): of government over them, that he
should thus savvn upon her vvho^ he condemns, and loves as well as the light
of the gospel, which neither he, nor any of that dark brood could ever
abide, yet I say, that he dares thus shamlesly to flatter, as though she were
so simple to be carried away with words, when she sees and understands their
deeds, has selt their practices, and (if God of his wonderful mercy had not
kept her highness) had tasted of their cruelty, as other Princes and noble
gentlemen have done before her and round about her. What should I blot paper,
in setting down such things as every book sounds forth only let us hear out
of the Sanders the mouth of (...), in his book dedicated to the pope, approved
by the Cardinals, and allowed by the popish (...) of (...).
mouth of the papaists on of their own doctors, how they (...) of her (...). I
mean not to set down, that might yield me some advantage against them, as
neither standing with my (...) to (...) it, (...) spoken to the dishonor of
her majesty's person, not being So does Brist. (...). 5. fol. 72. 73.
fit to be noted by vvriting in the face of the world, but rather to receive, a
punishment due for such presumtuous (...): only I will mention, how Story,
Felton, the Nor to (...), VVodhou e, Plumtre, and all the northen men that were
in actual rebellion (...), the other in (...) and (...), (...).
he makes Story, Felton and others, that were condemned not in any cause of
religion, but for high treason, (...) he makes them Martyrs. The most (...),
that refuse without al reason the means of (...), and have been for (...) and
just (...) yet (...), he calls constant (...), but I hope, some of the^ are
ashamed (I know whatsoever they are, they may be) to have their names in such a
kale^der. Of those same rebels, in the north, that appeared in actual
rebellion against her highness, he makes a solemn kale^der, he puts in a
Catalogue their names and conditions giving it this Lib. 7. de visib.
(...). (...) qu: (...) fidem (...), and (...) Monarch page 730. page 734.
(...), arma (...), and (...) and (...). The names and conditions of those
englishmen which took arms, and are yet in exile for the Catholic (...), and
for the primacy of the church of Rome. He reherseth the Bull of (...) Quintus
against her highness, and plainly asseuereth, that it was for just causes
declared and published. He calls her majesty the pretended Queen, and
shows how Doctor Morton was sent into England to admonish (...) catholic
noble me^, that Elizabeth that then governed was an (...), and that for that
cause she was by very right fallen from all government and power, which she
usurped over the catholics, and that she might be (...) of them without any
danger, (...) an heathen and publicane, neither that they were from (...),
bound to obey her laws and (...) he shows, that (...) noble men (...) to
deliver their brethren ab (...) de from the tyranny of heretics, and albeit
things fell not out to (...) expectation, yet he (...) their attempt. In
another place he affirms that (...) in some cases, kings and Emperors that
govern christian Lib. 20. cap. 4. (...).
people be not subject to Christ's (...), yet by the virtue of the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, when their governments hurt the (...) of (...), and the
salvation of souls, they are to be deposed. Did (...) any professor of the
(...) a sentence? Alack, they (...) out of (...), for an (...) which (...)
gathered and forged many years after his death, that princes being in deadly
In (...). (...) Conci. Constable (...). (...).
sin are no longer princes, nor (...) are to yield the^ any longer obedience,
which yet the article (as it was first set down in the Council of Constance)
speaks of Priests and (...). This Ovvle a so vvhopeth against us of
obedience, that we break the book, that we despise aucthority, that we do this
and that, but look upon the face of this babe, mark the fea ture of this cub,
view his claw, and tell me who is his damme and (...) we or these (...)
papists? (...), (...) first a (...), and (...) an (...), or an (...) amongst
Catholic pe ple (...) be (...) of (...) kingdom And a (...) Li. 2 ca. 4. 78.
(...), If (...) A (...) (...), that Christians being (...) common (...) under
them, (...) esse (...) born that (...) should of their (...) set (...). (...).
d. (...) suffered an (...): que (...) them? (...) (...) thou must not say (...)
Aue, (...) of (...) their (...). (...) they serve (...) or (...) not more to
obey (...): (...) to (...)? Do you think the Queen is (...) the (...) o (...).
not like to have good (...) and (...) of (...) as may not (...) to salute
(...)? do not they call her their mother, Gods substitute, and their (...)
Queen, in mockage, when they cry thus all (...), and yet buffet her, breking
the very neck of her (...). The same Sanders (...), that it is the special
(...) of bishops, (...) their (...) or an (...), (...) Page (...).
they (...) the (...) the (...), as that (...) as may (...), may (...), (...)
in (...) non (...), It is the (...), by (...) soever (...) they (...), (...),
that (...) in the (...) of (...) not in the (...) of (...). This traitor
throughout that whole chapter laboreth to prove, that (...) del ought not to
(...) the faithful, (...) he asks whether he be (...) the name of (...) man,
(...) shall (...) that (...) not (...) be (...) to (...), (...), (...) after
one (...), if (...), ob (...) a (...), (...), per (...) and (...) and (...):
For the same (...) they may (...) ought (...) of (...) to be (...) from i (...)
they holds (...). After a long (...) he (...) conclusion, Pronus (...), (...),
(...), (...), eum (...) non vult, (...), and (...) It is (...) for the Church
of Christ, to remove a king that is (...), (...), (...) and (...), (...) a
(...) not (...), from his (...), and (...) place. It amongst a multitude one
(...) man or two, have (...) their (...) opinions, not in co^ mon, but (...),
not by (...), against such as they (...), but tyrants in deed, O how they
yelpe, (...), (...), crovv and vvhoope, to bring all the (...) into (...), and
yet these are their (...): in them forsooth catholic and religious, (...) in
us (...) and (...). This made Bishop Fysher and Sir. Thomas Moore with (...)
others, to loose their heads. supposing to dye Catholics, they had in deed
as they were and deserved, the (...) of (...) The pope that then was, I mean
Pope Clemente that was the son of a Curtesan, This was Leo the tenths bastard
also, as some think, sent out (...) Bull against king Henry the eyghte, but
thanks be to God, it neither shook his seat, as he had thought it should
(...) deprived him of his kingdoms, as he undoubtedly looked (...); but it
was a means to bring many of those Romish calves to a just (...), though many
ventured but to late upon his absolution, (...) they took it after his life in
purgatory.

Of this wholesome doctrine confirmed by the popes practice, have sprung all
rebellions, Treasons (...), tumults, (...), and vprores, in all com mon vvealths
and (...), where the pope has had any thing ado, not of any right, but by
usurpation. Plat lib. 10. 2. Tom. Conci.
For Emperors were wont (...) depose evil popes, now evil popes despose good
kings. So was the government In (...) and (...). (...) Parisiis cap. 14.
of France once by such a deposing, transposed from the right heirs for ever.
When (...) deposed Chilperick, and Pipin his Marshal became, (...) q 6. (...).
king, so did Urban depose Perse the king of Spain, setting in (...) Henry a
(...). I (...) not Alius.
(...), (...) Henry the fourth, because I have mentioned them before. So would
Pope Pius impiously have done, (...) his power had (...), to our gracious
Queen, whom the Lord long preserve, to hold up his icepter among us Neither
say we as Parsons (...) would (...) us speak, that every contrary profession
(...) in any state or (...) is by and by treason, or that they (...) any
contrary religion (...) by and by traitors. For falsehood The (...): (...) M.
Charkes book v. (...) it (...); (...)the name of (...) or any others.
is many times defended and perketh up, when truth is in (...) and hardly
(...) face. The world loves her own, and all princes be not true professors
and (...) of Prophets: But this (...) say, that (...) and treason are commonly
inseparable (...) and (...). The foundation and whole building is naught (...)
but treason and treachery. Christ and his (...) the truth, taught true
obedience, gave to Caesar that which was Caesar's, and to God that which
was Gods, Christ (...) tribute (...) and for Peter: and though (...) be
contrary to falsehood, yet there is no (...) in (...) against falsehood, but
in (...) against truth Our gracious (...) therefore by the grace of God
mainteining truth (...), true religion against (...), upholding the Gospel of
righteousness, and reigning by Christ, they that shall (...) it, seeking
together her (...) with it, from a foreign Italian usurper are not only
traitors against her, but against God. They that shall If the (...) any (...)
land, he must (...) have it from the word of God, or (...) our laws and so
from both, or else (...).
pinche her (...), (...) it, (...) to (...) power, (...) her (...), (...)
against her, (...) the (...) of obedience, (...) in Bulls to roar out her
(...), discharge her (...) from (...), hold her as an (...) and labor to
withdraw the loving (...) of her subjects by any new pardons or (...), all
which the papists have done, and do (...)? they are enemies to God, to her
Highness, to the whole state, and to them selves: and except they (...), God in
(...) when they think least of it, will find out their wickedness, and as he
did unto Story make the^ feel the punishment of their wicked treason? If this
be not their dealing, let me be reproved. If their rebellion in the North,
their conspiracy in Norffolke, their calculating her birth, their practices by
Sorcerye, by imagery, and such trumpery, their libelling (...) slaundering,
their threatening and monstrous flattering, their (...) inuading of her highness
territories and dominions, with giving placards to the meanest of her subjects
to shed her blood, that has been alleged before, be not enough to convince
them to be (...), let me bear the shame of it. I could set down the
particulers, but that the same are handled, and it may please God, one day,
besides that which is already declared, that a just (...) vvil be published of
it. I refer the reader for further satisfaction herein to the worthy works
of M. Norton published at that time, when the Bull roared so (...) in our
ears, and to his warning given to our Northen rebels. I refer them also to
Howlets check now in publishing. Who did these things but papists? who
procured the Bull, brought it into the Realm, set it up, and published it?
And what was the matter, against whom, for what, and to what purpose?
What were (...)? who platted the deposing of the Queen, and (...) up of
another Mary amongst us? Who conferred with the Devil? sowed (...) reports
and (...) to effect their mali ious purposes? Who had their (...), their
Seminaristes and landleapers to gadde from place to place, and from country to
counrrye, and from gentleman's house to gentleman's house to shed the seed of
(...), but rank and (...) papists? (...) that are in high places, know to
whom the knowledge of these things specially belong, that (...) conspiracies,
treasons, practice of her majesty's death, has been found in that nest, For
(...) they glauer, their minds are known, and their (...) are seen, and to the
discomfort of all (...) be it spoken, God of his goodness has from time to
(...) brought their secretest (...) and attempts done in the dark to light; he
has thrown their ladden treasons into our lappes, unfolding the^ and laying
them open; in tender regard of his church, and to the end her highness
taking good heed might more and more be confirmed in the truth and learn to
rest in the assurance of his protection, that has been her mighry (...), in all
her greatest dangers, And thanks be to his goodness, he has done it (...) any
great blodshed or hard dealing, either of rack, or of any other torturs, and
though it please (...) M. Censurer to utter his malapertnesse, (...) into the
judgment of her (...) dealings concerning the racking of those lately in the
tower, (...) the world in hand, that it was for religion, yet he might have
considered, that it is much better for one or two bodies to be scaired and
feared, then that a whole country should be betrayed; that one member
should be cut off, then all the rest should (...), and had he been so
(...) seen, as he would seem to be, he had had sufficient (...) to consider,
that they coming over at such (...) as they did, their accomplices the Popes
soldiers appearing in actual rebellion in (...), and diverse commnig over in
companies and troops, to scatter (were it) but their errors, their Honors
had good cause finding them obstinate against religion and her highness Jaws,
to distrust their sidelity, and to regard (...) safety, rather to (...) them
with the rack, then we should be seared with the overthrow of our flourishing
peace and country, vvihch God in mercy turn from us. This also has God done
for her, that her highness may carry alvvayes a thankful heart toward him,
when she shall have such experience of his mercy in preserving her, when she
shall be established in judgment, not to be affected with every Sirens voice
that seems very sweet, but yet brings a sharp destruction, as this
Howlet, that with his yuybushe at the first is very humble, lowely and lovv,
but rests not there. For as it grows and gets strength, it claspeth and
girdeth so hard, that within a little time it will kill the heart of the
greatest oak. and get above it; to be an haborowe for such owls and unclean
birds as himself is. And even so did the first pope deal with the Emperor,
he crept allow, till (...) aurhotity bare him up, and so he crept up by little
and little, (...) the (...) decayed; was removed and overthrown, and now he is
become the (...) for all the silthy byrds in the world. I will make on farther
application, the wise I hope will see light at a little hole.

Who have been those traitors that have stirred, up other princes against the
Quecne? who have procured their forces, and labored for an alteration by
colorable practices, but papists? Who have been such trayterly fugitives
as them selves? who are the authors of erroneous and traitorous books, (...)
forth as wildfyre, and thrown as fyr: (...) into our church and common wealth,
to kindle the sire (...) rebellion, but papists? For who has written against
her highness by name, against her trusty (...) but you Papists? against such as
you most hated, because their vvisdome and care in the Lord was against you,
foam being (...) from your malice, and (...) yet living maugre your heads, to
help (as long as it shall please God) with their faithful (...) against you?
who (...) taken upon (...) to decide (...) to discover, as they say, privy
treasons to debate of state matters, and to make heirs apparent, but papists?
Was there any one protestant that can be named that did these things. No
goodman How let, howsoever Surius, Frarin, and such scurrilous raylers charge
the gospel and the profestors of it, it is with the same truth that the
(...) their master is wont to speak against the truth, and no otherwise. It
is as fit (...) a papist to speak of obecience, and as ill it be comes him,
as when an Ovvle counterfaiteth to become an Eagle, or when he will take upon
him to sing like an Nightingale. You must bear with me, the name you have
chosen, whether truly or like a counterseite, makes some proverbs to fit my
porpose. Is not true obedience to God in his true religion and worship, the
mother of all true obedience and duty to princes and peers? And how then
can a (...), that is a traitor to God in his worship, be saythful and true to
princes? What conscience is there, where there is no knowledge? and what
knowledge can there be without his word. and without the gospel, to teach
either obedience to God, or duty to Princes? The subject that fears God, the
instructed Christian, he only knows how to obey in and for God. He (...)
knows what duty is to be rendered to Gods Liuetenants. They are not the best
(...), that are readiest to fulfill all Princes commandments and pleasures,
but they are (...) subjects, that love and honor their Princes in the Lord,
not of custom but of conscience, yea for conscience sake, though they be
evil, both to pray for them and to (...) in (...) duty (...) their conversion
unto God; and if they cannot be vvonne, patiently to bear (...) is laid upon
them. The other are servants and (...), these are children. The one obey of
fear, the other of love. Those fulfill their wills with the breach of Gods.
These submit themselves to suffer, and pray the changing of their minds, that
they may enjoy a kingdom, where there shall be no respect of (...).

If any (...) obiecte the troubles of France, and Flaunders, and (...)
countries, where they (...) to have color of charging the professors of the
Gospel to have taken arms against their princes, as I have said (...), to I
say again, they (...) arisen by occasion from (...) own wicked and wretched
(...), for that through treason and (...) have (...) drawn most dishonorably
to break (...) own faith and (...), to go (...) their (...) laws and (...),
which armed subjects, (...) against their Princes, but with and (...) the
(...) of them, against the (...) and heady (...) of (...) singular persons And
therefore they have evermore been (...) by their (...), (...) de (...) and
(...) discharged from all disloyalty by their public instruments and
vvritings, their soldiers have been paid from their Princes pay, and so have
been discharged. As for rebellion and the scholars thereof, have alvvayes
sprung out of the Schole of Popery, it is a vvhelpe of your own litter, and
an egg of your own nest. Macke Morris was a Papist, so is Saunders (if he be
yet (...)) that set in of late for Ireland, and brought a company thither, out
of Italy to get a kingdom, to (...) a place wherein to lay their dead (...),
and to bury their bones. It is your doctrine, Hovvlet, and those of your
fether, that hold that (...) be duly discharged from subjection, and Bristovv
in his Motives. Motive 40. In the (...) of obedience.
(...) Prince from dominion, by the (...) authority of the common Pastor of
(...). We have and do acknowledge our selves subject of duty, by the
institution of God, we confess her Hyghnes lawful authority to extend to
and over all sorts, and no man's profession to exempt him from obedience and
fealty, which you do not: for if you yield any, you say, It is but (...)
common (...) sake, (...), and so far (...) as (...) for the accustomed use of
a natural (...). and only in temporal things. You have no cause therefore,
to storm in such (...), nor to take it in such dudgeon, for being said to
be enemies to God, and to her royal Majesty. And it is a lewd lie that this
broadefaced owl would face down that Papists set her (...) into her
government, and will Hovvlet Praef.
likewise be ready to maynteine her in it, when all the (...) knovveth, and
every Court upon record sounds, that they have shaken her seat, and
endeavored from time to time, as much as lay in them to depose her from her
peaceable and rightful Scepter. To conclude therefore, The Papists erring in
doctrine, and being members to (...) that (...) of sin, adversary to (...)
Christ, and being the most (...) livers that ever were, setting them selves
(...) against the righteousness of the This is (...) by all their p (...) be
fore.
Gospel, and being plainly proved to be deadly enemies against all
government, the (...) of treasons, the styrrers up of strife and rebellion, in
all (...) wheresoever they become, being persuaded that the Pope can not
err, who has pronounced our Sovereign to be a Schismatique, and has (...)
his Bull to deprive her of (...) royal (...) and dignity, and to discharge
her Subjects of all loyalty and duty, reconciling, persuading, and
vvithdravving her subjects to the pretended authority Against the last
statute.
of Rome: I conclude that they are enimiesto God, to their own Realm and
country, to their natural Prince, and to them (...): and I beseech God,
either to turn their hearts, or else to give them the (...) of traitors. And
thus much to require this Papist in asseuering that which I set down in my
dedicatory Epistle.

Now a word or two concerning the Fast at Stamford, and so an end.
Whereas this (...) Ovvle, to bring the truth into hatred with her Majesty,
by way of comparison, setting his quiet Catholics, and their doctrine of
obedience, against us and (...) of the same matter, to (...) The common (...)
of (...) to (...) and (...) men with that where, (...) they have no (...).
me, who have (as he said) so falsely infamed them, promising to set down
certain propositions (...) out of two (...) of my Preachers. etc. I (...) no
farther credit of the whole Church of God, of her (...), and of all
indifferent men, then I shall be able to prove the same by sufficient
testimonies to be most shameful and (...). And first, before I enter into it,
what color of (...) can it have, that those propositions out of their Sermons
should be gathered by a Minister, unless it were some such (...) as Euerard
Hans was, alias Ducket, who (...) thereabouts before his going over? Think
you there was any Minister so familiar with this Ovvle being of the dark
brood of Papists? If he were a Minister, either he must be some such
hypocritical liar and an accuser and (...) of his b. (...), or else this ougly
owl has out of his own head to declare himself a (...) like his father,
(...) these shameful untruths. He (...) that this (...) was forbidden, by the
L. Superintendent of Lincoln, by his letters bearing date the fifth of
September, and yet that these Preachers would not (...), that the letters
were directed to the (...) and Comburgesses there. In deed it is true, that
after the allowance of this Fast, by former letters (...) the Bishop, and at
the request of others, all which (...) are set down, that the Bishop sent
some such restraynt, (...) by some rumor (...), that his appointed order should
not (...) observed, both as touching the Good things never lack (...).
(...) of (...), and also (...) bringing in some (...), for whose doings he
could not answer: but M. (...) and his brethren very wisely considering that
the (...) now already appointed and warranted, and being clear in their
(...) knowledge from any (...) of altering that which was prescribed and
(...), (...) they should seem to yield to such suppositions as they (...)
dreamed of, and so show them selves (...): they kept their determination
according to thorder which Otherwise they should have shevved themselves
(...).
was prescribed. And therefore, though Parsons Howlet by some of his
inteligencers gat notice of such a letter, yet he was not acquainted with the
premises, nor with all that belonged to this matter. And it might well be, that
by practice of some enemy giving false insormation (as lightly there lackes
none to hinder good things) when the fast had been in diverse places of the
Realm else where, (...) the fearful earthquake, a token of Gods anger, and
was ordinarily sought for, by the Alderman and Comburgesses there, to the end
they might shevve their forwardness, to humble them selves beforc the Lord, as
(...) had done, it may be, I say, that that exercise was then sought to be
stayed, as the first was, but thanks be to God it was both orderly kept, and
well obtained. For upon better information given The Lord Treasurers
honorable readiness to further the fast of Stamford.
to the Right Honorable the Lord Burleigh, Lord high (...) of England, who by
reason that his Honor is Lord of that town of Stamford, and for that also his
Lordships house of Burleigh is hard adjoining (...), and being otherwise very
good Lord unto the town, he was the rather made acquaynted with their good
desire and proceeding, and by the letters of M. Robert Johnson also satisfied.
To which letter his Honor vouchsafed to give an honorable and favorable
answer, returned to the said M. Robert Johnson from the Court then being at
Otelandes, bearing date the 25. day of July 1580. wherein his Lordship
shows his good contentment and forvvardnes to so holy an exercise testifying
that for the said M. Iohnsons readiness and pains in preaching, in teaching
and reading in those parts thereabout, he has cause both to esteem and love
him. His Lorship exhorts him to continue in his vocation. I set not down
his Honors letters in respect of duty, not having communicated my purpose
with his Honor, trusting of his Honors favor in this behalf, seeing it is
against an enemy of God, and in maintenance of the truth. But this is true,
that therwithall his Lordship vvrote also a loving letter to the Alderman and
Burgesses of the said town of Stamford, bearing the same date, approving any
thing, that the Bishop should direct or order in that behalf, and another also
he vvrote to the Bishop of the Diocese which they foorthvvith sent by a
special messenger and a letter from themselves: and this was the copy of the
letters sent from the town.

To the right reverend Father in God, and our Diocessan, my L. Bishop of
Lincoln.
The letters of th (...) of the (...) of (...) to the (...) his allowance (...)
the (...).
RIght reverend Father, after our duties most humbly premised. It may please
your L. to be advertised, that vvheras of late we made request to the godly
learned (...) about us, to afforde us their godly travel, in a days exercise to
be spent with us in the serving of god, in fasting prayer, godly meditations,
and (...) his word and relieuing of the poor, which orders we understand to
the great (...), edification, instruction, and comfort of Gods people, has of
late been observed in many (...) of (...), and in sundry such places within
your good Lordships Diocese, as law thought convenient for that purpose:
which our (...) determination was misreported of to the Lord Treasurer our
especial and very good Lord, whereupon by (...) letters of the second of this
month, he required and advised us, that the said intended exercise for some
considerations should be stayed and forborne, whereupon we have made stay of
it hitherto. So it is now that upon some (...) and more particular declaration
made to his Lordship, by letters sent from M. Johnson a preacher to his
Lordship touching that matter, it has pleased his Lordship by his letters of
the 25. of this month, to grant us his good and favorable allowaunce, to the
having of the say de exercise, and further has advertised us in the same
letter, to beseech your good Lordship of your direction and consent thereunto,
to the vvnich purpose he has sent a letter to your Lordship, included with a
letter sent to me, and my brethren the Comburgesses of this town, which
letter we send unto your good L. by this bearer, most humbly beseeching you
to grant us your good furtheraunce in this our request, which we (...) and
(...) make to your good (...) in (...) we nothing doubt, (...) godly zeal and
care to the (...) and (...) of Gods glory. And thus (...) Lordships favorable
(...) by (...) we most humbly take our leave. (...) this 30. of July. 1580.

Your (...) humble (...) the (...) and (...) of the Borough and (...) of (...)
etc.


To these letters and by occasion of the others the Bishop gave his consent,
and returned in effect this answer, gathered out of his letters by M. Frauncis
Harington Recorder there.

(...) superscription.
To my very (...) friends, the Alderman and (...) of Stamford, (...) this.
THE order that I do (...) good of is this, that The sum of the bishops
answer to the town again.
you of the town of (...), by conference with your Preacher M (...), should
agree upon some (...) or days, vvherin you vvil use that godly (...) of
preaching and fasting, without the confluence of other (...) that apperteine
not unto your town. And that M. Hanson on the Sunday before the (...)
appointed, do in a Sermon exhort the people (...) to (...) themselves to so
convenient and godly an exercise, and that on the day it self there be two
sermons, one preached by M. Hanson, and (...) by M. Lively, the residue of the
time, either before, between, or alter the Sermons, you may (...) in open or
(...) prayer, or in co^tribution to the poor, in such (...) as you shall
think convenient. This manner I think in my (...) sufficient, neither would I
(...) you to do it otherwise, for I know, and have signification given me
already that it (...) be very offensive, and breed more (...) then I would
gladly have come to (...). These my letters (...) you keep. sor the (...) of
my (...), (...) the matter (...) come in contiouersie. Thus fare you heartily
(...).

Your very loving friend, (...).


Hereby may plainly appear the shameless lie of this staring Owl, that
blushed not in the ears of her (...) to vvhoope, that this exercise was kept
(...) against the Bishops will, that the preachers disobediently stepte up in
the pulpit, and uttered such sedicious (...), as he and his informing scribe
have patched together, as far from all coulor of truth, as any of the rest,
to the slander, not only of those godly and learned preachers, but also of
the magistrates, and whole corporation of that town, who did nothing, but
according as they were directed by aucthority, saving only that M. Johnson
preached in the second place, in steed of him that was appointed by the
bishop, he upon some occasion failing (as there may (...) out in such a case
many (...)) M Johnson being notwithstanding requested of the magistrates there:
both by letters at the first and at that instant, and that after the viewing of
his (...): and as for M. Lively the first preacher, let him be heard, as able
to speak for himself in this matter.

Richard Lively minister in Market Deeping and first preacher in the public
fast at (...), to John Howlets acculation, answers as follows.
IT is not without great cause, that Saint Paul in his first Epistle to
Timoth. cap. 5. 19. sets down this rule, and leaves the same as a (...)
order in the Church, that against an Elder no accusation should be admitted,
but under the testimony of two or three witnesses: he did well consider, that
the minister being stained, his doctrine is in hazard, and the gospel thereby
like to receive some wound. Therefore he would not that the minister without
true proof should be condemned, but rather iudicially called, and heard to
answer for himself, Again, as nothing more hinders or plucketh down the
kingdom of Satan, and sets up the kingdom of Christ, then the word and
Gospel, and the comfortable preaching thereof: So there is (...) wherein he is
more diligente, then to accuse and slander, to deface and deprave the
Preachers of the word, as the readiest mean to hinder the credit and course
of the Gospel, to retain the wicked in their (...), and so to hold the
world (as it were) in his claws. That this has been the practice of Satan
from time to time, not only by his own unclean mouth, but other convenient
instruments for that, to forge accusations and slanders, to carrye and
recarrye misreportes, especially against the ministers, experience of all ages,
and examples in Scriptures do plentifully record, He moved Corah, Dathan, and
Abyram, to accuse and slander Moses and Aaron in the open face of the
congregation, he procured the Priests and false Prophets to accuse Jeremy, and
Amaziah to accuse Amos, he (...) the Scribes and Pharisees to slander Christ
himself, he stirred up the eloquent Orator (...) to accuse Paul. So it is a
(...) of the Gospel till this day, to be subject to captious enemies, and the
preachers thereof to the persecution of (...) lous tongues, which no doubt
were able to discourage us from our duties, and wound us to the very
hearts: if we had not that good shield left us, Mat. 5. Blessed are you, when
men shall speak all manner of (...) sayings against (...).

Now Sir, if you be found in the rabble of these accusers, and your
accusations, though in many words, yet most of them untrue, then with what
Spirit you were led in penning these things, your conscience will tell you,
even with the Spirit of him who as a liar, from the beginning, and the father
of the same thing. And all men may easily conjecture that malice in your heart
exiled truth from your tongue, and bashfulnesse from your countenance. For
if to report a lie to a meaner person, has been evermore counted shame and
dishonesty; Then so malepertly to insinuate such manifest untruths into the
ears of a prince, yea of so wise, godly, and virtuous a Prince, because you
would do the greater hurt, I doubt not but it shall purchase to your self
perpetual discredit and (...).

You lay to our charge the odious crime of disobedience, and contempt of laws
and magistrates, and this you seem to prove, partly by our acts as violent
rushing up into the pulpit being forbidden, partly, by certain propositions of
doctrine published at the general fast in Stamford as you are informed by a
minister there present.

Now how greatly your minister that gratified you with these (...) did therein
abuse you, and consequently you abuse others, you shall soon perceive. First,
concerning the note of disobedience, I say, that the (...) of Stamforde, who
(...) the (...) person in that town, with the other (...), by one assent and
consent, and by earnest suite requested me to (...) that good work, my (...),
which is my L. Bishop of (...), by his letters (...) date the (...) day of
August did nominate, and by special name appoint me to that (...), to occupy
the place that day: Therefore, (...) by the alderman and his brethren
requested, and by the Bishop appointed, and never after had, nor heard of any
restraint or countermaund, nor any (...) tending to that purpose, what truth
can be in your assertion, that I would not obey? my charge lies not in that
place and therefore no cause why I should intrude my self against authority.

Concerning your four propositions of Doctrine inferred as it seems
altogether from the Prophet Jonas, has not so much as any face of truth,
seeing my text was in the prophesy of Esaias. Upon these Articles as false
(...), you ground a most wicked conclusion, that we vvoulde have no ruler
nor governor at all. Notvvithstanding I doubt not to approve my loyalty to my
Prince, and my good affection toward magistrates well enough, howsoever
you dare so maliciously (...) port it.

In that place, and not long time before, I proved, In a Sermon upon (...)
seven teenth of November, Anno 1579.
that neither City nor Kingdom, nor Socictye of men was able to endure, but
by the benefit of good and wholsome Laws, and that Laws were nothing
vvorth, (...) there should be Magistrates to execute the same, for Lex (...),
(...) autem est lex (...). The law is a dumb Magistrate, but the Magistrate
is a speakinge law.

I declared openly that by them we enjoy our lands, livings, goods, and
possessions in safety: that by them our controversies are decyded, and the
weakest, which else were like to go to the wales, by this means godly
defended. And therefore the sun in his brightness not more needful for the
increase of the fruits of the earth, nor meat and drink for the sustentation
of this our nature, then the use of good and godly magistrates in every common
wealth. As occasion then required, I styrred up the peoples hearts to
thankfulness to God, for the happy and peaceable government of this Realm. All
which may argue how far I am, from such Anabaptisticall opinion of
vvishing no ruler or governor at al.

At that instant time of the general Fast, I made prayer my self, and
exhorted the people to pray asvvell for her Highness, as her most honorable
Counsel, and all other the Nobility of this Realm, all Judges, Justices, and
civil Magistrates, and by special words for her Majesty's preservation,
against all traiterous practices either of domestical or forreyne enemies, for
the multiplying of her days and years, in abundance of peace and godly life,
and for the continuance of her and the Gospel, if it were his good will and
pleasure, even to the days of Methushelah. And can any man think that in the
turning of a hand, out of one fountain should flow svveete water and sovvre
also. first to show honest and hearty affection to Magistrates, and immediately
to breath out hatred and contempt of Magistrates, to make a divorce betvveene
my words and my heart, to vvishe there should be no ruler or governor at all?

No it is you and your sect of stisnecked Papists, that pinch at Magistrates,
while you exempt your selves from (...) obedience, you know who ground them
selves upon that saying of the Psalm, (...) meos, Touch not mine anointed,
do wrest this and such like places, and retche them as Shomakers do their
lether, to serve your purpose for the Popes shauelings. A learned father
confuting your vanity, says, you might as well make a Latimer in Sermon. habit.
syllogism of Quem terra pontus, to prove of nothing something. Stamford.


Where you are pressed, with the authority of S. Paul, Romans 13. Let every
soul submit himself to the authority of the higher powers, you know who
shift of the matter with this gloss, Onnis anima secularis, non item (...),
Every secular soul, and not every spiritual soul. But Chrysostom confuteth
your saying, Omnis anima (...) Propheta, sieve Apostolus, sieve (...), Every
soul whether he be Prophet, or whether he (...) an Apostle, or Evangelist. But
this is beside my purpose. And therefore to return to your propositions,
albeit by charitable instruction they might be mitigated, from that rigor that
you would enforce upon them, yet to do not only that which is just, but to
do the same justly, faithfully and truly, I say I never spoke them, yea as
surely as the Redeemer of the world lives, and I my self hope to be partaker
of that redemption: so surely I never uttered the^. How far they were from my
words, the whole company then present can testify, how far from my heart, God
himself does know. And albeit my nay ought to be as good as your yea, and my
flat denial in mine own defense, in good reason ought to counteruayle and
prevail with your bare and naked affirmation, yet to put the matter out of all
doubt, I have craved the (...) of such as did hear me, not of the simple,
rude or ignorant, but of the better, the more learned sort, and such as be of
good credit and calling in the common wealth, as follows.

WE the alderman and comburgesses of Stamford knowing the premises which the
said Richard Lively has alleged to acquit himself of the abouesaid slander
of disobedience, to be most true, have thought good to ratify the same by the
subscription of our names as hereafter follows.

Comburgesses.
John VVimbleby Alderman William Lacy Gent. John Houghton Gent. Reinold
Harrison. Richard Euely.
The true report of John Hanson Bacheler of divinity, and preacher in Stamford,
concerning the (...) of Richard Lively, and Robert Johnson, at the general
fast in Stamford. 14. Sept. Anno. 1580.
I John Hanson with great (...) writing and gathering the (...) of the (...)
sermons, and having examined and (...) the same with eight propositions of John
(...) promised, wherevvith (...) charged the (...) parties, do find no such
(...), (...) words, but (...), that they are (...) therevvith, and this I am
ready, if need be to verify by oath.

By me John Hanson.

The faithful information of Robert Crosdale preacher, concerning the
abouesayd sermons of M. Richard Lively, and M. Roberte Johnson, at the general
fast in Stamforde. 14. Sept. Anno. 1580.
I Robert Crosdale, gathering the notes of the said Sermons, and conferring the
same with the propositions which are laid to their charge, do steadfastly
and truly affirm they have great iniurye to be so wrongfully accused, and to
this I am ready to be sworn, if I shall be thereto ordinarily required.

By me Robert Crosdale

The testimony also of the right honorable, the Lord Zouch: M. Frauncis
Harrington Recordor of Stamford, and M. Shepherd Archdeacon of
Northhamptonshire, concerning the said (...).
TOuching the propositions set down by John Hovvlet, which (as he says)
were gathered at two sermons, by a Minister present at Stamford at a general
Fast. These are to certify, that howsoever the minister your informer,
mistook the matters by gathering and setting down his notes, or for want of
diligence or readiness of his pen, or for want of memory, capacity, or
understanding or howsoever, the said John Howlet has altered them to serve his
purpose, the truth is so, that I am certain ly informed, by some both of
honorable and worship full callings which were then present, that he has very
much abused the prechers in this his report, by setting down that which they
never uttered; and that in truth, there was nothing then and there taught, which
was not spoken with all loyal and dutiful obedience, and in good terms, and
which might; without just occasion of offense given, have been preached
before any estate in this land, both for the matter and manner thereof.

And albeit it must needs be confessed, that both (...) and after the order
was set down, by the Lord Superintendent of the Diocese (as you term him)
that said exercise was secretly undermined, and some ways crossed, by false
intymations and untrue (...), yet in the end it was reverently and profitably
kept, according to the true meaning which was permitted, prescribed and
allowed in vvriting by the letters of the said superintendent, the procee ding
herein was after this manner At the request of the Aldermen and (...), not
without some allowaunce from the right Honorable the Lord Treasurer, to
whom the inheritance of that Borough (...), upon such good liking and
allowance as should thereof be made by the ordinary (to whom his honor
vvrote about that matter) the exercise was held and performed in such sort,
as nothing was taught corruptly, disorderly or seditiously, but the godly
order set down in that behalf, by the right honorable the Lords of her
majesty's privy Counsel, being first kept in every point, for the more better
edification of the people according to the Bishops letter, there were two
sermons preached by two such as were lavvfuly and sufficiently allowed and
aucthorised thereunto, one of the said preachers being earnestly entreated to
preach by the Magistrates and (...) of the Town, by occasion of the defect of
one of the two which was named in the Bishops letter, and this was thonly
difference of the order observed, from the order prescribed in the bishops
letters.

Both the sermons were neither twelve nor (...) hours long, nor yet much
above five hours, which time was thought to be little enough for them,
considering they had to (...) and (...) the manifold corruptions and abuses of
the popish and Pharisaicall fasting, and to teach the true order and end of
true Fast, with the doctrine of true (...), and humbling of their souls and
bodies by true repentance and newness of life, which necessarily ought to
accompany (...), as without the which it is unprofitable, which being done,
there was a liberal contribution and collection made for the poor, and so the
action was peaceably and profitably ended. And thus much briefly touching that
matter.

Edward zouch.
Nicholas Shepherd
Francis Harring^on Recorder of Stamford.

The credible report of Tobie Houghton of Cliffe in the County of Northhamp.
Gentleman, for and concerning the sum and effect of the late Sermons of M.
Richard (...), and M. Robert Johnson preachers, at the (...) general Fast at
Stamford, the 14 of September. 1580 as follovveth.
The Text of the said M. Lively being contained in Esa. 22. 12. 13. 14. 15
verses, whereof (...) the said Tobie Houghton, vvrote the quantity of one
sheet and a half of large (...) in notes, gathered from the say de preacher,
out of his own mouth, and by these presents do justify, that the said M.
Lively is (...) and unjustly charged by John (...) in his late book dedicated
to the Queens most excellent majesty.

And further, I am in like sort to clear the said M. Johnson of the said
Hovvlets like slander against him. I having gathered out of his sermon at the
said (...); to the quantity of one whole (...) of paper in notes as he spoke
them, his Text being the 2. of (...) 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. verses.

And to conclude, I will by the grace of God, be ready to justify, that they
or either of them at that present, spoke not any of the articles objected
against them by the said Hovvlet, neither did they utter any manner of speech
against the good and godly government of the estate of this our Realm of
England. In (...) whereof. I have written this same with mine own hand and
set my name to the same, this xii. of February. 1580.

(...) Houghton.

By these testimonies alleged by me, concerning the Fast of (...), it
appears (I (...)) (...) how vayn the accusation is, that these enemies of
God, and of her highness, have made against those Godly and learned men the
Preachers that preached there, against the whole Borough and Magistrates
thereof, and against my self who never was acquainted with the matter, neither
had any dealing at that time or at any other (...) any such thing. And now
because I have sufficiently discovered this whole trovvp of papists under
Antichrist the Pope, to be enemies to our Lord and Captain Jesus Christ, to his
religion, to our gracious Sovereign for professing it, and to us, as (...) as
under her highness gracious government heartily embrace it: (...) that he has
severed us from them, to the end we should hold out his glory against them,
and not be ashamed of his Cross in the groatest (...) they shall be able to
lay upon us, and, that (...) should have no fellowship with them. And
therefore I most humbly befeech her Majesty upon the (...) of my heart;
whom God has (...) to that high top of honor, to honor him, and to hold
us (...) in all obedience under his septer and government (which these enemies
(...), (...) their (...) both against God (...) of (...), and against her (...)
of it:) that she vvil (in that (...) knowledge of the truth, whereof by the
singular (...) of God she is made (...)measure, and in that (...), the Lord in
mercy has (...) in her gracious heart, against (...)) (...) without famting,
to the (...) on of all (...), her most (...) and loving (...): wherein as
(...) have by Gods: assistance pitched our staves to stand fast, so (...) fully
(...) our selves of her gracious defense even to the end. It is no time (...)
for us to look back: All the boastinges land proud challenges in the
world, of (...) and nevve (...), cannot (...) to any suspense of the truth.
We are not ignorant of their great speech and proud words: we know that
Antichrist shall come with power, yea with lying signs and wonders: his bulk
shall be big, and his men shall appear as (...) as great as ever were the
Anakims and Goliath: yet we are not by the grace of God, afraid of the^. We
have had suf ficient trial of their weapons and armor, we know their
standings and their studies, and evermore when we have crapled with them, by
the (...) of God, we (...) ben to hard for the^. A taste was given in the
beginning of her majesty's most (...), and since at sundry times, at VVifbich
of late: and this other day at the Tower. And as evermore God has knit
victory with his truth, so he gives shame and confusion to salsehood, with
what wisdom of man soever, with what learning or policy it be
maintained. And therefore having by the grace of God found the truth, we
are fully determined to live and dye in it. And it is (...), that as God and
Satan can not be served together, so we can not be faithful Subjects to
Elizabeth our Queen mainteining (...), if we serve Antichriste. We can not
be (...) to her, if we yield (...) to her enemy, and a (...) usurper. And
(...) as we are made one with Christ our head, and are sorted and (...)
into his fold, as his Confederates, under the leading of our Christian Prince
on earth: we meame by his assistance faithfully to fight his battles. Neither
can they (...) us, though they shoue in amongst us, as long as they come in,
under this Antichrists standered and (...), (...) the Marks both of false
(...), (...). Tyranny and wicked life. (...) if they (...) to be with us as
friends, and yet craftily undermine us to cool us and hinder us, we may for
a time be deceived, but our (...) will at the length discover them, and when
they are found out, our eyes shall not (...) them. They shall be used not as
confederates to him, which only the fathfull are: but as enemies, whom we
being commanded to strike, we dare not spare, neither reserve: how goodly
and fat Oxen soever they be, and what good shows soever they have. We
dare not trust neither the (...) and whining of these Curres in this time of
their bondage and tying up. The time was when they were lose, and then they
played their parts, they showed their kind; and we know that there is no
change, but by regeneration. Their snarling, their barking against the truth,
their lying in wait, and continual looking for advantage, when they may
crush us, even in this time, testifies what we were like to find, if they
had any power over us. And though in this (...) of them up, as Wolves they
have licked out hands whilst we sed them to train the^ to humanity, yet lying
lose, they will be the more (...) against us: God of his gracious goodness keep us
out of their hands. And we give him most humble and hearty thanks, who in so
exceeding mercy and wonderful patience, waits for our conversion, even
ouercomming our sin with his goodness, in protecting and defending us
against the madness and (...) of these open and deadly enemies. We humblye
thank him for defending this Realm, our Queen, her Counsailours, and all
her people. For it is well known, and we (...) it, that if he had looked
upon our unthankfulness, we should have been as a pray unto them and they
would have eaten us up alive: he has done it: not unto us, that is, not for
our sakes, but unto his own name, that he may have the glory of it. And
surely, if we faint not, but go cheerfully sorward in that glorious truth, in
(...) he has called us unto, if we labor to approve our selves to him, giving
him a pure woorship and service according to his own appointment and will,
striving to sincerity and cleansiug our churches from that popish filth, this
man of sin has left behind him in the^, if we give him the honor of leading
us, and will be ruled by his word, renouncing man's wisdom, policy, and
strength in the work of our salvation, then shall we not need to fear,
though these enemies be never so many or mighty: If God be with us who can be
against us? Though their Parsons be taule and terrible, their furniture well
appointed, their strength in the judgment of men invincible, their knowledge
in martial affairs equal with ours, their learniug, wealth, riches, and
policy above ours, yet in the name of the Lord of hoastes we will not fear
them: if God be in the midst of us, compass us about and fight for us, if
we be under his leading how can they prevail against us? And surely
comfortable experience we have had of his good nesse these many late years in
protecting this realm, so beset with enemies, our gracious prince by nature a
vveake woman, and subject to many infirmities, her counselors exercised with
many difficulties and hard tentarions, her people given up in peace, as
commonly common people are in such times, to (...) their profits and
pleasures: that God, I say, has yet so mightily defended them, and enriched us
all, with so many blessings both of this life, and of the life to come which
are most precious, what other argument can it yield unto us, then of great
encouragement? This should even increase our hope, and add new strength
unto us, to make us stand fast to our God: The truth is, that our policy
and arm has not wrought it, but our (...) God who has kept continual vvatch
over us, to the end we should walk in holy and (...) obedience, in fear and
trembling as in his presence: not that we should be secure and careless,
arming these enemies of ours, with our sins and transgressions against us,
but that we should fear before his (...), and trust in him, being armed with
the righteousness of Jesus Christ our head, which shall not only shroud us from
their fury, but from his own wrath and (...) damnation.

Thus much I thought good, being specially drawn in by the adversary to
speak in the defense of Gods everlasting truth. If I give any just offense to
the godly, by any slip of human infirmity, I crave pardon for it: but I
protest before him, that knows the secrets of all hearts, that I have not
of any malice, sinister affection or desire of revenge, written any thing, but
for and in the simple dese^ce and maintenance of the truth and to the end to
discredit error and (...). And concerning one Hovvlet, whom I (...) in my
Epistle dedicatory to aim at, and since have understood that the name by all
likelihood should be counterfaite, and taken upon, by one (...) a runnagate
Jesuit: I am very sorry for the wrong (if any be) that I have done to Howlet,
whom I supposed it to be. And I would the vvillingliar cry him mercy for it,
(...) the Lord vvoulde vouchsafe him an happy conversion, from that false
religion of popery, which I will undoubtedly pray for, with all my heart. The
Lord God of all glory, who is king of kings, and Lord of Lords, preserve
our gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, and all her honorable counselors,
(...), inferior officers and people, and so strengthen them in the truth, as
all may have judgment to discern those things that differ, and in their
several callings know what belongs unto their special duties, that they
may all detest popery, false doctrine and heresy, and with the glorious
profession of the truth, join a sincere and godly conversation in life, and so
hold out the glory of Christ their head, through the sanctification of his
blessed spirit, till they be gathered the way of all flesh, and arrived at
that happy Huen of (...) rest, which he has purchased.

Amen.
I have hated the Church of the Malignant.
FINIS.

