AN ANSWER TO A PAMPHLET, INTITVLED: THE FISHER CATCHED IN HIS OWN NET. IN
WHICH, BY THE WAY, IS SHEVVED, That the Protestant Church was not so visible,
in all Ages, as the true Church ought to be: and consequently, is not the true
Church. Of which, men may learn infallible Faith, necessary to Salvation. By
A. C.

MATTHEW. 28. verse. 19, 20. Going, teach al Nations, baptizing them, etc. Behold,
I am with you AL DAYS, even to the consummation of the World. EPHESIANS. 4. verse.
11, 14. Christ gave some Apostles, and some Prophets; othersome Evangelists,
and othersome PASTORS and DOCTORS, etc. that we be not Children, WAVERING and
CARRIED ABOUT with every wind of Doctrine, etc.

M. D. C. XXIII.

THE PREFACE.
GEntle Reader, although I doubt not, but all that be wise and judicious
especially if they duly consider the occasion and state of the question, lately
treated (in a Conference betwixt D. White and D. Featly Ministers; and M.
Fisher and M. Sweet Jesuits) will easily discern (even by that false Relation,
which is set out in print by a Protestant) that the Protestants Cause has not
gained any thing: Nevertheless, because those who be partially affected, or of
mean capacitte, may (as it is to be doubted diverse do) conceive and speak
amiss of this matter, to the disgrace of the Catholic Cause, and the
prejudice of their own and other men's souls: I have thought it needful to set
out a true Relation of the occasion, progress, and issue of that Conference,
and this in such sort, as diverse falsehoods of the Protestant Relator, may be
easily perceived, and the weakness of the Protestants Cause may be evidently
discovered; which is also so bad, as it seems it cannot be supported, but by
setting out such lying Relations; the sight and consideration whereof, makes
me more easily believe that to be true which I have read, viz. That a decree
was made by Divines Eudaimon Johannes in defens. p. H. Garn.
in Geneua, defyning it lawful to lie for the honor or credit of the Gospel;
and that conformably to this decree, an English Minister being told that one of
his Powfellowes had made lies in stead of proofs of his Protestant Religion,
did answer, saying: He cannot lie too much in D. Bishop against Rob. Abbots.
this cause. It must needs be a weak and bad cause, that needs to be
supported by such weak and bad shifts. I for my part will not promise, to have
perfectly remembered and set down every word that passed in this Conference,
especially spoken by bystanders; nor to have strictly observed the precise
order of every passage: but for the substance, and truth of the matter that I
do relate, I assure, that there shall not be found any falsehood, unless it be
in some of those Parcels; which I do not relate of my self, but out of the
Protestant Relator: whose Relation ordinarily as I do not contradict, unless
it be upon necessary occasion; so I do not intend to approve: but simply
relating what it says, I will leave it to others to judge, what they think fit
of it. Only this I will say, That every one may believe it so far, as it
relates any thing, which may advantage the Catholic Defendants, and their
Cause, or disadvantage the Protestant Disputants, and their Cause. For it is
certain, that no man will lie for the advantage of his Adversary, or his
Cause; nor for his own disadvantage. But in such things as it has set down
aduantagiously for the Protestant Disputant, or his Cause, there is just reason
to suspect it; in regard I am told, that D. Featly himself (who is said to be
the Author) has confessed, That more is said in the Relation, then was said in
the Conference it self; and I am sure something is left out, which was said,
and something mis-reported. This being premised, by way of Preface, I will begin
to discourse of the matter it self.

CHAP. I. About the first occasion of the Conference, in which is showed, that
Master Fisher did not seek it, or provoke his Adversaries by any challenge
unto it, nor did intend to have it so public, as by his Adversaries fault it
proved
The Protestant Relator of this Conference, sets down the occasion in these
words.

EDWARD BVGGS Esquire, about the age of 70. years, being lately sick, was
solicited by some Papists then about him, to forsake the Protestant Faith,
telling him: There was no hope of salvation, without the Church; there was no
Catholic Church but theirs; and to believe the Catholic Church, was the
Article of his Creed; and by it, could no other Church be meant but the Church
of Rome, because it could not be proved by all the Protestants in the Kingdom,
that they had any Church before Luther.

This Gentleman being much troubled in his mind with these and the like
suggestions, who al his life time had been, and prosessed himself a Religious
Protestant, became now more sick in mind then body.

After his recovery, being much troubled in mind with these former suggestions
of the Popish Priests, he repaired to Sir Humfrey Lynd Knight; who, by reason
of his alliance, and long acquaintance with him, gave the best satisfaction
that he could to his said Cousin Master Buggs? who seemed to take content in
such his Conference, and to be well satisfied by him, in all points.

But the Popish Priests and Jesuits not desisting to creep in further, where
they had once made a breach, perseuering still in questioning him, where his
Church was before Luther.

Whereupon he repaired again to Sir Humfrey Lynd, and required some further
satisfaction of him, concerning that demand. And thereupon Sir Humfrey Lynd
told him, it was first in Christ and the Apostles, A very weak and
Insufficient satisfaction, as is showed hereafter.
consequently also conspicuous in the Primitive Church, for 600. years after
Christ, after which time some errors crept into the Church, as diseases into a
man's body, so that the Church which Luther and we acknowledge, was in general
the same Christian Church, as his body was the same substantial body being now
well and lately sick, though different in the qualities, etc.

How far this parcel of the Relation is true or false, I will not stand to
discuss, as not yet knowing how, or by whom, the aforesaid Gentleman came
first to doubt of his Church, and consequently of his Religion; yet I have some
cause to doubt, that it is not altogether true, especially in that he says:
The Popish Priests and Jesuits not desisting to creep in further where they
had ^^ce made a breach, perseuering still in questioning him: where his Church
was before Luther? For I do not think that many (if any at al) Priests or
Jesuits, did first put this doubt into the old Gentleman his head, nor
perseuered in questioning him about it. And for Master Fisher in particular, I
know certainly that he never saw this old Gentleman, much less did he speak
to him, in any matter of Religion, til that time, when Sir Humfrey Lynd first
met Master Fisher. The which meeting is mentioned in the Protestant Relation,
saying thus:

And after his return to London, the said Sir Humfrey Lynd going to Master
Buggs his house in Drury lane, to vsit him, found Master Fisher the Jesuit
there, where after some debates about Religion, and the visibilite of the
Church, Master Fisher called for Pen and Ink, and set down this question in
terminis, thereby adding under his hand, that he would answer upon it
negatiuely, as challenging and expecting Opposers; delivering also the Paper
into the hands of the said Sir Humfrey Lynd; who upon view of it, answered:
That it was an Historical question, and not so proper for disputation. But
Master Fisher urging it, Sir Humfrey told him: If he would go to D. Whites,
where formerly he had been, the said D. would easily resolve those doubts,
which being refused by the Jesuit, the said Sir Humfrey did then return him
his Paper again, and so left him.

In this parcel some thing is omitted, some thing misreported, as will appear
by this which follows:

A certain Catholic Gentleman, coming to Master Fisher, told him: That the
aforesaid old Gentleman was desirous to hear D. White and him dispute; and
therefore desired to know, whether he would think it convenient to undertake a
meeting with D. White. M. Fisher told him expressly, that he neither might, nor
would make any challenge to D. White; but, says he: If D. White do challenge
me, I will not refuse.

And some reason M. Fisher gave to the Gentleman, to let him see, that it was
not fit that he should be a Challenger in such a business: whereupon the
Gentleman, for fear of mis-deliuering M. Fishers mind, did entreat M. Fisher
to deliver his own answer to a Protestant Knight, Sir Humfrey Lynd, who was
employed by the said old Gentleman, to move D. White to come to such a meeting.
M. Fisher having some acquaintance in the house where the old Gentleman was,
said: He would that night be there, and if the Knight would come, he should
hear the same answer. So M. Fisher came, and Sir Humfrey (being advised by the
said Catholic Gentleman, of M. Fishers intention to be there) also came. And
after some speeches, the question was moved, Whether M. Fisher would speak
with D. White about the visibilitie of the Church? He answered as before: That
he would not challenge D. White; but if D. White would challenge him to treat
of that matter, he would not refuse. It was answered: That it was not meant in
the nature of a challenge, but to have a quiet meeting, to satisfy the old
Gentleman: and so Sir Humfrey wished M. Fisher to set down the questions. Then
M. Fisher having heard wherein the Gentleman did chiefly doubt, set down
these two questions:

Whether there must not be in all ages a visible Church, of which, al sorts
must learn that one infallible faith which is necessary to salvation?

Whether the Protestants Church was in all ages visible, especially in the ages
before Luther: and whether the names of such visible Protestants in all ages,
may be showed out of good Authors?

The first question being read before Sir Humfrey and the old Gentleman, and
some others, they said: That it was out of question, that such a visible Church
as the question mentioned, must needs be granted; whereupon M. Fisher took
his Pen, and subscribed to the first question, these words: It is granted.
Which being supposed; M. Fisher read the second question, and was contented it
should be the only Question, for so Sir Humfrey desired; who also bad M.
Fisher choose, whether he would be the Disputer or Answerer. M. Fisher said, It
would be requisite both to dispute and answer. Yet Sir Humfrey urging him to
choose the one or other part, M. Fisher said, I will answer; and so he took his
Pen, and writ in the Margent briefly, what answer he meant to make to the
whole Question, and said: I will answer, that it was not; to wit, so visible as
the Question required.

This Paper, in which these Questions were, Sir Humfrey took, but with intent,
that only one, that is, the second, should be disputed on. Then question being
made about the Place, Sir Humfrey named D. Whites house. M. Fisher said, he had
no reason to go to the Doctors house; in regard, the last time he was there,
it was given out, and made a general report, That M. Fisher would have killed
D. White in his house. And therefore, says M. Fisher, I will not go, unless
himself inuit me: but if he inuit, I will go. Sir Humfrey doubted, that D.
White would not inuit M. Fisher: and so, for want of agreeing about the Place,
M. Fisher verily thought, that no meeting would be at al: yet he did not take
again the Paper, in which the Questions were; but either left them with Sir
Humfrey, or the old Gentleman: yet without any mind at al, to make any
challenge, as he had more then once expressed.

About two days after (says the Protestant Relator) M. Buggs repaired to Sir
Humfrey Lynd, and entreated him (for his satisfaction) to give M. Fisher a
meeting, saying: That M. Fisher had again told him, That he would maintain
what he had set down; and that our Divines could not prove our Church visible,
before Luthers time. Whereupon Sir Humfrey told him, That D. White and D.
Featly were to dyne with him on Friday following; and if, after Dinner, M.
Fisher would come thither, with four, or six at the most, they should be
admitted for his sake and his Wifes, who (by reason of such solicitation) were
troubled in their minds; and satisfaction should be given, as occasion
required. And these were the true causes of the meeting.

What to say to this Parcel, I know not, because it was private, betwixt Sir
Humfrey and the old Gentleman. But there were other more remarkable passages,
omitted by the Protestant Relator, which I think fit to set down. As first,
That M. Fisher coming to the old Gentleman, the next day, or next but one,
after the Question was set down; found him still desirous, to have the meeting
go forward: and then it may very well be, that M. Fisher might say; He would
maintain what he had set down, and that Protestant Divines could not prove
the Protestant Church visible, before Luthers time. But what in particular he
said, he does not remember. Only he is sure he made no challenge; and so the
old Gentleman did well understand: who told M. Fisher, That it was intended
only to be a friendly and a private meeting at Sir Humfrey his own house: and
that D. White would bring with him one to assist him, as M. Fisher should bring
with him one to assist him; and beside, some four more, whom they thought
good, to be Witnesses; and two Writers, to set down on each part what was
said: and that Friday next should be the day.

M. Fisher hearing this equal offer, did not refuse: but (to prepare the mind
of the old Gentleman, to be better able to make benefit of what should be said
about it) writ, and delivered unto him a Paper, showing briefly and plainly,
how the true visible Church of Christ must be so visible in all Ages, as that
the names of some principal Members thereof, in every Age, may be showed out
of good Authors.

A true Copy of which Paper, I think fit here to set down; in regard it may
serve others, as well as this old Gentleman, to understand, Why Catholics do
ordinarily so much press Protestants, to name (if they can) Protestant
Professors, in all Ages, as Catholics do in printed Books ordinarily set
down, a Catalogue of the Names of the chief Pastors, and other principal
Members of the Catholic Roman Church, in all Ages.

A Copy of the first Paper, which M. Fisher writ, and delivered to the old
Gentleman, before the meeting.
1. It is certain, There is one, and but one true infallible Ephesians. 4. Heb. 11.
Faith; without which, none can please God, nor consequently, attain eternal
Salnation.

2. This one infallible Faith cannot be had (according to the ordinary course
of Gods providence) but Romans 10. v. 14, 15. Ephesians. 4. 11.
by hearing Preachers and Pastors of the true visible Church, who only are
lawfully sent and authorized to teach the true Word of God.

3. As therefore this one infallible Faith has been, and must be, in all Ages:
so there must needs be, in all Ages, Preachers and Pastors of the true visible
Ose. 2. v. 19, 20. Isa. 59. 20. Matthew. 18. 20. Ephesians. 4. v. 11.
Church; of whom, al sorts of people have in time past (as appears by
Histories) learned, and must in all future times, learn the said infallible
Truth.

4. Hence follows, That if Protestants be the true visible Church of Christ;
al sorts of men, who in every Age have had the aforesaid infallible Faith,
have learned it, by hearing Protestant Preachers, whose names may yet be found
in Histories; as the names of those are found, who in every former Age did
teach and convert People of several Nations unto the Faith of Christ.

5. Hence further follows, That if there cannot (as there cannot) be found in
Histories, Names of Protestant Preachers, who in all Ages did teach al sorts of
faithful People, and who converted several Nations unto the Christian Faith:
Hence follows, I say, That Protestants are not the true visible Church of
Christ; neither are their Preachers lawfully sent, or sufficiently authorized
to teach; nor People securely warranted, to learn of them that one infallible
Faith, without which none can possibly please God, nor (if they so live and
dye) be saved.

If any Protestant will answer; let him set down Names of Protestant Preachers
in all Ages, who taught People Protestant Doctrine in every several Age; or
confess, there were no such before Luther; or, at least, not in all Ages to be
found in Histories.

After this, M. Fisher let the old Gentleman see a little printed Book, in
which was a Catalogue of visible Roman Professors in all Ages: wishing him to
urge his Ministers, to show (if they can) a like Catalogue of their Protestant
Professors. And it is very likely, that this Book (as also the foresaid Paper)
was by this old Gentleman carried to Sir Humfrey: from whom, about two or three
days before the meeting, a Paper was sent to M. Fisher, containing the former
Question; and another like Question proposed to him, to dispute upon: the
contents whereof were as follows.

The question proposed by M. Fisher, in which he undertakes to maintain the
negative, is set down by him in haec verba:

Whether the Protestant Church was in all ages visible, especially in the ages
going before Luther: and whether the names of such visible Protestants, in all
ages, can be showed and proved out of good Authors?

To this universal demand (requiring rather an Historical large volume then
Syllogical brief disputes, we answer, That although:

1. Divine infallible Faith is not built upon deduction out of humane History,
but divine Revelation, as is confessed by the Schoolmen, and expressly by
Bellarmine, Historiae humanae non faciunt fidem nisi humanam.

2. And this question is grounded upon uncertain and false supposals: yet we
requite this Proponent, putting him to his own task in his own defense, by
propounding to him the like question: viz.

Whether the Romish Church, (that is, a Church holding the particular entire
doctrine of the now Romanists, as it is comprised in the Council of Trent) was
in all ages visible, especially in the first 600. years; and whether the names
of such visible or legible Romanists in all ages can be showed and proved out of
good Authors?

We will answer negatiuely, That no such Church or Professors can be showed.

This Paper being delivered to M. Fisher, he writ a second Paper, to explicate
the meaning of his question, to show an equal method of proceeding in the
Disputation.

A Copy of a second Paper, written by M. Fisher before the meeting.
M. Fisher being requested thereunto, for satisfaction of a Gentleman,
propounded two questions:

1. The first, Whether there must not be in all ages a visible Church, of which
al sorts are to learn the infallible Faith, necessary to salvation?

2. The second, Whether the Protestant Church was in all ages visible,
especially in the ages going before Luther; and whether the names of such
visible Protestants in all ages can be showed, and proved out of good Authors?

To the first question, Sir H. and others that were present, assented; so as it
was subscribed with these words, It is granted: and so M. Fisher was content,
that his second question should be the only question. Then Sir H* having left
it to the choice of M. F. whether he would answer, or dispute: M. F. did choose
to answer, and defend the negative part. So as it lies upon Sir H. and those
whom he shall choose, to make his party good, to prove out of good Authors the
affirmative; to wit: The Protestants Church was in all ages visible, especially
in the ages before Luther. And likewise, they must set down the names of such
visible Protestants in all ages, as was demanded. When Sir H. or his friends
shall have performed this their task, M. Fisher will perform what is required
in the Paper sent unto him by Sir H. in the same sort and sense, as he
requires Sir H. and his friends to perform their task.

For avoiding therefore of al mistaking, and consequently, needless and
fruitless Disputes, M. F. in his question requires:

1. That names of men in all ages be set down, whom Sir H. and his friends
conceive to have bin Protestants.

2. That those men whose names they set down, be showed out of good Authors,
to agree in holding some points of Faith, in which Protestants differ from the
Roman Catholics.

3. That Sir H. or his friends will defend against M. F. that the same men held
no other points of Faith, one differently from another, and from the present
Protestant Doctrine (contained in the 39. Articles, unto which al English
Ministers are sworn) for otherwise they cannot make one and the same
Protestant Church.

In this sort and sense, when Sir H. or his friends shall have showed a visible
Protestant Church in all ages, then M. F. or his friends will in a like
proportionable sort and sense, show, prove and defend a visible Roman Church
in all ages.

This Paper was delivered to the old Gentleman, and was confessed to have been
received by the Doctors before the disputation, and before the meeting. The
time and manner of which meeting is set down by the Protestant Relator, in
manner following:

The 27. of June, 1623. M. Fisher, M. Sweet, Jesuits, and some others with
them, came to Sir H. Lynds house, in a little dyning room, where they found
the aforesaid M. Buggs, his wife and children, and others of Sir H. friends,
that had then dined with him, together with some others also: whose coming in,
as the said Sir H. did not expect; so he could not with civility put them
forth his house, but did instantly cause his doors to be locked up, that no
more might enter: notwithstanding which his command, some others also came in
scattering, after the conference began.

In this parcel it is to be considered, how great care M. Fisher had to have
the meeting secret, and how well he observed the fore-appointed conditions: in
which he was so punctual, that after he had his number, of one Assistant, and
four Witnesses, and a Writer, he would not so much as tell a Gentleman of his
acquaintance (who had by other means understood of the meeting, and the place
of meeting) at what hour the meeting should be; whereas on the contrary part,
so much speech was made of it, by some of the Protestant side, that (beside the
number appointed to be Auditors) many Protestant Gentlemen and Gentlewomen,
and some Noblemen, and many Ministers, did repair to Sir Humfrey his house,
which M. Fisher found to be so filled, as he complained to Sir Humfrey of the
inequality of that Audience, compared with the few he brought; which Sir H.
could not deny, but excused himself in such manner as he could, saying: He
could not help it, etc.

CHAP. II. About that which passed in the Conference it self.
DOctor White and Doctor Featly, being invited to dinner (says the Protestant
Relator) by Sir Humfrey Lynd, and staying a while after, had notice given them,
that M. Fisher, and M. Sweet, Jesuits, were in the next room, ready to
confer with them, touching a Question set down by M. Fisher, under his own
hand, in these words: viz.

Whether the Protestants Church was in all ages visible, and especially in the
ages going before Luther. 2. And whether the names of such visible Protestants,
in all ages, can be showed and proved out of good Authors?

This Question being delivered to the parties above named, and it being
notified unto them, that there were certain persons who had been solicited,
and remaining doubtful in Religion, desired satisfaction especially in this
point; they were persuaded to have some speech with the Jesuits touching this
point: the rather, because the Priests and Jesuits do daily cast out Papers,
and disperse them in secret; in which they vaunt, That no Protestant Minister
dare encounter with them in this point.

Any man reading this parcel, would be induced to think, that D. White and D.
Featly had never had notice before, for what end they were invited to Dinner,
or for what end they were to meet with the Jesuits: but that they were on the
sudden summoned to this Conference, without any preparation, or knowledge of
the Question. Which not to be so, is evidently convinced, partly, by that which
is already said, partly, by that which I am after to say.

2. This Relator would make his Reader believe, that M. Fisher under his own
hand had set down the words of the Question, distinguished with the express
figure of 2. Which is not so, for M. Fisher did not write any such figure of 2.
in the middle of the Question, nor did not mean to make any more then one only
entire Question, as Sir Humfrey himself had desired.

3. He seems willing to persuade, that Priests and Jesuits do daily cast
out Papers, which is not true.

At the beginning of this meeting, when the Disputants were set (says the
Protestant Relator) D. Featly drew out the Paper, in which the Question above
rehearsed was written, with these words in the Margent, viz. I will answer, that
it was not; and demanded of M. Fisher, Whether this were his own hand? which
after he had acknowledged, D. Featly began as follows:

D. Featly. (...). To this universal demand, requiring rather an Historical
large Volume, then a Syllogistical brief dispute, we answer:


] And then he read out of a Paper (which this Relator would make men believe
to have been said memoriter) the same in effect, which was written before the
meeting, to M. Fisher.

1. That although divine infallible Faith is not built upon deduction out of
humane History, but upon divine revelation, as is confessed by your own
Schoolmen, and expressly by Cardinal Bellarmine, Historiae humanae faciunt
tantum fidem humanam, cui subesse potest falsum: Humane Stories and Records
beget only an humane Faith, or rather Credulity, subject to error; not a
divine and infallible Belief, which must be built upon surer ground.

2. Although this Question be grounded upon uncertain and false supposals: for
a Church may have been visible, yet not the names of al visible Professors
thereof now to be showed and proved out of good Authors: there might be
millions of Professors, yet no particular and authentical Record of them by
name: Records there might be many, in ancient time, yet not now extant, at
least for us to come by: Yet we will not refuse to deal with you in your own
Question, if you, in like manner, will undertake the like Task in your own
defense, and maintain the Affirmative in the like Question, which we now
propound unto you here in writing.

Whether the Romish Church, (that is, a Church holding the particular entire
doctrine of the new Romanists, as it is comprised in the Council of Trent) was
in all ages visible, especially in the first 600. years; and whether the names
of such visible or legible Romanists in all ages can be showed and proved out of
good Authors?

Here the Relator omitteth to tell how M. Fisher caused the two Papers, written
and given the old Gentleman, as is above said, to be publicly read: by the
first whereof, it appeared why he had propounded such a Question* by the
second, the true sense and meaning of the Question was explicated, and a
convenient Method of proceeding was prescribed, with due proportion to be
observed on both sides.

Then D. Featly beginning to argue (in this place, and not in the end of the
Disputation, where the Protestant Relator places it) did say: M. Fisher, I
wish, I warn, I command, I conjure you, to answer truly and sincerely, in
the sight of God, and as you will answer it at the Day of Judgment. To this M.
Fisher said: I willingly accept your warning, and I wish you to observe the
like.

About this time M. Sweet propounded these Conditions to be observed.

1. That al bitter speeches should be forborne. 2. That nothing should be
spoken, or heard, but to the purpose.
Which second he did propound, to prevent impertinent digressions.

Nevertheless, after this, D. Featly made a long digression, altogether
impertinent to the Question which he was to dispute of* for in stead of proving
a Protestant visible Church, and naming visible Protestant, in all ages, he made
a vain and unseasonable bragging offer, to disp^oue the Roman Church in diverse
particular points (as are rehearsed by the Protestant Relator) which he read
out of a Paper. Whereunto as he was speaking M. Sweet according to the second
Condition, before propounded, answered, That th^se things were then
impertinent, and nothing to the purpose. But M. Sweet did not say, as the
Relator reports, They are Scholastical points, not Fundamental. Neither was
there any such Syllogism then made, as the Relator annexeth.

D. Featly having ended his long digression, M. Fisher said (as the Protestant
Relator tells:) After you have proved your Church visible in all ages, and
named the Professors thereof, I will satisfy you in your particulars.

D. Featly. In the mean while, name but one Father, but one Writer of note,
who held the particulars above named for five hundred years after Christ.


To which instant demand of D. Featly (says the Relator) nothing was answered.

But neither was this said, neither was it needful to answer. First, for that
M. Fisher formerly answered, That he would satisfy al particulars, after the
visibilitie of the Protestant Church, in all ages, was showed, as the present
Question required. Secondly, because to dispute of these particulars, was
unseasonable, and not to the present purpose: as likewise was that other
motion, made by Sir Humfrey Lynd to M. Sweet, to dispute of Transubstantiation
out of S. Augustine. To which motion, being (as I said) unseasonable, M. Sweet
answered well, according to his second Prouiso, saying: That is not now to the
Question.

Then D. Featly said (says the Protestant Relator) there are two means only
to prove any thing by necessary inference, to wit, a Syllogism, and an
Induction; other forms of Argument have no force, but as they are reducible to
these. I prove the visibilitie of our Church by both, and first, by a
Syllogism.

No, says M. Fisher, you must not only prove it to be visible, but so
visible, as the names of Protestant Professors in all ages may be showed out of
good Authors.

To this, D. Featly said: There are two Qu^res in your Question: First, Whether
the Protestants Church were in all ages visible? And secondly, Whether the names
of such visible Protestants can be showed?

No, said M. Fisher, my Question is meant to be but one entire Question: and
so, to cut off al needless wrangling (made by D. White and D. Featly about the
Aduerbe Vtrum, Whether, and the Copulative Et, And, as if Grammar Scholars had
been disputing, rather then grave Divines, who were not to stand upon rigor of
Grammar, especially in this case, where the sense of the Speaker is plain, and
may well stand with Grammar) M. Fisher said: The Question being mine, it
pertains to me to tell the meaning; and my meaning was, only to make it one
Question: viz.

Whether the Protestants Church were so visible, as the names of visible
Protestants, in all ages, may be showed out of good Authors?

Wherefore, if you will dispute, you must dispute in my sense, and must conclude
the Affirmative: viz. The Protestant Church was so visible, as the names of the
Professors in all ages may be showed out of good Authors. Prove this, or prove
nothing.

D. Featly. That Church, which is so visible, as the Catholic Church ought to
be, and as the Popish Church is pretended by M. Fisher to be, is so visible,
that the names of the Professors thereof may be produced and showed, in all
ages, out of good Authors.

But the Protestant Church is so visible, as the Catholic Church ought to be,
and as the Popish Church is pretended to be. Ergo


M. Fisher. I deny the Minor. Minorem probate.


D. Featly. That Church, whose Faith is eternal, and perpetual, and unchanged,
is so visible, as the Catholic Church ought to be, and the Popish Church is
pretended by M. Fisher to be.

But the Faith of the Protestant Church is eternal, perpetual, and unchanged.
Ergo


To this, M. Fisher answered: first excepting against the Word, Eternal;
saying: Faith is not eternal, or ab aeterno.

It is true, said a Minister who sat by; Faith is not eternal, but euiternal.

Neither so, said M. Fisher; for it is not to be for ever in Heaven.

It is eternal (said D. White) in Predestination.

So (said M. Sweet) D. White himself may be said to be eternal: and he might
have added, this present Disputation may be said to be Eternal.

D. Featly. You have a purpose, M. Fisher, to cauil: you know my meaning well
enough, by the term Perpetual; to wit, that Christian Faith, which has
continued from Christ's first publishing it, til this present, and shall continue
until his second coming, etc.


If this were said by D. Featly (which is doubted) he should have considered,
how he and D. White cauilled upon the word Whether, and And, when they knew M.
Fishers meaning well enough; yea, after they had heard him plainly explicate
his meaning: Whereas M. Fisher only put them in mind to speak properly, like
Scholars, and did not cauil or reply, after D. Featly did explicate his
meaning. But to return to the argument.

D. Featly. That Church which holds this Faith, you believe shall be so
visible, that the names of the Professors thereof may be showed in all ages.

But the Protestant Church holds this perpetual Faith. Ergo


M. Fisher. Your argument is a fallacy, called Petitio principij.


D. Featly. A demonstration, a causa, or a priori, is not Petitio principij.

But such is my argument. Ergo

Is it not a sounder argument, to prove the visibilitie of the Professors from
the truth of their Faith; then as you, the truth of your Faith from the
visibilitie of Professors? Visible Pastors argue not a right Faith. Heretics,
Mahumetans, and Gentiles, have visible Professors of their Impieties: yet will
it not hence sollow, that they have a right beleese. On the contrary, we know
by the Promises of God in the Scripture, That the Church which maintayneth the
true Faith, shall have always Professors, more or less, visible.


M. Sweet. You ought to prove the truth of your Church a posteriori, for that
is to the Question, and not a priori.


D. Fealty. Shall you prescribe me my Weapons? Is not an argument a priori*
better then an argument a posteriori? etc.


To this, M. Fisher said: A proof a posteriori is more demonstratiue then a
priori.

Thus far the Relator; who has here added much more then was said: and in
particular, those formal words which he reports M. Fisher to have said: viz.
A proof a posteriori is more demonstratiue then a priori, M. Fisher did not
speak: perhaps he might say, That a proof a posteriori does better
demonstrate to us then a priori: not meaning in general to prefer a Logical
demonstration a posteriori before that which is a priori; but that such a
proof a posteriori, as he in this present Question required, and as the
Question it self exacted, would better demonstrate or show to al sorts of men,
which is the true Church, then any proof which D. Featly or D. White can make
a priori, to prove the Protestant Church to be the true Church, as shall be
showed when need is, hereafter: at this present it may suffice to say to that
which D. Featly now obiecteth against the proof taken from visibilitie, That
although al kind of visible Professors do not argue right Faith, yet want of
visible Professors argues want of Christ's true Church. For supposing it to be
true, which even D. Featly himself here says (according to the Protestants
Relator) viz. We know by the Promises of God in the Scripture, that the Church
which maintains the true Faith, shall have always Professors, more or less,
visible: and (as M. Fisher further proved in one of the foresaid Papers, given
to the old Gentleman before this meeting) so visible, as their names in all ages
may be showed out of good Authors. Supposing also out of D. Whitaker, contra
Dur. l. 7. p. 472. That whatsoever is foretold by the ancient Prophets, of the
propagation, amplitude, and glory of the Church, is most clearly witnessed by
Histories: and supposing lastly out of D. John White, in his Way. p. 338. That
things past cannot be showed to us, but by Histories. Supposing all this (I say)
it is most apparent, That (if there cannot be produced (as there cannot) names
of Protestants, or of any other Professors of Christian Faith, in all ages, out
of Histories, to whom Gods Promises agree, beside those which are known Roman
Catholics) not Protestants, nor any other, but only the Roman Catholics are
the true Church of Christ; which teaches the true Faith, and of which al sorts
are to learn infallible Faith, necessary to Salvation.

But as for the argument, which D. Featly will needs persuade us not to be
Petitio principy, but Demonstratio a priori: viz.

That Church, whose Faith is eternal, and perpetual, and unchanged, is so
visible, as the Catholic Church ought to be, and as the Popish Church by M.
Fisher is pretended to be.

But the Faith of Protestants Church is eternal, perpetual, and unchanged.

Ergo, The Protestants Church is so visible as the Catholic Church ought to
be, and the Popish Church is pretended by M. Fisher to be.

This argument, as it is set down, is so far from being a Demonstration
(whose property is to convince the Understanding) as it is not a probable or
Moral persuasion: For I am verily persuaded, that no wise man (not already
possessed with Protestant opinions) will or can be so much as morally convinced,
or in any sort probably persuaded by it, That Protestants be the true visible
Church; more then a man (in case of doubt) can be by the like argument, which a
man may make to prove himself and his Brethren to be as well spoken of, as any
in all the Parish. Thus:

Those who are in heart true honest men, are as well spoken of, as any in all the
Parish.

But I and my Brethren are in heart true honest men. Ergo

As this proof is not able to make any man not partially affected to believe
these men to be well spoken of, or to be honest men; so neither can D. Featlyes
proof make any wise man believe Protestants to be the true visible Church, or
to have the true Faith.

Secondly, If the term, That Church, be understood only of a particular
Church (as for example, the Church of England) it is so far from a Logical
Demonstration, as it has not in it any Logical form, according to any of the
usual Moods, Barbara, Caelarent, etc. But if it be understood universally, of
every Church, that is, or may be; then both Mayor and Minor are false: and so
it cannot be a Demonstration, whose property is to consist of most certainly
true propositions. The Mayor in this latter sense is false: for that there may
be a Church, or Company, who may have inward Faith, eternal and unchanged (as
for example, a Church of Angels) who for want of visible Profession are not so
visible, as the Catholic Church ought to be. The Minor is false also: for the
Protestant Church has not the true Primitive Faith, neither is that Faith they
have unchanged, but so often changed, and so much subject to change, as one may
say (as a great Person in Germany once said of some Protestants) What they
hold this year, I do in some sort know; but what they will hold next year, I
do not know. Which is true, in regard they have no certain and infallible
Rule, sufficient to preserve them from change. But if D. Featly shall say, That
he neither meant the term, That Church, in either of the aforesaid senses,
but meant to signify by it, that one holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church,
which the holy Scriptures do show both to have perpetual unchanged Faith, and
also to be perpetually visible: Then indeed the Mayor is true. But the Minor is
most false: and so the argument is far from being a Demonstration, especially
when it endeuoreth to prove Magis no^um per ignotius, viz. the Visibilitie
(which is easily known) by the truth of Doctrine (which is more hard to be
known) especially by only Scripture of the sense: Whereof (according to
Protestants, who say, The whole Church may err) no particulat man can be
infallibly sure. For if the whole Church or Company (to whom Christ promised
the Spirit of (...)
Truth, to teach them al truth) may err: Then much more may every particul^r
man err; and consequently, no particular man can be infallibly sure of the
sense of Scripture.

Thirdly, This argument beggeth or supposes that which is in question: For in
asking, which is the true visible Church, or Congregation of the true faithful;
we ask, at least virtually* which is the true Faith; in regard, the true
Church cannot be without this true Faith. Yea, therefore do we ask which is
the true Church; that of it, being first known by other Marks, we may learn
what is the true Faith in all points, in which we yet know not what is to be
held for true Druine Faith.

Fourthly, Although Faith be pre-required to be in some or other members of the
true Church; yet inward Faith alone, without some outward profession, by which
it is made visible, or sensible, does not sufficiently make a man to be a
member of the visible Church.

Let D. Featly therefore look back upon his argument, and tell us what
Academical Learning taught him to call it a Demonstration a priori.

But let us hear how M. Fisher did answer this argument, according to the
Protestant Relator.

M. Fisher. I distinguish the Mayor.

That Church, whose Faith is perpetual, and unchanged, so as the names of the
Professors may be showed; is so visible, as the Catholic Church ought to be,
and as M. Fisher pretends the Roman Church to be: I grant it.

That Church, whose Faith is perpetual, and unchanged, yet so, as the names
cannot be showed in all ages; is visible, as the Catholic Church ought to be,
and as M. Fisher pretends the Roman Church to be: I deny it. To the Minor I
apply the like distinction; and consequently, to the Conclusion in the same
manner.


D. Featly. What? answer you to the Conclusion also? This is a strain of new
Logic.


This idle exception, M. Fisher (attending to the matter) did not regard: but
might have told him, That it is not vnuseal, after a distinction made both to
Mayor and Minor, to apply the like to the Conclusion. For, although it be true,
That in a Syllogism, when Mayor and Minor are absolutely granted, the
Conclusion must not be denied, nor distinguished, but must be absolutely
granted; yet when Mayor and Minor also be distinguished, the Conclusion may be
distinguished. And I marvel what Rule of Logic D. Featly can bring against
this?

In like manner, if D. Featly did say any such words as the Relator tells:
viz. A strange distinction of the eternity of Faith, by Professors to be
named, and not to be named: What are Professors nominable, or innominable, to
the eternity of Faith?

If (I say) D. Featly did say these words; it is like, M. Fisher did not regard
them, as being impertinent: but might have said, That this distinction had not
relation to eternal Faith, but to a Church which has eternal Faith: about
which, it imports much to know, whether it has Professors nominable, or
innominable. For if it has not, it is invisible; or, at least, not so visible
as the true Catholic Church (of which, al sorts in times past have learned,
and in time to come must learn the infallible Divine Faith, necessary to
Salvation) ought to be.

Therefore M. Fisher might well (though I think he did not) say as the Relator
tells, Toll distinctionem, M. Fisher.
and conclude that which I deny: That the Faith of the Protestant Church is so
eternal, as the names of visible Protestants in all ages may be showed.

To prove this, D. Featly made this argument, according to the Protestant
Relator.

D. Featly. That Church, whose Faith is the Catholic and Primitive Faith, once
given to the Saints, without which no man can be saved, is so perpetual, as the
names may be showed in all ages.

But the Faith of the Protestant Church is the Primitive and Catholic Faith,
once given to the Saints, without which none can be saved.

Ergo, The Faith of the Protestant Church is so perpetual, as the names may be
showed in all ages.


Note here, That the Relator puts in the Margent, ouer-against the Minor,
Tollitur distinctio. But how false this Marginal Note is, appears to any who
will reflect upon what the Distinction was, and what I have now said of it; For
this Minor speaking only of Faith, does not take away the distinction applied
to the Church.

That which D. Featly thinks to be a strain of new Logic, to wit, to
distinguish upon a proposition, without applying the distinction to any
particular term, is not so strange as he makes it. As for example: When one
says, An Ethiopian is white; neither the term Ethiopian alone, nor the
term White alone in it self needs distinction, because it is not
Aequiuocal: but the whole proposition, being Amphibological, needs; it being
true, if it be meant, The Ethiopian is white in the Teeth: and false, if it be
meant, He is white in his whole Body.

To the argument. M. Fisher said: I deny the Minor. But marking, that hereupon
D. Featly would have transferred the Question to endless disputes, about
particular Controversies, from the present general Question, about the
perpetual visible Church; whose Professors names (as himself says) may be
showed in all ages. M. Fisher (I say) marking this, would not let D. Featly make
his proof: but having said, I deny the Minor; he presently added, by way of
explication, these ensuing words:

My first Question was, Whether there must not be a true visible Church of
Christ in all ages, of which al sorts must learn that infallible Faith, which
is necessary to Salvation? and therefore, we must first find such a Church,
before men can know it to be such, as they may securely learn of it, what is
the infallible Faith, necessary to Salvation.

While M. Fisher was beginning to make this explication, D. Featly insulted, as
if M. Fisher durst not, for Conscience, deny the Minor absolutely. To whom, M.
Fisher said: I do absolutely deny it. And then he went forward with the
aforesaid explication. Which ended, M. Fisher said: And hereupon I answer
again to the said Minor; If this proposition be taken simply in it self, I
absolutely deny it: but if this proposition be considered (as it must be) as
related to the first Question, and the end thereof; I further add, That it is
not pertinent to that end, for which the whole Dispute was intended: viz. To
show to those who were not able by their own abilities to find out the
infallible Faith, necessary to Salvation, without learning of the true visible
Church of Christ: and consequently, Visibilitie of the Church is first to be
showed, before the truth of Doctrine in particular shall be showed.

To this (as the Relator says) D. Featly replied: viz. First, What speak you
of those, who are not able by their own abilities to find out Faith? Is any
man able, by his own ability, without the help of Divine Grace? Secondly,
What helps the Visibilitie, to confirm the Truth of the Church? Visibilitie
indeed proves a Church, but not the true Church.

These words either were not spoken, or M. Fisher did not regard them, being in
the midst of his answer: in which he went on, showing the necessity of a
visible Church, by a saying of D. Fields: viz. Seeing the Controversies D.
Field in his Epistle Dedicatone.
of Religion at this day are so many in number, and so intricate in nature,
that few have time and leisure, fewer strength of wit and understanding, to
examine them: what remains for men, desirous of satisfaction in things of
such consequence, but diligently to seek out which, among all the Societies of
men in the World, is that Spouse of Christ, the Church of the living God, which
is the Pillar of the Truth; that so they may embrace her Communion, follow her
Direction, and rest in her Judgment?

M. Fisher therefore (I say) being busily speaking this, did not regard what D.
Featly did then say, but might easily have answered: First, That he never
meant, that any were able of themselves, without help of Gods grace, to
attain the true Faith; which hinders not, but that some may have that
ability of Wit and Learning, by which they can better examine Controversies of
Faith, then those who want these abilities. Secondly, Although Visibilitie
alone do not prove the true Church, yet it (supposing Gods Promises, That the
true Church shall be always visible) much helps: and want of Visibilitie, in
any one age, proves a Company not to be the true Church.

D. Featly. The sum of your former answer was, That the Minor of my former
Syllogism was both false, and impertinent. It is neither false, nor
impertinent: Ergo, your answer is false, and impertinent. And first, it is not
false.


M. Fisher. I answer to the Antecedent, That it is both false, and impertinent:
but I add, That for the present it must be proved to be pertinent; or else it
diuerteth us from the chief end of our dispute: which was, as I said before,
That infallible Truth may be learned of the true visible Church; and not the
true visible Church, by first finding every particular infallible Truth: and by
that, to conclude which is the true visible Church.


D. Featly. I prove that the Minor is pertinent* That Minor proposition, which
together with the Minor does necessarily and directly infer the conclusion of
the Minor last denied, is pertinent to the probation of that Minor denied.

But the Minor proposition of the third Syllogism, does necessarily and
directly infer the conclusion of the Minor last denied.

Ergo, the Minor of that Syllogism is pertinent.

M. Fisher did distinguish the Mayor. That Minor proposition, which together
with the Mayor does necessarily infer the Conclusion, so as it may serve for
that purpose to which the whole Dispute is ordained; I grant it to be pertinent.

But if it do infer the Conclusion; yet not so, as may serve for that
purpose for which the whole Dispute was ordained: I deny the Mayor.


Here (says the Protestant Relator) the Disputants iarred, and so the Writer
ceased.

What this Jar was, is not set down, nor by me remembered, unless it were
about this subsequent Syllogism.

D. Featly. That Minor, which together with the Mayor, inferres the Proposition
last denied, the whole process having been per directa media, is pertinent to
that purpose to which the Dispute is ordained.

But the Minor, together with the Mayor, directly and necessarily inferres the
Proposition last denied; the whole Processus having been made per directa
media.

Ergo, It is pertinent to that purpose, to which the Dispute is ordained.


M. Fisher. Your Media in your Syllogismes were directa, but they tended not ad
directum finem.


If M. Fisher did say these words, his meaning may be gathered out of his
former explication: in which he showed, how the direct end of the Disputation
was (not to treat of particular Controversies, but) to find out first by other
means the true visible Church, whose Professors names may be showed in all ages
out of good Authors. Which being once found, men desirous of satisfaction,
might (as D. Field said) rest in her Judgment; who otherwise (as Lawyers
without a Judge) might wrangle in every Controversy, without end.

Those Media therefore directa (as D. Featly termed them) might in some sort
be so termed, as being directed by D. Featly to his own end, of transferring
the Question to particular Controversies, but not ad directum finem; that is,
not ordained to the direct end of the whole Disputation: viz. To show a visible
Church of Protestants in all ages, whose names may be showed out of good
Authors. Which (supposing D. Featly would have proceeded sincerely) ought to
have been his only end: as M. Fisher signified, by saying these words;
Responsum nullum dabunt pr^ter vnum quod nunquam dabunt* ecce nomina.

D. Featly therefore had no just cause to say, as the Protestant Relator makes
him say: It is a Bull, M. Fisher, media, directa, yet not ad directum finem;
that is, direct, and not direct: for media are said to be directa only ratione
finis.

D. Featly (I say) had no just cause to say this: and M. Sweet might well tell
him of his fault, in seeking to transfer the Question from the Church, to
particular points of Faith, as the Protestant Relator says he did; saying:

Is not, Transitio a genere in genus, a fault in arguing? etc. But M. Sweet did
not speak these formal words which the Protestant Relator has set down:
only he asked the Doctors, Whether it seemed strange to them, that a Question
should be transferred by a good Syllogism: which he said, in regard D. Featly
endeavored to prove his argument to be pertinent, because his Syllogismes were
good.

Here D. Featly (as the Protestant Relator tells) said: I acknowledge, that
Transitio a genere in genus, is a fault in disputing; but I never heard, that
the inference of the effect by the cause, was Transitio a genere in genus: such
was my argument. For Faith in a Believer produces profession and confession
thereof, which makes a visible member; and the like profession of many members,
a visible Church. Where the cause is perpetual, the effect must needs be
perpetual: Therefore, where the Faith is perpetual, the profession thereof must
needs be; and consequently, the visibilitie of the Professors thereof, is this
Transitio a genere in genus?

But D. Featly did not say all this; yet if he did, it does not make any thing
against M. Sweet: and for him to speak of the cause, being obscure, when the
Question is only about the effect, being more apparent and clear (as in our
case) is a fault in honest and sincere dealing. Neither is M. Sweets Logic
less to be esteemed, if he had termed that fault Transitio a genere in genus:
For a cause as a cause, and an effect as an effect do not only differ specie,
but also genere: and beside, a proof a priori and a posteriori are diverse
kinds of proofs.

Here (says the Protestant Relator) those of M. Fishers side calling for
Names, D. White said:

Where are your Names?

This is nothing but apparent tergiuersation. You will not answer any argument
directly, nor suffer us to proceed in our arguments: and therefore I require
you, M. Fisher, according to the order mentioned in the beginning, for each
party to have an hour and a half for that you now oppose, and suffer me to
answer.

Prove by Christ and his Apostles, or by any of the Fathers for the first six
hundred years, these present Tenets of the Roman Church:

and then he named (as the Protestant Relator says) six particular Points.

But D. White did not speak thus, neither did he in all the Conference make any
such long discourse. Yet if he had so said. M. Fisher might well have answered,
as the Protestant Relator says he did.

M. Fisher. When you D. White, or D. Featly, have proved your Church to be
visible in all ages, and named visible Protestants; then will I satisfy your
demands.


But before this was done, M. Fisher had no reason to divert to those
particular matters, nor to produce Names of Catholics in all ages; in regard it
was his adversaries fault to spend so long time in impertinent Syllogismes,
which should have been employed in naming and proving Protestants in all ages:
which by the prescribed method was first to be done, before M. Fisher needed to
prove any thing pertaining to the Roman Church* Worthily therefore might M.
Sweet call for Names of Protestants, and well might he say: That if Protestants
had been in all ages, their Names (at least some) in every age might be
produced.

Unto which, as the Protestant Relator says, D. Featly replied, saying: That
is a Non sequitur, etc. What say you to a People of Africa, who (if we may
believe Pliny) have no Names at al?

M. Boulton. Yet they have descriptions, and may be known by some Periphrasis.


D. Featly. What say you then to the Heretics, called Acephali, who are so
called, because their Head and Author cannot be named, nor particularly
described; yet the Author was a visible man? Are al visible men's Names upon
record? Are all the Records that were in former times, now to be produced?


To this Objection, M. Boulton answered: That those Acephali held some
particular Doctrine, which did amount to the nature of a Name, sufficient to
distinguish them from others; insinuating hereby, that these Acephali were not
Anonymi.

Further, it may be answered, That it is not certain, whether they had any
particular Author: for some say, That they were a Company, who in the
Controversy betwixt John the Bishop of Antioch, and Ciril of Alexandria,
behaved themselves like Neutrals, submitting themselves to neither, as to their
Head. Others think, That they were certain men, who being the favorers of
Petrus Mogus the Heretic, did afterward renounce him from being their Head,
because he would not accurse the Council of Calcedon. Others say, That one
Seuerus, Bishop of Antioch, was their Author.

But howsoever this particular were, it do^th not conclude, That there could be
in all ages visible Professors of the Protestants Faith, whereof no Story nor
other ancient Monument makes mention of Names, or Opinions, or Places of abode
of any of them, or of those who opposed them: as Stories make mention of some
of these circumstances, both of the Acephali, and whatsoever other eminent
Professors of every true or false Religion.

We do not require, that al visible men's names should be upon record, nor al
Records produced. For although to prove such a visible Church as that of our
Savior Christ's, described in Scripture to be spread over the World, a small
number of visible Professors be not sufficient, as S. Augustine proves
against the Donatists; Aug. lib. de vnitate Ecclesiae.
yet to show how confident we are of our cause, we for the present only
require, That three eminent Protestants Names in all ages be produced out of
good Authors. But they are so far from being able to produce three, as they
cannot name one in every age (as is clearly proved in the Protestants
Apology) neither indeed can they abide with any patience, when they be much
pressed in this Point: as appears by diverse who have been urged; and in
particular, by D. Featly, in this Conference: who having been called upon
several times to produce Names, as he had undertaken; at one time he burst
forth into these words, set down by the Protestant Relator: What? will nothing
content you, but a Buttrie-Booke? You shall have a Buttrie-Booke, if you will
stay a while.

Note (Reader) this Doctors want of gravity and patience, and what a fit Title
he gives to a Catalogue of Names of Protestants, who (indeed) are more like to
be found in a Buttrie-Booke, then in any good Record of Antiquity: as having
had their beginning of late in one Martin Luther; who, after his Arostasie,
more respected the Buttrie, then any Ecclesiastical Story.

But how unwilling D. Featly was to bring out this his Buttrie-Booke,
appears; in that after the Auditorie had long stayed and often called for the
Names of Protestants in all ages, which should have been given at first; after
not only Catholics, but also diverse of the Protestants (being weary and not
willing to hear any more of his dilatorie and impertinent Syllogismes) had
entreated him to give over his arguments, and to produce Names.

First, he said: If I should give over, M. Fisher would say of me, as he said
of D. White, That I was at a Non*plus: and therefore I will go forward in
arguing.

To which, M. Fisher said: Then will I go forward in answering.

But the Company earnestly calling for Names, D. Featly bad the Writer set
down in writing, That he was willing to proceed; but to satisfy the Company,
he would divert unto the Names.

Which M. Fisher seeing to be written, said: Unless this be blotted out, it
shall be set down for Answer; That hitherto D. Featly having diuerted from the
chief end of the Question, will now speak to the purpose.

M. Sweet also said: That it was a manifest wrong. Whereupon the former words
were blotted out.

And it was written (as the Protestant Relator says) That both the Disputants
being willing to proceed, D. Featly was desired by the Company, to produce
the Names of such Protestants as were extant before Luther, in all ages.

This being written, and subscribed both by D. Featly and M. Fisher, D. Featly
proceeded to his Induction. But before he would begin to name any, he first
endeavored to fore-stal his hearers with an il opinion against M. Fisher,
saying:

There is no credit to be given to this man, who not only slandered D. White
in a former Conference, but also falsely writ what passed betwixt M. Musket and
my self, in a certain Disputation.

M. Fisher hearing this false slander, did rise up, and for the honor of the
Truth, and clearing of his Credit, did (before the Audience) solemnly protest,
upon his Conscience, That wittingly and willingly he did never wrong either D.
White, or D. Featly, in report of any former Conference. And if any thing were
false written, it was not willingly: but, as the Protestant Writer of this
present Conference has sometimes mistaken the words of the Disputants; which,
as he (being warned) did correct: so did I (said M. Fisher.)

To this, nothing was replied: and therefore I suppose that the Audience was
well satisfied of M. Fishers sincerity in his Relation, and writing of the
former Disputations.

After this, D. Featly named for the first age, our Lord and Savior Christ, and
the Twelve Apostles, and S. Paul, and S. Ignatius: after which he stayed a
while, as if he studied for more Names; but not remembering any more, whom he
would set down for the first age, he said: These, not denying others, may
serve for the first age.

Then turning to M. Fisher, he said: Let us dispute of these. No, said M.
Fisher; name first of al ages. What? said D. Featly, will you not dispute of
Christ and his Apostles? Yes, said M. Fisher, in due place: but first name the
rest in all ages, and then I will answer you. What? said D. Featly, do not
Christ and his Apostles deserve the first place? M. Fisher: I will not answer,
before you have named the rest.

Then, said D. Featly, in a heat: Well, you will not dispute of Christ and his
Apostles? Then you grant, Christ and his Apostles to be Protestants. And so
instantly (without expecting M. Fishers answer) he turned himself to the
Audience, and said: He grants Christ and his Apostles to be Protestants.
Whereupon diverse of the Audience made such a showt (as if they had gotten a
Victory) with such a noise, as M. Fisher endeavoring to answer, for a time
could not be heard. But he rising up, and with his Hand and Voice craving
silence, made such as would hear him, understand how falsely D. Featly had
slandered him to his Face; and either then, or upon some like occasion, he
said: What may I expect behind my back, when you thus mis-report me to my Face?

And in this sort when many of the company were willing to depart, D. Featly
(being called upon as it seemed) by some of his companions to go away, did
arise and offer to begone. yet in his rising he turned to M. Fisher, saying:
Will you dispute upon Christ and his Apostles, or no? To which M. Fisher said,
I will, if you will stay* And stretching out his hand, he took D. Featly by
his arm, offering to stay him, yet he in that abrupt manner went away.

This is the true Relation of this last passage; by which the falsehood of that
Relation which is made by the Protestant Relator, may appear: For to make the
best of D. Featly his Tergiuersation, or rather plain flight from proceeding
in his Induction, and to cast some color over the matter, by which he may make
Protestants believe, that D. Featly had reason, and M. Fisher was to blame;
First he makes M. Fisher say, You shall not begin with Christ and his
Apostles: as if M. Fisher had prohibited him to begin with the names of Christ
and his Apostles, which he did not: neither did he say those words at all,
which the Relator reports. Secondly he suppresseth in silence M. Fishers
express yealding to dispute about Christ and his Apostles, which M. Fisher did
express two several times: once thus; I will dispute of them in due place:
the second time when D. Featly would needs begone, and in going asked, will you
dispute or no? thus, I will, if you will stay. Thirdly he relates a Syllogism
to be made in this last passage, which is not remembered; but if it were, it was
very impertinent to an Induction, and may easily be answered out of that which
was formerly said against a like Syllogism called by D. Featly, A
Demonstration a priori, but is proved not to be so much worth as a probable
proof a posteriori. Fourthly he relates a coniuring charge to have been made
by D. Featly to M. Fisher, in this last passage, which was not made.

But to return to the breaking up of the Conference. So soon as D. Featly had
in the abrupt manner aforesaid, gone away, and left M. Fisher and M. Sweet,
and diverse others of good rank sitting at, or near about the Table, amongst
whom was the Earl of Warwick* who not liking (as it seemed) that the matter
should end in that ill fashion, made a speech to M. Fisher, and told him, that
the Doctor should come again, and give the rest of the Names of Protestant
Professors after some days, it being requisite that the Doctor should have
time to study for them. To which M. Fisher said, he was willing he should take
time. Then the writing of such things as had passed in the Conference (being
subscribed under D. Featly, and M. Fishers hands) was wrapped up in a paper,
and sealed up with three seals, one with my Lord of Warwicks, and the other
with two other seals, and left in Sir Humfrey Lynds hands, or some other
Protestant, with promise that it should be kept vnopened till the next meeting,
and that M Fisher afterward should have it, or a true copy of it: which
promise has not yet been performed, partly by reason the next meeting was
prohibited; but by whose means this prohibition came, although I will not
Censure (as the Protestant Relator says, a Romanist has confidently auerred)
that the Protestant party labored to have all future meetings, touching this
occasion, forbidden, because they cannot make good that which they have
undertaken about naming of Protestant Professors in all ages; yet I cannot
hinder men to have such like suspicion, because I know it is impossible for
Protestants to perform that vndertake^ Task.

Now whereas my self have heard that some suspected, that the Catholic party
had made means to get the second meeting hindered, this idle fancy has no
foundation of any probability. For all Catholics are confident, that
Protestants can never produce out of good Authors, Names of the Professors of
this their new Reformation, no more then any other Sect of Heretics can
produce the Names of men of their profession in all Ages since Christ: whereas
Roman Catholics in their printed Books ordinarily set down the Names of
their Professors, and chief Pastors in all Ages: And so the victory being so
certain on their side, they had no reason to hinder the meeting, whereby this
question should be determined, especially in such sort as is prescribed in M.
Fishers second paper (above rehearsed) written before the last meeting. And in
particular for M. Fisher and M. Sweet, it is most certain, that they much
desired the second meeting, as may appear: First, in that the next day after
the last meeting, they went to Sir Humfrey Lynds house, offering to give unto
him a Catalogue of Names of such as they would defend to have been Professors
of the Roman Faith in all Ages, that he might deliver it to D. Featly and D.
White to consider of against the next meeting, upon condition that they should
also reciprocally deliver up to M. Fisher, and M. Sweet, a Catalogue of such
as they would defend to have been Protestants in all Ages, to be considered off
against the said next day of meeting. The which offer seemed to another
Protestant (who was then in Sir Humfrey Lynds company) very reasonable and
equal. But Sir Humfrey said: No, I know the Doctors mynds, that they will not
give up any Catalogue before the very meeting: and he asked M. Fisher, why he
did so much press the Doctors for names of men of their

profession in all Ages? To whom M. Fisher answered that the reason (to deal
plainly) was, because he was fully persuaded, that they could not give up any
such Names. After this M. Fisher and M. Sweet reflecting upon Sir Humfreys
words, began to suspect, that there would be no more meeting, unless the Earl
of Warwick (who had engaged himself by his word to M. Fisher that it should
be) did press the Doctors unto it: wherefore it seemed good that the Earl
should be moved heerunto by a letter written by M. Fisher unto him, the copy
whereof I have thought good, to insert here as follows.

Right Honorable Lord.
I esteem it a special providence of God, that your Lordship was present at a
late Conference, wherein D. White and D. Featly undertook to show against me,
and my companion, that the Protestant Church had been visible in all Ages, and
that their Professors might be named, especially in all Ages, before Luther.
Your Lordship may remember the substance of all the proof to have consisted in
this, That the true Church was always so visible, as the Professors thereof in
all Ages might be named: But the Protestants was the true Church; we refused to
dispute of the Minor, because it transferred the question, and avoided that
plain proof of the visible Church, which was then propounded and expected.
If, as they conclude, they are able to name their Professors in all Ages, why
did they refuse to give us a Catalogue of theirs, as we were ready to have
given them another of ours? Why went they about to prove they were able to name
them, when with less ado they might have named them? Where deeds are justly
expected, words without deeds are worthily suspected.

Certainly heerby they are so far from having discharged themselves, of the
great enterprise they undertook, as they stand more engaged then before to the
performance of it: for having now professed and acknowledged that the true
Church, or (to use their own words) the Church which is so visible as the true
Catholic Church ought to be, (and the Church whose faith is eternal and
vnehanged, must be) is able to name her Professors in all Ages, either for
their own honor, and for the satisfaction of the world, they must set down
the Names of their Professors in all Ages, or else they shamefully discover
themselves not to be that true and visible unchanged Church which is able to
name them. Again, at the length yealding as they did to show the continual
visibility of their Church, by a full induction of their visible Protestants in
all Ages (which they seemed to undertake with great confidence) why did they
stick in the first Age alone, refusing to name their Professors in the Ages
following, until the first were tried? May not the Answerer choose to deny
which part of the Argument he pleases? And was it ever heard that he should
be enforced to reply to one proposition alone, before the whole Argument,
whether it were Syllogism or Induction, were fully propounded? Very Nobly
therefore, and prudently your Lordship in the end desired another meeting, not
doubting that your own party within 3. or 4. days, would be content to give
us the Names of their Professors in all Ages, as we were ready to give them the
Names of ours, that thereby both sides might be the better prepared for a second
Trial, which when they have performed, we shall not fail to encounter with
them, either by way of speech or writing, as your Lordship (all things
considered) shall think fairest, or safest, or most convenient for the
discovery of Truth.

But if your Lordship shall not be able to obtain at their hands this your
most just and important Request, the defect of proof on their part must needs
be accounted a plain flight; and no man hereafter can prudently rely his
salvation upon that Church, which (for want of perpetual visibility proved)
they themselves shall have concluded to be false and faygned.

Thus expecting the issue heerof, and your Lordships further pleasure from the
mouth of this bearer, I remain, this first of July 1623.

Your Lordships servant in Christ, John Fisher.


By this Letter it may appear how willing M. Fisher and M. Sweet were, and
yet are, of their part, to have the matter soundly prosecuted, either by
meeting or writing. And I have heard that the Earl to whom this letter was
written, did send to D. Featly, so, as although there be a prohibition of
meeting, yet it is expected that by way of writing D. Featly go forward to
perform his undertaken Task, and setting down first the Names of such as he
judges to have been Protestant Professors in every Age since Christ: And then
proving out of good Authors, those whom he names, to have been members of the
Protestant Church, not condemning any one point wherein Protestants at this day
do differ from the ancient and Roman Church, and especially in any one of the
39. Articles which English Protestant Ministers are sworn unto; and therefore
so long as D. Featly, and D. White shall be silent, and not so much as by
writing give a Catalogue of Names of the Professors of their Church, all sorts
of people may justly take this their failing for a flight, and for a silent
granting, that they have not had visible Protestants in all Ages, whose Names
may be showed out of good Authors, as the question required. Whereupon
follows, that the Protestant Church is not the true Church of Christ, nor the
Preachers theroflawfully sent to teach, nor people securely warranted to hear
and learn of them, what is, and what is not to be believed, by Faith necessary
to salvation.

CHAP. III. Of the issue of the Conference.
THe Protestant Relator says, that the issue of the Conference was, that the
aforesaid M. Bugges came to Sir Humfrey Lynd, and gave him many thanks for the
said meeting, and assured him he was well resolved now of his Religion; that he
saw plainly that it was but the Jesuits bragging without proofs: and whereas
formerly by their Sophistical persuasions he was in some doubt of the Church,
he is now so fully satisfied of the truth of our Religion, that he does utterly
disclaim the Popish Priests company, and their doctrine also.

I have cause to doubt that this which the Relator says, is not true, for
thereby he makes the old Gentleman to be but of a weak capacity, or of a very
mutable nature. For first I am sure, there was no cause given in the Conference
of any such effectual resolution to be made by the old Gentleman. Secondly I
cannot see when this speech should be made by the Gentleman to Sir Humfrey. If
immediately after the Conference, it would argue toto much want of capacity: for
if he did but rightly conceive the true state of the question, in which
himself had especially desired to be satisfied (as I verily hope he did) he
might easily have marked the insufficiency of D. Featly his diuerting proofs,
which also were so answered, as the Audience for want of satisfaction in them,
urged him to leave off, and to produce Names of Protestants in all Ages: the
which producing of Names being so often and earnestly required to be done in
all Ages, and yet being only pretended (and that most falsely) to be done for
one Age, and the Conference being so abruptly left of by D. Featly before he
would go forward to name men in other Ages, especially in Ages before Luther,
as the Question required; any mean capacity might see, that the Question in
which the old Gentleman desired to be satisfied, was not fully answered, nor
consequently he satisfied.

Moreover the same Gentleman being present when the Earl of Warwick told M.
Fisher, that D. Featly should at another time come again to give Names of
Protestants in other Ages, he might easily, and doubtless did, understand that
as yet Names in all Ages were not given, nor consequently the Question
satisfied, in which he expected answer. Furthermore presently after he went
away from the Conference, he told M. Fisher himself, that he was glad, that at
the next meeting his Question should be answered, which showed that as yet he
did not conceive it to be answered.

Lastly, diverse days after all the trouble and stir was past (which was made
about the Conference) the old Gentleman was not so resolute a Protestant as the
Relator pretends: for meeting M. Fisher and M. Sweet, he desired them to
give him a Catalogue of Names of Professors of the Roman Church, saying, that
if after this the Doctors should not give him a Catalogue of Protestants, he
should dislike their cause. Which Catalogue M. Fisher and M. Sweet have ready
for him, but will not deliver, till he get the Doctors to make theirs ready,
that he may bring to them the Doctors Catalogue with one hand, and receive
theirs with the other to deliver to the Doctors.

All that can be suspected is, that in the very time of the said stir when
the old Gentleman either was, or feared to be called in question, it may
perhaps be, that he might say those words which the Relator me^tioneth; but
this (if it were) was only upon frailty or humane fear of trouble, and not any
firm and settled resolution grounded upon the Conference; since both before and
after he showed a contrary mind, as has been said.

As for other idle and false reports of a great Lady This great Lady did
expressly say: that the conference did make against Protestants, even as it was
related by you Protestant relator.
, or any other Catholics said to have been turned Protestants upon this
Conference, I neglect them as being notoriously false. It may be that some
Weaklings who not being present at the Conference, nor having commodity to
hear what passed, but from the lying lyps of some Protestants ( Who reported
that Fisher was overcome, and had yielded Christ and his Apostles to be
Protestants) some Weaklings I say, might perhaps be staggered, until they
heard the true report, that this was only an impudent slander, uttered by D.
Featly, And another Lady, who was present at the conference did protest (to one
that asked her how it moved her) that she was by it confirmed in Catholic
religion.
but in words and deeds contradicted by M. Fisher. But I make no question so
soon as these shall see or hear what is here related, they will be well
satisfied and confirmed in the Catholic truth; and that even Protestants
themselves, will be moved to harken more after the matter. And in case their
Doctors do not give them a better Catalogue of Names of Protestants in all
Ages, then they did in this Conference, they will doubt, as they have cause,
that the Protestant Church has not been so visible in all Ages, as (even by D.
Featly his argument is proved) the true Catholic Church ought to be; and
consequently that it is not the true Catholic Church, which in their Creed
they profess to believe, and out of which (as even Calvin confesses) they
cannot hope for remission of Lib. 1. Inst. c. 1. Sect. 4.
their sins, nor salvation of their souls.

CHAP. IIII. Containing a Reuiew, and Reflection upon the Premises.
NOw having made an end of this Relation, I am to entreat the Gentle Reader,
to reuiew it, or reflect upon it, and to call to mind and mark. 1. The
occasion, and consequently the end of the disputation. 2. The Question and true
meaning of it. 3. What Method was most fit to have been observed in treating
of this question. 4. What course was taken by the Protestant Disputant, and
what by the Catholic Respondent. All which being duly considered, thou will
better see what is to be judged of the whole Conference, and wilt make to thy
self more benefit of the matter treated in it, then perhaps hitherto thou have
done.

. 1. About the Occasion, and end of the Conference.
1. The occasion of this Dispute was, as thou have heard in the Relation, that
a certain old Protestant Gentleman was told (as the truth is) that there is no
salvation out of the true Catholic Church, and that to believe the Catholic
Church, is one of the Articles of the Creed, which every Christian is bound to
believe and know: and that this Church was no other besides the most ancient
and universally spread over the world, the known Catholic Roman Church, which
has had, and can yet show visible Pastors and other Professors in all Ages:
and that the Protestant Church (whereof for the present, he was a member) sprung
up of late, and could not be the true Church of Christ, as not having had (as
Christ's true Church ought to have) Pastors and Doctors, and lawfully sent
Preachers so visible, as the Names of them may be showed in all Ages out of
good Authors. And this was the occasion of the dispute; for heerupon the old
Gentleman was so much moved in conscience to doubt of the Protestants Religion,
that he could not be quiet till he had made means to get this matter discussed
in a Conference betwixt Catholic and Protestant Deuines, in such sort as in
the Relation has been told. And therefore, the end of this Conference was to
give this old Gentleman and others that should hear it, satisfaction in this
most important and necessary point. I call this point, most important and
necessary, in regard the certainty of every other point believed by infallible
divine Faith, necessary to salvation, depends upon it. For although every
point believed by divine Faith be in it self most true, and by reason of the
Divine revelation (made known to the world by Christ and his Apostles) most
certain and infallible; yet this truth and infallible certainty thereof is not
made known to us (according to the ordinary course of Gods providence) but
only by the means which God has appointed, Ephesians. 4. v. 11. etc.
to wit, by Pastors, Doctors, and Preachers Romans 10. v. 14. etc.
of the true visible Church of Christ.

. 2. About the Question and meaning of it.
The Question propounded to be treated in the Conference upon the occasion, and
for the end aforesaid, was*

Whether the Protestant Church was visible in all Ages, especially in the Ages
before Luther: and whether the Names of such visible Protestants may be showed
in all Ages, out of good Authors? The reason why this question was proposed
rather then any other, was* for that the old Gentleman was already persuaded
that there must be in all Ages a visible Church of Christ, having in it visible
Pastors and Doctors, and lawfully sent Preachers who are by Almighty God
appointed and authorized to teach, and of whom all sorts of people are
commanded and warranted to learn infallible Faith necessary to salvation. And
further, that this Church, and these her Pastors and Preachers, have been in all
Ages past, not only visible, but so visible as the Names at least of some
Pastors teaching, and some people learning the true Faith in all Ages, might
be produced out of good Authors. And therefore, as he had heard, the Roman
Catholics made no difficulty to produce out of good Authors the Names of their
Pastors and people in all Ages: so he much desired to hear, whether the Names
of Protestant Pastors and Preachers in all Ages could not also be produced out
of good Authors: for if they could, he meant to remain a Protestant as he had
been all his life time* but if they could not, he thought it necessary to leave
the Protestants, and to adhere to the Roman Church, to learn of it Faith
necessary to salvation.

By this appears that the sense and meaning of the Question could be no other
then that which M Fisher explicated in the Conference: viz. Whether the
Protestant Church was in all Ages so visible, especially in the Ages before
Luther, as the Names of Protestant Pastors and Preachers in all Ages may be
showed out of good Authors. And further that in case the Protestant Disputant
should undertake (as he did tooto boldly undertake) the affirmative part,
saying, and offering to prove in general, that the Names of such Pastors and
Preachers of Protestant Religion may be showed in all Ages out of good Authors;
it should further be required (as M. Fisher required of him) that he should
actually name in particular in every several Age such Pastors and Preachers as
he thought he could prove and defend to be Protestants. For if the Question had
not been thus understood, it should not have been answerable to the occasion
and end above said. Neither could the Protestant Disputant sufficiently
satisfy the doubt of the old Gentleman, being chiefly caused in that he had
heard, that no Protestant could name Pastors and Preachers of his profession in
all Ages out of good Authors; So as (to satisfy this doubt) it was not
sufficient only to say, nor only in general to prove by such Syllogismes as D.
Featly made, (which were such as the old Gentleman (I dare say) did not
understand) that the Names of Protestants in all Ages may be showed, but as M.
Fisher had showed him a printed book, in which Roman Catholic Pastors and
people were in particular named in all Ages: so he expected Protestant
Pastors, and people of all Ages to be named in particular, and after proved
and defended to be Protestants, as M. Fisher was ready to prove and defend whom
he would in particular name, to be Roman Catholics.

Furthermore although it may seem to some not much material, whether the
Protestant Disputant has begun to name first those of the first Age, and next
of the second, and so downward until Luther, or contrary wise to begin with
Luther and so upward till the Apostles and Christ; yet both the words of the
Question, and the doubt of the old Gentleman had been far better satisfied, and
the Tergiuersation which D. Featly used in the first age avoided, if M. Fisher
had urged him, as he might* first to begin with the Age immediately before
Luther (a confessed Protestant) and so go upward until Christ, the confessed
Fountain of infallible perpetual unchanged Truth: for then it would have been
clearly seen, even by the Confession of learned Protestants, particularly
Luther himself and others; that those who either are named, or can yet be
named by D. Featly, after he has sought (as I am told he went to seek)
Records in the great Library in Oxford, were not visible Protestants, but of a
different Profession, Faith, and Religion, and so different, as that they
cannot be justly deemed members of one and the same Protestant Church with
Luther, after his Apostasy from his Religious Order, and revolt from the Roman
Catholic Faith. For proof whereof, I for breuityes sake do refer every one who
desires full satisfaction in this point, to what is largely related and proved
in the Protestants Apology, in diverse places, but particularly tract. 2. cap.
2. sect. 11. subdiuision 3. And will only content my self to cite these few
testimonies for their sakes, who have not commodity to see that book.

First therefore Luth. ep. ad Argentin. anno 1525.
Luther himself says: We dare boast that Christ was first published by us.
Wherefore the Latheran Conradus Schushelb. in Theol. Calu. lib. 2. fol. 130. B.
versus fine.
Conradus Schushelburg says: It is impudency to say that many learned men in
Germany (and the like is of other Countries) before Luther did hold the
doctrine of the Lutheran Gospel. And another Geo. Mylli. in Augustanae
Confessionis explie. art. 7. de Eccl. page 137.
of them not only says in effect thus much, but proves it by this argument:
If there had been right believers that went before Luther in his office, there
had been no need of a Lutheran reformation. Another says: It Benedict
Morgest. trac. de Eccl, page 145.
is ridiculous to think that in the time before Luther any had the purity of
doctrine, and that Luther should receive it from them, and not they from
Luther: considering (says he) it is manifest to the whole world, that before
Luthers time, all Churches were overwhelmed with more then Cymerian darkness,
and that Luther was divinely raised up to discover the same, and to restore the
light of true doctrine. And least this may be thought to have been only the
conceit of Luther and Lutherans (who yet could better tell then D. Featly, D.
White, and such other new Masters) I will add heereunto what is said, first by
Calu. in I. epist. ep. 141.
Calvin, who does acknowledge, That in this Lutheran reformation, there was
made a discession or departure from all the world. Secondly by Bucer. ep. ad
Epis. Hereford.
Bucer, who calls Luther, the first Apostle of the reformed doctrine.
Thirdly, by Beza Beza in Theol. ep. epi. 5.
a principal Caluinist, who teaches that at this time, ordinary vocation of
the Churchmen was no where extant, and consequently teaches, that there was at
that time no visible Church; and so if any Church at all, it was only
invisible, as is affirmed eue^ by our own English Protestant Deuines, namely
M. Jewel in his Apolog. of the Church. 4 c. diuis. 2. and in his defense 42.
Jewel, who says, The truth was unknown and unheard of when Martin Luther and
Vldericke Zuinglius first came to the knowledge and preaching of the Ghospel.
And M. Perkins Perkins in exposit. of the Creed.
who says: We say, that before the days of Luther, for the space of many
hundred years an universal Apostasy ouerspread the whole face of the earth,
and that our (Protestant) Church was not visible to the World.

I might add many more See the book entitled: The Author and substance of
Protestant religion
testimonies of others, who either in express terms, or in effect affirm
the Protestant Church to have been in many Ages before Luther latent, and
altogether invisible: which indeed was the common opinion of Protestants at
their first vprysing; who on the one side thought they could with shifts,
bettter answer places of scripture, which made often and honorable mention of
the Church, then they could answer the evidence of Histories, and of their
own experience showing that no visible Protestants were extant before
themselves: But now of late, diverse plain places of Scripture and Fathers
having been produced, and such evident reasons deduced out of them, proving
ineuitably that the true Church of Christ, of which all sorts must learn
infallible says necessary to salvation, must needs be visible in all Ages,
as, to omit others, are these: My spirit which is in thee, and my words which
I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the
mouth of Isa. 59. v. 21.
thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed from henceforth for ever.
Again: Their seed shall be known in Nations, Isa. 61, 9,
and their branches among people: all that see them, shall know them, that
these are the seed which our Lord has blessed. Again: Thy gates shall be opened
continually day and night, Isa. 60, 11,
they shall not be shut, that the strength of the Nations and their kings may
enter into thee: for the nation and kingdom which Matthew. 5, 14,
shall not serve thee, shall perish. You are the light of the world: a City
built upon a hill cannot be hid. Tell the Church etc. He that will not hear
the Church, let him be unto thee as an Matthew. 18, 17, Matthew. 28, 19, 20
heathen and Publican Going, teach all Nations, baptizing them etc. Behold I
am with you (to wit, your selves, and successors teaching and baptizing) all
days until the end of the world. Conformable to which Scriptures, are also
innumerable plain places of ancient Fathers, which may be seen in Coccius:
and among others S. Augustine Coccius in thesauro Co^trouersiarum, tomo 1. lib.
8. art. 1.
who says: that the Church being built upon a mountain cannot be hid.

Out of these, and other plain places of of Scriptures and Fathers, evident
Reasons also may be Aug. in psalm. 47. lib. de unit, Eccles. cap. 16. and 25.
deduced, showing that the Church must needs be visible in all ages. As for
example, that otherwise it cannot be such a Church as Christ did institute:
nor could it perform those offices which Christ appointed it to perform: nor
could those which were in it be instructed by it: nor those which were out of
it be converted to it: nor Heretics (pretending to be the Church) co^vinced
not to be it. Wherefore out later Pro testants being not able to sail any
longer against this inevitable Scylla, without apparent danger to split their
boat, would needs (rather then turn back to the safe haven of the visible
Catholic Roman Church) adventure upon the Charybdis of contemning all
Monuments of ancient histories, and the plain experience of their primitive
Protestant Patriarchs, hoping to escape by landing upon the imaginary Island of
invisible records, supposed to have been written, and after suppressed in the
pretended Popes persecution of the visible Members of their invisible Church,
in the Ages before Luther, (a shift very unsafe and such, as if it were good,
might serve any other Sect of ancient, or present Heretics, (as well as our
modern Protestants) if they would pretend to have had a continual visible
Church of their profession.) But alas, who sees not that these be mere
imaginary Chymaera's, or dreams? For if any such people had been (practizing
especially rites of their religion, though never so secretly) they could not
even with a Giges ring have passed unseen, but either with their positive
profession of their own doctrine, which in some cases obliges all true
believers, or at least with negative profession of faith, by which all
faithful men, and at all times are obliged never to make show and profession
of a contrary religion; they, or some of them could not choose but to have
been noted. And if for that cause any persecution were in that age, as is
supposed, infallibly they would have been taken (as others of other Religions,
in like cases ordinarily are taken) and imprisoned, or otherwise so punished,
as the world could not have been ignorant of their persons, nor Historyes set
out by friends or enemies silent, in setting down (as usually is done) their
names, conditions, opinions, punishments, and persecutions, in such time, such
place etc. And if such records of such conspicuous things had been set down in
historyes, it is not possible that the memory of such notorious matters could
be razed both out of books, and out of the minds of men, who without book do
continually deliver in words to their successors what they saw with their eyes,
or heard with their ears of their predecessors, or read in books to have been
don to such persons as professed such a Religion, or to have been done to such
books, in which mention was made of such persecution, made against professors
of that Religion.

To say therefore that such persons were, and yet no record in any book or
other memory of them, or that once such Records were, but after were by the
Pope razed, or burned, and yet no mention made in any book, or other monument
that such razing or burning of books was by such a Pope, at such a time etc.
(as we can yet out of good Records tell the books burned by Dioclesian the
Grande Persecutor of Christians:) To say (I say) this, is senseless, and
plainly shows, that these men who sought to avoid the Scylla of an invisible
Church, by this shift fall into the Charybdis of speaking against sense and
experience, and indeed run back upon the Scylla of the same invisible
Church; for avoiding whereof they devised this sandy shift of invisible
Persecutours, invisible Persecutions, invisible Records of nameles (supposed
to be visibly persecuted) members of the Protestant Church in all Ages before
Luther. O misery! O madness of our poor deceived Protestants! What? Is it
possible, that Luther and Lutherans, Calvin and Caluinists, yea our own
Contrymen prime Protestants, convinced with the clear euidency of things in
their own days, and with plain Records of all ancient Monuments for former
ages, do confess (as you hear even now) that Luther was the first that
announced, or published Christ; that he was the first Apostle of the Reformed
doctrine; and this so certainly, that they do account it impudency and
ridiculous to say, That there were other visible Protestants in Germany before
Luther; that they prove by argument this to be impossible; that they
acknowledge themselves in this Lutheran Reformation to have departed from all
the world; that at Luthers and Caluins coming no ordinary vocation of
Churchmen (without which the visible Church cannot be) was extant in any
place; that the Church both then, and for many hundred years before was wholly
latent and invisible? Is it possible, I say, that all this should be confessed
by the primitive Parents, and prime Doctors of Protestancy, and that now their
professed children and scholars, and in respect of them, Punyes in Protestant
divinity, dare be so bold (as D. Featly was in the late conference) to
controlle and contradict those his grand Masters, in not only affirming, but
offering to prove by a Syllogism, and by a Demonstration a priori, that the
Protestant Church has been in all Ages visible; and (O wonder!) so visible,
as the names of the particular men may be showed in all ages out of good
Authors: and further offering to second this Syllogism, by a full Induction,
in which he undertook actually to set down their particular names in every
several age? Surely the aforesaid Protestants, if they had been present,
would have wondered to see such boldness, and would have censured this attempt
to be ridiculous impudency.

By this may appear how notoriously the old Gentleman, and the rest of the
Protestant Audience were abused by D. Featly, undertaking so boldly to prove
both by syllogism and Induction, the affirmative part of the aforesaid
question, which was proposed to be treated in the conference, the Negative
whereof is so plainly confessed by so many Prime Protestants, as now we have
heard.

. 3. About the Method.
Concerning the Method, which had been fittest to have been observed in
treating the aforesaid Question; it is to be noted, that there be two several
methodes of finding out infallible divine truth in all points necessary to
salvation, the finding whereof was the chief end, for which the aforesaid
Question about the perpetual visibility of the Church, was proposed to be
treated of.

The first method or way is, that every man either by his own wit, or by
hearing another discourse do examine thoroughly each particular point of divine
Faith, about which Controversy, or Question is, or may be made, what is, and
what is not to be believed under pain of damnation; the which requires, 1.
Ability and strength of natural wit, and skill in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and
other languages, and some art by which he may understand the terms and state
of the Question, and all that is written of it. 2. That he read, or hear, and
understand all that is written of that Question in holy Scriptures, Counsels,
Fathers, and modern Writers, and in the original Languages and Copyes; and
what else may be said of it, pro and contra, by learned Disputants. 3. That he
do maturely weigh and ponder all that is said, both for the affirmative and
negative part of the Question. 4. That by prayer and good life he obtain the
assistance of Gods spirit to illuminate his understanding, in matters which
exceed the capacity of his natural wit. 5. That all this premised, he of
himself (without relying upon the Judgment of any Church) frame a firm and
infallible Judgment, what is, and what is not to be held, for truth necessary
to salvation; and this being known, by it, as by a rule, to judge which
company of men are, or are not the true visible Church of Christ in all Ages.
Now who sees not that this method, or way of attayning sound resolution in
all particular points of Faith, and by that to judge what company of men are,
or are not the true visible Church in all ages, cannot be fit and convenient to
be prescribed to all, or indeed to any sort of men, and especially to such, as
neither have extraordinary ability of natural wit, or skill in languages, nor
art requisite to understand the terms, and state of all Questions, nor
leisure to read, or hear, nor strength of judgment to weigh and ponder all
that is, or may be said of them, nor such extraordinary guiftes of prayer and
other virtues, as they may presume to have gotten particular assistance of Gods
spirit, more then other men, whereby they may assure themselves, that they in
particular (without relying upon any Churches judgment) can firmly and
infallibly judge in every Question about points of Faith, what is, and what is
not to believed, as a truth necessary to salvation.

The 2. method, or way, which indeed is both most easy, and may give full
satisfaction to all sorts, consists in these 3. points. 1. To believe and
acknowledge, Isa. 59. v. 21. 60. v. 11. 61. v. 9.
as every Christian is bound by the articles of his Creed, that there is, and
has been in all Ages a visible Catholic Church of Christ, which is 1. Tim.
3. v. 15. Ephesians. 4. v. 4. 11. 12. 13. 14. Tertul. lib. de praescript.
the Pillar of truth, and in it a visible company of Pastors and Doctors, and
lawfully sent Preachers, assisted by the spirit of God (who have learned of
their predecessors, and they of theyrs, still vpwardes until Christ his
Apostles, who learned of Christ, and Christ of God his Father, the infallible
Truth in all points of faith) of whom by Gods appointment all sorts have in
all Ages past (as appears by Historyes) learned, and must in times present,
and to come, learn the infallible truth in all matters of Christian faith
necessary to salvation. The 2. is, to discern which company of Christians are
this visible Church of Christ, and who be these Pastors, Doctors, and
lawfully sent Preachers, of whom all sorts of men may securely learn what is,
and what is not to be held for infallible truth in all matters of faith
necessary to salvation. The 3. is, to hear and believe, and obey whatsoever
this Company of Christians have in all Ages taught, and what the present
ordinary Pastors, Doctors, and Preachers thereof do teach to be divine and
infallible truth, necessary to salvation: which to do, will not be hard to
those, who do truly fear and love God, and be meek, and humble in heart, and
who can, and will for the love and service of Christ captiuate their
understanding, and submit it to the obedience of faith, which must be done by
mortifying and denying their own private opinion, that they may follow the
sense and judgment of Christ, speaking in, and by his Catholic Luc. 10. v. 16.
Matthew. 18. v. 17
Church, Which whosoever hears, believes, and obeys, does hear, believe,
and obey Christ. And, Whosoever contemns, or will not hear, believe, and
obey the Church, he contemns Christ, and by Christ's own censure is to be
accounted, as an Heathen or Publican.

Now, concerning the first and third of these points, as no doubt or difficulty
was moved either by the old Gentleman, or Sir Humfrey Lynde, or the Doctors,
or any other of the Company present at the Conference, so there is no reason
why any difficulty should be made thereof at all. And as for the 2. point it
seems to me there should be no great difficulty, in regard it is already
agreed of all sides, that there must be one or other such Company of
Christians, and among them Pastors and preachers so visible, as is said; and
none besides the Catholic Roman hitherto has showed a sufficient Catalogue
of names of men in all Ages, who can with any color be proved or defended, to
have been professors of the true, divine, infallible, Catholic, primitive,
unchanged faith, first delivered by Christ, and his Apostles, and after
continued in an orderly succession of visible Pastors and Doctors appointed by
God to be always in the Church of purpose, to preserve people of all ages
from wavering in doubt of any point of faith, or being carried about with the
wind of any vpstart Error. Neither indeed can any such Catalogue be given, but
it may be manifestly showed to be insufficie^t, as either wanting names of men
in some ages, or containing names of such as may certainly be proved to be no
Protestants, but to differ in doctrine of faith one from another, and to
condemn one or other of the 39. Articles, unto which English Protestant
Ministers are sworn. Nevertheless if any one be not yet satisfied in this
point, but will have the Question made, whether the Protestant. Church has
been so visible in all Ages, as the names of their Pastors and Doctors may
be showed out of good Authors, I do not see what better method can be
prescribed for an easy, speedy, and certain resolution of the question, and
sound satisfaction of all sorts of men, that shall desire to be resolved in
this most necessary and important question, then that which M. Fisher
prescribed in his second paper written before the Conference, in which he
required his Adversaries, 1. To set down names in all ages of me^ which they
thought to be Protestants. 2. To prove out of good Authors by some doctrine of
theirs different from the Roman, that they were Protestants. 3. To defend the^
to be Protestants, showing that they did not differ in faith one from another,
nor condemned any of the 39. Articles, unto with all English Protestant
Ministers are sworn, in regard otherwise they cannot be al of one Protestant
Church: I do not (I say) see, what fitter method can be prescribed for
clearing the before said Question of such visibility as is required, and
presuposed to be in the true Catholic Church, then by actual naming, proving
and defending, as is above said. For only to say there were, or to ofter by
arguments, exceeding the capacity of the common sort of auditors, to prove, that
there were men in all ages professing Protestancy, so visible, as that their
names may be showed out of good Authors, is no sufficient satisfaction; when
especially one being urged actually to show these names, he will not show
actually any names, but of one or two ages, and such names as the Roman
Catholics, his adversaries, by better right may and will name: and being still
pressed to name more, he will not name more, but desires first to dispute of
these; which not being permitted till all be named, he most falsely then
affirms that his Adversary does grant these to be Protestants, and so runs
away: To do thus (I say) (as D. Featly did) is no fit way to give satisfaction
to all sorts, expecting resolution of the aforesaid most important Question. As
it were a very insufficie^t way to give satisfaction in a debt of twenty pieces
of gold to another his creditor, if instead of actual payment required, he
should say, and offer to prove by a Syllogism, yea by a Demonstration a
priori, that he can pay him the said twenty pieces: and being urged to lay
down the particular pieces of gold, he faith, that by an Induction he will lay
down those pieces of gold one after another; and being further pressed to do
so, he not having one piece of gold of his own takes out of his Creditors
purse one, or two, or more pieces, and laying down one or two of them, says,
lo here is one or two toward the twenty; and being never so much urged, he
will not lay down any more until his Creditour first dispute with him,
whether these two or three pieces laid down, be his own or no: and being
hereupon seriously told by his Creditor, that unless he laid down all the
pieces of gold, he did not satisfy the debt, but lost his credit, and forfaited
his band, he then falls into passion, and says: What, will you have me eat
my dinner at a bit? I cannot lay down all at once: Will you dispute with me
about these or no? Which his Creditor refusing to do, until all the twenty
pieces be actually laid down, he lastly says: Well, you will not dispute
about these? You grant these to be mine: and so without expecting answer, he
turns to the company, saying, he grants these to bemyne, and takes up his
cloak and runs away, not regarding that his Creditor so soon as he can
open his mouth, bids him stay, and denies any such grant to have been made
by him: yea offers to dispute with him of that point, if he will stay: I
suppose no man will think this kind of dealing to be an honest and good
satisfaction in a debt of money: and therefore much less should it be
accounted good in matters of far more importance and value, and specially in
satisfying this (by D. Featly undertaken) debt of showing names of visible
Protestants in all ages, out of good Authors.

. 4. About the manner of proceeding of the Disputant.
By this which has been now said, and that which was heard and seen by those
who were present at the Conference, may appear how vnfittly D. Featly
proceeded in his Syllogism, and his Induction: for in the one, to wit, his
Syllogism, he endeavored to avoid that plain method prescribed by M. Fisher
before the meeting, of naming men in all Ages, and proving and defending those
he named to be Protestants, and sought to draw the disputation into particular
Controversies, which the capacity of those (for whose satisfaction the
disputation was ordained) and of diverse others who were present, could not
sufficiently comprehend. Now concerning the other, to wit his Induction; first,
it was long before he could be drawn to it: secondly having undertaken to make
it full (and as the Question required) in all Ages, he (having only made it
(and that most falsely) for the first Age) would not proceed further, unless his
Adversary would first dispute with him (in particular Controuersyes) about
those whom he named in the first age: which particular disputation (being of
mere Tergiuersation and delay) because his Adversary would not presently
permit, but told him, that he must first make his full Induction, and then he
would answer him as much as need should be in all particulers; he either
having no patience to expect, or rather intending to take any such like
occasion to break off the Conference, before he should be further pressed to
give this full Induction (which with credit he can never give) made such an
abrupt end, as in this my Relation is declared.

Now, for the manner which both D. White, and he observed in the process of
the conference, it was noted, that it had not that decorum, which the
circumstance of their persons and places should promise. For it no way suited
with the gray hairs and gravity of a Doctor, and a Deane, to have laughed and
fleered so much as D. White did, upon no cause. And for D. Featly, both his
looks, speeches, jests, and gestures were such, as did not become him, but
might better have beseemed a Stage Player then a Doctor and an Archbishops
Chapline, and discovered a mind not so tempered, as had been requisite in one
who pretended to be a Teacher of true Divinity. Finally his whole carriage in
this business showed, that he rather sought to please his Audience, and to gain
applause to himself, then soundly to satisfy that most important Question, of
the visibility of the Protestant Church.

On the other side, M. Fisher, and M. Sweet behaved themselves moderatly, not
only in the eye and judgment of Catholics, but also of others: so as even
their greatest Adversaries could not take exception against them. And one of
the principal Protestants present has since (in respect of temper and
modesty) given special commendations of them, and far preferred them before
his own Churchmen. And as the method which M. Fisher prescribed before the
meeting, is already showed to be the fittest that could be, for giving good
satisfaction to the old Gentleman and all others, so in my opinion both he and
M. Sweet did very well to stand (as they did) constantly to it, prudently
forseeing, when the Adversary would have diuerted them from it, and warily so
answering his his arguments, as that for all he could say, they would not
suffer themselves to be transported from the proposed Question, and the
prescribed Method; but still kept the Adversary to the point, and would not
permit him to divert, either to dispute about Christ or his Apostles, or any
other point, until names were given in all Ages, which was the point demanded
and undertaken. The which course they took upon just and good reason, and not
for any distrust or diffidence (as some Protestants did inconsideratly imagine)
that they could not defend Christ and his Apostles not to have been
Protestants, or any particular point of those which D. Featly, or D. White
unseasonably proposed, or any other held (in such sense, as it is held as a
point of faith) by the Catholic Roman Church; which they could, and would have
defended, and proved if need had been, or if the meeting had been intended
and appointed for that purpose. The reason therefore why M. Fisher might well
refuse to enter into such particular disputes, before full Induction of Names
were ended, was, for that this had been to follow two Hares at once, and so to
catch neither, and to leave that which was most pertinent to the present
Question, and which most imported to be decided in the first place, as being
the only thing in which the old Gentleman, and many other of the Audience did
particulerly expect, and desire to be satisfied, and being a most easy and
assured means to help them to be satisfied in all other matters in
Controversy; and without which, it is most hard, or rather impossible ever to
attain certain and infallible Resolution in all particular, even most
necessary, points of faith, as M. Fisher expresely showed, and proved by a
sentence above cyted out of D. Field.

A second reason might be; for that all disputation about particulers (before
the true Church were by her perpetual visibility, or some such evident marks
found out, and acknowledged, as a sufficient means appointed by God to
instruct all sorts, in matters of faith, and to preserve unity and determine
Controuersyes of faith) would have been fruitless and endless. Which was the
reason why M. Fisher, in another former conference had with a certain Minister
would not enter into any particulers, until he had asked these general
Questions: 1. What grounds the Minister would stand upon? The Minister
answered, Scripture: which M. Fisher accepting wrote down, and then asked. 2.
Whether he would believe nothing but express words of Scripture? The
Minister answered Yes, he would also believe a good Consequence out of
Scripture. This also M. Fisher accepted, and wrote down, and further asked. 3.
If it should happen, that the consequence which the Minister should bring,
should not be thought good by him: and e contra, the Consequence brought by him
should not be thought good by the Minister, who should judge and end that
fruitless, and otherwise endless contention and Controversy? The Minister
said: The Church* M. Fisher very willingly accepted and wrote it down; and 4.
asked: Whether after the Church shall have judged and decyded such a
Controversy, it should be lawful for any private man to oppose his judgment
against that, which the Church had so determined? As for example, when
Cutholikes and Arrians having alleged Scriptures, and pro and contra brought
consequences out of the^, about the Divinity of Christ our Lord; The Church in
a general Council judged the consequences of Arrians to be naught, and those
of the Catholics good. The Minister said: No, it was not lawful for any
private man to oppose his judgment against such a Judgment of the Church.

These Questions being asked, M. Fisher joined issue upon a question, bidding
the Minister choose what he thought most material against Roman Catholics,
and let it be tried, whether the Church did judge for Catholics, or
Protestants. The Minister did choose the Question about Merits, and took for
his tenet, That there was not any Merit of man before God. And when the day of
trial came, the case was so clear against the Minister, in the ancient
Fathers (whom the Minister granted to be the Church) even by confession of the
Magdeburgians, that the Minister had no shift, but to divert the disputation
from the substance of the proposed Question, to a circumstance of Commutatiue
Justice, and that equality betwixt the Work and the Reward, which is written
of by Bellarmine. About which circumstance M. Fisher was content to dispute
after he had plainly showed the substance of Merit out of the ancient Fathers.
Coming therefore to dispute about the aforesaid circumstance of Merit, M.
Fisher found, that there would be no end, nor fruit of the argument, in regard
the ancient Fathers had not spoken of it in express terms, as they had done
of the substance of Merit, and no other visible Church of this present age was
agreed on, to whose judgment this matter should be finally referred. By which
experience, M. Fisher has learned, how endless and fruitless it is, to waste
words about particulers, until both parties be agreed which is the true
Church, not only in ancient times, but also of this age. So as after each party
has said what he can, the final resolution of the Question may be referred to
that present Church, which (having without interruption of Pastors and
Doctors, and without change of doctrine successively descended from the true
visible Church of ancient times) is by this, and other Marks proved to be the
prepresent true Church, whose Judgment no private man must oppose. This
Question therefore of the continual successiue visible Church, being so
necessary to end al Controversies, and being now proposed to be treated of
betwixt M. Fisher and D. Featly, M. Fisher had great reason not to permit
speech of any other particular Question, until by his prescribed Method, he
had gotten it clearly seen, that the Protestant Church was not, and the
Catholic Roman Church was the only true Church, to whom it pertayneth to
give Judgment of, and determine Controversies, and to instruct all sorts of men
in the true Faith, and not to permit men by their private interpretations of
Scripture to wander in errors, or waver in in certain ties, or spend their time
in fruitles, and endless disputations about controuerfies of faith: It being
most certain, that these can never be with fruit, and fully ended, but by the
censure of the true visible (not only ancient but also present) Church, which
must when doubt is (as most often is) made, tell us, what particular books be
true books of Scripture and Fathers, which be true translations, and which be
right interpretations: for both about Scriptures and Fathers such Questions may
arise, and cannot be well decided whout the Judgment of the true present
visible Church, in regard Scriptures and Fathers do not always sufficiently
express what is to be held in the aforesaid Questions; neither will one
private man, in such cases, follow another opinion, when each man will be
easily inclined to think that he has as good Scriptures, or Fathers, or
Reasons, or all these together, to plead for the truth of his opinion, as
another has for his.

This reason may be confirmed out of Tertullian who in his golden book of
Prescriptions, gives diverse reasons why Heretics (who reject the authority of
the Church) should not be admitted to dispute out of Scriptures. First, for
that (by their disputations) they weary those that be fame, they overcome those
which be Tertull. de praescrip. c. 15.
weak, and those which be in a middle disposition, they dism^sse with scruple
or doubt. Another reason Tertullian gives, because, this Heresy does not
receive some Scriptures, or if a receive, it peruerteth them to their own
purpose, with additions and detractions; and if it receive some, yet not whole,
or if whole in some sort, yet by false expositions it turns them (from the
right) to a perverse sense. And a perverse, or corrupt sense (says he) is as
contrary to Cap. 19.
truth, as is a perverted or corrupted Text.

Tertullian therefore for these reasons judged best not to make the combat in
Scriptures, but that this gappe should be stopped, and that Heretics should not
be admitted to any disputation of Scriptures; and he tells how this may be
done, saying: It must be examined Cap. 20. 21. 22 and sequent.
to whom the possession of Scripture does belong, to the intent that he who
has no right unto them, may not be admitted unto them. And further he shows,
That the right order of things requires, that first it only be disputed, to
whom the Faith belongs? (As if he should say, which is the true visible
Church?) Whose are the Scriptures? From whom, by whom, when, and to whom
was delivered that discipliae, by which they are made Christians? for where
there shall appear the truth of Christian says and discipline to be (as
doubtless it is in the true visible Church of Christ) there shall be truth of
Scriptures, and expositions, and al Christian Traditions. And having showed how
Christ did promulgate his doctrine by the Apostles, he further prescribes:
That, what Christ, and his Apostles did preach, must be learned no otherwise
then by the Churches which they founded: so as every doctrine agreeing with
those Apostolical and Mother-Churches, that is to be deemed true; and what
does not agree, to be judged false. And therefore to make it apparent, that the
Heretics opinions (although pretended by themselves to be cc^formable to
Scriptures, and such as may be proved out of Scriptures) are not Apostolical,
nor true, he urges them (as M. Fisher urged D. Featly) to show the beginning
of their Churches, and to unfold the order of their Cap. 32.
Bishops, so from the beginning running down by succession, as that their
first Bishop had some of the Apostles, or some Apostolical man, who perseuered
with the Apostles, for his Author and Predecessor; and having given examples
of the Catholic Churches, who can thus unfold the order of their Pastors,
and namely Rome for one, he says afterward: Confingant tale quid Haeretici:
Let Heretics even feign some such like thing.

Thus we see what Tertullian did say to Heretics of his time, by which we may
learn what we may say to the Nouellists of our time, whom (offering to
dispute with us about Scriptures) we may altogether debar from Scripture,
and may examine them, as Tertullian did those of his time, saying: Who are
you? When, and whence came you? What have you to do in my ground, you that
are not mine? By what right do thou, O Marcion (we may say, O Martin Luther)
cut down my woods? By what license do thou, O Valentine (O Calvin) divert, or
turn aside my fountaynes? By what power do thou, O Apelles. (O Anabaptist)
remove my limits? Why do you, O the rest of Heretics, sow and feed according
to your own will upon my Land and pasture? It is my possession, I am the
ancient possessour, I have the firm Originalls from the Authors themselves, to
whom the propriety did first belong: I am the heir of the Apostles; as they
did ordain in their Testament and last will, as they did commit it to my
faithful Trust, as they did adjure me, so I hold it. But you they have
disinherited and cast out, as strangers and enemies etc. So as by this
prescription of Tertullian, until D. Featly, or some other can by other marks
then by alleging words of Scripture (as by perpetual visibility, and
interrupted succession of Bishops etc.) prove Protestants not to be Heretics,
but the true Church of Christ, and the right heir of the Apostles, to whom
consequently belongs the most ancient and first possession of Scriptures, M.
Fisher had good reason and right to defer disputing with him (out of
Scripture) of Christ and his Apostles, until he had made his full Induction of
Names of Protestant Churchmen, and unfolded the orders of their Prostant
Bishops, so running down from the beginning by succession, as that their first
Protestant Bishop had some of the Apostles, or some Apostolical man, who
perseuered with the Apostles, for his Author and Predecessor. The which I
account to be so impossible for him to do, as I dare, and do challenge him,
saying with Tertullian: Confingant tale quid Haeretici: Let D. Featly (or any
of his fellow Protestants) at least feign (because I am sure they cannot find)
Names of Protestant Bishops, and Pastors, whom they do imagine (for prove they
cannot out of good Authors) to have been in all ages. Which whiles they do
not, al sorts of people have just cause to think, that neither D. Featly, nor
D. White can perform that task, which they did tooto boldly undertake of
naming, proving, and defending visible Ptotestants in all ages: and thereupon al
men may, as I do, conclude, That the Protestant Church has not been so
visible in all ages, as the Cathelike Church ought to be: and consequently, the
Protestant Church is not the true Catholic Church which we prosesse to
believe in our Creed; Neither consequently, are their I'astours, and Doctors
and Preachers lawfully sent, or sufficiently authorized, to teach and expound
Gods word; nor consequently, are people securely warranted to learn of them,
what is, and what is not to be believed by infallible divine faith necessary to
salvation; nor indeed ought they to believe or hear them at all, but ought to
unite themselves to that One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, perpetually visible
Roman Church, hearing, believing and obeying the Pastors thereof; whereby they
may have infallible iustruction in all matters of faith, secure direction for
all matters concerning good life, in such sort as they may attain remission of
their sins, and salvation of their souls; the grace of God in this life, and
endless heavenly happiness in the next. Unto which I beseech sweet Jesus to bring
us all.

Amen.
FINIS.

