Wisdom and grace see in that modest look
Trueth's triumph errors downfall in this book
Maerebunt piscatores
Isa. 19.8. Tocksonus sculp^^^


THE ANSWER UNTO The Nine Points of Controversy, Proposed by our late
Soueraygne (of Famous Memory) unto M. Fisher of the Society of JESUS. AND THE
REIOYNDER Unto the Reply of D. Francis White Minister. With the Picture of the
said Minister, or Censure of his Writings prefixed.

Be ready always to give an ANSWER to every one, that asks you a reason of
the Hope, that is in you.

1 Petr. 3. Verse. 15. Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XXVI.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES KING OF Great Brittayne, France,
and Ireland etc.
MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN, These Theological Labors, which we now publish,
were undertaken by Order of our late Soueraygne of Famous Memory, for his
desired Satisfaction about some of the principal Points, which withheld his
Royal joining unto the Church of Rome. The Author when he penned them, did
expect they should have been kept within the private Library of his Princely
Reading, and not made public to the World, as afterward they were by a Doctor
Minister, together with a Voluminous Reply, wherein he seeks to disgrace them,
by much bitterness of speech, uttered in the violence of his Zeal.

This imposed an Obligation upon the Author, to reuiew them again, and to set
them forth whole and entiere, purged from the faults of handwriting
misprision; cleared from the clouds cast upon them by ignorant Cavil;
strenghthened with some new Collateral Additions of more evident Explication
and Proof. Which Labors renewned and published, we humbly offer unto your
most Excellent Majesty, as unto the Heir, not only of your Renowned Fathers
Dignity and State, but also of his Wisdom and Virtue, in whom is perpetuated,
as the Nobility of his Blood, so the Excellency of his Mind.

And though it be their hard fortune to appear in your Presence at the time,
when the light of your Royal Clemency is toward your Catholic Subjects
eclypsed; yet for themselves, they confide to find some special Favor, not to
be forbidden, or banished your Maiestyes Dominions, in that they be Natiffe of
your Royal Fathers Command, by the Warrant of his Authority borne into the
World, whose Sacred Pleasure, through pious Excess of Filial Affection, You
still reverence after his Discease.

Neither can it be for the credit of our Adversaries, or of their Cause, that
free Access should be denied unto these Writings, which (as themselves
testify) were by the sound of Authority summoned unto the Combat, upon
supposition, that thereby, Our weakness, and want of strength would manifestly
appear. For thus they write: The better to discover their weakness, D. Whites
Preface.
and to pluck them out of their Fox-hole of Personal Succession, and
visibility, the King imposed the Task of writing upon the Nine Questions,
knowing our Adversaries to be cunning, and subtle in eluding our Arguments,
but of no strength, especially in particular Questions, to prove their own
Tenet, or to confirm their Faith by sacred Scripture, or Ancient Tradition.

If after so solemn Inuitation unto the Combat, if after so bold Promises that
in these Writings, our weakness would be discovered, if after so great
assurance given to their Credents, that we cannot confirm our Religion by
Scripture, these challenged Writings be stayed by Authority, not to enter into
the Field; this may yield unto Judicious Protestants just reason to suspect,
that weakness and want of strength, rather lies on their side; and that the
Patrons of their Reformed Religion, place their confidence of Victory, rather
in the Partiality of the State, then in the Evidence of the Scripture, in the
behalf of their Doctrines.

And, as these Tytles, even the Credit of the Protestant Cause, plead for the
free permission of this Book: so the Book it self contaynes nothing that may
cause the hinderance of so due a favor. Therein no person in Authority is
censured, no matter of State touched, nothing uttered that may justly offend;
only the evidence of Gods Holy Word is urged, in defense of that Religion,
which even in your Royal Judgment, is so far from being impious in it self,
or an Enemy of your State, as You have by most happy choice selected the same
to be the Consort of your Crown, to be the Parent of those glorious Stars,
which (according to the hope of all Loyal Subjects) shall from your Majesty's
Throne, by long continued Succession, shine unto these fortunate Kingdoms: who
by her euer-honoured Name of MARY, but much more by the rare Excellency of her
Virtues, lively represents the sweet Memory of your Right Glorious
Grandmother, whiles she lived, for Princely qualityes the Paragon of Europe,
and now a singular Ornament of the Heavens, in regard of her co^stancy in the
Catholic Roman Religion unto death; that her enraged Enemies, not being able
to conquer her Immortal Affection unto the same, feared not to shed her no
less Innocent, then Noble Blood, the Fountain of Your Maiestyes Royal Rights
unto the Kingdoms of Great Brittayne, to strike of that Thrice-Venerable Head,
more Glorious for the luster of the One Catholic Faith She maintained, then
for the shining gemnes of Three Christian Crowns, of which, two She wore, and
the third was undoubtedly her Due.

Your Royal Magnanimity, timely tokens whereof appeared in your tender Years,
has engaged the Hearts of your Loyal Subjects, in a secret Joy of Hope, that
God by means of your Majesty, will illustrate this Kingdom, by many rich
Blessings of Temporal Glory. In which Hope we are strengthened by the fortunate
Name of Charles the First: fortunate I say, to bring Felicities upon Kingdoms;
under, and by which Name, France under Charles the Great: Spain under Charles,
the fifth Emperor, but the first of that Name King of Spain, surnamed
Maximus.
the two mightiest Kingdoms of Europe advanced to Imperial Dignity, grew unto
the highest of worldly Greatness. In which respect it is not any disloyal
Affection, that we wish in our Hearts, and pray unto the Soueraygne
MoModeratour, in whose hands are the Hearts of Princes, that he will incline your
Princely Heart, to be favorable unto that Religion, which only has been
Conquerant in former ages; that hardly can any Christian King be named
Renownedly Victorious, that was not a Professor, or a Favorer thereof. Yea, if
we call to mind the most famous and wonderful victoryes that have ennobled the
Christian Name, we may find, that they were fruits, and effects of some
Devotions of the Catholic Roman Faith questioned, and proved in this Treatise.

Constantine the first Christian Emperor surnamed the Great, who does not know
that his Conquests were obtained by his worshipping Eusebius. in vita Constantini
lib. 3. c. 2. Zozom. l. 1. cap. 8.
the sign of the Holy Cross, being doubtless of a contrary Religion unto the
Prime Religion-deuiser of this age Martin Luther, who says of himself,
Luther. Tom. 1. Wittemberg. fol. 539.
If I were a Soldier, and should see in the field the Standart of the Cross,
I would fly from the same, as from the Devil. For this Emperor still carried
Eusebius. l. 2. de vita Constant. c. 3^ and 4. Salutaris passionis Christi
Insigne, vniuersum Exercitu^ perpetuo antecedebat.
the Standart of the Cross before his army in all his battayles against
Maxentius, Maximinus, and Licinius, putting therein assured confidence of
victory, unto whom God gave miraculous success, and He, an example unto
Christian succeeding Monarchs, to prostrate the Imperial Purple before the
said sacred Ensign, to adore thereby Christ their God. Wherein a chief Saint
of that Age rejoicing, sings this verse, -- Prudent. lib. 2. contra Symmach.
Iam Purpura supplex
Sternitur Aeneadae Rectoris ad atria Christi,
Vexillu^que Crucis summus Moderator ADORAT.
Imperial Purple now Christ's aid implores,
The Soueraygne Lord prostrate his Cross adores.


Theodosius, to whom likewise Heroical Worthynes has given the title of
Great, no doubt, but his so many great Victories, specially against Eugenius
the Pagan Usurping Emperor, were won by his Devotion unto Saints, whose
Churches before he went to that warlike Expedition, he did visit, Ruffin lib.
2. Histor. c. 33.
lying prostrate before their Shrines, craving the assured aid of their
Powerful Intercessions. In the Enterprise, having in the first Battle lost
the day, by the slaughter of a great part of his army that were Infidells, full
of perplexity he spent the night in prayer in a Chapel on the top of a
mountain, Theodor. lib. 5. c. 24. Vidit duos viros candido vestitu equis albis
vehi.
and there having watched a long while fell asleep. In his sleep two men
appeared unto him in white attire, mounted on white horses, bidding him not to
fear, but the next morning presently upon break of day, to offer again the
Battle, se Auxiliares ei, and Antesignanos a Deo missos, that they were sent
of God to be the Protectours, and Leaders of his army, and that the one was
John the Evangelist, the other Philip the Apostle.

The Emperor upon this warrant the next day gave again the field to his
Enemies, and Signo CRVCIS se munie^s, signum praelio dedit. Oros. l. 7. c. 37.
making upon himself the sign of the Cross, began the fight, got a most
memorable Victory through the divine assistance. For Theodor. Ruffin. Oros. and
omnes Histor.
when the Enemies through their multitude began to prevail, a storm suddenly
blowing from the mountains drove their darts and lances back upon themselves,
wherewith amazed, without further fighting, they yielded; yea laying hands on
Eugenius they brought him unto Theodosius captive, and bound in chains. The
miracle of which Victory a Pagan Poet, who then lived acknowledging says
thereof, -- Panegyr. in 3. Honor.
Aquilo de monte procellis
Obruit armatas acies, reuolutaque Tela
Vertit in auctores, and turbine reppulit hastas.
O nimium dilecte Deo, cui militat Ether,
Et coniurati veniunt ad Classica venti!
A Wind the Army felled with Northern blast,
And Lance and Dart back on their Authors cast.
O loved of God, for whom the Heavens do fight,
And Winds at call employ commanded might!


Honorius Son of the foresaid Theodosius obtained two wonderful victoryes to
the astonishment of the whole world; the one in Afric, with an army of only
five thousand, Sigon. de accident. Imper. lib. 10. page 160.
against the army of Gildo the Pagan Tyrant, consisting of seauenty thousand:
the other in Italy, against Radagaysus the Goth, bringing with him an army of
more then two hundred thousand, which was defeated, and wholly extinguished,
not one Christian Soldier being August. l. 5. de Ciuit. c. 23.
so much as wounded; and this by Paulin. Nolan. de Sancto Felice, Not. 12.
the virtue of Piety and Devotion unto Saints. For Paulin. in vita Ambrosij.
Saint Ambrose, deceased some few years before, appearing unto the General
assured him of the Victory, and taught him Oros. l. 7. cap. 36.
where, and in what manner he should order his army; thereby confirming the
Catholic Doctrine, set down by S. Augustine as undoubted: August. de cura
pro mortuis. cap. 15.
Sancti per diuinam potentian humanis rebus intersunt; Saints, not by the force
of Nature, but by the power of God, have care of human affairs.

Theodoricke the Goth, though in opinion an Arian, yet by special divine
instinct Nicephor. l. 16. c. 35.
a great Favorer, and Honourer of the Roman Act. Synod. Romans sub Symmach.
Religion and Sea, by many famous victoryes conquered in short time the whole
Kingdom of Italy, the which he many years peaceably enjoyed; Sigon. de
Occident. Imper. lib. 16.
until in the end of his life, deflecting from his former Piety, to be a
Persecutour of the Roman Bishop and Faith, he concluded his long happy raygne
with a dismal, and unfortunate death.

Justinian Emperor, filled the three parts of the world, Asia, Afric, and
Europe with the Trophies of his Conquests, which he did ever Nouel. 36. and 37.
vide Baron. Anno Domini 533. and 534.
acknowledge as benefits bestowed on him, for his singular devotion unto the
most Blessed Virgin, whose glorious Title of GODS MOTHER, he maintained against
the Nestorians, by many Edicts, Procop. de Aedific. Justin. orat. 4.
raising in Jerusalem, Carthage, and other chief Cittyes of the world
sumptuous and magnificent Temples in her Honor: yea Narses his General by
whom he expelled the Goths out of Italy, was so Euagr. l. 4. cap. 23.
devout to our Lady, that being to give the battle unto his Enemies, his wont
was to spend the whole night before in Prayer, and in Inuocations of her aid,
whereby he obtained so great favors, as he was still Nicephor. l. 17. c. 13.
taught, and instructed by her appearing unto him, in what manner he was to
manage the Field.

Who has not heard of the renowned Victory which Heraclius the Emperor won
upon the King of Persia, with small forces against three mighty armies, rather
by divine miracle then by human strength for the recovery of the Holy Cross,
whereby God confirmed Rusticus Diaconus co^tra Eutich.
the Catholic devotion then used without contradiction over the whole
Christian world, Paulus Diaconus Hist. Miscel. l. 1. and Cedrenus de Imper. in
Heracl.
to worship that most holy wood, and holy Images, the said Emperor causing the
Image of our Blessed Savior to be carried in all his Battayles before his Army.

Clodoueus the first Christian King of France, surnamed Belliger, what were his
so many Victoryes, but Trophies of the now disliked Roman Devotion? When
Gregor. Turon. (who did live about that time) l* 2. Histor c. 17. Hincmar. in
vita Sa^cti Remigij. Aim^n. and alij.
he went in expedition against Alaricus the Arian, who had usurped Gascoigne,
and other parts of the most Christian Kingdom, to prepare the way unto the
victory, he offered Gifts, and Donaryes unto S. Martin, in honor of whom he
also commanded none should touch any thing of the Country of Tours, but only
water and grass for their horses. Against which Edict when one of his
Soldiers had transgressed, he gave order he should be punished, saying, What
hope of Victory, if we offend Saint Martin? Hence his Enterprise was so
fortunate, and illustrated by wonderful events. A Stagge went before his army,
showing where they might wade over the River of Vienne, then so swollen with
water, as it was not passable, but only in that place. Being in the field near
unto Poytiers, where Saint Hilaryes body is honored, Pharus ignea.
a Tower of light coming forth of the Church of the Saint, shined upon the
King, whereby encouraged, he won a a most glorious day, slew the Heretical
Usurper with his own hands, delivered the flourishing part of France from the
Arian Tyrany. In his return acknowledging the Victory gotten by Saint Martins
intercession, he offered unto him his Warlike Palfree, whereon he had fought so
gloriously, redeeming the same afterward with a Sum of money.

Pepinus, who joined a great part of Germany that then was Pagan unto the Crown
of France, had greater confidence of Victory in his devout Invocation of
Saints, then in the strength of his Armies. Hence having in a fierce Battle
with the Saxons, obtained a glorious Victory, his wearyed and wounded Army
being presently set upon by a fresh mighty Band of Infidells, S. Ludgerus in
vitae S. Swiberts.
he lighting from his horse, prostrate on the ground, made a Vow unto God, and
unto Saint Swibert, to visit his Relics with his whole army barefoote. Upon
which Vow, straightwayes a wonderful light from Heaven shined over him and his
Forces, that the Pagans terrified therewith, without fighting yielded
themselves, and their whole Country of Westphalia, to his Obedience.

As almost all books be full of the Victoryes of Charles the first of France
surnamed the Great; so likewise they make full Record of his singular Reverence
unto the Roman Bishop, in whose defense he fought so many victorious Fields,
specially against the Longobards, whose Irreligion toward the Chair of Peter
the principal sea, the fountain of Christian Unity, wrought in the end the
total Sigon. de Regno Ital. l. 3. and 4.
subversion of their Kingdom.

After the Empire was translated from the Franks unto the Saxons, who more
Va^iant and Victorious then Henry surnamed the Faulkener, the first Emperor of
that Stock? Being sick, and so weak as he could hardly hold himself on his
horse, he durst in person go into the Field against the mightiest army of
Hunnes that ever entered Germany Witich. l. 1. de reb. Saxon. Frodoar. Chron.
Eccles. Rhem. Luitprand. l. 2. c. 8. and 9. Nauclerus in Chron. Genesis 31. a
Christo nato.
; so many in number, and so confident in their forces, as they durst brag,
they could not be overcome, except either the Earth should sink under them, or
the Heavens fall upon them. The King and his Soldiers fought valiantly, but
prayed no less devoutly; the King making often Vows unto God to root Symony
out of his Kingdoms did he win the day, the Soldiers often repeating Kyrie
eleyson, Kyrie eleyson; by the devout ingemination of which Christian Letany,
against the Hunnish Hui, Hui, Hui, they got the Victory: making manifest how
great is the force of Prayer, though in a language not vulgarly known. For the
victory was so Illustrious, as in respect thereof, the said Emperor became
renowned, admired and honored of all Christian Princes.

Otho the Great, as in Piety and Devotion, so likewise for admired victoryes
was nothing inferior unto the foresaid Henry his Father. He Witichind. lib. 1.
Luitprandus lib. 4. cap. 11. and 12. Naucler. in chron. Generat. a Christo 32.
part. 2. page 82.
much honored the holy Lance made of the sacred Nails of our Saviors Cross,
by virtue whereof he overcame miraculously an immense Army of Hungarians who
then were Pagans, and mighty troops of Rebels that were joined against him.
Being on the one side of the Rhene, and the Rebels on the other, a few of his
Soldiers, without his priuity passing the River, fell into the Enemies hands.
The Pious Emperor seeing them in distress, and not able to succor them,
moved with compassion, prostrated himself (his whole Army doing the like)
before the holy Lance with many tears, praying unto our Savior whose Hands,
and Feet had been pierced with those sacred Nails. No sooner was he prostrate
on the ground, but presently the Rebels, no man knowing why, ran away, their
hearts inwardly co^suming with fear, so that many of them were killed, and
taken prisoners by the aforesaid poor handful of men.

Henry the second Emperor, Nephew to this Otho, was on the one side so
Victorious, as he joined unto the Crown of the Empire the Kingdoms of
Bohemia, Sclauonia, and Hungary; on the other so given unto Roman devotion, as
he is a canonized Saint of the Roman Church. His Dithmar. lib. 6.
Religion toward Gods B. Mother was singular, in whose Honor he vowed, and
kept his Virginity unspotted, together with Kunegundis the Virgin holy
Empress his Spouse. When Godofred. Viterb. in Chronic. Cuspianus. Bonfin. de
rebus Hungar. Dec. 2. lib. 1.
he entered into any City, his custom was to spend the first night praying in
the Church of our Lady, if any were in the place consecrated to her Name. Hence
in the battle he fought against Bolistaus King of Bohemia, the Holy martyrs
Saint Laurence, Saint George, and Saint Adrian, sent by the Queen of Saints,
were seen to go before his Army, Nauclerus a Christo genesis 34. part. 2. page
106.
carrying the Standart of the Cross, striking the Enemy with blindness; so that
they not being able to behold, much less to resist the Emperors forces,
Bohemia was made Vassal unto the Empire, without any effusion of blood.

About the same time the two renowned Normans Robert, and Roger, undertaking to
free Sicily from the Tyranny of the Saracens, wherewith the same had been a
long time oppressed, were constrained with small forces to Thomas Fazellus, de
rebus Sicul. Decad. post. lib. 7. p. 397.
encounter an huge Host wherein were thirty thousand horse, and foot without
number. In the heat of the battle Saint George was seen blazing forth
glorious beams of brightness upon a white Steed, in a white Horsemans coat, on
which was sowed a Red Cross thereby encouraging the Christian Army, and
driving the Enemy before him. Hence the Nation of the Normans conceived
special devotion unto S. George, calling upon him in their Battayles next
after God; and with the Normans it is likely, the same devotion entered into
England.

In confirmation of this truth, how many Examples does Spain affoard of
Victories gotten by Catholic devotions against the Saracens, who in the year
701. made themselves masters of the greatest part of that Country? None of
their victoryes more famous then that obtained by the virtue of the Holy
Cross, whereof they keep yearly a Triumphall Feast. The This history is
written by Rod^ricus Archbishop of Toledo, who was there present. De rebus
Hispan. l. 8. c. 10. Marian. de reb. Hisp. l. 11. c. 14, 15.
Mahometans, in a battle with Alphonsus King of Castile, surnamed the Noble,
having the better of the day, the Christian Army being almost put to flight,
the Archdeacon of Toledo full of Christian courage, having in his hands the
Ensign of the Cross which he carried before his Archbishop (wherein also was
the image of the Blessed Virgin) went therewith through the thickest of the
Enemies without being hurt, though innumerable Lances and Darts were cast, and
Arrows shot at him. By his example the Christian Army encouraged, retourning
with new fortitude to the Battayne, put the Saracens to flight, made massacre
of them, who were so many, as the Lances, Darts, and Arrows left behind the^
in the field, could not be consumed with the many mighty fires made two days
together, as well in token of joy, as for other uses.

More ancient, and no less wonderful is the Victory gotten against the same
Infidells by Raymirus King of Leon and Galicia. He Ambros. Moral. and all other
Historians.
having gathered together all the forces of his Kingdoms against these
Mohammedan Usurpers, being defeated, was brought to great distress and sadness.
As he rested in the night, S. James appeared unto him, telling him that Christ
had peculiarly committed Spain to his Tuition, that he should not fear, but
trusting in God the next day present the Field to the Infidells, for himself
would be in the fight. The King did as the holy Apostle ordained, who according
to his promise, was seen in the Field upon a white horse, with a Red Cross on
his breast, running upon the Mahometans, and putting them to flight. Unto Vide
diploma Regis apud Joan. Marian. in lib. de S. Iacobi in Hispaniam aduentu, in
fine.
which Victory, not only the King in his Charter with many Bishops and Nobles
of his Realm, as eyewitnesses give record, but even the Mohammedan Historyes
make mention thereof.

If I add unto these forrayne Historyes our domestical Victoryes, I should be
over long, yet cannot I pretermit to touch one example in every Line and Nation
of our Kings. Amongst the Britans, none more famous then Prince Arthur, nor is
any of his Victories more certain then that recorded by Beda lib. 1. c. 20.
histor. Henricus H^nt^ng. R^nulph.
Venerable Bede, though without mention of him. The Picts and Saxons
associating their forces, and inuading the Britans with a most dreadful Army,
the Priests of the Britans (holy S. German Bishop being Prince of the Quire) by
singing Alleluia, and other Church-prayers, struck such a dismal fright into
the hearts of the Infidells, that abandoning their weapons and armor, they
ran away with all possible have: the miracle of Iosue Iosue c. 6.
his victory being renewed, when the walls of Jericho fell to the ground at the
sound of the Sacerdotall Trumpets; whereby also the Catholic Doctrine was
authorized, that Church-prayers in a language not vulgarly understood, may be
pleasing and effectual with God.

In the Line of our Saxon Kings, who for the fighting of many battayles, for
the obtaining of renowned Victoryes, more admired then King Alfrede? Which
Asser. Meneu. in vita Alured Polidor. l ^. Gu^^el. Malmes. and alij.
Victoryes, so many and so great, he won by his devotion unto Saints,
particularly by the assistance of Saint Cuthbert, who appearing to the King
encouraged him unto that famous Battle, whereby the forces of the usurping
Infidells were in a manner wholly extinguished.

After the Conquest, (to say nothing of the Conqueror himself, whose vast and
Valiant Enterprise was made fortunate by a Consecrated Standart Ingulph. Matt.
Westmon. and alij.
sent him by Pope Alexander the second) I will only name King Henry the fifth,
the mirror of Kings, in whom was summed together the whole perfection of
all Catholic Military and Politic Worthynes. On the one side, who more
renowned for Victoryes, the^ this Conqueror of France, which in the space of
few years he brought in a manner wholly under his Obedience? On the other, who
more Memorable for his Obedience to the Roman Sea, for his Reverence of
Catholic Priesthood, for his care and respect of Churches, for his zeal
against the VVickliffian Heresy, for his daily devout Invocation of Saints, for
his going barefoote in pilgrimage unto Churches Titus Liuius de vita Henrici.
Thomas Walsing. Enguerant. Stow, and others.
? Two Monasteryes he built from the foundations, opposite the one to the other
upon the banks of the Thames; that termed Bethleem for Religious men, this
Syon for consecrated Virgins which should day and night without intermission
pray for the happy Success of his Wars in France. He Nicol. Harpesfield
Hist. Eccles. Anglic. saecul. 15. cap. 3.
spent, and commanded his Army to spend the night before the famous Battle of
Agincourt in Prayer, in Invocation of Saints, in making their confession unto
Priests, in doing penance for their sins; and in the morning before the
battle every one by his order, put a piece of Earth to his mouth, to testify
his desire (had there been opportunity) to have received the sacred Communion
in one kind, as both the token did signify, and then was the practice. So that
the Divine Providence granting so glorious a Victory unto so few, against
Walsingham writes the French were an hundred and forty thousand, the English
not above ten thousand.
so many, made as it were Proclamation unto the world, that these now
questioned Roman Devotions, are acceptable unto him.

In the Hecto^ Boethius Histor. Scot. fol. 196. Bucan. Histor. Scot. fol. 48.
Annalls of Scotland we read, that Guthran King of the Danes, in Baptism
termed Athelstan, having subdued a good part of England, invaded Scotland. His
army was so puissant, as therewith he environed Hungus King of the Picts, and
Alpinius Prince of Scotland with their forces that came against him; denouncing
unto them by one that had a loud and shrill voice, that not one of them should
escape alive. The King Hungus after long prayer unto God and S. Andrew, being
asleep, the said Apostle appeared unto him, bad him fight the next day with
confidence in God and his aid. The battle was fought Crux decussata.
Saint Andrews Cross appearing over the Scottish Army; the field won
against the Danes; Athelstan slain therein; S. Andrew confirmed Patron of
Scotland; his Cross made their Ensign; a famous Church built in his Honor,
to the use whereof, and mantaynance of Chanons therein, the King applied the
tenth part of Decima^ Regiorum praediorum partem.
his Royal Patrimony.

The Greatest Battle that Scottishmen ever won, without doubt is that of
Striueling against our Edward the second. The Scottish Historyes say this Kings
Army did consist of an hundred and fifty thousand horse, and of as many foot;
And though this may seem great exaggeration, yet our Thomas de la More in vita
Edwardi 2. Numqua^ magis sple^didus, nobilis, and superbus Anglorum exercitus
visus. Stow anno Domini 1313. page 333.
English Annalls testify, that never before was the like preparation, pride,
and cost in time of war; the Souldyers even the night before the battle,
bathing themselves in wine, casting their gorges, crying, showting, vau^ting,
confiding in their forces as invincible. On the Hector Boethius Histor. Scot.
lib. 14 fo. 3.114. Thomas de la More vbi sup
other side the Scottishmen spent the night in confessing their sins unto
Priests, in prayers unto God by the mediatio^ of Saints, specially of S. Finan,
whose sacred Relikes they brought with the^ into the Field. In the morning, the
King with his Nobles on the top of an Hill in the sight of his Army heard
Mass, received the B. Sacrament at the hands of Mauritius Abbot, as the rest
of the troops also did, at the hands of other Priests. The Mass ended, the
said Abbot came down, and stood in the Front of the Army with the Standart of
the Cross, which they all saluted falling with their bodies on the ground. The
English imagining this was done in token that they yielded, soon found
themselves deceived, and were taught by their overthrow an invincible Truth,
That not Warlike preparation, not the multitude of men, not the courage of
human Heart, not the forces of Arms; but true Catholic Piety, Confidence in
God, Invocation of Saints, Worship of the holy Cross, humble Confession of
sins unto Priests, devotion unto the most dreadful Mystery of the Mass, make
Kings and Countries Victorious.

By these examples continued from Constantine unto these times (unto which
innumerable others might be added) Your Majesty may perceive, the Roman
Religion to have been, as the means to assure glorious Victoryes unto Christian
Princes; so likewise the public Christian profession, at the least, of all the
last fourten Ages. If this so ancient and victorious Religion be proved by the
express Texts of Divine Scripture, so clearly that her Adversaries be forced
to leave the litterall sense, upon no better ground then because the same is
beyond the capacity of their understanding, what more can be desired?

Now this we have endeavored to demonstrate, and hope to have fully performed
the task, in the Treatise we here present, prostrate at the Feet of your
Royal Clemency; humbly beseeching the soueraygne Ouer-seer, and Over ruler of
Hearts, so to incline your maiestyes Heart to be favorable unto your Catholic
Subjects, as he sees their Hearts to be sincerly loyal unto you; ever desirous
of your Royal Sovereignty; full of endeared Affection unto your Person, which
from your Infancy has grown together with the Increase of your Years; which
has waited every where on your Honorable Undertakings, with hartyest prayers
for the most desired success; still wishing that our CHARLES the first of
England, may in the glory of Catholic Religion and Piety, in the Fame of
Victoryes and Conquests, in the large Extent of Dominions, equal, yea exceed
the former Worthyes of that Name and Number, the GREAT and GREATEST: and after
a long happy Raygne, pass to be participant of an eternal Crown.

Your loyal Subject, and Beadesman. I. F.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
TO the end (good Reader) thou may more clearly conceive the Scope of these
Writings, I have thought fit, to give thee notice of some things, concerning
the Answer unto the Nine Points, and of the occasion thereof.

I suppose, thou have heard of some Conferences about matters of Religion,
which passed between M. John Fisher Jesuit on the one side, and D. Francis
White Minister on the other, for the satisfaction of an Honorable Person that
was moved to doubt, whether the Protestant were the true Church. At the second
Conference our late Sovereign King James being himself present, about the
conclusion thereof imposed upon M. Fisher a Task of writing about some
Questions of Controversy, and accordingly sent a note contaying Nine Points,
with this title of Superscription: Some of the Principal Points, which
withold my joining unto the Church of Rome, except she reform herself, or
be able to give me satisfaction, are these.

This is the true Occasion of M. Fishers writing, and the manner in which his
Majesty proposed the said Nine Questions: whereby thou may discover the
falsehood of the Occasion pretended by the Minister D. White, to save his own
credit, and to discredit M. Fishers Relation of the Conference. He says, In
his Preface to the Reader.
his Majesty having well understood of the Jesuits Cretizing Relation, and of
his dispersing hundreds of papers to his own praise, and to the disgrace of
his Adversaries, THEREFORE made the proposition of the Nine Questions, that, the
Jesuit answering them, and the Minister replying against his Answer, a
public testimony might be extant, whereby men might judge of the sufficiency
of the one, and insufficiency of the other. This is a Tale faygned upon the
fingers ends of the Writer thereof. For (besides that the superscription of the
Nine Questions shows, his Majesty had another intention in proposing them)
his Majesty laid the charge of writing upon M. Fisher, at the second Conference
when he had dispersed no papers about the particulars of the first Conference;
yea the said Relation was not penned, nor the penning thereof begun, when the
Note of the Nine Points was d^liuered into his hands. So that it is a mere
Fable, that his Majesty judged the Jesuits Relation of the Conf^rences to be
Cretizing and false, and therefore charged him with the obligation of writing.

And in my Judgment the Minister is not advised in confessing, that according
to M. Fishers Relation, his carriage in the Conference was most shameful, That
a Schoole-boy of thirteen years old, Preface to the Reader.
could not have been more vnskillful, and childish. This Confession, (I say)
cannot but be a stayne to his Cause and Honor in the Judgment of most men,
the foresaid Relation being of such Credit, and in substance so exactly true,
as none of the Honorable Audience disclaymed from it; yea, which is more, the
Ministers Counter-narration ready and prepared, as he says, for the print,
durst never appear against it. Whereof no doubt the reason is, for that he saw
that his printed narration must either be notoriously false, with danger to be
proclaimed a falsifyer by the Honorable Audience, or else in substance agree
with M. Fishers, which he does acknowledge to be so much to his discredit.

Again, the Minister (which was the cause M. Fisher published his Relation)
had by word of mouth uttered vaunting reports of his own victoryes, and of
his putting M. Fisher to a Nonplus, by arguments he never proposed; yea
concerning Controuersyes that were not touched. In his printed Narration, these
triumphant arguments could neither have been well omitted, nor hamsomely set
down. If he should have omitted the^, his Credents would have been
scandalized, perceauing he does delude them by verbal Reports which he dares
not utter in print. If he should have set them down, the Honorable Audience
would have been offended to see the Cause (as they suppose) of Truth, mantayned
by such exorbitant Falsehood.

This is the true Reason he is so silent in print about the particulars of the
Confere^ces, only doing his endeavor to disgrace the Jesuit in general
terms saying, That he vanished away from before his Majesty with foil and
disgrace, his Majesty telling him, he never heard a Verier Meaning a Fool or
Ass.
etc. A report so false, as the Minister contradicts the same himself
elsewhere, writing to the contrary, In his Preface toward the end: and Reply
to the Jesuits Preface initio.
That, by the second Conference his Majesty observed, that the Adversary was
cunning, and subtle in eluding Arguments. For what more opposite to the
Veriest Ass, or Fool, then one cunning and subtle? If his Majesty observed
by that Conference, that the Jesuit was cunning, subtle, acute in answering,
how could he say of him, I never heard a Verier Ass? Thus men implicate
themselves, that speak what they would have believed, without care of Truth.
But in defense of the Relation, I need say no more, there being extant an
Apology for the same in print.

Now concerning the Answer it self to the Nine Points, M. Fisher having
received the note, presently addressed himself to comply with his Maiestyes
Command, being encouraged thereunto by the Title, showing his Maiestyes desire
of joining unto the Church of Rome, could he be satisfied about some Points.
And as he employed therein his greatest strength, so likewise he was careful
to use the expeditio^ that was required, atchieuing the Work in less then a
month, though the same was not so soon delivered into his Maiestyes hands.
This expedition was likewise the cause, that he did omit the discussion of the
Ninth Point, About the Popes Authority to depose Kings. For being bound by the
Command of his General, given to the whole Order, not to publish any thing of
that Argument, without sending the same first to Rome, to be reuiewed and
approved, his Answer to that Point could not have been performed without very
long expectation and delay. And he was the more bold to pretermit that
Controversy, in regard that sundry whole Treatises about the same, written by
Jesuits and others, both Secular and Religions, had been lately printed: These
Authors so fresh and new, he was sure were not unknown to his Majesty, nor
was it needful that any thing should be added. Also knowing that commonly
Kings be not so willing to hear the proofs of Coerciue Authority over them,
be the same never so certain, he judged by this omission, the rest of his
Treatise might be more grateful, and find in his Maiestyes breast less
disaffection and resistance against the Doctrine thereof. Nor could he think,
that his Judicious Majesty, being persuaded of the other eight Points, would
have been stayed from joining unto the Church of Rome, only in regard of the
Nynth, Of the Popes Authority over Kings; the Doctrine of the Protestant Church
about the Authority of the people, and of the Common wealth in such cases,
being far more disgraceful and dangerous. And this forbearance is not, Reply
page 571.
as the Minister objects, against the resolution of a constant Divine, or S.
Bernards rule, Melius est, vt scandalum oriatur, quam vt veritas relinquatur.
It is indeed, better that scandal arise, then Divine Verity be forsaken, by
the denial thereof, or by not professing our Conscience therein, Reply unto
the Jesuits Preface initio.
when we are iuridically examined by the Magistrate; wherein even the Minister
gives testimony that the Jesuit was not defective, but did fully and clearly
declare his Faith about the Popes Authority, his Majesty telling him, he liked
him the better, in respect of his playnesse. This notwithstanding, there is no
man of Learning and Discretion, but will acknowledge, that a Constant Divine
may put off the Scholasticke Tractatio^ of some Point of Faith that is less
pleasing, until the Auditors, by being persuaded of Articles that do less
distaste, be made more capable of the truth, toward which by disaffection they
are not so prone.

The other articles are largely discussed, and as exactly as shortness of time
joined with penury of Books would permit. They be according to the Note, but
Eight, yet some of them contain diverse branches, and so all together they
amount to the number of fourteen: to wit, 1. The worship of Images. 2. The
worship of the holy Cross and Relics. 3. That Saints and Angels hear our
prayers. 4. That they are to be worshipped with honor super-humane, or more
then Civil. 5. That we may and ought to invoke the^. 6. That Repetitions of
Prayers in a fixed number is pious. 7. The Liturgy lawful in a language not
vulgarly known. 8. The Real Presence of Christ's body unto the corporal
mouth. 9. Transubstantiation. 10. Merit. 11. Works of Supererogation. 12. The
remaynder of temporal pain after the guilt of Sin. 13. That holy men by
Divine grace may for the same make compensant, yea superabundant Satisfaction.
14. That superabundant Sati^factions may be applied unto others by the
Communion of Saints. Before these is prefixed the fundamental Controversy of
the Church; That men cannot be resolved what doctrines are the Apostles, but by
the Tradition and Authority of the Church; About the sufficiency and
perspicuity of the Scripture; About the Churches ^isible Unity, Universality,
Holiness, Succession from the Apostles; That the Roman, is the visible
Catholic Church whose Tradition is to be followed. So that in this Treatise a
Sum of all the chiefest Controversies of this Age is contained.

Concerning the manner of ha^dling these Points, the Minister granting the
Jesuit shows himself well verst in Controversy, adds, In his Preface.
he is deficient of divine proof in every Article, and far more specious
including our Arguments, then happy in confirming his own. What reason he may
have to give this ce^sure of the Treatise I do not see, but only that he would
say something against it, and no better exception occurred: otherwise it is
clear, that in every Article the Answerer urges not only the Tradition of the
Church, not only the consent of Fathers, but also sundry Texts and Testimonies
of Scripture. And he does not only (which is the Ministers trick) score
Books, Chapters, Verses, without so much as citing the words, nor only does
he produce the words of the Text, but also refuteth the Protestant Answers,
by the rules of interpretation themselves commend, by recourse unto the
Originalls; by the consideration of the Texts, Antecedent, and Consequent; by
the drift and scope of the discourse; by Conference of other places, specially
by the express Letter and proper sense of Gods word. He shows that
Protestants pretending to appeal unto Scripture, interpreted from within it
self, as unto the supreme Judge, in very truth appeal from the express
sentence of divine Scripture unto the figurative construction of their humane
conceyte. For in every Point of these Controuersyes, they are proved to leave
the litterall sense of some Text of Scripture, without evident warrant from the
said Scripture so to do, upon Arguments at the most probable, unto which
themselves say, specious Answers are made, yea upon the Arguments that have
neither substance, nor seemelines, neither form, nor speciosity in them.

And this will be more clearly confirmed by the ensuing Confutation of the
Ministers Reply, which against the Answer unto the Nine Points came forth at
last after two years expectation. He pretends that his Book being long before
finished, and ready for the print, In his Preface.
he stayed that he might cite word by word the sentences of the Authors,
quoted in his margent; that so his work might be more useful unto such as
want the benefit of Libraryes. Which excuse to be false his margents proclayme
in innumerable places. I should rather think, considering the circumstances of
the time (if his book was so long before ready) that another reason stayed
the printing thereof. You may remember, that the Catholics of England by the
Clemency of our late Sovereign during those two years had more calm days,
and a season of some more freedom, then many years before they inioyed.
Whereby the minds of Protestants became more free and impartial, more erected
to understand the issue of the Controuersyes between them and us, and less
unwilling to see the Catholic Truth, which now they might with less trouble
and danger embrace. Wherefore the Ministers book not daring to appear in these
sunneshine days of more sincere and unpassionate judgment, was by him reserved
to be published, when the Sky should be darkened with the Clouds of
Persecution, and displeasure, without which protection of darkness it would
(per^hance) never have come to sight. Even as deformed Birds the daytime lie
Hidden in barnes, in night abroad they fly.
For when former amity and peace with Catholic Princes began to be shaken,
when the Parliament was hot in petitioning for a persecution of Catholics with
uttermost rigor, then presently went the Ministers book to the press, and
not long after (when the Decree for Persecution was enacted) came forth secure
and joyful, Answer to the Jesuits Preface. In fine.
chaunting (as Sirens singe in tempests) certain verses of Ovid, extending by
his Vote and Suffrage, the Persecution decreed for England, to the Roman Church
far and near.

-- Qua ROMA PATET fera regnat Erynnis,
In facinus iurasse putes, dent OCIVS OMNES
Quas meruere pati (sic stat SENTENTIA) poenas.
And who shall with indifferency reuiew the book, may find the same had good
reason to fly the light, being every where full of afflictiue Terms, and
spiteful Inuectiues, which can give no content, but only to minds dimmed with
the extremest passion of dislike, who take pleasure to read not what may
convince and convert, but what may grieve and gall the Adversaries. Wherein the
Jesuit has some cause to complain, that his Answer being so moderate and
temperate, without any sharp terms against Protestants, still excusing their
Errors and Mistakings, by the forwardnes of their Zeal; he has reason, I
say, to grieve, that his Treatise written with such Charity, and Modesty, and
this not upon his own pleasure, but enforced by his Majesty's Command, could
not find in England a proportionable Reply, tending toward a calm clearing
of the truth, but was set upon by fierce Reproaches, as if he had been urged to
write for no other end, but that a Minister might have occasion to disgorge
toward him, and his Religion, the bitterness of his gall.

It is true, that with these reproachful discourses, the Minister has mingled
matters of substance, that is, all the principal Shifts devised by others, and
which he could devise himself, to give a show to his Religion, or to obscure
the light and evidence of the Catholic; which had he set down learnedly and
calmely, without the admixtion of so much ragefull Impertinency, his Book had
been of lesser bulk: Whereby also, one good piece of this Reioynder might have
been spared, to wit, the Censure prefixed before the same.

My purpose indeed, was to have passed over his bitter Inuectiues and large
impertinencies with contempt, and only have touched what is really of
substance: but the request of friends won me to the contrary. For they
considering, that many be carried away to their perdition, not by the Ministers
learning, but by their opinion thereof, thought it necessary I should prefixe a
Discovery of his Inside, in the beginning of this Reioynder, as he has placed
a fair Picture of his Outside, with diverse glorious Emblems to his Honor,
upon the front of his Reply. In which prefixed Censure, in every passage
thereof matters of substance are handled; yet my principal drift is to make
the same a Picture, wherein the Ministers Ignorance in all sorts of Sciences,
and his falsifying of all kinds of Authors is set forth, not with the black
Coal of bare verbal Accusation, ^ut with the lightsome and lively Colors of
evident Proof: which that they may be more indeleble, are oyled with
commiseration of his blindness, and of his deceived Credents, that on him for
their Salvation rely.

In the Reioynder, which is collaterally joined with the Text of the Answer
unto the Nine Points, the matters of substance in the Ministers Reply, that
indeed may breed doubt to men not perfectly learned, are refuted: The
difficulty is not dissembled, nor shu^ned, the same is set down commonly in
the Ministers words, with the whole force and pith thereof summed together,
the Refutation presently following, not by the sole contradiction of words, but
by the oppositio^ of reasons. These, as they be ordinarily still of number, so
I hope the Reader will find them to be likewise of weight, that pondering them,
and comparing them with the Ministers, in the balance of impartial judgment,
he will easily see toward whom the doctrine not only of Christian Tradition,
but also of the holy Scripture inclines.

If any wonder that this Treatise came forth no sooner the time being more then
an year and a half since the Ministers Reply was printed; let him consider,
that it was a good while after the printing thereof, before the same came to my
hands, in regard of my absence and great distance from London. The book is
huge and vast, that to read the same attentively time and disoccupation is
required. The Vastnes thereof was likewise the cause the same could not be
confuted Verbatim (which had been easy) without making a Book as big as
Calepine, with great and unnecessary charges; which also being so big, would
never have found passage, and utterance in times of difficulty. Hence the
Reioyner was forced not only to read his huge Volume attentively, but also to
choose and sum together what the Reply contains of substance, seuering the
same from the dross of impertinent Reproach, which cost him both time and
labor. Besides about the time this Work should have gone to the print above a
year ago, they that should have concurred unto the printing thereof, were
called to another place by their necessary occasions, and stayed away more then
half a year; in which case we have not the choice of Printers, that
Protestants enjoy.

Of thee (Gentle Reader) in requital of my Labors I require no more, then
that to the perusing of them thou will bring an impartial mind, free from
preiudicate opinion, raised by Pulpit-inuectiues, and Popular Reports; free I
say, from human regards, affected unto the Truth of Salvation, resolved when
the same appears not to be kept from the embracing thereof through the fear of
te^porall dangers. If thy mind be thus indifferently and piously disposed, I do
not doubt but after atte^tiue reading, thou will give the same Censure of the
Conferences and Disputations b^twixt us and our Adversary, which Marcellinus
pronounced of the Co^ferences betwixt the Catholics and Donatists, Augustine.
in Breuiculo Collat.
Omnium Argumentoru^ manifestatione, a Catholicis Aduersarios confutatos esse:
That the Catholics are proved superior unto their Adversaries, by the
manifest truth of all kind of Arguments.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS AND PRINCIPAL Matters handled, as well in the Answer,
as in the Reioynder.
THE Preface to the Reader.

An Introduction to the Censure, showing the vanity of the Pictures and
Pageants displayed in the first two pages of the Ministers Book.

CONTENTS OF THE CENSVRE.
Sect. I. Doctor White his Ignorance of Latin and Grammar, or else wilful
going against the known Truth. page 9.. 1. S. Epiphanius words about Images
interpreted against Grammar. page 10.11. etc.. 2. His Grammatical Ignorance,
about the words Accipite, Manducate, Bibite. page 12.13. etc.. 3. His gross
misprision in translating of Latin. page 15.16. etc.. 4. About S. Cyprians
teaching Transubstantiation, and the word Species. page 19.20. etc.. 5. His
abusing the Jesuits words, against English Construction, to an impious sense.
page 23.24. etc.
Sect. II. D. White his gross and incredible Ignorance in Logic. page 30..
1. His fond accusation of the Jesuit, as peccant against the form of
syllogism. page 31.. 2. Four Arguments by him brought, all foolish, and
peccant in form. page 37.38 etc.. 3. His ridiculous Arguments to prove a divine
Ordinance for Laymen to read the Scripture. page 43.44. etc.
Sect. III. D. White his gross Ignorance of Theology. page 51. ^ 1. His
teaching that unto Ministers Religious Adoration is du^. page 52.53. etc.. 2.
That that cannot be the true Church which has wicked Pastors. page ^6.57.
etc.. 3. He professes Infidelity about the Blessed Sacracrament. page 64.65.
etc.. 4. His gross Ignorance further discovered about the same. page 68.69^
etc.. 5. His extreme Ignorance, about Satisfaction. page 72.73. etc.. 6. His
Ignorance about the Holy Cross, and Water of Jordan. page 77.78. etc.. 7. His
Ignorance, About Traditions. page 83.84. etc.
Sect. IIII. D. White his Ignorance in holy Scripture. page 86.. 1. He denies
the Text, and context of Scripture. page 87.88. etc.. 2. He is forced to go
against Christ's express words. page 89.90. etc.. 3. He is forced to deny the
Creed. page 92.93. etc.. 4. In answering Scriptures he contradicts himself,
and grants the Jesuit the Question. page 95.96. etc.. 5. In lieu of answering,
he confirms the Jesuits Arguments. page 98.99. etc.. 6. He sends the Jesuit
to God for an Answer. page 101.102. etc.. 7. His innumerable gross
Impertinencies, in cyphering and scoring of Scriptures. page 104.105. etc.. 8.
He cites Scriptures that make against him. page 108.109. etc.. 9. Scriptures
abused and falsified. page 112.113. etc. The Text of Matthew. 24.24. That even
the Elect shall be deceived were it possible, by him most grossly applied.
page 116. etc. The Text Act. 17.11. About the Beroeans, abused. page 118.119.
etc. The Text 1. Joan. 18. If we say we have no sin etc. falsified. page
120.121. etc.
Sect. V. His Ignorance, Fraud, and Falsehood, in alleging Fathers, and all
manner of Authors. page 125.. 1. Seven Testimonies of S. Augustine about
Scripture and Tradition falsified. 127.128. etc.. 2. Seven Testimonies of
other Fathers falsified. page 134.135. etc.. 3. Foul Calumniation and
Falsification of Hosius, Bellarmine, Petrus a Soto, and Bosius. p. 143.144.
etc.. 4. Other Fathers impudently falsified, as if they did auerre, what they
do most constantly maintain and prove. page 150.151. etc.. 5. Gross
Imputations, with manifest falsehood imputed unto Cardinal Baronius. page
153.154. etc.

CONTENTS OF THE ANSWER, AND REIOYNDER.
THE Preface to King James. page 3. That the Roman Church is the only true
Church. p. 3. A short Treatise concerning the Resolution of Faith, for the more
full clearing of the ensuing Controversies about Tradition, Scripture, and the
Church. page 15.. 1. The Protestant Resolution of Faith declared. page 15.16.
etc.. 2. The former Resolution confuted by six Arguments. page 16.17.18. etc..
3. Concerning the light of Scripture. page 21.22. etc.
The second Part of this Treatise, About the Catholic Resolution of Faith.
page 30.. 1. The first Principle proved. page 30.31. etc.. 2. The seeond
Principle demonstrated. page 32.33. etc.. 3. The third Principle proved. page
36.37. etc.. 4. How the Churches Tradition is proved infallible independently
of Scripture. page 38.39. etc.. 5. The difference between Prophetical, and
ordinary divine Illumination, by which Protestants Cauills are answered. page
41.42. etc.. 6. The fourth Principle proved. page 44.45. etc.
THE FIRST GROUND.. 1. That a Christian Resolution of Faith is built upon
perpetual Tradition, derived by succession from the Apostles. page 50.51.
etc.. 2. Concerning the Sufficiency and Clarity of Scripture. page 61.62. etc.
How Catholics grant the same sufficiency to be in Scripture as Protestants do,
and the true state of the Question about the sufficiency of Scripture, and of
Tradition. page 63.64. etc.

THE SECOND GROUND.. 3. That there is a Visible Church always in the world, to
whose Traditions men are to cleave. That this Church is One, Universal,
Apostolical, Holy. page 70.71. etc.. 4. The Properties of the Church proved by
Matthew. 28.20. page 82.83. etc.. 5. That the Roman is the One, Holy, Catholic,
Apostolical Church, from, and by which we are to receive the Tradition of
Christian Doctrine. page 85.86. etc. That the Protestant Church was not before
Luther. page 85.86. etc. That the Grecians were not Protestants in Essence.
page 87. That the Waldenses were not Protestants for Essence and kind. page 88.
That Protestants not being able to clear themselves to be the Visible Church
by Tradition, do vaynely appeal unto Scripture for their Doctrine. page 89.90.
etc.
. 6. The Conclusion of this Matter, showing that Protestants err
fundamentally. page 108.109. etc.
THE NINE POINTS. I. Point, About worship of Images. page 123.. 1. Worship of
Images consequent out of the Principles of Nature and Christianity. page
125.126. etc.. 2. That this Worship was ever since the Apostles in the
Church, without beginning. page 142.143. etc.. 3. The places of Exodus and
Deuteronomy. with no probability urged against the Worship of Images by Protestants
that make them. page 154.155. etc.. 4. Inconveniences which may come by
occasion of Images easily prevented and their vtilities very great. page
158.159.
THE SECOND AND THIRD POINT. II. Praying, and offering Oblations to the B.
Virgin Mary. III. Worshipping and Invocation of Saints and Angels. page 172..
1. An Eleauen Demonstrations that the Ancient Christian Church did ever hold
Invocation of Saints, as a matter of Faith and Religion. page 173.174. etc.. 2.
Invocation of Saints not to be disliked because not expressed in Scripture.
page 194.. 3. Knowledge of Prayers made to them communicable, and communicated
unto Saints. page 196.197. etc.. 4. The Worship in spirit and Truth with
outward prostration of body, due unto Saints. page 206.207. etc.. 5. Praying to
Saints not injurious to Gods mercy, but rather a commendation thereof. page
211.212. etc.. 6. Invocation of Saints, not an injury, but an honor to Christ
the only Mediator. page 215.216. etc.. 7. How it is lawful to appropriate the
obtaining of Graces and Cures unto Saints. page 219.220. etc.. 8. Concerning
Oblatio^s made to Saints. p. 223.224. etc.. 9. The Roman Churches set-formes of
Prayer, without cause misliked. page 226.227.

THE FOVRTH POINT. IIII. The Liturgy, and private Prayers for the Ignorant in
an unknown Tongue. page 130.131. THE FIFTH POINT. V. Repetitions of Pater
Nosters, Aues and Creeds, especially affixing a kind of merit to the number of
the^. p. 241.242. etc. THE SIXTH POINT. VI. The doctrine of Transubstantiation.
An Addition, proving the Catholic Real Presence, according to the litterall
Truth of Gods word, against Ministerial Metaphors, Figures, and shifts. page
248.. 1. The Zwinglian and Caluinian Religion about the Sacrament. page 248..
2. The Zwinglian and Caluinian Presence confuted. page 250.. 3. The Ministers
Arguments against the litterall sense of Christ's word, vain and idle. page
253.254. etc.. 1. That the Real Presence of the whole body of Christ under the
forms of bread belongs to the substance of the Mystery. page 260.261. etc.. 2.
Transubstantiation belonges to the substance of Real Presence. page 266.267.
etc.. 3. Transubstantiation was taught by the Fathers. page 271.272. etc.

A Refutation of the Ministers shifts to elude the former Testimonies of the
Fathers. page 276.277. etc.. 4. The seeming repugnances this Mystery has with
Sense, should inclyne Christians the sooner to believe it. page 290.291.

THE SEVENTH POINT. VII. Communion under one kind, and abetting of it by
Co^comitancy. page 305.. 1. The Doctrine of Concomitancy proved. page 306.307.
etc.. 2. Communion under one kind not against the substance of the Institution
of Christ. page 311.312. etc.. 3. Communion under one kind, not against the
substance of the Sacrament. page 315.316. etc.. 4. Communion under one kind,
not against Christ his Precept. page 319.320. etc. The place of S. John, Qui
manducat hunc panem etc. explicated, with an Answer to the Testimonies of the
Fathers. page 330.331.
. 5. Communion under one kind not against the practice of the Primitive Church.
page 332.333. etc.
THE EIGHT POINT. VIII. Works of Supererogation, specially with reference to
the treasure of the Church. page 334.. 1. The Doctrine of Merit declared. page
ibid. and 335.336. etc. The Ministers Arguments, or rather Inuectiues against
this Doctrine of Merit, answered. pa. 347.348. etc.
. 2. Merit of works of Supererogation. p. 348.349. etc.. 3. The Fathers taught
works of Supererogation, and proved them by Scripture. page 352.353. etc.. 4.
The Doctrine of Satisfaction. page 358.359. etc.. 5. Works, with reference
unto the Treasure of the Church. page 362.363. etc. The Ministers railing
Arguments against the former doctrine, censured. page 372.373. etc.

THE NINTH POINT. IX. The opinion of deposing Kings, and giving away their
Kingdoms by Papal power, whether directly, or indirectly. page 382. The
Ministers fond Cavil, That Jesuits honor not the King, as Soueraygne. page
383.384. etc. His fond proofs of his Slander, that Jesuits hold singular
Opinions to the prejudice of Kings. pa. 385.386. etc. His Fondnes in Cauilling
at the Jesuits words, about the Temporal Soueraignity of Popes. page 389.390.
etc. His miserable Apology for Protestants. p. 391.392. etc. His Cavil against
the Jesuits special Vow of Obedience to the Pope. page 393. etc.

THE CONCLUSION.
Faults escaped in the printing.
In the Picture, and Censure.
Page 10. lin. 14. Christ read Christ's. Page 12. lin. 17. in marg. Ministry
read Minister. Page 13. l. 2. in marg. conferunt read conferant. Page 16. l.
20. place translated, read place truly translated. Page 25. l. 19. pleasore
read pleasure. Page 37. l. 7. are read were. Page 86. l. 19. now read new. Page
44. l. 3. this read his. Page 104. l. 16. of read in. Page 121. lin. 32. an
read be. Page 132. l. vlt. diriue read drive.

In the Answer, and Reioynder.
Page 4. l. 10. in marg. if read it. Page 19. line penult. in marg. seipsum
read sensum. Page 24. l. 1. God. Though. read God, though. Ibid. l. 16. could,
not read could not, Page 56. lin. 30. in marg. this read thus. Page 71. lin.
32. in marg. but must read but they must. Pag^ 74. l. 16. in marg. do to prove
read do prove. Page 80. l. 30. in marg. Votaies read Votaries. Page 81. lin.
32. Philip and in dele and. Ibid. l. 34. in innumerable dele in. Page 100. l.
1. and 3. suppositious read supposititious. Page 115. l. 16. in coll. read in
loc. Page 119. l. 12. opinions read opinion. Page 129. lin. 1. Axione read
Axiom. Page 32. l. 34. in marg. a positive read a positive precept. Page 141.
l. 11. in marg. Sect. 3. read Sect. 1. Page 142. l. 26. in marg. the argues
read he argues. Page 144. lin. 21. viz. read vero. Page 145. l. 10. reliueth
read relieueth. Page 152. l. 33. in marg. Anthropomorphilae read
Anthropomorphitae. 177. l. 9. in marg. praebitur read praebebitur. Page 180. l.
22. wash awayt read washed away. Page 227. l. 5. if they dele if. Page 229. lin.
23. in marg. him that dele him. Page 141. lin. 9. reverent read renewed. Page
378. l. 22. satisfaction read (satisfaction) Page 396. l. 4. Roall read Royal.
Page 399. l. 2. fallable read fallible.

THE TRVE PICTVRE OF D^ WHITE MINISTER. Or, the Censure of his Reply unto M.
Fisher.
The Reason of this Title.
THIS Short Censure is prefixed under the Name of your Picture, that the
Reioynder may correspo^d in proportion unto your Reply, the beginning whereof
is consecrated by an Image of your For he teaches that Religious Adoration is
due to Ministers. See the Censure Sect. 3.. 1.
Adored Self, and with other glorious Giew-gawes in honor of your Book and
Religion. Touching which I will say a word, that hereby the Reader may give a
guess at the Truth, Learning, Discretion Modesty you show in your book, A
good house (as says Bona domus ex limine debet agnosci. Ambros. De institut.
Virg.
S. Ambrose) being known by the Frontispice thereof.

The Roman Orator rebukes some ancient Philosophers, who made show to
contemn human Glory, whereof in their hearts they were insatiably greedy;
conuincing their Hypocrisy by this Argument; Cicero pro Archia.
Libris quos de contemnenda gloria scribunt, sua nomina inscribunt, Their
books inscribed of the contempt of glory, are superscribed with their names,
that they may be glorious. What then may we think of you, who in the book
wherein you reject the Image of your Lord and Savior, as Reply page 21^.
no good, nor effectual means to breed godly memory, and heavenly desires, in
this very Book, I say, eue^ in the first Page thereof next after the Blankes,
you have placed your own Picture, in as Lively, Lovely, and Venerable manner
as you could devise, that people gazing thereon, might by the aspect thereof,
be moved with Love, with Veneration, with Devotion toward you.

This shows, that through a Vain glorious Humor you feel that Truth in
your heart, which through want of Religious devotion, you Reply page 214.
deny in words; to wit, that Honors done to the Image, are by the law and
institution of Nature referred, and to be taken as done to the Person. And if
this be so in a Minister, why should not holy Images, be good means of pious
Devotion, and godly Memory, toward Christ Jesus? Why should not me^ be moved
to Religious Devotion by the Image of our Savior crucified, as well as by yours
here painted, with all the Ornaments of a Ministerial Deane? By the Picture,
I say, of the Son of God, suffering for man, not sitting in a curious wrought
Chair as you do, but hanging on a Paynfull, and Ignominious Cross; not with
a Velvet Cap on his Head, as you wear to keep in your Wits, but with a
Crown of Thorns, which piercing into his sacred Temples let out his blood;
not clothed in Damask as you be, but in the Purple of his precious Blood; not
set forth with fine Ruffeb^nds and Cuffs, wherewith your wrests and neck be
trimmed, to make your face look smugge, and gracious to the eye of flesh, but
full of rough blows, ^^ide sores, and bleeding wounds, which represent the
Credentibus vbique Sponsus pulcher occurrit, pulcher ad dexteram Patris,
pulcher in manibus Matris, pulcher in Caelo, pulcher in Ligno, pulcher in
Miraculis, pulcher in Flagellis. Augustine. in Psalm. 44.
beauty of his Charity to the eye of the Soul.

But herein you are pardonable, in that this Irreligious Vanity comes to you by
The like was done by Acacius that Enemy of the Roman Sea, as writes Suidas.
And by the Bohemian Protestant-Rebell Zisea, who having destroyed all holy
Images, caused his own to be set up in every place. Aeneas Syluius Histor.
Bohem.
kind. You imitate herein the Grand propagatour of your Ministerial Stock
John Calvin. He having rejected the images of Christ Jesus and his Saints, not
allowing them so much as to be fit Books to instruct the Ignorant Calvin
Instit. l. 1. c. ^^.. 1.
checking Saint Gregory for so affirming, As not brought up in the School of
the Holy Ghost; Nevertheless he did dote on his own Image, and was most
greedy of the tokens of Affection showed him by the same. Hence when sundry
persons, specially the Damsells of Geneua La via de Calvin. c. ^^.
to show their devoted Love to this their Arch-Prophet, wore his Image about
their necks, directly upon their hearts, he took therein singular Content; so
far, as unto some zealous Ministers, and Godly Brethren that with show of
dislike warned him thereof, he made this charitable Answer, The thing shall
be continued in despite of you; if you like it not, turn away your eyes,
otherwise let your hearts break with Envy. Whereby it is clear that Ministers
understand, and feel by the instinct of Nature, that Images are fit
instruments to kindle and conserve Affection toward Persons Venerably
represented; giving us just cause to suspect, that their condemning the use of
Christ's Image by way of Religious Devotion toward him, proceeds not in truth
(as is pretended) from their zeal against Idolatrous Worship, but because
themselves alone by the means of their Images would take possession of men's
Hearts.

What is the reason that so many fond Images are daily invented, and vented in
England in lying forms, no less Honorable to your Religion, then Disgraceful
to the Roman, but that you know, that Images are the Books of the Ignorant,
and weapons to expugne the hearts of the simple, either with love and affection,
or by auersion and contempt? A Candle signifying the Light of your Gospel, is
painted with a general Assembly of your Gospellers with great show of Piety
about it, Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Husse, Wickliffe, Melancthon, Knox,
Bullinger, Beza, Zanchy, and some other; A Devil, a Pope, a Cardinal a Friar
in Vggly shapes, puffing and blowing, and casting holy water in vain to put it
out. A fabulous vanity to delude Sottes, seeing every man that is not a fool,
may most easily know even by Luthers Confession, Luther Tom. 7. Wittemberg.
Anno. 15^8 lib. de Missapriuata and Unction Sacerdotum fol. 228.
that his light came not from heaven but from Hell, kindled by conference with
the Devil, whose Halitus eius prunas ardere facit. Job 41.18.
breath made your dead coals to burn, so far is he from going about to
quench the fire of your Gospel. As for the general meeting of your
Gospellers, sitting together in such a Concordious manner, they that have read
their Writings know, that should they meet in truth, as they are made in your
fancy (if their tongues be of the same temper as their pens) they would not sit
so demurely, and peaceably as they are painted by you, but fall together by the
ears, and to Cuffs, the one with the other, that (as says your Bilson de
perpetua gubernat. Eccles. c. 16. Si linguae eoru^ similiter se habent ac
calami, pluribus cer^e opus erit Pacis Custodibus ad pugnas praeueniendas, quam
Notarijs ad decreta eoru^ perscribenda.
Bishop Bilson) without doubt there would be need of more Justices of peace to
part the frayes, ^^en of notaryes to write the decrees of that Counsel. Hence
the Painter not without mystery, and with great foresight has made the
Minister KNOX in the midst of this imagined Assembly, to signify, that if ever
a General Council of your Reformers happ to meet, KNOCKS will be sure not to
be wanting amongst them.

I need not seek far for the like examples of your Vanity, the very next
Page after your Picture is sufficiently stored with such kind of stuff. Two
Women there stand opposite the one to the other. That of the right side for
your Gospel, that on the left for the Roman Religion. Between whom you have
pictured four or five oppositions, which deserve to be noted being wise ones;
in which shines your skill in Mystical, or Symbolicall Theology.

The first opposition. Your Protestant woman has a Sun of Glory about her
head, to signify that she is In SOLE posuit TABERNACVLVM suum, id est, in
manifestatione posuit Ecclesiam suam: Non est in oculto, no^ est quae lateat
Quid Heretice fugis ad tenebras? quid latitare conaris? August. in Psalm. 18.
seated in the Sun, ever in manifest sight, ever conspicuous to the world; so
perpetually visible, that for more then 12. hundred years, to wit from the
days of Constantine unto Luther, she was never seen in the world, as Napier
upon Reuelat. page 168.
your Doctors confess, and the Motto you have set under her does insinuate,
Veritatem aperit Dies, Time discouers Truth; as who should say, the same was
hidden until these later days of Luther. But seeing the Conference with the
Devil whereby your Luther was illumined, happened at Midnight, as Vbi supra.
Media nocte expergefactus sum qua mecum Diabolus disputationem orsus est etc.
himself does testify; me thinks not, Veritatem aperit Dies, but, Nox Nocti
indicat Scientiam, according to the verbal sound, would have been the fitter
Motto for your Gospel.

On the other side, the Roman Religion (poor Woman) is by you painted stark
blind, with this Vnderscription, Error caecus. Perchance, you think she must
needs be blind in respect of her old Age, having lived in open profession to
the world, ever since the Apostles. This I might suspect to be your reason, did
I not see that you attribute the same Papisticall blindness even to the ancient
and primitive Church. Luther affirms Luther Tom. ^. Wittemb. lib. de seruo
Arbitr. p. 434.
that the Fathers of so many ages were STARK BLIND. Another Protestant of
great name does profess, Caelius Secundus Curio de amplitud. Reg. Christi l.
1. page 43.
That the WHOLE WORLD EVER almost since the Days of the APOSTLES, until this
last Age, lived in darkness, BLINDNESS, and Ignorance. Your Archbishop of
Canterbury doubts not to pronounce, Whitegift defense page 472 and 473.
How GREATLY SPOTTED were almost ALL THE FATHERS of the Greek Church, and of
the Latin also, for the most part, with the doctrins of Freewill, Merit,
Invocation of Saints and the like; that NEVER SINCE THE APOSTLES, was there a
Church so pure and perfect, as the Church of England is at this day. Wherefore
we need not be angry with your paynting our Religion stark blind seeing she
could not be the Christian Religion of the ancient Fathers ever since Christ,
were she not blind, in the foolish imagination of your fantastical Gospel.

The second opposition. Mistress Protestancy is painted with her breasts open,
her paps displayed, naked down to the girdle: You will say, this does
represent the naked Simplicity and Candor of Truth which your Religion loves*
No doubt that simple Truth is found in her, which holds Men may lawfully lie in
behalf of her Osiander Epitom Histor. ce^tur. 16. page* 79^. Ha^^ regulam
habent Caluinistae, L^cere pro gloria Christi mentiri.
Gospel, and that they can never lie enough in so good a cause. Might not I
say more ^^uly that this more fitly represents, that the immodest Fashion of
Women to go with their breasts naked, as now is the use, was by your Gospel
brought into England; a fashion so odious in Catholic times, as even Strumpets
durst not use it in public? Hence some may suspect this Leuity and Lightness
charactered by her attire, to be the cause of her great Belly, wherewith you
seem to set her forth: Whereby also you may signify, that she is the offspring
not of the Gospel of Christ, but of Vigilantius his Gospel, which was so
religious and devoted unto carnal Fecundity, that (as does testify Nisi
pregnantes viderint vxores Clericorum, infantesque de vlnis matrum vagientes,
Christi Sacramenta no^ tribuunt. Hieron. lib. aduers. Vigil. cap. 1.
S. Hierome) her Bishops would not order any Ministers, except first they saw
their wives either to have great bellyes, or young babes hanging at their
breasts. Though perchance your meaning was by this Emblem, to express the
blessing of Fecundity, which your Gospel enjoys in your Worships of the
Ministry, who yearly fill the Parishes of the Realm with many novel Branches
of your Leuiticall Stock.

On the other side, you have done a deed of Charity toward the Roman Woman in
clothing her with modest attire from the crown of the head, to the sole of the
foot: the Feet of your Religion being bare, to signify, perchance, that she
is a barefooted Nun, or a great Practicant of going Bare-foote in
Pilgrimage, and of such Penitential works. And whereas you make the garment of
our Church speack^^d with great variety of incised works, this does not
displease us, whatsoever your meaning may be. For this does agree with the
Emblem of the Christian Church, used by the Royal Prophet psalm. 44. where she
is described a Queen standing on the right hand of the Fairest amongst the
Sons of men, Psalm. 44.15.
Circumamicta varietatibus, clothed about with varietyes; which varietyes
wrought on her garment may signify the great variety of Holy Heroycall Works,
practiced by her Children, whereby she Lex Domini immaculata conuertens animas.
Psalm. 18.8. Isa. 59.6.
co^uerts so great variety of Nations from Paganism unto Christ. From the
attire of which kind of works, your Religion is as naked and innocent, as the
Child newly borne, that of your endeauours in this behalf we may pronounce that
of the Prophet, Telae eorum non erunt in vestimen u^^ opera eorum opera
inutilia*
The webbs they weaue will not serve for clothing, their works are
unprofitable works. For your doctrines have no force to convert Infidells unto
Christ, but only to pervert, and draw Indocti and instabiles deprauant
Scripturas, in quibus sunt difficilia intellectu. 2. Pet. 3 16.
unstable Christians from his Church.

The third Opposition. The Woman of your Religion is painted with a Royal
Crown in her right hand, holding the same toward her breast, to show her
affection unto Kings, whom she huggs in her arms (as the Ape does his young
ones) till she press them to death by extremity of love. This happened unto
his Maiestyes Camden. Elizab. p. 458. Hunc lame^tabilem vitae finem habuit
Maria Scotorum Regina etc.
mother, who falling into the hands of your Religion, you held her so fast, you
griped her so hard, as you drove the breath out of her body, and made her
Sacred blood run about her Anointed Shoulders. The Roman Religion in opposite,
has given her by your paynting a Vizard, and is made to stand treading upon
Crowns and Scepters, to signify that she is by doctrine and practice a Deposer
and Contemner of Kings. This Fancy would indeed be a Truth, could you prove
that Wickliffe, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Knox, Buchanam, Wittingham, Goodman, and
the like See Bancroft Danger. Posit. Whit. l. 1. c. 4. and l. 2. c 1. and
Protestants Apolog. ^reface.
were Roman Catholics. Or could you show that they were Papists, of whom Beza
Ep. Theolog. 68.
Beza says, putting himself in the number, What Churches should we now have
in the world, had not this course been held, to wit, of erecting Churches by
force of Arms, in despite Protestants have murdered five Catholic Kings, or
Princes: They have deposed Nine from their Kingdoms wholly, or in part: They
have set up their Religion at the least in forty towns by force of Arms,
expelling the Magistrates, murdering Priests and Religious Persons, breaking
down Images, and burning Churches: They have been at the least twenty several
times in the field against their Catholic Soueraygnes, and six or seven times
against their soueraygnes that were present in person: All which may be proved
by the testimony of Protestants, if the marge^t did permit. Read Bancrofts
Dangerous positio^s. Osianders Epitom. Histor. Centur. 16. and the ^rotesta^ts
Apolog. Preface.
of Princes, and Magistrates? So plainly does he acknowledge your Churches to
have been every where planted, by treading under foot the Commands and Edicts,
the Swords, and Governments, the Crowns, and Scepters of Kings.

The fourth opposition. The Protestant Gentlewoman holds a pillar under her
left Arm, with a bough of palm in the same hand: whereas the Roman has on
her left hand a Camelion sitting. Your meaning is, that you (forsooth) are
strong and Constant in your Religion, but we weak and wavering ready to
change for fear of persecution. Your Constancy indeed is known, that you are
in your doctrines, as immutable as the Moon. In what point of Religion (says
Andraeas Duditius. See Epist. Theol. Bezae. epist. 1. and 3.
an emine^t Protestant) be they, that impugn the Roman Bishop, firm and
constant? They COIN MONTHLY FAITHS, they are carried away with the wind of
every doctrine. What their Religion is to day one may know, but what it will be
to morrow, neither themselves, nor any mortal man can tell. And whereas you
make this your Gossippe to have on her left side the pillar of Religion, and on
her right the Crown; could any thing be more fit to express your Church of
England? For in her Religion Kings have the better and upper hand of God: the
Apostolical sentence, We must rather obey God the^ men, is turned backward,
her Doctrine is mutable with the Princes pleasure; that she may be better
resembled by a Weather-cocke the^ by a Pillar. For what consta^cy can she have,
that preferrs a Temporal Crown, before Christian Truth^*

The fifth Opposition between these two Women, is in respect of the Tytles
that are set over their heads; yours being termed, Veritas Vniuoca, and ours,
Mendacium Aequiuocum. Veritas vniuoca, being in English, Verity taught, by the
professors thereof, with one voice, with uniform consent, I think the Reader
will smile at your good Invention, that you could find no truer Title for your
Gospel. For what more notorious to the world, then that your reformed
Professors are Univocal in the doctrine they preach as divine truth, even as
the builders of Babel were Univocal in language, after the division of their
tongues? Unto the Roman Religion, which does detest lying about any the least
thing, which co^demnes Equivocal and Ambiguous speech in the affayre of
Religion, in matters of Bargayne, in familiarity of See the Treatise tending to
Mitigation.
Speech, why do you term her Mendacium Aequiuocum? Upon no other ground, but
in regard she teaches, that a Christian, to defend his life and goods from the
Tyranny of Oppressors, may sometimes use ambiguous and reserved speech: A
practice expressly allowed in Scripture, as Gregor. in exposit. l. 1. Reg. c.
16. His verbis ostenditur, quod Tyrannorum saeuitia atque versutia quandoque
est PIA FRAVDE deludenda: sic tamen Tyranni deludendi sunt, vt caueatur culpa
mendacii. Quod tu^c been perficitur, cum illud quod fit asseritur; sed quod
fit, sic dicitur vt celetur, quia ex part dicitur, and ex part reticetur.
says S. Gregory. The Scripture shows, that the crafty cruelty of Tyrants is
sometimes to be deluded by PIOUS FRAVD; so saving our selves from their malice,
that we tell not a Lie: which then is well performed, when what is done is
affirmed, yet so affirmed, as what is done is also co^cealed, the thing being
uttered in part, and in part not uttered, but retained in mind.

I hope I have clearly discovered the falsehood and inanity of your
Frontispiciall Emblemes and Pageants which occasioned my setting this Picture
before the Reioynder, the rather also to make your Image perfect, and complete
in the Entrance of both our ^ookes put together, that the Reader may behold in
the one the Outside, in the other the Inside of your Venerable Self. If
Calvin Calvin lib. de scandalis.
said true of Ministers, Praeclarum quidem zelum simulant, they can make an
excellent fair show of Zeal, I will not deny, but your Paynters curious hand
has elegantly set forth your Outside. For he has painted in your Face a
fair show of Zeal, of Modesty, of Wisdom, of Gravity, specially in your
demure look, Velvet cap, and gray Beard so combed and handsomely composed, as
your Wife may seem to have had her fingar in the trimming thereof, as well as
in the setting of your Ruff.

But, quid si intus excutias? What if we look into the Inside? Here your
Paynters Pensill failed him, which defect some body, (perchance your self)
undertook to supply with his Poetical Quil, setting these verses under your
Picture, and the Picture of your Book wearing a Crown, Wisdom and Grace see
in that modest look,
Truth's Triumph, Errors downfall in this Book.


But this is not lively paynting of your Inside to the eye, but only Verbal
Assertion of your hidden Worth to the ear, which if one will reject as the
fabulous co^ceyt of a Poet, what can be replied? Or if you be Author of the
Verses your self, some perhaps will attribute these praises not unto Truth,
but unto your Fawning, with ouer-fauourable Fancyes, upon your own Learning,
Triumphing before the Victory, and usurping a Crown without right. What then
shall I do? how may I set forth the true and undeniable figure of your
Inside? Your Reply page ^74.
self say, (...), Speech and Discourse show the true shape and figure of a
man, according to the mind. This is true. Hence a Philosopher when a Lad was
brought unto him to be his Scholar said* Speak Child, that I may see thee. If
one desire to know what stuff a Similes estis sepulchris deal^atis quae aforis
parent hominibus speciosa, intus vero plena sunt omni spurcitia. Matthew. ^3.27.
Sepulcher WHITE and PAINTED without, co^taines within, the way is to mark
what savor commes out when the same is opened?

Wherefore, according to the Luc. 19.22.
Gospel ex ore tuo te iudico, I will judge you by your own mouth, and by the the
words thereof delineate the Feature of your mind. Qualityes of mind may be
reduced unto two heads, Learning and Honesty; the one being the ornament of the
Understanding, the other of the Will. Hence this your Picture, or Censure of
your Book, containing five Sections, in the last of them your Honesty, in
citing of all sorts of Authors, is discovered. The other four are employed to
set forth the quality of your Learning in every kind of Science that belongs to
a Divine. Whereby will appear what great reason you had to set this Inscription
about your Picture, Effigies The title of Doctissimus was given to Luther by
the Devil in his nights Conference with him, as Luther vbi supra, does re^ord.
Doctissimi Viri D.ni Francisci White etc. The Picture of the most Learned man
M. Francis White, taking to your self the Title of Learned in the superlatiue
degree above other men. This Censure with the Reioynder will also make
manifest, how iudiciously by way of preue^tion the Jesuit in his Answer
convinced your future Reply, and your rude quaxing therein against the
Catholic Truth; that whereas you have made the Jesuits Arm holding a net with
a frogge in it, if your Painter will in lieu of the Frogge paint a Minister, he
shall not need to change the Motto, Piscatoris rete habet Ranam, the Fisher
has caught in his net a Frogge.

Ignorance of Latin, and Grammar; or else wilful going against known Truth.
SECTION I.
TO begin with that kind of learning which Children are taught in the first
place, and which is the key unto all other knowledge, I shall make manifest
your gross Ignorance therein, by four Examples.

The first Example.. 1.
THERE is a controversy betwixt you and your Adversary about the fact of S.
Epiphanius, who writes of himself: Epiphan. epist. ad Joan. Hierosolym. quae
est 6. inter Epistolas Hieron.
I found in the entry of a certain Church in the Village of Anablatha, in the
Country of Bethel the image of a Man, pendentem quasi Christi, aut alicuius
Sancti, nescio enim cuius erat, hanging as Christ's, or some Saints (for I know
not whose is was:) when then I saw the Image of a Man to hang in the Church of
Christ against the authority of Scripture, I cut the same (...) pieces etc.

The question is, whether this Image was Christ's (...) some Saints, and not
rather some profane man's, ^anging as Christ's, or some Saints. The Jesuit
Jesuit in the Reply p. 251. and ^5^*
^aintaynes that it was a vulgar and profane image not any sacred Picture.
This he proves, first because Epiphanius urges the unlawfulness of this fact
because it was the image of a man, When (says he) ^^gaynst the authority of
the Scripture, I saw in the Chur^^ the image of a man. But there was no reason,
why (...) should urge the unlawfulness of this fact, in respe^^ the image was of
a man, had he not understood mere ordinary man. For otherwise it is so far
from being against Scripture to set up in Churches the I^mage of a man, as by
Gods express order Ezod. 25.34.
the Cherubims were figured in the Temple under the shape of Men.

Secondly, it is a principle in Philosophy, Nullu^ simile est idem, what is
like to a thing, is not the sam^ thing, without distinction. Epiphanius says,
the ^^mage of this man did hang as Christ, or some Saint that is, in like
manner as such sacred images did (...) to hang, Ergo, that image was not
Christ's, or some Saints, but the image of some profane man* ha^gin^ in the
Church, as Christ's, or some Saints.

You coming to answer your adversary, (...) according to your custom, you
enter into a com^mon place, and rail page 251. No testimony can be clear
which Sophisters will not labor to pervert and (...) otherwise what is cleerer
against Imageworship, then (...) words of Epiphanius. It is lost labor to
contend with me^ qui sola pertinacia pugnaces neruos contra persp^^cuam
veritatem intendunt, which upon sole perti^ bend their uttermost force to
gainsay perspicuous verity

After this Semoti^ NVGIS locorum communiu^, causa, cum causa, res cum re,
ratio cum ratione confligat. Augustine. de vtil. cr^d. c. 1.
childish declamation, commin^ to answer the Jesuits arguments, you skip over
the first, without any Reply at all. Unto the secon^ grounded upon the word,
quasi Christi, aut (...) Sancti, you shape this solution.

Epiphanius writing (...), or (...), translated by (...) ad verbum quasi, is to
be construed not by a note of ^^^parison, but of conjecture, or guessing in
things we do perfectly remember, or know, as vidi gregem ouium quasi (...),
or, I saw a troop of horse, put case an 100. Thus you; showing what an
excellent Gra^marian you are. For I beseech you in what Grammar, or Dictionary
did you ever read that quasi does signify put case? And your English example, I
saw a troop of horse, put case an 100. if it be brought with reference unto
the Latin, vidi gregem ouium quasi mill, as a true translation thereof (as it
ought to be, for otherwise why is it brought?) what Grammer-maister would
endure a boy that should so interpret? I urge not your translating mill, an
hundred, nor gregem ouium, a troop of horse, for this I know does not much
import; but your translating quasi, put case, which quasi does no more signify,
then mill does an hundred, or ouis, a horse If a Gra^mer-boy having this
English to be put into Latin: Behold a troop of twenty horse, put case they
(...) hundred, let us set upon them; should thus translate* Ecce turmam viginti
equitum, quasi centum, irruam^^* were not this senseles and ridiculous Latin?
And yet the Latin were true, and ad verbum, if quasi did signify put case, as
you say it does.

Wherefore quasi is still a note of similitude, which sometimes does together
imply doubting or coniecturing when the similitude is so perfect as we can
(...) no distinction. As in your example vid^ (...) ouium quasi mill, we
signify, that the number of (...) sheep is so near a thousand, as we cannot
(...) whether they be more or less. And thus ^^^phanius finding the image of a
man hanging in the Church of Anablatha, with a lamp burning before it, says,
that it did hang as Christ's, or some Saints, tha^ is, in such manner as he
could not discern any diffe^rence betwixt the reverence given by that people
unto it, and the reverence the That images of Christ and his Saints were hanged
up in Churches in that age of S. Epiphan. Hierom. and Augustine is evident, by
Euodius Vzalensis* l. 1. de mirac. S. Stephani c. 4.
Church used toward the Images of Christ and his Saints. You may the^ rail at
your pleasure, but whiles you reply no Seeing the Ministry grants this to be
the cleerest testimony that may be found in antiquity against the honoring of
holy Images, the Reader may judge how poor and defectuous of solid proof
Protestants are in this point.
better, even Grammer-boyes may see your adversary has concluded you in a
Cap-case, which qua does signify, as much as, put case.

The second Example.. 2.
YOUR adversary page 487. does defend that the words of Christ drink ye all
of this, were spoken to the twelve Apostles upon a personal reason be^longing
to them only. This he proves: First because when a word is ambiguous, the same
is to be interpreted by another place speaking of the same matte^ where the
same word is used without ambiguity. I^ this speech of S. Matthew. 26. verse. 39.
Matthew drink ye all of this, it (...) ambiguous, whether the word all,
concern all me^ or only all the twelve there present. S. Mar. 14.23.
Mark speaking of the same matter, and signifying how tha^ precept drink ye
all of this, was accomplished, says they drank all thereof, where all cannot
be extende^ further then unto all the twelve; Ergo, this place cannot with any
reason, or by the rule of exposition (...) further extended.

Secondly, the words Accipite, manducate, bibi^^* were certaynely spoken unto
the same persons, and they run so together in rank that no man wit^
probability can make the one out-runne the other. But the command Accipite,
(which signifyes tak^ with your hand, for it is a precept distinct from
m^^^ducate, which is take with your mouth) was given to (...) Apostles only,
not unto all the faithful* else we ^ust say, that al communicants are bound by
divine precept to take the consecrated cup, or bread with their hands. Who ever
heard of such a precept in the Christian Church?

You being to make answer unto this grounded discourse, first, you keep your
wont, and according to your Qui loquitur maledicta stultissimus est. Prou. c.
10. Et nullus acriter impoperat Eccles. 18.18.
skill in Rhetorike ad captandum beneuo^^ntiam, to win our good will, set upon
us thus with a Prefatory peale of reproach: That which S. Stephen spoke to the
unfaithful Jews; ye do always resist the holy Ghost, Act. 7.51. is verifyed
in the Pharisees of Rome, for no light of heavenly verity is so illustrious
which this generation, in favor of their own impiety, will not endeavor to
cloud. Is it possible for any thing to be more evident for communion in both
kinds, then this precept of Christ, Drink ye all of this: yet the sons of
darkness, having renoun^^d verity, and chosen the way of error, blunder and
^rope in the clear light, and, verba recta ac veritatis (...) fulgentia,
tortuosis interpretationibus obscura^^, and deprauare moliuntur, as S.
Augustine long since spoke of the Pelagians. Thus You might have here
remembered the saying of S. Hierom. Haereticorum machinae sunt, vt conuicti de
perfidia, ad maledicta se conferunt, super quo viderint quomodo illud audiant,
Maledici regnum Dei non possidebunt. l. 3. aduers. Ruffin. c. 11. and* lib. 2.
c. ^^
you. So great a sin it is for us to expound the word of God against the
fancy of a Minister, by conference of places, by consideration of antecedents
and consequents, by the circumstances of the action, and by all other Christian
allowed rules.

Having thus rayled, you approach to the Jesuits arguments, and again skip
over the first without any syllable of reply. In your solution of the second,
grounded on the word accipite, take, to show both your Grammatical and
Scripturall erudition, you write in this sort: The Jesuit imagines that all
taking is with the hand, and thus he proves himself to be neither good
Grammarian, nor Divine. Virgil says, illos porticibus Rex accipiebat in
amplis, where accipio is to entertain. S. Paul says, per quem accepimus
gratiam. Romans 1.5. By whom we have received grace and Apostleship. c. 8.15.
Ye have received (accepistis) the spirit of adoption. The Angel said, Joseph
thou son of David, fear not to take Mary thy wife, Matt. 1.20. His
Bishopric let another man take, Act. 1.20. Thus you, very learnedly as you
think; so that you dare accuse the Jesuit as neither good Gramarian nor
Divine. Give Jesuits I pray you, leave to examine your learning before they
yield that you be their master both in Grammar and Divinity, as you challenge
to be.

First, what blindness is it in you to say, that the Jesuit imagines that all
taking is with the hand? Does he not in this place most expressly say, men may
take meat out of the hand of another, with their hand immediately, or with
their mouth? He supposes then, that there is other taking then with the hand;
but proves in this text, take, eat, drink, that take must needs command
taking with the hand, not immediately with the mouth. For (as he says) in this
text, take, eat, drink, take commands such a kind of taking of meat offered,
as is distinct from eating thereof, and not inuolued therein: But to take with
the mouth is inuolued in eating, and commanded therein. Ergo, in this text,
take, eat, drink, take cannot be understood of taking immediately with the
mouth, but with the hand.

Secondly, If the Jesuit were so simple as you make him seem, as to imagine
that all corporal ta^^ng is with the hand, have you not very learnedly
instructed him of the contrary, both out of Virgil, and Scripture? Virgil,
forsooth says, Illos porticibus (...) accipiebat in amplis, the king
entertained them in his ample Galleryes, where accipio is to entertain, Ergo,
all corporal taking of a thing out of the hand of another, is not with the
hand. The scripture says, Ye have received grace, the Apostleship, the spirit
of adoption, therefore all corporal taking is not with the hand. The Angel
said to S. Joseph, fear not to take Mary thy wife, ergo all taking is not by
the hand: yea which strikes the nail on the head, it is written of Judas, His
Bishopric, let another man take. Might you not without taking so much pains
to show your learning in Virgil and scripture, have proved, that all corporal
taking is not with the hand, because men many times be taken with agues, and
with death, yea some with Ministers wives. Verily should Deane-ryes be given in
England according to learning, this your discourse about taking, would deserve
this verdict in the Judgment of all learned ^en, His Deane-ry let another man
take.

The third Example.. 3.
WHAT shall I say of your gross misprision in translating, which shows your
ignorance in Latin, or else your fraudulency and wilful impugnation of
known truth.

To prove, that General Counsels may err in ^ayth, you Reply page 155.
cite this saying of Cusan. lib. 2. concord. c. 6.
Cusanus* Notandum est experimento rerum, universal Concilium plenarium posse
deficere; The true English whereof is, It is to be noted that a plenary
Universal Council may f^ile in the experiment of things, or deficere potest
in experiendo. ibid.
matters of fact. You translate, Experience of things does manifest, that a
plenary Universal Council may be deficient. What grossenes is this? Does
notandum signify manifest? what more manifest, though not noted by you, then
that Cusanus Docet Augustinus quomodo plenaria co^cilia per subsequentia
Co^cilia corrigantur ob FACTI ERROREM ibid.
by experiment of things, means matters of fact? For his drift is to show,
that former Councels may be corrected by the later ob facti errorem, in respect
of errors in matter of fact: otherwise in matters of faith, that plenary
universal Counsels are INFALLIBLE, Cusanus does Si concordanti sente^tia
aliquid definitum fuerit, censetur a Spiritu sancto inspiratum, and per
Christum in medio congregatorum in eius nomine praesidentem, INFALLIBILITER
iudicatum. ibid. c. 4.
hold, and prove in that very Book.

To prove that all Heretics pretend not scripture Orthodox. page 41. and 42.
you cite S. Augustine, as saying: All heretics read not scriptures; August.
lib. 7. in Genesis c. ^.
whose words in Latin be: Neque enim non omnes haeretici scripturas Catholicas
legunt, nec ob aliud haeretici sunt, nisi quod eas non recte intelligentes,
suas falsas opiniones contra earum veritatem pertinacit^^ asserunt. Which place
translated proves the contrary: For it is this, All heretics read scripture,
nor are they heretics for any other cause, but that understanding the
scriptures amiss, they pertinaciously maintain their erroneous opinions
against their truth. These words, neque enim non omnes haeretici scripturas
Catholicas legunt, you translate, all Heretics do not read scriptures against
Grammar, against sense. Against Grammar, by the Rules whereof two negations
affirm; so that non omnes haeretici non legunt, is the same as omnes Haeretici
legunt, all Heretics read the scriptures. Against sense, for in this your
translation, All heretic do not read scriptures, nor are they heretics for
any other reason, but because they understand them no^ aright, one part of the
sentence destroys the (...). For if all heretics read not scriptures, as you
(...) S. Augustine say, in the first part, then the cause of their heresy is
not only pertinacious misprision (...) the sense of scripture, as he affirms
in the (...). No doubt if heretics read not the sacred text, (...) not only
misinterpretation of the sense, but also ignorance of the text may be the cause
of their (...). This same Ignorance in Grammar makes you in this Repl. page 35.
in margin. lit. b.
your Reply, in proof that Protestants acknowledge some places obscure in
scripture, to cite these words of your fellow-Minister Paraeus; NON n^g^mus
scripturam NIHIL habere obscuritatis. Is not (...) the plain contrary of what
you intend? For what is non negamus, but we affirm, scripturam nihi^ habere
obscuritatis, the scripture to be no where obscure.

To prove that we make scriptures subject to (...) Pope, you cite the Dictates
of Gregory the 7. set down by Baronius, containing certain privileges of the
Popes authority, whereof one is, Quod nullum Capitulum, nullusque liber
Canonicus habeatur sine authoritate ipsius, you Reply. page 92. in fine.
translate thus, that no chapter, no book of scripture be esteemed Canonical
without (...) authority. In which translation you show both falsehood and
ignorance. Falsehood in that you ad to the text This you have done, not only in
this place, but also in your Orthodoxe three or four times, as in the Epistle
dedicatory page 10. and elsewhere.
in the same letter, as part thereof, no ^^^pter of scripture, no book of
scripture, those words (...) being in the latin text, nor in the sense: for if
it ^^re granted that the Pope does here speak of the chapter of books, it
does not follow that he means (...) books of scripture, but rather the books
of Canon law, which laws in that age Burchardus, Isidorus Gratianus.
diverse did begin to compile, and gather together into volumes: and so he
defines, that no Chapters, that no books of Canon, or Church-law be held
authentical without his approbation.

Ignorance, because common sense might have taught you, that this Decree could
not be vnderderstood of Chapters, or Books. The reason is, because, to put
chapter before book, and to say no chapter of book, nor any book shall be
held Canonical without the Pope, is idle and senseless. For if no chapter can
be Canonical without the Pope, much less a whole book; so that having said,
that not so much as a chapter be held Canonical without the Pope, it was
senseless to add the same of whole books. This speech is as foolish as this,
should one say, Not any person, nor any whole family came to Church; or as
this, He read not one line, nor one chapter, nor one book; whereas sense would
say, not one book, not one chapter, not one line.

Thirdly a little skill in latin, joined with judgment would have easily found
out the true and coherent sense of this Dictate. For Capitulum signifyes not
only a chapter of a book, but also a Chapter House, or college of Chanons:
Liber signifyes no^ only a book, but also free and exempt: Canonic^^ also (as
every man knows) signifyes not only Canonical, but also a Chanon, or
Prebend: So that the Popes privilege, quod nullum Capitulum, nullusq^^ liber
Canonicus habeatur absque illius authoritate, is thus in English, that no
Chapter House, or College of Chano^s, nor any single Canon or Prebend be free,
and exempt from the authority of the Ordinary, but by the Popes authority (...)
sole authority of Metropolitans, or Primates not (...) sufficient to make such
exemptions. As for ^^okes of scriptures, we teach that they all be divine and
canonical in themselves, and for the most part ^^ own to be such, by the
perpetual tradition of the Church, some very few excepted that have been
^anonized unto us by general Counsels, and not (...) by the sole and single
authority of the pope. Behold how wide off the mark you shoot, through your
ignorance of latin, and through want of judgment to make sensible construction
of latin sentences.

The fourth Example.. 4.
You devise many mysteries about the word species, in answer of S. Cyprian
his words cited by the Jesuit for Transubstantiation: Iste pani^ non effigy se
natura mutatus, omnipotentia verbi factus est (...). Cyprian. sermon. de Coena.
This bread changed not in shape but in nature, by the omnipotency of the Word
is made flesh, you say, the Author by the words natura mutatus, changed in
nature, understood not a corporal or Physical, but only a mystical change.
This you prove, because in the same book this Father says, that Cyprian ibid.
Corp^^ralis substantiae retinens speciem: sed virtutis diuinae inuisibil.
essentia probans adesse praesentiam*
although the immortal food delivered in the Eucharist differ from common
meat, yet ^^retaineth in the kind of corporal substance: He says not species
in the plural number, meaning, according to the new Popish sense, the
external shapes and accidents of bread (for let the Adversary prove out of
antiqui^^ that S. Cyprian, or the Primitive Church maintained (...) late Roman
doctrine concerning shapes of bread and (...) without the material substance,
and we will freely grant that the doctrine of Transubstantiation is ancient)
(...) he says specie^ in the singular number, that is, the corporal form and
substance. Thus you: showing your self to have no species of true learning,
whether species signify kind or shape. For here you discover four
simplicityes in matter of Grammar.

The first, is the mystery you make about the plural and singular number of
species; as though S Cyprian* if he had said in the plural, Alimonia
immortalitatis, corporalis substantiae retinens species, should have favored
Transubstantiation; whereas now that he says in the singular, corporalis
substantiae retinens speciem, he does overthrow it. He says not (say you)
species in the plural number, meaning the shapes and accide^ts of bread, but
speciem in the singular, that is the kind or the corporal substance or form.
Now I pray you, what Gra^mer does teach, that species in the plural number
does signify shapes and external accidents, and in the singular, kind and
substance? had S. Cyprian said plurally that the Eucharist corporalis
substantiae retine^ species, why might you not have interpreted species, kinds,
natures, and forms, as well as now you interpret speciem, the nature, kind, and
form? And though S. Cyprian say speciem corporalis substantiae in the
singular, yet why may not we expound shape and semblant of corporal substance,
as well as we might have expounded shapes and semblantes, had he said in the
plural corporalis substantiae species? Verily you are by your adversary, and
by the force of truth driven into such straites, as you coin new Grammatical
mysteries against all Grammar.

Your second simplicity, is the noting that species in the singular does
signify nature, and kind, as though we were ignorant thereof, or that you could
hereby elude the testimonies of the Fathers we bring, to (...) they taught the
Eucharist to be the shape of (...) and wine, containing the body and blood of
(...) Lord. This I say, is a seely and miserable shift, for though species
signify nature and kind, and this signi^^^^tion be much used, specially in
Logic, yet no (...) can deny but species does also properly signify (...)
outward semblant, show, and shape, and that this signification is very vulgar
And to know when specie^ does signify shape, and not kind, this rule is
infallible, that still it is taken for shape when it is opposed unto nature and
invisible Essence. When S. Paul exhortes, that not only men have their inward
conscience pure toward God, but also that they abstain ab omni specie mali, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
who endued with common sense will interpret this otherwise, then from any
show or ^^^blant of evil? By this rule we prove that the Fathers when they
say, that the species of bread remains, they mean the shapes, because they
oppose the species of bread unto the inward substance and true being of bread*
Thus S Cyrill: Cyrillus Hierosol. orat. 4* mystagog.
Know and most certainly believe (...) this bread which seems to us, is not
bread, though the taste esteem it to be bread, but the body of Christ; and that
the wine seen of us, though to the taste it seem wine, is not wine, but the
blood of our Lord: nam sub specie panis datur tibi corpus, sub specie vini
datur tibi sanguis, under the species of bread is given thee the body, under
the species of wine is given thee the blood of Christ. What (...) be more
clear then that this Father does distinguish the species and shape of bread
and wine from (...) nature, kind, and substance, affirming the first (...)
^emayne, and not the second?

Your third simplicity is, that to prove that species in the singular does
signify kind, not shape, you bring this place of Saint Cyprian: Cyprian. sermon.
de coena.
im^mortalitatis alimonia datur, a communibus cibis differens, corporalis
substantiae retinens speciem, sed Diui^^ Virtutis inuisibili essentia probans
adesse praesentiam. For even in this testimony species does not signify kind
but shape, and so by this very text Transsubstantiation is proved. This is
clear; because when the species of a thing is in speech opposed agayns^ the
virtue of the same thing, then species mu^^ needs signify shape and show, not
truth an^ substance. As when S. Paul says 1. Tim. 3.5^
Habentes specie^ pietatis, virtutem autem eius abnegantes, no man that sober,
will translate, Having piety in the nature and kin^ yet denying the virtue
thereof, but, Retayning the show* piety, yet denying the virtue thereof. Now S.
Cyprian^ this text by you cited, does oppose the Eucharist, ac^cording to the
species, unto the Eucharist accordin^ to the invisible Essence thereof,
affirming the same to (...) a common thing specie, but a divine presentiall
ve^^tue iuisibili essentia. Wherefore his words can bear no other sense but
this, that the Eucharist is the sub^stance of corporal Bread, according to the
outwa^^ shape and show of the accide^ts, but the divine presentiall virtue of
Christ's body and blood, according (...) the inward nature, and invisible
Essence of the thing*

Your fourth simplicity is, that this your Gram^maticall speculation about the
singular and plural (...) Species being of it self seely, is likewise
altogeathe^ impertinent unto your purpose. For you by this acception of
Species, would clear the text of S. Cyprian alleged by the Answearer to
prove, that bre^^ in the Eucharist remains only in shape, and no^ in
substance. In which text the Father does not (...) (...) word species but
effigies, saying: Panis non effigy, sed (...) mutatus etc. Bread changed not
in the effigies, (...) in the nature, is by the omnipote^cy of his Word (...)
his flesh. Now though we should grant your (...) conceyt, that Species in the
singular does signify the kind of the nature, and not the shape of outward
accidents; yet I think you are not so deuoyd of all (...), as you will affirm
that effigies in the singular may signify nature and kind; nor will you be so
sensele^^^ as to translate panis non effigy sed natura mutatus, bread changed
not according to the kind, but according to the nature. And if effigies signify
shape and not kind, then we see this most ancient Father supposes as a thing
most certain, that the sacred Eucharist is bread in shape and show, not in the
nature o^ invisible essence: A mystery seemingly absurd to flesh and blood, yet
you might more wisely upon the litterall sense of Gods word believe it with
simplicity of Faith against your carnal sense, then seek to maintain this
was not the Faith of the ancient Church, with so much Childish simplicity
against Grammar.

A fifth Example of Ignorance, joined with extreme Insolency.. 5.
HAVING made manifest your simplicity in Latin, I add another conviction of
your Grammatical Ignorance, even about the Construction of an English
sentence, whereby most calumniously you (...) upon your Adversary false and
impious doctrine. I would not have noted your grossenes in this point, were not
the same joined with serious disputation against the supposed error, and most
bitter Insultation against the Jesuit, not only reuiling him but also his whole
Order, yea, through their sides, the most Holy Ancient Fathers* Thus you write
page 236.

The latter branch of the Jesuits assumption, to wit, The Cross, Nails, and
Lance were offered by Christ to his heavenly Father at his passion, is
impiously false* For nothing was offered by Christ to his heavenly Father,
(...) his passion, but himself, and part of himself. Hebr. 7.27 (...); he
offered up himself. Hebr. 9.14. (...); through the eternal Spirit he offered
up himself without spot to God etc. Hebr. 10.10. We are sanctified through the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. Hebr. 9.12. By his own
blood he entered once into the holy place. And if the Cross, Nails, and Lance
were offered by Chrict to his Father, then we were redeemed with corruptible
things, which is a Jesuitical, or rather Anti-Iesui^ doctrine, that is, a
doctrine ascribing to dead Creatures, Iron, wood, steel, nails etc. that
which is most proper to the precious blood of Jesus. This Doctrine (mayntayned
by Loyolists) is most sacrilegious, and more to be abhorre^ then Judas his
lyps: But it is fulfilled in these men which Clement Alexandrinus says of
Heathen Idolaters, (...), Are they not prodigious monsters, that adore stocks
and stones?

Thus seriously do you dispute against Jesuits, whom you name Loyolists, for
holding doctrine they never dreamt of. They Crux ara fuit summi Sacrificij.
Bellar. de Imag. c. 17.
teach with the Crux Christi non Templi fuit ara, sed Mundi. Leo sermon. 10. de
pass.
Fathers that the Cross was the Altar whereon Christ offered up himself; but
that he offered up to his Father the wood of the Cross, or the Steel, and
Iron of the Lance, and Nails for our Redemption, certain I am this never
passed through their thoughts. And ye^ (...) his supposed Errour^* you are so
waspish, as (...) have Not without cause, she having given out disgraceful
words against M. Fisher.
suspected, that as Omphale (...) the ^lub of Hercules, so your Xantippe in
your (...) took your pen into her hand, and thence powered down upon our heads
this shameful shower (...) ^^proach. I might (I say) have intertayned this
su^^^tion, were it not for the so frequent aspersion of so many Greek words,
according to the Si duo aut tria verba graeca sonuerit, sapere sibi videtur.
fashion of ^eretikes, against which I may fitly in this place apply the words
of the Satyr -- Omnia Graece, Cum sit turpe magis nostris nescire Latin*

Greek words flow from their mouth, whereas in men of (...) it is more
shameful to be ignorant of their own language, and to want wit and judgment to
construe the same. Upon which Ignorance this your imputation of (...) unto
Jesuits is grounded, except you will acknowledge that herein you slander them
maliciously* as I will now clearly demonstrate.

First those words, The Cross, Nails, and Lance were offered by Christ to
his heavenly Father at his passion, how are they set down by you? As the very
text of the Jesuit in so many words? Show these formal words in his book,
and he (I know) will give you leave to rail at him (wherein you take so great
pleas^re) till you have eased your stomach of all your (...). As your own
words, wherein you think to (...) down not the text, but the sense of the
Jesuits (...)? why then are they put in a distinct letter, as (...) from
yours, and as the Jesuits formal (...)? If the Jesuits words were
ambiguous, and (...) to that impious sense you set upon them (...) ^hey are
not) yet, as it had been Charity to have co^^rued them to the better sense, so
is your falsehood intolerable, to substitute in lieu of his ambiguo^^ speech,
another that contaynes impiety; without (...) ambiguity and doubt: Another (I
say) of your ow^ making, set in a distinct letter, as if it were formall^ and
verbally his.

Secondly, if the true words of the Jesuit (...) down it will presently
appear that his propositi^^ is not, That the Cross, and Nails were offered
to the (...) at Christ's passion, but that they were instrumen^ of his passion;
not as the same proceeded from (...) hearts of the wicked, but as by him
intertayned in (...) own heart, and offered to his Father; and this so
cle^^^ly, as it may seem prodigious, that you could igno^rantly, or that you
would wittingly mistake his se^^tence. For the Jesuit answering a Protestant
vulg^^ objection the Kings majesty urged in the Confere^^^ If the Cross and
Nails be worshipped, because they touch the body of our Lord, why not also the
lypps of Judas (...) touched our Saviors lypps when he gave him that
tray^^^rous kiss? The Jesuit (I say) delivers a threefold m^^nifest disparity
between the lyps of Judas, and the h^^ly Cross, and about the third disparity
he thus (...).

The Passion may be considered two ways: First, as p^^^ceeding from the will
of wicked men that tormented hi^ in which consideration it is not grateful
unto God, (...) detestable^action in the doers thereof. Secondly as it was
^^^ceaued in the body of Christ, admitted into his heart, (...) OFFERED to his
Father; and by this consideration is sacred and venerable. The lips of Judas
betraying (...) were instruments of his Passion, as it proceeded from (...)
heart, and consequently as it was a detestable action; but (...) Cross, the
Nails, the Lance that stayed in, and was (...) to the body of Christ, were
instruments of his passion (...) in his sacred person, and as offered to his
heavenly Father, and consequently, as of a thing most highly (...).

What can be more clear, then that in this discourse, not the wood of the
Cross, but the pain and passion thereof is said to have been admitted into
Christ's heart, and offered to his Father? In proof hereof I omit, that your
sense is both false and senseless. False, because the wood of the Cross did
not enter into the heart of Christ, nor the iron of the nails, but only the
pain and passion caused by the same* and the steel of the Lance though it
went into his heart, yet this was after his death, when he could not offer it to
his Father. Senseless, because though the Cross and nails had been offered
unto God the Father, yet could they not be said to have been instruments of his
Passion, as they were offered. For in that case Christ's offering of them unto
his Father, should have been an action consequent upon the Crosses
isntrumental operation in pay^^^g and tormenting his body, whence the Cross
should not have been the instrument to torment his body, as offered to his
Father, but contrariwise the Cross as the instrument torme^ting his body,
should have been offered to his Father.

Nor will I urge the drift of the whole discourse, which does most clearly
declare the last clause thereof. For the Jesuit by the whole discourse does
intend to show, how the suffering of our Lord, as it (...) an actio^ proceeding
from the heart of the wicked, is distinct from the same, as a passion received
in his body, and intertayned in his heart, and offered to his Father; for this
opposition, and the saying, It (...) received, It was offered, does most
evidently (...) that offered to the Father, is spoken of the Passion, (...) of
the Cross and Nails. These arguments I preterm^^ and remit unto our
Adversary, and only will stan^ precisely upon the Construction of this last
claus^ The Cross, Nails, and lance were instruments of Christ Passion, as
lodged in his sacred Person, and offered to (...) heavenly Father, and
therefore as of a thing most high Venerable. The words, as lodged, and as
offered to (...) heavenly Father, cannot possibly be referred, and co^^strued
with the Cross and Nails, but only with (...) Passion. This I prove, because
to be lodged in Christ sacred Person, and offered to the heavenly Father, is
referre^ in this speech, to that thing which herein is concl^^ded to be a
thing most higly venerable, as the (...) does declare, as lodged in his sacred
Person, and offe^ to his Father, and therefore as a thing most highly
ve^^^rable. Hence lodged, and offered, being Participles, (...) Adjectives,
must in this speech be of the same Num^ber, and Case, as is the thing thence
concluded (...) be most highly Venerable. Now the thing most hig^ Venerable, is
in this speech put in the Genetiue (...) singular, of a thing most highly
Venerable, therefore* lodged in his person, and offered to his Father, must
(...) likewise the Genitive Case singular. How then (...) they be construed in
speech with Cross, Nails an^ Lance, that are the Nominative Plural? Had the
I^^suit said, the Cross, the Nails, and lance were instrumen^^ of Christ's
Passion, as lodged in his person, and offered (...) his father, and
consequently as most Venerable, this speech taken precisely by it self, had
been ambiguous, an^ the former Epiphets lodged, offered, most Venerab^^ (...)
have been referred unto the Cross and Nails, (...) as unto the Passion. But
now saying as he does Instruments of Christ's Passion, as lodged in his Person,
offered to his Father, and therefore as of a thing most Venerable, it is your
gross ignorance, or unadvised rash^^^ (if not wilful perverseness) to
refer lodged in his Person, and offered to his Father, unto the Cross and
Nails.

The reproaches you load on Loyolists (so you please to nickname Jesuits) do
move them to take Compassion of you, these being tokens of great passion that
distempers your Judgment, which the learning of your Adversary has put you
into. For were you not blind with passion, would you revile Jesuits as you do,
for Adorers of stocks and stones, for prodigious Monsters, most sacrilegious,
more to be detested then Judas his Lips, in respect of their worshipping our
Saviors Cross? Do you not mark that reuiling them, in this regard, you
revile together with them, all Christians that have worshipped that most
sacred Wood, to wit, all the Fathers of the six Primitive Ages? For hear what
a learned Father and Famous Antagonist of the Acephali then living, does write
and witness of the Church in those ages: Rusticus Diaconus contra Acephalos.
Clauos quibus crucifixus est, and Lignum Venerabilis Crucis, omnis per mundum
Ecclesia, sine vlla contradictione, adorat: The universal Church of Christ
spread over the world, does adore the Nails wherewith he was crucified, and the
Wood of the Venerable Cross, without any contradiction: because as then
Maho^^t was not borne, by whom See Zonoras and Cedrenus in vita Leonis
Isaurici, and Paulus Diaconus in Miscella. lib. 13.
unfortunate Christians were first taught to malign the worship of their
Saviors Cross, and Image.

Another Father Hormisda. epist. 27. ad Euphem. Augustam.
more ancient, and of greater authority says: Helena salutis humanae LIGNV^
and Crucem quam totus veneratur mundus inuenit. Helena found out the Wood of
human Salvation, which the whole Christian world does Worshipp. What will you
say of the Fathers, who taught the Deuotes of their time, Hieron. epist. 17. in
Epitaph. Paulae Prostrata ante crucem, quasi pendentem Dominum cerneret,
adorabat.
to prostrate themselves before the Cross and adore, as if they saw their Lord
hanging thereon? Who even in the time of persecution before Constantine, did
plant the Image of Christ Crucified in the Entry of Churches, informing
Christians that did enter, how to behave themselves toward it, by this verse.
Lact^n. in Carm. de pas. who lived in the time of persecution, and died in the
beginning of the Empire of Constantine.


Flecte Genu, Lignumque Crucis Venerabile adora.
Bow knee, adore the Crosses sacred Wood.
The day will come, when Matthew. 24.3.
the sign of the Son of Man shall shine in the sky, and then the lips of
Verity it self shall declare, who be more to be detested then Judas his lips,
Nouell-Gospellers, or Ancient Fathers, the Enemies, or Honourers of his
Cross, when (except the Fathers be Prodigious monsters) you must be bound up
together Alligate ea in fasciculos ad comburendum. Matt. 13.30.
with Judas, to kiss each others lips for ever, and eternally.

Gross and incredible Ignorance in Logic. SECT. II.
AFTER Grammar and Latin, Children are commonly taught Logic, or the Art of
Reasoning, without which no man can be grounded either in Philosophy, or
Theology. Your ignorance in this kind, spreads it self over every (...) of
your book, and it is such, as an Adversary (...) your disgrace, could not have
wished you should commit grosser faults. This I shall make clear by three
Examples, whereof each inuolueth many arguments, not only of your Ignorance, but
also of your Boldness in talking about things, of which you are totally ignorant.

The first Example.. 1.
THE Reply. page 116.
Jesuit to prove against protestants, argumento ad hominem, that the Roman is
the true Church, argues in this sort: That Church from which Protestants
received the Scripture, is the one, holy, Catholic Apostolic Church. The
Church from which Protestants received, is no other then the Roman: Ergo, The
Roman is the one, holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church.

To this argument you reply page 116. This syllogism is peccant in form, and
both the propositions are affirmative in the second figure: which I note the
rather, because the Adversary at the end of this Argument, cries victoria,
saying; An argument conuincing and unanswerable: I must therefore reduce the
same to a lawful form and then answer. Thus you. Now vouchsafe to take a
view of your manifold ignorance.

I pretermit your falsehood in charging the Jesuit of saying, that this Argument
is conuictiue, and unanswerable. For the Jesuit does not so affirm of this
argument, but of another, to wit of this: If it be possible, that the Church
can deliver, by full and unanimous consent, a false sense; then it is possible
that in like manner she may deliver a false text. But protestants cannot say
that the Church, by full and unanimous consent of Tradition, can deliver a
false text: Ergo, they may not say, it is possible that (...) Church should
deliver by full and unanimous co^sen^ a false sense. This argument the Jesuit
terms (...) answerable, not the other which you challenge ^ peccant in
form. But this your falsehood I pretermi^ and only prosecute your faults in
Logic The^^ are four, and so gross as they show clearly that yo^ never
learned, or else have utterly forgot the Sur^^mula's or Rudiments of this Art,
which children customarily are taught.

The first fault is, not to distinguish betwixt (...) Second and Third Figure,
which is as childish in L^^gike, as in Grammar not to know the third
Decle^^sion from the second. You say, the Jesuits argume^^ is in the second
figure, and therefore peccant in form^^ both propositions being affirmative:
Whereas i^ truth the same is in the third figure, in which it lawful to argue
both propositions being affirmati^^ The third figure is, wherein the Medium, or
mean^ of proof is subjected in both propositions, that is* the thing whereof
another term is predicated, th^^ is, is affirmed or denied. In the Jesuits
Argument (...) medium to prove the Roman to be the holy, Catho^like Church, is
the Church from which Protesta^^ received Scriptures: This Church from which
Pr^^testants receive the Scripture is predicated in ne^^ther of his
propositions, but in both is subjected, th^^ is, is the term whereof another
thing is affirmed (...) said In the mayor proposition of the Church (...) gave
protestants the scripture, One, Holy, Catholi^^ Apostolic is affirmed: The
Church from which Protestants received the scripture, is the one, holy
Apostolic Church. In the minor likewise of the (...) Church from which
Protestants receive Scripture, the Roman is predicated. The Church from which
Protestants receive the Scripture is the Roman. Hence in lawful form in the
third figure, follows this conclusion, Ergo, the Roman is the one, holy,
Catholic, and Apostolic Church.

Your second fault is grosser then the first. For you know not the quality of
Propositions, nor can discern a negative from an affirmative, which is as
great simplicity in Logic, yea greater then in Gra^mer not to know the
termination of the second Declension from the first. You say, in the Jesuits
Argument both propositions are pure affirmative, whereas his Minor is in part
negative, to wit, Protestants received the Scripture from no other but the
Roman. Who feels not this proposition to be partly negative, wherein is
denied, that any Church besides the Roman, is that Church from which
Protestants can pretend the Scriptures, to wit, authentically, or by assured
perpetual Tradition, hand to hand from the Apostles? For Exceptiue and
Exclusive Enuntiations, be compound Enuntiations, partly Affirmative, partly
Negative, and as Logitians teach, the Enuntiationes exponibiles.
Exposition of them is to be made into two single propositions, whereof the one
is negative, the other affirmative. So the Jesuits proposition Protestants
received Scripture by no other Church but the Roman, being exceptiue, is to be
expounded by a Negative, No Church not Roman, is the Church from which
Protestants received Scripture; and also by an affirmative, The Church from
which Protestants received Scripture, is the Roman. Hence the Jesuit, as he did
conclude in a form of the third figure called Disamis, his minor being partly
affirmative, so might he have concluded in a form of the second termed
Camestres, the same minor being also negative in this manner: The Holy
Catholic Church is that from which Protestants received the Scripture: No
Church but the Roman, is that Church from which Protestants received the
Scripture: Ergo, No Church but the Roman is the holy, Catholic, Apostolic
Church.

Your third fault is, not to know the form of Expository Syllogismes from the
common An Expository syllogism is that, wherein the means of proof is a
singular and individual thing, in which kind it is good form to argue
affirmatively in any figure even in the second. For example this sillogisme:
The Minister grossly ignorant in Logic, replied against M. Fisher. The Deane
of Carlisle is he who replied against M. Fisher. Ergo, the Deane of Carliele is
the Minister grossly ignorant of Logic This sillogisme is in the second
figure, and both propositions are affirmative; yet if you deny the form of
arguing to be good, you will but confirm the truth of the conclusion. Hence
the Jesuit might in good form have argued affirmatively in the second figure,
in this manner. The One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolical Church, is that
Church from which Protestants pretend to have the Scriptures authentically: The
Roman is that Church from which Protestants pretend to have the Scriptures
authentically: Ergo, the Roman is the One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolical Church.

Your fourth fault is, that you play the Reformer of Arguments, as Luther did
of Churches, that is, you reject lawful and good forms, and in lieu of them
bring in vicious and damnable. The Jesuits argument as by you Reply page 117.
reformed is this: The Church from which Protestants received the scriptures,
is the One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolical Church: Protestants received the
scripture from the Roman: Ergo, the Roman is the One, Holy, Catholic,
Apostolical Church. In this reformed argument both propositions are
particular, and consequently the form of arguing vicious in any figure, as
every Logitian knows. The Jesuit to prevent this fault made his minor an
universal Proposition: For this proposition, Protestants received the
Scriptures from no other Church but the Roman, is equivalent, or equipollent
unto this, Every Church delivering scriptures unto Protestants is Roman.
Wherefore to reduce the Jesuits argument in true form unto the first Figure,
you should have made the mayor For as Logic teaches, In prima Figura mayor
semper est vniuersalis.
Universal in this sort: Every Chuch that delivered unto Protestants the
scriptures is the Catholic: The Roman delivered the Scriptures unto
Protestants: Ergo, the Roman Church is the Catholic Church. If you say the
Means of proof in the Jesuits argument is Individual, and so the Syllogism
Expository, and not according to the ordinary form; why then do you reprehend
his argument, as being affirmative in the second figure, seeing Expository
Syllogismes may be affirmative in any figure? Are you a Doctor, a Deane, a
Master in Israel, and know not these things? Being so ignorant of Logic,
were you so destitute likewise of discretion, as you could not keep your self
from carping at the Jesuit, as peccant in Logic? Could you not at least have
been silent about figures and forms of arguing, concerning which, you speak
no more assuredly, then a blind man of colors?

Some may say, that though you be ignorant of Logic, you do not greatly care,
because this your Ignorance howsoever evident unto the learned, cannot be made
palpable unto the Ladies who esteem you, and are lead away by you. I answer:
Although your Ignorance in Logic cannot by this discourse be made palpable
unto Ladies; yet the falsehood of your Religion, even about your ground and rule
of faith, may be made palpable unto them. You make the rule of Faith to be not
express scripture, affirming a thing in so many words (for then the Ladies
that can read, might straight discover the falsehood of your Religion, whereof
not one article against us is expressly delivered in scripture:) You therefore
(I say) make the rule of Faith to be not only Scripture, but also The doctrine
of faith is either expressly or deriuatiuely contained in Scripture. Fran.
white page 300. What is deduced by necessary consequence according to the rules
of Logic. VVott^n. Tria^l. page 88.
what doctrine soever is by Principles of reason, and Rules of Logic deduced
from the Scripture. Now when a thing is deduced from scripture, by good
consequence, by true art, and not by Sophistry, Ladies, except they have
diligently studied Logic, cannot possibly know. This is evident. For nothing
is deduced by good consequence from scripture, which is not deduced by
discourse in lawful figure and form, and not by Sophistry, or a fallacious
show: But the Ladies cannot possibly know, when an argument is in true mood
and figure, nor consequently discern Syllogismes from Sophismes, which their
insufficiency they must needs feel in themselves, if they be in their senses:
Therefore they cannot possibly be assured, by the ground and rule of Faith you
prescribe them, nor consequently can they groundedly believe Christian
Religion, nor be saved. They must trust ignorant Ministers, who cry Sophistry,
Sophistry against arguments in lawful form, as now you have done, not so much
out of malice, but as I am persuaded, out of mere Ignorance of such Rudiments
of discourse, as men are taught in their childhood.

The second Example.. 2.
You not only accuse the Jesuits Arguments of Sophistry when they are lawful,
but also pretend to bring invincible Demonstrations when your Arguments be
childish, and known Sophismes. Behold hereof notorious Examples. Your
adversary to prove the tradition of the Church to be more Prime and Original
then the scripture, bringes 4. Arguments. You on the contrary side to requite
him in the same number, have set down other 4. to prove, that a Christian is
built originally and fundamentally on the word of God, not as delivered by
tradition, but as written. In these Arguments you glory, Reply page 47. and 48.
saying, That the Jesuits are but funiculus vanitatis, a bundle of vanity, and
a potsheard covered over with the dross of silver. Now these your arguments,
in comparison of which you so debase the Jesuits, are all and every one of them
idle and triuiall fallacyes, as I will particulerly and clearly demonstrate.

The first Reply page 48*
is, That which is most excellent in every kind, is the model of the rest; but
I trow you will grant the Scripture to be the most excellent part of Gods word.
(2. Pet. 19. August. l. 17. cont. Faust. c. 5.) Ergo the scripture is the
model, and pattern of the rest.

This Argument is constans ex quatuor terminis, that is, has four different
terms, whereas all true form of arguing ought to have only three. Scripture
is one term, Model and pattern of the rest, a second, Most excellent in
every kind, a third, the most excellent part, a fourth: for it is not all one
to say the excellent thing in every kind, and the most excellent part of many
parts. Amongst whole and total things, the most excellent in every kind may
in some sort be said to be the pattern of the rest, but amongst parts, the
most excellent is not the ground of the rest.

In substantuall Compounds, the substantial form is more excellent then the
substantial matter, yet the substantial form is not the ground of the
matter; yea rather the matter is the ground of the form, being the
fundamental and radical cause out of which material forms are produced. Who
sees not that Walls, Chambers, and Galleryes are more excellents parts of the
house, and more beautiful then the fundations? Yet the fundations are more
prime, original, and whereon the Walls, and Chambers depend, and are kept in
being. In this manner the word of God as written, is more excellent, in respect
of deep and profound learning, then Tradition, yet the word as delivered by
Tradition is more prime, original, fundamental; because it is the sole ground
and foundation, by which we know which is the word of God the Apostles
delivered in writing. Hence you are such a Bungler in Logic, as you undertake
to prove one thing, and conclude another. You undertake Reply 47. lin. 28.
to prove, that the foundation of Christian Religion is the word of God, not as
delivered by tradition, but as written: you conclude, that the written word is
the pattern, and model of all other kinds of Divine Revelations. Now to be
the ground of the rest, is different from to be the pattern of the rest; yea
the ground of things is seldom or never the pattern of them. The grape by
common consent is held the most excellent of all kind of fruit, and so by your
rule, the model and pattern of the rest; yet the grape is not the ground, the
root, and seed of all other fruit; nor do all other fruit spring and proceed
from it.

Your second Argument: Ibid. page 48.
A Christian is built fundamentally on the Rock, but the scripture is the
rock, (Cardinalis Cameracensis quaest. vespert. recom. Sacrae scripturae.)
Ergo, A Christian is built fundamentally on Scripture.

I wish that this my Discovery may make you wise unto your eternal Salvation,
as is does lay open your shameful Ignorance unto your temporal disgrace: for
here you are so grossly, and together unluckily ignorant, as you are fallen
into the very same fault in Logic, whereof without cause you charged your
Adversary, as peccant, to wit, of making Syllogismes, whereof both propositions
were affirmative in the second figure. An argument is affirmative in the second
figure, when the Means of proof is affirmed in both propositions. Your Means
to prove that a Christian is fundamentally built on Scripture, is this term,
Built on the rock, and this is the very thing affirmed in both your
propositions. In your mayor, Built on the rock, is affirmed of the Christian:
The Christian, or he that is fundame^tally built, is built on the rock. In the
minor the same is affirmed of him that is built on Scripture. The Scripture is
the rock, that is, he that is built on the Scripture, is built on the rock.
Hence your conclusion, Ergo, The Christian, or he that is fundamentally built,
is built on the Scripture, is affirmative, in the second figure. How fond, and
inconsequent this form of arguing is, you may feel by this of the same
tenor, with change of matter.

He that is borne in Sicily, is borne in an Island. He that is borne in England,
is borne in an Island. Ergo, He that is borne in England, is borne in Sicily.
This is a folish Sophisme, because concluding affirmatively in the second
figure, and so is yours. For as it is not consequent, if a man be borne in an
Island, that he is borne in Sicily, because there be other Islands besides
Sicily; so this is no good consequence, A Christian is built on the Rock,
Ergo, on the Scripture, because Scripture is not the only Rock, the word of
God, as delivered by Tradition, being a rock and ground of Faith no less sure
and infallible then Scripture, or Gods Word as written. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, and innumerable other holy persons were fundamentally built in faith,
and yet not built on Scripture, the word of God not being then extant in
writing S. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 4. does write, that in his days many Nations were
Christian, and did diligently observe the true Christian Religion printed in
their hearts, and yet had not any Scripture, nor the word of God as written.
False then is this negative which your argument put into true form, does
imply; No man is built fundamentally on the Rock, that is not built on the
word of God, as written.

Your third argument: Reply page 48.
The seed of faith is the root and foundation of every Christian: But the
Scripture is the seed of faith, (Joan. 20.41.) for it is the word of God. (Luc.
8.11. Joan. 1.18. 1. Cor. 4.15.)

This argument is also an idle fallacy, and sophististicall sillogisme, for
both the propositions thereof are particular; which form (as has been said)
is vicious, and not lawful in any figure. This you may perceive by this
argument formed punctually according to the shape of yours, with change of
matter.

The seed of Faith is the root and foundation of every Christian. But the
blood of Martyrs is the seed of Faith, for it is the seed of the Christian
Church. Ergo, The blood of Martyrs is the root and foundation of every
Christian.
This argument is like yours, and both are vain, because the Argument being in
the first figure, the Mayor proposition is particular, which ought to be
universal in this sort.

Every seed of faith, is the root of every Christian. The Scripture, or word
of God as written, is the seed of Faith. Ergo. The Scripture, or word of God as
written, is the root of every Christian.
This argument is in lawful form, but the mayor thereof is false, for every
seed of Faith is not the root of a Christian, but only that seed which first
breeds faith in him, and whereon all other seeds depend. Now the seed which
first breeds Faith in Christians, is not the word of God as written, but the
word of God as delivered by tradition. For upon the credit of Tradition, we
know the written word, and without this (ordinarily speaking, and without new
immediate Revelation) we cannot know the Scripture, or written word to be from
the Apostles, and by them of God. Ergo, the word of God not as written, but as
delivered by tradition, is that seed of faith which is the root of every
Christian.

The fourth Argument* Reply* page 48.
The Scripture given by divine inspiration, is simply, and without exception to
be received, and all tradition repugnant to Scripture is to be refused. Hence
it follows, that Scripture is a rule of Tradition, and not Tradition of
Scripture. This argument proceeds upon the supposal of an impossibility, and
so is idle, sophistical, inept. Logitians are taught by their Master
Aristotle, if one impossibility be admitted, a thousand other impossibilityes,
and absurdityes will be thence concuded. You suppose in this argument, that the
word of God as delivered by full tradition, may be repugnant unto the word of
God as written. Hence you infer, that Tradition is not simply to be received,
but only so far forth, as it agrees with the Scripture. Your supposition is
blasphemous: for the word of God unwritten cannot be repugnant unto truth,
being the words of the Prime VERITY that cannot deceive, nor be deceived. This
impossibility supposed, your consequence is not good: Ergo, Tradition repugnant
to Scripture, is to be rejected, and Scripture to be held only, and simply as
the rule of Faith. For if Gods unwritten word could be repugnant unto the
written, it would not follow, that the unwritten word were to be rejected, and
the written simply to be received; but that neither the written nor unwritten
were to be credited. This is clear, because if God may lie, and deceive us by
his word of lively voice, delivered by Tradition, why not also in his writings,
delivered by Tradition? What authority does writing add to Gods word, that God
cannot lie in writing, if he may lie in speaking?

I hope I have showed apparently these your Arguments, wherein you so much
glory, to be not only false in respect of matter, but also fallacious in
respect of form. The same I could show of almost all the rest of your
Arguments of this your Reply. Is not then the case of your ignorant Proselites
most deplorable and desperate, whom you persuade to trust these your halting
consequences, rather then the perpetual Traditions of the Church? You will
have them to make themselves Judges, not only of what is contained expressly
in Scripture, but also of what is thence derived by Arguments, according to the
rules of Logic, wherein if they chance to mistake, they err, and are damned.

The third Example.. 3.
A Third Example of Logical Ignorance, is your heaping together of many fond
Inferences, in a matter where you pretend to be very confident that you can
bring most invincible proofs. A Controversy there is between you and us,
Whether it be a Divine inviolable Ordinance, that all Lay men read Scriptures,
so that the Church be bound, by Divine Precept, to translate Scriptures into
all vulgar tongues, and not to take Translations from such persons as abuse
them, or use them to their perdition. In which question, We (say you) Reply
page 278.
affirm with great confidence, that the reading of holy Scripture by lay
people, which must needs imply translation of them, is a Divine Ordinance. And
because the Jesuit said, that he could never hear, nor read in Protestant
substantial proof out of Scripture, of this pretended divine Ordinance, the
commonly urged text, Search the scriptures, being insufficient; You say, that
you not only urge the text John 3.39. which the Jesuit thinks he can elude
by subtle distinctions, as the Arrians eluded the text of S. John 10.30. (that
is solidely answered, as Calvin in caput 10. Ioa^. circa verse. ^0. says; The
ancient Fathers abused this text, I and my Father are one, to prove Christ not
consubstantiall with his father. For Christ does not speak of unity of
substance, but of unity of consent betwixt him and his Father.
Calvin auerreth) but other texts of Scripture, which you lay together on a
heap in this Reply page 378.
sort.

The Eunuch is commended for reading holy Scripture Act. 8.28. The Beroeans are
called Noble by the holy Ghost, for searching the holy Scripture. Act. 17.11.
He is called blessed that reads and hears. Apocalip. 1.3. The Galatians
read the Scripture. Gal. 4.22. The Ephesians. c. 3.4. The Colossians. c. 4.16.
the Thessalonians. 1. These. 5.27. The Fathers are so plentiful in this
Argument, as I have Defense of my Brother. page 42.
elsewhere showed, that it would astonish any man who has read them, to behold
such impudency in Papists, as to deny the practice to have been Primitive and
Catholic; But necessity has no law* For if the Scriptures may be suffered to
speak, Papistry must fall like Dagon before the Ark^.

Thus you; giving us great cause to commiserate your blindness, that disputing
so ignora^tly you should conclude so arrogantly. You have in the place by you
quoted, Orthodoxe page 42.
according to the custom of Heresy, brought many testimonies of Fathers to
prove what no man denies, to wit, these two things. First, that it is Pious and
Godly to read Scriptures with devotion, with humility, with submission of
judgment unto the teaching of the Church, and common Exposition of Catholic
Doctors. Secondly, that the practice of reading by Lay people was common and
frequent in the Primitive Church, for the time that the learned Languages were
vulgarly known, in which tongues the Church neither now does, nor ever did
prohibit the reading of Scriptures unto any person. These two things we
approve; so that you are unadvised (might I not say impudent?) in your
affirming that, The Papists impudently deny this to have been a Primitive
practice. No, we deny not the reading of Scripture with due humility, to be
pious, or to have been a primitive practice, but only two proud Noueltyes
brought in by your Religion. First, that it The very words of your brother
John in His Way page 126.
is lawful, yea necessary for every particular man, by the Scripture to
EXAMINE, and IVDGE of the things the Church teaches him. And when A PRIVATE
MAN by Scripture reiects and condemns the teaching of the GREATEST, and BEST
CHVRCH that is, his IVDGEMENT is not to be taken as PRIVATE, but as SPIRITVALL,
and the PVBLIKE Censure of THE SPIRIT. Secondly, that all, even Laymen, by
divine Pretext and Ordinance, are bound to read the Scriptures, and to have
them in their vulgar languages.

This your doctrine; This your practice we dislike, as dangerous, as impious,
as the fountain of Discord, of Heresy, and of manifold most damnable errors.
A doctrine, which were it every where established, not Dagon before the Arc,
but Christianity would fall before, and yield unto the Devil: as some of your
side, taught by lamentable experience, acknowledge and complain: This opinion,
say they, Hooker Ecclesiast. Policy page 119.
being once inserted into the minds of the vulgar, what it may grow unto, God
only knows. Thus much we see, it has already made THOVSANDS so HEADSTRONGE
even in GROSS and PALPABLE ERRORS, as that a man whose capacity will scarce
serve him to utter five words in sensible manner, BLVSHETH not for MATTER of
SCRIPTVRE to think his own bare Yea, as good as the Nay of all the wise,
grave, and learned men that are in the world: which insolency must be represt,
or it will the VERY BANE of Christian Religion. Behold open Confession extorted
upon the rack of Truth, by which we may perceive, how fully and handsomely
your Doctrine (that it is necessary, and Divine Ordinance, that every
particular man read Scripture, and by it examine and judge the Churches
teaching) has made Dagon to fall before the Arc.

But leaving the vanity of your bitter vanting, let us examine what
demonstrations out of Scripture you bring for your pretended Divine Ordinance,
which with so much confidence you auerre. If your arguing be idle and
ridiculous in this point, wherein you profess to be so confident, what may be
expected of you in other articles? Especially being challenged to show your
uttermost force by your adversary, affirming See the Reply page 278.
that he could never find any solid proof out of Scripture, of this
Protestant pretended Divine ordinance.

Your arguments be seven, drawn from 7. texts of Scripture, in which your
Antecedent commonly is either false or uncertain, and your inference
ridiculous.

The first: The Act. 8.28.
Eunuch is commended for reading holy Scripture; Ergo it is a divine Ordinance
that ignorant Laymen read Scripture in their vulgar tongue: Your Antecedent is
more the^ the Scripture does express. I read not any direct praise of him in
this respect: The Text only Act. 8.28.
says, he was sitting in his Chariot, and reading the Prophet Esaias. But
suppose he be commended for his reading (as it was indeed commendable) is it
consequent, that therefore every Christian, by Divine order and precept, do the
like? Is every man bound by divine precept, to do every thing for which any
person is praised in Scripture? David is commended in Scripture for rising at
midnight to praise God; is this Argument good, Ergo, Every Christian is bound
by divine precept to rise at midnight? Verily this consequence is as good, yea
better both in respect of form and matter, then is this of yours: The Enunch
is commended for reading holy Scripture; Ergo, every man is bound to read
Scripture, by divine ordinance.

The second is: The Act. 17.11.
Beroeans are called Noble by the holy Ghost for searching the Scriptures.
Ergo, we may with great confidence avouch, that it is a divine ordinance, that
all ignorant Laymen read Scripture in the vulgar. A strong argument. The
Scripture does not say the Beroeans read the Scripture in their vulgar tongue,
nor does it term them Noble for their reading of Scripture, but for their
receiving the word of Paul with alacrity and joy. Yea the term of The more
noble, is not given them in praise of their Religion, but to declare the
quality of their Gentry: and so Fulke his Bible has the Noblest for birth. But
suppose the Beroeans read in their vulgar, and be therefore called Noble, is not
this inference ridiculous: Ergo, it is a divine Precept that every man read
Scripture? Does not this arguing deserve rather to be laughed at, then answered?

The third: Apoc. 1.3.
Blessed is he that reads and hears: Ergo it is a divine ordinance, that
all me^ read the Scripture, and that the Church give the^ the Scripture
translated into all vulgar tongues. Here you not only argue impertinently, but
also detruncate and curtall the text of Gods Word, leaving out words without
which the text has a false and foolish sense. For if all be blessed that read
and hear, without mention or care of what, then they be blessed who read or
hear Tully and Virgill* or the books of Knighthood. Why do you not let the
Scripture express the thing, which being read or heard makes men blessed? The
Scripture fully and truly cited says, Blessed is he that hears and reads
the words of this Prophesy, to wit of the Apocalypse; Which place either
proves nothing for your purpose, or else proves a necessity, that every man
read the Apocalypse, under penalty of otherwise not to be blessed. This
perchance for very shame you dare not auerre. If you do; what shall we, or may
we think of Luther, who did neither read, nor hear, nor believe the Apocalypse
as a Prophesy, or as the word of Nec Apostolicum nec Propheticu^ esse puto:
hunc libellu^ similem reputo Quarto Esdr^^* nec vllo modo deprendere possum
quod a Spiritus Sancto confectus sit. Lutherus praefat. in Apocalip.
God? And what an idle inference is this, He is blessed who reads the
Apocalypse, Ergo, it is a divine ordinance that every man read Scriptures? S.
Paul says, 1. Cor. 7. Bonum est homini mulierem non tangere. verse. 1. Bonum
est illis si sic permaneant. verse. 7. Beatior erit si sic permanserit. verse. 40.
he is blessed that does not marry: Is it consequent, Ergo, every man is bound
not to marry? or, Ergo, men cannot be blessed but only such as do not marry?
Surely your wife will see this inference to be foolish: and yet it is as good as
yours, Blessed is he that reads, or hears the Apocalypse: Ergo, it is a
divine ordinance that none be blessed but such as read Scripture.

The fourth argument; The Galathians read the Scripture; Ergo, it is a divine
ordinance that ignorant laymen read them, and that they be translated into
every vulgar Dialect. That the Galathians read the Scriptures you prove by the
cipher of Galat. 4.24. where the Apostle says, you that will be under the Law,
have you not read the Law? For it is written, Abraham had two Sons. This
proof is very poor. For the Apostle does not affirm they read, but
doubtingly demands whether they had not read one particle of Scripture? Also,
the question was moved without doubt only to the learned Galathians But
suppose they read the Scripture; is it lawful thence to conclude* Ergo they
read it in their vulgar? If they read it in their vulgar, is it thence
consequent, Ergo, every man is bound by divine ordinance to read, and this so
strictly as the Church may not forbid translations unto such as abuse them?

The fifth place; The Ephesians read the Scripture; Ergo, it is a divine
precept that ignorant Laymen read the Scripture in their vulgar tongue. The
antecedent you show by the cipher Ephesians. 3.4. where the Apostle says, Reading,
you may vnderctand my wisdom in the Mystery of Christ* A seely proof. Saint
Paul does not say, that the Ephesians read, but only, that by reading his
Epistle, they might understand his wis^ome, about the mysteries of grace and
Christian Religion. But suppose they read S Paul's Epistle sent unto the^; does
it follow, Ergo, it is a divine ordinance that Laymen promiscuously read
Scripture? and that the Church must translate Scripture to that end? This
inference as even as good as this: By reading the Epistles of Saint Peter, one
may understand the great knowledge he had of Christ; Ergo, Every man is bound
to read S. Peter's Epistles.

The sixth; The Colossians read the Scripture; Ergo, it is a divine ordinance
that all ignorant Laymen read the Scripture. The antecedent is by you proved by
the cipher Coloss. 4.16. which says, When this Epistle has been read amongst
you, cause it also to be read in the Church of Loadicea. This place does not
prove your intent, that they read so much as that Epistle privately by
themselves, but only that the same was publicly read in the Church by the
Bishop, or the Priest, or some Church officer in the same language wherein it
was written originally. But suppose the Colossians read this Epistle privately
by themselves, what a wooden inference is this, Ergo, every Christian is bound
by divine ordinance to read Scripture? Or, Ergo, the Church is obliged by
divine precept to provide, that the Scripture be translated into vulgar tongues?

The seventh Argument; The Thessalonians read the Scripture; Ergo, the reading
thereof by ignorant Laymen is a divine ordinance. The antecedent you prove by
the cipher 1 Thessalonians. 5.25. which says, I adjure you, that this Epistle be read
unto all holy brethren. Neither does this text prove private reading of
Scripture by Laymen, but only publik reading thereof in the Church. But suppose
they privately read this Epistle sent them by the Apostle, is it conseque^t,
Ergo, all Laymen are bound to read Scripture, and the Church to translate the
same into every tongue? Truly this argument is even as good as this, God
created heaven and earth of nothing: Ergo Ministers may make arguments of
nothing, or make arguments good that have nothing in them. Or, as this: In the
beginning was the word, and the word was with God, Ergo every godly person is
bound to read the Scripture word by word from the beginning of Genesis, to the
end of the Apocalypse: Or, Ergo, Godly persons do nothing else but read Scripture.

Gross Ignorance of Theology. SECTION III.
BESIDES the manifold Errors which you maintain in common with other
Ministers, you have diverse proper and peculiar to your self, and exceeding
gross, whereby you declare how ignorant how are of Theology. I will only
discover some few of them, but those fundamental, by which you so shake the
fabrike of your Reply, as no piece thereof remains ^ound.

The first, That unto Ministers Religious Adoration is due.. 1.
THIS you affirm page 224. Where you undertake to range in order the kinds of
union with God, unto which Religious adoration is due. RELIGIOUS ADORATION (say
you) primary or secondary is not founded upon every kind of union, as appears
in mental images, but upon certain kinds of union; to wit; first Personal,
as when the Humanity of Christ is coupled with the Deity. Secondly
Substantial, as when the parts are coupled with the whole. Thirdly Causall,
Relative or Accidental, to wit, when by divine Ordination things created are
made instruments, messengers, figures, and receptacles of divine grace, as the
holy Sacraments, and the Word and Gospel, and the MINISTERS of the Church etc.

Behold, amongst the objects that have such union with God, as is a sufficient
ground to yield them Religious Adoration, you number Ministers, with an Et
caetera in the end, perchance leaving room for your wives to enter, to be
likewise your Consorts in Religious Adoration, as good reason they should. How
gross this Error is, specially in you, hence may appear, in that hereby you
overthrow a great part of your Reply. First you clearly co^tradict that
Principle which so many times you set down, and very earnestly urge, to wit,
that Religious Worship, is due to God only. How can this be true, if Religious
Worship is due unto Ministers? Be not Ministers Creatures? Be they not other
things, and persons, besides God?

Nor can you say, that when you affirm Religious Worship to be due to God
only, you mean primary Religious Adoration, and that consequently you do not
contradict your self in saying, that secondary Religious Adoration is due unto
Ministers. This evasion (I say) will not serve your turn, because you declare
in express terms, that all Religious adoration, primary or secondary, is due
to God only. Thus you write page 322. Whereas the Jesuit does distinguish two
kinds of Religious Worship, the one Primary and simply Divine, founded upon the
increate and infinite Excellency, which is due to God only: the other
Secondary, founded upon the created Excellency of grace and glory, which is
yielded unto Saints and Angels. To this we reply, that there be no other kinds
of worship, then there be Tables of the moral law; but there are only two
tables of the moral Law, the former whereof teaches divine worship, and the
second humane, civil, and of special observance. And if there be a mixed
worship partly human, partly divine, so much thereof as is divine, is proper to
God, and may not be imparted unto any creature, Isa. 42.8. Where God says, My
glory I will not give to another. Thus you. How grossly do you contradict
your self, and implicate in your sayings? Be not Ministers others from God,
as much as Angels? If then Adoration, and Religious Adoration be given unto
Ministers, how is it not Adoration given to others besides God, as much as when
Angels are Religiously adored?

Secondly, you have destroyed all you say in the first point against the
Worship of Images, specially page 246 where you thus speak unto us: If you
adore Images outwardly and relatiuely, then you make Images a partial object of
adoration: but God himself who says, I will not give my glory to another, Isa
24.8. has excluded Images from compartnership with himself in Adoration. Thus
you All which is proved idle by your doctrine, that Ministers are religiously
to be adored. For if no Creature can be compartner with God himself in
adoration how may Ministers be his partners therein, and challenge Religious
adoration as due to themselves? If they may be religiously adored, and yet not
be his partners in adoration against his divine Edict, My glory I will not give
to another; why not Angels? Why not holy Images? What say you of the holy
Sacraments? Be they not creaturs as well as Images? specially in your opinion,
who hold that they be bread, and wine, and Elements unchanged in substance, and
yet you say, that unto the Sacraments, and Word of the Gospel Religious
adoration is due, because they have a relative union with God How the^ is
Religious adoration due to God only? If Religious Adoration may redound from
Christ unto his Sacraments, why not from Christ unto his Images* which have a
relative Union with him, as being resemblances, and representations of him?

Thirdly, you have overthrown and contradicted all you said about the second
of the Nine points, to wit, against Oblations unto the Virgin Mary. In the old
Law (say you) not only Sacrifices, but also Vows and Oblations were made to
God only, Reply page 348.
Deuteronomy. 23.21. Leuit. c. 24.5.6. This law in respect of the substance is moral;
and obliges Christian people as well in case of Oblations, as of Sacrifices.
Now, by what authority, and right can the Roman Church abrogate this law in
whole, or part, and appropriating Sacrifice unto God, make Oblations common to
God and Saints? Thus you very vainly; not only in regard that the Text of
Deuteronomy does not say, that Vows and Promises are to be made unto God
only, but no more, then that if one make a Vow unto God, he must be careful
to keep it; whence to infer that Vows and Promises may not be made unto men
or Saints, but to God only, is ridiculous. The text also of Leuiticu^ says,
that Oblations and gifts are to be made unto God, but that to God only, not a
word. And to say, giving of gifts to be proper unto God only, is foolish,
except you mean gifts and oblations by way of Sacrifice, as unto the author
of all gifts and fountain of Being. For what more daily and quotidian then for
men to make presents, and oblations the one to the other, specially unto Kings
and Princes in testimony of their duty? But as I say, your discourse is vain,
not only in respect of your idle cyphering of Scripture, but also because your
self demolish this your Doctrine, by saying, or supposing the contrary, to
wit, that Oblations by way of Religion, may be made unto Ministers. That this
is by you supposed, I prove.

To show that Ministers are Religiously to be adored, you cipher 2. Cor. 8.5.
where S. Paul says of the Church of Macedonia: Reply pa. 224. lin. 26.
They gave themselves first unto God, and then by the will of God, unto us. By
which text you cannot conclude Religious Adoration to be due unto Ministers,
but by arguing in this manner: They unto whom men by way of Religion and
devotion give and offer themselves, are Religiously adored, because oblations
be Divine and Religious worship: The Church of Macedonia did by way of Religion
and devotion, offer themselves unto S. Paul, because he was a Minister: Ergo,
Unto Ministers Religious adoration is to be given. This I say must be the force
of your argument. For if the Macedonians did not by way of Religion, and
devotion offer themselves unto S. Paul, how can you show that by giving
themselves unto him, they did Religiously adore him, because he was a Minister?
Now, if it be granted, that gifts and oblations by way of Religion may be made
unto Ministers, your discourse against Oblations unto Saints is eueruated, and
falls to the ground. For thus I argue. If oblations may be made to God only,
why are they made unto Ministers? If they may be made unto creatures, why not
unto Saints and Angels, as well as unto Ministers? If oblations be proper unto
God, how dare Ministers make themselves fellows with God in this point of his
Honor? If they be not proper unto God, why do you reprove us for offering
gifts, and vows unto the blessed Virgin his Mother? Here you are so taken,
that you cannot shift away, nor euade.

Fourthly and principally, by this doctrine that Religious Adoration is due
unto Ministers, you overthrow all you say in the Third point against giving
worship, specially Religious unto blessed Saints and Angels For if Ministers
may be religiously adored with reference unto God, why not Saints, why not
Angels? You allege Matthew. 10.14.
Scriptures that affirm Ministers to be the messengers of God, and threaten
punishment unto such as will not admit of them. But I pray you, be not Angels
Gods Messengers as much as Ministers, yea in a more high, holy, and excellent
sort, being all ministering Spirits sent in service for them, that partake the
inheritance of salvation? Hebr. 1.23.

You bring Matthew. 10.42. He that shall give to one of these little ones a cup
of cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say he shall not loose
his reward. How can you hence in force, that divine and Religious worship is
due unto Ministers, rather then unto any poor Christian, Lazar, or Beggar, of
whom Christ says, Matthew. 25.40.
Whatsoever you do to one of my least ones, you do unto me? If Saints living
upon earth, that be the lively images of Christ may not be honored with
Religious adoration, though what is done to them Christ takes as done to
himself; what little color and pretext can you Ministers allege, why we
should honor you with Religious Adoration?

You produce Galat. 4.14. where the Apostle says unto the Galathians; You
received me as an Angel of God, eue^ as Christ Jesus. Who sees not that this
maks rather for adoration of Angels then of Mynisters? S. Paul thought the
Galathians did much, in that they received him as an Angel: But you say, we
must worship Ministers, more then Angels, to wit, with Religious Adoration,
which is due to God only.

To the same purpose, you cite two Fathers S. Ambrose, and S. Gregory. S.
Ambrose epist. 26. says: Domino def^rtur, cum seruulus honoratur; the Lord is
reverenced, when the servant is honored. S. Super Reg. lib. 5. cap. 1. Quam
reuerendi sunt optimi Pastores Ecclesiae Sa^ctae liquet. Dum enim Deo fideliter
seruiunt, tanto ei amoris vinculo coniunguntur, vt quidquid eis ingeritur,
Diuinae iniuriae ascribatur.
Gregory writes, that good Pastors who serve God faithfully are so conjoined
with him in the bond of love, as what is done against them is taken as injury
offered unto God. How do these texts conclude Religious adoration to be due to
your Ministerial worships rather the^ unto Angels? I pray you Sir, be not
Saints and Angels the faithful servants of God, his friends? Be they not
conjoined with him in love as much as any Minister? Why then should Religious
worship be due to Ministers, and their Et caetera's, and not to Saints, their
Relics and Images?

That Saints and Angels be the friends and faithful servants of God, we
certainly know; that you Ministers be such, how can you make it apparent or
certain? And if you cannot, why may not we argue against your worships as you
argue against Images page 233. I am taught by learned Vasquez that the Devil
may lurk in Images, and our Adversary cannot prove that Christ is present, or
assistant unto them. Now it seems unreasonable to worship that which may
receive the Devil, when on the other side one cannot be certain that it have
any fellowship with Christ. This your argument against Images is stronger
against Religious Adoration of Ministers. For of the Images we are certain,
that they represent Christ Crucified unto us, and we feel this their force and
efficacy in our hearts, when we worship Christ in them But that Ministers may
receive the Devil, that the Devil may lurk in them, we are Luther tom. 2.
Ie^iensi. fol. 68. says of Carolostadius: Puto non vno Diabolo obsessum fuisse
miserabilem illum hominem. And of Zwinglian Ministers he says, That the Devil
now and ever dwells in them, and that they have a blasphemous breast
insatanized, supersatanized and persatanized. See the place in the book of the
Tigurine Deuines confess. Tigur. An. 1544. fol. 3.
taught by Luther who affirms so much of diverse Ministers, and by other
Ministers that The Tigurine Deuines in the place alleged say: Lutherus cum
suis Diabolis. And Zwinglius: En vt hunc homine^ Satan totus occupare conetur.
Tom. 2. respons. ad Confess Lutheri. fol. 478.
auerre no less of him That Ministers be Christ's fellows, or have fellowship
with Christ, that Christ is present by sanctity and grace with any of them, you
cannot make certain; yea according to your Tenet, Christ does not certainly,
and infallibly assist the whole Church, much less is it certain and
infallible, that he is present and assistant unto every Minister. Wherefore
seeing it is certain that the Devil may lurk in Ministers, and it is not
certain and infallible, that Christ is assistant unto them, we may conclude by
your principles, that it is unreasonable they should be worshipped, specially
with Religious adoration, which yet you do require that men yield unto you, in
regard of your union with God.

The second Error. That that cannot be the true Church which has wicked
Visible Pastors.. 2.
ANOTHER error no less absurd and sottish the^ this you maintain, to wit,
that that cannot be the true Church whose visible Rulers are, or have been
wicked or impious. Thus you write page 100. Wicked persons according to S.
Augustine, are not indeed and verily the body of Christ: And again, they are
not in the body of Christ which is the Church, because Christ cannot have
damnable members. And Bernard says, that it is evident, that Christ is not the
head of an Hypocrite: but the visible Rulers of the popish Church have many
times been, as our Adversaries themselves report, not only Hypocrites, but also
apparently monstrous and damnable sinners. Therefore the Popish Church cannot be
the Catholic Church out of which no salvation is to be had. And again. page
54. you argue in this manner. They which are not of the body of Christ, nor of
the house of God, really and in truth, do not constantly preserve, or
faithfully deliver Apostolical traditions, nor are they such as the spirit of
God infallibly and always directs in their public doctrine. But wicked
persons says S. Augustine, retain the figure or outward shape of a member,
but they are not in truth the body of Christ, Non sunt de compage domus Dei,
they are not of the frame of the house of Christ. Ergo. Thus you.

How false and absurd this your Doctrine is, I will not stand to show by
Scriptures, and Fathers, which are clear and plentiful in this point. For
though Christ as he is the head and fountain of sanctifying Grace cannot have
wicked and damnable members that receive influence from him, yet as he is the
head and fountain of all spiritual government and authority, he may have
damnable subjects and members, and from him power and authority may flow unto
them. But omitting this, I will make your Folly and Ignorance apparent, by
proving that this your argument is inept, in respect of form; and in the
matter so absurd, as you contradict your self, you overthrow your own Church,
you cross the maine stream of Protestant Doctrine.

First your argument eue^ in respect of form is fond, for you change the medium
or means of proof, arguing from the time preterite, to the present: Reply page
^00. in fine.


Wolves hypocrites, and impious Persons BE NOT the true Church. Romish Prelates
HAVE BEEN Hypocrites, Wolves, and impious Persons. Ergo. The Romish Prelates be
not the true Church.
Who does not feel this manner of arguing to be inept, as good, and no better
then this?

A sucking Child is not a Preacher and Minister of the word. Francis White has
been a sucking Child. Ergo. He is not a Preacher or Minister of the word.
Hence, though your paradoxe, that the Church which has a wicked man for
Pastor cannot be the true Church, were true and your tale, that some Popes have
been wicked, were also granted; yet it is not hence consequent, that the
Roman Church is not now the true Church, but at the most that it was not the
true Church for the time that it had some wicked Pope for supreme Pastor.

Secondly you contradict your self about the doctrine, that wicked Pastors
cannot faithfully preserve and deliver the true word of salvation: for page 52.
you thus write to the contrary. The promises of Christ made to the Church
concerning his presence and assistance to his Sacraments, preached and
administered according to his commandment are fulfilled, when WICKED Persons
execute the office, and perform the work of outward Ministry. For although
the wicked, like the Carpe^ters of Noah's arc, reap no benefit to themselves,
yet God almighty CONCVRRETH with their ministry, being his own Ordinance, for
the salvation of all devout Communicants. Thus you. If this be true, as it is
most certain, then may wicked persons faithfully and constantly deliver
Apostolical Traditions about matter of Salvation. This sequel I prove. They
with whose ministry God does concur for the salvation of all devout and
worthy co^municants, being bound so to do, by his promise, do constantly and
faithfully deliver Apostolical Traditions concerning the doctrine of
salvation, and are infallibly directed so to do. This is evident, because when
God concurreth with his Ministers to teach the truth, they never err, nor
deliver in matter of faith and salvation false doctrine: But God does still and
infallibly concur with them, with whom to concur he has bound himself by
promise ever and always* even to the consummation of the world. Wherefore if
God has bound himself to his Church, that he will concur even with the
wicked Ministers of his word, in their teaching for the salvation of all devout
and worthy communicants, as you affirm page 52 lin. 18. then wicked persons may
deliver faithfully and constantly Apostolical traditions concerning faith and
salvation, and are infallibly directed so to do; which you deny page 54 lin. 6.
manifestly contradicting your self within less then a leaf.

Thirdly, you overthrow your own protestant Church. For if that cannot be the
true Church directed by God, according to his infallible promise, wherein wicked
men have sitten as visible rulers and governors, then Protestants and all of
their communion cannot be the true Church out of which salvation is not had*
For I hope they will not be so impudent as to deny, but they have had some
wicked me^ for their rulers and Pastors. Was not King Henry the eight ruler
and Governor of the Protestant Church, and yet their own Historyes paint him
forth as a monster for beastlines, cruelty, and impiety? Was not Cranmer a most
wicked persecutour* and murderer of diverse Saints, not only of Catholics, but
of sundry Foxian martyrs who were by him sent to the fire? And yet he was a
ruler and governor in the Protestant Church. Wherefore the argument which you
set in distinct letters, and lines as of special weight, may be with the same
force and form applied against your Protestant Church in so many words, only
by placing the words Protestant in lieu of Romish.

Wolves, Hypocrites, and impious Persons are not the holy Catholic Church.
Protestant Prelates and Visible Rulers have been Wolves, Hypocrites, and
impious persons. Ergo. Protestants are not the Holy Catholic church, out of
which there is no salvation.
Fourthly, what more opposite to the common stream, even of the Protestant
Doctrine, then that that Church cannot be the temple and house of God, in which
wicked and impious men sit, or have sitten as visible rulers? Commonly all
Ministers (foolishly (I confess) yet earnestly) endeavor to prove that the
Pope is Antichrist, because he sits in the Temple and Church of God, as
Christ's Vicar, and as her supreme Visible Head and Ruler under Christ: which
Doctrine you your self suppose as certain page 588. were you make this
Exclamation: What a misery will it be, if it fall out (as it is certain it
will) that at the Day of Judgment, the greatest part of English Romistes be
found to have followed the man of sin, the son of perdition, who exalts
himself above all that is called God, so that he sit in the temple of God,
showing himself as if he were God. Thus you. I urge not the folly of this your
Exclamation, in that it is a fond supposition of the Question, yea a taking of
that, as certain, which not only Catholics, but also learned Protestants
deny. Your self, have you not lately since the writing of this Reply, approved
The Appeal unto Caesar of Richard Montague.
a Book by Order of his Majesty? in which that Author does often, and
earnestly Second part. c. 5. page 141.
profess, not to believe the Pope to be that Antichrist; further affirming
that Protestants, out of affection have been to violently forward to pronounce
the Pope is that man of sin and son of perdition: yea that some, out of
violent and transported passion no doubt, make it an Article of their Creed;
whereas their arguments be so far from the force of demonstratiue, as they are
not persuasiue. Thus this Author in that Book which you have subscribed unto,
as containing See the Approbation I Francis White etc.
nothing but what is aggreable to the public Faith, and Doctrine established
in the Church of England. And yet here you say, It is certain, that the Pope
is the man of sin, and son of perdition; so showing your self to be of
their number whom the said Author in that very place* does rebuke as Omnium
horarum homines, Halters in opinions for private ends.

I omit also your folly in exclaming at the misery of English Romists, for that
they adhere unto your supposed Antichrist, not marking that to cleave to the
Antichrist of your forming, must even according to your own principles be
singular happiness. For Antichrist according to your Tenet, does sit and govern
in the House and Temple of God, and so by the same breath wherewith you make men
vassals of Antichrist, you make them Gods Domestics, his House, his Temple.
Will it be misery to be found such at the day of Judgment? Yea rather the
Church of Christ, the Temple of God being only one, out of which no salvation
is had, what a misery will it be at the day of Judgment, when by your own
mouth, you shall be convinced to have forsaken that company which you confess
to be the Church and Temple of God, through fear of your own shadow, and
fancy? For what can be more foolish, then to fasten the name of Antichrist upon
the Governor of the Christian Church, who does daily profess to believe in
Christ Jesus the son of God and Savior of the world? who by his Adherents
does more then all the world besides defend, and propagate amongst Pagans his
most holy Name and Religion? But to let these things pass, mark how you
co^tradict your self in saying on the one side that, that cannot be the House
and Temple of God which now has, or in former times has had wicked Pastors:
On the other side that, that is the House and Temple of God, in which the Man
of sin, that is, a succession of wicked Pastors, has a long while for many
ages governed, and does rule and govern So hard is it for men blinded with
passion against Christian Doctrine, derived by succession from the Apostles, to
run in their passionate conceits, without falling into the pit of open
contradiction, whereby their folly comes to be manifest unto all men.

The third Error. You prof^sse Infidelity about the Blessed Sacrament.. 3.
THVS you write page 179. To that part of the Jesuits speech, that we deny the
Real Presence, or else the main Article of the Creed, that Christ is still in
heaven, because we will not allow a body in two places at ^nce: I answer, We
cannot grant, that one individual ^ody may be in many distant places at one,
and the same ^nstant of time, until the Papalls DEMONSTRATE THE POSSIBILITY
THEREOF, by te^timony of Scripture, or the ancient Tradition of the Church, ^r
by apparent reason. Thus you. This is plain dea^ing, and open profession of
Infidelity. For what ^s heretical obstinacy, but to reject the word of God,
about the mysteries of our Faith, in the plain, ex^resse, and literal sense,
until the possibility of that sense be first demonstrated? No Heretic was
ever so barbarous as to prefer his reason beyond Gods word so far, as to
affirm, that the word of God, contrary to his reason, was false. Their impiety
was to reject Gods word about some mystery of faith in the literal sense,
flying to moral and mystical interpretation, because they could not
comprehend, and therefore would not believe the possibility of the plain, and
litterall sense. The Arrians did not deny the word of Scripture, saying 1.
Joan. ^.7.
of the Father, Word, and Holy Ghost, these three are one; nor the Word of
Christ, Joan. 10.30.
I, and my Father are one, to be true morally, and mystically in respect of
unity by singular affection and consent betwixt these three persons. They were
Heretics for denying the truth of these words in the proper and substantial
sense, because the same seemed to them impossible. For seeing that we might not
expound the Scriptures about mysteries of faith to an easy figurative sense,
when the same according to the letter goes beyond the capacity of our
understanding, God does so often in holy Writ Genesis 18.17. Numquid Deo quid est
difficile. Hie^rm. 32.17. Non est difficile tibi omne verbum. Et v. 27. Numquid
mihi difficile erit omne verbu^? Luc. 1.37. Non erit impossible apud Deum omne
verbu^. Et, Deo omnia possibilia sunt Matt. ^9.26. Luc. 18.27. Omnia possibilia
sunt credenti Mar. 9.22.
assure us, that nothing is impossible or difficile unto him; and Job. 9.10.
That he can do things incomprehensible without number: What greater obstinacy
then for Christian men to profess, that they will never believe his word about
the mysteryes of faith, in the literal sense, until the possibility of the
sense be demonstrated unto them, that is brought within the compass, and
comprehension of their wit?

You may perchance excuse your self by saying, the words of Christ's
institution, This is my body, taken in the literal sense, do not enforce, that
Christ according to his corporal substance, is in two places at once. I
answer, this you cannot say without contradicting not only the word of
Scripture (as is proved in the Reioynder) but also your self. For you do
plainly affirm, that this our doctrine, yea even Transubstantiation is
contained in the literal sense of the words of the Institution. If (say you)
the substance of bread and wine be delivered in the Eucharist, then the words
are figurative, and cannot be true in the proper sense, because one individual
substance cannot be predicated of another properly. Thus you Reply page 3^7.
: whereupon I thus argue. That without which the word of Christ cannot be true
in the proper and literal sense, is enforced, and proved by the word of
Christ taken in the literal sense: But except the substance of bread be
absent, and Christ in lieu thereof present, according to his corporal
substance, the word of Christ, This is my body, cannot be true in the literal
and proper sense, as you affirm: Ergo, Transubstantiation, and the presence of
Christ on earth, according to his bodily substance in lieu of bread, is
enforced, and proved by the literal sense of the word of Christ's institution.
Wherefore to profess (as you ^o) never to believe Christ's body to be in two
places at once, until it be demonstrated unto you to be possible, is to
profess you will not believe the word of God in the literal sense, about
mysteries of faith further then the possibility thereof can be made evident
unto you. Is not this to profess Infidelity?

Secondly, you may say, that when you require that we demonstrate by testimony
of Scripture, that a body may be in two places at once, you mean not that we
bring texts of Scripture that demonstrate by reason how this is possible, but
only that we bring places that expressly say that, This is possible unto God.
For as you say page 438. In the words of our Savior, This is my body, there
is not a syllable concerning accide^ts without a subject, or of a bodies being
in two places at once, or concerning any miracle wrought by Gods omnipotency. I
answer, that likewise in this text of Scripture, Joan. 1.1^.
The Word was made flesh, there is not a syllable, that a perfect substantial
nature can exist without proper personality, or that two complete natures can
subsist together in the same Hypostasis, nor of any miracle done by the divine
omnipotency; yet because this text of Scripture about the mystery of the
incarnation cannot be true in the literal sense, except those hard and
incomprehensible things be granted to be possible by divine omnipotency, we
must together with the mystery implicitly believe, that God can separate
proper subsistence from complete substantial natures, that two natures
infinitely distant in perfection, can subsist in the same Hypostasis, though the
Scripture does not expressly so affirm. In like manner though the words of
Christ, This is my body, do not expressly say, that his body may be in many
places at once, nor that accidents can exist without a subject by divine
omnipotency, yet because this his word whereon we ground our faith concerning
this mystery, cannot (as your self grant) be true in the proper and literal
sense, except Transubstantiation, and the Presence of his body in many places
at once be believed; hence we must together with the real presence and
litterall sense of Gods word, implicitly believe these miracles to be done.
Wherefore in saying, you will never believe them, except their possibility be
first demonstrated unto you, through ignorance of Theology you profess
Infidelity. For to resolve not to believe seeming implica^cies inuolued in the
mysteries of faith, except they be either severally expressed, as possible in
Gods word, or else demonstrable by reason, is the right way to believe just
nothing; there being no mystery of faith which does not imply some
difficultyes, the possibility of which is neither expressly auerred in
scripture, nor can be demonstrated by reason.

A fourth Example of your Ignorance in Theology.. 4.
I Add another Example about the Blessed Eucharist, wherein you discover
gross Ignorance, not only against Theology but even common sense. And this
Example may serve, as a pattern how insufficiently and impertinently you
answer the Jesuits argument. The Jesuit page 406. argues in this sort:
Christ does affirm that the Sacrament is truly, really, substantially (not the
figure, and effect of his body, but) his very body: but how can consecrated
bread be termed truly, really, and substantially the body of Christ, if his
body be not so much as in the same place with it? Thus you answer page 406. To
the effecting hereof, local and corporal presence is not necessary. A Father
and his Son may be absent by distance of place one from the other, yet the
Son is TRVLY AND REALLY UNITED with his Father, so as his Fathers nature is
in him, and he has right in his Fathers person and state. A man's goods may be
at Constantinople, and yet he living in England is a true possessour and owner
of them, and he may communicate and use them, and distance of place hinders
not his right and propriety. Now, although there be a difference between
things temporal and spiritual, yet thus far there is agreement, that even
as we possess temporal things being locally absent, so likewise we may
receive and partake Christ's body and blood by the power of Faith, and donation
of the Holy Ghost, according to a celestial and spiritual manner. Thus you.
Now behold how many ways you discover gross Ignorance in this answer.

First, were all that you say true, yet is it impertinent and ineptly brought
in answer of the Jesuits argument. For the question is not, whether men may
receive by the virtue of Faith and donation of the holy Ghost, sanctity and
grace through the merits of Christ's body and blood that are absent (for this al
acknowledge to happen in Baptism, and to be possible in the Eucharist, if
Christ had so ordained:) The question is about the truth of Gods word whether
consecrated bread may be truly and really called the body of Christ, being (as
you say) a thing not only indiuidually distinct, but also locally distant from
his body. A man being in London may possess iuridically an Horse that is in
the Country, is it therefore true to say, that this man in London is truly and
really the Horse in the Country? A Merchant in London may have great treasures
of money in Constantinople, and a right to lay them up in his Coffers at
London, may one therefore showing his empty coffers at London say truly, this is
a treasure of money? In like manner, suppose (which is false) that a man has
iuridicall authority over Christ's body absent, and existing in heaven, to
dispose thereof at his pleasure, may he therefore be said to be truly and really
Christ's body? May one therefore showing the Sacrament, being in your Tenet an
empty thing in respect of containing Christ's bodily substance, say truly
thereof, This is really Christ's body and corporal substance? who will maintain
such absurdities that is sober? Wherefore your discourse that a man may truly
posesse a thing absent, serves nothing to satisfy the Jesuits question, how
can consecrated bread be truly, verily, and really the body of Christ, if he be
not so much as present in place with it?

Secondly, what more absurd then what you affirm, that a man may not only in
right possess, but really and truly use his things that be absent? Can a man
in London use, and ride on his horse that is at York! Or a Merchant in Bristow
feed on his grapes that are growing in his vineyard in Spain? If they cannot
(and it is ridiculous to say, they can) how can a man existing on earth,
receive truly and really Christ distant from him, as far as the highest
heaven? Receive him (I say) not in a sign only, and according to gracious
Effects, but even according to his body and corporal substance, with their
mouth of flesh. For Christ did not say, This is a figure of my body, or, this
is soule-feeding grace given by the merit of my body and blood; but, This is my
body, even to your corporal mouth, wherewith I bid you, to take, and eat it.

Thirdly, who ca^ forbear laughing to hear you so soberly affirm, that the
Son that is absent from his Father, as far as Constantinople is from London, is
not only morally by Love and Affection, but TRVLY and REALLY UNITED with his
Father? For Union is the way unto Unity; so that whenever two individual
things are truly and really united, by this union is made a third individual
thing distinct from each of them a part, and from all other individual things.
When soul and body come to be united, by this union is produced a third
substance, to wit, a man composed of soul and body. When two waters that were
severed come to join together, there arises one third water, wherein the two
lesser waters are included as parts. But Father and Son, the one in London,
the other at Constantinople, do not compose a third individual nature constant
of the^ both, wherein they both are contained, as is most evident: Ergo, It is
ridiculous to affirm, that the Father in London, is truly and really united
with his Son in Constantinople.

Finally, put case there were true and real unity betwixt Father and Son, so
that the son might be said to be one with his father, truly and properly, in
respect of kind, or specificall Identity; what can this serve to show that
consecrated bread, remaining bread in nature and kind, may be said to be the
body of Christ, or the same with it? Had Christ said of another man's body, This
is my Body, you might have co^strued it thus, This is my body, that is, a body
of the same kind and nature with mine; but Christ saying of that which was
bread, this is my Body, how can you understand this to be true in respect of
specificall Unity? Is bread of the same kind and nature as Christ's body? I am
sure, being before warned of this absurdity, you will not dare so to teach. What
then, does specificall Identity or unity in nature and kind serve to show, that
consecrated bread remaining bread in kind, nature, and essence, may be truly
and really Christ's body? Certainly Christ did affirm that the thing contained
within the shape of bread, was his individual body, not another individual
body of the same kind. This cannot be true verily, and according to propriety
of speech, as you grant, if the substance of bread remain, much less if also
the substance of Christ's body be locally absent. The Jesuits argument then does
convince, that the Sacrament cannot be truly, really, substantially Christ's
body, if the body of Christ be not locally indistant from the same.

A fifth Example, About Satisfaction.. 5.
I will produce yet another Example of your Ignorance, by which you contradict
Protestants, yea your self in the very same page, and establish our Catholic
doctrine of Satisfaction and Purgatory, against which in that place you
earnestly dispute. Thus you wite page 540. The difference between the
Pontificia^s and us in this dostrin is, THAT WE BELIEVE A REMAINDER of
TEMPORAL Affliction, AFTER the REMISSION of the GVILTE of Sin, in this life
only, for Chastisement, ERVDITION, and PROBATION. They maintain a Remainder
of Temporal Punishment, not only in this life, but after the same in
Purgatory. Further, we believe, that the Pain of Chastisement inflicted upon
penitent sinners, may by prayers of faith, exercise of virtue, humiliation and
mortification be REMOVED, MITIGATED, or converted to the increase of grace and
glory in them, that with patience and holiness endure the same in this life. But
we deny, that either any pain follows just persons after their decease, or
that they can in this life by any good works, merit release of any temporal
punishment, or satisfy the Divine Justice for the fault, or guilt of any sins
on their behalf, much less for others.

Thus you* On the one side denying, against Catholics, Temporal Pain in the
next life, and on the other, granting against Protestants a Remaynder of
Temporal Chastisement, for sin remitted after the remission of the guilt.
Whereby you contradict your self, yea establish the possibillity of
superabou^dant Satisfaction. You lay Principles which unanswerably enforce
temporal pain for remiss Penitents in the next world; Which three things I
will in order demonstrate, that so it may appear, that through Ignorance you
have your self dissolved and broken in pieces the whole frame of your
Voluminous Reply, in every point of Controversy proposed by his Majesty, and
handled therein.

First, you contradict your self; for in this very page 540. against the
Remainder of temporal pain thus you write: That which is so forgiven that
after pardon it is not mentioned or remembered, and which is cast behind Gods
back, and thrown into the bottom of the sea, and which can no where be
found, and which is blotted out of the Debt-booke of the Almighty, is not taken
away by commutation of a greater punishment into a lesser, but by a free and
full condonation of all vindictiue punishment. But the holy Scripture, and the
Fathers teach such a remission of sin on Gods part to the penitent. Thus you:
what cleerer contradiction can be devised then is between these two sentences,
Remission of sin is made not by commutation of a greater punishment into a
less, but by free and full condonation of all vindictiue punishment: and,
There is a remainder of temporal pain after the remission of guilt of sin,
not only for the trial and erudition of the penitent, but also for
Chastisement, which may be removed, or mitigated by mortification and
penitential works? What clearer contradiction, I say, can be devised? For
te^porall pain inflicted upon penitent sinners by way of chastisement after
the remission of the guilt of their sin, is vindictiue Punishment. You
profess in the end of this page to believe Temporal pain to remain, not
only by way of Probation and Erudition, but even by way of chastisement, after
the remission of the guilt of their sin: Therefore you contradict what you say
in the beginning of this page, That remission of sin is free, and full
condonation of all vindictiue punishment.

Again; Condonation of sin, whereby eternal punishment is changed into
temporal, is remission of sin, by commutation of a greater chastiseme^t into
a less, to wit, of eternal into temporal, as is most evident. But in the end
of this page, you teach, that sin is so remitted, as the guilt of sin, and
eternal Damnation is changed into a remainder of temporal affliction for
chastisement of the penitent sinner. Wherefore, if the changing of Eternal
punishment into Temporal be commutation of greater punishment into less; then
by granting, in the end of the cited page, a Remaynder of Temporal Affliction,
after the remission of the Eternal, you overthrow what you taught in the
beginning of the same, that remission of sin is not made by commutation of
greater punishment into less.

Secondly, this your doctrine of the remainder of temporal pain, after the
remission of the guilt of sin, proves that penitent saints may make
compe^sant, yea superaboundant satisfaction, in manner as Catholics teach; for
in the remainder of temporal affliction we may consider, and distinguish two
things; the greatness of the pain reserved, and the greatness of Gods remaining
anger against sin remitted, which he does yet temporally punish. If we regard
the greatness of Gods just anger and offense, we hold Si ad ipsam offensam
Diuinae Maiestatis respiciamus, quatenus Deus videlicet sic homini manet
infe^sus, vt merit^ velit illu^ subire malu^ Poenae Temporalis; non potest pro
eiusmodi offensa fieri iusta and prorsus aequalis compensatio a nobis. Nam illa
offensa habet ex part Diuinae Maiestatis quandam infinitatem. Gregor. de
Valent. Tom. 4. in D. Tho. disput. 7. q. 14. punct. 1. col. 1756.
that no compensant, or equal satisfaction is made in this respect, the
offense having a kind of infinity from the infinite majesty of the person
offended. But if we regard the greatness of the penalty reserved, a man may
remove the same by satisfaction compensant, yea superaboundant. This may be
made evident by examples. Let us suppose the remainder of Temporal affliction
reserved, be equal unto the pain of forty days fast in bread and water in
one whole year, why may not a just man fast in this manner forty days in a
year, and so offer unto God satisfaction just and equal? Also why may he not
fast fifty days in a year with only bread and water, and so offer
satisfaction superaboundant? Superaboundant, I say, not in respect of the
Majesty of God offended, but in respect of the temporal reserved punishment:
So that granting, as you do, a temporal remainder of chastisement after the
remission of sin, to be removed or mitigated by penitential works, if you
be in your right judgment, and ponder the matter, you cannot deny (as you do)
that compensant and superaboundant satisfaction may be made for the same.

Thirdly, this your doctrine does evidently enforce Temporal and Purgatory
pains in the next life. This I prove. Unto sins of equal offense and
heynousmes against God, remitted by the same measure of faith and contrition,
the same punishment is due in justice, after the remission of the guilt. For
God being just, does never punish sin remitted with more or longer affliction
then it deserves: Go^ forbid (says Job. 34.10.11.
Job) that there should be impiety in God, or iniquity in the Almighty. For he
will repay unto man his own work, and render unto every one according to
their ways: nor in punishing the remitted sins of his servants is he an
acceptour of persons. Hence unto every sin, as great as David's, remitted upon
no greater contrition then had David, as great temporal punishment is in
justice due, and shallbe inflicted* as was inflicted upon David for his
remitted sin* This being evident, I assume: But we see innumerable penitent
men who have committed greater sins then David, and yet have not had greater,
nor so great measure of faith, nor of sorrow and contrition for their sins as
had David, that dye presently afte^ their repentance, without enduring either
by Divine infliction, or by voluntary assumption, such grievous temporal
afflictions, as David did: Therefore innumerable penitent Saints depart this
life, being obnoxious unto as great, or greater punishment, after the remission
of their sins, as David did endure after the remission of his. This supposed
what shall become of these men? They cannot go to hell, the guilt of sin, and
of eternal damnation being graciously remitted unto them. They Non introibit
in ea^ aliquid coinquinatum Apoc. 21.27.
cannot go presently to heaven, for no stained thing, that is, no person unto
whom punishment is due in justice, can enter into that seat of pure Reward,
Joy and Felicity^ Wherefore, seeing you say, that unto sin remitted a certain
measure of temporal pain is due, to be removed or mitigated by works of
mortification, it is forcible, that you also admit temporal Purgatory-paines
in the next life, for them that die before this debt of temporal chastisement
be satisfied in this world.

Your Ignorance about the holy Cross, and the Water of Jordan.. 6.
CONCERNING the Holiness and Honor of our Saviors Cross, you show want of
judgment in Theology. That the liuelesse and insensible Cross, (say you, page
235.) whereupon Christ suffered, was sanctified by his Passion, must be
believed when Divine Ordinance is produced to make the same manifest. And
again, page 236. Those things which at the instant time of Christ's Passion
had a residence in his body, and were joined thereunto (per contactum
physicum,) as instruments of his passion, were not thereby made most highly
Venerable, because there is no Divine Authority, or any other sufficient reason
to prove this assertion. In these words you show great Ignorance of Christian
Theology, yet such as is common to those of the Puritan stamp, A Malignant
Generation See the Appeal unto Caesar, which our Doctor warrants, as
containing nothing, but Catholic English doctrine. page 281. The Cross is as
much vilifyed by furious Puritans in these days, as ever it was by Pagans in
the days of the Fathers.
against the Cross of our Redeemer. Wherefore I should not account to deny
Sanctity unto the Cross notable in you, did you not presently in the very same
page attribute Holiness and Sanctification unto the ground whereon Moses stood,
and unto the water of Jordan. Thus you write* Whiles God appeared to Moses in
the Bramble ush, the ground whereon Moses stood is called holy. Exodus 3.6. But
this Holiness being, only relative, transitory, and denominatiue, and not
inherent and durable, the former vision and apparition being finished, the
ground whereon Moses stood returned to his old condition. The like may be said
of the water of Jordan, considered when Christ was Baptized with it, and again
considered when his baptism was finished, and out of the use. Thus you.

Now I pray you, what reason can you assign why the Land whereon Moses stood,
was Sanctified, and made Relatiuely Holy* during the time of the Divine
apparition, and not the Cross, at the least, for the instant time of our Lords
Passion thereon? You will say that no Scripture does warrant the tearming of the
Cross Holy, whereas the land whereon Moses stood, is called Holy, Exodus 3.6.
But what want of understanding is this, not to see how the Scripture tearming
the ground whereon Moses stood Holy, and commanding him to put off his shoes
out of reverence unto it, because confining on the Bush wherein God appeared,
or rather an Angel bearing his person? What blindness (I say) is it not to see,
that this very Text does a fortiori, more strongly and forcibly warrant the
tearming the Cross holy and venerable, and ^he doing reverence unto it, at the
least, whiles Christ ^anged thereon? As the law commanding the Jews ^o be
grateful unto God for his delivering them out ^f the Land of servitude, by
killing the First-begotte^ ^f Egypt, does a fortiori, charge Christians to be
^hankefull for their redemption from sin by the ^eath of Gods only Son:
Even so, the Scripture ^alling the land whereon Moses stood holy and vene^able,
in regard of a Divine apparition, nigh unto ^he same, does a fortiori charge
men to respect the Cross as Holy and Venerable, which God even in ^erson
corporally and substantially united unto man, ^id touch with his sacred body,
and imbrue with his ^retious blood, in offering the sacrifice for our
Re^emption.

But what will you say of the Water of Jordan? What Divine manifest Ordinance
can you bring to say ^he same was Relatiuely Holy, and Venerable during our
Saviors Baptism, more then to ascribe the like Sanctity and Venerability unto
the Cross, for the ^nstant time of our Saviors suffering thereon? And whereas
you say the Cross was liuelesse and insen^ible, seeming to assign this as a
reason why the same ^ould not be made Holy and Venerable, what more ^ayne? Was
not the ground whereon Moses stood, ^as not the water of Jordan as liuelesse
and insensible ^s the wood of the Cross? Verily I cannot imagine what here
you may reply and am persuaded that God ^n his providence would have you utter
in print this truth about the water of Jordan, that thereby you ^ight be
convinced that no reason but only passion ^eades you to deny the Holiness, and
Venerabi^^ty of our Saviors Cross. And seeing, when the blind lead the blind
both fall into the pit, what wonder that you following the blindness of passion,
against the Churches Tradition, be fallen into so open a pit of folly, as to
make the Land whero^ Moses stood, and the water of Jordan more holy and
venerable, then the wood of the Altar of our Redemption?

If any demand, why the Cross is still worshipped after it ceased to touch our
Saviors body, and no^ the water of Jordan? the reason of disparity is evident.
For things sanctified by the presence, and touch of some sacred person, still
remain holy and venerable until the same be lawfully applied unto profane
and vulgar use Thus the Chair of State being ciuilly sanctified, that is,
aparted from common and ordinary service, remaynes so perpetually, until the
same be lawfully applied unto vulgar employment. I say lawfully, for if the
same be vulgarly used unlawfully, and in contempt, it loses not sanctity, but
is still holy de iure, and has a right to be venerably used. Now the ground
whereon Moses stood, the apparition being finished; the water of Jordan, our
Sauiour^ baptism being ended, were presently and lawfully applied to profane
use, no custom or law forbidding the same, and so they presently ceased to be
holy.

But the Cross whereon our Savior suffered, and which he imbrueed with his
blood in the sacrifice (...) the worlds redemption, was hereby made so holy and
venerable to Christian imagination, as by Christian custom the same is
vnappliable to vulgar and pro^phane use: which reverence to the Cross, is so
in^graffed in Christian hearts, as I am persuaded that (...) the Protestant
would abhor the Puritan as pro^hane, that should use the wood of the Cross,
in vulgar manner, as for example to make a pegge thereof. Wherefore the Cross
being by Christian custom and ^euotion for ever vnappliable to profane use,
the ^ame is durably holy, and venerable, and shall be wor^hipped, so long as
Christianity shall last in the world.

And seeing in this place you use the terms of Relative, Transitory, and
Denominatiue holiness, let me request of you, what reason you have to rail, as
you do, at the Jesuit for using the terms of outward, relative, and
transitory worship? The Jesuit having proved by Scripture, and the Principles
of faith, that Christ his Image is to be honored, says page ^43. that this
honor is given outwardly, relatiuely, and ^ransitorily to the image; inwardly,
affectuously, absolutely, finally unto Christ: for this you come upon him, in
this sort page 244. How prove you by divine revelation and testimony, that
adoration is to be performed according to ^our distinction of outwardly,
relatiuely, transitorily unto Images? Against such loose, and voluntary
presumption we say with S. Chrysostom Diuinae scripturae testimonia sequamur,
neque feramus eos qui temere quiduis blaterant: We are to follow (...),
testimony of Divine Scripture, and not to regard them which as Rouers, and
without ground blatter out what they please.

Behold how bitter you are against the Jesuit: And why? Is it for his using
distinctions that are not verbally, and expressly found in Scripture? Then you
are blind not to see your self to be guilty of the same fault: for where do
you find in Scripture the terms of relative, transitory, and denominatiue
holiness? Is it, because his distinction of Absolute and Relative worshipp is
not to be proved by Scripture, as yours may? The^ you are so shallow in your
thoughts as not to perceive a thing, not only clear in Scripture, but also
near to your self. When the Scripture says, Matthew. 4.10.
Adore thy Lord God, what is this, but absolute, and inward affectuous
worship? When the same Scripture says, Bow thy self to the footestole of
his feet, for he is holy, what is this, but relative worshipp, Psalm. 98.5.
that is outward bowing before Gods footestole, inwardly referred unto his
person?

Yea the Jesuits Relative worshipp of inanimate things that have outward
reference to God, is proved by the very text by which you prove the relative
holiness of the same, Exodus 3.6. Put off the shoes of thy feet, because the
ground whereon thou stand is holy. The land whereon thou stand is holy;
Behold relative holiness: Put off thy shoes, and presume not to touch the same
but barefote; Behold relative worshipp, that is outward respect to the land,
inwardly referred to worshipp God there appearing. What shall I say more? the
Jesuits distinction is so clear and near unto you, as it is not only thus to
be proved by your very text of Scripture, but also intrinsecally inuolued in
your distinction, as by this argument I demonstrate.

Unto things that be holy, Honor and Veneration is due, and this of higher or
lower kind, according to the state and degree of their holiness. This
proposition no man that knows what he says, will deny.

But (as you distinguish) there be two kinds or states of holy things, some
being absolutely and inherently holy, other only relatiuely and outwardly.

Ergo, There are two kinds of worships due unto holy things, the one inward
and absolute, the other only relative and outward.

And, that the image of Christ is Relatiuely holy, as having an outward visible
reference unto a person, inwardly and infinitely holy, you can not deny, except
you want either notice of the Gospel, or eyes in your head. You may then see,
how wrongefully you up brayd the Jesuit with loose and voluntary presumption,
with blattering out at Rouers what he pleases, and how justly he might turn
the (...) of this sharp Reproach upon your self, for your denying that
sanctification unto the wood of ^he Cross at Christ's passion, which you grant
to the ^ater of Jordan in his Baptism.

A seventh Example, about Traditions.. 7.
^ will conclude this section with an example or two (...) of your simplicity
in using of distinctio^s. For your ^istinctions are either senseless, or else
you establish that doctrine which most of all you impugn. Take his example
hereof. The Jesuits principle that, there (...) Tradition unwritten, and that
this is the prime ground of ^ayth, more fundamental then Scripture, you most
lar^ely labor to refell, and term it page 91. an Anti^hristian, and impudent
assertion, to depresse the written lord of God, and exalt the profane,
bastardly, Apocriphal ^^aditions of the Pope. This is bitter enough, and yet
cer^^ynly you teach that there be traditions maintay^ing and upholding the
Scripture in authority, or (...) you speak ineptly, not knowing what you
affir^e. For some two pages before this your reproachful words, to wit page 89.
you thus distinguish about Traditions: The Church has no perpetual Traditions
but such, as are EITHER contained in Scripture, OR which are subseruient to
MAINTAIN the Faith, Verity and AVTHORITY of the Scripture, and the doctrine
thereof. Thus you.

I demand of you; These subseruient Traditious about faith and doctrine, be
they contained in Scripture or not? If they be your distinction is senseless,
one member thereof not being condistinct against the other: for if subseruient
traditions be traditions contained in Scripture, what more inept then to say,
traditions either contained in Scripture, or subseruient? If they be not
contained in Scripture, but condistinct from them, then according to your
distinction there be some traditions, not contained in Scripture, which
maintain and uphold the authority of Scripture, and the verity and doctrine
thereof. If you grant this (as you must, unless you will grant your
distinction be void of judgment) then must you also grant tradition to be more
fundamental then Scripture. For thus I argue: That which is the ground of the
authority of Scripture, is more fundame^tall then Scripture: That which does
mantayne, and uphold the authority of Scripture, is the ground and foundation
of the authority of Scripture: Ergo, That which does uphold and mantayne the
authority of Scripture, is more fundamental then Scripture. Now your self
ascribe unto Tradition subseruient, condistinct against written Tradition, the
office of mantayning the authority of Scripture. So that, either you know not
what you do write, or else by your own distinctions you are convinced to
establish that very doctrine which elsewhere you so sharply censure, as
Antichristian, impudent, profane, bastardly. Certainly you are a seely
Disputant about matters of Theodogy.

No more sense or judgment is there in the distinction you make of holy
Belieuers into triumphant and militant page 49. The term (Church) (say you)
is taken in the holy Scripture for the universal number of holy belieuers in
all ages: and more strictly for the whole number of holy belieuers under the
new Testament, Hebr. 12.23. Apoc. 5.9 Ephesians. 5.25.27. And thus it comprehends
both the Church militant and triumphant. Thus you: distinguishing the Church of
belieuers into militant and Triumphant; whence it is consequent that the
Triumphant Saints in heaven are belieuers. What more ridiculous, and against
the prime and known Notion of Triumphant Saints? It may be God permitted you
to stumble upon this gross simplicity, through want of reflection, that you
might thereby be warned to reflect upon the foulenes of another doctrine, which
wittingly and wilfully you mantayne, though being no less exorbitant then
this. The doctrine is, that your Protestant Militant Church is a multitude, who
John White in his Defense page 309.
by divine illumination see manifestly the truth of things believed of the
Blessed Trinity, and other mysteryes; and that, you are like not unto men
Francis White Orthodoxe page 108.
which see a far off a certain obscure glimmering of the light, but unto men
that coming to the place where the light is, behold the said light in it self.
Verily to term the Church militant, a multitude of BEHOLDERS resolved of
truth, by manifest light and evidence, is as Exoticall, and as idle Gibberish
in Christian Theology, as to call the Church triu^phant a multitude of
BELIEVERS, that war and walk by Faith. As for your Protestant triu^phant
Church, if they did not formerly believe in this life the word of God, without
seeing the light, luster, and resplendant verity of the doctrine thereof (as you
pretend they did not,) I do not doubt but they are belieuers in the next world,
to wit, in the number of them, of whom the Apostle writes, Joan. 2.9.
credunt and contremiscunt.

Ignorance in Scripture. SECT. IV.
CONCERNING Holy Scripture you brag intollerably in every page of your Reply,
how the same stands clearly on your side, and that the Jesuit has not been
able to prove any of the Nine Points by Scripture. How vain this your vant is,
does appear by the Reioynder wherein you are proved almost in every controversy
to forsake the litterall and plain sense of Scripture, and to devise now
figurative, typical, and mystical interpretations. How idly also you
dispute out of Scriptures for matters of greatest moment, which you most
confidently maintain in your Religion, is made evident by what has been
showed, concerning your arguing for the pretended Divine Ordinance, binding
ignorant Laymen to read the Scripture. Notwithstanding that your ignorance
herin may more indeniably appear, I will add here some other arguments and
tokens of the same, to wit, unto what shameful shifts you are forced to
answer Scriptu^es brought by your Adversary in the behalf of Ca^holicke
doctrine.

You deny the Text, and Context of Scripture.. 1.
FIRST, many times you are enforced by your adversary, when you cannot answer,
to deny the ^ext and context of Scripture, whereof I allege two ^xamples. The
Jesuit page 480. to prove, that Christ ^romised eternal life unto the worthy
participant ^f the sacrament, under the form of bread, brings ^he words of
our Savior, John. 6. Qui manducat hunc ^anem, viuet in aeternum: he that
eats this bread shall ^ue for ever. You in the place quoted, answer, The
^cripture John. 6.51. says not, whosoever eats sacra^entall bread without
wine, shall live for ever; but if any ^^te this bread which came down from
heaven, to wit, Christ ^^sus incarnate, shall live for ever. And then it
follows, ^nlesse you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink (...)
blood you shall not have life in you, John. 5.53. Thus (...). Now mark unto
what straytes, maugre your ^^agging, you are brought by the Jesuit. First you
are not acknowledge these words cited by the Ie^^ite, he that eats this
bread, lives for ever, to be our ^^uiours, but only those, If any shall eat
etc. Wher^^ they be our Saviors, and the express text of Scrip^^re in so many
words and syllables, John. 6.59. which ^^yth, He that eats this bread, lives
for ever. Se^^ndly, you are compelled to answer, that Christ ^^ter he had
said, he that eats this bread lives for ^^er, said, Unless you eat the
flesh and drink the ^^oud of the son of man, you shall not have life in ^ou.
By which ensuing sentence he did, as you think, ^eclare the former, If any
eat this bread etc. that it must not be understood of Sacramental bread,
without wine. This is against the context and order of the sentences of Gods
word; this sentence, He that eats this bread shall live for ever, being five
sentences or verses after this other, Unless you eat the flesh and drink the
blood. Yea these words, he that eats this bread lives for ever, are
absolutely the very last, wherewith Christ shuts up his discourse about
Sacramental taking his flesh and blood. Wherefore not to be forced to grant,
that Christ promised as much to the eating of Sacramental bread only, as to
eating and drinking both, you are forced to deny the text, and context of Gods
word. If you say, our Savior indeed spoke the words, He that eats this
bread, shall live for ever, but that he spoke not of Sacramental bread, nor of
Sacramental eating; I reply: First, why then did you not acknowledge this text
as well as this other; If any eat this bread, he shall live for ever? Secondly
you contradict your self, for that the seaue^th Chap. of S. John speaks of
Sacramental eating and drinking, your self affirm many times in this Reply,
as page 395. lin. 8. page 406. lin. 13. and page 466. lin. 20.

A second example of your being forced to deny, or not to acknowledge the text
of Gods word, is found page 75. There the Jesuit says, that even in the days
of Antichrist, the Church shall be visibly universal, referring himself for
proof to the Apocalips 20. v. 8. You in lieu of the eight verse, cite the
seventh, Then shall Satan be let loose, and shall go forth, and seduce
nations which are upon the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, and shall
gather them into a battle, the number of who^ shall be as the sands of the
sea. Which text is impertinent. For it proves that the army of Antichrist,
shall be for multitude of men innumerable; Not the universal diffusion of the
Christian Church in his reign. Why stopped you at the sea^enth verse? Why
would you not proceed to set ^owne the words of the eight, that were under your
^yes, unto which the Jesuits marginall quotation re^erred you? Verily you saw
that they proved the Ie^uits intent so clearly, as you knew not what to re^ly.
For the text says Apoc. 8.20.
of Antichrists Purseuants, ^hey went over the breadth of the earth, and
compassed a^out the camp of Saints, and thc beloved City. By which ^lace it
is evident that the camp of Saints and the belo^ed City, to wit, the Church
persecuted by Anti^hrist in his reign, shall be spread over the face of ^he
earth.

^ou are forced to go against Christ's express word.. 2.
THE Jesuit page 409. argues in this sort: If God can put a whole Camel in
the eye of a needle, is he not ^ble to put the whole body of Christ in a
consecrated Host? ^ut, God can put a Camel in a needles eye, witness our
Sa^iour Matthew. 19. v. 24.25.26. where having said, It is ^ore easy for a Camel
to pass through a needles eye, then ^or a rich man to enter into the Kingdom
of heaven: when ^is disciples did much wonder thereat, demanding who then can be
saved? He answered, With men this (...) impossible, but all things are
possible unto God.

Our Answer (say you, page 412.) is, that these words ^ll things are possible
to God, are referred to the latter ^art of Christ's speech, touching the rich
man's entering into ^eauen, and not to the Camells passing through the needles
(...). All things agreeable to truth, and which God will have done, are
possible: but that it is agreeable to truth for a Camel, retayning his
quantity, with the whole body to pass through a needles eye, or that God will
have this to be done, deserves to be credited, when the Adversaries prove it
by divine Revelation, or by other demonstration. Thus you forced by your
adversary to deny the express word of God, as I demonstrate by three arguments.

First, if our Savior having named many things as difficile, hard, and
impossible with men, conclude that not one of these things only, but al are
possible with God; then to say, that one of the things only, and not all are
possible to God, is directly to contradict our Savior, and to give him the
lie. Our Savior having named many things as hard, difficile, and impossible
unto men, to wit, that Camells pass through a needles eye, and that rich men
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, concludes, that not one of these things
only, but all are possible unto God, apud Deu^ omnia possibilia sunt, Matthew.
19.16. Mar. 10.27.
all these hard, and difficile things are possible with God. Ergo, you in
saying that one sort of these things by him named as hard and difficile, are
impossible unto God, to wit, that Camells pass through a needles eye, do
directly contradict the words of our Savior, and give him the lie.

Secondly, to affirm that a Camells passage through the eye of a needle is
impossible unto God, is more directly against this speech of our Savior, then
to say, that a rich man's entrance into heaven is impossible. This I prove. If
our Savior say, that of the two, the Camells passing through a needles eye is
more easy, that is less difficile, then to deny the Camells passing through a
needles eye to be possible unto God, is more directly against our Saviors
lord, then so to affirm of a rich man's entering into (...) Kingdom of heaven.
For if things more easy and ^^sse difficile be impossible, how much more things
^^sse easy and more difficile? If we may with truth ^ffirme, that God cannot do
what by the truth of his word we know to be more easy, much rather may we
affirm, God cannot do what by the truth of his word we believe to be more
difficile. This is clear. ^ut our Savior says most expressly, that it is more
ea^y, that is less difficile for a Camel to pass through ^ needles eye, then
for a richman to enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Ergo, Your saying the
pas^ing of a Camel through a needles eye to be impos^ible unto God, is more
against this place of his word, ^hen had you so affirmed of a rich man's entering
in^o heaven.

Thirdly, if this word of our Lord, All is possible unto God, be referred
directly, properly, and special^y unto a Camells passing through a needles eye,
and not unto a rich man's entering into heaven, then you do directly oppose the
truth of Gods word: But that ^his speech, All is possible unto God, is in this
manner ^eferred unto the Camels passing through a needles eye, and not unto the
rich man's entering into heaven, ^s evident by the drift of this place: For our
Lord by this discourse, does directly intend to show not a rich man's salvation
to be possible, but the Apostles argument which moved them to despair of the
salvation of richmen, not to be good. They hearing our Savior say, it is more
easy for a Camel to pass through a needles eye, then that a rich man enter in
the Kingdom of heaven, supposing in their thought as most certain, that a
Camells passing through a needles eye, was altogether impossible, concluding,
What richman then can be saved? Our Savior answering unto the argument that so
perplexed them says, though these things be impossible with men, yet all is
possible unto God. As if he had said: What you suppose in your thoughts as
certain, that a Camel cannot pass through a needles eye, is false; because
God is omnipotent, and so though such things be impossible with men, yet all is
possible unto him. Now your supposition being false, your argument that richmen
cannot be saved, is not solid. For from my words, it is more easy for a Camel
etc. you can only enforce, that as the Camel cannot pass through a needles
eye, but by the ompote^cy of the divine hand; so the richman cannot be saved,
but by the omnipotency of divine grace. Hence it is evident that our Savior
did directly inte^d to teach the possibility of a Camells passing through a
needles eye; so destroying the ground on which the Apostles did build their
false persuasion, that rich men could not be saved. But this you avouch not to
be possible unto God. Therefore you are forced by the Jesuit to deny Gods
express word, howsoever you brag, that the Jesuits arguing from Scripture,
is wondrous weak.

You are forced to deny the Creed.. 3.
THE Jesuit page 409. thus argues: If the body of Christ being mortal and
passible, could penetrate with the body of his blessed Mother, and come out of
her womb, the same still remaining entyre, as we confess in the Creed, Natum
de MARIA Virgin; why then may not the same body being now glorious, and
immortal, and (as the Apostle speaks) spiritual, penetrate the quantity of
(...) bread, and enclose it self wholly and entierly within the (...) compass
thereof?

You answer page 411. The blessed Virgin in her ^RAVELL in puerperio, bore not
Christ in a different ^anner from other women. Luc. 2.23. And what a
Sophi^^icall inference is this, the Creed has, Borne of the Virgin MARY,
meaning according to conception, and genera^^ons, and cleernesse from the
company of man. Ergo, the ^ody of the blessed Virgin was not opened at the time
of his ^yrth. Thus you: whose assertion that the Creed on^y says, that
according to co^ception, the blessed Vir^in was clear from the company of man,
is open de^yall of a principal part thereof. For the Creed does ^ot only say,
our Lord was conceived by the Holy Ghost, which does import his Mothers purity
and cleernes from the company of man in his generation; but the ^urity of his
conception being declared, the Creed ^ddeth, as a new point of faith, borne of
the Virgin Mary, requiring that we believe she was a Virgin, that ^s, incorrupt
and entyre in her childbirth. So that ^our interpretation whereby you confound
her virginity in generation, with her virginity in childbirth, which the Creed
does so exactly distinguish, is ^laine denial of the text of the creed. And
your tear^ing this our simple sincere belief of the words of ^he creed, a
sophistical inferrence, is first ridiculous. ^or the believing of the text of
Gods word, as it ^^ands, cannot be termed an inference, much less a
^ophisticall inference.

Secondly, it is not only foolish, but also impious, being a reproach to the
perpetual Faith of the whole Christian Church, as Augustine. Enchyrid. cap. 34.
De Virginenasci oportebat quem Matris fides non libido conceperat. Quod si vel
per nascente^ corrumperetur eius integritas, non iam ille de virgin
nasceretur, eumque falso (quod absit) de Virgin Maria nat^^ tota confitaretur
Ecclesia.
S. Aug. does testify. It was says he) necessary, that he whom the faith, not
the lust of his mother had conceived, should also be borne of a Virgin. For if
the integrity of his mother had been broken in this being borne of her, then
had he not been borne of a Virgin, and then (which God forbid) false were the
belief of the whole Church professing in the Creed, Natum de Maria Virgin,
borne of the Virgin Mary. The same is taught by the rest of the Fathers, namely
by S. Ambros. Epist. 81. De via iniquitatis poduntur dicere, Virgo co^cepit,
sed non Virgo generauit.
Ambrose, who terms it wicked and perverse to say, as you do, that in her
generation, the blessed Mother was incorrupt and entyre, not in her childbirth.
She (says S. Ambrose) that could conceive him being a Virgin incorrupt, could
she not bring him forth remaining a Virgin incorrupt? If they will not believe
the tradition of Priests, let them believe the oracles of the Prophets: Non
concepturam tantummodo Virginem, sed and parituram Virginem Propheta dixit.
A Virgin shall bring forth a Son: Let the^ believe the creed of the Apostles,
which the Roman Church does purely and inuiolatly keep, to wit, which says,
not only conceived by the holy Ghost, but also borne of the virgin Mary,

What you object out of S. Luke, verse. 23. Every Male-child that opens the
womb shall be holy unto our Lord, has been answered long ago, and declared
by the ancient Fathers. For the Scripture by the child opening the womb,
understands the Child that comes first out of the womb, because that Child
commonly does, and by course of nature must, needs open the womb. Hence he is
termed, the Child opening the womb, though it happen that he do not open the
womb. As the fire of the Babilonian furnace may be termed a thing which
co^sumeth what is cast into it, because commonly it does so, and by course of
nature it must needs do so, though there by divine Miracle the contrary did
happen; which manner of speech is so vulgar, as it is by you used even in this
place percha^ce without reflection. For you tearming ^he Blessed Virgins
bringing forth of our Lord, TRAVEL, I think you are not impiously persua^ed
with the Jew, that she brought him forth with ^abour and pain as other women
do; but you ^all her Childbyrth TRAVEL, because common^y and naturally the
same is still joined with labor and travel. In this sort (say the Quod ait ad
aperiens vuluam, co^sueto natiuitatis more loquitur, non quod Dominus noster
sacri ventris hospitium, quod ingressus sanctificarat, egressus deuirginasse
credendus sit iuxta HAERETICOS qui dicunt Beatam Mariam Virginem fuisse vsque
ad paritum; sed iuxta FIDEM Catholicam, clauso Virginis vtero, quasi sponsus
suo pocessit ex Thalamo. Ven. Beda in cap. 2. Luc.
Fathers) the Scripture saying of our Savior, the male-child opening the
womb, consueto natiuitatis more loquitur, speaks according to that which
commonly does happen in the birth ^f such children, not that we should think
that our Lord in ^is going forth, did break the integrity of the Virgins
Clo^et, which by his entrance he had sanctified, as HERETICS ^each, that
Blessed Mary was an entyre Virgin only until ^er Childbirth; But according to
the CATHOLIC FAITH he came forth of the Virgins womb, the same still resting
entyre, and as a Bride-grome out of his Bride-chamber. Now you may crow, and
crake, and crown your Book, as you do in your Picture, when you are so
pressed by your Adversary, that you are forced to defend your Error by holding
ancient Heresies, and by laying the term of Sophistical Inference upon the
Catholic Faith of the Creed, and of the whole Christian Church.

In answering Scriptures, you contradict your self, and grant the Jesuit the
Question.. 4.
THE vanity of your former brag, that the Jesuit has proved nothing by
Scripture, is further made apparent in that he does so urge you with Scripture,
as you are sometimes forced to contradict your self, sometimes to grant as
much as he does require against your self. The Jesuit page 98. proves that
the Church of Christian pastors succeeding the Apostles, is infallible in her
Tradition, because our Savior says, Matthew. 28. Behold I am with you all days
until the consummation of the world. You answer page 100. That which is
promised upon condition is not absolute until the condition be fulfilled. The
presence of Christ is promised to the Apostles successors conditionally, and
as they were one with the Apostles by imitation and subordinatio^: that is, so
far as they walked in their stepps, and conformed their doctrine and
ministry to the pattern received from them. Thus you in this place. But page
174. lin. 21. speaking of the absolute perpetuity and duration of the Church
you say, that the place Matthew. 28.20. Behold I am with you all days until the
end of the world, proves, that the Church is universal in respect of time,
and that it continues successively in all ages.

This your saying overthrows what you said, that the presence of Christ is
promised upon condition, wherein the successors of the Apostles might fail For
this place, Behold I am with you all days until the worlds end, does show the
Church to be always in the world; no other ways, then because Christ
according to his promise, is always, and all days to the worlds end with his
Church, and he ca^ not be still in the world with his Church, except his Church
have still a being in the world. So that according to the truth of this place,
we may as well, or better say, the Church shall not be always in the world,
then that it shall be in the world without Christ, or his Divine assistance to
teach men infallibly the truth. Wherefore if by this place we cannot, as you say
we cannot, prove, that the Church shall be ever absolutely assisted of Christ,
much less does this place convince that the Church shall be always in the
world, or further then conditionally if it walk in ^he Apostles doctrine.
Contrariwise, if this place ^roue, that the Church is absolutely always in the
world until the consummation thereof, then a for^iori more strongely and more
directly does it prove that Christ is absolutely, and not only conditionally
^rese^t with his Church all days to the worlds end: ^o that to answer the
Jesuits proofs of his Religion ^y Scripture, you co^tradict your self, yea
sometimes ^rant against your self as much as he would prove.

For to prove the same infallibility of the Church ^e brings page 3. the
place of S. Paul, 1. Tim. 3.15.
that the church is the ground and pillar of truth, but the ground of ^ertaine
and infallible Truth, such as the Christian is, ^ust be certain and
infallible. You answer page 4. lin. ^. If by the Church we understand the
Church of Christ ^^uing after the Apostles, the same is by office and calling
^he pillar and ground of truth in all ages. This your an^were allows unto the
Jesuit as much as he desires, (...) can desire to show the Church to be always
infal^^ble. For that which is by office and divine vocation the ^^llar, and
ground of infallible truth, has by divine ^rdination and assistance
sufficiency for the perfor^ance of that office, as is most evident. The Church
which is fallible and may err is not a sufficient pillar (...) ground, that
is, has not sufficie^cy to be the ground (...) Christian truth which is
infallible. For how can (...) building sure and immovable stand, founded upon
(...) uncertain, ruinous, and tottering foundation? ^herfore seeing you grant
the church succeeding the ^postles to be in all ages the ground of truth by
divine vocation unto that office, you do consequently allow unto the Jesuit as
much as he would prove, to wit, that the Church succeeding the Apostles, is i^
all ages until the worlds end certain, and infallible in her teaching.

In lieu of answering, you confirm the Jesuits Arguments.. 5.
THE Jesuit page 38. accuses Ministers of abusing the word of God, who to
prove the sole sufficiency of Scripture in respect of all men, cite the text of
S. Paul 2. Tim. 3.15. The Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation.
For the words of the Apostle are directed particulerly to Timothy, saying, they
are able to make THEE wise unto salvation: whence it is consequent, that the
Scriptures were sufficient for Timothy, and are sufficient for such men as
Tymothy was, to wit, for men learned and aforehand instructed by word of mouth,
and thereupon firmly believing all the most maine and necessary points of
Christian doctrine and discipline. That the Scriptures for men in this manner
taught and grounded in faith, are abundantly sufficient, who will deny? Thus
the Jesuit. Unto whom you shape this answer page 39. Although sentences of
holy Scripture are sometimes restrained to the personal and particular subject
of which they are first spoken; yet this is not general, and when the same
happens it must be proved by better arguments then by the bare Emphasis of a
word. For God said (...) Iosuah (a man qualifyed above the ordinary rank) I
will not leave, nor forsake thee, Iosuah 1.5. Yet the promise employed in this
text is general, and common to all (...) persons, Hebr. 13.5. Thus you,
confirming the Iesuit^ ^olution in lieu of confuting thereof. For as the
pro^ise, I will not leave thee, made particularly unto Io^ue in regard he was a
just man, does not agree unto ^ll men, but only unto such as Iosue was, to
wit, unto just men, and such as seek God as he did. So the ^ext of S. Paul,
they are able to make THEE wise unto ^aluation, spoken particulerly unto
Timothy, in re^ard he was learned, judicious, aforehand instru^ted and grounded
in Christian tradition, does agree ^nely to Timothy, and such men as Timothy
was, to wit, men aforehand taught, and grounded in the ^ayth of tradition. On
the other side, as the promise ^ade to Iosue in regard he was a Just man,
cannot ^e challenged of other men, that be not just as he was, and if they rely
thereon they deceive themselves; ^o the promise, the Scriptures are able to make
THEE ^ise unto salvation, made unto Timothy in regard he was aforehand taught
and grounded in the faith of Tradition, cannot be challenged of them that are
^f a differrent stamp from Timothy, to wit, men that were never taught the
faith of Tradition, or ^lse so ungrounded therein, as upon a seeming eui^ence
of Scripture they be ready to change their f^rst ^eceiued faith. Hence it is
manifest, that the Jesuit ^ad reason to say, Ministers abuse Gods word when
^hey cite it, the Scriptures are able to make us wise unto ^aluation, making
that common to all men, which was spoken only to Timothy, and unto such as he
was.

Will you have another example of the same kind? The Jesuit says, the words of
Christ, Do this in remembrance of me, was spoken of the Sacrament, in the
form of bread, not under the form of wine. For our Savior speaking of the
Sacrament under the form of (...) says 1. Cor. 11.
not absolutely, do this, as he did of bread, (...) conditionally, do this as
often as you drink in memor^^ of me, that the Adversary of the Church might
not have (...) much as a plausible show to condemn co^mun^o in one kind (...)
against Gods word. You after much bitter railing, calling the Jesuit infatuated
Romanist, and vermin, for (...) urging you beyond your learning, answer thus
(...) the end. Touching the fancy of this objection, I furthe^ say, that even
as when S. Paul said 1. Cor. 10.31. whethe^ ye eat or drink, or whatsoever
else you do, do all to the glory of God; If these word^ should be resolved
(...) this manner: As often as ye eat or drink, or do any thing else, do all
to the glory of God, the placing (...) this word, as often, restrayneth not the
speech from being a precept: so likewise when S. Paul says: As often as ye^
drink, do this in remembrance of me, this manne^ alters not his words from
being a commandment. Thus you, confirming the Jesuits answer. For no example
could have been devised, or imagined more fit to show, that Christ's words, as
often as you drink import not an absolute, but only a conditional precept*
Which thus I demo^strate. You grant that the words of Christ, Do this as often
as you drink in remembrance of me, be preceptiue in the same manner, as, and
no more then these of S. Paul, as often as ye eat or drink, or walk abroad,
or do any thing else, do all to the glory of God. But no man that has his
right senses will say, that this speech does absolutely command Christians to
eat, or drink, or sleep, or ride, or walk, or to do any of the like actions
of human life, but only does conditionally command, or direct men, that when
they will eat or drink, or sleep, or ^^de, or walk, that they do all to
Gods glory. Ergo, (...) words of Christ, saying, do this as often as ye drink
(...) ^emembrance of me, do not imply an absolute precept of ^^^nking of the
cup, but only a conditional direction, that ^^en men drink, they do that
Sacramental action in ^emory of his Passion. So that in lieu of soluing the
(...) of the Jesuits argument, you entangle your self, (...) tie the same more
fast.

You send the Jesuit to God for an Answer.. 6.
THE Jesuit See the Reply page 256.
charge the Protestant doctrine, that holy Images may be lawfully made, and
not ^^wfully honored, to be destitute of all show of Scrip^^re. For the Exodus
20.4.5.6. Deuter. 5.6.7.
text of the Law is no less clear a^^inst the making of such Images, then
against their ^eing adored, Thou shall not make to thy self any image, ^^ou
shall not worship nor adore them. Hence he argues, ^he images which by this
precept we are forbidden (...) adore, be such as by the same we are forbidden
to ^ake: But the Images of Christ be not such Images (...) we are forbidden by
this precept to make: Ergo, ^^ey are not the Images we are forbidden by this
^^ecept to adore. And whereas Protestants expound (...) first part of the
precept, Thou shall not make ^^em, to wit, with purpose and intention to adore*
^his exposition (says the Jesuit) is not only violent ^^ainst the text, but
also incongruous against sense. For (...) Some may object that God does forbid
Adultery in the 6. Commandment Non ^oechaberis, and yet in the ninth he forbids
by special commandment, the purpose and intention of adultry, Non concupis^es
vxorem proximi tui. I Answer, that the ninth Precept does not forbid the doing
of ^^^nges with purpose and intention of Adultery (for this was sufficiently
for^^^den in the six^ precept,) but this supposed, forbids inward desires
and lusts (...) Adultery, though without doing any thing with purpose and
intention there^^^ And so our Saviors Praecept Matthew. 5.28. Not to look upon
a woman to lust (...) her, supposes the doing of things with intention of
Adultery to be vnlaw^^^, and forbids the looking upon a woman with lustful
delight, and desire, (...) without intention of doing the act of Adultery.
prohibition of things, does likewise forbid the doing things with intention
to do against the Prece^^ Hence I argue. The Precept, thou shall not adore
Images, does forbid the making of them with intention to adore, as much as the
precept, Thou shall not kill* does forbid the making of weapons with intention
to kill. But the precept, thou shall not kill, does so fully and sufficiently
forbid the doing of any thing with intention of murder, that it had been
superfluo^^ to have set down that precept in this form, Thou shall not make,
or wear weapons with intention to kill, thou shall not kill. Therefore without
sense we^^ the precept, Thou shall not make any Images, Tho^ shall not adore
them, had the first part no more sens^ then you give it, to wit, Thou shall not
make Ima^ges with intention to adore.

Besides, as to make an image to adore, is Idolatry, (...) to take it in hand,
to look on it to that purpose; wh^^ the^ was not such looking on, or taking in
hand wit^ purpose of adoration forbidden as well as making? (...) if looking on
the^ with intention to adore them is (...) clearly forbidden in the precept,
Thou shall not ado^re the^, as there needed not further expression; wh^^ need
was there, or reason that making of images with intention to adore, should be
more largly or fully expressed? You answer: As for the Jesuits
interrog^^tions, Why then? What need was there? we refe^^ him to the Lawgiuer
to challe^ge or demand reasons of him* And as for our selves we rest upon the
revealed will of God not daring to question, or demand reason of his action^*
Thus you. Whereby it is manifest that you grant the Jesuits arguments against
your exposition of Scripture to be so clear, as you cannot answer them, (...)
must send him to God to ask an answer of hi^ ^ndeed if, Thou shall not make
to thy self any images with ^^tention to adore them, thou shall not adore
them, were ^he text, and very letter of Gods word, you might ^ith less shame
have confessed your ignorance, that ^ou can say nothing in defense of the text.
In which ^ase, the Jesuit (I presume) would willingly have ^ad recourse unto
God by prayer, entreating him ^o enlighten his understanding with some
sufficient ^eason, and would have hoped to have obtained his ^uite. If not, yet
would he have believed Gods word ^o have had some congruous sense, though he
saw ^ot the same, this being reverence due to the word ^f Supreme Verity.

But now this saying, Thou shall not make any Ima^es, with purpose to adore
them, is not the text of Gods word, but a Ministers addition unto his word,
pre^ended by way of exposition. Hence the Jesuits ar^uments, for which you send
him unto God to have them answered, tend not against the text of Gods word, but
against a Ministers explication thereof. This being so, why should the Jesuit
finding your in^erpretation to be sottish, and senseless to his see^ing, go
unto God, and not unto you for a soluti^n of his questions against it? What Law
binds ^im to adore your additions to Gods word, as divine Oracles, such as he
must believe, though he cannot ^omprehend? Why should he go unto God, and pray
^im to unfold the high misteryes of your Ministeri^ll wisdom, which you
confess you do not vnder^tand your self? Why may he not without more a^oe,
think your doctrine to be incomprehensible through want of reason, as are the
fooleryes of fan^y, not through height of wisdom, as the misteryes of faith?
Show (I say) some reason that obliges Jesuits to accept of your
interpretations of Scripture, which they can prove to be sottish and
senseless, so clearly, as you cannot answer* or else confess that the Jesuit
by conference of texts, by consideration of Antecedents and Consequents, by the
drift of the place* has so convinced your exposition of falsehood, as you have
not a word to reply in good sense, but to be rid of his urging, you send him
unto God for an Answer.

Your innumerable gross Impertinencyes in cyphering, and scoring of
Scriptures.. 7.
YOU have a manner of arguing proper to your self, at least which I find by
none of your rank more frequently used, then by your self. This is to set
down a conceit of your own words, suting with your own humor, and then to
score Books, chapters, and verses of Scripture on heaps, without relating the
words, as if your conceit were in those places recorded in so many syllables.
And because in this kind of cyphering, consists the strength of your whole
book, I will by some store of examples decypher the gross vanity thereof, and
consequently of your whole Book.

First, you often cite texts and chapters of Scripture that are not, so making
your self like unto God qui vocat ea, quae non sunt. Page 10. lin. 24. to
prove that Protestants acknowledge the lawful authority of the Church, you
cite 2. Thessal. cap. 5. Whereas the second to the Thessalonians, has only
three chapters. Page 106. lin. 17. to prove that Christians may depart from
the Christian Church, whereof they are ^embers, without joining unto any other
Christi^n Church, you cite Hos. 10.17. whereas that chapter ^^th only 15.
verses, and not one to the purpose you ^^eage it. Page 45. lin. 17. for this
your saying, the Scrip^^re is the seed of faith you cite John. 20.41. whereas
that ^wentith chapter has verses only thirty one, and not ^ne of them has
this sentence, The Scripture is the ^sed of Faith. Had you cited the words,
though you ^ad erred in the book, chapter, or verse, we might ^aue helped your
mistaking, now God only know^th the texts you intended.

Secondly, the places you cipher, not only do ^ot contain the sayings, for
which you cipher them expressly, and in so many words; but also ^hey are
commonly so infinitely impertinent, and so ^arre from the matter you intend to
prove, as being ^ited and applied to your purpose, they are most ri^iculous.
Page 224. lin. 26. to prove that you Ministers ^aue such Union with God, as
Religious Adoration ^s due unto you, you cipher Act. 10.34. which ^ayth, Then
Peter opened his mouth, and said of a truth, I perceive that God has no
respect of persons. Page 30. lin. ^5. to prove Scripture is the voice of God,
you cipher Luc. 1.7. which says, Salvation from our enemies, and from the
hands of all them that hate us. Page 105. lin. 13. to prove that right Faith
may be preserved in persons living in a corrupt visible Church, as Wheat among
Tares, you cipher 1. King. 19.11. And he said, go forth and stand upon the
mountain before the Lord, and behold the Lord passed by. Page 106. lin. 16. to
prove that Christians may separate from all Christian Churches, and begin a
new Christian Church of themselves, you cipher 2. Cor. 6.14. which says, Be
not yoked together in marriage with Infidells. Page 223. lin. 4. to prove that
in adoration, Christ and his Image have no agreement, you cipher 2. Cor. 6.16.
which says, What agreement between the Temple of God and Idols? Page 30.
lin. 23. to prove that the Scripture is a divine light showing it self to be
heavenly, you cipher 2. Cor 4.6. God has shined in our hearts, to give the
light of knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus.

Page 558. lin. 3. to prove that living Saints have not Communion with the
Saints defunct, by partaking their superabundant satisfactions, you cipher
Ephesians. 4.15. But speaking the truth in love, you may grow up to him in all
things, who is the head, even Christ. To the same intent in the same place you
cipher 1. John. 1.3. That which we have seen and heard, we declare unto you,
that you may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Christ Jesus. Page 546. lin. 1. to prove that the
reward of works may be given of free bounty, and not of debt, you cite Psalm.
127. v. 2. It is vain for you to rise up early, or to sit up late, to eat the
bread of sorrow, for so he gives his beloved sleep. Also to the same purpose,
you cipher Ezech. 29. v. 18. Every head was bald, and every shoulder was
pealed, yet had he no wages, nor his army, for Tyrus. Page 551. lin. vlt. to
prove that the B. Virgin said the Lords Prayer, or Pater Noster, whereof one
petition is, Forgive us our trespasses, you cite Act. 1.14. They continued in
prayer and supplication together with the women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus.
Which text proves the Virgin prayed; but that her prayer was vocal, and not
pure mental, and if vocal, that she said Pater Noster, rather then
Magnificat, or Benedictus, or some of the psalms of David, who that is sober,
would undertake by this text to conclude?

Page 43. lin. 2. to prove that the Scripture is sufficient in genere regulae
for Ministers, you cipher 1. Tim. 6.12. Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold
on eter^all life, whereunto thou art called. Ibid. lin. 3. to prove ^he
Scripture to be sufficient for spiritual men, you ^ypher 1. Cor. 2.15. But he
that is spiritual, judges all ^hinges, and is judged of none, which proves
the contrary (if it prove any thing) to wit, that the spiritu^ll Man is not
judged and ruled by Scripture, but rather the Scripture is judged and ruled by
him. Page ^0. lin. 21. to prove that we wrong you, in saying ^ou derogate from
the Church, you cite Matthew. 18.^7. He that hears not the Church, let him be
as a Heathen and publican. Ibid. to the same purpose you cipher Heb. ^^.17.
Obey your Prelates, and submit your self unto them. ^ag. 169. lin. 22. to
prove that no Church ever pri^^d the oblation and meritts of Christ's passion
more ^^ghly and religiously then you do, you cipher Heb. ^.14. With one
oblation he did consummate for ever the ^^nctifyed: and Ephesians. 5.2. He gave
himself a sacrifice (...) us, to a sweet smelling savor: and John. 1.29.
Behold the ^ambe of God that takes away the sins of the world: and ^ct.
4.12. There is not Salvation in any other Name. Page ^1. lin. 1. to prove we
wrong you by saying, you a^^int that The words of John White way page 126.
EVERY particular MAN examine and ^^dge of the Church and her teaching, you
cite 1. Cor. ^.19. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all teachers? ^re
all workers of miracles? If one would study to ap^^y Scriptures impertine^tly,
I am persuaded he could ^^rdly devise greater impertinencyes then these, which
are so ri^e in every page of your book; so that it was intolerable folly for
your Poet and Paynter, to represent this your Voluminous cyphering of
Scripture, with a crown upon it, bidding men to Beh^^^ grace and wisdom in
your look, and Truths Triumph^^^ your book. For if this kind of cyphering of
Scripture be Wisdom, what I pray you, is the last Extreme an^ Nonplus of I
wonder you would not be warned to be more wise, by the Book of Quaeres, or
Prurit-anus. For you cite the Scripturs as impertinently in good earnest, as he
did in jest to show your Ministerial Folly.
Folly?

You cite and cipher Scriptures that make against you.. 8.
HEREUNTO I add, that the texts you cyphe^ many times make against you. Page
548. lin. 19. to prove that reward is given unto works of Gra^^ and bounty,
as well as of Desert, you cipher Romans 4*4. which says, to him that works, the
reward is not reckoned of grace, but of debt. Could any text be devise more
directly against the purpose you cite it? For by this place, joined with a
sentence of yours, I conclude unanswerably our Catholic doctrine of Merit. The
reward which is given to him that works in regard of the Goodness and
Righteousness of his work, is given not of grace, but of debt. But Etern^^ life
is termed a Crown of glory, because it is bestowed (...) them which exercise
Righteousness, and in regard of the righteousness, the true inherent dignity,
sanctity, and purity of their works. Ergo, Eternal life is a reward o^ good
works given to Gods children of debt, not (...) mere grace and bounty. The
Mayor is S. Paul's by you cyphered in this place; the Minor your own^ in so
many words page 174. in fine. and 1^9. so th^^ the text of Scripture by you
cited, proves inuinci^bly the doctrine of Merit, against which you cite i^
Page 558. lin. 4. to prove that living Saints have no communion with Saints
defunct, by partaking the ^^perabundant satisfaction, you cite Romans 12. v. 4.
We have many members in one body, and every member has ^ot the same office.
This text proves the contrary to that you intend, to wit, that Satisfactions
are communicable betwixt Saints: for from this text I ar^ue thus. If Saints
living and Saints deceased be mem^ers of the same body, having different
offices, then ^here must be betwixt them communion in all things which
superabound in some members, and are nee^ed of other; for this we see to be
that fellowship which by the institution of nature, the members of ^he same
body ought to enjoy the one with the other. But the Myrrh of mortifications and
satisfactions superabound in many most rare, innocent and penitent Saints in
heaven, and is no less needed of diverse other Saints upon the earth, that have
done many sins, and cannot do such great penance. Therefore, the Myrrh of
superabounding Penance and Satisfaction, ought to flow down from deceased
Saints in heaven, unto their fellow members the needy Saints that live on earth.

The Jesuit See the Reply page 523.
says, that the first Precept Thou shall love thy Lord God with all thy heart
etc. binds not man to love God in this life with Beatificall love, nor to be
always in actual employment of his love on him; but only to love sincerely
and inwardly, to the keeping of all commandments, without any mortal offense,
which breaks friendship with God, desiring, though not inioying, the happynes
of beatificall love. This, he says, is the meaning of S. Bernard, and S.
Augustine, when they say the perfection of the next life is contained in this
precept, to wit, in voto, not in re. This doctrine you impugn page 525. lin.
26. saying, That the Saints of God having observed other commandments, brake
the first commandment, and did undergo corporal pain after the breach
thereof. How prove you this? marry you cipher Heb. 11.31. They were stoned,
they were sawen a sunder, they were slain with the sword. Does this text prove
the Saints transgressed the first Commandment? That they were corporally
afflicted for their not loving God with all their heart? Does it not rather show
the contrary, that they loved God perfectly, and were temporally tormented,
because they so loved him with all their heart, that they would rather undergo
most cruel and barbarous deaths, then offend him, or abandon the truth of his
word, which is, as our Savior says, the highest degree of Charity?

Page 10. lin. 20. You deny the Church to be infallible in her Traditions and
Definitions; yet (say you) we acknowledge her lawful authority for expounding
Scripture and maintayning unity in right faith. In proof hereof you cite
Matthew. 18.17. Who so hears not the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen
and Publican. You could not have invented a text that does more inuincibly show
the contrary of what you intend. Let us make this text of Scripture the Mayor,
and your Protestant doctrine the Minor, and put your Argument in form, then
will you see how handsomely you prove, that you acknowledge all the lawful
authority of the Church. The Scripture says, The Church is of so great, and
absolute, and infallible authority, that whosoever does not hear her, is to be
held as an Heathen and a Publican. Protestants say, the Church is so subject to
error, and so fallible that every particular man of the people, for fear of
being deceived, John white way page 116.
must examine her teaching, yea your self affirm, Reply page 136. lin. 20.
etc.
that not whosoever contradicts the whole Church, is to be held as an Heathen
and Publican, but only such as oppose the whole Church rashly, without cause,
or inordinatly. Ergo, Protestants acknowledge the authority given to the Church
by the word of God, and consequently her lawful authority.

Page 169. The Jesuit does charge you to extenuate the value of our Lords
passion, in saying that the same does not purchase, and merit true inward
purity, and sanctity to men's souls and actions. Against this, you say, Reply
page 169. lin. 20.
No Christian Church ever prized the oblation and merits more highly and
religiously then we. Great praise or rather pride; even the Church of the
Apostles were not more religiously devout unto, nor more highly conceyted of
Christ Jesus, and his passion, then you are. Well, how prove you it? Heb.
10.14. it is written with one oblation he did consummate his sanctified for
ever. John. 1.29. Behold the Lamb that takes away the sins of the world.
This is even just, as if an Arian should argue in this sort: It is written
John. 10.30. I, and and my Father are one. Ergo, Never Christian Church prized
the divinity of Christ, nor thought more highly, or religiously of his Equality
with his Father, then we. Would not this argument (should an Arian use it)
prove him to be more ridiculous, then religious? And the same force, has this
your argument, as will appear if we put together into form the propositions
thereof, the one Scriptures, the other your Assertion. It is written, that
Christ is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, who by his
one oblation on the Cross did consummate the sanctified for ever. Protestants
Calvin. Antidot Trident. in sess. 5 Permane^ vere peccatu^ in nobis, neque per
Baptismu^ vno die extinguitur. and lib. 3. Institut. c. 14.. 9. Nullu^ a
sanctis exire potest opus, quod non mereatur iusta^ opprobrij mercedem.
say, that Christ takes not away the sins of the world* but that the same
does truly and properly remain in justified persons, and is only hidden and
not imputed; yea your self affirm page 170. and 171. That sin is still
adjacent unto all the virtuous actions of just men, and that this imperfection
and sinfulnes is only covered by Christ his merits and purity, that it be not
imputed: Ergo, Protestants prize the value of Christ's passion, for the
effectual and perfect sanctification, cleansing and consummation of saints,
and their actions, as highly and religiously, as ever did any Christian Church.

Scriptures abused, and falsified.. 9.
I Will conclude this section with some few Examples of fraud and falsehood in
your citing of Scriptures, where you help the dice by addition or subtraction
of some particle, or word, to make the Scripture found on your side: Although I
do not doubt, but your scoring up in ciphers of so many impertinent Texts,
though being discovered it be ridiculous, was also not without fraud by you
used; that you might make show of Scriptures for such articles of your
doctrine, for which you know in conscience, that no true proof from Scripture
can be produced.

The text, John 5.39. abused, Search the Scriptures.

To begin with the Scriptures themselves, and with a falsehood more then once
repeated in your Book; you would show that the sacred Scripture is so easy, as
Unlearned people may understand the sense thereof, without relying on the
Churches Tradition, and Exposition. To this purpose you say Page 9. lin. 9. Our
Savior commanded even simple people to use the Scripture. Joan. 5.39. One
would according to this your citation think, that the sacred Text did expressly
say, that Search the Scriptures, was spoken unto simple people: And yet this is
a fancy by you cunningly foysted into the text, against the plain evidence
thereof, which shows that, Search the Scriptures, was said not to the simple
people, but to the Church-magistracy of the Jews, as these three arguments
euince.

First the word Jews, in the Ghospel of S. John does signify the Magistracy of
the Jews, excluding the simple people: This might be proved by forty examples,
but this may suffice John. 7.13. Joan. 1.9. and 2.18.20. and 5.15.16.18. and
7.1.11.35. and 8.22.48. and 9.18.22.
There was much muttering about him (our Savior) amongst the common people,
yet none durst speak openly of him, for fear of the Jews. Behold the Jews
opposed and co^distinguished against common people, and feared of them, whereby
it is manifest, that by the Jews, the Gospel of S. John does understand the
Magistracy of the Jews. But certain it is, that our Savior said, search the
Scriptures, to the Jews, according to the signification of that word in the
Gospel of S. John: Dixit Jesus Iudaeis, Scrutamini Scripturas etc. John. 5.32.
Therefore the words were said to the Magistracy of the Jews, the common
people being excluded.

Secondly, our Savior does testify, that he said search the Scriptures unto
them, that sent the Embassage unto John, to know what he was, John. 5.34.
vos misistis ad Ioannem. But clear it is that the authors of this Embassage
were not the simple people, but the Church-magistracy of the Jews. Ergo, Not
unto simple people, but unto Churchmen, and Church-magistrates did our Savior
say, search the Scriptures.

Thirdly, our Savior said search the Scriptures unto men highly persuaded of
the sole-sufficie^cy of the Scripture, thinking in them to have eternal life.
This appears by the text, Ibid. verse. 33. Testimoniu^ per^ibuit veritati*
Ibid. verse. 36. opera quae facio testimonium perhibent. Ibid. verse. 37. Pater
qui misit me testimonium perhibuit mihi.
search the Scriptures, because in them you think to have eternal life. Hence
they would not believe in our Savior, neither upon the testimony of John; nor
upon the testimony of his works and miracles, nor upon the testimony of his
Fathers voice from heaven. Now, that the simple people were thus conceyted of
Scriptures, against the miracles of our Savior, we have no ground to think;
whereas that the Church-magistracy of the Jews, was thus conceyted, the
Gospel does expressly declare. There we read how they appealed from his
miracles to Moses his books, bidding such as were lead away by his works,
Joan. 7.52.5^. Scrutare Scripturas, and vide quia a Galilaea Propheta non
surgit.
to search the Scriptures, and see that our Savior could not be the Prophet.
Therefore to these men, standing upon the testimony of Scripture, and
sole-sufficiency thereof unto eternal life, and not to simple People, did our
Savior say, Search the Scriptures, because in them you think that you have
eternal life, without me, whereas even these give testimony of me.

Hence appears another falsificatio^ of this place, by cogging in your own
conceyt as it were, the very Text, to wit, that our Savior by these words gave
a command to use scriptures. For it is clear he did not by way of command say
to the Jews search the Scripturs, but by way of permission, in respect of
their obstinacy, whereby they would not without Scripture believe in him, upon
other most sufficient divine testimonies. So that search the Scriptures,
because in them you think to have eternal life, has this sense: Seeing you
will not be won to believe upon the testimony of John, nor, of my miracles,
nor, of my Fathers voice from heaven, but appeal from these testimonies unto
Scriptures, thinking that in them you have eternal life, search the Scriptures
in Gods name, I am content; (...), do not superficially look upon the^ but
search deeply into them, for being thus searched into, they yield testimony
unto me.

Certainly, if our Savior had been of the Protestants mind, and would have
given the precept they pretend* he would not have said to the Jews, search the
Scriptures, because in them you think that you have eternal life, but, search
the scriptures, because in them only eternal life is to be had, or, because
nothing necessary unto eternal life is to be believed until it be clearly
proved by them. This he does not say, but rather rebukes the Jews for this
their Ministerial co^ceite, that nothing is to be believed upon any other
testimony without Scripture. He did not therefore command the^ to use the
Scriptures, but seeing them obstinatly addicted unto only Scripture, he
permitted them to proceed in their own way: Even as when Protestants cannot be
won to believe neither the testimony of John, that is, the consent of
Fathers, nor the testimony of Christ's works, that is, of miracles done daily in
his Church, nor the Fathers lively voice from heaven, that is, Gods word
unwritten; we at last say unto them, Search the Scriptures, for even they give
testimony unto the Catholic doctrine.

Hence two things appear. First that your two assertions that Christ saying
search the Scriptures, did command, and command even simple people to use
Scriptures, be two fancyes of your own, foysted into the Scripture not by way
of interpretation, but by way of Historical Relation of the sacred text, which
is gross abuse thereof. Secondly, that if we search deeply into this text,
Search the Scriptures, the same does clearly condemn the Protestant fancy,
that only Scripture is the rule of faith, and shows this to have been the
ground and principle of Jewish Infidelity.

The text Matthew. 24.24 That even the elect be deceived, were it possible,
grossly applied.

THVS you write page 586. Although the Tradition, and teaching of the Church be
fallible, yet unlearned people where they enjoy the free use of Scripture, as
in ancient times all people did; and if they be careful of their salvation,
and desire to know the truth, God blesses his own Ordinance, and ordinarily
assisteth them by grace, in such sort as they shall not be seduced to
damnation. Math. 24.24. Thus you encourage simple people to be proud and
obstinate in their private fancies, against the teaching and tradition of the
Church: For in this speech you assure the^, that reading their vulgar Bible, if
they be careful of their salvation, and desire to know the truth, though they
will not regard the Church, as the pillar, ground, and infallible Mistress of
truth; yet God will so bless and assist them, as they shall not be seduced
into damnable error. Now what is the bane of Christianity, but this false and
proud persuasion inserted into the heads of Sots? Trinitarians, Anabaptists,
Arians, Brownists, Familians, do they not desire to know the truth, who to that
end so studiously peruse their Bible? Be they not careful of their Salvation
that go so readily to the fire, rather then abandon the doctrine which by
their skill in the Vulgar Bible, they judge to be the saving Truth? In these
Wretches you may see, how in men desirous to know the truth God blesses the
ordinance of reading the vulgar Bible, without regard had to the Church, as an
infallible Mistress.

And as your doctrine is the seed and spring of heresy, so is the text of
Scripture Matthew. 24.24. most violently drawn to confirm it. For what says
the text? They (the false Prophets) shall do great signs and wonders, that
even the elect be induced into error, if it be possible. By which text it is
clear that the elect people of God, cannot be finally intrapped in damnable
error. This is understood (as Deuines speak) in sensu composito, that is,
they cannot be deceived, because God ordaynes and foresees that they shall use
the means to know saving Truth; which means is to cleave unto the Tradition
of the Church, not trusting their own skill. Now then with what engines can
you, from this truth, wrest your Paradoxe that men desirous of the truth,
reading the vulgar Bible, cannot be damned? Are all men desirous of the truth
that read the Bible, Gods elect? If Heretics dispute in this manner: The Elect
cannot be seduced unto damnation. Ergo, If they presume on their skill in the
Bible not respecting the Churches doctrine as infallible, they shall not be
seduced unto damnation. Why may not murderers argue in like sort? The elect
cannot be damned, Therefore if they commit murder every day, and so persevere
until the end, they cannot be damned. This argument is as good as yours. For
the contemners of the Church can no more be saved the^ murderers, if our
Savior say true, who so hears not the Church, let him to thee as a Heathen
and Publican.

The text, Act. 17.11. about the Beroeans, abused.

TO the same purpose of encouraging simple People to follow their fancyes,
gotten by reading their vulgar Bible you say page ^87. Vnlearn^d people by
comparing the doctrine of the Church with the Scripture, may certainly know
whether it erreth, or not. Act. 17.11. Thus you. What says the text that
thence you may make such deductio^s? These were more Noble then those of
Thessalonica, who received the word with all readiness of mind, searching daily
whether these things were so. Now behold your manifold abuse of this sacred
Narration.

First, the text does not say, these Beroeans were unlearned; how then can you
hence conclude any thing for the ability of unlearned people to search the
Scriptures? Again, the Text does not say, that by comparing the doctrine of
Paul with Scripture, they came to know certainly, that the doctrine of Paul was
true; but only that believing his doctrine, they searched the Scriptures about
the same, without mention of the success of their search. And if they were
resolved by Scripture, this was only in one point, to wit, whether Jesus were
the Messiah, about which the Scriptures are clear and express. How the^ can
you hence prove that unlearned people may know certainly whether the doctrine
of the Church be true, by comparing the same with Scripture, in so many main
articles of Controversy about Faith, whereof some (as you page 106.
confess) are only implicately contained in the Scripture, and must by the
rules of Logic and Deduction, be thence wrunge out.

Finally, the Beroea^s read the Scriptures, only for their greater cofirmatio^
in Faith, in case they should find by their private reading, the doctrine of S.
Paul to agree with the Scripture. They read not by way of doubtful
examination, that is, with purpose not to believe S. Paul, if so they should
not find the Scriptures to yield plain testimony unto his doctrine. That they
read not in this manner, is clear. For the Scripture says, that before they
searched the Scripture, they received the word with all alacrity, and readiness
of mind: But if they had been doubtful of S. Paul's doctrine and had (to clear
that doubt) gone to search the Scriptures, it could not have been truly said of
them, that they received the word with alacrity, and all readiness of mind, and
afterward searched the Scriptures. Therefore they did not search Scriptures by
way of doubtful examination, but with full resolution, to believe S. Paul's
doctrine, even in case they should not find by their private industry, the same
clearly delivered in the Scripture. How then may you by this example make good
your Protestant doctrine, that Unlearned People may compare the doctrine of the
Church with the Scripture, in doubting manner, that is, with intention not to
believe the Church in case they should not be able to discover her doctrine by
private reading in their vulgar Bible? Or, in case, that in the seeming of
their private judgment, the Scripture should appear as opposite unto the
Church?

The Text, 1. John. 1.8. If we say we have no sin etc. falsified.

WHEREAS the Jesuit (page* 550.) says out of S. Ambrose and S. Augustine, that
the Blessed Virgin never committed actual sin; you (page 551.) reply, It is
a manifest untruth. For S. John speaking in the person of all the Elect, says,
1. John. 1.8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves and there is
no truth in us. And verse. 10. If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar,
and his word is not in us. And page 517. much more bitterly thus you write to
this purpose. If our adversaries will be so graceless, as to make any man in
this life (except the Holiest of the Holyes 1. Petr. 2.22.) free from sin,
the Apostle enrolleth him in the black book of damnable liars 1. John. 1.10.
And they may with Acesius the Nouatian borrow a ladder, and so climb up alone
to heaven, yea rather fall to Hell; for who are more desperately sick quam qui
mentem febribus perdiderunt, then they which by the fever of pride, have lost
the understanding of their sinful condition? Thus you: which you cannot deny
to be bitter in excess. What is the Jesuits fault? No other but this: he
says, that not only Christ Jesus, the holiest of the holyes, was by nature,
and Hypostaticall Union impeccable, but also, Council. Trident. sess 6. can. 23.
Sicut de Maria Virgin tenet Ecclesia.
that his Holy Mother was pure from all actual sin, by special grace.

And why is this so great and damnable an offense? Marry; because S. John
says, If we say we have not sinned, we make God a liar, and this he spoke
not in the person of only ordinary Saints, but in the person of all the Elect,
even of Saints as singularly chosen as the Blessed Virgin. This is the ground
of your bitterness. But first, though the Scripture had said, that all the elect
commit actual sin, yet perchance not without warrant we might except the
mother of God; but I will not stand herein against you. Show in Gods word this
text, all the elect have sinned, or this: S. John said in the person of all the
elect, If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the Jesuit
presently yieldes. What can you wish more? But if, in the person of all the
Elect, be as in truth it is, your addition unto the text, joined therewith so
cunningly as it may seem the very letter of Gods word, what may we think of
you, but only that your railing against us, is not so bitter, but your injury
unto Gods word is greater.

I add, that to say S. John spoke the aforesaid words in the person of all
the Elect, not only is not the text, but also against the text, except we will
make S. John excessive in the conceyte of himself. For thus I argue. It is
manifest, S. John spoke the words aforesaid in the person of such Saints, in
the number of which he ranketh himself, If WE say that WE have no sin. But
S. John could not without pride rank himself in the number of Saints as
singularly chosen as was the glorious Virgin, so that if the sense of his
saying be, If we, that is, Saints as singularly privileged as Gods Blessed
mother, say we have not sinned, we deceive our selves, what can be more
arrogant? Luther Luther Sermon. de Natiuit. Mariae. Sumus pares Matri Dei, ac
aeque Sancti sicut illa.
indeed has left behind him written: We are all as holy as the Virgin Mary;
but that S. John ever said it, or thought it, the Minister will never an able
to prove. So that without any question (as also the S. Augustine de not. and
great. c. 42. and and 60. and Epist. 95.
Fathers note) S. John spoke in the person only of al common holy Christians,
among who^ he might without pride number himself.

As for your reproaches so many and so bitter, for two reasons you are to be
pityed: first, for that your passion against the Jesuit, is either so blind as
you see not what lies before you, or so fierce as not to spare him, you let
contumelious terms fly, that must light on the head of the holy Fathers. For
this is your ce^sure. They that hold any (except the Holiest of the Holyes,) to
have been free from actual sin, are graceless, and are by S. John enrolled
in the black book of damnable liars; mentem febribus perdiderunt, they have
lost their wits by the phrensy of pride. Now, under this your Censure I
subsume a known and undeniable truth: But holy Fathers exempt the Blessed
Virgen from actual sin, not only S. Sermon. 2. de Assumpt.
Bernard, S. De excel. B. Virg. c. 3.
Anselme, but also S. Epist. ad Epict.
Athanasius, S. In cap. 1. Reg.
Gregory, S. Ser. 22. in Psalm. 118.
Ambrose, yea S. Augustine, de Not. and Great. c. 36.
who thus speaks for them all: In matter of sin, no mention is to be made
of the mother of our Lord, she is not included in the general sentences of
that kind: Scimus enim etc. For we KNOW, WE ARE CERTAIN, that unto her,
singular Grace was given to conquer sin every way. What is hence consequent?
That except you recall your Censure, you must censure the Fathers, as
Graceless, Damnable liars, Frantic fools, so great is your passion, and so
small your judgment in railing at the Jesuit.

Secondly, you are to be pittyed, in regard your passion is so extreme, as you
cannot join together the parts of your discourse in any sensible manner. You
say, that the Jesuit holding the Blessed Virgin was immaculate, and pure from
actual sin, is like to Acesius the Nouatian, who thought himself pure and
innocent, and denied possibility of salvation unto men that sinned after
baptism, so leaving no ladder to Climb up to heaven, but only that of
Innocence. What can be more inept, then to lay this censure on the Jesuit in
that respect? If the Jesuit hold the Blessed Virgin to have been ever free
from actual sin, does it follow that he must also so esteem of himself, as
did the Nouatian? May he not judge her to be an Immaculate Virgin, and yet
himself a sinful man, craving pardon of his sins by her prayers? And if he
should be so fond also as to think himself unspotted and pure from sin,
does it follow, that he must needs with Acesius exclude from salvation all
penitent sinners, and allow no ladder unto heaven, but only that of purity,
taking away the other of penance? Surely, you cannot but see this your
Inuectiue to be not only wrongful, but also witless. The same distemper of
passion causes you not to mark the want of coherence betwixt your Textuall
assertions, and Marginall proofs. In your text you say, The Jesuit by saying
the Blessed Virgin was pure from sin, has lost his wits by the fever of
pride. In proof hereof you cite in your margent this sentence of S. Cyprian,
Quisquis se inculpatum dixerit, aut superbus, aut stultus est? who so does say
that himself is without sin, is either proud, or a fool. Do you not yet
perceive the wonderful impertinency of this proof? Let the same be put into
form, and then you will perchance presently feel it. Whosoever says that
himself is without sin, is a proud fool. The Jesuit says that the mother of
God was without sin. Ergo, The Jesuit is a proud fool. Verily, the Jesuit is
not so great a fool as he who does not perceive the folly of this arguing,
which is just as good as this: Who so thinks himself the holiest, and
learned Divine of this age, is a very fool. But Francis White thinks John
Calvin the holiest, and learned Divine of this age. Ergo, Francis White is a
very fool. Suppose you were thus conceyted of Calvin, and some Catholic
Divine should thus come upon you for the same, would not his folly seem
prodigious unto all learned men?

Other falsifications I might yet further discover, as page 5. lin. 8. where to
show that the Church shall not be always visible, Aug. de unit. Eccles. c. 16.
you bring the Donatists objection; The Scriptures fortell a large revolt from
heavenly truth. 2. Thessal. 2.2. these words from heavenly truth, are added to
the Text: for the Text only says first there shall come the defection, or
revolt, which most Expositours understand, from the Roman Empire.

And page 519. citing 1. John 5.18. He that is begotten of God SINS NOT, for
the Divine generation keeps him, and the wicked One touches him not; you
omit, sins not, that the Scripture might not seem to avouch what you so
bitterly rail against, that the Saints of God by special grace may live
without sin.

Likewise to reprove the Jesuits doctrine, that Saints though they sin
venially, yet do not sin against the Divine Law: For this Law does exact
things of men no further, then they are necessary unto eternal life; but
Venial sin destroys, or opposes nothing that is necessary to eternal
life. Against this doctrine you argue page 522. lin. 20. If just men have any
sin, they perform not all the Divine law requires; for every sin is a
transgression of the Divine law, 1. John. 3.4. Here to the Text of your
English Bible, you add Divine, the Text being, Every sin is a transgression of
the Law, or of a Law. And this sentence is true: for though Venial sins be
not against the Divine special law, because they are not against Charity and
Salvation; yet they are against the law of reason, which binds me^, as much
as may be, not to be forgetful and inconsiderate even in small matters. And
though some sentences of Scripture reco^mend these small things unto us, it is
only to put us in mind of what we are bound unto by the law of reason, not to
lay new divine obligations upon us, Many such other tricks of your falsehood I
omit to discover, for breuityes sake.

Ignorance, Fraud, and Falsehood in alleging Fathers, and all manner of
Authors. SECT. V.
IN this subject I might be large, you being copious in your quotations,
whereof scarce one is to be found, which being examined to the original, is
not either impertinent, or wrested against the Authors mind, or falsified by
mistranslation in the very text Which to discover fully and particulerly were
an hugh work, and hardly worth the labor, and no ways necessary. For even as
to the end that one may know the Sea to be salt* it is not needful, that he
drink up the whole main, two or three tastes taken here and there may
sufficiently resolve him of this truth; so four or five examples in every kind
may more then abundantly serve, to make this your want of conscience known
unto your unwary Credents, that they may see whom they trust, in a business
that does so highly import.

These your falsifications are of two kinds, some crafty and subtle some
gross and impudent Crafty falsification is, when to draw Authors to your
purpose, in your translation of their text you either add to it, or detract
from it some words or particles, thereby changing the sense, or else cite their
words truly, but contrary to their meaning. Gross falsification, is when you
lay doctrines to the charge of Authors which they reject even in the places by
you cyted Both these kinds of falsehood S. Paul does signify to be practiced by
Heretics Ephesians. 4 8. where he says, That Christ has left Pastors and
Doctors to his Church, to the end that we be not carried away with the blasts
of every doctrine, by the wiliness of men, to circumuent weakelings in error.
What be the blasts of heretical doctrine, but their violent and audacious
falsifyings of Scriptures and Fathers? What their wiliness to circumuent in
error, but crafty corruption, by stealing away, or cogging in words, in their
producing of the monuments of Chistian Antiquity. The Greek word used by S.
Paul is, (...), which signifies properly, cogging of the dyce, or helping the
dyce craftily to cast what chance they please: Even so Heretics by helping the
ye, by cogging words in and out of the Text, make Scriptures and Fathers
speak as they please. This your cogging in Scripture is already discovered. Now
about the Fathers.

Seven Testimonies of S. Augustine, about Scripture and Tradition, falsified..
1.
TO note some few of the many. Page 22. lin. 5. to make S. Augustine seem to
favor your Protestant fancy, that men are resolved in faith, by the
resplendent Verity, and evidence of the Christian Doctrine, you cite him as
saying: Cont. Ep. Fund. c. 4.
Manifest Verity is to be pr^fered before all other things, whereby I am h^ld
in the Catholic Church In this quotation the word, other is cogged into the
text, to change the sense, as if S. Augustine had said, I have many motives to
believe the Catholic Doctrine, amongst other the manifest verity of the things
revealed, and this is the chiefest of all. S. Augustines true text is, manifest
verity so clearly showed, as no doubt thereof can be made, praeponenda est
omnibus, is to be preferred before all these things, whereby I am held in the
Catholic Church. Hence it is clear, that the manifest Verity was not the
stay, and motive of S. Augustines faith. For what is preferred before all the
motives, that stayed him in the Catholic Church, was none of his motives: But
(he says) that man^f^st verity so clearly shining as no doubt thereof can be
made, is to be preferred before all his motives. Ergo, S* Augustine was not
befooled with this foppery, that Faith is resolved finally into the manifest
resplende^t verity of the doctrine, and things revealed in Scripture.

Near to the same Page 21. lin. ^2. and in marg. lit. b. c.
place, you cite S. Augustine Aug. l. 2. de Baptis. c. 3.
saying, That former counsels are corrected by latter: Whence you infer,
that the Tradition of the Church is fallible. For what sentence of the Church
is infallible, if that of Counsels be fallible, In which (say you) some
Papists place the sovereignty of Ecclesiastical authority. Here you show
Ignorance and Falsehood. Ignorance about the doctrine of Catholics: For though
some prefer the Council before the Pope, and others the Pope before the
Council, in case the whole Council should be opposite to the Pope in matters
of Faith to be defined, which case yet never happened; yet all prefer
perpetual Tradition hand to hand from the Apostles, before both Pope and
Council. For how can we know, that Church definitions made by Pope and
Council be infallible, but by Tradition? Some may say, that is clearly proved
by Scripture. It is true; but how shall we know the texts assumed in this
proof, to be the Apostles Scripture, but by Tradition? How should we be so
sure, that we truly expound the Texts aright, did we not see the Tradition, and
practice of the Church to have been still conformable to the sense we give of
those Scriptures?

Your Falsehood is, in that you conceal the words that immediately follow in S.
Augustines sentence, which had you set down, Aug. lib. 2. de Baptis. c. 3. Ipsa
plenaria Concilia saepe priora posterioribus eme^dari, cum EXPERIMENTO ^erum
aperitur quod clausum erat.
it would have been evident, that he does attribute fallibility, and
corrigibility unto Counsels, only in matters of fact, or Ecclesiastical Laws
about manners. For the whole sentence is, Amongst plenary Counsels the former
are corrected by the latter, cum experimento rerum etc. when by EXPERIMENT of
things, something is brought to light which before was hidden. Now the truth
of matters and mysteries of Faith is not brought to light by time and
experience, but the truth of matters of fact is, of which One says: Quicquid
sub terra est in apricum proferet aetas.

Therefore S. Augustine speaks not of matters of Faith, but of matters of
fact, or of Ecclesiastical Laws about manners, which in some cases, time and
experience does discover to be inconvenient, and therefore to be recalled.

In the same place to prove S. Augustine Page 21. in lit. b. etc.
held, that the Church in her perpetual Traditions may be deceived, you cite
him, saying: Aug. l. 2. cont. Crescon. c. 21. E^clesiastici Iudices, sicut
homines, plerumque falluntur.
Ecclesiastical Judges, as men, may be deceived: and Lib 2. de Baptism. c. 3.
Episcoporu^ litteras quae post confirmatum Canonem Scriptae sunt etc. licere
reprehendi. Non debet Ecclesia se Christo praeponere, vt putet a se iudicatos
baptizare non posse, ab Illo autem iudicatos posse, cum Ille semper veraciter
iudicet: Ecclesiastici autem Iudices, sicut homines, plerumque falluntur.
the writings of any Bishops since the Apostles, may be questioned and called
into doubt. I do not doubt but you know in your conscience, that S. Augustine
in both the places, is alleged oppositely to his meaning. In the first place,
he speaks not about Church-errours in matters of faith, but about errors in
matters of fact, or Church judgments, concerning criminal causes. For this is
his whole sentence: The Church ought not to prefer herself before Christ, as
to say, that men condemned by him as wicked, may validely baptize; but such as
she does condemn, may not, seeing He in his judgments never erreth, whereas
Ecclesiastical Judges as being men are often deceived. Who does not see, that
you wrong Saint Augustine, to bring this his testimony for his holding the
perpetual Tradition of the Catholic Church, hand to hand from the Apostles,
by the succession of Bishops, to be fallible? And no less injuriously you
produce him in the second testimony. For he speaks of single Bishops,
considered each of them by themselves, that their writings are obnoxious unto
error, and so may be questioned and examined by Scripture; thence inferring,
that the Donatists should not wonder, that he did examine the Epistle of S.
Cyprian, against the Baptism of Heretics: so clear it is he speaks of
single Bishops, not of Tradition by the full consent of Bishops.

Page 37. lin. 33. For only Scripture, you cite the same S. August. as thus
writing: August. in epist^ 1. Ioa^. tract. 3.
The Church has only two breasts wherewith she feeds her Children, the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. You corrupt this place by addition and
false translation. First, by adding to the text the word only, to make men
believe S. Aug. held that no doctrine of Faith is to be believed, which is not
clearly contained in Scripture: whereas l. 4. de Baptis. c. 6. and 24. l. 5. c.
22.
he has an express principle to the contrary many times repeated in his
works: Sundry things (to wit of faith, such as was the doctrine that Baptism
given by Heretics is valide,) are most justly believed to be the Apostles,
though they be no where written in the Scriptures. Secondly, S. August. says
not as you translate, that the Churches two breasts are the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament (for the^ it would follow, that she has no milk in her
two breasts, but written doctrine;) but he says her two breasts, are the two
Testaments of Divine Scriptures. Hence you may gather that in each of her
breasts, in each of the Testaments, the milk of Scripture is contained, but
that only the milk of written doctrine is in them contained, you cannot from
this text truly cited infer, and therefore both by addition, and
transposition of words you help the dyce.

To prove, That the Tradition of the Church has no credit or authority, but
from Scripture, and that though this Tradition might be false, yet Faith would
subsist, because there remains always an higher, and more sovereign Judge,
to wit, God speaking in the Scripture; To prove this, I say, you Page 90. in
margin. lit. c
cite this text of Augustine. lib. 11. (...). Faust. c. ^. Tanquam in sede
qu^dam in sublimi collocata est cui serui^t omnis Fidelis and pius intellectus.
S. Augustine: It is placed as it were in an high throne of authority, unto
which every faithful and pious understanding must be subject. What is this?
Why do you not name it? Because you durst not set down the words that
immediately precede, which make clearly against you, to wit these: Excellentia
Canonic^^ authoritatis Veteris and Noui Testamenti, Apo^stoloru^ confirmata
temporibus per SVCCESSIONES Episcoporu^, and Propagationes Ecclesiarum, tanquam
in sede quadam sublimiter constituta est etc.
The Canonical authority of the Scriptures, confirmed in the Apostles days,
is by SVCCESSIONS of Bishops and propagations of Churches placed in an high
throne of authority etc. How directly is this testimony of S. Augustine against
that, which you would prove thereby? How has Tradition no credit or authority
but from Scripture, if the Scripture, by successiue tradition of Bishops hand
so hand, from the Apostles, has gotten (quoad nos, in the persuasion of the
Christian world) the high seat of Divine authority, to be honored as Gods
word, unto which every man must yield? If this successiue Tradition, on which
(as S. Augustine teaches) our persuasion about the authority of Scripture
dependes, be made weak and fallible by Protestants, how shall the Scripture be
able to keep her credit, and authority in our Faith? Verily it cannot, except
Christians will cease to rely on the authority of God revealing, and on
doctrine delivered by the succession of Bishops, and hunt after Divine and
Apostolical Scripture, by the sent, and smell of the doctrines delivered
therein, as you do.

Likewise by addition of the Particle Only, you falsify the saying of Page 95.
lin. 31. and in Marg. lit.
Paschasius. For whereas he Paschas. in Matthew. c. 28. Cum electis semper
adfuturum se promittit.
says, Christ promised to be with his Elect all days until the consummation
of the world, you cite him as saying, Only with the elect. More grossly in the
same place you falsify Druthmarus: for whereas In cap. 28. Matthew.
he says, Christ is with the Reprobate by the presence of his Godhead, but
with the Elect in another manner; you make him say Christ promises to be only
with the elect; contrary to his meaning, who teaches, that the presence, and
perpetual assistance of our Savior are so united unto his Church, and her
Pastors, that they may not err, but still teach all that he commanded: but
that presence whereof that Text properly speaks, is not only affoarded unto
the Elect, but unto wicked men, for the Salvation of all worthy Communicants,
as your self Page 52. lin. 14.
affirm.

You See page 105.
rail bitterly against the Jesuit, for proving, that your Protestant Church
cannot be the true Church, nor part thereof, because you severed your selves
from the Roman Church, and did not join unto any preexistent Christian Society
of Pastors, but aparted your selves from the Communion of the whole world. For
this his argument you rail against the Roman Church for a whole leaf, page
106. and 107. Where thus you conclude your foul Foliall Inuectiue: They, since
their Synod (of Tre^t) have proceeded from evil to worse, The Minister in
proof of all this bringes nothing: only in the Margent he names the Massacre
of Paris. Was that done by the Fathers of the Council of Trent? Does that
prove obscuring and out-facing of Truth? Had not the Protestants then slain,
been Traitors against their king? Was not the king informed of their plot, to
murd^r him, his mother, his brethren and the cheiefest of his Nobles? If to
prevent his own instant death the king did by martial law without Iuridicall
form, proceed against known Rebels, i^ this such a thing as you may say, It
surpasses all perfidious Stratagems, and immane Cruelty of Infidels? what idle
Eloquence is this?
obscuring and outfacing the truth with forgery and sophistry. They have
conspired against Kingdoms and States, they have surpassed professed Infidells
in perfidious stratagems, and immane cruelty. And whereas they expelled us by
Excommunication and chased us away from them by persecution, yet this Roman
Advocate taxes us with Schism and Apostasy; never remembering what lib. 5. de
Baptism. c. 1.
S. Augustine long since delivered; The Sacrilege of Schism is then
committed, when there is no just cause of Separation. Thus by long continued,
fierce, bitter blasts of false reproach, you diriue your unwary Reader upon the
hidden rock of a falsified sentence of S. Aug. as though this most Divine
Doctor had insinuated the lawfullnes of revolt and separation from all
Christian Churches. What can be more false? He disputes against the Donatists
who had severed themselves from the Christian world, pretending that Caecilia^
Bishop of Carthage, and other Catholics had given up the Holy Bibles to the
fire. S. Aug. does convince them of Schism two ways: First because this
pretense were it true, is not just, for there can be no just cause of
separation from the whole world, and of beginning a new distinct Christian
Church. These be his words: Augustine. ep. 48. ad Vincent. Fieri non potest vt
aliqui iustam causam habeant, qua communionem suam separent a co^munione Orbis
terrarum, eamque appellent Ecclesiam Christi, quod se just ab omnium ge^tium
communione separauerint. Ibid. Nos ideo certi sumus, neminem se a co^munione
omnium Gentium iu^^e separare potuisse etc.
We are certain that none could justly separate themselves from the Communion
of the whole world. And again: It is no way possible that any should have
reason to separate themselves from the communion of the whole World, and so
term themselves the Church, because upon just cause they have divided
themselves from the Society of all nations. Thus S. Aug. What can be more
direct against that doctrine for which you cite him? Or more efficacious to
conclude, that you Protestants are guilty of damnable Schism?

Secondly (says S. Augustine) the cause you Donatist pretend is nulla, none at
all; it is an untruth, Calumniarum suarum ^umos ^actantes. D. Baptis l 5 c 1.
Caecilian having cleared himself from that crime, and been absolved in all
manner of Courts: Yea though the same were true, yet by Restat v^ fateantur
nulla maloru^ etiam cognitorum tali communione Ecclesiam maculari. (...) cum
fassi fuerint, non inuenient causam cur se ab Ecclesijs separauerin^.
your own principles, it is convinced to be no just cause Wherefore your
separation is not only Schism* but most eminent and notorious Schism. For
then is Ape^^issimum autem sacrilegium eminet Schismatis cum NVLLA fuit causa
Separationis.
the Sacrilege of Schism most notoriously eminent, when there was NO cause of
separation. He does not say, When there is no just cause of separation, Schism
is committed, as though there might be some just cause, and then Schism is not
committed; but when there is no cause of all, which may with any color, or
show be pretended for separation, then Schism is not only committed (for it is
still committed when separation is made from the whole Christian world what
cause soever be pretended) but then, it is notoriously and most evidently
committed. Behold how changing the text of S. Augustine, and against Justice
cogging into the same the word, just, you make his speech to have a sense, just
contrary to his meaning. How justly might I charge you with obscuring and
outfacing of the truth by forgery, which calumniously, without any proof, you
object unto the Sacred Council of Trent? But like to like, such a Religion,
such an Advocate.

Seven Testimonies of other Fathers falsified.. 2.
LET us also discover some of your corruptions about other Fathers besides S.
Augustine. For the fulness of Scripture about all points of faith, you cite
these words of Sermon. de Bapt.
S. Cyprian: Christian Religion finds, that from this Scripture the rules of
all learning flow, and that whatsoever is contained in the discipline of the
Church, does arise from this, and is resolved into this. These words Puritans
might better then you allege for their Geneuian Principle, that not only
Church-doctrine, but also Church Discipline must be contained in Scripture, and
proved by the clear Texts thereof. But happily they never saw it, or if they
did, they durst not be so impudent, as to allege it, as you do, against the
meaning of the Author. For S. Cyprian speaks not of the whole volume of
Scripture, but only of twelve or thirteen words thereof, to wit, this little
sentence: Praecipis Domine vt diligam te, and de proximo iubes vt ad meam eum
mensuram complectar etc. Legate hoc vnum verbum and in hoc mandato meditetur
Christiana Religio, and inueniet ex hac Scriptura omniu^ doctrinarum regulas
emanasse etc.
Love thy Lord God with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy self. This
would have appeared, had you not omitted the words immediately precedent in the
very same sentence, Let Christian Religion read this one word, and meditate on
this commandment, and it shall find, that from this Scripture the Rules of all
learning flow etc.

And this example may serve to make evident to the eye, your perpetual
Protestant Impertinency in alleging words of the Fathers, in which they
commend the perfection and fulness of Scripture, for your fancy of
only-only-only Scripture. For the Fathers meaning is, that all is contained in
Scripture in a general, and confuse manner, not so particularly, and
distinctly as Scripture may be the sole rule for all necessary points of Faith.
This is clear, for what they say of the whole Scripture, they say of some
principal particle thereof, as of this: Thou shall love thy Lord God with all
thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy self: But no man that is in his judgment,
will say what this sole sentence is a sufficient Rule of Faith, for all
necessary points of Doctrine and Discipline: Therefore their commendations of
the plenitude of Scripture can enforce no more, then that all is contained in
Scripture in some general manner, not so particularly, but that for
explication and distinction of many points, the rule of Churches Tradition is
necessary.

For the clarity of Scriptures, that unto them that know not the Tradition of
the Church, they are easy, you page 45 lin. 10
cite S. Homil. 2. de verbis Isa. Vidi Dominum.
Chrysostom: Scriptures are not like Metalls which have need of workmen TO
DIG THEM OVT, but they deliver a treasure ready at hand to them which seek
hidden riches in them. It is sufficient that thou look into them etc. Here you
falsify the Text of S. Chrysostom, by adding unto it to dig the^ out,
whereby you make both the Father to contradict himself, and his speech to be
senseless. For if the Riches of the Scripture be hidden in the Text thereof,
as he says, how is it a Treasure ready at hand without digging or searching?
How it is enough to look into the book to find it? Had you dug deeply
into the golden Mine of S. Chrysostom, you would perchance have found out his
true meaning, and not have imposed upon him this false, and pernicious doctrine.

S. Chrysostom in getting gold out of mines, does consider that a double
labor is to be undergone. The one to dig out that earth wherewith Gold is
mingled. The other to sever the gold from the earth. The first labor he says
is necessary, that we find out the Treasure, and true sense of Scripture: we
must (says Chrysostom. Homil. 40. in Joan. FODERE nos profundius iubet, vt quae
alte delitescunt inuenire possimus* Idem in Genesis Homil. 37. Indagatis
Profundis, verum sensum veritatis percipere.
he) not only look into the book, not only attend to the bare reading, but we
are commanded to DIG DEEPLY, that we may find out the things that lie
hidden in the bottom. For we dig not for a thing that lies open, and READY
AT HAND, but for a treasure that is hidden in the deep. Thus S. Chrysostom.
How directly against his mind do you make him say, that the sense of the
Scripture is a treasure so ready at hand, and obuious, as we need not dig for
it?

In respect of the second labor, to wit, of seuering dross from Gold when the
same is found, this labor S. Chrysostom. says is needless, in regard of the
Scripture. In metallis difficile est inuenire quod venantur. Etenim cum metalla
Terra sint, and Aurum non aliud quam Terra, similitudo celat aspectum eorum
quae quaeruntur. In Scripturis non est eadem ratio. Neque enim proponitur Aurum
terrae commixtum, sed Aurum purum etc.
In Mines (says he) men have difficulty to ^ind out what they hunt for. The
Mines being earth, and Gold also earth, this likeness and similitude confounds
^he sight, not to discern the one from the other. In scriptu^es it is not so,
the doctrine proposed therein being not gold mingled with earth, but pure Gold;
(the word of God is pure silver refined wilth fire) so that the Scriptures be
not metals that require workeme^ (to sever in their doctrine Dross from
Gold;) they offer a ready and refined treasure to them that seek the riches
hidden in them. Thus S. Chrysostom, and he does there largely discourse, how
every thing in Scriptures, even the Chronologies, and proper Names of men do
affoard wholesome and profitable doctrine to the Reader; but to find this
treasure, we must not (as he there says) nudam tantum scripturam aspicere, sed
insistere, and cum studio repositas scrutari opes, not only look upon the
Scripture, but insist, and with study search out the riches hoarded up therein.
Have you not the^ notoriously falsified the sense of his discourse, by the
insertion of words of your own?

In the behalf of your Protestant sole-sufficiency of Scripture, you cite Page
50. in Marg. lit. E. and page 3. lin. 6. and in marg. lit. E. and alibi saepe.
this sentence of Durand tearming, him A famous Scholeman: Ecclesia licet Dei
Dominationem habeat in terris, illa tamen non excedit limitationem Scripturae.
Although the Church have the power and authority of God upon earth, yet that
authority does not exceed the limitation of the Scripture. This place is by you
alleged many times in this your Reply, but most impertinently. For his
meaning is, that the Church, though it have the authority of God upon earth,
Matthew. 16. v* 20. Quicquid solueris, quicquid ligaueris super terram, erit
solutum and ligatum in caelis.
yet the same power is in some cases restrained and limited by the Scripture.
In which respect the Church cannot dispense in many things wherein God might
dispense: In Ecclesia licet habeat authoritate^ Dei in tertio, illa tamen non
excedit limitatione^ Scripturae. Scriptura autem docet express seruos
conuersos ad fidem adhuc manner Dominis suis prioribus, licet illi maneant
infideles.
particular she cannot, (says he) exempt slaves that be made Christians from
their subjection unto their old Ma^sters, because that the Scripture does
expressly teach, that Slaves converted unto the Faith, are to be still subject
to their former Masters, though their Masters be Infidels. Thus Durand. Now
what is this to the purpose of proving, that men are bound to believe nothing
but what is clearly contained in Scripture? Except, according to your skill in
Logic, you will argue in this sort; The Church cannot do the things
forbidden her in Scripture, because her power is not beyond the restraynt
thereof given in the Scripture Ergo, she cannot believe, and teach doctrines
proposed unto her by the rule of Tradition without Scripture, which is a thing
commended unto her in Scripture; Hold the Traditions you have, whether by
speech, or by Epistle. 2. Thessal. 2.15.

How many times in this your Reply have you cited this testimony of the Master
of the Sentences, Lombard. l. 4. sent. d. 18. lit. f.
God does not still follow the judgment of the Church, which sometimes, through
ignorance and surreption, judges not according to truth. This I say, you cite
See page 89. in lit. ^ and p. 93. lit. d and alibi.
to prove, that the Church may err in faith, at the least, about secondary
articles. And yet it is most certain and evident, that he speakerh of judgment
in criminal causes. For hence he inferretth, Soluere noxios vel damnare se
putant innoxios, cum apud Deum non sententia Sacerdotum, sed reorum vita
queratur. Et ita aperte ostenditur quod non semper sequitur Deus iudicium
Ecclesiae, quae per ignorantiam and surreptionem interdum iudicat*
the Church-me^ must not think because Christ said unto them, whatsoever you
bind or loose upon earth, shall be bound and loosed in Heaven, that therefore
they may condemn the Innocent and absolve the Nocent. For God in such case
does not follow their sentence, but judges according to the life of the
accused.

To prove that the Roman Bishop was not anciently acknowledged the supreme
Pastor of the Catholic Church, you say page 161. lin. 15. Pope Stephen was
slighted by S. Cyprian and other Bishops of Africa. In proof whereof you cite
in your margent Ibid. lit. D.
these words of Firmilian Firmil. apud Cyprian. epist. 75.
: Atque ego in ^ac part just indignor in tam manifestam and apertam Ste^hani
stultitiam, quod qui sic de Episcopatus sui loco gloria^ur, and se successionem
Petri tenere contendit. And indeed I am justly grieved against the open and
manifest fol^y of Stephen, that he so much glories of the dignity of his
Bishopric, and stands upon his having the succession of Peter. Thus you.
Now behold your falsehood (for I omit your ignorance in naming Firmi^ian as a
Bishop of Africa, whereas he was a Bishop ^f the East, to wit of Eusebius. Hist.
Eccl. l. 6. c. 20. Caesareae Capadocensis Episcopus.
Caesarea in Cappadocia). Your Legier-de-maine, I say, and falsehood is twofold.
First, you omit to let your Reader know that this Firmilian when he wrote this
Epistle, was a Quarta^eciman, and also addicted to the Error of Rebapti^ing
the^ that had been baptized by Heretics. And because S. Stephen a most Vincent.
Lyrinensis aduersus Haeres. cap. 9.
Holy Pope and Martyr had made a decree against their Nouelty, Cyprian. epist.
74.
Nihil innoua^dum prae^erquam quod traditum, Let no nouelty be admitted, ^ut
let the ancient Tradition be kept; this Firmilian wrote against him an Epistle
full of sharp and contumelious speech. Had you mentioned this quality of
Firmilian, which I do not doubt but you knew, your impertinency would have been
apparent. For this supposed, your Argument goes thus. Some Bishops, specially
Firmilian, erring against Faith, and blasted for the time with the spirit of
Heresy, wrote a co^temptuous Epistle against the Sea of Peter. Ergo, the Sea of
Peter is not by divine Institution, the Rock of the Church, against which the
gates of hell (all Heresies) should (rage, but) never prevail.

Secondly, you notoriously falsify the sentence of Firmilian, in making him to
rail against the Roman Bishops being the successor of Peter. For this, even
in that his Heretical passion (whereof he afterward was This is testified by
Dionysius Alexandrinus, who then lived, in his Epistle to Xistus the Successor
of S. Stephen. apud Eusebius. l. 7. Histor. c. 3. and Niceph. l. 6. c 7.
penitent) he never did; yea he does rather acknowledge the Roman Bishops
succession from Peter, and thence argues, that seeing to Peter only, Christ
said, To thee I will give the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven etc. that Pope
Stephen should least of all me^ admit, that Heretics who cleave not to Peter's
Sea, can validely baptize. For his true words by you falsified and curtalled,
are these: And Quod vna Ecclesia semel a Christo supra Petram solidata est;
hinc intelligi potest, quod SOLI PETRO Christus dixerit: Quaecumque ligaueris
super terram etc. Atque adeo in hac part just indignor, quod qui successionem
Petri se habere co^tendit, supra quem Ecclesiae fundame^ta posita sunt, alias
Petras inducit etc. Firmil. epist. citata.
herein I do justly fret against the open and manifest folly of Stephen, that,
seeing he does so glory of the dignity of his Bishopric, and stands so much
upon his being the successor of Peter, on whom the foundations of the Church
were laid, that he will bring in two rocks, and the buildings of many
Churches, whiles by his authority he does mantaine, that in them (Churches
alien from Peter's Sea, or rock) true baptism is given. Thus Firmilian: whence
it is clear that he did not revile S. Stephen, in respect of his clayming
Primacy and authority by succession from Peter (as you make him to your purpose
to do) but that being the successor of Peter, he urged this his Primacy
against Anabaptisme; whereas he should rather in Firmilian his opinion, have
been Stephanus, qui per successionem Petri Cathedram habere praedicat, nullo
aduersus Haeretico^ Zelo excitatur. Ibid. Firmilian.
zealous in denying the validity of Baptism, given by Heretics, who ever
impugn the unity of Peter's Chair.

Whereas your Adversary says, that the Scripture, to them that know Tradition,
is abundantly sufficient, but without Tradition not: Against this Page 37. lin.
5. and page 42. lin 16.
you urge this saying of Vincentius Lyrinensis: Vincent Lyr. adu. Her. c. 2.
The Canon of the Scripture is perfect, and sufficient in it self for all
matters, yea more then sufficient. Verily this is sufficient, and more then
sufficient to show the beggary of your Religion: otherwise this testimony so
impertinent would not be by you and your fellows so perpetually John White
Defense page ^70. Wotton, Field, Whitaker, and who not.
alleged. For Lyrinensis does not say* that the Canon of the Scripture is
abundantly sufficient, but only, the same is supposed in an objection or
question moved unto him: In answer whereto Lyrinensis does show, that this
supposed sufficiency is not such, but of necessity the rule of Tradition must
be joined therewith.

I know you are not ignorant of the Text, you have read it, but read it I pray
you, once again, and therein read the conviction of your falsehood. Some
Forsitan requirat aliquis c^m sit perfectus etc.
may ASK, seeing the Canon of the scripture is perfect, and sufficient unto it
self, in all things, what need is there that the authority of Ecclesiastical
interpretation be joined therewith? Because all do not understand the holy
Scripture in the same sense; and this in respect of the depth, (or difficulty)
thereof, that the same passage is taken this way by one, and that way by
another; so that as many dissonant interpretatio^s may seemingly be brought
thereof as there be interpreters etc. Hence in regard of the manifold windings
and turnings of Error, it is MVLTVM Necesse est.
VERY NECESSARY, that the line of Prophetical and Apostolical doctrine be
squared, according to the Ecclesiastici and Catholici sensus norma.
RVLE of the ECCLESIASTICAL sense.

In this Testimony two things are affirmed contrary to the purpose you bring
it. First that the sufficiency of Scripture is not so full, nor so perfect, as
is supposed in the question; the Scripture being deep, dark, difficile, that
setting Tradition aside in lieu of one certain assured Truth, one may find
therein manifold windings and turnings of Error. Secondly, that in this
respect the Scripture cannot be the only rule of Faith, but it is NECESSARY,
and VERY NECESSARY, that besides Scripture, we allow the RVLE of
Church-Tradition, or Exposition. You knowing this, as you did, with what
conscience could you cite this place for the sole-sufficiency of Scripture, and
so many times cite it, taking a thing falsely supposed in the Question for the
doctrine of the Author?

Page 44. lin. 24. to prove the Perspicuity of the Scripture in it self,
without the light of Tradition for all necessary points, you cite the words of
Irenaeus: All the Irenaeus l. 2. cap. 46.
Scriptures both Prophetical and Evangelical are clear without ambiguity,
and may indifferently be heard of all men. Is it possible you durst in defense
of your fancy cite this place in this manner, according to which it is false,
even in your own fancy? For do not you yourselfe write page 35. lin. 18. We
acknowledge that MANY particular Texts and passages of holy Scripture, are
obscure and hard to be understood? How then are all Scriptures, both
Prophetical and Evangelical, clear without any ambiguity indifferently unto
all men? Are you also so dull of hearing as not to perceive the jar betwixt
this sentence of S. Irenaeus, and the sentences of the Fathers, which after him
presently you produce? S. Hierome: It is the manner of Scripture to join that
which is manifest, after that which is obscure. S. Augustine: Plain places are
found in Scriptures to expound and open the dark and hard. If this be true,
how are all the Scriptures clear without ambiguity? yea S. Irenaeus in the
very next chapter Iren. l. 2. c. 47. Vt in rebu^ creati^ quaedam Deo subiacent,
quaedam and in nostram venerunt scientia^: sic and in (...) Scripturis.
says; That some things in Scripture are clear and manifest, which we must
learn and believe* other are dark, and obscure, the interpretation of which
we must remit unto God.

Verily these Arguments convince you to have falsified Irenaeus, as you have
indeed, and very grossly. For he does not say, All Scriptures are clear
without ambiguity, as you cite him, but this: Cum itaque vniuersae Scripturae
and Propheticae and Euangelicae, in aperto and sine ambiguitate, and similiter
ab omnibus audiri possunt, (etsi non omnes credunt) vnum and solum Deum (ad
excludendos alios) praedicent, omnia fecisse per verbum sicut demonstrauimus
ipsis Scripturarum dictionibus; valde hebetes apparebunt, qui ad tam lucidam
adapertionem caecutiun^ oculis, and nolunt videre lumen praedicationis.
Seeing all Scriptures, both Prophetical and Apostolical, openly, and without
ambiguity, and in manner as they may be heard of all (though all believe not)
preach, that one only God made all things by his word, as we have proved by
Scriptures so affirming in the same words; how dull sighted may they appear
whose eyes against such manifest evidence are blinded, and will not see the
light of this preaching? Thus S. Irenaeus, affirming no more then that all
Scriptures do evidently preach this one point of Faith, That there is one only
God. So that we may say, how dull sighted were you, that would cite this
testimony for your fancy against the plain evidence thereof?

Foul Calumniation, and Falsification of Hosius, Bellarmine, Petrus a Soto,
and Bosius.. 3.
IN this kind I may with good reason register in the first place your
slanderous dealing with Cardinal Hosius, the falsehood being not only notorious
in it self, but also discovered against your Ancestors in forms times. Page
151. in fine, and 152. initio, you charge Catholics, That they debase the
sacred Scripture, advancing humane Traditions. In proof whereof you allege
these words as of Cardinal Hosius; Page 152. lit. a. Hosius de express. verb.
Dei page 50.
Non oportet legis aut Scripturae esse peritum, sed a Deo doctum; vanus est
labor qui Scripturae impenditur. Scriptura enim creatura est, and egenum
quoddam elementum, non conuenit Christianu^ Scripturae addictum etc. A man
ought not to be learned in the Scripture, but taught of God; lost is the labor
which upon Scripture is spent. For the Scripture is but a Creature, yea an
empty element, it does not become a Christian to be conversant in the same.

These words contain horrible Blasphemy, in so much as Cardinal Hosius
himself hearing that some Protestants in their printed books had laid this
sentence to his charge, did not doubt to say: Bellarmin. de concilijs in
praefat.
That I should thus affirm? Verily had I so written, I were worthy to be burnt
in the market place. What then? Has not Hosius the words? Indeed the words
are found in the Cardinals book, but how? brought as blasphemy spoken in the
person of the Swenckfeldian Sect, or of the Heavenly Prophets. This is Hosius
his discourse: Hosius de expresso Dei verbo pa. 545. Tom. 2. operum Hosij.
Lugduni apud Guil. Rouillium. Anno M.D.LXIV.
When men (says he) seek to draw the Scripture (...) their own fancyes, not
regarding the sense and exposition of the Church, what do they but (as S.
Augustine says) open a way that the authority of the Scripture be wholly
abolished? Do we not see this Prophesy performed in this our Age? Yes verily:
Luther first rose up, and endeavored to (...) Scriptures unto the liking of
his fancy. Against him rose Carolstadius, and out of him Zwinglius,
Oecolampadius, Calvin, and other innumerable Sects, most mainly ^^posite the
one to the other, yet each of them clayming ma^^fest Scripture on their side.
Hereupon the Heavenly ^^ophets, whose Prince is Swenckfeldius Viderunt hoc
Caelestes Prophe^ae (quoru^ Princeps Suenckfeldius) quod isti suo sensui
Scripturas (...) empe^a^e^t and sic secum cogitare coeperunt. Quo vsque tand^
hanc Excucullatorum tyrannidem feremus. etc.
perceauing ^^ese men to make no other use of Scripturs, then to persuade unto
seely people what they please, under pretense of Gods (...) and express word,
began thus to discourse with them^^lues: HOW long shall WE endure these Friars,
that ^^^ue cast of their Hoods and Habits? Shall we be still forced (...) adore
as Gods holy word whatsoever they please to propose (...) us cloaked with Texts
of Scripture? No, we will hereafter ^^pect the resolution of our Questions from
Heaven, and bid ^^ese Contentioners to be packing together with the
Scrip^^res, which they pull this and that way as they list to establish ^^posite
doctrines. What the heavenly Father shall in pri^^ate please to reveal unto
us, that shall be our express word ^f God. A CHRISTIAN ought not to be
skillfull in ^he Law and Scripture, but taught of God: lost is the labor that
on Scripture is spent; for the Scripture is but a crea^^re, and an empty
ELEMENT. Hosius having thus (...) down these words and blasphemies of the
^wenckfeldian Sect, adds his Censure upon them as ^olloweth. You see (most
Pious King) how truly the say^^g of S. Aug. l. 32. cont. Faust. c. 19. Videtis
id vos agere, vt omnis de m^dio Scripturarum auferatur authoritas, and suus
cuique animus auctor sit.
Augustine is, that whiles men labor by their ^riuate interpretations to make
the Scripture the subject, (...) one of his own fancy, they open a wide gappe
unto men, (...) deny the authority of the Scripture. And again: Quo res ad
extremum redijt! stupor and mirabilia* Natum est nouum Prophetarum genus, qui
Scripturarum authoritate Scripturis omne^ authoritatem detra^ere non sunt
veriti.
O ^^onder, able to astonish any man! To what a pass by Satan's ^ubtilty are
men come! Unto what extreme misery is the ^orld brought? whiles every Sect will
wrest the Scripture to (...) self, and challenge the sole true exposition
thereof, be^old a new Sect of Heavenly Prophets is sprunge up, which (...) not
doubt by the authority of Scriptures, to take away from ^cripture all
authority. Behold the true words of Hosius, and together behold what
impudency it is to urge the blasphemous words by you cited as his. (...)
blasphemous assertions may be laid to the charge of them that with detestation
relate them, you may lay the blasphemies of wicked men related in Scriptures on
the sacred writers. You may impeach Sal^mom for this speech of the Ungodly,
Sap. c. 1.
Come let (...) enjoy the pleasures that are, let there be no meddow wherein our
luxury do not wallow it self. You may endight o^ blasphemy S. John for the
words of the Jews about our Savior, Joan. 9.16.
This man is not of God who keeps (...) the Sabboath Day. You might charge
Saint Matthew with the words of the Pharisees, Math. 11.19.
Behold a glutton, and drinker of wine.

I have not read in any Protestant Minister a more foul Calumniation of any
Catholic Author except only one in your self against Bellarmine. Bellarmine
(say Orthodoxe page 136.
you) says: A man is not bound to believe the Scripture to be Divine, because
the Scripture (...) self says so, more then one is to believe the Alcoran
(...) be of God, because in sundry places thereof we read, that (...) was sent
from Heaven by God. What horrible blasphemy is this? What Christian will not
tremble at the hearing thereof? The Scriptures affirmation is no more to be
believed, then the Alcoran? Has Bellarmine this sentence, which you cite in a
distinct letter, as his formal assertion? Behold the true words of Bellarmine
for the Reader, that seeing your falsehood, he may join together with
detestation of Turkish impiety, detestation of your Protestant slau^dering: Nam
etiamsi Scriptura dicat, Libros Prophetarum and Apostolorum esse diuinos, tamen
non certo id credam, nisi prius credidero Scripturam quae hoc dicit esse
Diuinam. Nam etiam in Alcorano Mahumeti legimus ipsum e caelo a Deo missum
esse, and tamen non ei credimus.
Although the Scripture say, that the Books of the Prophets and Apostles be
divine, yet shall I not certainly believe it except I have aforehand believed
the Scripture, which does (...) affirm to be divine. For also in sundry places
of Maho^^ts Alcora^ we read, that the same was sent of God from hea^^^^, yet do
we not believe it. Is there no difference bet^^xt, these two sayings, A man is
not bound to believe the S^^ipture affirming the books of the Prophets to be
Divine, (...) then the Alcoran: and this: I should not believe the S^ripture
saying the books of Prophets are divine, except I (...) believe the Scripture
that so says? Verily they differ (...) much as Hell and Heaven, as Blasphemy
and Truth.

With Hosius you join Petrus Soto to be a debaser (...) Scriptures, Page 152.
in lit. a.
citing these words as his: Petrus Soto ^nstructio Sacerdotum Part. 1. lect. 6.
page 17. if he be truly cited, for in my Edition, it is page 25.
Quae (...) cultum pertinent, magis ex traditione and Spiritus Sancti
^^^ustratione, quam ex scriptura petenda sunt. The things (...) belong unto
worship, are to be taken by Tradi^^on, and the light of the Holy Ghost, rather
then from (...) Scripture. Thus you. Omitting, and putting in ^^ordes, chopping
and changing the Text. Let us ^^are the Authors very words: Aduer^a^t hunc
Doctrinae Euangelicae modum. Quod ad vitae rationem attinet, post illa quae
communia sunt omnibus, qualia sunt praecepta Decalogi, atque dilectionis Dei
and Proximi, de quibus Christus frequenter loquitur* Post haec inquam omnia,
aduer^ant plura esse quaerenda extraditione and illustratione Spiritus Sancti,
potius quam ex Scriptura, praecipue quae ad cultum pertinent*
Post haec omnia ^^uertant, plura quaerenda esse ex Traditione, and
illustra^^one Spiritus sancti, quam ex Scripturis; praecipue quae ad ^^ltum
pertinent. After all these things, that is, after a ^riest knows, not only
the articles and mysteries of ^ayth, but also, in respect of manners and good
life, (...) communia omnibus, de quibus Christus frequenter lo^^itur, those
things that are commonly to be kept (...) all Christians, as the Ten
Commandments, and (...) like* about which Christ does frequently speak: after
they know these things, let them remember, that more ^^ings yet are to be
sought for rather by Tradition, and the (...) Ghosts illumination, then by the
Scripture, sp^cially (...) things that belong unto Reverence. In these words
^etrus Soto delivers two things. First that the things ^oncerning matters, not
only of Faith, but also of good life that are common and must be known of all
Christians, are largely delivered in holy Scripture. Secondly, that post haec
omnia, after the knowledge of all these common substantial matters, (...) for
other particular things, they are to be learned by Tradition, more then by
Scripture. Hence I infer that Petrus Soto by the words, quae ad cultum
pertinent, does not mean the main duties of Latriae, and Religion; but
Reuerentiall carriage and ceremonies to be used in the administration of the
Sacraments. This is clear. For by things pertinent unto Reverence, he means
things that are not common unto all, nor to be known and observed of all But
the main duties of Latria and Religion are common unto all Christians:
Therefore Soto does not mean them in his words Quae ad cultum pertinen^; but
only things of ceremonial Reverence in the use of the Christian sacrifice and
Sacraments, as the Author Quae autem in celebratione Baptismatis, and qua
ratione agenda sunt, vbi est scriptum? Credendumne est, tantum Ministerium sine
vlla praeparatione, SOLEMNITATE and RITV quae ad eius excitant venerationem
traditum esse? Ibid. page 26.
does also in that place declare. So that it is in you wonderful boldness, by so
many leauings out by so many alterings and transposings of words, to change
Sotus his meaning, as though he had been besotted with Swenckfeldian fancy of
immediate Revelation without Scripture.

In your Reply to the Preface, These leaves want numbers, but it is in the sixth
leaf the first side from the beginning of the Reply to the Preface.
you say, Th^^ the Roman Church does require, that Protestants send the holy
scriptures packing, and not reckon the same among D^^uine Principles. To make
this slander good, you (...) in the margent Had Bosius spoken inconsideratly,
what folly or impotent malice is it to urge the unadvised speech of a private
writer, as the faith of the Church?
Bosius de sig. Eccles. lib. 16. cap. 10. scriptura non refertur inter eiusmodi
principia; the Scripture is not reckoned amongst these principles, (...) wit,
Divine. This saying of Bosius you repeat over and over in your Book; yea the
same is twice repeated in your answer to the Jesuits Preface. In your
Orthodoxe you have it also, and your Defense page 1^1.
Brother more often, as though Bosius did say, the Scripturs were not Divine.
But your slander is intolerable, for he does not say, that Scriptures are not
reckoned amongst Divine Principles, but only not amongst the articles of the
Creed. His words are: We know, that amongst other articles of the Creed one
is, I believe the holy Catholic Church: Now these articles are as it were
certain principles, which must be known and believed in the first place: But
the Scripture is not numbered amongst THESE Principles, although it be named
HOLY, and SACRED.

Hence appears, how notoriously you slander and falsify Bosius, by making
him say, that Scriptures are not numbered amongst Divine Principles. First,
because he says not, they are not numbered amongst Divine Principles, but only
not amongst the twelve Articles of the Creed; which is a truth so manifest, as
Ministers cannot be ignorant thereof, if they be acquainted with the Creed.
Secondly, because in that very place and sentence, he does affirm the
contrary, to wit, that the Scriptures are holy and sacred. What is this but
Divine? Verily this accusation that Protestants if they will be Catholics must
send the Scriptures packing, is as true, as what you Answer to the Preface
fol. 6. page 1. lin. 19.
there also affirm, That they must let the Roman Nahash pluck out their right
eye, and vow blind obedience unto him. Which you prove, because Bonauenture In
vit^ Francisci c. 5.
says, that S. Francis exhorted his Friars unto blind Obedience. As though
Protestants might not be admitted into the Roman Church, except they will be
Friars; or that by Religious obedience men put out their right eye, which
regards God, and Heaven, and not tather the left, which looks upon earth
and worldly pleasure. Had you either the right, or left eye of Wisdom you
would not write as you do. Had you any spark of divine Wisdom, you would not
vent such false, and odious slanders. Had you any dram of humane Wisdom, you
would blush to confirm your slanders, with such seely and ridiculous proofs.

Other Fathers impudently falsified, as if they did deny, what they do most
constantly mantayne, and prove.. 4.
YOU are so bold in your Falsehood, as you dare cite the Fathers for your fancy,
where ex professo, even of purpose they dispute against it, and prove the
contrary. Page 85 lin. 26. you say, the gifts of doing Miracles were never
promised in the Scripture to be perpetual, and are long since ceased.
Augustine. Retract. l. 1. c. 13. Now S. Augustine does in that place say, and
prove the contrary; to wit, that though Miracles be not now ordinarily annexed
unto the office of teaching and administration of Sacraments, as they were in
the Primitive Church* yet Miracles are done, and frequently done, so that they
are for multitude innumerable. I never meant (says August. lib. 1. retract. c.
13.
he) as though that now no Miracles are done in the name of Christ, for that in
Milan a Blind-man received his sight at the Shrine of the Martyrs; and sundry
the like miracles my self did even then know to have been done: In which kind
so many are wrought in this our age, as we neither know the^ all, nor can
number them we know. How durst you name this testimony to prove Miracles to be
ceased?

Also that Miracles cannot be sufficient testimonies of Christian Faith, as the
Si non opera in eis fecissem quae nemo alius fecit, peccatum non haberent.
Joan. 15.^4. and 5.20. Ego habeo Testimoniu^ maius Ioanne: Opera enim quae
dedit mihi Pater vt faciam, ipsa testimonium perhibent de me.
Scripture terms the^, you Page 112. lin. 24.
cite Suarez the Jesuit De fide Catholica contra Sect. Anglican. l. 1. c. 7.. 3.
saying Haec adulterari possunt, and ita exterius fingi, vt no^ sint necessaria
signa verae fidei. Miracles may so be adulterared and externally falsified,
that they can not be necessary signs of the true Faith. Thus you cite Suarez:
but how grossly? These be not the words of Suarez, but words spoken by way
of objection in the behalf of Protestants for their Paradoxe, That the Church
is invisible. This is then your argument in Suarez: Without faith the true
Church can not subsist. But there are no infallible, external, and visible
signs of true faith, seeing even Miracles themselves may be forged and
counterfaite. Ergo the Church cannot be assuredly known by visible marks.
Suarez having urged this argument with others largely, he says, Ibid. 8.
Notwithstanding all this, we must believe the Church to be visible. And to the
Argument about Miracles Ibid. c. 8.. 9. Non ad cognoscendam singulorum
credentium fidem, sed ad cognoscendam congregationem vere credentium.
he says, that though they be not certain tokens of the sanctity of the
person that does them, yet they are sufficient signs to prove, that true Faith
and sanctify are in the Church wherein they are done. So that what Suarez the
Jesuit sets down out of Protestants, as to be by him refelled, you produce
as the assertion, and doctrine of Suarez.

If you believe, that God will severely punish those that deceive souls in
matter of Religion, by forgery and fraud; I wonder how you did not fear to
cite Page 160. lin. vlt. and in marg. lit* a*
S. Chrysostom Homil. 3. upon the Acts, as affirming, That no Monarchical and
supereminent actions were exercised by S. Peter, no vassallage or subjection
yielded him by the rest of the Apostles. In your margent you cite these words
his: Petrus egit omnia, ex communi discipulorum sententia, nihil ex
authoritate, nihil cum imperio. Peter did all things by common advise of the
disciples, nothing by way of authority and command. Thus you cite S.
Chrysostom. Now see, your falsehood. He says not as you cite him, universally
Peter never did any thing by way of authority and command, but speaking of the
election of S. Matthias, he says, that in this business he did all by common
advise, not by way of authority: and then adds presently, that this not using
authority was wisdom and modesty, not want of authority in Peter. Behold his
words so pregnant for Peter's Monarchy, as nothing can be spoken more fully.
Why does he (Peter) communicate this business with them? Quid? An non licebat
ipse eligere? Licebat and quidem maxim. Verumtamen non id fecit, ne cuiquam
gratificari videretur.
What? Had he not power to make the election him self? He might verily have
done it alone, without any question, but he did not, least he should be thought
partial to some one, had he chosen him by this sole authority. And again.
This was the wisdom, and foresight of this Doctor: He said not, We alone are
sufficient to teach; and although he had right to appoint an Apostle, as much
as they all had, (that is, he could alone have done as much, as together with
them in respect of his eminent power) yet this doing it with advise, was
agreeable to the virtue of the man; and because eminency in spiritual power is
not an Honor but Care of subjects, yet worthily Merito primus omnium
authoritatem vsurpat in negotio, vt qui omne^ habebat in manu. Ad hu^c enim
dixit Christus, and tu conuersus confirm^ Fratres ^uo^.
does he FIRST before them all EXERCISE AVTHORITY in the business, who had ALL
THE REST AT HIS DISPOSITION, and will. For this is he, unto whom our Lord
said: Thou being converted, confirm thy Brethren. Thus S. Chrysostom. Could
any thing ^e devised more full, to show that Peter had, and did ^xercise
Monarchical authority? specially seeing S. Chrysostom in that very place says
further upon the words: Peter rising up in the midst of the Disciples said:
Quomodo cognoscit creditum sibi a Christo Gregem* quam in hoc Choro est
princeps?
Behold how fervent is Peter: how he does acknowledge and oueruiew the FLOCK
COMMITTED to HIM by Christ: How does he show himself PRINCE and Primate ^f
this Quire. Behold likewise the modesty of James: He ^ad the office of Bishop
of Jerusalem, yet he speaks nothing. Consider also the singular modesty of
the rest of the Apostles, Quo pacto concedu^t ei solium non amplius
disceptantes.
how they YIELD the THRONE of Primacy unto him, not striving for it amongst
themselves as they ^ad formerly done. Thus S. Chrysostom: which things ^re so
clear for Peter's exercising Monarchical Pri^acy, and for the Apostles
yielding Vassallage unto ^im, that it is manifest you could not cite this place
^ut against your Conscience, knowing you did but ^elude souls in matters of
Salvation, against the truth.

Gross Imputations, with manifest Falsehood imputed unto Card. Baronius.. 5.
WHAT impudency it is for you to write, as you do, page 114. lin. 14. Baron.
an. 1089. n. 11. Non eos homicidas arbitramur.
It is monstrous ^octrine which was hatched by Pope Urban, and approved (...)
Baronius, that they are not to be judged Murderers which slay Excommunicate
persons. As who should say ^ope Urban and Baronius affirm, that to murder any
way, any Excommunicate persons, is no sin. ^ut your slander will seem
monstrous when their ^octrine, according to truth, is set down. This it is.
Certain Cleargymen, and Schismatic Priests of ^ewd and dissolute life,
excommunicated by the Church, did against the laws of the Church, take arms
and were slain in the field, In a battle fought betwixt Henry Emperor and
Egbert Marquess of Saxony.
as men may justly be in lawful war.

Now because the law of the Church censures such as strike Cleargymen, they
that killed these wicked and seditious priests in the field, had a scruple and
demanded absolution, and penance of their Bishop. The Bishop wrote of the
matter to Pope Urban, who answered: Iuo part. 10. c. 54.
That although he did not judge those, that thus had killed such Excommunicate
persons in the battle, to be murderers, yet that the discipline of the
Church might be kept, and also because such as killed the^ though the fact were
lawful, might have had some sinister and insincere intention therein (as doing
it out of private emnity,) that therefore the Bishop Secundu^ intentionem
eorum, modum congruae satisfactionis iniunge.
should according to their intention and desire, inioyne them a measure of
congruous penance. Hence it follows, that it is no sin to kill any
excommunicate person, even Priests when they be inuaders of our life, and in
just war; but universally, that it is no sin to kill any excommunicate
person what way soever, is not Pope Vrbans Monstrous Doctrine, but a Monster of
your Protestant slaundering, out of a monstrous desire you have to delude, and
enrage men with lies, against the Catholic Church.

In the same page, 114. lin. 29. You thus write of Baronius: Baron. Anno 1106.
n. 14.
Cardinal Baronius commends to the skies young Henry the Emperors son, for
rebelling against his natural Father, for deposing, imprisoning him, and
bringing him with sorrow to the grave. What Turk or Savage would be the
Encomiast of such unnatural and enormous Villainy? Thus you. Let the truth be
examined, and then it will appear, that Baronius his commendation ^f young
Henry is not to the sky, but your slaunde^ing of Baronius comes from as low as
the pit of Hell. first it is false, according to truth of the History, that
^enry the Fourth Emperor dyed of sorrow, in the ^estraynt which he had laid
upon him by his Son See Baronius ibid. and all other Historians that write of
these matters.
nay he was in that durance used with such mild^es and liberty, as he easily
got away, gattered for^es, and invaded his Son, who by his own con^ent, and
by the voices of all the Electours, and ^rinces of the Empire, had been made,
and crowned ^mperour. This is your first untruth, that Baronius ^rayseth that
imprisoning of the Father, wherein he ^as brought with sorrow to his grave, by
his Son.

Secondly, Baronius does not commend young ^enry at all for that fact, but only
speaks con^itionally, and on both sides, no more in his praise ^en his
disprayse. For having set down the letters which the Emperor Henry the Elder,
now being at ^^berty, wrote full of complaynt against his son, ^aronius thus
turns his speech to the Reader: If Baron. Tom. 12. page 46.
^hou sit Arbiter betwixt the Father and the Son; as for ^he Sons procuring
his Fathers restraynt and deposition from the Empire, by the Peers and Princes
thereof, the ^onne is not to be condemned, IF ( as he pretended) HE ^ID this
sincerely, out of Si vere pietatis intuitu, prout prae se tulit, ea omnia
praestitit.
PIETY, to bring his Father unto a better mind, and to make him seek to be
absol^ed from Excommunication wherewith he had been so many ^^mes tied and
chayned. On the other side, IF (as his Father complaynes) HE DID those things
by wicked plots and stratagems, by perjury and breaking his oath given to ^is
Father, verily HIS DEED CANNOT DE PRAISED: (...) wonderful is the Justice of
God, that this Emperor should suffer the same persecution from his wicked
Son, which he had by perpetual incorrigible hatred, for many years
together, offered unto his spiritual Father. Thus Baronius.

Hence it is apparent, that as Baronius and Bellarmine were great friends in
their life, so they are by you slaundered in the same manner after their death.
That Bellarmine may seem Turkish and guilty of propension to Turcisme, you
make him say, The Scripture affirming a thing, is not therefore to be believed
more then Mahomets Alcoran, whereas he only says conditionally, I should not
firmly believe the Scripture affirming a thing, did I not aforehand believe
the Scripture to be divine, as I do not the Alcoran though it say of it self,
that it is of God. Eue^ so to make Baronius seem more savage then any Turk,
whereas he says conditionally, If young Henry did restrain his Father
sincerely out of piety for the good of his Father, that he might return to the
Church, be absolved of excommunication, and afterward peacebly enjoy his
Empire, this kind of severity was indeed piety; you make the proposition
absolute, and make Baronius say: It was piety in the Son, to use Cruelty to
his Father. The Reader, I do not doubt, sees the exorbitancy of this false
dealing.

I must needs add another falsification you Page 56. in margin. lit. c.
use toward Baronius, accusing him as blasphemously extolling the Authority
of the Pope, in this saying, Baron. Ann. 373. number. ^1.
Vt plane appareat ex arbitrio dependisse Romani Pontificis Fidei Decreta
sancire, and sancita mutare: Whence it appears that it was in the power of
the Roman Bishop, to establish Decrees of Faith, and to recall the established.
This you bring, as if Baronius had held, the Pope may make, and vn-make
Decrees about the Truth of Faith, making that to be Truth which before was
Error, and that Error which before was Truth So easily do you believe and
charge any Barbarous and Inhumane conceyte upon Catholic Authors* But he that
shall consider attentively the Antecedents and Consequents of the place, will
see* that Baronius speaks not of Decrees of Faith in regard of the truth of
Doctrine (which are Eternal, and so immutable that if the Pope should
endeavor to change them, he were Decret. d. 40. c. 6. Si Papa.
by Catholic Doctrine an Heretic, and to be deposed) but only of decrees of
faith, about keeping, or denying Communion unto persons suspected of Heresy, in
regard of doubtful propositions. This would have appeared had you cited the
words of Baronius that immediately follow. This is his whole sentence: Hence
Baron. Tom. 4. page 306. Decreta sancita mu^are and DECERNERE quibuscum a
reliqua Ecclesia COMMVNICANDVM sit.
it may appear, that it did depend on the judgment of the Roman Bishop to
establish Decrees of Faith, and to recall the established, and to DECREE with
whom the rest of the Church were to keep COMMUNION. Hence it is evident that
Baronius speaks of Decrees of faith declaratiue, with whom Communion in
Faith is to be kept, and that those are mutable, as the Church shall see cause.

For the better understanding whereof, we must know, that it was the practice
or Heretics, Sic Verba temperant, sic ambigua quaeque concinna^, vt nostram
and aduersariorum confessione^ teneant. Hieron. epist. ad Pammach. and* Ocean.
as S. Hierome notes, to couch their Errors in such ambiguous words, that
taken one way, they sounded Heretically and another way, they carried a
Catholic sense. Hence upon the arising of new Heretics, even the Catholic
Fathers were sometimes devised, some communicating with, some denying communion
unto such Dogmatizants. The decision of these doubts is to be made by the
Catholic Church, and the supreme Pastor thereof, in which case the Church may
change her decrees. For when there is sufficient reason to think that such
propositions be taken by the Authors in the Heretical sense, Decree is to be
made, that no communion be held with them. If afterward it appear by good
proof, that they meant the said propositions according to the Catholic sense,
they may be received by some latter Decree, and the former Decree, about
avoiding their Communion, may be repealed. In this sense true is the saying of
S. Augustine: Lib. 5. de Baptism. c. 1.
That former Councels are reformed by later, when by experime^t of things what
before was hidden comes to light. In this sort ancient Counsels In co^cilio
Ephesians. Christiparae nome^ explosum est Canis. de B. Virg. l. 3. c. 19.
made this decree of Faith, that none should term the most Blessed Virgin
(...), Christ's Mother, because by that Title Heretics did mean tacitly to
imply, that she was not (...), Gods Mother. And yet this Decree of Faith is now
by custom repealed, because it now appears that such as term her Christ's
Mother mean not thereby to deny, that she is truly and verily Gods Mother.

This is that which Baronius says: for speaking of the Apollinarians who did
utter their Errors Ruffin. de adulterat. libror. Origin.
in doubtful words, he says, that first by Pope Damasus they were rejected
as Heretics, and Catholics were forbidden to communicate with them.
Afterward these Greg. Nazian. ad Chelid. epist. 2.
Apollinarians falsely gave out that the Council of the Western Church,
including principally the Roman Bishop, had again received the^ into
Communion. Upon the news of this report, S. Gregory Nazianzen thus writes.
Those that agree with Apollinaris say, that they were admitted by the Council
of the West, or Roman Bishop, by whom it is manifest they were once condemned:
Yet Hoc oste^dant and nos acquiescemus.
let them but show this, and we yield. For it is manifest PERSPICVVM enim eos
veritati assen^iri (nec enim aliter se res habere potest) si hoc consecuti sunt.
that their doctrine does agree with the true Faith (for it cannot otherwise
be,) if they have obtained this. This S. Gregory Nazianzen. Hence Baronius does
infer against Heretics that the Grecian Fathers did bear such reverence
unto the Roman Church, and Roman Bishop, believing he could not err, that if
his Decrees declaratiue of doubtful and ambiguous propositions should change
and alter, they were ready to change and alter with him, and to think that
manner of speech in matters of Faith most fitting for the present, which he did
for the present allow. This I say, is all that Baronius does affirm, not that
the Pope may change his Decrees about the truth of the articles and mysteries
of Faith, as you in your blind auersion would impose upon him, catching at
words and syllables of every less clear sentence, which to be the right iogge
Aguntur spiritu maligno in pios, vt Satanica virulentia incensi, EORVM VERBA ET
SCRIPTA NON MALOTIO SE INTERPRETARI non possint. Loc. commun. Martini* Lutheri
5. Class. page 26.
of the Caluinian spirit, Luther long ago noted.

THE CONCLUSION.
BEHOLD good store of your Ignorances, Impertinencyes, Misallegations of
Scriptures, Wilful and Unconscionable Falsehoods in your producing the Fathers,
which I offer unto your Picture to adorn that Crown, which in your Glorious
Humor you have caused to be set over your Book, in the second page thereof,
giving it the Title of Wisdom and Truths Triumph. Verily, no Jewels and
Gemmes can sit the Crown of such Wisdom and Truth as yours is, better then
these, being made in this Censure Clear, Shining, Illustrious by manifest
proof*

My purpose was, to have discovered many besides these, yea more then an
hundred, no less notorious then these, about the Nine Points, with many other
eminent Untruths; but now I perceive, that hereby your Picture would grow,
though not disproportionable to the greatness of your Desert, yet into a greater
bigness they Paper-Images use to have, which commonly are still less then their
Patterns. I must therefore remain indebted unto you for the rest, which are
many hundreds, engaging my self to pay the last farthing of this debt,
whenever the same shall be exacted, with sufficient assurance that the
performance thereof shall avail, not only to your personal Disgrace, but also
to the public Good, by conversion of so many, by you miserably seduced,
souls. Although I must confess, that the former are so many, and so clear,
as they may sufficiently resolve such, as depend on you, of their miserable and
dreadful danger; and move them to return to the truth, if they err through
weakness of Understanding, not through willfulnes of heart. For as S. Cyprian
says, Lib. aduer. Demetrianum initio.
Qui ad malum motus est mendacio fallente; multo facilius ad bonum mouebitur
veritate cogente; such as have been simply lead away unto evil, by the fallacy
of lying; will more easily be brought back again unto Good, by the force of
Truth.

FINIS.
THE ANSWER UNTO The Nine Points of Controversy, Proposed by our late
Soueraygne (of Famous memory) unto M. Fisher of the Society of JESUS. AND THE
REIOYNDER Unto the Reply of D. Francis White Minister.

Et faciam VOS fieri PISCATORES Hominum.

Matthew. 4.19. And I will make YOU FISHERS of Men.

Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XXV.

His Maiestyes Note delivered unto M. Fisher.
SOME of the principal points which withold my joining unto the Church of
Rome, except she reform her self, or be able to give me satisfaction, Are
these.

1. The worship of Images. 2. The Prayings and Offering oblations to the
Blessed Virgin Mary. 3. Worshipping and Invocation of Saints, and Angels. 4.
The Liturgy, and private Prayers for the Ignorant in an unknown Tongue. 5.
Repetitions of Pater Nosters, Aues, and Creeds, especially affixing a kind of
merit to the number of them. 6. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation. 7.
Communion under one kind, and the abetting of it by Concomitancy. 8. Works of
Supererogation, especially with reference unto the Treasure of the Church. 9.
The Opinion of deposing Kings, and giving away their Kingdoms by Papal power,
whether directly, or indirectly.
THE PREFACE.
Most Gracious, and Dread Soueraygne,
A Conference about Religion between Doctor White and Me, was occasion, that
your Majesty called me to your gracious Presence, not disdayning to dispute
with one so mean and unworthy as my self; imitating his Benignity whose
Vicegerent you are, and according to the Phrase of Holy Scripture, As 2. Reg.
14.17. Sicut Angelus Dei, sic est Dominus meus Rex.
his Angel. And as it is the property of the Good Angel, first to strike
fear and terror into them to whom he appears, but in the end to leave them
full of comfort; in like sort your Majesty. For though the first salutation
carried a show of severity, yet your dismissing me was benign and gracious,
not only pardoning my earnestnes in defending the part of the Catholic Church,
but also saying, What the Minister does object against this narration, is
refuted in M. Fishers Book, about untruths falsely laid to his charge.
You liked me the better.

The grateful acknowledgement, and admiration of this your Princely Clemency,
makes me desire from the bottom of my Soul, that I could fully satisfy your
Majesty of my dutyfull and loyal affection, which is fast tied unto your
sacred person by a threefold Funiculus triplex difficile rumpitur. Eccles.
14.14.
inviolable bond. The The Minister says, that the Jesuits Oratory is
plausible, and thereupon enters into a common place, that Truth needs no
Trimming, which is true, yet if needs many times Apologies and Defense against
Slanders.
Law of nature obliges me thereunto, as being your Majesty's borne Subject,
the transgression whereof were Unnatural, Barbarous, Inhumane.

The Law of God requires the like constant, and perfect Allegiance at my hands,
binding me to regard you as his Lieutenant, and to acknowledge your power and
authority, as Romans 13.1.
his Ordination: so that according to the doctrine of the Catholic Church, I
must not only outwardly observe, but also admit your Majesty's will and command
with Reverence, into the secret closet of my inmost Romans 13.5.
Conscience and Soul.

The Constitutions also of the Order whereof I am an unworthy member, do
strictly command me the same, in seuerest manner charging the Subjects thereof
no ways to meddle in State-matters, or in Princes affairs; much less under
pretense of Religion to attempt any thing, or to consent unto any enterprise,
that may disturb the quiet and tranquillity of Kings and Kingdoms. And seeing
we are so devoted to our own Institute, that our Colloquium de Secretis
Iesuitarum.
Adversaries thereupon amongst many other Calumniations, lay to our charge,
that we more reuere^tly esteem, and carefully observe the constitutions of our
Rule, then the Law of God; I shall for your Majesty's fuller satisfaction, set
down some part of our Constitutions in this point, in manner following.

Decret. 101. Cong. 5. General. ac Can. 12. ^iusdem.
Monita Gener.. 18. The Constitutions, out of which these are taken, be termed
Monita Generalia, General Admonitions, because they concern generally al
persons of the Order, by way of distinction from Particular, which concern
only some kind of persons, as Preachers, Masters etc. Which particular
Admonitio^s are as public as the general. Whereby you may see the Ministers
ignorance in Logic to be equal unto his malice against Jesuits, who says
that the term of General Admonitions, forbidding to meddle in State-matters,
argues that Jesuits have other Secret Admonitions, that warrant such meddling.
As though General Admonitions were condistinct against secret, and particular
against publik. Whereas general may be kept secret, and particular be made
public.
Vt ab omni specie mali abstineatur, and querelis etiam ex falsis suspicionibus
prouenientibus quoad fieri poterit occurratur, praecipitur nostris omnibus in
virtute Sanctae Obedientiae, and sub poena inhabilitatis ad quaeuis officia and
dignitates, seu praelationes, vocisque etiam actiuae quam passiuae priuationis,
ne quispiam publicis and saecularibus Principum negotijs, quae ad rationem
Status, vt vocant, pertineant, vlla ratione se immiscere, nec etiam quantumuis
requisitus and rogatus, eiusmodires politicas tractandi curam suscipere audeat,
vel praesumat.

Decret. 57. and Can. 17.
Illa autem omnia quae a spirituali Instructione diuersa sunt, negotia Status
censeri debent, qualia sunt quae ad Principum inter se foedera, vel ad Regnorum
iura and successiones pertine^t, vel ad bella tam ciuilia quam externa.

In Regulis communibus, Reg. 41.
Iubet regula 41. vt saecularia negotia, vtpote quae sunt a nostro Instituto
aliena, and vehementer a spiritualibus auocant, multum auersemur.

In Regulis Concionatorum.
Iubentur Concionatores Societatis a reprehensionibus Principum, and Magnatum
Reipub. abstinere, and obedientia^ erga Principes and Magistratus frequenter,
and serio suis in Concionibus populo commendare.

In Constitutionibus.
Iubent Co^stitutiones nostrae varijs in locis, vt oremus speciatim pro
Principibus, eorumque spirituali saluti praecipua cura procurandae, ac
promouendae inuigilemus, ob universal bonum, quod ad multos alios qui eorum
authoritatem sequuntur, vel per eos reguntur, proueniet.

In Instructionibus.
Extat denique Instructio pro Confessarijs Principum, qua Nostris serio
interdicitur, ne occasion huius muneris rebus Politicis, aut Reipublicae
gubernationi se immisceant. Iubentur etiam hanc Instructione^ Principibus
ostendere, curareque vt ij plane intelligant, quid Societas ab eo postulat qui
Confessarium sibi eligit, neque per Leges nostras licere nobis alijs
conditionibus id oneris suscipere.

I humbly crave pardon for offering so many particulers of our Rule unto your
Majesty's perusal, which I should not have done, but out of a most strong
desire to give your Majesty The Minister shapeth this argument into this
form: No Jesuit observing the Rules of his Order can meddle in state matters.
Every Jesuit observes the rules of his Order. Ergo, No Jesuit does meddle in
State matters. And the^ in answer thereof he says: He that belieues the
Minor, must be a stranger in the world, and have lived an Anchoret, or Recluse
in some Cave, who never heard of Campian, Parsons, Creswell, Garnet, Suarez,
Bellarmin, etc. I Answer, This does show the Innocency of the Jesuits, seeing
you can bring no examples of their dealing in State-matters, but such as are
either ridiculously impertinent, or manifestly false. Was it matter of State,
and not of Religion in Bellarmine to write against the English abnegation of
the Popes Authority? Or in Suarez, to write Contra sectam Anglicanam, the
English Schism and Heresy? Or in Philopater, to write for the Innocence of
Catholic Priests? Or in Mariana, to give instructions about the pious
Education of a Christian Prince? In which writings if they hap to err (as
Mariana did not by way of assertion, but by way of doubt) does this prove they
dealt in state-matters? The Casuists that write about matters of Conscience,
how far Kings may proceed without sin and divine offense in waging war,
exacting Tribute, and the like state-actions, do they deal in state-matters if
perchance they hap to err? What impertinency is this?

Now also see your falsehood. That Fa. Parsons wrote the book called Dole-man,
you cannot prove, and he with oath denied it, naming another secular Gentleman,
as Author. That M. Garnet had his anointed fingar in the Gunpowder treason,
is so false, as even your Lord Cook did not accuse his Fingars of dealing
therein, but only his Ears for hearing thereof in Confession. What Catholic
in Christendom, though an Anchoret or Recluse, has not heard of the singular
Innocence and constancy of F. Campian, and of your Heretical barbarity toward
him? Cambden in your Protestant History [ Elizab. page 336.] does acknowledge,
that the Queen (which she would not have done, had she not been well assured
of his Innocence) would no ways a long time consent unto his execution. At
last, seeing your Ministerial rage against him would not believe her to be
truly a Protestant in heart unless she imbrued her hands in his Innocent blood
[ importunis precibus euicta permisit] being overcome by your importunity, she
permitted him to your cruelty (as Pilate did Christ to the Jews) to be
butchered, with sundry other Priests, [ plerosque tamen conscios fuisse non
credidit] yet did she not (says he) believe some of them to be guilty of the
treasons you in your malice objected against them.

And yet if some Jesuit should against his Rule meddle in State-matters, is
this to be imputed to the Order? Did all the Apostles, and all the Angels keep
their Order? Yea, seeing you hold Ministers to be worthy of Religious Adoration
[ page 224.] and therefore more holy and venerable then Angels, I pray you, do
they all keep their Orders, Rules and Canons? Yet every man is to be thought to
keep the Rules of his Society and Incorporation, until the contrary be clearly
proved against him. And when this is proved against some one, that crime is to
be taken as the fault of the person, not of the Order. This is the law of
common Humanity, and the contrary proceeding of Ministers against Jesuits, is
Barbarous, and Savage.


satisfaction, against such wrongefull aspersions, wherewith Maleuolency, and
Suspicion labors to disgrace us, and to make us odious to them, whom
(howsoever disaffected from us) we must perpetually reverence and obey; and of
whom under God, our comfort, safety, and the success of our Labors does
principally depend. And when I consider your Majesty's gracious disposition,
and excellent maturity, and sharpnes of Judgment to penetrate assuredly into
the depth of affairs, together with our Innocence, whereof our own
Conscience is unto us instead of a thousand Witnesses, and which (as we are
persuaded) does in the course of our actions, and whole proceedings appear to
any that shall impartially and without passion look into them* I cannot
despair, but the prayers which for this intent with tears and afflicted hearts
we daily power forth, will at last so much prevail with that Sovereign
Governor of the world, Cor Regis in manu Domini. Prou. c. 21.1.
in whose hands are the hart^ of Princes, that your Majesty may conceive some
better opinion of your (without cause so much calumniated) subjects, as to
judge of us according as our Co^stitutions frame us, and our Actions deserve;
and not as i^ pleases disaffection to paint us forth.

And as your Majesty is a living Monument of that late Parago^ of France, Henry
the fourth, and of his wisdom and other Princely excellencyes; so why may we
not intertayne a far off a hopeful thought that your Majesty may one day be
better informed against so many maleuolent suggestions; and see that they
proceed from another origin then our desert, as that famous Here also the
Minister forms the argument after his own sta^pe, as if the argument were
grounded on the temporal prosperity of this King, saying: Your reverence
looks this way: Henry the fourth a wise King was prosperous in his
re-intertayning the Jesuits. Ergo, the King of great Britayne should do well to
intertayne them. Did not the Minister look asquint on Jesuits, he would not
have thus wrested the argument awry. The Argument is this: Henry a wise and
prudent King, bitterly incensed against Jesuits through misinformation, by
exact looking into their Institute and course of life, discovered, that only
Maleuolency void of truth, did vent such accusatio^s against them. Therefore
the same may happen, and be hoped of an other as wise and prudent a Prince.
Temporal Prosperity, as it does not ever accompany the friends of Jesus, so
neither the favorers of Jesuits, nor I think the friends of Ministers. The
first king in the world that ever loved Minister, was Christerne king of
Denmark, a fast friend unto Luther, of whose miseries and misfortunes all
historyes are full. [ Tribus Regnis exutus a suis, and a Successore ^inctus in
Clathrata cauea etc. Tursellin. hist. page 256.] Can they brag of the
prosperity of the Duke of Saxony their first Prince in Germany? of Seyme^ their
first Prince in England? of James the bastard their first in Scotland? of the
Prince of Orange their first in the Low Countries?
Prince did, thereupon restoring the^ whom sinister Information had banished
whom sinister Information had banished out of his kingdom, for which fact
(says the Petrus Mattheus in his History of Henry the fourth of France.
Historiographer of France) he received thanks from all parts of the world,
even out of Peru, and Cochin, Iapon, Goa, and China with presents of some
singularities of the Country. I observed (says the same Author) the pleasure
which he took in speaking of that action, and what content he received, when
as a great Cardinal told him that by this restoring, his Majesty had gotten
two thousand learned pens for his service and perpetual fame. When as the
Jesuits represented unto him the Catalogue of Colleges, and the thanks of the
three Provinces of France, he used these words unto them, which should serve as
an Epigraphe upon all their houses: Assurance follows Confidence; I trust in
you, assure your selves of me; with these papers I receive the hearts of all
your company, and with the effects I will witness mine unto you. I have allwaies
said that they which fear and love God well, cannot but do well, and are
always most faithful to their Prince. We are now better informed, I did hold
you to be otherwise then you are, and you have found me other then you held me.
I would it had been sooner, but there is means to recompense what is past.
Love me, and I will love you.

Noe labors would we spare, nor any endeavor omit, nor stick to venture the
loss of any thing dear unto us (except the grace of God and our eternal
salvation) to purchase a small portion of that favor your Majesty's meanest
subjects enjoy, that we might in some sort cooperate to the felicity of the
Christian world, which (as we are persuaded) does on your Maiestyes person
singularly depend.

For God, rich in mercy and goodness, as he has made your Majesty partaker of
his power and authority in governing this inferior world: so likewise he has
adorned you with many Excellent gifts, as Wisdom, Learning, Authority with
foreign Princes, and Common Wealths, made you beloved of your subjects, that
on you are cast the eyes of all Christian countries, as on the person whom the
Prince of peace, has beyond the rest enabled, to Here our Replicant shows
himself to be according to the Ministerial kind, by railing at the Answerer,
and by scorning Peace and unity, saying contemptuously: Forsooth to join
together again the parts of Christendom distracted. Deceyuers love to fish
in troubled waters. It was Luthers joy to see the world in dissensio^. tom. 9.
Germ. de Commit. Worm. fol. 8. Nihil ita mihi visu iucundum, quam cum tumultus
and dissenssiones exoriuntur.
join together again the parts of Christendom distracted one from another
through Controversies of Religion.

If the requests of the pretended Reformers were such as the Roman Church might
yield unto them, without overthrowing the very foundations of the unity of
Faith; if instead of Catholic principles misliked by them, they did propose
such other of their own, as she might see some probability* or almost
possibility of assured continued peace likely to follow upon her yielding in
some points; feeling-Compassion (in regard of the wound of discord bleeding in
the heart of Christendom) would move her to the uttermost approach toward
Protestants, that the Law of God can permit, though with some disparagement to
her Honor.

But so it is, that those that desire her reformation, be so many for number,
and for opinions so divided amongst themselves, that it is impossible she
should satisfy all. The Minister against this clear and co^uincing discourse
of the Answerer, comes forth with this syllogism set down in a distinct
letter, each proposition in a distinct line very maiestically. Whosoever abides
in error, ought to reform.

The Roman Church abides in error. Ergo,

The Roman Church ought to reform.

The Assumption (says he) is manifest by the repugnancyes of the Roman
doctrine with holy Scripture.

Is not this most ridiculous? Against him I oppose this Syllogism. The
Minister forced by truth, does acknowledge that by Theology which he calls
Sophystrie, we give seeming solutions unto their arguments out of Scripture.
page 581. But Arguments unto which seeming solutio^s are given, be not
manifest. Ergo, Protestants have no manifest arguments to prove our Religion to
be against Scripture, and so without ground break the peace of Christendom.


Their conditions of peace are, that she reform herself, by forsaking
definitions of General Counsels, Customs, Doctrines universally received for
many ages, time out of mind co^fessedly without any known beginning since the
Apostles. Instead of these means (so potent to stay staggering Consciences,
and to keep the Christian world in peace) they present her with the Scripture,
understood The Minister here very impudently denies that Protestants resolve
by private illumination; whereas himself more then twenty times in this Reply,
does teach that each Protestant does lastly resolve by divine illumination,
whereby he sees manifestly the resplendant verity of things believed, as will
appear afterward.
by private illumination, the source of discord, from which an Ocean of strife
must needs flow. These things considered your most Judicious Majesty cannot but
see, that her yielding would not compose debates already begun, but rather open
a wide gappe unto innumerable new braules, and bring them into Kingdoms
hitherto with such dissension untouched.

Wherefore there being no possibility that the Catholic part could gain peace
to Christendom by any yielding unto our adversaries either reasonable, or
unreasonable; whither should lovers of Concord turn themselves but unto your
Gracious Majesty, that have in your power the affections of Protestants, and
therefore would be the Here the Minister raileth ve^ting new scolding Phrases,
Gross errors, and the sharking rapine of the Romish Harpyes, trampling Gods
truth, and Gods people under the foot of the inerrable, and uncontrollable
Grand Seigneur, of the seauen-hilled-Citty, lewd Superstition, Roman tyranny:
tearming the Answerer impudent, bold, frantic, guided by an evil Genius, and
the like, only for motioning unto his Majesty the means of the reunion of
Christendom, and for his conceauing some possibility to give satisfaction
which his majesty himself does allow that we should conceive as possible,
saying; Except she reform herself, or else be ABLE to give me satisfaction.
fittest instrument for their Reunion with the Roman Church. The God of
Charity has put into your Majesty's heart a desire of unity of the Church, and
into your hand an Oliue-bough. Crown of peace, to set it on the head of
Christendom, which weary of endless contention powers forth unto your Majesty
her suppliant Complaint; Quem das finem (Rex Magne) laborum? And seeing nothing
hinders, but that your self are not yet satisfied in some Doctrines of the
Roman church, particularly in the Nine points your Majesty has set down in
writing, I humbly present unto your Majesty these my poor labors for your
satisfaction, so much desired of the Christian world.

That the Roman Church is the only true Church.
AND to the end, that this my Answer may be in it self more solid, and better
accepted off by your Majesty, before I descend unto particulars I think best
first to show in general the Roman to be the only true Church, for this was
the occasion and subject of the Conference between Doctor White and me, and is
the Because the Minister here cauilleth; note that doctrine of Faith may be
most important two ways. First, as a truth which is essentially the object of
supernatural affection, as of Hope, charity, contritio^, without which no man
is saved. In this kind the Incarnation of the Son of God is most important.
Secondly, as the principle, and means by which the said truth is proposed,
without which the same cannot ordinarily be known. In this kind, most
important it is to know the true Church.
most important and maynest point of Controversy, in which all other are
inuolued, and by the decision thereof resolved; the Church 2. Tim. 3.15. Math.
16. Isa. c. 2. v. 3. Dan. c. 2. v. 35.
being the Pillar and Foundation of truth; the eminent Rock, and Mountain
filling the whole world; on the top whereof stands the Tradition of saving
doctrine, conspicuous, and immovable. If this Church be overthrown, the
total certainty of Christianity cannot but with it together fall to the
ground: if it be hidden, and made invisible, men must needs wander in the
search of the first delivered Christian doctrine, without end, or hope of ever
arriving at any certain issue. And if this Co^trouersy be not examined and
determined in the first place, disputation by Non ad Scripturas prouocandum,
nec in ijs constituendum certamen, in quibus aut nulla, aut parum certa
victoria. Tertull. in praescrip. c. 19.
Scripture will prove fruitless, by the sole euidency whereof no victory can be
gotten against proteruious error, or at least no victory that is very The
Minister ( page 8.) says that by the Church appare^t victory cannot begotten
more then by the Scripture, which is false. For apparent victory is that whereby
men are forced to yield, or else to disclame from the authority of the Judge. If
the true Church be found out, and made Judge, men may be forced by her sentence
to yield unto truth, or else to disclame from the Judge: which yet we see is not
done by the Scripture. For men that allow the same Scripture to be Judge,
neither are forced to yield unto truth nor to appeal from the Scripture: yea
says Luther Tom. 2. Wit. in Concion. Domin. octauae post Trinit. fol. 118.
Never any Heresy was so pestilent or foolish, that did not cover it self with
the veyle of Scripture.
apparent: neither will answers about particular Doctrines easily satisfy a
mind preoccupyed with a long continued dislike of them.

BECAUSE the Minister has repeated sundry false Principles, and moved many
doubts about the Resolution of Faith, declared in the two ensuing Grounds of
the Jesuits Answer: Because also this Co^trouersy is the ground of the rest,
by which they are finally resolved; and except it be cleared in the first
place, Heresy will be still hyding it self in the obscurity thereof; Hence I
have thought necessary, in this very Entry to superadde, and prefixe this
ensuing Treatise.

A SHORT TREATISE CONCERNING THE RESOLVTION OF FAITH, For the more full
clearing of the ensuing Controversies, about Tradition, Scripture, and the
Church.
THIS Treatise is divided into two Parts. In the first I will set down, and
refute the Protestant form of Resolution. In the second declare and prove the
Catholic.

The Protestant Resolution of Faith declared.. 1.
PROTESTANTS perceive, that if they pretend to believe Christian Religion
without seeing the truth thereof, upon the sole authority of God revealing, they
must consequently believe that God revealed it upon the word and authority of
the Apostles, who preached the same to the world as doctrine unto them revealed
of God, and then again, that the Apostles did thus preach, and publish it by
Quid Apostoli praedicauerint praescribam, non aliter probari debere, quam per
easdem Ecclesias quas ipsi condiderunt. Tertull. de praescrip. c. 19.
the light of the Church succeeding the^, delivering it hand to hand as from
them; which Tradition if they admit as a certain and infallible rule, they are
To this purpose they say: So long as we stay upon the Fathers, we shall still
continue in our old (Popish) errors. Peter Martyr. de votis page 476. Luther de
ser^uo Arbitrio. Tom. 2. Wittemberg. page 434. Pomeran. in Ionam. Napier upon
the revelations, Calius Curio and alij.
brought into streights, and mightily pressed to receive many doctrines of
Tradition, which they are now resolute never to believe.

Therefore to lay the axe to the root they would feign build their faith on an
higher ground then the authority of God darkely revealing, to wit John White
defense page 309. None can believe except God illuminate their hearts, but such
as have this illumination do SEE MANIFESTLY the truth of things believed.
on Divine illumination, whereby they see manifestly the truth of things
believed: whereby they are Francis White Orthodoxe, page 108. adding, that
Protestants herein are like to a man that sees a far off an obscure
glimmering, but coming to the place, beholds the light it self. And the same
is taught by Calvin, Institut. l. 1. c. 7. n. 2. and the rest.
convicted in conscience by the evidence of the thing it self, that their
Religion is Divine: by the luster, and resplendent verity of the matter of
Scripture, and majesty of the doctrine thereof, sensed according unto their
manner.

The former Resolution confuted by six Arguments.. 2.
THis pretense of Resolution so much Page 19. lin. 4. and page 28. lin. 3. and
ibid. lin. 28. and page 68. lin. 20. The Majesty and luster of Heavenly
doctrine is such, as it appears illustrious though propounded by mean and
obscure persons, as a rich Jewel does manifest his own worth.
repeated by our Minister in this Reply, is refelled by 6. arguments as being
extremely arrogant, ignorant, disorderly, fond, desperate, the devise of Satan.

The first Argument.
First, what more Arrogant then to challenge ordinary illuminations more high,
rare, and excellent then the Apostles had? The Apostles, though they had this
privilege that Christian Religion was to them immediately revealed of God, yet
did they not see the resplendent verity and shi^ing truth of the Doctrine
thereof, but saw darkely, believing what they did not see, as S. Paul does 1.
Cor. 13.12. Videmus nunc in speculo in aenigmate: we se through a glass
darkely, that is, we be sure, by believing Gods word of what we do not see.
testify. Therefore illuminatio^ showing manifestly the truth of things
believed, challendged by Protestants, is more high, rare, and excellent light,
then that the Apostles had, what greater Innumerabiles sunt qui se Videntes non
solum iactant, sed and a Christo illuminatos videri volunt. Sunt autem
haeretici Augustine. tract. 43. in Joan.
arrogance? Swenkfeldians equal themselves unto the Apostles, pretending
immediate revelation and teaching from God, such as the Apostles had; but
Protestants pretending to see manifestly the truth of things believed, equal
themselves unto the Blessed, whose happiness is to see Fides est credere quod
nondum vides, cuius Fidei merces est videre quod credis. Augustine. de verb.
Apostol. Sermon. 29.
what we believe; specially seeing one point of the doctrine Protestants pretend
to see, is the blessed Trinity, the true light and resplendent verity whereof a
man cannot see manifestly without being blessed.

The second Argument.
Secondly, what greater Ignorance against the Rudiments of Christian Religion,
then to resolve Christian faith by the evidence and resplendent verity of the
doctrine, and matter, and of things believed? What is Divine faith but to
believe things we do Argumentum non appare^tium. Hebr. 11.1. Fide credimus ea
quae non videmus. Aug. de Genesis ad lit. l. 12. c. 31. Et Enchirid. c. 8. Fides
quam diuina eloquia docent, est earum rerum quae non videntur.
not see, upon the word of God revealing them, whom we know to be worthy of all
credit? so that howsoever some learned men may otherwise see some doctrines
revealed by the light of reason, yet never by the light of faith: for faith is
that virtue, whereby we Fides inchoat meritum. Aug. l. 1. retrac. c. 23. Et
epist. 106. Fides meretur gratiam been operandi.
merit and please God, by showing reverence to his word; but what merit, or
God-a-mercy is it to believe what we see manifestly Augustine. tract. 79. in
Joan. Laus fidei est si quod creditur non videtur. and Gregor. hom. 26. in
Euang. Cyprian. Sermon. de Natiu. Christi, Haec fides non habet meritum.
convicted by the evidence thereof? What pious affection to Gods word does a man
show by seeing it to be the truth?

The third Argument.
Thirdly, it is extremest Disorder, as S. Augustine says August. de vtilit.
credendi c. 14. Pri^s videre velle vt animum purges, peruersum atque prae
posterum est.
first to see that we may believe; whereas we ought first firmly to believe
what we do not se, that so we may See this Ministers reply page 16. The matter
and form of the Books show themselves to be Divine.
merit to see what we have believed. But Protestants pretend first to see the
resplendent verity of Scriptures doctrine, thence concluding See this Ministers
reply page 16. The matter and form of the Books show themselves to be Divine.
that the Scripture being so high, and divine truth, as they, forsooth, see it
to be, cannot but be revealed of God; and if If Divine then Apostolical. Reply
page 19.
revealed of God, then preached by the Apostles; if preached by the Apostles,
then the full public tradition of the Church in all subsequent ages, Page 105.
the Minister says; If we can demonstrate we mantayne the Religion which the
holy Apostles taught this alone is sufficient to prove we are the true Church,
though we could not nominate any visible Church of our Religion out of History.
though the Preachers and Professors thereof were never seen, nor can be named.
Thus disorderly they place the Cart before the Horse: they know that their
Religion is supernatural truth, before they be sure that it is either the
doctrine of the Church, or of the Apostles, or of God.

The fourth Argument.
Fourthly, it is great blindenes, and Field appendix part. 2. page 20. does
acknowledge, that they who see not this light of Scripture, and yet pretend it,
must be brain, sick and frantic.
want of common sense for men that digladiate amongst themselves about
Scripture, and the doctrine thereof, which is divine and heavenly, and which
not; to pretend that they are enabled by the spirit to discern heavenly
writings, doctrines, and senses from humane, by the evidence of the thing, as
easily as men distinguish light from darkness, honey from gall. Protestants
disagree and contend bitterly about the very Scriptures they daily peruse, see,
and behold, which text and sense is divine and heavenly, which not* as (to omit
many other Examples) about Luther praefat. in Epist. Iacobi edit. Ienensi.
Chemnitius Enchyrid. page 63. The Epistle of James, the second of Peter, the
second and third of John, the Epistle of Jude, the Apocalypse of John are
Apocryphal.
the Epistle of James, and about the sense of these words, This is my body; and
yet they John White says, they know the senses of Scriptures to be divine by
their own light shyning, and by their own showing it self in them, as
sweetness is known by it own taste. Calvin lib. 1. Institut. c. 7.. 2. in fine.
Non obscuriorem veritatis suae seipsum scriptura vlt^o praese fert, quam
coloris suires albae and nigrae, saporis res suaues and amarae.
challenge resolution in these matters by the light of the spirit, making them
to see manifestly the truth of the thing, and to discern true scripture in
text and sense from false, as easily as the light of the Sun, from darkness:
what can be more fond and ridiculous?

The fifth Argument.
Fifthly, if no man be saved without divine and supernatural faith, and if
supernatural faith be resolved not by the authority of the Church of God, but
by the resplendent verity of the Doctrine, what hope of salvation can wise and
prudent men expect in the Protestant Church? Without divine illuminatio^,
making them to see the truth of things believed, they cannot have supernatural
faith, nor be saved, if Protestants say true. Wise and prudent men cannot be so
fond, as to believe that they see manifestly the truth of the things they
believe by Christian faith, as the truth of the Trinity, of the Incarnation, of
the Real presence, of the Resurrection of the dead, and other like articles
believed: What Protestants are forced by this argument to contradict
themselves. For, sometimes they teach, that faith builded on the authority of
the Church, is but human, and acquisite, not sufficient unto Salvation. Thus
our Minister page 14. And yet at other times, they teach that Nouices and
weakelings have faith sufficient unto salvation whose says is built upon the
authority of the Church: this also is taught* by the Minister page 22. saying:
Nouices in faith ground their historical faith upon the authority of the
Church.
then can they expect, but most certain damnation in the Protestant Church, if
this Protestant way to resolve supernatural faith, be the truth?

The sixth Argument.
Finally, no devise more proper of Satan to entrap simple souls, then the
promise of clear and manifest Truth; this being the very Timeo, ne sicut
Serpens Heuam seduxit astutia sua, ita corrumpantur sensus vestri and excida^t
simplicitate quae est in Christo. 2. Cor. 11.3.
means of delusion, whereby he deceived our first parent Eve, and Genesis 3.4.
won her to taste the forbidden fruit* for what more grateful unto men that
groan under the Augustine. de vtil. cred. c. 9. Vera Religio sine quodam graui
authoritatis imperio iniri recte nullo pacto potest.
yoke of Christian authority, pressing them to believe what they do not see,
the^ this Haeretici non se iugum credendi imponere, sed docendi fontem aperire
gloriantur. Augustine. Ibid.
promise of Heresy, Follow us and you shall be like unto God seeing the truth,
you shall by following us not darkly believe, but know good from bad, truth
from falsehood in matters of Religion, by evidence and resplendant verity of the
thing? With these promises says S. Augustine Qua promissa anim^ naturaliter
gaudet humana, and sanorum escas appetendo, irruit in v^nena fallentium.
Augustine. Ibid.
the souls of men are naturally ouerioyed, and whilst they gape after the
promised sight of divine truth whereof as yet they be not capable, the cosening
promisers cast into their mouth, and make them devour the poisoned morsells of
their falsehood.

Concerning the light of Scripture.. 3.
CONCERNING the light of Scripture, two things are evident. First some
arguments of probability may be drawn from the Scriptures, to prove they are
of God, which serve for the comfort of Belieuers, and may somewhat incline
Infidels to believe upon other greater motives, to wit the authority of God and
his Church. This probable evidence, and evident probability is al which the
testimonies of Scholemen brought by the Minister, affirm.

Secondly, the Scripture has not light to show it self with evident
certainty, to be the word of God, but is believed to be such without being
seen, as much as any other point and mystery of faith, to wit, upon the word
of God so revealing delivered by tradition.

This is demonstrated, because to be the word of God and the rule of faith, is
to be true and certain, not only in some part^ but also in all, and every part
and particle thereof, so that, as says our Page 16. lin. 2.
Minister, no liar can speak therein: and if Augustine. epist. 9. Si ad
scripturas admittatur me^dacium, quid eis authoritatis remanebit?
one sentence of Scripture be proved false, the credit of the whole is lost.
But it is impossible that any man should know by the light and evidence of the
sense and doctrine of Scripture, that the Scripture according to every book
and chapter, leaf and line, is certain and assured truth, and that no lie or
falsehood is contained therein, as these seven Arguments euince.

The first Argument.
First, because the Hieron. epist. ad Aug. 19. inter epist. Aug. Scripturae
obscurissimae sunt. Iren. l. 2. c. 47. Origin. lib. 7. contra Celsum. Reuera
multis locis obscurae. Vide Bellarm. de Script. l. 3. c. 1.
Fathers teach, and Field. Church l. 4. c. 15. No question but there be
manifold obscurityes in Scripture.
Protestants, even our Reply page 35.
Minister, acknowledge, that there be many dark and obscure passages of
Scripture; that the Scripture is full of innumerable difficultyes; that
sometimes one Quid vel falso suspicentur non inueniunt. Aug. l. 2. de doctr.
Christ. c. ^. Whitaker. de Eccles. page 220. Quaedam loca de quibus nihil certo
statui potest.
can hardly so much as give a probable guess at their meaning: but these texts
and places cannot be known to contain divine truth and no falsehood by the
evidence of the doctrine* Therefore we cannot know the Scripture to be the word
of God, that is, nothing but truth, by the evidence of the doctrine. Hence
appears, that Protestants teaching that ^he Scripture is known to be the word
of God, and that no lie is contained therein by the evidence and light of the
doctrine, co^tradict themselves in saying, that in many places it is difficill
and dark, as they cannot assuredly understand it. For how can they know by the
light of the sense, or doctrine, that the texts not understood contain nothing
but truth?

The second Argument.
Secondly the Scriptures are pretended to be known by the majesty Reply page
16. Internal matter and majesty of the books. Item page 30. and 68. Field.
appendix. 34. Calvin. Instit. l. 1. c. 7.
and purity of the doctrine, but though some mysteries of the Scriptures carry
a majesty in respect of natural reason, and a show of sublimity above it, as
the Blessed Trinity; yet Sunt quaeda^ in sacris litteris quae quia suboffendunt
animos ignaros and negligentes sui (quae maxima turba) populariter accusari,
defendi autem populariter propter mysteria quae in illis co^tinentur, non a
multis admodum possunt. Aug. de vtil. cred. c. 1.
other points of Scripture seem unto reason ridiculous and childish: As that
the serpent did speak to the woman; that Adam and Eve were naked without
perceiving themselves to be so; that there was day and night before the sun
was created, and the like. Therefore we must have some other and surer ground
then this majesty of the doctrine, to be certain that the Scripture is nothing
but truth, and Gods infallible word.

The third Argument.
Thirdly, whereas the Reply page 19.
Minister much urges the harmony of Scripture, to prove the same to be of God.
Though this harmony appear in diverse things, yet who does not know, that
innumerable seeming contradictions are objected against Scripture, This is
evident unto all that have read the co^me^taryes of the Fathers.
many of which are only probably answered by the Fathers, many answered by
things assumed without proof, only because otherwise we must admit
contradiction in Scripture, This appears particularly in the four first
chapters of Genesis, and in the Genealogy of our Savior. And in concording the
Chronologyes of the Book of Kings.
some places not fully answered, but the Fathers were forced to fly from
literal unto allegorical senses: how then could the ancient Fathers know the
harmony of Scripture by the evidence of the thing, and thereon ground their
faith, that the Scripture is of God? Or if they could, not how can we? For what
the Minister boastingly affirms Reply page 24. lin. 15.
of himself and his fellows, we find at this day a perfect harmony of all the
parts of the Gospel among themselves, and a perfect agreement of the same with
the Scriptures of the old Testament: This Ministerial brag, I say, of their
finding the harmony of all Scriptures at this day, above all the Ancients, by
the evidence of the thing, is incredible: for men cannot be more sure of the
perfect harmony of Scriptures, then they are sure that all contradictions laid
to the charge of Scripture, have true solutions. But no man living ever was, or
is sure by evidence, that all the solutions and answers used to reconcile
Scriptures, be the truth, no not Protestants. For did they understand assuredly
every text of Scripture and every seeming contradiction is reconciled, could
there be amongst the^ such different and adverse exposition of Scripture?
Therefore no man ever did, or does know the perfect harmony of all Scriptures
by the evidence of the thing, nor consequently the Scripture to be of God, by
the evidence of this harmony.

The fourth Argument.
Fourthly, whereas the Minister pretends the Scripture to be known by the style
affirming, that seeing God has bestowed tongues and voices on men by which
they may be known, the Jesuit cannot persuade any reasonable man that God so
speaks in Scripture as men elevated by grace cannot discern the same to be
his voice and word. This is spoken with more confidence then consideration. God
has an Joan. 1.
Eternal Increate manner of speaking, to wit, the production of the Eternal
Word, by which the Blessed discern him from all other speakers, by the
evidence of blisse-full learning; but no created manner of speaking This is
also true when God speaks inwardly to the soul. For in that speaking he
uses the native intellectual tongue, that is, the understanding Faculty of
the soul, his divine inspirations being apprehensions of understanding of the
will and affections. Hence this inward speaking is not by the mere sound
known to be Divine, but by the conjecture of some effects, or by special
revelation.
is so proper to God, as it can be known to be his speaking by the mere sound
of the voice, without special revelation, or else some consequent miraculous
effect. Which I declare and prove by this argument. If there were a man that
had no proper sound and accent of voice, but could, and did exactly use the
voice of every man as he pleased; this man could not be known by his voice.
Likewise if a man had no proper style in writing, but could perfectly write the
style of any author as he should think good; he could not be known from
other writers by his phrase. But God has no proper external sound or accent of
voice, nor any proper style or phrase in writing, but uses the prope^ tongue
of those men, whom it pleases him to inspire, folding up his heavenly
co^ceites in the Prophets natural language, whence arises The difference of
style betwixt the Apocalypse and the Gospel of S. John is noted by Dionysius
Alexandrinus apud Eusebius. l. 7. c. 10. And Calvin Institut. l. 1. c. 8. notes
variety of style amongst the Evangelists and Prophets: Dauidi and Isaiae
^ucunda and suauis fluit oration: Apud Amos Pastorem Ieremiam and Zacharia^
asperior sermorusticitatem sapit.
such difference of styles amongst the sacred writers. So that it is great want
of discretion to think to know a book to be of God by the style, abstracting
from the matter.

Now the matter is such as it does not with evidence certainly show it self to
be nothing but truth, as has been proved. Learned men, as has been said,
may from within Scripture gather arguments that probably persuade that the same
is the word of God, but evident probability cannot be the ground of persuasion
certain and ineuident; it may be a comfortable confirmation, not an assured
foundation of Faith.

The fifth Argument.
If Scriptures be not clear and evident but only to such as have the light and
faculty of faith, they cannot be the prime principles of Faith, evident in
themselves, and not proved by the principles of faith. This is clear, because
every faculty supposes her principles, and by the light of them which the
student bringes with him, she shows truths pertine^t unto her skill that were
hidden. But the Scriptures are not clear and evident, but to such only as have
aforehand the light and faculty of faith, yea they be dark and obscure unto
Infidels, as not only the Verbum eius infidelibus nox est. Hilarious in cap. 10.
Matthew. 2. Calvin l. 1. Iustit. c. 8. n. 9.
Fathers teach, but also Protestants grant. Therefore the Scriptures be not
the prime principles of faith supposed before faith, which Infidells seeing to
be true, resolve to believe the mysteryes of Faith; but only are secondary
truths dark and obscure in themselves, believed upon the prime principles of
faith.

The sixth Argument.
Hence arises the sixth argument which is a priori. If Scriptures may be
proved by the light of a superior principle of Faith, they are not the prime
principles of says evident in themselves and indemonstrable. But Scripture is
proved by a superior and more evident principle of faith. For the doctrine of
the Scripture is proved to be true, because God the prime verity author of
Scripture cannot deceive, nor be deceived. Now, that prime verity cannot
deceive nor be deceived is a principle of faith superior and more evident then
that the Scriptures be of God and divine. Therefore Scripture is not the supreme
indemonstrable principle of Faith, but is proved to be truth by the authority
of God revealing it; to be of God by the miracles of the Apostles publishing
it; to be the Apostles by the tradition of the Church, delivering it as such;
even as all as other mysteryes of Faith are proved.

The seventh Argument.
Finally Protestants for this their fancy of final resolution of faith by the
resplende^t verity of the doctrine, have not any argument worth a rush. Their
chief Argument are two. First, Scripture is a principle of faith; but
principles are to be evident in themselves, and to be known by their own
light. This argument (much and often urged by you, and your Way page 37.
Defense cap. 20.
Brother) is seely, because al principles must not be evident in themselves,
but only the first and prime principles of every faculty or hability of
knowledge, as all know. But Scriptures are not (as has been showed) the prime
principles of faith, but are secondary principles, which being known, we by the
light of them may know many other things.

The second argument. This argument is urged by the Minister page 16. and often
elsewhere.
The Scripture is light, for the word of God is light, and Scripture is the
word of God. But every light is evident in it self, and known by the evidence
it has in it self. Therefore the Scriptures must of themselves appear^ and
show that they are divine truth. I Answer, the Minor of this Argument is
false, and the whole argument grounded upon ignorance, in not discerning a
difference betwixt corporal and spiritual light. True it is, that every
corporal light that does enlighten the eye of body must be evident in it self
and primely and originally clear, but not so every truth that illustrates man's
understanding. The reason is, because the eye of body cannot by things seen,
infer and conclude things that are hidden, but only can apprehe^d what does
directly and immediately show it self. But man's Understanding not only
apprehends what shows it self, but by things known infers and breeds
in it self knowledge of things hidden.

Hence unto Understanding, though things showing themselves directly, and by
their own light, be her prime principles, and means to know other things;
yet also things hidden in themselves being formerly known by the light of
authority, may thereby become lights, that is, means to know yet further of
things hidden. So that speaking of spiritual and intellectual lights, it is
false that all lights enlightening man's Understanding to know other things,
are evident in themselves; yea some secondary Principles and Lights there are,
which must be showed by superior light, before they become lights. In which
kind is the Scripture, being a Light unto the faithful, because known by the
Churches perpetual Tradition to be from the Apostles, by the Apostles
miraculous authority to be of God, by Gods supreme Verity who cannot deceive,
nor be deceived, to be the truth.

THE SECOND PART. About the Catholic Resolution of Faith.
NO doubt but that to the end a man may believe, divine inward illuminatio^
anointing his heart is necessary. The question is, what is the external
infallible ground unto which Divine inspiration moves men to adhere, that they
may be settled in the true saving faith? The answer in few words is this. The
Resolution of true Religion is firmly assured about four Principles, against
four Enemies, by four Perfections belonging unto God, as he is Prima veritas,
Prime and Infinite Verity, that cannot deceive, nor be deceived. This I declare
and prove.

The first Principle proved.. 1.
THE first Enemy of true Christian Religion is the Pagan, Dicunt pagani, Ben^
viuimus.
or Profane Fuerunt Philosophi de virtutibus and vitijs sublimia multa
tractantes. Aug. Tract. 45. in Joan.
Philosopher, who is persuaded he may attain unto perfect felicity and
Sanctity by the knowledge of sole natural truth. Against this enemy is the
first principle of true Christian Religion, The Doctrine of Salvation, is that
only which was revealed of God unto his Prophets. About this Principle true
belieuers are resolved by a perfection which in the first place belonges unto
God as he is Prime and Infinite verity, to wit, that he cannot lie nor reveal
any untruth when he speaks immediately himself by secret inspiration. Hence we
thus resolve. God the Prime verity cannot reveal untruth, specially about the
State-matters of salvation when he speaks by secret inspiration immediately
himself. But he revealed in this manner by inspiration unto his Prophets, that
men cannot serve him truly, nor be saved without knowing supernatural truths
beyond the As man's felicity, the blissfull vision of God, is above the forces
of Nature: so it was convenient God should bring him unto it by believing truth
above the reach of his reason.
reach of Reason, which truths in particular he revealed unto them. Therefore
the doctrine of salvation is supernatural truth, such as was revealed of God
unto his Prophets and others, whom he did vouchsafe to teach immediately by
himself, and send them to be the teachers of the world.

This the prime and highest principle of Christian resolution Protestants not
in express words, but in deeds, and by consequence, reject from being the stay
of their faith. For as they that believe the doctrine of Aristotle lastly and
finally by the light and evidence thereof, because it shows it self to be
conformable to reason, do not build upon the authority of Aristotle, nor upon
his bare world; even so they that believe the doctrine of Scripture by the
light and resplendent verity thereof, because it shows it self to be divine
and heavenly truth, as Protestants pretend to do, do not build upon the
authority of God the author and doctor of Scripture, nor his bare, mere, and
pure word. This is most evident for who does not see that it is one thing to
believe the word of some Doctor by the light of the doctrine, and another to
believe his word through reverence unto his authority, as knowing him to be
infallible in his word? Hence the Protestant faith is so independent of the
authority of God, as though God were not prime verity, but fallible in his
words, yet their faith might subsist as now it does. This is clear, because
let one be never so fallible and false, yet when his sayings show themselves to
be true, we may (yea we cannot but) believe his word, in respect of the
resplendent verity thereof. But Protestants pretend that the sayings of
Scripture show themselves to be true by the light and luster of the Doctrine
believed therein, and upon this resplende^t verity they build lastly their
faith: Therefore though God were fallible, and might be false, yet their faith,
that his Scripture is truth, which shows it self to be truth by the
resplendent verity of the doctrine, might subsist. Is this the true Christian
faith which depends not upon Gods being the Prime and Infallible Verity? which
gives no more credit unto God* then men will give unto a liar, to wit, to
believe him so far as they see him? To credit the word of his teaching so
far as it shows it self to be truth by the light of the doctrine? Verily
this form of Fayths resolution is gross and unchristian, which I am persuaded
Protestants would not mantayne, did they well understand what they say, or
could they find some other way of Resolution, whereby they might know what
doctrine is the Apostles, and therefore Gods, without being bound to rely upon
the Tradition of the Church.

The second Principle demonstrated.. 2.
SOME will say, God is prime Verity, by whose word we cannot be deceived: But
how prou^ you these pretended divine revelations to be truly such? Here comes
in the second enemy of true Religion, who following his blind passion labors
to deprive the world of the proofs of divine revelations that are more evident
then the Sun. This Enemy is the Jew, who grau^ting the doctrine of salvation
to be supernatural truth revealed of God, denies the revealed doctrine of God
to be Apostolical, that is, the doctrine which the Apostles preached to the
whole world as the doctrine of salvation. Against this Enemy is the second
Principle of true Religion, The Doctrine of salvation revealed of God is no
other, but Apostolical, that is, which the Apostles published to the world.
About this principle true belieuers are resolved by a second perfection of the
prime Verity, which is, That he cannot with his seal, that is with miracles
and works proper to himself, warrant or subsigne falsehood, devised or ve^ted
by any man. Hence we make this resolution. God being Infinite verity cannot by
sign and miracle testify falsehood devised and vented by men: God has by
manifest miracles testified the doctrine of the Apostles to be his word and
message: Ergo, the same is not a false religion invented of men, but the
doctrine of Salvation revealed of God.

The miracles by which the Prime verity has given testimony unto the Apostles
doctrine may be reduced unto four heads. First the miraculous predictions of
the Prophets, most clearly and punctually fullfilled in Christ Jesus, his B.
Mother, his Apostles, his Church. Secondly, the miraculous works in all kinds
which Christ Jesus, and his disciples have wrought, which are so many, so
manifest, so wonderful and above nature, as we cannot desire greater
evidences. Thirdly, the miraculous conversion of the world, by twelve poor
unlearned Fishermen, the world (I say) which the^ was in the flower of human
pride and glory, in the height of human erudition and learning bringing them to
believe a doctrine seemingly absurd in reason, to follow a course of discipline
truly repugnant unto sensuality, to embrace a way of salvation so contemptible
in the eye of men, that verily, the work of the worlds creation does not more
clearly discover God the Author of Nature, then this of the worlds Conversion
does show it self to proceed from the Author of grace. Fourthly, the
miraculous continuance of a Christian Catholic Church, spread over the world,
foretold by our Savior, notwithstanding so many persecusecutions by the Jews,
Heathens, Heretics, Politicians, and dissolute Christians.

Against this Principle of Resolution, Ministers Chalenour in his Credo
Ecclesiam Catholicam. p. 1. c. 6. Field l. 3. cap. 15.
and our Minister Reply page ^16. citing
in particular, object, that miracles are only probable, and not sufficient
testimonies of divine doctrine, yea Bellarm. l. 4. de Eccl. cap. 14.
Bellarmine says, we cannot know evidently that miracles are true, for if we
did, we should know evidently that our faith is true, and so it should not be
faith. I Answer, that such evidence as does exclude the necessity of pious
reverence, and affection unto Gods word, evidence I say, enforcing men to
believe, cannot stand with true faith. If we knew by Mathematical or
Metaphysicall evidence that the miracles of Christ, and his Apostles were true,
perchance this evidence would compel men to believe, and overcome the natural
obscurity and seeming impossibility of the Christian doctrine. And therefore,
as Bellarmine says, we cannot be mathematically and altogether infallibly
sure by the light of nature, that miracles are true.

Notwithstanding we must not deny what Scriptures affirm, Joan. 5^ 36.
that miracles are a sufficient testimony binding men to believe, and
consequently that we may know them to be true, Suarez de fide disput. 4. sect.
3. n. 9. Videntibus co^stare poterat euide^tia naturali vera esse quae
agebantur.
by Physical evidence, as we are sure of things we see with our eyes, or of
such as being once evident to the world, are by the worlds full report declared
unto us. Neither does this Physical evidence of miracles take away the merit
of Faith. The reason is, because this evidence not being altogether, and in
the highest de^ree infallible by it self (for our senses may sometimes be
deceived) is not sufficient to overcome the natural obscurity, darkness, and
seeming falsehood of things to be believed, upon the testimony of those
miracles. For the mystery of the Trinity, of the Incarnation, of the Real
Presence, and the like seem to reason as impossible, as any miracle can seem
evident unto sense. Hence when faith is proposed by miracles, arises a
conflict betwixt the seeming evidence of the miracles, and the seeming darkness
and falsehood of the Christian doctrine. Against which obscurity a man cannot
get the victory by the sole e^idence of miracles, except he be inwardly helped
by the light of Gods spirit, moving him by pious affection to cleave to the
doctrine which is by so clear testimonies proved his word. As a man shut up in
^ chamber with two lights, whereof the one makes ^he wall seem white, the
other blew, cannot be firmly ^esolued what to think till day light enter, and
obscuring both those lights, discover the truth: Even so a man looking upon
Christian doctrines, by the light of Christian miracles done to prove them,
will be moved to judge them to be truth; but looking upon them through the
evidence of their seeming impossibilities unto reason, they will seem false:
nor will he be able firmly to resolve for the side of faith, until the light
of divine grace enter into his heart, making him to prefer through pious
reverence toward God, the so proposed authority of his word, before the
seeming impossibility of man's reason.

The third Principle demonstrated.. 3.
BEING resolved that the doctrine of God is saving truth, and the Apostles
doctrine the doctrine of God, we meet with a third Enemy who labors to drive
us out of the beaten high way, to know what doctrine is the Apostles. This
Enemy is the Heretic, a domestike Enemy, and therefore more dangerous. These
men grant the doctrine of Salvation to be supernatural and revealed, the
revealed to be the Apostolical, and no other; but they will have the rule of
knowing what doctrine the Apostles taught to be special illumination of the
spirit, not Catholic Tradition. For there is a double kind of Tradition from
the Apostles, that may be pretended. The one public, by the uniform
perpetual teaching of Pastors. The other secret by the teaching of some
private men, pretending to have been taught more singularly and highly, then
other men by the Apostles. The second kind of Tradition hand to hand from the
Apostles, by the secret teaching of an invisible Church, Heretics have
pretended, but never the first of public and Catholic Tradition.

The cause why Heretics prescribe the course to resolve by illuminations, is,
because an Heretic will not admit doctrines delivered unto him by the consent
of his Christian Ancestors, but with choice receive some, and reject others, as
he finds good. Whence he has the Tertull. de praescript. cap. 6. Haereses
dictae Graeca voce exinterpretatione Electionis.
Name Heretic, that is, one who is his own caruer, and chooser in matters of
Religion, still Augustine. l. 7. de Genesis ad lit. c. 9. Neque enim non omnes
Haeretici Scripturas Catholicas legunt.
pretending for all his fancyes Scripture, understood by the light of the
spirit* If Catholic Tradition were by him admitted, as a rule infallible to
know what doctrine the Apostles preached, he could not have liberty to choose
according to his best liking, but would be bound Nobis nostro arbitrio non
licet indulgere, sed q Apostoli fideliter consignarunt accipere.
to receive the form of Religion, made unto him by Tradition of Ancestors.
Hence, against this way of Catholic Tradition he bandeth with might and main,
charging the same to be fallible, that errors may secretly creep into it,
teaching men to retire unto the inward teaching of the spirit, as the only
secure means to know which be the Apostolical Scripturs, which the
Apostolical interpretation of them.

Against this Enemy is the third principle of true Christian Religion, The
Apostolical doctrine is the Catholic, to wit, the doctrine that is delivered
from the Apostles by the Tradition of whole Christian worlds of Fathers, unto
whole Christian worlds of Children, that in matters of Christian Religion,
Heresy, that is, private election and choice may have no place. About this
principle, faith is resolved and assured by a third perfection belonging to
God, as he is Prime Verity. This is, that he cannot so much as conniue unto
falsehood whereby he become any way accessory of deceauing then that simply,
readily, religiously believe what they have just reason to think to be his
word. But there is just and sufficient reason to believe that doctrine
delivered by full and perpetual Tradition, hand to hand from the Apostles, is
verily their doctrine, and therefore Gods. Ergo God being the prime verity
cannot permit Catholic Christian Tradition to be falsified.

How the Churches Tradition is proved infallible, independently of Scripture..
4.
HENCE is answered the common Objection which Protestants make, that Tradition
of doctrine from hand to hand made by men, is fallible, and subject to error,
for they may deceive, or be deceived. If We answer, that Christian Catholic
Tradition of doctrines is infallible, through Gods special assistance, They
reply, this infallibility of tradition through divine assistance cannot be
known but by the Scripture, and so before we can build our faith on Tradition
as infallible, we must know the Scripture to be the word of God, and
consequently we cannot build our persuasion of the Scriptures being
Apostolical and divine, on Tradition, except we commit a Circle.

I Answer. First, that Catholic Tradition is proved to be Est su^mus gradus
certitudinis humanae de qua SIMPLICITER dici potest, no^ posse illi falsum
subesse. Suarez de gratia l. 9. c. 11. n. 11. Et hoc ibid. probat.
simply infallible, by the very nature thereof. For Tradition being full report
about what was evident unto sense, to wit, what doctrines and Scriptures the
Apostles publicly delivered unto the world, it is impossible it should be
false. Worlds of men cannot be uniformly mistaken and deceived about a matter
evident to sense, and not being deceived, being so many in number, so divided
in place, of so different affectious and conditious, it is impossible they
Neglexerit officiu^ suum Villicus Christi etc. Qui verisimile, vt tot and
tantae Ecclesiae in vnam fidem errauerint? variasse debuerat error Ecclesiaru^.
Caeterum, quod apud multos vnu^ inuenitur, non est erratu^ sed traditum.
Tertullian. de praescript. c. 28.
should so have agreed in their tale, had they maliciously resolved to deceive
the world. Wherefore it is impossible that what is delivered by full Catholic
tradition from the Apostles, should be a thing by the traditioners first
devised. Secondly, I say, that how soever human Tradition may be by nature
fallible, yet the Christian Catholic is assisted of God that no error can
creep into the same. Which divine assistance to be due unto it, is demonstrated
by the perfection of Divine verity, and by the nature of tradition, precedently
and independently of Scripture, and therefore without any Circle by two
Arguments.

The first is the same we before touched. God being Prime Verity cannot
conniue, that the means of conueying the Apostles doctrine unto posterity
which binds Religious belieuers to receive the same as his word, should
secretly be infected with damnable Error. For being Infinite Verity in his
knowledge, this cannot be done without his priuity. Knowing thereof, being
infinite veracity in his teaching the truth, he cannot yield that the means of
conueying his truth obliging men to believe, should ^mperceptibly be poisoned,
whereby men for their devotion unto his Verity incur damnation. This being
so, I assume: But the Catholic tradition of doctrine from the Apostles
binds Christians to whom it is delivered, to believe the same as Gods word.
This I prove. When doctrine is sufficiently proposed as Gods word, men are
bound to believe it. But that is sufficiently proposed as Gods word unto
Christians which is unto them sufficiently proposed ^s Doctrine of the
Apostles. Now, that Catholic Tradition of doctrine from the Apostles is
sufficient proposition and proof, that that Doctrine is the Apostles, is
proved; first because Catholic tradition of doctrine is by nature simply
infallible, as has bin showed, but proposition known simply to be infallible,
is sufficient to bind men to believe. Secondly, Catholic tradition, that is,
the report of a world of Ancestors concerning sensible matters of fact, is so
pregnant and obligatory, as it were insolent madness to deny it. In so much, as
even Calvin. Institut. l. 1. c. 8. n. 9. Quaerunt quis nos certiores fecerit a
Moyse and aliis Prophetis haec fuisse scripta quae sub eorum nominibus legu^tur
etc. quis non colaphis and flagellis castistandum illum insanum dicat? Certo
certius est ipso rum scripta non aliter peruenisse ad posteros, quam de manu in
manu^ TRADITA.
Calvin says, that such as deny the tradition of Ancestors concerning the
authors of the Canonical books, are rather to be reformed with a Cudgel,
then refuted by Argument. Thirdly, God himself sends children unto the
tradition of their Ancestors to learn of them the sensible works of his
miraculous power done in former ages, Deuteron. 32.7.
Ask thy Father and he will tell thee, thine Ancestors and they will certifye
thee. Fourthly, the proof of tradition is so full and sufficient as it
conuinceth infidels. For though they be blind not to see the doctrine of the
Apostles to be Divine, yet are they not so void of common sense, impudent and
obstinate as they will deny the doctrine of Christian Catholic tradition to
be truly Christian and Apostolical. Whence two things are evident. First, that
Catholic tradition from the Apostles is an external sufficient proposition,
and a conuincing argument that the doctrine so delivered is Apostolical, and
consequently Divine revealed Doctrine. Secondly, that Heresy which stands
against this tradition, (...) wilful obstinacy and madness, and worse then
Paganism.

The second argument. God being Prime verity binding all men that will be saved
to know and firmly believe the Apostles doctrine, even until the worlds end,
cannot conniue that the only Means to know this doctrine perpetually, and ever
after the ^postles decease, be secretly and insensibly poisoned with errors
against the truth of Salvation. This is ^eere. The only means whereby men
succeeding ^he Apostles may know assuredly what Scriptures and doctrins they
delivered to the Primitive Catho^icke Church, is the Catholic tradition by
worlds ^f Christian Fathers and Pastors, unto worlds of Chri^tian children and
faithful people, Ergo, Catholic Tradition is by God the Prime verity, so
defended, ^reserued, and assisted as no error against Salvation ^an be
delivered by the same, and consequently it ap^eareth by the very notion of
prime Verity indepen^ently of Scripture, that Catholic tradition is ^roued to
be infallible, through Gods special assi^tance.

^he difference between Prophetical, and ordinary Divine Illumination, by
which Protestants Cauills are answered.. 5.
AGAINST the Minor of the former argument, Protestants object first, that
though the testi^ony of tradition be a good Reply pa. 15. lin. 32.
moral, human, and pro^able proof, that these Scriptures were by the Apo^tles
delivered; yet the chief ground of faith in ^his point, is inward
illumination, and the testimony ^f the spirit speaking within our heart, and
assuring (...) of the truth. I answer, God may assure men of truth by inward
inspiration two ways; first, by the ^^ght of inward teaching and inspiration,
without ^he mediation and concourse of any external in^allible ground of
assurance. Secondly, by the light ^f his spirit inwardly moving the heart of
man to ^dhere unto an infallible external ground of assurance proposed unto
him, God by the help of his grace making him apprehend divinely of the
authority thereof. This second manner of inward assurance is ordinarily given
unto every Christian, without Triden. sess. 6. Can. 3. Arausican. 2. Can. 6.
which no man is able to believe supernaturally, and as he ought unto
Salvation. The first manner of assurance is extraordinary, and immediate
revelation, such as the Prophets had. Wherefore Protestants, if they callenge
this first manner of inward teaching and assurance, they approve Enthusiasme,
and immediate revelation, which in the Swenkfeldians they seem to condemn. If
they challenge only the second manner of inward teaching and assurance, then
besides inward light, they must assign an external sufficient ground why they
believe these Scriptures to be the Apostles, and then I ask what ground this
is besides Tradition?

Secondly, they will object, that though they have no infallible ground besides
the teaching of the Spirit, yet they are not taught immediately in Prophetical
manner because they are also taught by an external probable motive, to wit the
Churches tradition. I Answer, that except they assign an external infallible
means besides Gods inward teaching, they cannot avoid, but they challenge
immediate revelation. For whosoever knows things assuredly by the inward
teaching of the spirit, without an external infallible motive unto which he
does adhere, is assured prophetically, though he have some external probable
motives so to think. S. Peter had some coniecturall signs of Simon Magus his
peruersity and incorrigible malice; yet seeing Act. 8.32. In fell amaritudinis
and obligatione peccati video te esse.
he knew it assuredly, we believe he knew it by the light of prophesy, because
besides inward assurance he had no external infallible ground. If one see a
man give publicly alms* though he perceive probable tokens and signs that he
does it out of a Vayne-glorious intention; yet cannot he be sure thereof but by
the light of immediate revelation, because the other tokens are not grounds
sufficient to make him sure. For if a man be sure, and have no ground of this
assurance in any thing out of his own heart, it is clear, that he is assured
immediately, and only by Gods inward speaking. Wherefore Protestants, if they
will disclayme in truth, and not in words only from immediate revelation and
teaching, they must either grant tradition to be infallible, or else assign
some external infallible ground besides Tradition, whereby they are taught
what Scriptures the Apostles delivered.

Thirdly, they will say they know the Scriptures to be from the Apostles, by an
external infallible ground besides Tradition, to wit, by certain lights,
lustres, evidences of truth, which they see to blaze, and emane from the
things revealed in Scripture, by which they are sure that the doctrine thereof
is heavenly. I Answer, If they did see such lustres and lights that clearly,
and not only probably, convince the doctrine of Scripture to be heavenly truth,
they be not indeed assured by immediate dark revelation, but by an higher
degree of heavenly knowledge, to wit, by the supernatural light and evidence
of the thing believed, which is a paradox, and pretense far more false, and
sensibly absurd, then is the challenge of immediate revelation, or Enthusiasme,
as has been showed. Wherefore, seeing that God has chosen no external means
besides Catholic Tradition to make men know perpetually, until the
consummation of the world, what doctrins and Scriptures the Apostles published,
it is clear unto every Christian, that this is the means by him chosen, and
which he does assist, that it cannot be obnoxious unto error: so that
precedently and independently of Scripture, the Catholic tradition of
Christian pastors and fathers is proved to be infallible, through Divine
special assistance, and therefore a sufficient ground for Fayths infallible
assurance.

The Fourth Principle proved.. 6.
IF we be resolved, that saving truth is that which God revealed, that he
revealed that which the Apostles published, the doctrine published by then the
Catholic Christian Tradition, our search is ended, when we have found the
Christian Catholic Church. Here the fourth Enemy of true Christian Religion
offers himself, to wit, the Wilful Ignorant. These kind of men not only hold
against Pagans, the doctrine of salvation to be that only which was revealed of
God; against Jews, the revealed of God to be only the Apostles, but also in
words they condemn the Heretics and profess that no doctrine is truly
Apostolical but the Catholic; yet in resolving what doctrine is the
Catholic, they follow the partiality of their affections. These are termed
by De vtil. cred. c. 1.
S. Augustine, Credentes haereticorum, Belieuers of Heretics, building upon
the seeming learning and sanctity of some men; being therein so wilful, as to
venture their souls that such doctrine is Catholic, not caring nor knowing
what they say, nor what the word Catholic put into the Creed by the Apostles
does import. Some be so ignorant, as to think that the word Catholic does
signify the same, as conform unto Scripture. And so what doctrine is
Catholic, they resolve by the light and luster of the doctrine, or by the in
ward teaching of the spirit, whereby they fall upon the principle of Heresy,
and become not so much belieuers of Heretics as Heretics. Some understand by
the word Catholic, Doctrine truly Catholic, that is, delivered from the
Apostles by Christian worlds of Fathers, unto Christian worlds of children, yet
are so blind as to give this Title unto Sects lately sprung up, which through
pretended singular Illuminations, gotten by perusing the Scripture, have chosen
forms of faith opposite one against another, reformed against the form to
them delivered by their Ancestors: These Sects I say, they term Catholic,
which not to be Catholic in this sense, is as evident as that night is not
day.

Some through wilful ignorance, no less grossly divide the name of
Catholic according to the division of Countries, naming the Catholic
doctrine of the Church of France, of the Church of England etc. Which speech
has no more sense, then this: A fashion ever since Christ universally over the
world, newly begun, and proper unto England.

Against this Enemy true Religion is resolved in this fourth principle, The
Catholic Tradition of doctrine from the Apostles is the Roman. By Roman we
understand not only the Religion professed within the City and Diocese of
Rome, but over the whole world by them that any where acknowledge the primacy of
Peter and his successors, which now is the Roman Bishop. About this principle
faith is assured by a fourth perfection belonging unto God, as he is prime
Verity revealing truth, which is, that he cannot permit, that the knowing of
saving doctrine be impossible.

Hence I argue: God being Prime Verity revealing, cannot permit the means of
knowing his saving truth to be hidden, nor a false means to be so adorned with
the marks of the true, as the true become indiscernable from it. But if the
Roman be not the true Catholic Tradition, the true Catholic Church and
Tradition is hidden, yea a false Church has so clearly the marks of
Catholic, that no other can with any color pretend to be rather Catholic
then it, that is, to have doctrine delivered from the Apostles, by whole worlds
of Christian Fathers unto whole worlds of Christian Children Hence either there
is no means left to know assuredly the saving truth, or else the means is
immediate revelation, that is, inward teaching of the spirit, without any
external infallible means, or else Scripture known to be the word of God,
and truly sensed, by the light, luster, and evidence of the things: which ways
of teaching, it is certain, God does not use toward his militant Church
succeeding the Apostles. For teaching of divine and supernatural truth by the
light, luster, and shining of the thing or doctrine, is proper unto the Church
triumphant. Inward assurance without any external infallible ground to assure
men of truth, is proper unto the Prophets, and the first publishers of
Christian Religion. Hence I conclude, that if God be the Prime Verity, teaching
Christian Religion darkely without making men see the light, and luster of
things believed, and mediatly by some external infallible means, upon which
inward assurance must rely; then he must ever conserve the Catholic
tradition, and Church, visible and conspicuous, that the same may without
immediate revelation, and otherwise the^ by the luster of doctrine be discerned,
to wit, by sensible marks.

If any object, that the senses of me^ in this search may be deceived through
natural invincible fallibility of their organs, and so no ground of faith that
is altogether infallible. I Answer, that evidence had by sense being but the
private of one man, is naturally and physically infallible; but when the same
is also public and Catholic, that is, when a whole world of men concur
with him, then his evidence is altogether infallible. Besides, seeing God has
resolved not to teach men immediately, but will have them to cleave unto an
external infallible means, and to find out this means by the sensible
evidence of the thing, he is bound by the perfection of his Veracity to assist
men's senses with his providence, that therein they be not deceived when they
use such diligence as men ordinarily use, that they be not deceived by their
senses. Now, what greater evidence ca^ one have that he is not deceived in this
matter of sense, that the Roman Doctrine is the Catholic, that is, Doctrine
delivered from the Apostles by worlds of Christian Ancestors, spread over the
world, unanimous amongst themselves in all matters they believe as Faith; what
greater assurance I say, can one have, that herein he sees aright, then a
whole world of men professing to see the same that he does?

Some may again object, I believe the Catholic Church is an Article of Faith
set down in the Creed, but Faith is resolution about things that are not
seen. I Answer, An article of Faith may be visible according to the substance
of the thing, and yet invisible according to the manner it is believed in the
Creed. The third article, He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead
and buried, according to the substance of the thing, was evident unto sense,
and seen even of the Jews, and is now believed of their posterity. But
according to the manner as it is believed in the Creed, to wit, that herein the
Word of God by his ancient Prophets was fulfilled, that this was done in
charity for the salvation of Man; in this manner (I say) that visible Article
is invisible, and believed in the Creed. In like manner that there is in the
world a Catholic Church, and that the Roman is the Catholic Church, Pagans,
Jews, and Heretics (if they shut not their eyes against the light) do clearly
behold: But that herein the word of God about the perpetual amplitude of his
Church is accomplished, that this is an effect of Gods Veracity, to the end
that the means to learn saving truth may not be hidden; this is a thing
invisible, and according to this notio^ the Catholic Church is proposed in
the Creed. Secondly, propositio^s of faith must be invisible according to the
Predicate, or thing believed; but not ever according to the subject or thing
whereof we believe. The things the Apostles believed of Christ, to wit that he
was the Savior of the world, the Son of God, were things invisible; but the
subject and person of whom they did believe, was to them visible and seen; yea
God did of purpose by his Prophets fortell certain tokens, whereby that
subject might by sense be seen and discerned from all other, that might pretend
the name of Christ or else his coming into the world to teach the truth, had
been to no purpose. In this sort the Predicate, or thing believed in this
article the holy Catholic Church, to wit Holy is invisible, but the Subject,
to wit, the Catholic Church which we affirm and believe to be holy in her
doctrine, is visible and conspicuous unto all. Yea God has of purpose foretold
signs and tokens whereby the same by sense may be clearly discernable from all
other that may pretend the title of Catholic. For were not this subject, the
Catholic Church, we believe to be holy and infallible in her teaching,
visible and discernable from all other that pretend the name; of what use were
it to believe that there is such an infallible teaching Church in the world,
hidden we know not where, as a needle in a bottle of hay?

The End of the Resolution of Faith.

THESE things supposed, the Reader will have no difficulty to discern how
frivolous the Ministers exceptions are against the resolution of faith in
respect of believing doctrines to be the Apostles into Perpetual Tradition;
and how solid the Jesuits discourse was, which here ensues.

THE FIRST GROUND.
That a Christian resolution of Faith is builded upon perpetual Tradition,
derived by succession from the Apostles.. 1.
BEFORE I come to the proof of this principle some things are to be
presupposed, which I think Protestants will not deny. First, that no man can
be saved, or attain to the blissful vision of God, without firm and assured
apprehension of divine and supernatural truth concerning his last end, and the
means to arrive thereunto. Secondly that this assured apprehension is not had
by a The Minister here grants, that Faith is not had by clear and evident
sight: but afterward he says the same is resolved by the resplendent verity of
the doctrine.
clear and evident sight, nor gotten by demonstration or humane discourse by
the principles of reason, nor can be sufficiently had by credit given to merely
humane authority, but only by Faith grounded on the word of God, revealing unto
men things that otherwise are known only to his Infinite wisdom. Thirdly,
that God revealed all these verityes to Christ's Jesus, and he Omnia quae audiui
a Patre nota feci vobis. Joan. 15. v. 15.
again to his Apostles, partly by word of mouth, but principally by the
immediate teaching of his holy spirit, to the end that they should deliver
Docete omnes gentes. Math. 28.20.
them unto mankind, to be received and believed every where over the world,
even to the consummation thereof. Fourthly, that the Illi profecti
praedicauerunt vbique. Marc. vlt. 20.
Apostles did accordingly preach to all nations, and deliver unto them partly
by writing, partly by word of mouth, the O Timothee, depositum custodi. 1. Tim.
6.20.
whole entyre doctrine of salvation, planting an universal Christian company,
charging them to keep inuiolably, and to deliver Haec commenda fidelibus
hominibus qui possunt alios instruere. 2. Tim. 1.2.
unto their posterityes, what they had of them the first messengers of the
Gospel. Fifthly, though the Apostles be departed, and their primitive Hearers
deceased, yet there still remaynes a means in the world, by which all men may
assuredly know what the Apostles preached, and the primitive Church received of
them, seeing the Church even to the worlds end must be Ephesians. 2.20. etc. 4.5.11.
founded on the Apostles, and believe nothing as matter of Faith, besides that
which was delivered of them.

These things being supposed the question is, What this means is, and how men
may now adays, so many ages after their death, know certainly what the
Apostles taught originally, and preached?

To which question I answer, that the last and final resolution Note that the
Minister many times does falsify the Jesuits Tenet, specially page 34. saying,
That the last and final resolution is into unwritten Tradition, and not into
Scripture. This he does not say, but that the persuasion that our Faith is
true, is finally resolved into the authority of God revealing, and that it is
Divine, into the Apostles miraculous preaching. But what doctrine was taught by
the Apostles we know only by Tradition.
thereof, is not into Scripture, but into the perpetual tradition of the Church
succeeding All from this place unto the first argument the Minister leaves out
being the substance of the whole discourse, yet he says, he has set down the
book verbatim. See his Preface.
the Apostles, according to the principle set down by Tertullian in the
beginning of his golden (by Protestants commended) Book, Tertull. de
praescript. 1.61.21.
Quid Apostoli p^^dicauerint praescribam, non aliter probari debere quam per
easdem Ecclesias quas ipsi condiderunt: that is, I set down this principle,
what the Apostles taught, is to be proved, NO OTHERWISE then by the TRADITION
of the Churches which they planted. By which Prescription joined with the other
five suppositions, is raised the Ladder for true Catholic resolution about
Faith, set down by the said Tertullian, on which a Christian by degrees mounts
unto God, or as S. Augustine August. de vtilitate credendi cap. 10.
says ducitur pedetentim quibusdam gradibus ad summa penetralia veritatis: the
Ladder is this, and the ascending by it, in this sort: What Tertull. de
praescrip. c. 21. and 37. Nos ab Ecclesijs, Ecclesiae ab Apostolis, Apostoli a
Christo, Christus a Deo.
I believe, I received from the present Church, the present from the primitive
Church, the primitive Church from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, and
Christ from God, God the prime verity from no other fountain, different from
his own infallible knowledge. So that who so cleaves not to the present
Church, firmly believing the tradition thereof as being come down by
succession, is not so much as on the lowest step of the Ladder, that leads unto
God, the reuealer of saving truth; successiue tradition unwritten being the
last and final ground whereon we believe, that the substantial points of our
belief Note the Jesuit does not say Tradition is the last ground on which we
believe our Faith to be saving truth, or the word of God; but only, that it
came from the Apostles, so mounting up by the Church unto the Apostles, by the
Apostles unto God, and by him unto all necessary truth.
came from the Apostles. This I prove by these four These arguments as they
convince there is no means to know what the Apostles taught, but Christian
Tradition; so they consequently convince, that if the Christian Religion be
saving truth, God must assist this perpetual Catholic Tradition thereof, that
no Errors creep into it.
arguments.

The first Argument.
IF the main and substantial points of our faith be believed to be
Apostolical, because written in the Scripture of the new Testament, and the
Scriptures of the new Testament are believed to come from the Apostles upon the
voice of perpetual tradition unwritten; then our Resolution that our faith is
Apostolical, stays lastly and finally upon Tradition unwritten.

But so it is, that the Scriptures of the new Testament cannot be proved to
have been delivered unto the Church by the Apostles, but by the perpetual
Tradition unwritten, conserved in the Church succeeding the Apostles. For what
other proof can be imagined except one would prove it by the The Minister
page 19. to Titles, adds inscription of some Epistles, subscription, and
insertion of names, in the body of the books: but neither is this true of all
books, nor of all Epistles, nor it is enough to satisfy a man. For may not a
counterfayte write a Gospel for example in the name of Peter, repeating the
name of Peter the Apostle, in the book twenty times? So it is childish to
mention this as the last stay of persuasion. For what more childish then to
prove a thing unknown by another as much unknown?
Titles of the books, which were absurd, seeing doubt may be made, whether
those Titles were set on the Books by the Apostles themselves, of which doubt
only Tradition can resolve us. Besides, the Gospel of S. Mark, S. Luke, as
also the Acts of the Apostles were not written by any Apostles, but were by
their lively voice, and suffrages recommended unto Christians as Sacred* and
Divine otherwise (as also Bilson de perpetua gubernatione Ecclesiae. page 85.
Historiae illae a Marco and Luca exaratae, Canonicam authoritatem ex
Apostolorum suffragi^s nactae sunt, qui eas lectas approbarunt.
M. Bilson notes) they should never have obtained such eminent authority in
the Church, neither should they be now so esteemed but upon the supposall of
Apostolical approbation. But how shall we know that the Apostles saw these
writings, and recommended the same unto Christian Churches, but by Tradition?
Ergo, the last and highest ground on which we believe what doctrine was
delivered by the Apostles, is the tradition of the Church suceceding them.

For we may distinguish three properties of doctrine of faith, to wit, to be
True, to be Revealed of God, to be Preached and delivered of the Apostles. The
highest ground by which I am persuaded that my faith is true, is the authority
of God revealing it. The highest ground on which I am resolved that my Faith is
revealed, is the credit and authority of Christ Jesus, and his Apostles, who
delivered the same as Divine and Sacred. But the highest ground that moves me
to believe that my faith was The Mynister, and especially the Bishops Chaplin
page 16. and 17. charge the Answerer to resolve faith of the Scriptures being
the word of God into only Tradition. This is a slander: for he does
distinguish expressly in scripture the being preached by the Apostles, from the
being revealed of God or his word. This second property is spiritual, and
hidden, and believed not upon Tradition from the Apostles directly, but upon
the word of the Apostles so affirming, confirmed with the testimony of miracles
wrought by the Holy GHOST: but to be preached and planted in the world, was a
public sensible thing, and so is known by Tradition, hand to hand from the
Apostles. Thus the Church as believing her doctrine to be true, is built upon
God, as believing her doctrine to be of God is built on the Apostles, as
believing her doctrine to be the Apostles, is built on the Tradition of
Pastors succeeding them, The ground and pillar of Truth by office, as our
Minister graunts page 9. lin. 5.
preached by the Apostles, is the perpetual tradition of the Church succeding
the Apostles that so teaches me. Into this principle Aug. cont. epist. Fund.
cap. 5.
Saint Augustine resolved his faith against the Manichees who pretended that
the Scriptures of the new Testament had been corrupted, confuting them by the
Tradition of the Church; affirming That he would not believe the Gospel, did
not the Authority of the Catholic Church induce him, assigning this as the
last stay of his resolution in this point. For though he believed the Gospel
to be soueraignely certain and true, upon the authority of God revealing it,
and that it was revealed of God, upon the authority of the Apostles, who as
Sacred preached it; yet that this Gospel (as we have it) came incorrupt from
the Apostles, he could have no stronger, or more The Minister forced by this
testimony grau^teth two things which overthrow his cause: first pa. 22. l.
13.14. that Nouices and simple persons ground their faith on the authority of
the Church; as also Field grants, appendix. part. 1. page 11. now I assume.
But the faith of Nouices is saving faith, as S. Aug. there says contra Epist.
Fundamenti c. 2. and consequently their faith is divine. Ergo, saving and
supernatural faith is grounded on the authority of the Church. Secondly, he
graunts page 23. lin. 2. and 3. that The Church as including the Apostles, can
prove the Scripture: whence it is co^sequent that the Scriptures are not
principles known by themselves, but have another higher divine principle, by
which they are proved, The Church comprehending the Apostles being (as
Protestants grant Field. l. 4. of Church c. 21.) of greater authority, then
Scripture.
excellent proof then the testimony of the present Church, descending by the
continual succession of Bishops from the Apostles. Neither can we imagine an
higher, except we fly to particular and private revelation, which is absurd.

The second Argument.
SECONDLY I prove, that common unlearned people (the greatest part of
Christianity) are persuaded about all substantial points of faith by
Tradition, not by Scripture. Common and unlearned people have true Christian
faith in all points necessary and sufficient unto salvation, but they have not
faith of all these main and substantial points grounded on Scripture; for
they can neither understand nor read any Scripture, but translated into vulgar
languages, and so if they believe upon Scrpture, they believe upon Scripture
translated into their Mother tongue; but before that they can know that the
Scriptures are truly translated, even in all substantial points, that so they
may build on it, they must first know what are the main and substantial
points, and To this proof that Christians believe their Creed more firmly
then any translation, the Minister has not answered one word, nor can answer,
for it is conuincing, as appears by this syllogism. Persuasion more certain
and firm cannot be grounded on persuasion less firm and certain. Such as
are true Christians believe the articles of their Creed more firmly, then they
do that Scriptures are truly translated into their vulgar tongue. Ergo, True
Christians do not build their Faith of the Creed on Scripture translated, but
on doctrine known to be the Apostles formerly, and more firmly, then that
Scripture is truly translated.
firmly believe them, so that they would not believe the Scriptures,
translated against them. For if they know them not before, how can they know,
that Scriptures in places that concern them, are truly translated? If they do
not before hand firmly believe them, why should they be ready to allow
translations that agree with them, and to reject the translations that differ
from the^? Ergo, The Minister page 26. says, That Ignorant men resolve their
faith into Scripture; yet not into Scripture so distinctly known as they can
tell the names of the several Books, Authors and Sections, and so they
resolve implicitly, not explicitly. This is idle. For if they know the doctrine
of the Scripture because it is written, though they know not the name of the
book, nor number of the Chapter and Verse, nor the formal text, what ground
firmer the^ their Creed have they this to believe?
originally, and before they know any Scripture, they have faith grounded on
the Traditions of Ancestors, by the light whereof they are able to judge of the
truth of Translations, about such substantial points as they firmly believe
by Tradition. And this is that which Protestants must mean (if they have any
true meaning) when they say, that the common People know Scriptures to be truly
translated, by the The Minister is forced to fly to a found paradoxe confuted
already, That unlearned Rusticks know the Scripture to be Gods word by the
matter and form of the books, and by seeing the resplendent verity of the
doctrine, page 28. lin. 3. He adds. lin. 7. That they which actually resolve
their faith into the doctrine of Scriptur, do virtually and mediatly resolve
the same into the very Scripture, though they know not that it is written in
Scripture. This is frivolous and false. For the Pagan and Infidells, that know
honey to be sweet, and taken in abundance to be hurtful, should virtually
resolve their persuasion into the very Scripture, because they actually believe
a thing affirmed in Scripture, Prou. 25. 27. Yea the Jew believing that Christ
was crucified, belieues a doctrine of Scripture; does he therefore resolve and
build virtually upon Scripture? No. That one build on Scripture it is not
enough to know actually some doctrine which is in Scripture, but he must know
that it is in Scripture, and believe the Scripture ^o be the word of God: but
ignorant persons cannot know infallibly Scriptures to be the word of God truly
translated,, further then they find them conform to the doctrine delivered by
the Tradition of the Church. Therefore they build their Faith finally upon
Tradition, and not upon Scripture truly translated.
light of the doctrine, shining in true Translations, to wit, by the light of
the doctrine received by Tradition of Ancestors; and thereupon so firmly
believed as they will acknowledge Scriptures to be truly translated so far, and
no further then they perceive them, consonant with the faith delivered unto
them; so that their last and final resolution for substantial points, is not
into Scriptures truly translated into their vulgar tongue, but into Tradition,
by the light whereof they discern that the Translations are true more or
less, according to the measure of knowledge they have by Tradition.

The third Argument.
IF all the main and substantial points of Christian Faith must be known and
firmly believed before we can securely read and truly understand the Holy
Scripture, then the main and substa^tiall points of faith are believed, not
upon Scripture, but upon Tradition precedently unto Scripture. This is clear,
because true faith is not built but upon Scripture truly understood: neither
can Scripture before it be truly understood of a man, be to him a ground of
assured persuasion. But we cannot understand the Scripture securely and aright,
before we know the substantial articles of faith, which all are bound
expressly to believe the The Minister here labors to prove that the rule of
faith is contained in Scripture, and therefore cannot be Tradition vnwritte^.
Which discourse is impertinent and the inference false. For himself grants
page 150. lin. 16. that the rule of faith is both written Tradition and
unwritten. The Doctrine then of Tradition is termed unwritten, not because it
is no ways written, but because (as the Answerer says) it is known by
preaching precedently and independently of Scripture.
summary comprehensio^ of which points, is termed the Rule Tertul. de Praescr.
c. 13.
of faith. This is The Answerer here brings three Arguments that convince, that
none can understand Scripture securely and without danger of damnable error,
that are not aforehand grounded in the substantial articles of faith. The
Minister though he profess to have set down the Answer Verbatim, leaves all
this out, and then cries thus against the Jesuit, page 34. circa finem. That
men must be first instructed in the necessary points of faith before they can
securedly read and interpret Scriptures, is affirmed by the Jesuit, but not
proved. Thus he. What not proved? The Jesuit bringes three large co^uictiue
proofs thereof, which you because you cannot answer omit, and then cry: the
Jesuit does say, and not prove. This dealing is gross.
proved by the acknowledgement of Protestans in whose name D. Field. l. 3. of
the Church cap. 4.
D. Field writes in this sort: We hold with the Papists, that neither
conference of places, nor consideration of antecedentia and consequentia, nor
the knowledge of tongues, and lookinge into the originalls ^s of any force,
unless we find the things which we conceive to be understood and meant in the
places interpreted, to be consonant unto the rule of faith. D. Field. l. 4. of
the Church cap. 14. and 19.
For who can be able to understand the Scriptures, but he that is settled in
those things which the Apostles presupposed in their delivery of Scripture?
Secondly, by the experience both of all former ages, and this present, proving
by too many examples, that such as come to read and expound Scripture without
being aforehand settled by Tradition in the rule of faith, do fall into errors
most damnable against the maynest articles of the Creed, as the Creation of the
world, the blessed Trinity, and the Incarnation, Baptism, and other. So that
reading and interpretation of Scripture makes not men Christians, but supposes
them to be made by Tradition, at the least for substantial points, such as
every one is bound expressly to know.

Thirdly, we are not more able to understand Scripture then were our
Forefathers the ancient Doctors of the Church, neither is there reason that we
should so think of our selves; but they thought themselves unable to
interpret Scripture, precisely of it self by conference of places, without
the light of Christian Doctrine aforehand known, and firmly believed upon the
Churches perpetual Tradition from the Apostles: witness Ruffinus Eccles. hist.
l. 2. c. 9.
S. Basil and S. Gregory Nazianzen the two grande Doctors of the Grecian
Church, and Origin who thus writes: Orig. tract. in Matthew. cap. 29.
In our understanding of Scriptures: we must not depart from the first
Ecclesiastical Tradition, nor believe otherwise, but as the Church of God has
by succession delivered to us. Ergo, no man is able to read and interpret
Scripture without Protestants affirm, as Whitaker. contr. 1. q. 4. c. 2. and
others, that no man can understand Scripture that bringes not with him the
light of faith and Christian piety, puras and sanctas mentes: which does most
evidently demonstrate that faith about substa^tial points is grounded on Gods
word precedently unto Scripture. That persuasion which is precedent unto the
knowledge of Scripture, and is the rule guiding us in our knowledge of
Scripture, cannot be grounded upon knowledge of Scripture. But Christian faith
and piety as they grant, is precedent unto knowledge of Scripture, yea must be
brought unto the reading thereof, and direct us in it. Ergo faith is not
originally grounded on Scripture.
the light and assistance of firm Christian faith, aforehand conceived by the
voice of the Church delivering what by Tradition from Ancestors she received.
Whence I also conclude, that it is exceeding dangerous boldness in men of this
age, so to presume on their interpretations of Scriptures gotten by diligent
reading and conferring of places, as they care not though a Luther de captiu.
Babyl. Tom. 2. Wittenberg. page 344.
thousand of Cyprians, Augustins, Churches and Traditions should stand against
them.

The fourth Argument.
THOSE that understand the Scriptures aright, must be such as they were to whom
the Apostles writ and delivered the Scriptures, and whose instruction they
intended by their writing, but the Apostles (as D. Lib. 4. of the Church c. 4.
in the margent.
Field acknowledges) wrote to them they had formerly taught more at large,
that were instructed and grounded in all substantial and necessary points of
faith, that knew the common necessary observations of Christianity: Ergo, they
that read and presume to interpret the Scriptures, without first knowing and
firmly believing by tradition, at the least all necessary and substantial
points of faith, The Minister page 34. lin. 34. charge the Jesuit to say
that men not believing forehand all necessary points of faith cannot have any
certain understanding of Scripture. This is a slander. He only says that
such ignorants, and wanters of belief cannot understand aright Scriptures in
all necessary points, but they will err in some chief article or other,
though they may happily understand something aright. For there was never
Heretic that did err in all necessary points. But it is enough to damnation
to err in one substantial point, and therefore we must not presume to read
and interpret Scriptures, till we be well grounded in them by the Tradition of
the Church.
cannot with assurance understand them, but may even in maynest points mightily
mistake: for the blessed Apostles writing to Christians, that were beforehand
fully taught and settled in substantial Christian Doctrines and customs, do
ordinarily in their writings suppose such things as abu^dantly known, without
declaring them anew, only touching them Thus S. Peter act. 9.3. and 4.
reprehe^ding Ananias for the breach of his Vow, does by the way teach the holy
Ghosts Divinity, Why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to the holy Ghost? Thou
have not lied unto men, but unto God. For what is spoken directly and of
purpose in Scripture, is no more infallible truth then what is spoken but
cursorily and by the way. Wherefore the former speech of S. Peter does assure us,
that the holy Ghost is God, as much as that it is a sin to break a vow; and
yet that is spoken by the way, and this of purpose. Whence you may see the
Ministers great weakness of Judgment who holding that some points of faith are
contained in Scripture only consequently, page 32. lin. 3. raileth at the
Jesuit, for saying that some things are said in Scripture cursorily and by
the way. For to be written cursorily and by the way which the Jesuit gives
unto Scripture, is more then to be only virtually, and consequently written.
cursorily by the way, and therefore obscurely, so that they who are already
taught might well understand their sayings, and no other.

Concerning the sufficiency, and clarity of Scripture.. 2.
HENCE I may further infer, that Protestants have not yet thoroughly pondered
the place of the Apostles to Timothy which they so vehemently urge to prove the
all sufficiency of sole Scripture for every man, as though the Apostles had
said absolutely that the Scriptures are able to instruct, or make any man wise
unto salvation: which he says not, but speaking particularly 2. Tim.
3.14.15.16.17.
unto Timothy says, They are able to instruct, or make Thee wise unto
salvation; Thee, The Minister here labors impertinenly to prove that
speeches unto one single person may be general unto many other in Scripture,
which no man denies. And so this speech They are able to make Thee wise, is
general unto all persons that are like to Timothy, that is, instructed
aforehand and settled in the faith of Tradition. For what is said unto one
single person is not said unto others, further the^ they agree with that party
in the cause, for which it is truly said of him. What God said unto Abraham
Genesis 15.12. I am thy Protector, is not said to all men, but only to all me^
that were like Abraham, that is, devout worshipers of the true God, as he was.
that have been aforehand instructed by word of mouth, and do thereupon
firmly believe all substantial doctrines, and know all the necessary
practices of the Christian discipline. Verily the Apostle in that place
speaks only of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, affirming them not
sufficient for every man, but for Timothy; and not sufficient for him by
themselves alone, but per fidem quae est in Christo Jesus, that is joined with
the doctrine of the Christian faith, which Tymothy had heard, and believed upon
the lively voice of Tradition.

And the consequent words of the Apostle so much insisted upon, All Scripture
inspired of God is profitable to teach etc. If Protestants could so The
Minister here heapeth many speeches of Fathers, that say the Scriptures are
sufficient, to prove that Profitable signifyes the same that Sufficient. This
is ridiculous. The Jesuit grants the Scripture to be sufficient for them that
know Tradition, yet he will still deny that profitable signifyes the same as
sufficient.

How Catholics grant the same sufficiency to be in Scripture as Protestants,
and the true state of the Question about sufficiency of Scripture, and of
Tradition.
THE Minister here enters into a long impertinent discourse about the clarity
and sufficiency of Scripture, setting titles over the heads of his pages, Many
Scriptures plain; the Scriptures sufficient etc. as who would say, the
Answerer had denied this. To discover these his false insinuatio^s, and to
clear this controversy most important, we must know 5. things. First that
there was once a controversy betwixt Protestants, and us about the sufficie^cy
and clarity of Scripture. For in their beginning they taught all matter of
faith to be EXPRESSED in Scripture, and nothing inuolued: Omnia expressa nihil
inuolutum; De tota Scriptura dico nullam eius partem obscuram esse. So Luther
de ^er^to Arbitrio. in Tom. 2. Wittenberg. Nothing is to be believed without
the word of God, though it seem deduced by good consequence. Luther in locis
co^mun. 1. part. c. 24. page 69. Secondly, now Protestants (even our Minister
page 32 lin. 2. and often in this reply) disclaim from express and formal
Scripture, and pretend that all things are written either formally or
virtually, and so confess, that there is herin no difference betwixt the most
learned Papists and them. So says Field Church. l. 4. c. 20. page 241. lin. 6.
Thirdly, when some Catholics, as Dominicus Bannes, so many times cited by the
Minister. page 151. Marg lit. f. page 109. lin. 40. page 189. marg. lit. b. page
580. marg lit. a. say, that some points be neither expressly nor inuoluedly in
Scripture, they do not mean that they are not virtually inuolued in things
contained in Scripture as effects in their cause, and so are deduceable from
Scripture; but only that they are not formally inuolued in things of Scripture
as parts in their whole, in sort as they can be articles of faith by sole
Scripture. For things formally inuolued in Scripture as parts in the whole, a
soul and body in man, indiuidualls in the whole mass of their kind be
articles of faith by virtue of Scripture. Thus when the Scripture ^aith Job was
a man, it is said inuoluedly, yet formally, that he had soul and body etc.
when the Scripture says Libanus has Cedar trees, it says not formally but
virtually, it has imputrible wood. Fourthly, the question now resting between
Protestants and us, is not whether the Scripture be virtually intricate and
inuolued about some points of faith, nor whether some rule of interpretation be
necessary; for that the Scripture is inuolued and needs an unfolding rule is
granted on both sides: The only question is, by what rule these Doctrines
inuolued are unfolded and made known unto us as articles of faith. Protestants
say by Scripture and the rules of Logic and Reason, [Wotton Trial of the
Romish etc. page 88. lin. 29.] and by other things besides Scripture evident in
the light of nature, [Feild page 281. lin. 20.] Catholics hold that the rule to
expound Scripture, binding all men to believe deductions as matters of faith,
is not Logic, but the Tradition and definition of the Church.

And this Catholic doctrine is proved. First, because the rule of faith must
be for the capacity of unlearned men as well as of learned* But men unlearned
cannot be sure of the virtualityes of Scripture by the rules of Logic, or
Logical deduction; for they cannot understand when an argument is good by the
rules of Logic. Secondly, the Scripture it self to supply her wants sends
us not to the rules of Logic, but unto traditions, saying 2. Thessal. 2.15.
Hold fast the Traditions ye have received by word or our epistle. They send men
to the Church, as to the pillar and ground of truth. 1. Tim. 3.15. which
whosoever does not hear, is as a hea^hen and a publican. Matthew. 13.5.7.
Therefore by the rule of Church-Tradition and not by the rules of Logic do we
learn authe^tically the confessed virtualities, obscurities, and inuolutions
of Scripture about matters of faith. Thirdly the Fathers about matters inuolued
in Scripture, send men not unto Logic, but unto Tradition, auouching the same
to be a rule as certain and no less estimable then Scripture. S. Chrysostom
homil. 4 in 2. ad Thessal. The Apostles did not deliver all things in
Scripture, but some things without writing, and these are as much to be
credited as the written: It is a Tradition, this is enough, seek no more. The
same is taught by S. Dionysius Eccles. Hierar. c. 1. Iren. l. 2. c. 2.3. and 4.
Eusebius lib. 1. de demonst. Euang. c. 8. by S. Basil de Spirit. sanct. c. 27.
Epiphan. haeres. 55. and 61. Aug. de Baptis li. 2. c. 7. and lib. 5. c. 23. and
the rest.

Finally, we dislike the Protestant manner of controlling the Church by
Scripture. For on the one side they contradict the universal custom and
Tradition of the Church at the least, and as they grant, of many ages, saying,
The Popish doctrine during the space of nine hundred years has spread it
self over the whole world, so that an universal Apostasy was over the whole
face of the earth for many hundred years. [Perkins Exposit. of the Creed. page
307. and 400.] On the other side their Arguments out of Scripture are at the
most but probable, and they sometimes challenge no more: homini non prorsus
alienato probabilior apparet. [Whitak contr. 1. q. 5. c 8. circa finem] Others
allege Scripture not with as probable color as we do. [Iohn White defense
page 321.] Yea this Minister in his Reply does acknowledge page 581. That by
Sophistry we give unto their Scripturall arguments seeming and appearing
solutions. Now we Catholics think it to be Heretical, and as S. Augustine
says, insolent madness, upon probabilities, upon Arguments from Scripture that
receive seeming solutions, to contradict the Christian universal Tradition of
many hundred years: For what the Minister says, this to be done by Sophistry,
is ridiculous. For if to give seeming plausible, and probable solutions unto
Scripturall arguments, against the full Tradition of Christianity be Sophistry,
what is true Theology? On the other side, if for men to stand against the
Tradition of so many whole Christian ages upon arguments they confess to be
probably, and seemingly answered, be Christianity, what is heretical Obstinacy?

Fifthly, whereas you object that page 199. lin. 6. the Fathers disputed from
Scripture negatiuely against Heretics, in this sort; Doctrine is not clearly
delivered in Scripture, therefore it is not to be received as Faith; You must
know, that the Fathers proceed upon a supposition that was known unto all, and
granted by the Heretics themselves, to wit, that the doctrins they disputed
against, were not the full and public Tradition of the Catholic Church. For
seeing Scripture (as we have showed) does necessarily suppose Tradition that we
may know the true text and sense thereof; so likewise the Fathers when they
urge that all doctrine is to be rejected which is not in Scripture, still
suppose that that doctrine is not the public Tradition of the Church. Where
we must also note, that the Fathers did not only require of Heretics proof
from Scripture, by way of deduction and Logical inference (for such all
heretics did pretend and herewith deluded seely sots, as now Protestants do)
but they required of Heretics to show their doctrine in Scripture, ipsis
dictionibus, says Irenaeus. l. 2. c. 36. expressly and in terms, and prove
it, not by texts (says S. Augustine de vnitat. Eccles. c. 3.) which require
sharpenes of wit in the auditors to judge who does more probably interpret
them, not by places, quae vel interpretem quaerunt, which require an
interpreter, and an arguer making Logical inferences upon the text so
concluding for his purpose; but by places plain, manifest, clear, which leave
no place to contrary exposition, and that no Sophystry can wrest them to other
sense, to the end that Controuersyes which concern the Salvation of souls, be
defined by Gods formal word, and not by deductions from it according to
Logical form. For says S. Augustine, what more unjust, then Ingeniorum
contentionibus causam populorum committere?

Hence the Fathers negative argument from Scripture, overthrows Protestant
Religion, for thus I argue. Nothing is matter of Faith and of necessity, which
is not formally and expressly revealed by the word of God either written or
unwritten, delivered by full Ecclesiastical Tradition. But no Heretics ever
did nor our Protestants now do, or can pretend perpetual public Tradition
unwritten for their doctrins, against the Catholic and Roman Church: nor can
they prove their Tenets (ipsis dictionibus ex scriptura) by Scripture, auerring
them in express terms. Only they claim texts which as themselves confess
receive seeming and appearing solutio^s, against which they have nothing to
say, but that this is done by Sophistry, so bringing the business of the
Salvation of the world to be decided by contention of wit. Therefore their
doctrins are to be rejected as vnchristia^. Finally it is great vanity in you
to think that the Traditions unwritten mentioned by Fathers, are conform to
your Doctrine, writing as you do page 46. By Tradition the Fathers understand
not the Fabulous dreams and inventions of Papals, who like Pharisees corrupt
the right sense of Scripture by their unwritten Tradition, and affirm those
things to be Apostolical which agree with the confessed doctrine of the
Apostles like darkness with light. Thus you, with much bitterness, and no
less falsehood. For what Gerson [de signis ruinae Eccles. sig. 5.] says of the
heresies of his age, to wit of Waldo, Wickliffe and Husse, Fabulae sunt, they
are Fables, you turn as by him spoken of perpetual Traditions of the
Catholic and Roman Church. The Pharisees did indeed corrupt Scripture. But
how? By Logical deductions out of the same, according to your Protestant, and
the common Heretical fashion, pretending greater skill then all their
Ancestors. That they did affirm that their special observations were
Traditions unwritten from Moses, the Scripture has not a word; yea the thing
they most of all objected against our Savior, was the written Tradition of
Moses about keeping the Sabbath Day. [ Joan. 7.] From which precept not by
Tradition unwritten, but by Logical inference, they concluded that our Lord
brake the Sabboth-Day by healing diseased persons thereon. So that Pharasaicall
Traditions were never so much as pretended to be doctrines unwritten as you
imagine, but to be doctrines concluded from the text of Scripture, by the rules
of Reason and Logic, just according to your Protestant pretense.

Also, what you say, that the Fathers Traditions unwritten be not our doctrines
but yours, is spoken because you would have men so think though they err, not
because you can think the same to be so in truth. For thus I argue against
this your seely Shift. The Fathers, as appears by their words, understand by
Tradition Apostolical unwritten, Dogmata quae peti non possunt e Sacra
Scriptura, Doctrines of faith that cannot be gathered from the holy Scriptures
with such certitude as they may thereupon be believed as articles of faith. But
you pretend and glory, that all your Doctrines of Faith be ex sacris Scripturis
petitae, so drawn and gathered from holy Scriptures, as they are believed as
Faith only upon this rule. Ergo, it is great vanity for you to say that the
Fathers by Apostolical Tradition unwritten, understood the Doctrine not of the
Roman Church, but of your Protestant Separation.

And if from generality (upon which Ministers, whose drift is to deceive, do
willingly dwell) we descend to particulars, we shall find that you reject those
Doctrines and customs of the Roman Church as Fabulous dreams, and human
inventions, which the Fathers expressly, and in terms affirm to be
Apostolical Traditions. To pray for the relief of the Souls of the faithful
deceased Protestants esteem fabulous: the Chrysostom. Homil. 69. ad Pop.
Fathers affirm it was ab Apostolis sancitum, ordained by the Apostles. The
binding of the Cleargy-men and those that are in the holy Ministry to single
life, and from woing and wiuing, do not Protestants detest as impious? Council.
Carthag. Can. 2.
yet the fathers say, haec docu^runt Apostoli, haec seruauit antiquitas, this
the Apostles taught, this was kept by the Ancients. That it is damnable Sin for
Votaries to marry after their vows, do not Protestants contemn as a fabulous
invention? and yet Epiphan. haeres. 61.
the Fathers say tradiderunt Sancti Dei Apostoli, this is the Tradition of the
holy Apostles of God. The custom of making the sign of the Cross on the
forhead, Protestants deride as foolish: Basil. de Spirit. Sanct. c. 27.
yet the Fathers affirm, hoc tradiderunt Patres nostri in silentio sine
literis, it was taught by our Fathers (the Apostles) in silent Tradition
without writing. The Fast of Lent is it not in neglect and derision with
Protestants? and yet the Hieron. Epist. ad Marcell. de erroribus Montan.
Fathers said as we do, Quadragesima^ semel in anno ex Apostolica traditione
ieiunamus, we fast one Lent a year by the tradition of the Apostles. Do not
Protestants also scorn the feast of Ember-weeke four times in the year? And
yet the Leo de ieiunio sexti mensis, and Sermon. 6. de Pentecost.
Fathers say ex Apostolica traditione seruantur, they are received by
Apostolical Tradition. To fast one friday, or the sixth Day of the week in
memory of our Saviors passion Protestants condemn as superstitious: yet
Epiphan. haeres. 75.
the Fathers say, hoc decreuerunt Apostoli, the Apostles made this decree, and
the Church by Tradition from them has perpetually observed it. The making and
blessing of holy water, do not Protestants reject as magical? Yet the Basil.
de spir. san. c. 27.
Fathers say expressly, it is a Tradition of the Apostles. To mingle water
with Wine in the Chalice of the holy Eucharist, is thought by Protestants to be
fabulous: But by the Fathers Cyprian. lib. 1. Ep. 3.
Dominica institutio, the institution of our Lord, by Tradition unwritten
derived to us. Luther dares to cast off with a jest the commandment not to
receive the holy Eucharist but fasting, that so the body of our Lord may enter
in at our mouth before other meats: Aug. Ep. 118 ad Ianuar. c. 6.
yet the Fathers say, hoc placuit Spiritu sancto, and hoc Christus per
Apostolos disposuit, it pleased the holy ghost it should be so, and by his
inspiration the Apostles did so appoint. What shall I say of Aug. lib. 4. in
Julian. and Leo primus Ep. 14. Exorcizandi sunt secundum Apostolica^ regulam.
Exorcismes and Exsufflatio^s used in Baptism? the Origin. Homil. 5. in Number. A
magno Pontifice Christo, and eius filiis Apostolis traditam.
form of interrogations, answers, and other ceremonies? That Fabian. Ep. 2.
ad Oriental. Christus instituit.
they that be baptized, be afterward Chrismed with the oil of balm? Tertul.
li. 1. ad vx. Apostolica praescriptio. Epiphan. haer. 50. Propter eminentiam
celebrationis traditam.
That they who have been married more then once, be not promoted unto
Priesthood, out of reverence unto that dignity? Aug. lib. 17. de Ciuit. c. 4.
Hoc votum illi potentissimi vouerant.
That the Apostles made the vow of Religions perfection? That Chrysostom. homil. 17.
ad Paph. Antiochen. A Christo introducta. Casian. Coenobitarum disciplina
tempore praedicationis Apostolorum sumpserat exordium.
Monastical profession began by their institution? Tertul. de Corona Militis.
Anniuersarios dies colimus.
the keeping festival Days in the honor of Saints deceased? Council. Antioc.
Apostol. citat. in 7. Synod. act. 1.
The placing the Images of Christ and his Saints in the Church? Damascen. orat.
4. de Imagine Synod. Nicen. 2. act. 7.
Their Worship? Aug. Sermon. 17. de verbis. Apost. and Cyril. cathec. 5. Mystagog.
To commend our selves unto the prayers of Saints deceased in the holy
Sacrifice of Mass? These things Protestants detest as Superstitions; all which
yet the Fathers mantayne to be Apostolical Traditions.




metamorphize the word Profitable, as to make it signify the same with the word
Sufficient, which is very hard; yet were the text much ouershort to prove their
intent, that Scripture alone is sufficient for every man, seeing the Apostle
speaks not of every man, but expressly of him, who is Homo Dei, the man of
God, that is, one already fully instructed, and firmly settled by Tradition in
all the main points of Christian faith and godly life, such an one as Timothy
was. The Scriptures for men in this manner aforetaught and grounded in faith,
are abundantly sufficient, who will deny it? But this proves at the most the
sufficiency of the Scripture, joined with Tradition, not of Scripture alone, or
of onely-onely-onely Scripture, as Protestants books in great Letters, very
earnestly affirm. Hence also we may conclude, that the The Minister to prove
Scriptures are clear unto Infidels that have not the Spirit of faith, heaps
many testimonies of Fathers, that teach Scriptures in some matters to be
clear. Who denies this? they are so to the faithful not unto Infidels, not
unto them that are unsettled in the Catholic faith; yea many places he brings,
speak expressly only of the faithful and pious, Sicut vera Religio docet
accedunt, as S. Augustine and others by him alleged affirm, and therefore
are brought impertinently to prove the sufficiency and clarity of Scriptures in
respect of Infidels, page 34.35.36.
many allegatio^s of Fathers, which Protestants bring to prove the Scripture to
be clear in all substa^tiall points, are impertinent, because the fathers
speak of me^ aforehand instructed in all substantial points, who may by the
light of Tradition easily discover them in Scripture; as they that hear
Aristotle explicate himself by word of mouth may understand his book of
nature, most difficill to be understood of the^ that never heard his
explication, either out of his own mouth, or by Tradition of his Scholars.

I hope I have in the opinion of your most learned Majesty, sufficiently
demonstrated this first GROUND of Catholic faith, to wit, That a Christian is
originally and fundamentally builte upon the word of God, not as written in
Scriptures, but as delivered by Tradition of the Church, successively from the
Primitive, upon the authority whereof we believe, that both Scriptures, and all
other substantial articles of faith, were delivered by the Apostles, thence
further ascending, and inferring they came from Christ, and so from God the
prime veracity and author of truth.

THE SECOND GROUND.
That there is a visible Church always in the world, to whose Traditions men
are to cleave. That this Church is One, Universal, Apostolical, Holy.. 3.
THIS principle is consequent upon the former, out of which six things may be
clerly proved. First, that there is always a true The Minister still co^eth
forth with his distinction that by Church we may understand a Hierarchy of
mitred prelates; and the^ he denies that there is still a church teaching the
truth in the world. Secondly, for a number of belieuers smaller or greater,
teaching and professing the right says in all substantial points; and then he
grants there is still a true Church of Christ in the world. This distinction so
much repeated, specially page 57. and 58. is impertine^t: for by Church we
understand not every small number of right belieuers, but a Christian multitude
of such credit and authority, as upon her tradition we may be sure what
Scriptures and doctrines were the Apostles. For this is a fundamental point
necessary to be known, that so we may know, what Doctrine is of God, and it
cannot be known but by Tradition of the Church, as has been proved. Now
whether this Church be Mitred, or not Mitred, go in Black, or in White, or in
Scarlet, does little import. Let the Minister but show us a Church that has
evident Tradition of Doctrine hand to hand from the Apostles, and we will say
she is the true Church, though she have no Surplisse, or Miter, but be as
precise as Geneua it self: but if there be no Church in the world, but this
Hierarchy of Mitred Prelates, whose Tradition hand to hand can assure men which
be the Scriptures and doctrines of Religion delivered by the Apostles, men
ought not to bear such spleen against a Miter, or Corner-Cap, or Surplisse, as
in respect of them to fly from the Church, that only has Catholic Tradition
from the Apostles.
Church of Christ in the world, for if there be no means for men to know that
Scriptures, and all other substantial Articles came from Christ and his
Apostles, and so consequently from God, but the Tradition of the Church; then
there must needs be in all ages a Church, receiving and delivering these
Traditions, else men in some age since Christ, should have been destitute of the
The Minister pa. 59. lin. 15. says, A corrupt Church may deliver incorruptly
some part of sacred truth, as the Scripture and Creed, by which men may be
saved. Answer. We may conceive two ways of delivering an incorrupt text. The
one Casual and by chance, and so a corrupt Church, yea a Jew, an Infidel, a
child may deliver an vncorrupt Copy of the Bible. The other Authentike,
assuring the receauer this to be the incorrupt text of the Apostles Scripture,
and binding him so to believe. This Authentik and irrefragable Tradition cannot
be made by a false Church, erring in her Traditions, as is clear. Now it is
necessary to salvation, that men not only Casually have the true Scripture, but
must be sure that the text thereof be incorrupt. Therefore there must be still a
Church in the world, whose Tradition is Authentike, that is, a sufficient
warrant upon which men must believe Doctrines to come from the Apostles.
ordinary means of salvation, because they had not means to know assuredly
the substantial Articles of Christianity, without assured Faith whereof no man
is saved.

Secondly, this Church must be always The Minister page 61. lin. 15 and lin.
26. objects, that in time of persecution the true Church may be reputed an
impious sect by the multitude, and so not be known by the notion of True and
Holy; nor can her truth be discerned by sense and common reason. I answer. As
there are four properties of Church-doctrin, so likewise there are four
notions of the Church. The first is to be Mistress of the saving truth.
According to this notion the Church is invisible to the natural understanding
both of men and Angels. For God only and his Blessed see our Religion to be the
truth. The second is to be Mistress of Doctrine truly revealed by secret
inspiration. According to this notion (ordinarily speaking) the Church is
invisible to almost all men that are, or ever were, the Apostles only and the
Prophets excepted. The third, to be Mistress of Doctrine which Christ and his
Apostles by their Miraculous preaching planted in the world. According to this
notion the Church was visible to the first and Primitive world, but now is not.
The fourth to be Mistress of Catholic doctrine, that is, of doctrine
delivered and received by full Tradition and profession, all the adversaries
thereof being under the name of Christian, divided amongst themselves, and
notorious changers. According to this notion the Church is ever visible and
sensible to all men, even unto her very enemies. For not only Jews and
Infidels, but even Heretics know in their conscience, and sometimes
acknowledge in words, that the Church is truly Catholic. So long as the Church
according to this notion of Catholic is in the sight of the world, the world
has sufficient means of salvation. They that see with their eyes which
Religion is Catholic, may easily find out the truth. For it is clear to
common reason that the Catholic Doctrine is the Apostles, clear by common
discourse that the Apostles miraculous preaching was of God, and that God being
the prime verity, his doctrine ought to be received as the truth of salvation.
On the other side if the Church according to the notion of Catholic, be
hidden, and the light thereof lost, there is no ordinary means left for men to
know what the Apostles taught, nor consequently what God by inspiration
revealed unto them. We must begin again anew from a second fountain of
immediate revelation from God, and build upon the new planting of Religion with
miracles in the world by some recent Prophet. And if this be absurd, then there
must ever be in the world a Church, whose Tradition is illustriously
Catholic, and consequently showing it self to be the Apostles, unto all men
that will not be obstinate.
visible and conspicuous. For the Traditions of the Church must ever be famous,
glorious, and most notoriously known in the world, that a Christian may truly
say with S. Augustine de vtilit. cred. c. 17. I believe nothing but the consent
of Nations, and countries, and most celebrious fame. Now if the Church were
hidden, secret, invisible in any age, then her Traditions could not be
Doctrines ever illustriously known, but rather obscure, hidden, Apocriphall.
Ergo, the Church the mistress, pillar and foundation of truth must be always
visible and conspicuous, which (if need be) may be further proved most
evidently.

Thirdly, that this Church, is Apostolical, and that apparently descending
from the Apostolical Sea, by succession of Bishops The Church that has a
lineall succession of Bishops from the Apostles, famous and illustrious,
whereof not one has been opposite in religion to his immediate predecessor,
proves evidently that this Church has the doctrine of the Apostles* for as in
the rank of 300. stones ranged in order, if no two stones be found in that
line of different color, then if the first be white, the second is white, so
the rest unto the last: even so if there be a succession of 300. Bishops all of
the same Religion, if the first have the Religion of the Apostles, and of
Peter, the second likewise has the same, and so the rest, even until the last.
vsque ad Confessionem generis humani, even to the acknowledgment of humane
kind, as S. Augustine l. de vtil. Cred. cap. 17. speaks: for how could the
Tradition of Christian Doctrine be eminently and notoriously Apostolical, if
the Church delivering the same, has not a The Minister says p. 67. circa
finem, That this note of succession makes nothing against the Church of
England, because their Pastors and Bishops are able to exhibit a pedigree, or
deriuation both of their ministry and doctrine, from the Apostles. This is
ridiculous. For if they can really exhibit such a pedigree and deriuation of
their faith in all ages from Christ to Luther, why do they still keep us in
suspense, and never exhibit the same, which we so earnestly beg at their
hands? Let them but name the Church, or Pastor that did commit unto Luther the
Ministry of preaching his doctrines against the Roman religion? The Roman
Church made him priest, and gave him commission to preach her doctrine; but to
preach against her Religion who gave him order? That commission to preach
seeing he had it not from any Church as is manifest, he had it either from
himself, coining a religion of his own head out of Scripture understood in
his own manner, or from Satan with whom he conferred, and unto whose
arguments he yielded, as himself does witness Tom. 7. Wittenberg. fol. 228. or
else immediately from God, and then he ought to have made this immediate
revelation known by miracles. Let not Ministers therefore idly say, we can
exhibit a pedigree, feeding us with words; but affoard us present payment of
so long an exacted debt. If they know the pedigree of their faith the labor is
not great to write the names of their Ancestors in every age. That done they
may rest. For if we cannot demonstrate that these their pretended Ancestors
were either Catholic Romans, or else opposite one to another in substantial
points, and this by as authentike records as they do to prove they held some
points of their Religion, the victory shallbe theirs. Is it possible they
should thus delude men by saying, we can exhibit, and yet never do it?
manifest and conspicuous pedigree, or deriuation from the Apostles? Which is a
conuincing argument used by the same S. Augustine Epist. 48. circa medium. How
can we think that we have received manifestly Christ, if we have not also
received manifestly his Church? It is a principle of Philosophy, Propter quod
vnum quodque tale and illud magis, but the name of Christ, his glory, his
virtues, his miracles are to the world famously known from age to age by
reason of the Church, and her preaching, who in her first Pastors saw him with
their eyes. Ergo, this Church must needs be more famous, more illustrious, as
able to give fame, even unto the being, and doctrine, and actions of Christ.

Fourthly, this Church is One, that is, all the Pastors The Minister. page 108.
lin. 14. alleges the differences amongst Schooleme^, particularly betwixt
Dominica^s and Jesuits, about the manner of explicating the efficacy of Grace,
as an argument, that the Roman Church wants unity of faith as much as
Protestants. I answer, this is Idle, these differences not being in matters of
faith. If Scholmen should preach different doctrines, as matters of faith
condemning each other as Heretics, and the Church, this notwithstanding, should
allow of both sides as her children, then there should be in the Church disunion
in faith. But the Roman Church does not allow such dissonant Preachers, only
she permits them to differ in matters they teach, as greater probability,
and private opinion. If any preach their private probabilityes as Doctrines,
and as matters of faith, condemning others as heretics, except they recall
their censure, the Roman Church shuts them out of her communion, not
permitting disunion in faith. For such permitta^ce would utterly discredit the
authority of her preaching, and show that even in matters of faith she is a
Church to be believed no further the^ seen.
and Preachers thereof deliver, and consequently all her professors and children
believe one and the same faith. For if the Preachers and Pastors of the Church
disagree about matters which they preach as necessary points of Faith, how can
their Tradition and Testimony be of credit therein, or have any authority to
persuade? Who will, or can firmly believe disagreeing witnesses upon their
words? And this By this Note, Protestants are convinced not to be the true
Church, for the Protestant Church allows, that dissonant doctrines be preached
as her doctrine, as the word of God, as the truth of salvation; she permits
that her preachers condemn each other as heretics without disclayming from the
communion of either side. For she imbraceth in her communion both Lutherans who
preach as an article of faith, the carnal manducation of Christ's true body by
the wicked, [ Luther tom. 3. Germ. fol. 264.] and Caluinists who detest this
carnal manducation as blasphemous and impious. [ Calvin. admonit. 3. ad
Westphalum.] But it is evident that the Church that allows of dissonant
preaching in matters of faith, cannot be the true Church. For how can she be
the one true Church which allows that doctrine, she knows to be false, be
preached as her Religion and the truth of faith? The Protestant Church knows,
that of contrary doctrines the one side must needs be false. Therefore
consenting that both sides be preached as her faith, and as saving truth, she
yields that doctrine knownely false, be preached as her doctrine and saving
truth, and so is Mistress of falsehood, as much as of truth.
consent must be conspicuous and evident. For if in outward appearance and show,
preachers dissent one from another in main and material doctrines, their
authority is crazed, and their testimony of no esteem; howsoever percha^ce
their dissentions may be by some distinctions so colored that one cannot One
cannot convince an obstinate gaynsayer and wrester of words, but still he will
wrangle, yet may he be convinced that he does falsify and wrong authors in his
interpretations, and this evidently in the judgment of every indifferent
Reader.
convince him, that would boldly undertake to defend, as D. Field lib. 3. of
the Church cap. 42*
Doctor Field undertakes for Protestants, that their dissensions be but
verbal. But what is this to the purpose? Do the accused dissentioners allow
this Doctors reconciliation? do they give over contention thereupon? No, but
profess that such reconcilers miss of their meaning, and that they disagree
substantially about the very Prime articles of faith. How can these men be
witnesses of credit, for substantial articles concerning which there is open
confessed and professed dissension amongst them?

Fifthly, I infer, that this Church is universal, spread over all nations,
that she may be said to be every where Morally, that is, according unto common
humane reputation, by which a thing diffused over a great part of the world and
famously known, is said, to be every where. In this manner the Apostle said
that the faith of the Romans was renowned in the whole world, Romans 1.12. In
this sort the Church is still universal and every where. By this is answered
all the Minister brings upon mistaking of morally.
morally speaking, being so diffused, that the whole known world may take
notice of her, as of a worthy and credible witness of Christian Tradition,
howsoever her outward glory and splendor, peace, and tranquillity be sometimes
obscured in some places more or less, and not ever in all places at once. A
truth so clear, that it may be evidently proved out of The text Apocalypse
20.8. says, They (the Purseua^ts of Antichrist) went upon the breadth of the
earth, and compassed about the camp of Saints and beloved City: which place
proves clearly, that the Church and camp of God shall be spread over the whole
breadth of the earth in the days of Antichrist. This verse the Minister
mistaketh of purpose, and in lieu thereof cites the seventh, and very
absurdly says, that Antichrist shall persecute Christians, that is, put them
in prison and kill them where they were not. And Protestants themselves
affirm, that even all the days of Antichrist the Church shall be right famous
and continue dispersed over the world. Bullinger. in Apocal. 20. Fulke against
the Rhem. in These. 2. sect. 5. Whitaker answer to M. Reynols preface. p 34.37.
Scripture, Apoc. 20. v. 8. that even in Antichrists days the Church shall be
visibly universal. For she shall the^ be every where persecuted, which could
not be, except she were every where visible and conspicuous, even to the
wicked. The reason of this perpetual visible Universality is, because the
Tradition of the Church is, as I have proved, the sole ordinary means, on
which we ground faith for substantial points. Wherefore this Tradition must be
so delivered as it may be known to all men, seeing God The Minister says p.
78. l. 22. That God will have all men saved, according to his antecedent will,
citing Schoolme^ that say that Gods antecedent will is only a velleity, a wish,
a complacence; thence co^cluding that though God have antecedent will that all
be saved, yet this does not infer that he alwais prouides sufficient means
for the salvation of all. I answer. That God by his antecedent will of man's
salvation wishes two things. First the salvation of all men: Secondly the
means of their salvation. In respect of the means the will of God is
absolute, that all men in some sort or other have sufficient means of
salvation. In respect of the end, to wit, the salvation of all men, the will of
God is not absolute, but as Schoolmen say, virtually conditional, that is, God
has a will that al men be saved as much as lies in him, if the course of his
providence be not stopped, and men will cooperate with his grace. Whence I thus
argue. If God did not provide sufficient means for all men, it could not be
said, that on his part he wishes the salvation of all. But even our Minister
page 78. lin. 38. grants that God wishes the salvation of all men, and of
every individual person. Therefore God still makes his Church visibly
universal, vt neminem lateat, as says S. Augustine, that no man perish through
the hiddennes, and inuisibility thereof.
will have all men without exception of any nation to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth, 1. Tim. 2.4. But if the Church were not still so
diffused in the world that all known The Answerer writing to his Majesty and
knowing the Proverb sapienti verbu^, did inte^d by this word to insinuate how
God provided means of salvation for the world, whereof one part was many ages
unknown. The solution of this difficulty much urged by the Minister page 78
consists in these points: first God our Savior being borne and dying in this
known world, provided that his Church should be still visibly spread over the
same and famously known. Secondly, Nations be not so unknown, but by navigations
and other such natural means they may be discoueuered unto this world where
our Savior was borne, and his Church is ever visible. Thirdly, he still
provides as Experience shows, that in the firmer members of this his visible
Church, such zeal and charity is found that nations can no sooner be
discovered, but presently some preachers pass thither with the sound of his
Gospel. Fourthly, hence the cause why some nations hear not of the Gospel,
is not any defect in his Church, but the want of working in the natural causes
to discover such Countries, which defect God will not ever miraculously supply.
Fifthly, if the Church were invisible to the world, keeping her Religion to her
self, not daring to profess or preach the same unto others, Nations might be
discovered, and yet not a whit the nearer in respect of knowing the Ghospel.
Hence I thus argue. If the Church were hidden for many ages, as Protestants
acknowledge theirs was, men should perish, not through defect in the natural
causes, but only through the hidde^nes, obscurity and wretchedness of the
supernatural means, to wit, of the Church not daring to make profession of her
Religion to the world. But this is impossible, for then God should not for his
part wish the salvation of all men. Therefore it is impossible that the true
Church should not be ever universal and notoriously known, and consequently
it is impossible, that the Protestant should be the true Church.
nations may take notice of her, all men could not be saved. Sixthly this Church
is Holy both in Life and Doctrine. Holy for life, shining in all excellent, and
wonderful Sanctity to be a sign of the true Church must be on the one side
divine and excellent, and on the other external and manifest unto sense; were
it not evident unto sense, it could not be a sign; were it not divine, it
could not be a sign of a Christian Church, sanctified from the rest of the
world. Hence appears the idleness of the Minister who page 81. rejecting
external extraordinary sanctity, makes inward sanctity a sign of the Church,
and so he proves his Church to be Holy, because forsooth she is cleansed by
the blood of the lamb etc. This is idle. For how can this inward Sanctity,
caused by the blood of the Lamb and inhabitation of the spirit, be a sign of
the Church, except it be made known by outward excellent works? Hence our
Savior says of this sign of sanctity Matthew. 7.16. By their fruits you shall
know the^: and let your light shine before men, that they may see your works.
Matthew. 5.16. See S. Augustine de vtilit. Credendi lib. 17. and his book de
moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae.
sanctity, such as the Apostles gave example of, as Poverty, The Minister page
82. lin. 35. says, that vowed Chastity makes most of our Church more impure
then dogs, before God and me^. I answer, this is blasphemy. For the breach of
vowed Chastity, not the vowing thereof makes men impure before God. Otherwise
who should be more loathsome in his sight the^ his immaculate mother who vowed
Chastity? as the Fathers prove by the Gospel. Luc. 1.34.

This blasphemy is the same in effect with that of Turks, who say, that the
Christian band of chastity to one immaculate bed, forbiding multitude of wives,
makes Christians more impure then dogs. Which they prove, because now many
thousands of Christians fall into Adultery, Incest, and other impurity, which
would not have been had Christ permitted, as Mahomet did, the holy Liberty of
many wives which the ancient Prophets inioyed.

To this Heretical Turkish accusation of the Catholic Christian Church, I
answer: It was convenient that Christ Jesus being the Son of God should
exact of his followers such sanctity, and chastity as might suite with the
perfection of so divine a Lawmaker. And though he knew many thousands would
therein be defective, for whom therefore in his mercy he provided the remedy
of Penance; yet this failing of some, being but an effect of human frailty, he
thought it more tolerable, then that he should allow by his Law such liberty of
lust, as was indecent for his sanctity to permit, and unworthy of a people
redeemed with his blood, whereby there would have been fewer sinners among
Christians, not through strictnes of life, but through the loosenes of his law.

In this manner the Church of Christ taught by the spirit of his wisdom, does,
and did ever exact perfect chastity of them that were of her Clergy, though
she be sure that in so great a multitude many will fail who must seek to be
saved by penance. As adultery in Christians is rather to be suffered then
avoided by allowing many wives generally unto Christians, though this be not of
it self intrinsecally evil: even so the falling of some Votaies is not so
great an inconvenience as this were, that Sacred Ministers should not be bound
to profess Chastity worthy of the divinity of Christian Priesthood, the
sinning against Chastity being humane infirmity, but the not exacting thereof
an indignity in the very Christian law.

For all men not blinded with passion see, it is most vndece^t that Christian
consecrated Ministers should go a wooing and wiuing, and when one wife dies
wedde another as often as they please, as the Protestant pretended Holy
Ministers use to do. This practice is so evidently unworthy, and against all
Christian decency, as they cannot bring one allowed example of a Christian
Church in any former age, that did permit liberty of wooing and wiuing after
Holy Orders, which even the Grecian Church does detest. Let them therefore
consider how theirs can be the Holy Church, that does not so much as profess
high Sanctity that becomes a Christian Church, no not in her consecrated
Ministers and more Religious professors. Specially seeing also Ministers by
Marriage do not wholly avoid the stayne of wandering lust and other impurity, yea
themselves acknowledge that they be at the least, as vicious as the Catholic
Clergy. The sanctity of the Church is not to be measured by the report of
zealous complaint against sin, nor is the exaggerated generality thereof to be
urged as exact truth, with which kind of stuff our Minister has most
impertinently patched up many pages of his Book, see page 82.83.111. and seq.
for zealous complaint is Hyperbolicall even in holy Scripture, as all know. And
if Protestants be remeasured again by this rule whereby they measure us, they
will get the worst. For themselves compain that the world is made WORSE by
virtue of their doctrine. [Luther postil. in Dom. 1. Aduent.] and, that sin
had NEVER been so rife, but through the rifenes of their Gospel. [Doctor King
in Ionam, Lecture 45.] that scarce the tenth man of the Ministry is morally
honest. [Caluin in pannych. and in comm. 2. 1. Petr. 2.] No not one, but, all
be dissolute and lewd, says Luther Dom. 26. post Trinit. In so much as in
regard of this enormious wickedness of their Ministry and Church any man may
justly doubt whether they be the true Church, says Eberus praefat. ad com.
Philip. and in 1. ad Corinth.

This may convince our Minister, that his allegations be of no credit, and that
Judgment of the Sanctity of a Church, is not to be made by the report of
zealous complaint, but by the evidence of sight, ruled by impartial search. By
which rule one may find in the Catholic Clergy thousands, and thousands that
show admirable charity, specially in converting Infidells, yea that win the
glorious crown of Angelical Chastity, for which they would never have
striuen, had not the Church bound them thereunto.

So that, if human infirmity by occasion of this law make some men impure, that
otherwise perchance in marriage would have been chaste; so the Grace of God by
the same occasion works in innumerable Angelical Saints, who had never been
such but for the Churches exaction. And this harvest makes full recompense for
that loss, specially seeing also many of such delinquents be not lost but saved
by Penance, yea become more excellent Saints then they had been had they
never fallen.


Chastity, Obedience, Charity, in undergoing labors for the help of souls,
Fortitude in suffering of heroycall Martyrdomes, Zeal and Patience in the
rough and rigorous treaty of their bodies, by miraculous fasting, and another
austerityes. This sanctity shines not in all children of the Church, but in
her more eminent preachers and professors. Which kind of sanctity together
with miracles, if the Church did want, she could not be a sufficient witness of
the truth unto Infidells, who commonly never begin to affect, and admire
Christianity, but upon the sight of such wonders of Sanctity, and other
extraordinary works. Holy for doctrine, in regard her Traditions be divine and
holy, without any mixture of error. For if the Church could deliver by consent
of Ancestors, together with truth some Errors, her Traditions, even about
truth were questionable, and could not be believed upon the warrant of her
traditions; for who can without danger, and securely, feed on that dish that
may as well contain poison, as wholesome sustenance? And whereas some
Protestants affirm that the Church cannot err in fundamental points, but
only in things of less moment; the truth is, that in perpetual Traditions
she cannot err at all. If the Tradition of the Church delivering a small thing
as received from the Apostles may be false, one may call into question her
Traditions of moment.

For, like as if we admit in the Scripture errors in small matters, we cannot
be sure of its infallibility in substa^tial matters: So likewise, if we grant
Traditions perpetual to be false in things of less importance, we have no
solid ground to defend her Traditions as assured in others of moment. Wherefore
as he that should say Gods written word is false in some less matters, as when
it says, S. Paul left his Cloak at Troas, erreth fundamentally by reason of
the consequence, which gives occasion to doubt of every thing in Scripture;
even so, he that grants that some part of Traditions, or of the word of God
unwritten may be false, erreth substantially, because he gives cause to doubt
of any Tradition, which yet as I have showed, is the prime and originalll
ground of Faith, more The Minister here rayleth largely and lustily tearming
this assertion impudent, Antichristian, profane, bastardly etc. yet the
assertion is evident truth, and his reasons against it are of no force. For
they go not against the assertion, but prove another thing, to wit, the
excellency of Scripture, which none denies. For Tradition and Scripture
according to different co^parisons are equal, and superior the one to the
other. Compare them in respect of certainty of truth, they are equal, as the
Council of Trent defines sess. 4. both being the word of God, the one Written
the other Unwritten, and so both infinitely certain. Compare them in respect of
depth, sublimity, and variety of doctrine, the Scripture is far superior
unto Tradition, Tradition being plain and easy doctrine concerning the common,
capital, and practical articles of Christianity; whereas the Scripture is full
of high and hidden senses, and furnished with great variety of examples,
discourses, and all manner of erudition, Aug. Epist. 3. Compare them in respect
of priority and evidence of being the Apostles, the Scripture is posteriour
unto Tradition in time and knowledge, and cannot be proved directly to be the
Apostles and therefore Gods but by Tradition, as sometime not only Fathers but
even Protestants afffirme. As Philosophy is more perfect then Logic, and
Rhetoric then Grammar, in respect of high and excellent knowledge; yet Logike
is more prime, original, fundamental then Philosophy, Grammar, then
Rhetoric, without the rules and principles whereof they cannot be learned:
Even so Tradition is more prime, and original then Scripture, though
Scripture, in respect of depth and sublimity of discourse, be more excellent
then Tradition.
fundamental then the very Scripture, which is not known to be Apostolical,
but by Tradition: whereas a perpetual Tradition is known to come from the
Apostles by its own light. For what more evident, the^ that that is from the
Apostles which is delivered as Apostolical by perpetual succession of
Bishops, consenting therein?

The Propertyes of the Church, proved by Matthew. 28.20.. 4.
ALL this may be clearly proved (to omit other pregnant testimonies) by the
words of our Savior in the last of S. Matthew, Going into the world, teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, teaching them to keep all that I have commanded you: and behold I
am with you all days even to the consummation of the world. A The Minister
page 195. lin. 4. says, that this promise is conditional, in repect of
Pastors succeeding the Apostles: to wit, that Christ will assist them
conditionally when they teach and baptize as he has commanded, but that they
shall so still teach he does not promise, p. 24. lin. 28. This exposition is
false, first because our Savior here promises his Presence unto the Apostles
and their successors to baptize, and teach until the worlds end, by one and
the same form of speech and individual breath, so that the promise cannot be
conditional in respect of the successors, except it be also conditional in
respect of the Apostles. But in respect of the Apostles the promise is absolute
as the Minister grants page 94. lin. 23. Therefore it is also absolute in
respect of their successors. Not that this, or that Pastor may not be
deceived, but that they shall never deliver by joint consent, any falsehood as
the Apostles doctrine.

Secondly, if the promise be conditional, then the sense is this; I will
always assist you to teach and Christen aright, when you teach and christen
according to my commandment, as the Minister expounds page 94. lin. 22. But
this sense is idle and just nothing, as if Christ had said, Behold I will
assist you to teach aright when you teach aright: for what is to teach
Christian Religion aright, but to teach it as Christ commanded, and delivered
the same?

Thirdly, if this Promise were conditional and not absolute, then by this
place the Church could not be proved to last absolutely for ever, but only so
long as she Christeneth aright and teaches the truth, wherein according to this
Protestant exposition she may fail. But the Fathers from this text gather
against the Donatists, that the Church shall never fail to be in all Nations of
the world, until the end thereof, as S. Aug. in Psalm. 101. conc. 2. Leo Epist.
3. ad Pulcheriam, and others hence prove. Therefore the sense is absolute, his
Church shall be still in the world, and he still assisting his Church by his
spirit to teach and baptize aright.


promise of wonderful comfort unto them, that pawn their souls, and
salvation upon Gods word delivered by perpetual Tradition; for in this
sentence appears the six things I before set down. First, that there is
still A Christian Church all days, not wanting in the world, so much as one
day till the consummation of the world. Secondly, this Church is ever visible,
and conspicuous. For the Church that always teaches, and Christeneth all
Nations, must needs be visible. But this Church always teaches and
Christeneth all Nations, I am always with you, not with you sitting in
Corners, or hidden under ground but with you, exercising the office enjoined
you in the words precedent Docete omnes gentes, baptizantes. Thirdly, this
Church is ever Apostolical, for to his Apostles Christ said, I am always with
you to the co^summation of the world, not with you in your own persons, but
with you in your successors in whom you shall continue until the worlds end.
Ergo, a lawful company of Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors succeeding the
Apostles must be perpetually in the world. Forthly, this Church is Universal,
Ite in mu^dum vniuersum, where I will be always with you. Fifthly, this Church
is One, not divided into parts, because it teaches and belieueth uniformly
all that Christ delivered and commanded, without Factions, Sects, or Parts
about matters of faith. Sixthly, this Church is always holy for doctrine, never
delivering or teaching any falsehood: I (who am the Truth) am always with you,
teaching all nations. Holy also for life, Christ the holy of holyes assisting
and making her able to convert Infidels, which she could not well do The
Minister p. 85. and 86.102. alleges diverse Fathers and scholme^ to prove
that now miracles are ceased and not necessary. Answer. The Minister should
distinguish as the fathers do, who make two manner of beings of Miracles, to
wit, ordinary and extraordinary, and affirm three things. First, that in the
primitive Church miracles were absolutely necessary for the pla^ting of the
Gospel in the world. Joan. 5.24. Act. 4.29.30. and then the gift of miracles
was ordinarily annexed unto the Ministry of Preaching, yea so that every
Christian commonly had that gift in some kind or other. 1. Cor. 12.28. Act.
8.17. and 10. 4.6.

Secondly, that since the planting of the Gospel by twelve Fishermen, this
being the miracle of miracles, no further miracle is absolutely necessary for
me^ unto who^ this is known, and therefore the gift of miracles is ceased to be
ordinarily annexed to the office of preaching or common to al Christians, as
before it was. Aug. de Ciuit. l. 22. c. 8. Gregor. 27. moral. c. 1.

Thirdly notwithstanding, in all ages there were, are, and shall ever be some
special places and persons extraordinarily endued with the gift of miracles,
for the comfort of Christians Conversion of some remote Nations that know not
the first miraculous planting of our Religion by certain and celebrious fame:
and of miracles in this kind the writings of the Fathers and all Christian
histories are full. See S. Aug. l. 22. de Ciuit. c. 8. and Gregory in his
Dialogues.

THE PROTESTANT CHVRCH not before Luther.


without miracles, and tokens of wonderful sanctity, at the least in her more
eminent Preachers.

That the Roman is the One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolical Church, from, and by
which we are to receive the Tradition of Christian Doctrine.. 5.
THIS Ground being laid, it is apparent that the Roman Church, that is the
multitude of Christians spread over the world, cleaving to the doctrine and
Tradition of the Church of Rome, is the only holy, Catholic, and Apostolical
Church.

The first Argument.
THERE must always be in the world one, holy, Catholic, and Apostolical
Church; That is, a Church delivering doctrines uniformly, thereby making them
credible; universally, thereby making them famously known to mankind; holyly,
so making them certain, and such as on them we may securely rely;
Apostolically, so making the^ perpetually flow without change unto the present
Christianity in the channel of a neuer-interrupted Succession of Bishopps from
the Apostles. And this Church Unto this Argument the Minister page 104. makes
answer, that his Protestant Church was before Luther, in essence and kind,
though it began in Luther touching the Name, and some things accidental. In
proof whereof he thus writes: In all ages before Luther some persons held the
substantial articles of our Religion, both in the Roman and Grecian Church.
And by name the Grecians maintained with us that the Roman Church has no
primacy of Jurisdiction above, or over all other Churches; neither is the same
infallible in faith. They deny Purgatory, Private Masses Sacrifice for the
dead, and they propugne the Marriage of Priests. In this Western part of the
world the Waldenses, Thaborites of Bohemia, Wickliffi^ts ma^tayned the same
doctrine in substance, as appears by their confession of faith, and by the
testimony of some learned Pontificians.

This being the substance of all the Minister has said or can say for his
Church before Luther, the same is insufficient, false, more for Anabaptists
then Protestants. This I prove. In general this pedigree is insufficient for
two reasons. First because it is not for all ages. The Grecians were united
with the Roman Church until the year 1060. the Waldensians began about the
year 1160. Now there remaynes six or seven ages since the pretended Apostasy
of the Roman Church, for which the Minister does not name any professors that
were Protestants for essence and kind. Secondly, because Protestants teach,
that the most substantial article of their Religion is Justification by
special faith only, and not by works and merits of grace, as all know. But
these pretended professors, namely the Waldenses and Wickliffists held
rigorously the merit of works. In so much as Wickliffe said, Let every man
confide in his merits, for which saying he is refuted by the Catholic author
Thomas Waldensis Tom. 3. c. 7.8.9.

Graecians no Protestants in Essence.
In particular the Pedigree is notoriously false in respect of the Graecians
who cannot without impudency be named as Protestants, according to essence and
kind. First, they hold damnable heresies and substantial errors in the
Judgment of Protestants, so wit Invocation of Saints, Adoration of Images, as
they profess in their Censure sent unto Protestants, and by them printed,
Respons. 2. De Inuocatione Sanctorum. They defend Transubstantiation, ibid.
resp. 1. c. 13. Communion in one kind for the sick, Gilbert. Genebrard de
ritibus Graecorum. Secondly, concerning primacy of Jurisdiction, they hold that
Christ did institute Monarchical primacy in Peter, Theophilact. in cap. 21.
Joan. That the Roman Bistop for many ages lawfully succeeded Peter in this
Primacy, Ignatius Constantinopolitan. Epist. ad Nicolaum primum. That the Roman
Bishop lost this primacy for holding the Procession of the Holy Ghost from God
the Son, and that therefore this primacy is now in the Patriarch of
Constantinople, Michael Constant. apud Sigeb. in Chron. an. 1064. Is this
Protestancy in substance? Thirdly it is great indiscretion, (I speak with the
least) to affirm as our Minister does, that the Graecia^s deny sacrifice for
the dead, with which doctrine no author Catholic or Protestant ever charged
them. And they in their foresaid censure resp. 1. c. 12. profess the contrary,
saying, We hold that by the sacrifice of the Mass and Almesdeedes the dead are
relieved; yea Doctor Field Appendix part. 1. page 30. accuses some of them
for holding Sacrifice not only for them that dyed in penna^ce with sins of
infirmity, but also for them that dyed in damnable state. Finally concerning
marriages of Priests, they hold that such as are married before Holy Orders may
still keep company with their wives, which the Church of Rome allows in them.
But the Protestant liberty of marrying after Holy Orders, and that not only
once, but if their wives dye, twice, thrice, yea as often as they please; This
the Graecians detest in the foresaid Censure, Resp. 1. c. 21. So that the
Minister was in great penury of Professors before Luther that is forced to
name Graecians as Protestants according to kind. For he might as well have named
the Pope himself.

Waldenses not Protestants, for Essence and Kind.
Concerning the Waldenses, they were not Protestants according to kind, but
rather Anabaptists, unto whom Protestants are so unkind as they burn them as
Heretics. They were not Protestants; For (as all report, as may be seen in
Illyricus Catal. Test. page 1498.) the most essential doctrine of the
Waldenses was their extolling the merit of voluntary poverty, preaching the
same so rigorously, as they held all Ministers to be damned that have rents and
possessions, and that the Church perished under Syluester and Constantine
through the poison of temporal goods which Cleargy-men then began to enjoy (as
they said) against the Law of God. I am sure none that know Protestants will
think this doctrine of poverty and giving away all to the poor to be the
Essence, or so much as an Accidence of their Religion. In respect of this their
head-heresy about Poverty, the Waldenses are named the Poore-men of Lions, and
were said by Reynerius cited by the Minister page 130. to have been ever since
Siluester or the Apostles, and that they were much applauded in the world, to
wit, (as I said) only in regard of this Heresy about poverty, held anciently by
the Heretics termed Apostolici, not in respect of other errors or doctrines
wherein they agree with Protestants. And so Protestants labor in vain by
Waldensians, and the Apostolici, to bring their pedigree from the Apostles.

Besides, the Waldensians held these Anabaptisticall errors, which are set
down by Illyricus in Catalogo Testium page 1502. and seq. out of Reynerius an
author of those times whom he terms candidum and sincerum, sincere and
impartial; That children are not to be baptized, baptism being of no use for
them, seeing they do not believe; That there is no difference betwixt Bishopps
and Priests, nor betwixt Laymen and priests; That the Apostles were mere
Laymen; That every Layman that is virtuous, is priest may consecrate, preach,
administer Sacraments. That a woman pronouncing the words in the vulgar tongue
does consecrate; yea transubstantiate bread into the body of Christ; That it is
mortal sin to swear in any case; That the Magistrates secular and
Ecclesiastical being in mortal sin, loose their office, and that no man is
to obey them. Indeed Illyricus page 1514. and 1525. in fine says, that this
last error is falsely laid to the charge of the Walde^sia^s by Reynerius: which
he proves, because AEneas Syluius in his Catalogue of their doctrine makes no
mention of this. But he is grossly deceived two ways. First because Reynerius
living in that time, and being Inquisitour could know their errors better then
Syluius. Nor can we suspect his fidelity being as Illyricus does acknowledge
sincerus and candidus, sincere and impartial toward Waldensians. Secondly,
AEneas Syluius in his Catalogue set down by Illyricus even in that very page
1525. a little before the middle, charge the Walde^sia^s expressly with this
doctrine against Magistracy: Qui mortalis culpae reus sit, eu^ neque Saeculari
neque Ecclesiastica dignitate potiri, nec parendu^ ei esse. Finally the
Waldensians held it not necessary to profess their faith, yea that they might
deny it, go to Mass, celebrate and do outward acts of Idolatry. This even
Illyricus page 1508. does acknowledge to have been a fault in them, but he
says they may have been saved by repentance. This is an idle shift, for how
could they repent themselves of that which they held not to be sin? How could
they be the true Church, wherein salvation is found, who held such damnable
doctrine, as if they did not repent themselves thereof, they are certainly
damned: so that it is extreme beggary in Protestants to beg of these Beggars
of Lions, to be their Professors for the time before Luther, who were even by
Protestant acknowledgement, much more poor and void of true religion, then of
temporal wealth.

That Protestants not being able to clear themselves to be the visible Church,
do vainly appeal unto Scripture for their doctrine.
The Minister not trusting to the former answer, and feeling in conscience
that it is impossible that Protestants should show their Church to have been
visible before Luther, says page 105. That this notwithstanding if Protestants
be able to demonstrate by Scripture, that they maintain the same faith and
Religion which the Apostles taught, this alone is sufficient to prove them to
be the true Church.

I answer, they that cannot by marks of the Church set down in Scripture
clear themselves to be the visible Church, do idly appeal to Scripture in
respect of doctrine; and their promises to show the particular points of their
Religion by Scripture are idle. This I demo^strate by 3. Arguments.

First, either Scriptures can clear and end all controversies of Religion, or
they cannot. If they cannot, appealing unto them has no other end, but that
contention may be without end. If they can clear all controversies, then they
can clear the controversy which is the true Church, showing marks and signs
whereby the same may be clearly known. And if they can clear this
co^trouersy, the^ it is reason this be cleared in the first place. For as
Protestants acknowledge the particular examination of doctrines is tedious and
long, not for the capacity of all, whereas the finding out of the true Church
ends all controuersyes, seeing we may securely follow her directions and rest
in her Judgment. [Field Epist. dedicat.

Secondly, what more idle and vain then to appeal from Scripture, setting
down matters clearly, unto Scripture teaching things obscurely or not so
clearly? what is this but to appeal from light to darkness, or at the least
from noone day to twy-light? But no particular point of doctrine is in holy
Scripture so manifestly set down as is the Church, and the marks whereby the
same may be known; no matter about which the Scripturs are more copious and
clear, then about visibility, perpetuity, amplitude the Church was to have; so
that as S. Augustine says, Scriptures are more clear about the Church then
even about Christ. [in Psalm. 30. concion. 2.] That Scripture in this point is
so clear, that by no shift of false interpretation it can be avoided; the
impudency of any forhead that will stand against this evidence, is confounded.
[de unit. Eccles. c. 5.] That it is prodigious blindness not to see which is the
true Church. [Tract. 1. in 1. Epist. Joan.] That the Church is the tabernacle
placed in the Sun, that it cannot be hidden unto any, but such as shut their
eyes against it. [ l. 2. cont. Petilian. c. 32.] What vanity then is it for
Protestants not being able to clear by Scripture the cleerest of all points,
to appeal unto the proving of their doctrine by more dark or less evident
places?

Thirdly, if no man can directly know which be the Scriptures the Apostles
delivered but by the Tradition of the Catholic Church, then it is vain before
they decide this controversy to undertake to prove by Scriptures what doctrine
the Apostles taught. For how can Scripture make me know what the Apostles
taught, unless I know aforehand the Scriptures to be the Apostles? I may see
this, or that doctrine delivered in the Scripture, showed me as the Apostles,
but I cannot know that doctrine to be the Apostles, except I know aforehand the
book to be the Apostles, but this cannot be proved but by the Tradition of the
Church.

I omit many other arguments whereby this shift may be convinced to be but
flying from the light of Gods word about the visible Church. For as, says
Saint Augustine l. 1. contra Crescon. cap. 33. God would have his Church to be
described in Scripture without any ambiguity, as clear as the beams of the
Sun, that the controversy about the true Church, being clearly decided, when
questions about particular doctrines that are obscure, arise, we might fly to
her, and rest in her judgment, and that this visibility is a manifest sign
whereby even the rude and ignorant may discern the true Church from the false.
[ Augustine l. 13. cont. Faust. c. 13.]




must either be the Roman, or the Protestant, or some other opposite unto both.
Protestants cannot say a Church opposite unto both, for then they should be
condemned in their own Judgment, and bound to conform themselves to that
Church, which can be no other but the Grecian; a Church holding almost as many
(if not more) doctrines which Protestants dislike the^ does the Church of Rome,
as I can demonstrate if need be. It is also most manifest, and undeniable, that
Protestants are not such, nor part of such a Church since their Revolt and
separation from the Roman, seeing confessedly they changed their doctrines they
once held, forsook the body whereof they were members, brake off from the
stock of that tree whereof they were branches. Neither did they depart from the
Roman and join themselves with any Church professing their particular
doctrines dissonant from it. Ergo, the Roman is the one, holy, Catholic, and
Apostolical Church.

The second Argument.
THIS also plainly will appear to any man of understanding that will cast on
the Roman Church an impartial eye. For she is most evidently Apostolical,
having most glorious succession of Bishops and Pastors famous in all The
Minister p. 116. lin. 9. says, that it is inco^sequent to infer negatiuely
from humane history, and to say historyes are silent, and therefore no such
matter. I answer. Hence one may feel even with his hand, what an
vnconsequent, and absurd Religion theirs is, which cannot stand without denying
principles evident in common reason, and received by consent of mankind: for
who does not feel that to argue from humane history thus negatiuely they are
silent, Therefore there never was any such matter, is many times conuincing and
strong? This some Protestants more judicious then our Minister, acknowledge,
who thus write: It is most plain that even negatiuely an argument from humane
authority may be strong, as namely this: The Chronicles of England mention no
more then only six Kings bearing the name of Edward since the time of the last
Conquest, therefore it cannot be there should be more. It is true, men are
ignorant, many things may escape them, they may be deceived, they may conceal
truth, or utter untruth out of malice, they may forget what they know; Howbeit
INFINITE CASES are wherein all these impediments are so MANIFESTLY excluded, as
there is no show or color whereby any such exception may be taken. Thus M.
Hooker Eccles. Policy page 115. and 116.

Now, amongst these cases wherein the negative argument from Tradition and
history is strong, the chiefest is when the matter is famous and illustrious,
and there is a line and succession of chief Bishops, Princes, and Persons
notoriously known even to the particularityes of their names, actions, days
of their raygne, and death. Wherefore it is idle what the Minister page 230.
brings against this, that we know not who was the first that eat man's flesh,
nor when the Assyrian matrons did first prostitute themselves in the temple of
Venus. For no wonder we know not such things, seeing we have not a lineall
history of these times, as we have of other times, specially since the coming
of Christ. For lineall history concerning illustrious matters is both
affirmatively and negatiuely strong, yea more strong negatiuely then
affirmatively. The reason is, because it is not so impossible that men with
full report should vent an untruth, as that they should be by full consent
silent about a most illustrious truth, men being in such cases more prone to
report then to conceal. For example, should one contest that some of our Kings
since the Conquest set up Images in all Churches of England, the Country being
before that time pure Protestant, might not such an impudent writer be
convinced of madness by negative history? And why? But, because there is a most
notorious line of our Kings since the last Conquest, and their names, actions,
days of their raygne, and deaths most famously known. In the same manner
there being a line of Popes so conspicuously known, as nothing more, from
Peter unto Urban they eight, what impudency is it for Protestants to affirm,
that Rome was pure Protestant for the first five or six hundred years, and
that afterward the Pope changed Protesta^cy into Papacy, brought in Images,
Invocation of Saints, Auricular Confession, Adoration of the Sacrament, and the
like horrible noueltyes and changes of the whole world, which could not but
have been noted, if they had been novelties; whereas all histories be silent
herein, yea they mention the contrary, to wit, how Popes ever resisted them
that would have innouated about these points.


momuments of history and antiquity, who were What the Minister here says page
116. that the Pharisees did say as we do, that they had their Traditions by
succession from Moses, urging our Savior, that he could not prove by history
that they had changed their faith, and our Savior leaving History refuted them
by Scripture; this is a figment of his own head, out of mere desire to make
the Pharisees seem like to us, and himself to our Savior: for where does he
read that Pharisees so pleaded against our Savior? and what blasphemy to
think, that our Savior could not have refuted them by History, had they so
pleaded, showing where, when, and by whom they began? The truth is, the
Pharisees pretended not their observations, as successions hand to hand from
Moses, but as Traditions of their own. Some they urged as deductions from the
Scripture, which they (Protestant-like) did pretend to understand better and
more rigorously then any before them: such was their doctrine against healing
diseased persons, and doing small labors, as gathering ears of corn on the
Sabbath day, much like our Protestant Sabba^arians; other they taught as
singular inventions of Piety and Religion found out by themselves, for the more
exact observance of the Law, some of which Inventions were impious, some
frivolous, some pious and therefore allowed by our Savior, as that of paying
tithes unto God out of every little herb, a tradition of their own not
commanded in the Law, and yet approved by our Savior as binding, This you
ought to have done, and not to have omitted that other. [Luc. 11.42.] they are
rebuked for observing their otherwise pious inventions for vain glory,
covetousness, and for preferring small matters, because they were their own,
above the precepts of Gods Law. All this is evident unto them that are
conversant in the Gospel.
never noted, as delivering contrary doctrines the one to the other.

Apparently Universal, The Christians called the Chaldaean Assyria^s, the
Iacobites, or Cophti, the Georgians, the AEthiopians, or Abissines, the
Thomaeans in India, the Armenia^s specially those termed Franc-Armenians,
Maronits, are united with the Roman Church and have often and lately made their
obedience unto the Pope, and professing to hold in all points the Catholic
Roman faith: as you may see in Notitia Episcopatuum (...) Miraei lib. 1. c.
16.17.18.
spread over the world, with credit and authority, that whole mankind may take
notice of her doctrine for the embracing thereof.

Conspicuously The Minister page 107. says, that it is not enough to prove we
have unity, but we must prove we have unity in verity, for the Turks have
unity, and yet have not verity. I answer. That the unity and consent of a
grand diffused multitude spread over the world in the Tradition of Ancestors
about Religion, does evidently reduce Religion to the first external author,
and publisher, and the credit of his word. The unity and consent of Mahometans
in their Tradition from Mahomet proves their Religion to be Mahomets, and
consequently in the Judgment of Christians the Religion of a false Prophet:
Our unity and consent in the Christian Tradition of our Ancestors from
Christ, proves evidently our Religion to be of Christ, and consequently divine
and true, as certainly as it is certain that Christ Jesus was the Messenger of
God, and God the Author of truth. So that the unity of the Roman Church proves
directly her Religion to be Christ's, and then by consequence to be divine
verity.
One, the Professors thereof agreing in all points of faith, howsoever they
differ about small undefined questions.

Most manifestly Holy in all kind of high and admirable sanctity, giving
notorious signs and tokens thereof, striking What the Minister here brings out
of some zealously complaining against vice, is already by us answered, and was
long ago by S. Aug. de vtilit. cred. c. 5. where he names these sanctityes as
signs of the Church, Co^tine^tia vsque ad tenuissimum victum panis and aquae,
non solum quotidiana sed and per contextos plures dies co^tinuata ieiunia:
Castitas vsque ad coniugij prolisque contemptum: Patientia vsque ad cruces
flammasque neglectas: Liberalitas vsque ad patrimonia distributa pauperibus.
Thus S. Augustine, adding: Few I grant in the Church do these things, in
respect of the other multitude, and fewer do them well* and prudently, yet the
people, approve, applaud, love, admire them, and accuse themselves they cannot
do the like, so rising up toward God by these examples.
admiration into carnal men, that are not altogether profane, and diffusing
abroad the sweet odor of Christ and the Christian Name. In which proof that
these propertyes agree to the Roman, and be wanting in the Protestant Church,
I will not enlarge my self as I otherwise might, as well not to weary your
Majesty, as also not to seem to diffide (the matter being most clear) of your
Majesty's Judgment. Wherefore it is more then clear that the Roman is the One,
Holy, Catholic, Apostolical Church, by whose Tradition Christian Religion
has been, is, and shall be ever continued from the Apostles, to the worlds
end.

The third Argument.
PROTESTANTS have the Holy Scriptures delivered unto them by, and from the one,
holy, Catholic, and Apostolical Church. But they received them from no other
Church then the Roman. Ergo, the Roman is the one, holy, Catholic, and
Apostolical Church.

The Mayor I prove. If Protestants have not the Text of Scripture by, and from
the one, holy, Catholic and Apostolical Church they cannot be certain they
have the true incorrupt text the Apostles delivered, and recommended as divine,
to the first Christians, seeing the Tradition of any other Church is fallible
The Minister page 119. obiecteth against this, that if we cannot be sure of the
Scripture except the immediate deliverer thereof be infallible, then we cannot be
sure except we have the Scripture immediately from the hand of the Pope, or
general Counsel who only are infallible. Answer. We must (as Theology
teaches) distinguish immediationem suppositi, and immediatione^ virtutis, that
is the immediate person which delivers Scripture, and the immediate authority
upon the credit whereof Scripture is delivered. The person immediately delivering
may be a single Minister fallible taken solely by himself, but the immediate
authority that delivers Scripture is ever, and must still be infallible, to
wit, the authority of the Churches Tradition. For we neither must nor can
believe firmly any Minister of the Catholic CHVRCH, affirming a book to be
Scripture until we see clearly that he delivers therein the consent of the
Catholic Church, which then is evident unto us, when we see him preach it
freely and openly, and no Pastor to contradict him therein.
and may deceive. And if it may deceive, how can they be certain that they are
not deceived, seeing they themselves lived not in the Apostles days, nor saw
with their own eyes what coppyes the Apostles delivered. But Protestants, as
they pretend, be certain that they have the true incorrupt Apostolical text
of Scripture. Ergo, they have it upon the authority of the holy, Catholic,
Apostolical Church.

Now the Minor that they have the Scripture from the Roman is apparent: for
what other Church did deliver unto Luther the text of the Bible, assuring him
that they had it by Tradition from Ancestors time out of mind, as given
originally by the Apostles? Which is accordingly acknowledged by Whitaker. l.
3. de Ecclesia. p. 369.
M. Whitaker and M. Dove in his persuasion.
others, but particularly by Luther contra Anabap. to^. 7. Germa^. Ien. fol.
169.. 2. A Papistis sumpsimus Dei verbum, sacram Scripturam etc. alioquin quid
de istis omnibus nos sciremus? Thus Luther, showing that Protestants receive
the Scripture not only from the Roman Church, but also upon her authority and
word.
Luther himself. Ergo, the Roman Church is the one, holy Catholic, Apostolical
Church whose Tradition does deliver infallibly unto us the text of Scripture:
And if the true Apostolical Text then also Luther contra Anabap. to^. 7.
Germa^. Ien. fol. 169.. 2. A Papistis sumpsimus Dei verbum, sacram Scripturam
etc. alioquin quid de istis omnibus nos sciremus? Thus Luther, showing that
Protestants receive the Scripture not only from the Roman Church, but also upon
her authority and word.
the true Apostolicell sense. This I prove: if the Apostles did not deliver
the bare Text, but together with the Text, the true We do not say, that the
Apostles did deliver the true sense of all their Scriptures, making a large and
entire commentary of all difficil texts, as the Minister cauilleth pa. 121. but
only, that together with the text they delivered the sense, about the main
and most principal points; and this sense thus delivered by Tradition with the
text, is to be admitted as religiously and reverently as the text.
sense of Scripture to be delivered perpetually unto posterity, then they who
by Tradition rereiue from the Apostles the true Text, must together receive
the true sense. But, as Chemnit. in exam. Council. Trid. part. 1. fol. 74. D.
Bancroft in the Suruay* page 379.
principal Protestants affirm, No man doubts but the Primitive Church
received from the Apostles, and Apostolical men, not only the text of
Scripture, but also the right and native sense Which is agreeable to the doctrine
of Vincentius Lyrinen. cap 2.
the Fathers, that from the Apostles together with the text descends the line
of Apostolical interpretation, squared according to the Ecclesiastical and
Catholic sense.

Whereupon S Aug. de vtilit. Creden. c. 14.
Augustine argues, that they that deliver the text of Christ's Gospel must
also deliver the exposition; affirming, that he would sooner refuse to believe
Christ, then admit any interpretation contrary to them, by whom he was brought
to believe in Christ. For they that can deliver by uniform Tradition a false
sense, why may they not also deliver a false text, as received from the
Apostles? An argument conuincing, and Though the Minister page 123. storm at
this confidence of his Adversary in tearming it unanswerable, yet by deeds he
confirms the saying to be true in not answering, but cha^ging the force
thereof quite another way, saying: It is this: The text of the Scripture may be
as easily corrupted as the sense. Ergo, All they which can deliver by uniform
Tradition a false sense, may also deliver a false text. In this argument he
denies the antecedent or assumption. I answer. First, as I said, the argument
is perverted, and the medium, or means of proof changed; for there is great
difference betwixt Being as easy, and, Being as possible, seeing a thing may be
as possible as another, and yet not so easy. That ten men should conspire to
deceive me, is not so easy as that three should so conspire, as is evident; Yet
it is as possible as the other, because no reason can be brought to prove that
three may so conspire, that proves not that also ten may do the like. In the
same manner though we should grant the sense may be more easily mistaken by the
Church then the text, yet it is as possible, that the Church be mistaken in the
sense: Because no reason proves that uniform Tradition can be mistaken in the
sense, that proves not that it is possible that the Church may be mistaken in
the text, though perchance not so easily. Now, if the Church in her uniform
Tradition may be mistaken about the text, then is not Tradition a sufficient
ground of infallible persuasion that the text is the Apostles, and so faith is
overthrown, which has no other ground to know assuredly the incorrupt
Scriptures delivered by the Apostles but Tradition, as has been proved.

Secondly it is false, that the sense and doctrine of Scripture concerning
main and substantial articles of faith, may be sooner corrupted, and a false
sense persuaded to the Church, then a false text. The reason is manifest,
because millions of Christians know by Tradition the doctrine of Scripture
about main points, that know not all the texts by which the same is proved,
yea perchance truly and certainly not so much as one. For example the doctrine,
that there are Three Divine Persons, and One God, is so engraven in the hearts
of all, even simple Christians, as you may sooner pull out their hearts, then
make them believe that this is not the Christian faith: whence no man can deny
the Trinity, but he is presently noted by all. On the other side this text 1.
Joan. 5.7. whereby the Trinity is proved, There be three that give testimony in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these three are one, millions
do not know, and so it is more easy to take from Christians this text then the
doctrine thereof. And the same reason is of any other text, the texts being still
commonly far more unknown then the doctrine of the Creed, and such
substantial points.


unanswerable.

The fourth Argument.
MY fourth proof I gro^nd upon a Principle most certain, and set down by In
the sum of the Conference before his Majesty p. 75.
your Gracious Majesty, That the Roman Church was once the mother Church, and
consequently the one, holy, Catholic, Apostolical Church, all other Churches
being her daughters; and that she is not to be forsaken further then it can be
proved that she departed from her self, that is, from the mother and original
doctrines delivered by the Apostles.

But she cannot Here the Minister page 128. again repeateth his saying, that
negative arguments from humane history are vnconsequent: which his saying, as
has been showed, is against the consent of mankind. His arguments against
this ground of perpetual Ecclesiastical Tradition known by notorious fame of
history, are by him named four but the fourth co^taines four branches, and so
they are eight, which I will set down and answer. First it is not absolutely
necessary that the humane history of all matters should be composed. Answer.
There being a clear lineal succession of Princes and Prelates from the
Apostles famously and particulrely known, it is impossible but that
historical Tradition either written or unwritten should deliver most
notoriously the substantial matters of fact done since that time. These
matters are such, as cause great changes in the world; as in Civil affairs,
the setting up, the pulling down, and changing of renowned Kingdoms and
States: ^n the affairs of the Church, the beginnings of Religion, the most
famous Pastors thereof, the conuersions of great Nations, the springing up of
heresies and pote^t sects, their prevailing, their being resisted, their
overthrow, and commonly also the names of their principal and renowned
Patrons; ^hese illustrious things, when there is particular Tradition even to
the very names of persons, can not be hidden. Secondly, when history is
written, it causes only humane faith. Answer. Humane history made by mere
human writers and preachers concerning humane and natural things breeds only
humayne faith, but Ecclesiastical Tradition hand to hand from the Apostles
made by the Pastors of the Church, consecrated to that end by the holy Ghost
delivering divine revealed things being infallible, breeds not only human
Faith, but is elevated by the concurrence of divine Authority toward the
production of Divine Faith, as has been said.

Thirdly, historyes may totally perish and be suppressed, or corrupted by the
enemies of truth. Answer. Concerning substantial renowned matters which are
known not only by report but also by their permanent effects, it is impossible
that fame and Tradition should be suppressed or corrupted, so long as there is
a visible Church in the world. For example; Arius his doctrine, Luthers
occasion of changing from the Roman Church, King Henryes breach with the Pope,
and the cause thereof, can never be suppressed by the enemies of truth, so
long as there shallbe a famous Christian Church in the world, though about this
or that circumstance that are not so notorious, questions are moved, and new
may arise.

Fourthly, history may be repugnnant to history. Answer. This cannot be about
the substance of the narration when the matters thereof are in manner aforesaid
illustrious, to wit, when they are not only declared by full report, but also
declare themselves by effects, though in circumsta^ce there may be variety of
reports.

Fifthly, even the Papists teach that the principal monuments of antiquity, to
wit, the ^ncient Counsels have not been faithfully preserved. Answer.
Ancient Gene^all Counsels concerning the substance of their definitions which
they ^id principally intend, are, and ever were famously known, yea Tradi^^on
has made the fame of them immortal and incorruptible, so long as a visible
professing Church shall be in the world. Heretics may endea^our to misreport
and corrupt Counsels, as also they do Scriptures; but ^hey never could
prevail as concerning any substantial matter.

Sixthly, many things suppositious have been added to the works of the
ancient, (...) bastardly books pass under the tytles of Fathers. Answer. As
though also there have not been many suppositious books urged as Scripture by
Heretics, to wit the Ghospells of Peter, of Thomas, of Bartholomew? Do not
the most ancient Fathers, namely the Council of Carthage, and S. Augustine
receive some books of Scripture to the number of 12. which Protestants partly
Caluinists, partly Luthera^s reject? Must we therefore refuse trial by
Scripture? No: It is sufficient that we have by most certain Tradition
innumerable works that are undeniably ancient, though question be moved about
some, which therefore cannot be urged till they be known to be ancient.

Seauenthly, the Papists being a part, purge and alter such records. Answer.
This is untruth, we purge not any of the books of the ancient, as any may see
with his eyes that will take the pains to read our Index Expurgatorius, set
forth by the Protestant Iunius, and compare the Expurgations with the books.

Eighthly, the Papists despise and contemn Historians, as Eusebius, Sozomen,
Socrates, when they are against their Tenet. Answer. When good Historians do
not agree, the matter cannot be certain, but must be decided by co^i^ecture;
which does never happen about the substance of famous facts that by effects
made themselves notorious to the world. When historians are singular they may
be rejected, specially when the authors are otherwise heretics, and the
narrations wherein they be singular, favor their heresies.

Thus Eusebius being an Arrian, is not trusted in some narrations against
others historians, concerning Constantine, that seem to favor Arrianisme.
Socrates, and Sozomen being Nouatians are not easily credited in singular
narrations in the behalf of their Sect: Though as I said, concerning matters
and illustrious facts which make themselves evident to mankind by effects, as
are the changing of Christian Religion over the world, resistance made against
all open and notorious sects, and who were the resisters, who the resisted,
such difference is never found about substance but only in circumstance. And
only this Tradition of the Church concerning these kinds of notorious matter
which is as clearly Apostolical as the sun is bright at Noone day, we make
the ground of our belief, that our Roman Religion has not been changed since
the Apostles.


be proved to have changed her doctrine since the Apostles by any monuments of
History or Antiquity; yea the contrary in my Judgment may be most evidently
proved in this sort.

The doctrines that were for diverse ages universally received in the Christian
Church, and no time of their beginning is assignable, must be doctrines
unchanged coming from the Apostles. But it is most clear, and Because this
matter is stiffly (not to say outfacingly) denied by the Minister pa. 129. and
134. behold the very words of Protestants. D. Hutterus, Luthers successor in
the chair of Wittenberge, de sacrificio Missatico page 377. I willingly
acknowledge that the Roman Idolary, whose pyth is the sacrifice of the Mass,
did occupy in manner the whole world, specially for the last thousand years.
Hospinian the successor of Zwinglius in his chair and superintendency, Hist.
Sacram. pa. 1. page 157. In the age of Gregory the Great (that is more then a
thousand years ago) all manner of popish Idolatry and superstition, as a
main sea, overwhelmed and drowned in manner the whole world, no man making
resistance against it. Simon de Voyo^ a Geneuian Minister and of Caluins
school, in his Catalogue of Doctors, in his Epistle to the Reader, says: In
the year 605. (more then a thousand years ago) falsehood prevailed, and then
was the whole world overwhelmed in the dreggs of Antichristian filthiness,
abominable Traditions, and superstitions of the Pope. M. Perkins in his
exposition of the Creed page 307. and 400. says: During the space of Nine
hundred years the Popish Heresy has spread it self over the whole world, and
for many hundred years an universal Apostasy ouerspread the whole face of the
earth, so that our Protestant Church was not then visible to the world. M.
Fulke treatise against Stapleton and Martial page 25. The Pope has blinded
the world these many hundred years, some say 900. some 1000. some 1200.
Master Napier Reuelat. page 64. and 101. The Antichristian and Papisticall
raygne began about the year 316. after Christ, reigning universally without
debatable contradiction, Gods true Church abiding certainly bidden and latent.
confessed by the Prote^tants, whose testimonies plentiful in this behalf, if
need require, shall be brought. First, that the doctrines of the Roman Church
which Protestants refuse, have been universally received for many ages, a
thousand years at least, ever since Boniface the third. Secondly that
Protestants cannot tell the time when the Church of Rome began to change, and
deuiate from the Apostolical doctrine delivered by succession. Ergo, the Roman
Church never changed her faith, so that her doctrines are to be received as
Apostolical, if the Mayor of the first argument be true, to wit, that The
Minister page 15. says, The Jesuit conueyeth into S. Augustins proposition
certain words to wit, doctrines universally received etc. which are not found
in S. Augustine; for this Father did never allow that the universal Church
believe any doctrine of faith not comanded in Scripture. I answer. The words
of S. Augustine will discover the Minister what he is, for these they are
formally, in the place cited by the Jesuit l. 5. de baptis. c. 23. Many things
are Held by the Universal Church, and therefore are TRVLY believed to have
been COMMANDED by the Apostles, though they be NOT WRITTEN. Thus he. And
though there be no doctrine which may not be in some sort proved by Scripture,
and derived from thence by consequence, yet this Logical Deduction does not
suffice to make doctrines to be universally matters of faith, except they be
also delivered expressly by Tradition, or the word of God unwritten, as has
been often showed in this Reioynder.
doctrines universally received, whose beginning are not known are to be
believed as Apostolical. And what more true, this being a principle set down
by S. Augustine lib. 4. de Baptism. cont Donat. c. 6. and lib. 5. cap. 23.
allowed by Doctor Whitguift late Archbishop of Canterbury [Defence page 351.
and 352.] who in his book written by public authority against Puritans,
citing diverse Protestants as concurring in opinion with him, says, Whatsoever
opinions are not known to have begun since the Apostles time, the same are
not new or secundary, but received their original from the Apostles. But
because this principle of Christian Divinity brings in (as M. Cartwright there
alleged speaks) all Popery in the Judgment of all men, I will further
demonstrate the same, though of it self clear enough.

The spirit of Christ, or Christ by his spirit being still with the Church,
cannot permit errors in faith so to creep into the church, as they grow
irreformable eue^ by the principles of christianity* but if errors could so
creep into the church as their beginning could not be known since the
Apostles, and never be espied till they be universally received, then error
could so creep into the Church and prevail that by the principles of
christianity they are irreformable. This I prove, because errors (...) The
Minister says, that the errors of the Pharisees were universally received in
the Jewish Church, and yet reformed by our Savior. I answer. First his desire
to make our Religion like the Pharisees makes him fashion unto the Pharisees a
Religion of his own head as if he had never read the Gospel. For the
Traditions of the Pharisees were certain practices of piety invented by
themselves, and deducted by their skill from Scripture, whereby they would seem
singularly religious, and non sicut caeteri hominum. Secondly, Christ Jesus
proving himself to be true God might reform errors universally received, and
the Church of the Jews falling, erect a new Church of Christians as he did.
But this is lawful for no man, either before or since. For Christian Religion
must continue until the worlds end, by virtue of the first Tradition thereof,
never interrupted without extraordinary and Prophetical beginning, by
immediate revelation and miracles; and so if errors be delivered by the full
consent of Christian Tradition, they are irreformable.
irreformable by the Principles of ^hristianity, when whosoever undertakes
(...) reform them, is by the Principles of ^hristianity to be condemned as an
Here^^ke. But he that will undertake to re^orme doctrines universally received
by ^he church, opposes against the whole Church, and therefore is by the most
recea^ed and known principle of Christianity, and Christ's own direct precept
to be accounted as an The Minister says, that one man may oppose the whole
Church and oppugn her errors by Scripture, and not be as an Heathen or
Heretic. For not every one that opposes the Church, is to be accounted an
Heathen, but only such as in ordinatly and without just cause oppugn it. Thus
he page 136. I answer. By this doctrine every particular man is made examiner
of the whole Church and her judge, and Hellish Confusion brought into
Christendom. If against the sentence of perpetual universal Tradition a
private man may, without Heresy, pretend Scripture and stand stiffly therein,
and though the Church give seeming, and appearing answers unto his Scriptures,
yet condemn her, saying, these answers are sophistical, as our Minister does
p. 581. what can be more disorderly? or what is heretical obstinacy if this be
not? Wherefore S. August. epist. 48. says absolutely, it is impossible men
should have just cause to depart and impugn the whole Christian Church,
adding, nos cer^o scimus, hereof we (Christians) are sure. And why? but because
it is a ruled Christian case, He that hears not the Church is an Heretic.
Heathen and Publican, Matthew. 18. verse. 17. And, as S. Augustine ^ayth, Epist.
118. to dispute against the whole Church, is most insolent madness, specially
when the doctrine is ancient without any known beginning, as are the supposed
erroneous customs and doctrins of the Roman Church. For then the undertaking
Reformer must strive against not only the whole present Church, but also the
whole stream of the visible Church time out of mind since the Apostles, Et
quis ad haec idoneus? who is able to begin a new course of Christianity, and
to overthrow that doctrine which is universally received and cannot be proved
by any Traditions of Ancestors to be otherwise planted in the world, but by
the Apostles themselves, through the efficacy of innumerable miracles?
Wherefore these doctrins if they be errors, are errors which by the principles
of Christianity no man ought to go about to reform. And seeing it is
impossible, that there should be any such errors, we must acknowledge that
principle of S. Augustine as most certain. That doctrines received universally
in the Church without any known beginning are truly and verily Apostolical,
and of this kind are the Roman, from which Protestants are gone.

The fifth Argument.
THAT doctrine which Tradition has delivered as the doctrine of all Ancestors
without delivering any Orthodoxe opposition against it, that is, opposition
made by any confessed Catholic Doctors or Fathers, is doctrine derived from
the Apostles without change.

But such is the doctrine of the Roman Church, which consent and Tradition of
Ancestors does deliver, and does not together deliver that any confessed The
Minister page 141. and 144. lin. 8. says that in the days of the Fathers the
Roman doctrine was not in being, nor heard of, and that this was they cause
they did not so punctually and literally oppose them. I Answer. The Minister
does but set a face on the matter. For he knows, that it is most evident and
confessed by Protestants that at the least some Fathers held our Religion
expressly in diverse particulars. For example, does not Origin teach and
practice Invocation of Saints lib. 2. in Job. and in Iosue. c. 13. as a
doctrine undoubtedly pious, saying thereof: Quis dubitat? in Number. c. 31. Did not
diverse Fathers make it their special study to discover Origens errors, as S.
Hierome, Epiphanius, Theophilus? And yet these Fathers having noted so many
errors in Orige^, never ce^sured him in respect of this. Which is a manifest
sign they held with Origin in this po^nt, that Invocation of deceased Saints
is an undoubted Christian duty* even as much as the praying unto living Saints.
orthodoxe Father opposed against it. We know indeed by Tradition, that some in
former times stood against many points of the Roman doctrine, as Arrius,
Pelagius, Waldo, the Albigenses, Wickliffe, Husse, and some others, but they
are not confessed orthodoxe Fathers, but were noted for nouelty and
singularity, and for such by Tradition described unto us: which kind of
opposition does not discredit the doctrine of the Church, but rather makes the
same to appear more clearly and famously Apostolical; seeing as even D. Field,
Of the Church lib. 4. cap. 14. does confess) When a doctrine It is true as the
Minister says page 140. That this Doctor does not make the judgment of the
present Bishops of one age by it self solely infallible, but only the judgment
of perpetual succession from the Apostles: yet it is true also that he makes
the consent of one age so great, as is here expressed, an evident sign of the
judgment of perpetual succession. Read the place.
is in any age constantly delivered as a matter of Faith, and as received from
Ancestors in such sort as the contradictours thereof were in the beginning
noted for nouelty, and if they persisted in contradiction, in the end charged
with heresy, it is not possible but such a doctrine should come by succession
from the Apostles. What more evident sign of a perpetual Apostolical
Tradition, then this?

Protestants answer that it is sufficient that the Roman doctrine was
co^tradicted by Orthodoxe Fathers, and that this may be proved by their
wrytings which they have left unto posterity, though their opposition was not
noted by antiquity, nor by the fame of Tradition delivered unto posterity. But
this answer leaves no means whereby common people may know certainly the
perpetual Tradition of Gods Church, without exact examining and looking into
the works of the Fathers; which common people cannot do, I prove it.

If against every Tradition of the Church difficil and obscure passages may be
brought out of Fathers, and this does suffice to make the same questionable,
then no Tradition can be certainly known without exact reading, and examining
of the Fathers. But no Tradition, or Doctrine is so constantly and clearly
delivered by the Fathers but diverse obscure and difficill places out of their
works may be brought against them, with such a show, that The Minister does p.
141. and 144. auerre, that seely Ignorant men are to examine controversies by
Scripture; and, that by it they may know the right doctrine in all necessary
matters assuredly, without resting upon the authority of the Churches
Tradition. This has been formerly confuted, and it is to men of Judgment,
ridiculous. Yea the Minister himself elsewhere Orthodoxe 392. derides it saying:
A blind man cannot judge of colors, and a rude and ignorant person is less
able to EXAMINE Controuersyes, and deep points of Religion. And again ibid.
page 393. We do not set a blind horse before others, nor suffer any vulgar
person to be his own caruer in receiving and refusing public doctrine: and the
same does he teach in this Reply page 301. yea Luther Tom. 1. Germ. Wi^temb.
com in Gal. fol. 29.. 3 says: Non quiuis habet intellectum and sensum vt de
controuersijs Fidel inter nos and Papistas tuto and Christian iudicare possit.
How the^ shall these be saved, but by simply believing the Tradition of
Ancestors, hand from hand delivered unto them?
common people shall not know what to say. For what Tradition more constantly
delivered by the Christian doctors then our Saviors consubstantiality with his
Father according to his divine nature? and yet the New reformed Arrians, as you
may see in Bellarmin. l. 2. de Christo cap. 10. bring very many testimonies of
ancient Fathers to prove that in this point they did contradict themselves, and
were contrary one to another; which places whosoever shall read, will clearly
see, that to common people they are unanswerable; yea that common people are
not capable of the answers that learned men yield unto such obscure passages;
what then shall they do? They must answer, that antiquity did never
acknowledge such dissension amongst the Fathers in the point of our Saviors
Consubstantiality, which they would not have omitted to do had there been any
such real dissension, seeing they noted the Fathers opposition in lesser
matters. In the same manner Catholics do sufficiently answer Protestants
that bring places of Fathers against the received Traditions of the Church, as
the Real Presence, Invocation of Saints, and other the like, to wit, that
Traditions delivered these doctrines, as the uniform consent of the Fathers,
and never noted such oppositions, as Protestants frame out of their writings;
which is a clear sign that Protestants either misalleadge their words, or
mistake their meaning. For were that contradiction real, why did not Antiquity
famously note it, as it noted and conveyed by fame to posterity their
differences about disputable matters? The Minister here will retort this
argument page 144. lin. 34. If every doctrine (says he) is Apostolical against
which the ancient Fathers made no express opposition, then these Protestant
articles are Apostolical; that the Roman Bishop and Council may err; that
the substance of bread and wine remain after consecration; that common prayer
ought to be uttered in a known language. I answer, Not every doctrine against
which the Fathers do not expressly oppose, is Apostolical, for some heresies
were not thought of in that time, as this Protestant persuasion, That Common
prayer must be said by the public Minister in a language vulgarly understood
of every woman, and that it does not suffice that the more principal persons of
the Church understand it, word by word, and the rest being instructed, do for
matter and substance, though not word by word: So not every doctrine not
opposed, but every doctrine that is taught confessedly, as Christian doctrine,
by some ancient Fathers, and was never expressly and by name opposed by any of
the Fathers; Doctrine I say, thus taught and never opposed, and as such
delivered by full Tradition, is infallibly Apostolical. Such are our doctrins,
as may be proved even in the particular examples brought by the Minister as for
the contrary, particularly in this first insta^ce of their doctrine, That the
Roman Bishop and Counsels may err. For was this Protestant doctrine never
opposed by any Father? do not the Magdeburgians Centur. 4. col. 550.
acknowledge the ancient Ecclesiastical Canon, that the Councels are not to be
celebrated without the sentence of the Roman Bishop? And the Fathers held such
Co^ncells had the holy Ghost, so as they could not err; so clearly, as Luther
complaynes, Postill. Wittemb. Dom. 8. post. Trinitatem. fol. 114.6. 3 Gregory,
Augustine, and many other holy Fathers erred in taking from us power to judge
our Teachers commanding us to believe the POPE and Counsels. For this misery
is very ancient in the Church. Thus he.
This answer is full, and a certain ground of persuasion, else (as I said)
common people could never know the assured Tradition of their Ancestors, upon
which they must (as I proved) build their Chistian belief, seeing as D. Field
in the epistle Dedicatory also notes, There be few, and very few that have
leisure, or strengh of Iudgenent to examine particular controuersyes by
Scripture or Fathers, but needs must rest in that doctrine which the Church
delivers as a Tradition, never contradicted by any Orthodoxe Fathers.

To discredit therefore a constant received Tradition, it is necessary to bring
an Orthodoxe contradiction thereof, not newly found out by reading the Fathers,
but a contradiction by the same of antiquity delivered unto posterity, which
kind of contradiction they cannot find against any point of Catholic doctrine.
For let them name but one Father whom Antiquity does acknowledge as a
Contradictour of Invocation of Saints, Adoration of the Sacrament, Real
Presence, Prayer for the dead? they cannot certainly, though they bring diverse
places to prove (a thing which Antiquity never noted or knew of before) that
the Fathers be various, and wavering about these points.

The Conclusion of this point, showing that Protestants Err fundamentally.. 6.
OVT of all this appears, that the Roman Church is the true Church, and
consequently The Minister cauilleth at this consequence, but it is evident, for
the Church is but One, in which only salvation is had, and if the Roman be this
Church, Protestants are not saved out of it.
that Protestants have The Minister in making answer unto this Paragraffe, is
from the beginning to the end not only exceeding bitter, and full of railing,
but also impertinent, not understanding the state of the co^trouersy, nor what
the Jesuit undertakes to prove. The Jesuits conclusion bends against some
Protestants with whom he dealt in his Conferences, holding there is no
fundamental difference betwixt the Roman Church and the Protestant, that men
may be saved indifferently in the one and the other, Protestant doctrines
wherein they differ from the Roman, though they should be errors not being
fundamental, and damnable errors.

The Jesuits intention was against these men not to prove absolutely that
Protestants err, (for then he would have proved the Nine objected articles to
be errors, by such testimonies of Scriptures and Fathers as would have
puzzeled the Minister) but supposing as given and not granted by his
adversaries, Dato, and non concesso, that Protestants err, he undertakes to
show their errors to be main, fundamental and damnable, and that the
mantayners thereof cannot be saved, and so no salvation to be had but in the
one, Catholic Church. Hence it is evident, that the Ministers labor to show
that the Protestant doctrines be not errors, is impertinent; for this the
Jesuit did not intend to prove, but supposing they are errors, to prove they
are damnable and fundamental errors, against Adiaphorists, that hold there is
no fundamental difference betwixt the Protestant, and Roman Church.


fundamental Errors about faith.

Errors are The Minister says, that errors fundamental must be convinced to
be such out of Scripture, citing to this purpose the saying of S. Augustine De
doctrine. Christian. lib. 2. cap. 3. In these things that are clearly delivered
in Scripture, are contained all those things which contain faith and good
manners. I answer. S. Augustine says not, that all necessary things are
contained expressly in Scripture, not in particular, and distinctly, but in
general, and according to the genericall name of necessary virtues, as his
words fully set down declare, which are these; All things that contain faith
and good manners, to wit, hope and charity. No doubt but the genericall duties
of Faith, Hope, and Charity are expressly, and even in so many words set down
in Scripture, though not all particularityes about them, seeing now all
Protestants grant, that some things are contained in Scripture inuoluedly and
implicitly, that is, in other terms intricately and obscurely.
fundamental, that is damnable, either in regard of the matter, because
against some substantial matter of faith, the knowledge whereof is necessary
for the performance of a required Christian duty; or in regard of the manner
they are held, to wit, so obstinately as in defense of them one denies the
Catholic Church. Errors fundamental of the first kind Protestants have
diverse, particularly these Nine.

First, their doctrine against Tradition unwritten, whereby the By Tradition, is
understood, Doctrine known precedently and independently of Scripture, though
percha^ce the same be written. This doctrine precede^tly known unto Scripture
the Minister professes that Protestants deny page 105. lin. 24. and
consequently they err fundame^tally. For here by they be forced to make the
resolution of their faith by the evidence of the thing and light of the matter,
against the first ground of Christian Religion that in this life we walk by
faith, and not by evidence as has been showed.
Foundation is overthrown, on which we believe all other substantial and
fundamental points, as has been showed.

Secondly, their denying the The Minister though he deny the Primacy of S.
Peter, yet is forced by the evidence of the sacred Text to grant that whence
this primacy is proved. First, p. 157. that S. Peter had the Primacy of
spiritual authority and universal Jurisdiction over the whole Church with the
rest of the Apostles. Secondly, that this was given him singularly, to wit, as
appears by the Gospel Matthew. 16.10. Joan. 20.21. by the singular order and
institution Christ applied to him. Now this does enforce Monarchical primacy.
For the three different forms of government, Democracy, Aristocracy,
Monarchy, are nothing else but three different applications of the primacy of
jurisdiction universal, to different persons. Primacy of universal
Iuridiction applied generally to the whole Commons, is Democracy, applied
principally to some few chief persons of the State, Aristocracy, applied
singularly to one individual person, Monarchy. And what is understood by
Monarchy, but primacy of power and universal Jurisdiction applied singularly
to one individual person over all the affairs of a whole and entiere state?
Hence the Apostles were, as the Fathers say, both equal and inferior unto
Peter. Equal, in that they had the same kind of power that Peter had, to wit
the authority of the Key-bearers, of the Rocks, of the Pastors of the
universal Church, nor do we read in the Gospel any kind of power given to
Peter which was not also given for kind to the rest: on the other side, the
other Apostles were inferior unto Peter, as the same Fathers affirm, in that
they had the same kind of power in a lower degree with subordination unto Peter
as the chief, no kind of power being given to the rest of the Apostles, which
we do not expressly read in the Gospel to have been given to S. Peter by
singular commission, order, and institution. Whence it is consequent that Peter
was governor of the whole Church with the rest, in more eminent degree of
power and Jurisdiction then the rest, all men being bound to obey him more
specially, more singularly, and above the rest. The eminency of the rest in the
Church was universal power had by commission directed commonly to them all,
whereby they all indifferently, not one more then the other, received commission
of power in respect of all men of the Church distinct from themselves. The
eminency of Peter in the Church was universal power given by commission
directed singularly to his only person, To Peter the son of Jonas, Matthew.
16.18. Whereby he was endued with primacy of Ecclesiastical power in respect of
all men in the Church distinct from himself, in which number all Christians
absolutely are comprehended, not one excluded. And this is Monarchy. Now, if
Christ did ordain and institute Monarchical Government in his Church, then
the government thereof must be, and was* ever Monarchical, and that Peter
still has had a Monarchical successor; but if he had such a successor it is
by all historyes more evident then the sun, that he had no other but the
Roman Bishop. What the Minister here obiecteth against the Roman Bishops
Primacy is triuiall stuff, urged without any new difficulty, to wit, about the
title of universal Bishop, the Nicene Canon, Contention of S. Cyprian with
Pope Stephen, the controversy of the Africans about Appellations, the Asians
resisting Pope Victor. All which Instances truly examined, prove the primacy
most evidently* as is showed by Bellarmine l. 2* de Pontif. and lately by
Fidelis Annosus de Monarchia Ecclesiastica. l. 2. c. 5. and 6.
Primacy of S. Peter and his successors, the fundation which Christ laid of
his Church necessary for the perpetual government thereof, Matthew. 16.18.

Thirdly, their questioning the infallible Authority of lawful The Minister
here rayleth against Counsels gathered by the authority of the Pope, and in
most gross manner falsifieth Cusanus in eight or nine particulars, but in fine
he dares not make direct answer to the question proposed, whether Protestants
hold the definitions of Lawful General Councils to be infallible or not. His
answer hereunto is like the oracle of Apollo, given in general and doubtful
terms, to wit, that Protestants give the same authority unto Counsels that
the ancient Church did; in the margent he cites S. Augustine; that Counsels of
Bishops are not to be equalled unto Scriptures, as doubtless they may not. The
truth is, though he be ashamed to say it in plain terms, Protestants hold
General Cou^cells lawfully assembled to be inferior not only unto Scripture,
but also unto their exposition thereof. For they teach, that Counsels be not
assisted by the holy Ghost, that it is most pernicious yea abominable to think
so of them. Luther Tom. 7. Germ. Wittenberg. fol. 262. and though they proceed
lawfully and be confirmed by the supreme Pastors, yet be they fallible,
examinable, refusable, and subject to the Protestant skill in Scripture. In so
much as the same Luther in his articles, art. 115. says* When Counsels have
defined, then will we be Judges whether they be to be accepted, or not. And the
same says Calvin. l. 4. Instit. cap. 9. Hence appears how idle their pretense
is, that forsooth they would feign have a free General Council. To what
purpose? Surely they can intend nothing else but that they may bring the
Council to be of their humor, or else if it be against them, to contemn it as
not being in their judgment conform unto Scripture. It is reason M. White,
that you first meet amongst your selves, You I say, that pretend to be
reformed, and see whether you can agree, that General Counsels are infalli^^^
(...) by the spirit of Christ* so that no man may by his skill in Scripture, or
any other pretense reject them. This done then speak of meeting with
Catholics in a General Council: Otherwise Catholics by meeting with you,
are sure to gain no peace and unity except they yield unto you; and besides by
the very yielding to meet with you they must for ever renounce the
infallibility of Counsels, such a divine stay of peace and unity in the
Church. That this perpetual renuntiation unto Cou^cells must be made by
meeting with you, is clear. For by admitting you who question the authority of
Counsels, into their Counsels, they must admit that it is at least
questionable, among Christians, whether such Counsels be infallibly assisted
by Gods holy spirit, or not, else they cannot meet with you, but must fly from
you as damned heretics. If they admit the infallibility of Counsels to be
questionable, they must bid this infallibility farewell for ever, it can never
be established by any ensuing consent of General Councels. For if a General
Council should define that General Counsels are infallible, except we be
sure aforehand that Counsels are infallible we may doubt whether that Council
does not err in defining that Councels are infallible. Wherefore this doctrine
of the infallibility of lawful General Councels is either to be aba^doned for
ever, together with the unity of the Church that so much depends thereon, or
else it is to be held as a known perpetual Christian Tradition, delivered by
full practice independently of the definition of any Council, never permitting
the same to examination; as one of those articles whereof Luther says comment.
in Psalm. 82. fol. 546. Generales articuli recepti in tota Ecclesia satis
auditi, excussi, approbati sunt etc. ferendus non est qui v^lit eos in dubium
reuocare, sed velut blasphemus indicta causa and inaudita damnandus.
General Councels, thereby casting down the foundation of unity in the Church.

Fourthly, their denying the foundation of true This is the most essential
point of Protestancy which they term the foundation of foundations and the
pith and marrow of the Gospel. See the book de Essentia Protestantism. lib.
1. c. 6 This their doctrine co^sists in four points. First that every man is
justified by the justice of Christ, by being as it were vested therewith.
Secondly, this Justice of Christ is formally imputed unto every man, not through
repentance and mortification, but through Faith only. Thirdly, that this faith
is not the dogmaticall or historical faith, whereby we believe in general the
words of Christ and revealed misteryes of the Scripture, but a special faith
whereby a man does firmly and infallibly persuade himself, that to him in
particular the Justice of Christ is imputed for the full remission of his
sins. Fourthly, that he that has not firm faith that his sins are
remitted unto him by the imputation of Christ's merits, has not Justifying
faith, nor is just in the sight of God, but as good as an Infidel, though he
have historical faith that all the doctrins of Christian Religion are true.
Hence you may perceive, that our Minister is a man of no faith, who not only
denies this article of Protestancy, not only says that they neither now hold
or ever held it, but also reuileth the Jesuit, charging him with Lying, with
Calumniation, with Deprauing and falsifying their Protestant doctrine, and that
he wanted matter to fraught his papers when he charged their Church with
teaching Justification by this special Faith. page 163. yea on the contrary
side he says, that Protestants hold these four points. First, that a
Christian of a contrite spirit believing that his sins are remissible,
receaueth forgiveness though he want faith, and persuasion in himself that his
sins are remitted to him in particular by the imputation of Christ's merit.
page 166. lin. 6. and seq. Secondly, that Protestants hold no man is justified
by only faith, or by only believing himself to be just, and his sins
forgiven by the imputation of the Justice of Christ, but he must be just before
he can, or ought to believe himself to be so. page 62. lin. 8. Thirdly, that
the promise of remission of sins is conditional, requiring of sinners not
faith only, but also the forsaking of sin and doing good works. Esa.
1.16.17.18. and that this promise becomes not absolute, till the conditions be
fulfilled. page 166. lin. 12. Fourthly, that Justifying faith is the Christian
Catholic Dogmaticall faith, whereby we believe the hystories of Scripture and
mysteries of our Religion. ibid. page 161. lin. 5. Wherefore he says that the
difference betwixt Protestants and us Catholics, is only in two points. First,
that they require not only dogmaticall faith, but also that this be a Fiduciall
assent, that is, joined with Hope page 163. lin. 1. But we forsooth hold
Justification by dogmaticall faith only, and by such faith as is in Devils,
and do not require that the dogmatical or intellectual assent be also fiducial,
that is, joined with Hope. page 168. lin. 2. Secondly, that we hold that a man
cannot be certain by faith that he is just: but Protestants hold the contrary;
yet he says page 167. lin. 20. that there is very small difference, if any at
all, betwixt them and us herein, because they do not hold this their assurance
that they are just, to be equal in the firmity of assent, to the assurance of
Dogmaticall faith which they have about the common object of faith. Thus the
Minister: whom I leave to the censure of Protestants, with no little wonder
they can endure him to write in this sort, and thus openly to disclaim and
show himself ashamed of the very Essence of their Religion. What is certain
amongst Protestants, if this may be denied? Howsoever I conclude this point
with this syllogism against them. Protestants, even by the tacit concession
of this their Advocate hold fundamental and damnable heresy, as certainly as
it is certain that they hold Justification, not by common Dogmaticall faith,
but by special faith only, whereby one apprehends the Justice of Christ and
vesteth himself therewith, believing in particular his sins to be forgiven,
and himself to be just in Gods sight by the imputation thereof unto him
through this his faith. But that Protestants hold this as a most fundamental
article of their Religion, is as certain as it is certain that there is, or
ever was Protestant in the world; Wherein I appeal to the Judgment of all
learned Protestants, and to these their books, Luther Epist. ad Galat. Calvin.
lib. 3. Institut. lib. 11. Melancthon in coll. comm. Kemnit. Exam. Trid. 1. p.
John White (our Ministers Brother) Desence. pa. 188.189. and seq. and to the
conscience of every Protestant; yea this is the eleauenth article of the
English Church, That a man is accounted righteous before God, only for the
merit of Christ Jesus by faith. And it is wholesome doctrine (say they) that we
are justified by this faith.
Justification, which is the one, Catholic, Christian faith, about revealed
misteryes, bringing in a fantastical faith, pretending that every man is
Justified by believing himself in particular to be just, or one of Gods elect.

Fifthly, their extenuating the value of the price of our Redemption, not making
it sufficient to give The Minister being ashamed of his Religion, does here
also contest that Protestants teach the merit of works: He says indeed in
words they teach only the merit of Congruity, but in sense he makes them to
teach merit of condignity, as much as any Catholic does, as is after proved in
the 8. point.
inward sanctity and purity to men's souls, nor to raise the works of Gods
children to a due perfection with their reward.

Sixthly, their Errors against Baptism, the gate and entrance into Christian
life, whereof they deny the virtue to sanctify men, and the To discover the
vanity of the Minister, who says that the Protestant doctrine about Baptism
is held by our Schoolmen. Note, that concerning the necessity of Baptism
there be three errors, the one greater then the other. The first, that though
Baptism be the only ordinary means of salvation, yet some children dying
without Baptism are saved by extraordinary favor, as S. John was sanctified
in the womb. Luc. 1.2.53. This is held by some Catholics, but no fundamental
error, because it affirms not any extraordinary favor but such as by the
word of God we know may be granted, only it does rashly apply Gods
extraordinary favors to persons without sufficient warrant. The second error
is, that though Baptism be the ordinary means of salvation for Infants, yet
in defect thereof there is also another ordinary means for their salvation, to
wit the faith of their Parents. This error is gross, because it presumes
without the word of God written or unwritten, to appoint an ordinary means of
salvation for Infants. This doctrine is taught by Protestants, but no Catholic
holds it: Caietan once held it with submission unto the Church, which has
razed it out of his books. The third error is, that the children of faithful
Parents are justified by the promise made to their seed, and are Gods adopted
children before they be borne, so that Baptism does not truly regenerate them,
and make them Gods children, but is said to regenerate and adopt, because it is
a seal and sign of this grace of adoption, which children had before
Baptism, yea brought with them into the world. This error is fundamental and
damnable, which Protestants hold, and will hold in despite of their Church, and
yet dares she not say they are not her children. Calvin de vera Eccles. reform.
inter eius opuscula fol. 759. writes: The Issue of the faithful is borne into
the world holy and sanctified, because their children being yet in the womb
before they draw breath, be adopted into the covenant of eternal life. For it
is necessary that the grace of adoption go before baptism, which grace is not
the cause of halfe-saluation, but brings perfect and full salvation, which is
afterward signed by Baptism. Thus Calvin. What the Minister brings out of the
said Calvin to prove he held that Baptism does truly sanctify, to wit, that
children are regenerated by Baptism, is idle. For unto it Calvin himself has
made answer, l. 4. Institut. c. 15.. 2. When (says he) Baptism is said to
regenerate, to renew, to sanctify, to save men, the meaning is not, that our
purgation and salvation is made by water, or that water has virtue to purify,
to regenerate, to renew, but only because by that sign we conceive knowledge
and certitude of such gifts; for what is given by the message of the Gospel,
is signed and sealed by Baptism. Here also I conclude, that either the
Minister and his Church erres fundamentally, or at least they must grant four
things. First, that Calvin and his part err fundamentally. Secondly; that
Culuinists cannot be saved except they repent themselves of their Religion.
Thirdly, that amongst Protestants there is dissension about fundamental
matters. Fourthly, that the Protestants do not exclude from their communion
such as hold substantial Heresy.
necessity thereof for Infants, to whom they grant salvation without Baptism.

Seauenthly, their Error against the The Minister says that Protestants only
deny the manner of the Real Presence, to wit Tra^substantiation, not the
substance thereof, because they hold that the body of Christ is truly, really,
and effectually present to the worthy Receauer, but present by the apprehension
of the soul, and by operative faith, page 178.179. and seq. and page 390. and
395. I answer, that as the Answerer said, this Presence by faith is not Real,
nor true but only pious Imagination at the most, as is proved in the sixth Point.
Real presence which they deny, or else the main article of the Creed, that
Christ is still in heaven at the right hand of his Father. For they will not
allow a body in two places at once.

Eighthly, their denying the Sacrament of The Minister page 189. says, that
Protestants allow auricular Confession and Priestly Absolution, but deny it to
be a Sacrament, or of necessity, in proof whereof he cites the Augustane
Confession. Answer. If the Minister approve the Augustan confession, he must
approve priestly absolution to be truly a Sacrament, and of necessity being
commanded of God, even as Baptism is. For thus they write, Cap. de numero and
vsu Sacramentorum: The true Sacraments are Baptism, the supper of the Lord,
Absolution, which is the Sacrament of Penance. For these rytes have the same
commandment of God, and promise of grace proper to the new Testament. Thus
they: so even by the Judgment of this Confession, which they esteem as
containing the fundame^tall doctrine of their Religion, our Minister and his
Church err fundamentally.
Penance, and Priestly Absolution, the necessary means for remission of sin,
committed after Against this Sacrament the Minister disputes largely, but his
arguments are triuiall, which he takes out of Bellarmine concealing the
Solutions, which who will may there read in his first book of the Sacrament of
Penance. What he brings out of some Catholic Authors, affirming that it is
hard to prove clearly this Sacrament: the Answer is, That to prove the
Sacrament of Penance and the necessity thereof for sins after Baptism by
the perpetual Tradition, and practice of the Church, is not hard, but easy,
which you may see fully performed by Bellarmine; but to prove the same by some
text of Scripture so clearly as some cavil may not be taken at the argument,
this is difficill. And no wonder, seeing our Minister page 541. lin. 9. does
grant, that even the Principal articles of Religion cannot be so proved by
Scripture, but seeming Solutions may be given.
Baptism.

Ninthly, their denying the Catholic Church expressly set down in the Creed,
which of all other Articles is with Other articles are more necessary the^
this, as sole objects of necessary divine affection, and in this respect are
more dangerously denied: But as the means of knowing necessary objects nothing
more necessary then this true Church, nor any thing more evident, and therefore
the denial thereof is most dangerous in respect of heresy; yea the Article,
without resistance whereof no man can be Heretic.
greatest danger denied. For the standing out against this, makes men
heretics, and without erring against this no man is guilty of heresy:
whatsoever Doctor Field to the contrary says, that an Errant against a
fundamental point is an Heretic though he err without What the Minister
says, that a man may be pertinacious and obstinate against Scripture and not
against the Church is impossible. For either he sees his doctrine to be
against Scripture or not, if he see his doctrine to be contrary to the
Scripture and yet holds it, he does Judge the Scripture not to be Christ's nor
of God, and consequently he is pertinacious against the Churches Tradition,
which as has been said, is the stay of our Faith in this point. If he see not
his exposition to be against Scripture, but is deceived by conference of
places, he is not Heretic until knowing his exposition to be condemned by the
Church he persist therein. For what is pertinacious wilfulnes, but to resist
lawful authority which we know to be against us?
pertinacity, whereof he brings not any syllable of proof; and yet his doctrine
is against the whole Consent of Deuines, and expressly against S. Augustine who
says, that a man holding with Photinus (whose Errors were fundamental against
the Trinity and God head of Christ) thinking he holds Catholic doctrine, is
not yet an The Minister says pa. 196. that the IESVITE cites not Augustine
truly, for he only says, I would not affirm of such a person, that he is an
Heretic. Answer. This is untruth. S. Austine says, Istum nondum haereticu^
dico, I do affirm this man not to be yet an Heretic, though he hold
fundamental error, till he know he does it against the Catholic CHVRCH.
What he adds that S. Austine means, that ignorance is not heresy in foro
Ecclesiae, but is heresy in foro caeli, is ridiculous; for the contrary is
true, because whosoever denies though ignora^tly the known articles of the
Creed, is an heretic in foro Ecclesiae, because he is presumed to err out of
contempt, not out of ignorance. But if he be truly ignorant he is no heretic
in foro caeli, because verily he is not wilful.
Heretic, till warned that he holds against the Catholic Church, he chooses
to persevere in his error.

Hence I infer, that Protestants err fundamentally (according to the second
kind of erring, to wit in the manner) in all points they hold against the Roman
Church, which I haued proved to be the true Catholic Church. For he that holds
any private opinions so stiffly, as rather the^ forsake it he denies and
abandons the Catholic Church, a main article of his Creed, erreth
fundame^tally, as is clear. But Protestants hold their private opinions so
stiffely as thereupon they have denied and abandoned the Catholic Church, to
wit, the Roman. Neither does it import that they retain the word, having
rejected the sense, seeing not the letter of the Creed pronounced but the
matter believed makes men Christians. Neither is it enough to say, that they
believe the Church of the Elect, seeing the Church of the Creed is not the
Church of the only Elect (a mere Fancy), but the visible and conspicuous
Church, continuing from the Apostles, by succession of Bishops, which thus I
prove.

The Church whereof Christ said, I am always with you to the consummation of
the world, is the Church of the Creed, or the Church which to forsake is
damnable. For the Church wherewith Christ still abides, not according to
corporal and visible presence, but by his spirit, is the body of Christ
whereof he is head, into which he infuseth the life of grace, and consequently
he that forsakes this Church, forsakes the body of Christ, and the head
thereof, and cannot live by his spirit, but is in a dead and damnable state, as
a member cut off and separated from a living body, as S. Augustine epist. 50.
and de unit. Eccles. c. 16. long ago noted; The Catholic Church is the body
of Christ, whereof he is head; out of this body the Holy Ghost quickens no
man. Now the Church whereof Christ said, I am always with you to the
consummation of the world, is not the Church invisible of only the Elect, but a
visible Church derived by succession from the Apostles. Therefore he that
forsakes the Church derived by succession from the Apostles, forsakes the
Church of the Creed, the Catholic Church, the body of Christ, and puts
himself into a dead and damnable state, and may have all things besides
salvation and eternal life, as Fathers affirm, whose testimonies in this
behalf are notable and famously known; whereunto D. Field yields,
acknowleging one, holy, Catholic Church in which only the light of heavenly
Truth is to be sought, where only grace, mercy, remission of sins, and hope
of eternal happynes are found.

AN ANSWER TO THE Nine Points, proposed by your most Excellent Majesty.
I Have been large in my former proofs, that the Roman is the, one, holy true,
catholic church, whose Traditions coming down by perpetual succession from
Christ and his holy Apostles, are so constantly and strongly to be believed,
that no proofs out of Scripture (by private interpretation understood) though
seeming most evident, may stand to contest The Minister here spends a whole
leaf of Paper in bitterness and gall against us, as if we did profess to
prefer Old Custom, before known Verity. It is not so, but thus the case
stands between Protestants and us. First as for Verity neither they nor we
know our Religion to be verity by manifest sight, nor by the light, luster, and
evidence of the thing or doctrine, as both of us must acknowledge if we be
sober. Secondly there be records which by Tradition we know to have been given
by the Apostles, which upon good warrant are believed to deliver nothing but
Gods holy word. Thirdly, when Controversies arise about this word of the
Apostles, and there be different opinions about the sense thereof, and seeming
arguments be brought on both sides, we think that side ought to prevail as
the truly Christian, for which perpetual Christian Tradition and Custom
stand. Fourtly, we Judge that that side ought to be rejected as not truly
Christian, where Christian Tradition is so notoriosly defective as they cannot
ascend from this age upward toward Christ by naming professors of their
Religion, higher then one hundred years; or if they presume to pass further,
they are presently convinced to feign, as it happens unto Protestants. This
is the sum of all that has been hitherto said, and the form of the
Catholic proceeding about their resolution of faith.
against the^. And this I have not done without purpose, assuring my self,
that if your Majesty were thoroughly persuaded in this point, you would without
any man's help, most easily and fully satisfy your self in particular
controuersyes, out of your own wisdom and learning. For as some that have
been present at your Majesty's discourses casually incident about Religion,
report; few of our Deuines (though trained up continually in Academies, and
Exercises of Theology) are able to say more the^ your Majesty in defense of the
catholic cause for particular controuersyes, when you please to undertake the
patronage thereof: which I can easily believe out of my own Experience, who
could not but admire, seeing your Majesty so well acquainted with our doctrines,
and so ready and prompt in Scholasticall subtilities.

Wherefore most humbly I beseech your most Excellent Majesty to honor these my
poor labors with a gracious perusal of them, accepting of mine Answers when
they may seem reasonable, being in defense of doctrines received from
Ancestors, which deserve approbation when there is no euidency against them;
and of your abundant clemency pardon my prolixity, seeing the questions by your
Majesty proposed, were so difficill and obscure, as I could hardly have made
any shorter full explication of them.

THE FIRST POINT. The The Minister in this question knows not well what to
stand unto. He graunts the question, and then he denies it again contradicting
himself, yea censuring his own whole discourse as impertinent. This I
demonstrate out of his own words. First pa. 242. he says, that the question
is not about Divine and Religious worship of Images, but about any kind of
real worship. These be his very words. The question whether Images be to be
adored with divine worship, or not, is Heterogeneous, that is, impertinent to
this disputation. It is sufficient that Papists adore and worship Images with
some kind of Real worship, such as the Trident Council expressly defines.
Thus he there, professing that to impugn Iconolatry, or divine worship of
images, is impertinent. And yet in the beginning of this disputation he
professes contrariwise to impugn this only Adoration, and not every kind of
worship of Images. Thus he writes page 212. The Advocate of Images should first
of all have declared what he understands by worship of Images, whether
Veneration only, or Adoration properly so called. Veneration signifies
external reverence and regard of pictures, such as is given to Churches
Communion-Tables and sacred vessels; And according to this notion many have
approved worspippe of Images that deny adoration. Adoration properly so taken,
is yelding of honor by Religious submission of soul and body etc. the
worshipping of Images in this manner is superstition. Thus the Minister. Who to
prove that Protestants allow veneration or external worship of Images, in
his margent cites Iunius against Bellarmine, professing in the name of all
Protestants; None of us say, Images are not to be worshipped, much less do we
say, that they are no ways to be worshipped. WE ALLOW, that they be worshipped
in their kind as Images, but not with Religious worship. Behold how clearly
he grants the question in hand, even as much as the answerer intended to prove.
For what the Minister says, that the Answerer does not declare what he
understands by worship, whether external Veneration or internal
Adoration, is false. For he often and clearly affirms, that the worship he
means to prove to be due unto the Image of our Savior, is the external
regard and the reverence of bowing, such as is used toward Aultars and
Communion tables out of inward religions reverence and devotion unto Christ.
This the Answerer did set down presently in the beginning of his discourse
about images, and repeates the same almost in every paragraffe. See his text in
the Ministers book page 214. Outwardly to the Image, inwardly to Christ. page
206. Externally to the Image, by mental affection unto the person. pa. 827.
Outwardly to the Image, by devout and pious Imagination to the person, and the
like very often.

Nor is the Ministers insinuation true, that the Council of Trent does define
the worship of Images under the terms of Religious Adoration. First, the
Council nether uses the term Religious, nor Adoration; but Veneration, the
term, the very word allowed by the Minister. Secondly, the Council declares,
that this Veneration is outward regard, as kneeling, bowing the body,
uncovering the head, done before the Images of our Savior, to the end we may
adore him, that is, testify our inward supreme devotion toward him. Finally,
it is false that Adoration does properly signify Divine and Religious worship,
seeing properly according to the common acception of the word in Scripture, it
signifyes any bowing of the body in sign of reverence; as might be proved by
more then an hundred examples of Scripture where creatures are said to be
adored. The Fathers sometimes take the word Adore in the more principal sense,
and (...) only for divine worship. In which sense they say only God is
adored. Epiphan. haeres. 79. Sit in honor Maria, Deus adoretur. Hieronymus Ep.
53. Non Angelos vel aliquam creaturam adoramus. Yet also the same Fathers take
the word in the proper sense, and say, that other things besides God are adored
as Men. Augustine de ciuit l. 10. c. 4. Homines si mullum illis addatur etiam
adorandi. Men are to be honored, and when much adored. S. Hierome Epist. 17.
Baptistae cineres adorare, to ADORE the Ashes of S. John. The holy Cross.
Cyrill. Alexandrin. homil. de Deipara in Council. Ephesin. Crux adoratur toto
orb terrarum. Holy Images^ Damascen. lib. 4. Orthod. fidei c. 7. Saluatoris
etc. Imagines adoramus. we adore the images of our Lord. Hence it is evident,
that our Minister on the one side witnessing out of Iunius, that all
Protestants allow some kind of worship unto Images, to wit, veneration and
external worship; and on the other professing to impugn the Religious
adoration of images only, has yielded the question in controversy, and his
disputation against Iconolatry is, according to his own doom and word,
Heretogeneous, that is, impertinent, and in the air.


VVorshippe of Images.
I Have more hope to give your Majesty satisfaction in this article because all
kind of Theological proofs stand for the same, and nothing against it as I am
persuaded, which I declare by this discourse.

If the custom of worshipping Images be grounded on the prime principles of
nature and christianity; If the same has been received in the church
Universally, without any known time of beginning; If places of Scripture that
Protestants urge against us, make as much against their custom of making
Images, so that with no probability, or ingenuity they thereupon mislike us; If
by the use of Images there be no danger or hurt to ignorant people, which may
not with very ordinary diligence of pastors and teachers be prevented, and
otherwise the vtilityes very great; Then there is no reason of just mislike of
this custom. But this supposition is true, and in the same order I will
endeavor to show in the four Particulars.

Worship of Images consequent out of the principles of Nature and
Christianity.. 1.
AN Image This description of an Image shows the difference of proper Images
of our Savior from types and figures. By declaration whereof the chief part of
the Ministers disputation will be answered, which is grounded upon confusion of
these two different things. The proper Image represents the person of our
Savior, according to the true and proper shape of his kind, and some
individual propertyes that agree to him only. Such is the Image of a man
crucified, pourtrayted according to special circumstances recorded in the
gospel. A figure represents his person in the shape of some creature dissonant
from his form and kind whose corporal proprieties have resemblance with our
Saviors moral and spiritual perfections. Thus the Lion and Lamb be types or
metaphorical Images of our Savior, which resemble him not in corporal shape,
but in his heavenly perfections, his mildnes being figured by the Lamb, his
fortitude by the Lion.

From this fundamental difference other three flow. First, the proper Image
represents to man's Imagination, making him to apprehend by Imagination the
person, or the samplar, as really present before his eyes. The figure
represents to man's understanding, which apprehends by reason the analogy or
proportion which the corporal qualityes of the figure have with the moral
propertyes, and perfections of the thing figured. Secondly, upon sight of the
proper Image, straight a mental imagination of the person resultes in one that
knows him, especially when the knowledge is joined with affection; and this
is done so presently, that ocular aspect of the Image, and mental Imagination
of the person seem to be one and the same act; But upon sight of the figure,
the apprehension of the thing figured, does not instantly follow, but is
leasurely caused by discourse, comparing the one with the other.

Thirdly, hence the proper Image is taken for the prototype, that what is done
to the Image by way of outward honor or dishonor, the same is, and ought to
be taken as done to the person, and this by the natural force of Imagination,
and by natures institution in this matter, without any positive ordinance. The
figure is not so taken without some positive ordinance or custom. For example:
If a Jew tear in pieces the Image of our Savior by way of despite, that is
done, and to be taken as done mentally, and by affection to our Savior; but if
he tread under foot bread and wine, that is not to be taken as done in
disgrace of our Saviors body and blood, whereof bread and wine be types and
figures, except that bread and wine be sanctified to represent his body and
blood.


is a distinct and lively portrayture of some visible and corporal thing,
parts of the Image corresponding to the parts of the thing represented, more
or less particularly, according as the Image is more or less distinct and
lively.

The office of an Image is to carry the Imagination of the beholders thereof
directly, and immediately to the person Imagined therein, imagination of parts in
the person represe^ted, answering to the parts seen in the Image; which kind
and use of Images Nature allows unto men, to the end they may remember, and
more lively imagine persons absent and removed from their corporal sight, upon
whom they ought, and have great desire lively and stayedly to fix their
Imaginations, and Thoughts.

The first Argument.
Hence arises the allowed Principle of Nature, received by all Nations, Civil
and Barbarous, Ita vt in eo, to speak with S. Augustine, nulla doctorum
paucitas, nulla indoctorum turba dissentiat: That the Image may and ought to
stand for the prototype, and is by Imagination to be taken as it were the very
person. And The Minister page 214. says; This axione is not true of all
Images, but only of such Images as are by civil or divine ordinance appointed
to stand for the Prototype. This he proves by the examples of the brazen
Serpent, Paschall Lamb, Golden CHERVBIMS, which might not be adored, though
Images of Christ; yea Ezechias defaced the Image, that is, the brase^ serpent,
yet adored the Prototype Christ. Answer. These examples are impertinent. The
brazen Serpent, and the Paschall Lamb were types and figures of our Lord;
which we grant by the mere native force of Imagination, without positive
ordinance, do not necessarily stand for the thing figured; yea the Jews, at
the least the vulgar, did not understand that the brazen serpent was a type of
the Messiah, nor can it be proved that Ezechias himself so understood it. The
question is of proper Images of our Savior: These we say stand for the
prototype inuiolably by the law of nature, that honor done, or denied
outwardly to the Image, is done or denied mentally to the person, and ought so
to be taken. The Minister if he will speak to the purpose, must bring some
examples where the proper Image may be disgraced, without dishonor done to the
Prototype; which he will never find. For even Ezechias when he brake in pieces
the brazen serpent, did therein dishonor the proper prototype thereof, to wit,
the true serpent, of which the brazen was the direct and proper Image, and of
which he showed contempt, in respect of being adored of men, by tearing in
pieces the Image, because it was adored with reference unto it, as Heathens
worshipped the Images of Serpents and Calves. The truth of this difference
between an image and figure, may be made evident unto the Minister by this
familiar example. If his wife be found beholding and kissing his Image, that is
set in the frontispice of his Reply, with verses in praise of his sweet and
gracious face; ought not this to be taken as done mentally to his person? And
were not the contrary to wrong her? yet there is no civil Ordinance, nor
Parliament law that this his Image stand for him. On the other side, if she be
found kissing and making much of her little dog, though that be the type of a
preaching Minister; must that be taken as done unto him? No verily. It is then
clear, that there is difference betwixt figures and proper Images, in respect
of standing for the prototype. Hence this principle, Honor and Dishonor done,
or denied outwardly to the proper Image, is done, or denied mentally to the
person, cannot be proved ever to fail: nor can our Minister show by the word
of God, that any proper Image of an adored person, was ever lawfully made, and
not lawfully adored.
what we outwardly do to the Image, is done by Imagination to the person. And
when we kiss the hands and feet of the Image, in our Imagination we kiss the
hands and feet of the person inwardly Imagined by his Image. This is the Axiom
of Philosophy gathered out of Aristotle: Idem est motus in Imaginem and
Exemplar. For motion proceeding from the body and mind, what the body does
really and externally to the Image, the mind does Imaginarily, that is, by
conceit and affection, to the This is then the first argument for the
worship of our Saviors Image which may be thus su^med. The proper Image, so
stands for the Prototype, that what is done by way of outward honor to the
Image, is done by affection to the person; and whosoever denies outwardly
Reverence to the Image, is to be taken as denying mentally Reverence to the
person. But our Savior is worthy of all worship, so that it is impious to deny
any worship unto him. Therefore (supposing what Protestants grant, that the
Image of our Savior is lawfully made) it is impious to deny outward Reverence
unto it.
person.

The second Argument.
This Axione of Philosophy, that no man think it disauowed in Theology, the
ancient Fathers uniformly teach as a prime truth evident in reason. S.
Damascene l. 4. c. 12. S. Augustine de doct. Christ. c. 9. S. Ambrose de Dom.
Incarn. Sacrament. c. 7. S. Basil de Spiritu sancto. c. 18. S. Athanasius
Sermon. contra Arianos, The Minister page 229. lin. 24. answers to these
testimonies of the Fathers in this sort: Damascene is not Ancient, nor
Orthodoxal in all points: for as Cardinal Bellarmine says de Scriptor. Eccles.
page 269. he denied the procession of the holy Ghost from the Son. S.
Augustine speaks of signs that have divine Institution. S. Ambrose of
Christ's Passion, and not of pictures. S. Basil and Athanasius speak by way of
similitude only of the Image of kings. Where is now the uniform consent of
Fathers? Answer. First, S. Athanasius, though he speak particularly of the
kings Image, yet his reason is the same in all the proper Images of any adored
person. For his reason why the kings Image must be adored, is because the Image
of the king may (not by corporal speech but by the evidence of the thing) truly
say, I and the king who is adored, be one; but this the proper Image of any
adored person may truly say as well as the kings. For example, suppose that were
true which our Minister says. page 224. lin. 21. that Ministers have such
union with God, as they are to be adored with Religious adoration, why may not
the Image of our Adored Minister which is set in the front of this Reply say, I
and the Minister are one, he is in me, and I in him, he that adoreth me,
adoreth him, and who disgraceth me, disgraceth him as well as the kings? And if
the Ministers Image may truly affirm, I and an adored person are one, why may
not also the Image of our Savior, (who is a person more to be adored the^ any
Minister) say the same? S. Basil speaks not particularly of the kings Image,
but says universally, that honor done to the Image, is done and referred to
the person, and thence concludes in particular, that it is so in the adoration
of the king and his Image, so that there are not two adorations, but one, which
being done outwardly to the Image, is referred and taken, as referred mentally
to the king. It is true, S. Ambrose speaks of the Image and Cross of Christ.
That he means not the material Cross but the Passion, the Minister does
say, but he cannot prove it, seeing S. Ambros. orat. in Theodos. says
expressly, that the Cross is adored, and in his days the holy wood of the
Cross was publicly proposed to be adored, as says S. Paulinus Epist. 11. ad
Seuerum. S. Augustine says l. 1. de doctrine. Christian. c. 25. that such
Images are not idle inventions of men which are proposed by lawful authority;
but such be the Images of Christ and his Saints ever used by the Christian
Church. Wherefore those Images have divine Institution, mediate at least, and so
by S. Augustines rule, the worship of them is pious, as being not so much
worship of them, as the worship of Christ and his saints* S. Damascen lived
nine ages ago, and so was by an hundred years nearer unto Christ then unto
us, how then is he not ancient? What you say, that according to Bellarmine he
was not Orthodoxe, but denied the procession of the Holy Ghost from God the
Son, you wrong both Bellarmine and him. For Bellarmine l. 1. de Christo c.
27. not only affirms, but proves that S. Damascene held the procession of the
holy Ghost from the Son, quoad rem, as for the matter, though he allowed not
the form of speech, procedit ex filio, because it was used by Heretics in a
false sense, as though the son only had been the immediate origin of the
holy Ghost, and not also the Father. And this is all Bellarmine says in libro
de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis; nor does Bellarmine say, that Damascene denied
the procession of the holy Ghost from the Son, though your put these down in a
distinct letter, as Bellarmines very words. This is false play.
who thus writes: An Image of the King is nothing else but the form and shape
of the King, which could it speak, would, and might truly say, I and the king
are one, the king is in me, and I in him, so that who adoreth me his Image,
does therein adore the very King. Thus he: showing that the kings Image, is to
be imagined, and by Imagination to be conceived as the very king.

The third Argument.
This Principle, that Images by Imagination must stand for their Prototype, and
what is done by way of honor unto the Image is done mentally to the person, is
canonized by the holy Scripture, and we warranted to conclude by the light
thereof our obligations of worship. God in the old Testament appointed, that the
Tabernacle should be taken, by Imagination, as his House, The Propitiatory as
his Seat, The Arc as his Footstole, and so he Imagined there present as
sitting with his feet on the Arc. This ordination supposed, the Prophet David
Psalm 99.5. argues, that we are bound to adore the Arc that represents God,
as his footestole, saying: Adore his footstool, because he is holy. As if he
had said, God being holy, and most highly to be adored, makes the thing holy
and venerable, that has the office to represent him, as if he were corporally
present before our eyes. The Arc has the office of his footstool* and to
represent him as by Imagination present with his feet upon it. Therefore adore
the Arc, Adore this his footstool, because he is Unto this text the Minister
page 260. frames two Answers: first, that the ^sraelites did not adore the
material Arc, but God himself before the Arc. In proof hereof he bringes
1. Sam. 1.19. where is said of Elcana and his wife, They rose in the morning
early and worshipped before the Lord. Answer. This text shows the contrary
that they adored the Arc before the Lord, that is, in his presence bowing
outwardly to the Arc, by inward affection unto the Lord Imagined as there
present, according to the word of the Prophet, Adore his foostoole. Secondly,
the Minister answers, that the Arc was adored by Gods special commandment
(and so are not Images) citing to this purpose the foresaid verse of this
Psalm, Adore his footstool for he is holy. This is frivolous. For the Prophet
does not say that there is any special commandment to adore the Arc (for
then he would have said, Adore the Arc, because God so commandes) but he
shows, what was due in reason unto the Arc, in regard it was to be considered
as an Image of the Holy of holyes, imagined as sitting with his feet upon it,
saying, adore his fotstole, because he is holy, not because there is a special
positive precept so to do (for no such precept is found in Scripture,) but
because this is consequent out of the principles of the law of Nature; for that
reason teaches that the sanctity of God, makes any thing that must in special
sort stand for him, eue^ his footstool, venerable, and so to be bowed unto, in
respect of the Holy of Holyes imagined as sitting upon it. As when David says,
praise the Lord because he is good. Psa. 117. he delivers not a positive, but
shows that it is essential duty unto God in respect of his Goodness: so
likewise the Prophet saying, adore his footestoole because he his Holy, does
show what is due unto God essentially in respect of his holiness, to wit, that
that which represents him to the imagination, as if he were corporally present,
be holy, and adored for his sake.
holy. Where note that the obligation to take the Arc as an Image of God
sitting upon it, is a positive ordinance, the Arc not binding men so to do of
his own nature, not being a proper Image of God; yet this positive institution
supposed, the Law of nature binds men to worship and adore the Arc with
reference unto the holy adored person, imagined as sitting thereon.

The fourth Argument.
With this Principle so received in nature we must join another nolesse known
and notorious in Christianity, to wit, that God full of all honor and glory,
to whom all adoration and worship is due, became truly and verily Man, as
visible and aspectable as any other man, and consequently as Imaginable, that
he may be figured by an Image, no less truly and distinctly then another man.
In which Image the hands, feet and other parts shall truly by Imagination
correspond to the feet, hands, and parts of the prototype, and our Imagination
from it pass directly and immediately unto Christ, and his parts,
proportionable to those we behold in the Image: so that when we adore with an
humble outward kiss of hands and feet the Image, by inward Imagination,
Conceit, and Affection we kiss and adore the Imagined true hands, and feet of
Christ. Neither are these Imaginations false and erroneous, seeing (as
Philosophy teaches) no falsehood is in mere apprehension or Imagination,
without judging the thing to be as we Imagine. As in contemplation men
represent and imagine themselves as standing before Gods throne in the Court of
heaven amidst the quires of Saints and Angels, praising and honoring him in
their society, not judging themselves to be truly and really in heaven (that
were a falsehood and dotage) but only apprehending in themselves such a
presence, and behauing themselves outwardly and inwardly in prayer, as if they
were present. To which kind of Imaginations, as pious and goodly, the
Scriptures and Fathers exhort us. In this sort beholding the Image of Christ*
we apprehend The Minister objects pa. 223. lin. 16. one may imagine the sun,
or a lamb to be the figure of Christ, and conceive them as his Image, and yet
it is not lawful by one and the same affection to worship these Creatures with
their Creator. I Answer. This has been refuted already. For these creatures
be but types and figures of our Savior, which types and figures have no right
in nature with out positive institution to bind men's Imaginations to conceive
by them our Savior as if he were present, nor consequently to Imagine, what is
done unto them, is done unto him. But the proper Images of our Savior have
right in nature to bind man's Imaginations to conceive our Savior in his Image
as present in this sort. Wherefore he that will not conform his Imagination to
this pious institute of Nature, but will think he may deface the proper Image
of his Lord, without injury to his person, does by that defacing commit impiety
toward Christ, his Imaginations not having that rectitude toward so great a
Lord, as natural piety does exact. For piety toward our Lord requires of
man, that his Imaginations be respective of every thing, that has by consent
of men right of reference toward him.
him as therein present, not judging the Image to be Christ, but imagining, and
taking it as if it were Christ. That when we outwardly honor the Image by
kissing the hands and feet thereof, mentally by imagination and humble affection
of reverence, we adore and kiss the most venerable hands and feet of his
precious body.

The fifth Argument.
The Historyes of Christian Antiquity are full of holy Men, Bishops, Kings,
Queens, and other honorable Personages, who have cast themselves down on the
ground, before Beggars, Lazars, and leapers, kissing their feet and their
soars out of reverent affection unto Christ. In which kind, memorable is the
charity of the famous Queen Matildes daughter of Edgar King of Scotland, and
wife to Henry the first of England, whose custom was to wash with her own
hands, the feet of poor people, amongst whom were Leapers, and such as had
loathsome diseases, not disdaining with great Reverence on her knees to kiss
their feet with her princely lips. And when as the Prince of Scotland her
brother, being then in the Court of England entering into her chamber, found her
employed in so humble service, astonished thereat, rebuked her, saying: Sister
what do you? can you with those your defiled lips kiss the king your husband?
She answered: Know brother, that the feet of the King of heaven are more lovely
and venerable then are the lips of an Earthly king. Certainly this Queen with
all other addicted to the like devotion, when they kissed the feet of the poor
outwardly with their lips, did by Imagination full of reverent affection, kiss
the feet of Christ Jesus, taking the poor as Images of The Minister answers
this argument with a demand page 225. lin. 26. Where I pray you has our
Savior said of Images of wood and stone, nay of Puppets and pranked Babyes,
what ye do to one of these my least ones, ye do unto me, as he said of the
poor? I answer. That the images of our Lord, stand for our Lord so, that what
is done by way of honor, or dishonor unto them, is to be taken as done unto
him, is evident in the light of nature, not only to learned men, but eue^ to
women and children; and none deny it but such in whom Passion against truth
hinders the right use of common Reason. Hence there was no need, that this
truth should be expressly set down in the Scripture, though the Scripture in
some of her discourses does intrinse^cally suppose the same; for the testimony,
whereof we have already spoken, Adore the footestoole of his feet, because he
is holy, does suppose that what represents God unto the imagination, as if he
were visibly present, is to be worshipped for his sake.

On the other side that what is done unto poor beggars and lazars by way of
relief and comfort, is to be taken as done unto Christ, as he was once poor
and needy for our sakes upon earth, is not evident in the light of reason, nor
can be known but by divine Revelation. Hence it was convenient that the same
should be often and expressly set down in Scripture for the comfort and
encouragement of Christians, the more to inflame them unto Charitable works.
Where we may observe, that the Word of God only says, that what is done to the
poor by way of comfort and relief, is done unto Christ, not what is done by
way of honor, and yet Christian Charitable people have not only relieved, but
also reverenced these poor people, in respect of this their reference unto
Christ. And how this? But by grounding themselves upon this principle evident
in the light of nature, Whatsoever is done by way of honor to the image of
Christ Jesus, that is, unto the thing which represents him unto imagination, as
if he were visibly present, is to be taken as done to his very person.
Wherefore seeing the poor by the ordinance of Gods word, stand for our Savior,
and are his images, so that when we see them poor and needy, we must imagine
we see him poor and needy; hence it is consequent that what is done unto them,
not only by way of relief, but also by way of reverence, is done unto our
Savior, and so they may be worshipped for his sake. As for the title of
puppets and pranked Babyes, if the Minister think it a fine phrase, he may
keep it to adorn therewith his own Brats.


him, who said, What you do to one of my least ones, you do it unto me. Matthew.
25. v. 40.

Out of this, the common Objection of Protestants, to wit, that the worship of
Christ's Image is no where found in Scripture, and therefore it is a
Will Worship, may be answered; For as themselves confess (see D. Field l. 4.
c. 14.) many actions belong to Religion, whereof there is no express precept,
nor any practice in Scripture, which prove the lawfulnes and necessity thereof.
There is no express precept in Scripture to christen Infants nor is it there
read, that ever any were Christened; yet because there be Testimonies which
joined with reason, prove the lawfulnes and necessity of this Baptism, we may
and must use it. In Scripture there is no express practice, nor precept of
worshipping the Image of Christ, yet there be principles which (the light of
nature supposed) convince such Adoration to be lawful and necessary.

The sixth Argument.
Christ being true God, full of honor, to whom all supreme Adoration is due,
does, and must needs make honorable and adorable any thing that represents
him, that is, which must be taken by Imagination, as if it were his person. But
supposing God to be truly Man (as faith teaches) the light of nature shows,
that his Image truly represents him, that is, makes him present to the
imagination of the beholders thereof, and stands for him. Ergo, Christ Jesus his
Image is for his sake Venerable and Adorable as a thing standing for him, in
such sort, that the honor done outwardly to it, is done, and ought to be taken
as done (by devout and pious imagination) to his person. Whence further is
concluded the necessity of this worship* For God Incarnate being most venerable
and full of glory, requires of a Christian that, that which sta^ds for him, and
represe^t^ him be honored and This Argument is grounded upon this Principle of
Scripture, that all kind of honor and worship is due to the man Christ Jesus,
which can be due unto any other man whom we are bound to respect. But unto
other persons whom we are bound to respect, we owe reverence in their Images
more or less according to their dignity. And this duty is double, the one
negative, never to disgrace their Images; the other affirmative which is
actually to exhibit honor unto their Images, when otherwise the denial
thereof will be taken as irreuerence and contempt toward them. Therefore to the
Image of Christ we owe this double duty of honor, negative, never to disgrace
it, positive, to reverence the same outwardly, when otherwise the neglect of
reverence to his Image is, and ought to be taken as want of due reverence to
his person.
adored for his sake

The Seventh Argument.
If the honor due to a King be so great, that the same redoundes from his
person to things about him, as to his Chair of state (which is honored with
the like bowing and kneeling that is used to his person) and to his Image unto
which whosoever offreth injury is punishable, as offering injury to the king
himself; Shall not the honor due to Christ Jesus infinitely greater, so flow
out of his person unto things that belong and concern him, as to make his The
Minister page 228. says this similitude halteth, because the kings Chair of
state, and his image when it is honored or dishonored, are conjoined with his
person by civil ordinance and relation. I Answer. This is a manifest falsehood,
for what law is in England that every image of the king is to be taken as his
person in respect of honor? There is no such law written with pen and ink,
but only the law of nature written by the fingar of the Creator in men's hearts
and observed universally in all nations by custom, that the proper image of a
person is in respect of honor and dishonor to be taken as the person.
Image, Cross, and such holy Monuments of his Passion and Life Venerable for
his sake, and to be adored with bowing, kneeling, and other exterior honor,
as would be used to his person were he visibly present? not so, that the
worship rest in the Image, but be referred by imagination and affection to the
person imagined. But the Image of Christ being a true representation of God
incarnate, and able to convey our Imagination directly and truly toward him,
corresponding very particularly unto the parts of his sacred person, has a
right in reason, and nature which cannot be taken from it, to represent him,
and to stand in our imagination for him. Wherefore the Image of Christ has a
right, which without impiety cannot be denied unto it, to be honored and
outwardly adored for his sake, by kneelings, bowings, imbracings, and kissings
referred in mind by devout thoughts and affections to his person.

The eight Argument.
And this right is a The Minister here is hot, and demands page 230. lin. 8.
Has a dead picture or worme-eate^ statue greater dignity then the lively
Images of Christ, to wit, the saints that are on earth and excel in virtue? I
Answer, that no: yet the Image of Christ has a dignity which no other dumb,
dead, and senseles Creature (of which the Answerer here speaks) can have, to
wit, to represent our Savior according to his true or proper human shape.
Whence it has a right in nature to stand by imagination for our Savior, and
to bind us that our actions toward it be not respectles.
dignity which an Image of Christ has above other creatures, who though they
be referred unto God as unto their Author, yet God may not be honored in them
in that manner as Christ is honored in his Image. The reason is, because
creatures represent God their Author so rudely, remotely, darkly imperfectly
that only spiritual men and Note against the Ministers cauilling, that God
may be two ways known by visible creatures. First, only abstractiuely, to
wit, that he is, and has many divine perfectio^s. In this manner Heathen
Philosophers who were not perfect contemplants did by creatures know God.
Secondly, in a kind of intuitiue and contemplative manner, which is, when
presently upon the sight of a creature we are moved with reverence toward the
Creator, as if we saw him present therein. This presence of God perfect
contemplants only arrive unto, and unto these men only the creatures serve as
Images and mirrours of God. Such as are yet imperfect as they cannot thus
presently behold the Godhead in his creatures, must help themselves with the
sight of his sacred humanity, in the Images of the mysteries of his holy life.
perfect Contemplants can readily acknowledge God in them, and so such men
only, and that only privately to themselves, may worship God in, and by them,
which is all that Vasquez (so much accused) does teach. But as for public and
promiscuous adoring of Creatures, he condemns it, as indecent and scandalous,
saying expressly, ( l. 3. de adorat. c. 1.) that Indiscriminatim creaturas
adorandas proponere, esset multis manifesta causa periculi. In which respect
(S. Leo sermon. 7. de Not. Dom.) reprehends some Christians at Rome that bowed
unto the sun, mentally referring that bowing unto God the Author thereof,
because Paynims seeing that outward actio^ of adoring, might imagine that
Christians adored the Sun in their superstitious manner, the relation which
the Sun has to God as to his Creator, not being evident unto sight, nor by
imagination apprehended. But the Image of Christ (as I said) is apparently so
representative The Minister page 233. says, if he may speak his opinion, he
sees no reason why the Sun, or an Ass may not stand in our Imaginations for
God his maker, and we worship him referring the external bowing, and kissing of
the Ass unto God, even as well as the Image of Christ Jesus crucified may stand
for him by imagination, and be bowed unto, out of inward reverence unto him.
Answer. This is spoken only in sple^e against holy Imags, otherwise I cannot
think the Minister can be so gross of conceyt. For what Christian so wild and
void of common sense as not to perceive by the very instinct of nature a
difference betwixt the Image of a crucified man, and the Ass, in respect of
standing for our Savior? If an Ass may (as the Minister says) represent our
Savior, and stand by Imagination for him, and be bowed unto for his sake, as
much as his crucified shape and picture in stone, wood, or paper, why may not
an Ass (I pray you) represent the Minister, and stand in men's Imagination for
him, as well as the picture of a man in a Ministerial weed set in the beginning
of his book?
of Christ, that upon sight thereof our thoughts fly presently unto him, and his
picture is no sooner in our eyes, then his person by imagination in our mind.
Neither is there any excellency appearing in the picture worthy to be adored,
or sufficient to stay our thoughts and affections in it. So that no man can
with any probability suspect that any reason besides reverence to his Majesty,
makes us bow our bodies to his Image.

The ninth Argument.
Nor does it folllow, that if we worship the Image of Christ and the cross
that he died on, that we should also adore Judas his lips which touched our
Savior his sacred mouth, when he gave him that traitorous kiss; For What the
Minister has said in answer of this argument, is showed to be full of
ignorance and folly, in the Censure Sect. 3.. 7.
it is easy to show many maine differences betwixt Judas his lips, and the
Cross. First, Judas his lips were conjoined substantially with Judas that none
could bow or bend unto them, or kiss them, without seeming to bow, and to do
honor unto his person, in regard he being an intellectual creature, was an
object capable of veneration, terminated and stayed in his own person. But the
Cross being a senseles thing, is not an object sufficient to stay veneration
within it self, neither is it a part belonging to the substance of any wicked
man that concurred unto the punishing of our Savior, but rather was fixed
unto, and joined to his body, and so the outward bowing to the Cross is done
mentally, and is taken as done only unto Christ, whom we behold as stretched
thereon.

Secondly, the Cross, the Nails, the Lance, and other such instruments being
senseles creatures, may be thought off as things sanctified by the touch of our
Saviors body, they not having any thing in them contrary to the sanctity of
Christ, and so could not hinder the conceit of such imputed sanctity. But
Judas being most wicked and detestable, and full of the most horrible Treason
that ever was, did so defile and profane his whole person, and all the parts
thereof, that the mere touch of our Saviors most sacred mouth could not
sanctify, nor make holy unto Christian Imagination, his lips, without changing
and sanctifying his heart. For so long as he continues without repenting his
treason, the lively remembrance of that execrable fact does so possess a
Christian heart, as no respectfull thought to him can enter into it.

Finally, the passion of Christ may be considered two ways. First, as
proceeding from the will of wicked men, the Devils instruments to torment him.
In which consideration, it is not grateful unto God, but a detestable sin in
the Authors thereof. Secondly, it may be considered as received in the body of
Christ, as abiding and continuing in his sacred person admitted into his heart,
and The Minister his calumniation that the Jesuits, or Loyalists hold that the
Cross, and nails were offered by Christ to his Father at his Passion, and the
world redeemed with wood and iron, is discovered in the Censure Sect. 3.. 5.
together with the exorbitancy of his railing.
offered unto his father for the sins of the world, and by this consideration
it is sacred and venerable. The lips of Judas betraying Christ, as the hands
also of the wicked Minister that struck him in Caiaphas his house, and other
like instruments conioined with wicked persons, were instruments of Christ's
Passion, as it proceeded from their wicked hearts, and consequently as it was a
detestable action But the Cross, the Nails, and the Lance that stayed in,
and were joined to the body of Christ, were Instruments of Christ's Passion as
it was lodged in his sacred person, and as offered to his heavenly Father, and
consequently as of a thing most highly venerable.

Out of all which I may conclude, that Christ Jesus being a true man, his Image
has a most evident and undeniable right to represent him, and so to be
honored for his sake.

That this Worship was ever since the Apostles in the Church, without
beginning.. 2.
THE disagreeing of Protestants about the time when worship of Images began, is
a sufficient Argument that there is no certain beginning thereof Because the
Minister here cauilleth, that this discourse is vncoherent; Note, that the
Answerer does here suppose some things proved before. First, that there is a
known tradition and historical succession extant of the Roman Church and of
her Bishops, and their chief actions in matter of Religion. Secondly that
therefore such a notable change as is pretended by Protestants, made by these
Bishops turning Christian Religion into open Idolatry could not have been
without famous no^e thereof, according to time and persons, delivered unto
posterity by report written and unwritten. This supposed his discourse is
consequent and conuincing; for thus the argues: Had adoration of the Images of
our Savior been brought into the Church since the Apostles, against the
Religion planted by the^, the beginning thereof would have been famously known
by historical tradition written or unwritten. But the time of the beginning of
this pretended Idolatrizing is not noted by fame, nor by any full Tradition
delivered unto us. This is proved, because Protestants that go about to set
down the time of the first entrance of this worship into the Church by degrees
since the Apostles, vary among themselves, and their best narrations are
convinced of manifest falsehood, whereby it is clear they faygne. That the best
of their disagreing relations be thus false, the Answerer shows, because the
best and most esteemed relation may seem that of M. John White, which has
been so often printed, and reprinted, and wherewith so many are deluded (or if
this not the best, let our Minister show a better which he has neither done,
nor endeauored to do). But John Whites relation is patched together of most
intolerable gross falsehoods in every point wherein he pretends beginning, and
beginners. This the Answerer shows unanswerably.
assignable; but because it were long to set down all their disagreeing
assertions, I will only declare what M. John White, brother to my adversary in
his book printed and reprinted many times, says therabout, that your Majesty
may by this example understand with how little sincerity the best esteemed
Protestant Ministers handle controuersyes, to the deceptio^ of many Christian
souls, his words are these: First John White in his way p. 152.. 35. n. 13.
there was no Image graven or painted (says In Cathechism.
Erasmus) no not the Image of Christ himself to be set in Churchs, and this
appears by the Epiphan. ep. ad Joan. Council. Eliber. c. 36.
testimony of the Ancients. Secondly, when they began to be used, the Church of
Rome Greg. Ep. 3. l. 7. indict. 2. and li. 4. ep. 9.
forbad the Worship of them, as appears by the Epistles of Gregory to
Serenus; and Polidore De inuen. l. 6. c. 13.
a Papist conf^sseth all Fathers condemned the Worship of Images for fear of
Idolatry. Afterward the Council of Nice Act. 7.
brought in this worship, decreeing nevertheless that no Image should be
adored with (Latria) Divine honor. At the last, Thomas Aquinas 3. p. q. 25.
act. 3. and 4*
and the Trent Council Sess. 25.
expounded by the Jesuits Vasquez de adorat. l 2* c. 4. Suarez tom. 2. disp.
54. sect. 4.
taught, that divine honor should be given unto them.

Thus he. Which in my Judgment is sufficient to make any Judicious man mislike
Protestant writers, that defend their Religion by such palpable untruths. For
(to begin with his last saying and so upward) what can be more false, then that
the Two things you here devise for defense of your Brother. First you say page
241. lin. 25. that the determination in the Council, in this and in many other
articles, is like Appollo his riddles, so ambiguous, as no wonder your Brother
was deceived. I Answer that the Council of Trent allows only bowing before
Images, with inward reference of the adoring affection unto Christ, as any man
that shall peruse the decree will presently perceive. Secondly, though the
meaning of the Council were dark and obscure, yet whether the Council gave a
command in this form of words, some Images are to be worshipped with latria,
cannot be obscure, nor can any mistake theirin, but only misrelate against his
knowledge, through desire to deceive.

Now your Brother charge the Council with giving a command in this very
form of words in his Way of digressions from the Church digress. 49. numero 5
page 345. lin. 10. The Church of Rom (says he) commands that some Images be
worshipped, with Divine honor, the very same that is due to God himself. The
words with Divine honor are set in a distinct letter, and the Council of
Trent is cited as commanding in this form of speech, in the 25. Sessio^
thereof, where no such words are found in any part of the Council. Is not this
inexcusable lying?

Secondly, for his excuse ibidem lin. 33. you say, That which induced my
Brother to charge the Trent Masters with defining Divine worship of images,
was their silence in condemninge the teachers of such divine worship, but
especially the practice of the late Pontificians, that since the Council teach
Divine worship of Images. Answer. First, though later Deuines did teach Divine
worship to be given to some Images, yet this would not excuse your Brother from
being guilty of belying the Council. For your Brother does not only say, that
some Pontificians so hold, but that the Church of Rome defines, and commands
Divine worship of Images, citing the Counsel of Trent Sess. 25. so defining in
as many words. Is not this kind of lying damnable, as being gross in matter of
religion and salvation? Secondly, you either ignorantly mistake, or wilfully
pervert the meaning of those Deuines, as the Answerer does show in the next
Paragraffe.


Council of Trent taught that Divine worship is to be given unto Images, there
being no such words in the whole Council? As for the Jesuit, Vasquez whom he
cites, as so expounding the Council, no such doctrine is found in him, either
in the place quoted by the Minister, or in any part of his works, yea the
contrary is found l. 2. de adorat. disp. 9. c. 3. It is not (quoth he) to be
said, that divine honor is given unto Images. Neither does Suarez the other
Jesuit cited, expound the Counsel to give divine worship unto Christ's Image,
but only says, that out of the Council it may be gathered, that the Image of
Christ, and Christ, are honored by one and the same act of worship, which as
referred unto Christ, is Divine worship, as referred unto the Image, not divine
worship but inferior veneration. For as he declares in 3. part. To. 1. disp.
54. Sect. 3. ad 7. Ille actus respectu prototypi est proprie Latria etc.
respectu viz. Imaginis, non est tam perfecta adoratio, sed inferior veneratio.
The worship of Christ and his Image though one and the same Physical act, is
virtually two fold, being divine honor toward Christ, not divine, but a kind
of inferior honor toward the Image.

Nor is M. Whites [Way page 400] Argument good, We worship Christ and his Image
by the same act, but the worship of Christ is divine honor. Ergo, the worship
of the Image is divine honor. For this proves only that the worship of the
Image and of Christ being one and the same act, is divine as referred to
Christ, not as referred unto the Image. Otherwise if M. White should help to
pull his fellow-Ministers horse out of the mire, moved thereunto out of
christian charity and friendship, one might by the like argument prove that he
bears christian charity toward horses, for he reliueth the horse, and
pleasureth his friend by one and the same act. The pleasuring of his friend is
an act of christian charity toward him. Ergo the pullinge of the horse out of
the mire is an act of christian charity toward the horse. A foolish argument,
because that one act is virtually twofold; as referred to the man owner of the
horse christian charity, as referred to the horse only, no charity at all, but
a baser kind of love, and that for his friends sake. The like is when we kiss
with our corporal lips the feet of the Image of Christ, at the same time by
devout and reverent Imagination kissing his true feet represented by the Image,
we honor Christ and his Image by one and the same Physical act, and that
act is divine worship, though not divine as referred to the Image, but only
as referred unto Christ. A thing so easily understood by learned men, as I
marvel Ministers understand it not, or wrangle in a matter so clear, if they
sincerely seek truth. And though the ignorant understand not the terms of
Theology, by which Deuines declare the manner of honoring the Prototype, and
the Image, both by one act, yet may they honor an Image, as securely and with
as little danger of erring as any that understands them. For as the Clown who
knows no more of the nature of motion, then that he is to set one foot before
another, does move in the very same manner as Philosophers, who explicate that
action by terms most obscure, of intrinsecal and extrinsecall beginning and
ending, and per vltimum non esse, and primum non esse; so likewise a catholic
that understands no more of honoring Christ his Image, then that he is by
beholding the Image to remember Christ, and with pious and affectuous
imagination to adore him, does honor our Savior and his Image by one and the
same act, as truly, verily, and religiously as the greatest Divine that can
learnedly explicate the manner how that adoration is performed as being done
outwardly, relatiuely, and transitorily unto the Image, affectuously,
absolutely, finally unto Christ.

Secondly, whereas he says, That the council of Nice brought in the worship
of Images, yet forbad that any Image should be adored with Divine honor, he
both contradicts himself, and utters another manifest falsehood. He
contradicts himself in saying that the Nicene council forbad divine worship of
any Image, seeing in another place he thus writes, Defense page 453. Both the
Council of Nice, and the Deuines of the Church of Rome hold the Images of God,
and our Savior, and the Cross must be adored with Divine adoration The
Minister has not a word to say in excuse of this contradiction and falsehood
of his Brother.
. It is apparently false that the said Nicene council brought in the worship
of Images, which might be proved by many Testimonies, but this one may suffice,
Zonaras in Leone Isaurico and Paulus Diaconus in miscella. lib. 21. Accusabat
omnes antecessores Principes quasi Idololatrae fuissent, propter adorationem
sanctaru^ Iconum.
that Leo Isauricus before the council of Nice opposed Image-worshippe, not as
then beginning, but for many years before established in the church, boasting,
that he was the first Christian Emperor, the rest having been Idolators,
because they worshipped Images, so manifestly did he oppose antiquity, and so
little truth there is in M. Whites The Minister says that the Nicene Synod
brought in the practice of worshipping of Images, by definition, not simply.
For the Israelites worshipped molten Images in Dan and Bethel, and the
Symonians worshipped Images, Eusebius. Eccles. Historia lib. 2. c. 13. The
Gnostics worshipped the Image of Christ. ^ren l. 1. c. 13. Answer. By this may
appear, that so you satisfy your spleen ^n comparing us to Idolaters, you
care not how little you speak to the purpose. The question is, who first
brought in the worship that for many ^ges has been used universally by
Christians toward the Images of Christ and his Saints? You answer, not the
Nicene Synod simply, but before that Council the Israelites worshipped molten
Images in Dan and ^e^hel and the Synomians worshipped Images, to wit, of Simon
Magus and ^elen his strumpet: were these the Images of Christ, and his blessed
mother? The Gnostics also worshipped the Image of Christ and of Paul
sacrifi^ing unto it, and not only unto it, but also with it, unto the Images
of Homer, Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and other profane men, as Irenaeus
relate^ li. 2. c. 24. and Epiphan. here is. 27. the like did Marcellina noted by
S. Aug. de Haeres. haeres. 23. Is this the Catholic custom of worshipping
Images?
Assertion.

Thirdly, to pass yet up higher, that Images began in Gregory the great his
time, and that he forbad the worship of them, conteines other three falsehoods.
First Gregory is abused, who only What the Minister says page 248. lin. 2^.
that Gregory did not approve that Images should be worshipped any way, is not
only against Friar Bale, but also against the plain words of Gregory, who
says expressly lib. 7. Epist. 5. that worship or veneration is due to the
Cross of Christ, and Image of the blessed Virgin. Wherefore when elswher ( lib.
7. Epist. 10.11.) he says, that Images are no ways to be adored, this is to
be understood according as himself expounds himself, l. 7. Epist. 53. non
tanqua^ Deus, Images are not to be worshipped as God. And again we prostrate
our selves before the Image, not as before the deity, but we adore him, whom
by his Image we remember as borne, or as crucified, or as sitting in glory.
Where he teaches two things: first that (...) must prostrate our selves before
our Saviors Image: secondly, that (...) heart and affection, we must worship
the divine Samplar, our Sauio^^ person.
commanded that none should worship Images as Gods, believing as Gentiles did
that some Godhead was affixed to them, as he elsewhere declares Lib. 7. ep.
53. Non vt eam tanquam Deum colas.
himself. And so manifestly did he teach Image Worship establishing
pilgrimages unto them by Indulgence, as Bale pag^^ of Popes page 24. and 25.
Symonds on the revelation page 57.
Friar Bale accuses him thereof. Yea M. Symonds, and M. Bale write, tha^ Leo
140. years before Gregory decree^ the worship of Images.

Secondly, Polidore in this point is egregiously falsified, for he says not,
as the Minister makes him speak, All fathers condemned the worship of Images,
for fear (...) Idolatry: But his words are, Cultum imagnum (test Hieronymo)
omnes veteres patr^ damnabant metu Idololatriae, all old father (as Hierome
witnesses) did condemn^ worship of Images for fear of Idolatry by the old
Fathers meaning the Fathers o^ the Old Testament, not of the New; whi^^
appears because in proof of his saying (...) brings not the Testimony of The
Minister says page 250. lin. 11. that Polidore names Gregory amongst the old
Fathers that condemned the worship of Images for fear of Idolatry, as Hierome,
does witness. Answer. This is false and impossible. For Gregory living all most
two hundred years after the death of S. Hierome, how could he be one of the
old Fathers whom S. Hierome witnesses to have condemned Image Worship, for
fear of Idolatry? Gregory the^ is named by Polidore not amongst the old
Fathers, but as one of the new Fathers, that is, Fathers of the new Testament,
as seeming to speak against Image Worship, but in truth does not, as has been
said.
any Father of the New Testament, but only of the old, as of Moses, David,
Hieremy, and other Prophets. And the scope of the whole chapter is to declare,
that the reason why in the old Testament the Fathers misliked the worship of
Images of God, was because they could not paint him aright, Cum Deum nemo
vidisset vnquam, because then no man had seen God The Minister says, that the
Jews at least might have adored the Images of Prophets, if such adoration had
been lawful, as the Papists hold. Answer. In the same manner I argue. The
Jews might have made the Images of their holy Prophets if the making of them
had been lawful, as Protestants hold. Let the Minister prove by Gods word they
made them, and I will prove they worshipped the^. Let him, I say, show that
Images of Prophets were set in the beginning of their Prophesies, as his is set
in the frontispice of this his Reply, and I promise him to prove the same were
honored. This is the thing whereof we require example in Scripture, and wherein
the Minister is as dumb as a fish, not able to show one proper Image of an
adored person, lawfully made, that might not lawfully be adored.
. Afterward God (says Polidore) having taken flesh, and being become visible
to mortal eyes, men flocked to him, and did without doubt behold and reverence
his face shining with the brightness of Divine light, and even then they began
to paint, or carue his image already imprinted in their minds. And these
Images they received with great worship and veneration, as was reason, the
honor of the Image redounding to the original (as Basil writes:) which
custom of adoring Images, the Fathers were so far from reproving, as they
did not only admit thereof, but also decreed, and commanded the same by
General Counsels in the time of Constantine the fourth and Justinian the
second his son. And therefore what man is there so dissolute and audacious as
can dream of the contrary, and doubt of the Lawfulnes of this Worship
established so long ago by decree of most holy Fathers? Thus writes Polidore,
and much more to the same purpose in the very place where the Minister Cites
him to the contrary; which shows, how notoriously his credulous readers are
abused in matters of most moment. Hence appears the third falsehood, that in
Gregoryes days images began to be set up in Churches; which to have been in
the Churches long before, the Testimonies of S. Basil, Paulinus, Lactantius,
and Tertullian do sufficiently witness.

Neither can our Adversary bring any clear testimony of antiquity against
this custom. For the decree of the Council The Minister says, that some
Pontificians grant that this Council forbad the making of images, so clear is
their decree against them. I Answer: such Authors had no reason in the world,
to be so persuaded of this Counsel, but only the words of the decree. Now the
words of the decree be not clear, yea they cannot admit that sense being
compared with the words that immediately follow, as the Jesuit does
demonstrate: In so much as the Minister to frame an argument out of this
decree, is forced (ridiculously) to curtall the text, and take some few words,
leaving the rest. Such is his obstinacy against the light of truth.
of Eliberis, that no Picture should be made in the Church, least that which is
worshipped or adored be painted on walls (which the Minister [ way page 345.]
much urges) clearly signifies the contrary. For may not Images painted on
tables, be in Churches, and yet neither made in the Church, nor painted on
walls? which kind of Images the Council does not forbid. And why does the
Council forbid Images to be made in the Church as pertinent to the fabric
thereof, or to be painted on Walls, but out of reverence unto Images? for they
being holy things, and so to be honored for their prototypes sake, the Council
thought it unworthy of their dignity, that they should be made on walls where
they may easily be defaced and deformed, and by Persecutours (for that Council
was held in time of persecution) abused. He does also [ Way page 345.] much
insist upon Epiphanius, [epist. ad Joan. Hicrosol.] but relates (according to
his fashion) both his fact and words vnsincerely. Epiphanius (says he) finding
an Image painted on a cloth hanging in a Church rent it down, and said, it
was against the authority of the Scripturs that any Image should be in the
Church. Thus he vnsincerely (as I said) not expressinge what kind of Image that
was, that Epiphanius rent in pieces. For Epiphanius says: Cum inuenissem
imaginem hominis pendentem in E^cl sit tanquam Christi, aut alicuius Sancti,
n^scio enim cuius erat, when I had found an Image of a man hanging in the
Church, as Christ's or some Saints, for I know not of whom the Image was.
Epiphanius Here the Minister rayleth most intolerably, crying, that the
testimonies are clear; but not so much as endeauours to answer the Jesuits
arguments that are demonstratiue, as much as any can be in this kind of matter.
The Ministers arguments on the other side have no force at all being two,
proposed in a double interrogation. If (says he page 254. lin. 2.) Epiphanius
himself did not remember whose Image it was, whether of Christ, or of a Saint,
or of some profane man, how knows this Jesuit, that it was the Image of a
profane person? I Answer. That Epiphanius did know that it was not Christ's
image, nor any Saints, but some prophan persons, though he knew not
determinately, what profane persons the same was. For Epiphanius would not
have urged the unlawfulness of hanging that image in the Church, in regard it
was a man's Image, had he not understood a profane man's. Hence his second
interrogation is answered, why was Epiphanius silent and did not say it was
some profane man's? Answer. Epiphanius was not silent that the image he tore
in pieces was the image of a profane man, seeing he terms it the Image of a
man hanging in the Church, as Christ's, or some Saints. And this the complayners
knew well enough, for if this picture had been Christ's, or some Saints used by
way of devout remembrance, they would have accused Epiphanius of impiety
toward Christ, and his Saints, and not only of injustice in renting in pieces
the Cloth, without paying the price thereof, saying, si scindere voluerat,
iustu^ erat vt aliud daret velum, and mutaret.
does by this relation more then insinuate that this was the Image of some
profane man hanging in the Church, as if it had been a sacred Image of Christ,
or of some Saint, which is gathered by his reason: When I saw, says he,
against the authority of the Scriptures, the Image of a man hanging in the
Church; not absolutely any Image (as M. White cites him, for even by Gods
express command Images were placed in the Temple) but the Image of a man. Why
does Epiphanius so much urge the impiety of the fact, in regard that it was the
Image of a man, but that he understood by the word (Man) a mere ordinary
profane man, not a blessed Saint. For certainly it might seem more against
the authority of Scriptures to make and set up in churches the image of God,
then the image of holy men, and the image of Christ according to his godhead,
the^ as he is a man; so that there was no cause, why The Minister here sets
down other answers given by Catholics unto this place of Epiphanius, some of
which he would have thought better then this of the Jesuit, and that the
Jesuits is slighted by Bellarmine; which discourse is to little purpose. This
is certain, that if other solutions he better then this, yet this is so good,
as the Minister has not been able to speak a wise word against it, as is more
largely showed in the Censure. Sect. 1.. 1. And whereas some authors think,
that Epiphanius in regard of the error of the Anthropomorphilae, whereof he
was a great Ennemy, did reprove this Image of the Anablathans, as being of God,
in the form of man; although this conceyte does not help the Ministers fancy,
nor make against us, yet is it not so conform to the text, as is the Jesuits.
Which any man may perceive that will peruse attentively the text of Epiphanius,
and compare these two solutions therewith.
Epiphanius should put so much Emphasis in the word (man) had he not understood
a profane man. For some Christians in those Days, being newly converted from
Paganism, and so retaining some Relics thereof, did out of their affection to
their deceased friends and parents, use to paint their images, and offer unto
them oblations of Frankince^se and other the like Heathenish honor, especially
in their Anniuersaryes Days upon their sepulchers. These men S. Augustine, [de
mor. Eccl. c. 36.] reprehends, and not the worshippers of Saints Images, under
the title of Sepulchrorum and picturarum adoratores, who to the ghosts of their
parents defunct, did (though Christians) offer that Heathenish worship which
the Poet exhorts unto. Non pigeat tumulis animas excire paternas,
Paucaque in extructos mittere thura rogos.
Parua petunt manes. --
Wherefore seeing this Minister, so much esteemed in the Church of England, in
proof of the Roman Churches change brings nothing but manifest falsehoods, so
many in so few lines, any indifferent man may conclude, that worship of Images
has continued without change ever since the Apostles. For if any change in
such a matter as this had been made, it would have been most evident, when, and
by whom so great a Nouelty was introduced.

The places of Exodus and Deuteronomy. with no probability urged against the worship
of Images by Protestants that make them.. 3.
AGAINST Image-worshippe Protestants bring the places of Exodus Chap. 20. v. 4.
and 5. and of Deuteronomy Chap. 5. v. 6. and the 7. Thou shall not have false
gods before me. Thou shall not make to thy self a graven Image, or any likeness
either in heaven above, or on earth below, or of things that are under waters,
or under ground, thou shall not adore, nor worship them. Which place I wonder
they can think strong enough to overthrow a custom, in which the rules of
Nature, the Principles of Christianity, the perpetual Tradition of gods Church
does settle Christians. For this place makes against Note, that the question
between us and Protestants is not whether the Image of an adored person may
lawfully be made, for this they grant; but whether the image of an adored
person lawfully made may be adored. We affirm, and they deny, but for their
denial have not one syllable of Scripture. The Minister page 259. lin. 3.
brings the brazen Serpent and golden Cherubims that were made yet could not be
adored, but these examples are impertine^t, as has been showed, because they
were not proper images of adored persons whereof we speak, though S. Hierome
Epistola 70. also say, that the Golden Cherubims were adored. The Iconomachi,
the Turks, and Jews who think that to make any image of an adored person is
unlawful, and consequently forbid adoration have for them a little show of
Scripture, which says, thou shall no make any image, nor adore it. But
Protestants, that grant, that the proper images of adored persons may be
lawfully made, but deny they may be lawfully adored, have against them the
light and instinct of nature, and for them neither any example of Scripture nor
any text that may make so much as a little show.
them, or not against us, which I prove thus. The images we are forbidden to
worship, we are forbidden to make, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
Image, thou shall not adore them, nor worship them. Contrariwise the images
we may lawfully make, we may also lawfully adore or worship, if they be
images of venerable and adorable persons (as before has been showed.) But the
images we worship of Christ Protestants make, yea some (to wit Lutherans) set
them up in their Churches, and they are images of an adorable Person. Ergo they
cannot condemn our adoration of images, except likewise they condemn their
making them, as against Gods law.

If they answer, we are not forbidden to make the^ but only not to make the^
with purpose and intention to adore them, they discover much partiality, and
not so much reverence to Gods express (...) as they pretend; for the words of
Gods law are as clear and express against making of Images, as against
worshippinge of them, Thou shall not make them, Thou shall not adore them. If
then Protestants to excuse their custom of making of images may to Gods
express word, Thou shall not make them, add (by way of explication) with
purpose and intention to adore them, why may not The Minister page 259.
objects, that this precept, Thou shall not make to thy self a graven image, is
expounded by the greatest number of Papists, to wit, with purpose to adore. I
answer. Some Catholic Interpreters expound, Thou shall not make any image, to
wit, with purpose to worship the same as God, or with divine worship referred
unto it, or to some Godhead affixed unto it, not absolutely, not to worship it;
which exposition is true for matter, though not so conform to the letter. Now
that these Authors do not understand that all honoring of Images is here
forbiden, but only adoration of images as Gods or as if some Godhead or divine
intellectual virtue were affixed unto them, is evident by their words. For
the Authors are Gerson, Caietan, Castro, Oleaster, Stella, Turrecremata, Ferus,
Aquinas, but nothing more notorious then that some of these held worship of
Images: and the same might be demonstrated of every one. Let the first, to wit
Gerson, speak for the rest in his exposition of the ten Commandments. fol.
173. We must (says he) worship the Images of Christ, his Blessed mother and
Saints, not for themselves, but by seeing the^, to give honor unto the Holy
Person represented by them.
Catholics to defend from note of impiety a continued Christian custom, to
Gods word, Thou shall not adore any image, add (by way of explication) as God,
or with divine worship resting in it? How can they truly boast, they bring
Gods clear word for themselves and against us, which is no less clear and
express against their image-making, then against our image worship? If the
place be difficill, why build they their faith upon it against us? If it be
clear, why be they forced in their defense to depart from the express text?

Secondly, their exposition is not only violent against the text, but also
incongruous against the sense. For Gods prohibition of a thing does also forbid
the intention thereof. In the precept, Thou shall not kill, the intention of
murder is sufficiently forbidden: so that he who makes a sword with purpose to
murder his enemy, sins against the precept thou shall not kill. Wherefore if
Gods precept had been this, Tho^^^ all not wear about thee any weapon, Thou
shall not kill, the prohibition of wearing weapons should have been absolute,
and not only with purpose of murder. In like manner, Gods precept, Thou shall
not adore Images, does sufficiently forbid intention to adore them, and
consequenly forbids the making of Images with such an intention, so that if the
precept not to make Images be nothing else then not to have purpose to adore
them, a whole long sentence in the Decalogue is superfluous, and without any
special sense. Besides, as to make an Image to adore it is Idolatry, so
likewise to take it in hand, or look on it to that purpose; why then was not
such looking, or touching with purpose of adoration expressly forbidden as well
as making? Or if looking on them with intention to adore be so included in the
precept, Thou shall not adore, as there needs not that expression; what need
was there that making of images with purpose of adoration should be so largely
and particularly expressed? Wherefore whosoever is a religious follower of Gods
pure word must either, without explication, condemn the making of images,
together with their worship, or else allow the worship of Images (if the
Prototypes be adorable) the making whereof he approues. Hence I gather, that the
most natural and truest exposition of that precept is, that it forbids not
only the worship, but also the making of any Graven image. But how? to wit,
of false Gods, or to represent God according to his Divine Substance This
exposition is showed to be good by the two rules of exposition which
Protestants themselves appoint. The first is, that when a word is ambiguous and
difficill, we are to look to the antecedent, and declare the same with
reference to them. This text, thou shall not make any image, is difficil, as
sounding over universally, even in Protestants judgments: By lookinge unto the
words immediately precedent, this universality is restrained to a true sense.
For the words immediately precedent are, Thou shall not have false Gods before
me. Now, if we expound what follows, thou shall not make any Image, by
refere^ce unto this, to wit, Thou shall not make any image of false Gods, the
sense is clear truth.

The second rule is, when a place is difficil, we must expound the same by
another speaking of the same matter, that is clear, but the Scripture treating
of this precept, does in the same Chapter Exodus 10.13. clearly declare these
forbidden images, to be the images of false Gods, saying, Non facietis Deos
argenteos, nec Deos aureos facietis vobis, you shall not make to your selves
Gods of gold or of silver. Behold what is meant by graven Images.


. This sense is gathered out of the words precedent, Thou shall not have
strange Gods before me, which is explicated in the consequent verse, Thou shall
not make to thy self any graven Image, to wit, of false Gods; for he that
makes to himself the image of any thing, as apt to represent God according to
his Divine substance, and to convey our Imaginations directly to him, does
make, and has false Gods, because the true God is not imaginable, nor is
truly apprehended by imagination conformable unto any Image.

Wherefore the pictures of the Holy Ghost in form of a Dove, and of God the
Father in form of an Old Man, be not proper and direct Images of the two
divine persons, but only of the Dove that descended on Christ, and of the Old
Man seen by Daniel in a vision, in which the perfections of these persons are
not lively represented, but a far off, and imperfectly shadowed. Nor do
Catholics use them as proper images standinge for their prototypes, and
conueyinge our actions by imagination unto them, for no Catholic does kiss
the feet of the Dove, or lie prostrate at them, referring by imagination that
outward subjection to the feet of the holy Ghost, who has no feet but
metaphorical, not imaginable, nor such as can be represented by Image.

Wherefore seeing this text is thus clearly explicable, and not being explicated
at all, does make no less against Protestants, then against us; I see no
reason why they should be so much out of love with the worship of the Image
of Christ Jesus their Lord, to which Nature and Christianity binds them.

Inconveniences which may come by occasion of images easily prevented, and
their vtilityes very great.. 4.
ANOTHER argument against images Protestants much urge, That they be
stumbling-blockes for simple People, who easily take an image to be the very
God, even as the Paga^s did in former time The Minister says page 268. that
Papists themselves complain, that People did comnit Idolatry in the worship of
imags, to which purpose he cites, Viues, Gerson. Cornelius Agrippa, Dura^dus
Mimatensis, Gabriel Biel. Cassander, Polidore. Answer. First the Minister has
by some trick or other, abused the words of almost every one of these seven,
which were over long here to discover. Secondly, the witnesses are of no
credit, or speak not to the purpose. Cassander is no Papist but a Protestant,
and put, by the Roman Church, amongst heretics of the first rank. Cornelius
Agrippa a Necromant, fled for fear of punishment unto the Protestants of
France, and there professed what he was. Polidore, Viues, Gerson are noted as
full of mistaking in their complaints, and rash in Iudginge, and censuring.
Durandus speaks against indiscreet and excessive use of images, that the same
may be dangerous, which no man denies. Gabriell Biel derides the simplicitye of
some people that rather worship fair imags, and such as are trimmed the^
other. Which simplicity is no more Idolatry, then it is to hear the sermon of
a Minister trimmed in his Ruff^ and Cuffs more willingly, then of another more
simply attyred.
; to this purpose bringinge some testimonies of S Augustine epist. 19. and in
Psalm. 113. To this I answer first, that this may seem a great wrong not only
to the Christian Church, but also to Christ himself, to think that men endued
with his knowledge and faith, and made partakers of the light, whereby they
believe most high, divine, and incomprehensible mysteries which he revealed to
the world, should so easily be carried away into such blockish Errors, as to
think a stock, or a stone to be God; a blindness scarce incident unto men,
except they be wholly destitute of all heavenly conceits, and nuzzelled up from
their cradles in that persuasion, as Paynims were (of who^ only S. Augustine
speaks,) for they did not only want this light of Christian instruction, but
also were taught by their Ancestors, that in their Idols a kind of Divine
virtue, or Godhead was lodged, and affixed unto them; whereas Catholic Doctrine
teaches the contrary, that our Images are bare resemblances of holy persons,
no Divinity, no Virtue, no Dignity, no Sanctity that makes them venerable being
in them, but in the Prototype.

Secondly, such Idols as the Paynims adored, many of them did by Devils means
ordinarily speak, give answers, move and exercise other actions of life, so
that their speaking was not accounted miraculous and extraordinary, but rather
their silence; which speakings were very potente to persuade men to believe
what their Ancestors told them, that those very stocks, and stones were Gods,
or had a Godhead affixed unto them. Now these kind of things seldom happen in
our images, scarce once in a age, and when they happen they are taken as
Miracles wrought, not by the images, or any virtue residing in them, but by
Gods infinite power, nor are they brought to prove any excellency affixed unto
the image, but only that God likes that we should honor our Savior and his
Saints in their images.

Finally, I dare say, vulgar and ordinary Protestants in England, by reading
The Minister says page 272. that the Creed is as dangerous in this respect as
the Scripture, because it names the right hand of God. Answer. The Creed ca^
import danger neither unto Catholics nor unto Protestants. Not unto
Catholics, because with the text of the Creed they receive the Churches
explication thereof, which still preuents mistaking of that word. Not unto
Protestants, because they must believe the Creed no further then they see the
same conform unto Scripture, and so the Scripture attributing Humane shape
unto God is only dangerous unto them. For the Scripture perpetually attributes
humane shape unto God, and their common people read it by themselves, without
any guide whom they be bound to believe further, then by their skill in
Scripture they shall find reason.
the Bible in their mother tongue are in greater danger, to believe that God is
a body, and has all the parts thereof even as has a man, then any the simplest
Catholic is to think an image to be God. This is proved to be likely, because
it is impossible to conceive God otherwise then in the form of a corporal
thing; and as the Orator says, We easily flatter our selves to think our
shape the fairest, and so the fittest for God. Wherefore it is easy for men to
assent to this error, unto which the best and greatest wits that ever were,
Tertullian (apud August. here is. 86.) and S. Augustine himself, whilst he was
a Manichee, did assent ( l. 3. Confess. c. 7.) Much more easily therefore may
ignorant The Minister says page 272. lin. vlt. That the reading of Scripture
by the vulgar is lawful and holy, but the worship of images is always
condemned and censured by holy writ. Answer. This is easily said, but can never
be proved. For Protestants cannot bring one text of Scripture, that approues
Scripture to be read by the vulgar as Protestants pretend, to wit, with
authority to Censure, out of their skill in Scripture, the most Catholic and
best Church in the world. Nor will he, or any of his progeny be able to bring
one example, or one text that shows, that images of adored persons lawfully
made, may not lawfully be adored, which is the Controversy betwixt them and us.
people be deceived therein through weakness of conceit and inclination of
nature, when they read the Scripture, describinge God as having the form and
shape of man, with head, face, eyes, ears, hands, and feet. On the contrary
side never any Christian did teach that the image of Christ, is truly Christ,
or a living thing, nor ever did any man or woman, except some few, (and those
very simple and senseles, (if such historyes be true) fall into such foolish
imagination. Moreover, children and ignorant people are in the Catholic
Church often and plentifully instructed against such errors as by our
Catechismes appear, and particularly by Jesuits, who make a solemn vow to
keep their Institute, especially about teaching the Rudime^ts of faith unto
common and ignorant people. Hence it is that in Towns where they dwell, and
Villages about, on Sundays and holy days (besides their sermons for people
more intelligent) they teach without fail unto children and men of ruder sort
the form of Christian doctrine, and use all industry by giving rewards unto
children, and by bestowing alms on poor people to make them willing and
diligent in this learning. In the English Church what is done for the
instruction of ignorant, in their rudiments of faith by Ministers and Pastors,
as I know not much, so will I say nothing, but only, that time they spend in
the praises of sole Faith, The Minister here says, that the Jesuit does
depresse the English Church, accusing their Pastors of negligence; For which
cause he terms him, One, Cui verbosa lingua, cor vero obtenebratum, speaking
much in praise of his Church, and of the lively sole Faith they preach. All
which is idle, and ridiculous. And as for their sole Faith, if it be the same
Luther preached, it is so lively and liue-like, as it maks a man to live and
not to dye though he commit the deadest works that may be, Whoredom, and
Murder a thousand times aday. Luther. Tom. 1. Epist. Latin. fol. 334.
and about the secrets of Predestination, and in long bitter Inuectiues against
our doctrines, misunderstood (if not purposely misrelated) might (in my
opinion) more profitably be spent, in declaring the Creed, and prime Principles
of Christianity in plain, and Catechisticall manner.

Besides, it is easy for the Roman Church to keep her children from believing
that Images be Gods, or true living things, or that any divinity or divine
virtue resides in them, as may be proved conuincingly (in my Judgment) by
experience had of her power in this kind about a point more difficill. For what
may seem more evident then that a consecrated Host is bread, of which four
senses, sight, feeling, smell, taste, give in evidence as of bread, no less
verily the^ any other, so far as they can discern? And yet so potent is the
word and doctrine of the Church, grounded on General Cou^cells declaring the
word of God, for Transubsta^tiation, as Catholics denying their senses,
believe assuredly that what seems bread is not bread, but the true body of
our Savior under the forms of accidents of bread. Now ca^ any man with any
show of the least probability in the world, think that it is difficill for
this Church to persuade her children, that the image of Christ is not a living
thing, nor has any godhead or living divine power lodged in it, as plain
Scriptures show, and General Catholic Counsels, particularly the Tridentine
(sess. 25.) and the Nicene, act. 7. define, which doctrine neither reason nor
sense can mislike? Or shall the sole similitude of members correspondent unto
humane living members which images have, so much prevail in catholic minds so
to bow down their thought to base Idolatry, as to think a stock or a stone to
be a God, and that the Church shall not be able by her teaching to direct them
to a more high and divine apprehension, being able to make them firmly believe
a consecrated host is not bread, against the Judgment that they would
otherwise frame upon most notorious euidency of sense? The Protestants Church
on the other side may seem to have no great vigor by preaching to persuade
common people against the Error of the Anthropomorphits, seeing their Principle
is, that a world of preachers is not to be believed against the evident
Scripture, yea Here the Minister is bitter saying p. 277. lin. 30. That it is
impossible for Papists to deal sincerely; That his Brother M. John does not
speak of every private man, nor any company of people, but that one Michaia,
one Stephen, one Athanasius, with the word of truth in mouth is to be preferred
against 4. hundred Baalites. I answer. The Minister denying his Brother spoke
of every particular man, shall receive his doom by the breath of his Brothers
own mouth, telling him the contrary, who thus writes in the place cited by
the Jesuit, to wit, [ Way page 126. lin. 12.] It is lawful and necessary for
EVERY PARTICVLAR MAN to try all things, and by the SCRIPTVRE to EXAMINE, and
to IVDGE of the things the CHVRCH teaches him. And when A MAN in this manner
reiects the teaching of a Church, as great and good as the Roman Catholic, his
judgment therein is not PRIVATE, as Private is opposed to SPIRITVAL; Nor (says
he, page 128. lin. 2. is it impossible for a PRIVATE MAN to espy an error in
the best Church that is. And pa. 150. lin. 18. Whereas the Catholics answer,
That the text of Scripture, try the Spirits, does not allow EVERY MAN to do
this, but only Pastors; The Minister replyeth, this is all false, for the
Epistle of S. John speaks indifferently of ALL MEN, Every man by the Rule of
Scripture is to try spirits, that Epistle being directed not to the CLERGY,
but to the PEOPLE: And the reason added, shows that the PEOPLE are they that
must try spirits, for they must try the spirits, that are in danger to be
seduced by false Prophets, and such are the PEOPLE, and therefore they must
examine the^. All these are his brother John's words. Now let the Reader judge
whether John White does not hold that not only extraordinary Prophets as
Michaeas, and Stephen, not only chief Patriarchs as Athanasius, but that every
particular man of the people, may judge of the teaching of the whole Church,
and condemn as great a Church as the Protestants, if by his spiritual
exposition, or by the spirit he be moved so to do. What reason then had our
Minister in respect of this allegation, to be so bitter, as to say, it is
impossible ^or Papists to deal sincerely? Verily M. Francis, had you as much
natural understanding, together with knowledge of the Protestant Religion, as
had your Brother John, you would see this doctrine, that every Private man is by
divine Order and Institution to judge of the Church (how absurd soever) to be
necessarily consequent of the Protestant Principle, That every man must finally
resolve his faith into the light of the Scripture; yea I could show how your
self, even in this reply have given this authority of judging the Church unto
every private Man, as may partly appear by the Censure sect. 4.
that a common ordinary man by Scripture may oppose as great and greater
Church, then is the whole Protestant. [ Doctor White in his way page 59.]
Which principle being laid, how will they convince people, that God is a pure
spirit, whom the Scripture does so perpetually set forth, as having humane
members? I may conclude therefore, that their translating Scriptures into their
vulgar languages breeds more danger unto common people then our making of
images.

But they will say; the Translation of Scriptures into vulgar languages is
commanded in Scripture, and the Apostolical Church practiced it: whereas we
cannot prove by Scripture that the Apostles did warrant or practice the setting
up of images. This they say with great confidence, but any substantial proof
of this their saying, I could never read or hear. The testimonies they bring
in this behalf, Search the Scriptures, Let his word dwell plentifully among
you etc. are insufficient to prove a direct and express precept or practice of
tra^slating Scriptures into the vulgar tongue.

Catholics on the contrary side (though they boast not of Scriptures, as
knowing that nothing is so clearly set down in it, but malapert error may
contend against it, with some show of probability) yet have Scriptures much
more clear and express then any that Protestants can bring for themselves,
even about the use of the image of Christ crucified in the first Apostolical
Church. S. Paul to the Galatians c. 3. v. 1. says, O ye foolish Galathians,
who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes
Christ Jesus is lively set forth Crucified among you. The greek word
correspo^ding to the English ( lively set forth) is (...), and the word (...)
signifies to paint forth a thing. In so much as eue^ Beza tra^slates Jesus
Christus depictus C^ucifixus, Jesus Christ painted, or pictured, crucified
before your eyes. So that we have in plain and express terms that christ
was pictured as Crucified in the Apostolical churches, which the Apostle does
allow, thence drawing an argument to prove the Galathians were senseless and
sottish, that keeping in their sight the picture of Christ Crucified they would
think to be saved by the Law and not by the merits of his Cross. For it was
madness and folly to paynt Christ and honor him as Crucified, and not to think
that by his death upon the Cross he redeemed the world. I know, that some
Catholics expound this place that Christ was painted, and pictured out unto
the Galathia^s, metaphorically by preaching. Which I do not deny; but this does
not repugne with the other sense, that he was also materially painted as
Crucified, nor must we exclude it, this sense being imported by the native and
proper signification of the words, and having more connection with the drift of
the Apostles discourse, which is to prove the Galathians senseless in their
forsaking Christ whom they had pictured, Crucified before their eyes. For to
forsake Christ crucified, pictured by preaching as the Savior of the world,
though it be impious, yet not senseles, yea rather salvation by the cross of
Christ did seem folly unto the Gentiles. But for men to have Christ painted, as
crucified before their eyes, honoring him by Christian devotion, in regard of
his crucifixion and death, and not to expect salvation by his Cross and death,
is sottish and The Minister is much vexed with the evidence of this Text, not
finding which way to euade, as you may see page 280. First he says lin. 21. If
this were true it proves only that Images may be made, but not that they may be
adored. Answer. First, the Answerer in this place intends only to prove that
the Apostles did allow the making of Crucifixes to represent our Saviors
Crucified person unto Christian devotion. Secondly, this making does infer
worship; for the proper Image of an adored person if it be made, it may be
adored; against which principle evident in reason, you cannot bring one word of
Scripture. Secondly, you say Ibid. lin. 3. That according to learned Bannes,
The worship of Images is neither expressly, nor infoldedly taught in
Scripture. Answer. Ba^nes means that Image Worship is not formally inuolued
in Scripture, nor matter of faith by virtue of sole Scripture. But he does not
deny but it is virtually contained in Scripture, so that it may Theologically
be concluded by texts of Scripture. Thirdly, you cry page 282. lin. 24. One
Father that expounds this place literally according to your sense. I answer,
first no Father nor Catholic denies this litterall sense, and Athanasius is
brought by Turrianus l. 4. de Dogmat. Charact. thus expounding. Secondly,
Protestants who appeal unto the Scripture, as unto the last judge to give
definitive sentence, are bound to take the words of Scripture in the litterall
sense, except they can clearly demonstrate by Scripture the litterall sense to
be absurd. Otherwise if without evident proof by Scripture they metaphorize
the Scripture, they appeal not unto Scripture, but unto their own fancies.
But by Scripture you cannot prove, that the litterall painting of our Saviors
Image as Crucified is absurd, more then the painting of Luther, and Calvin, and
such other of your pretended Prophets is absurd. Therefore you must stand to
this litterall sense, or else confess that you will not be ruled by the word of
God, but depart from the litterall sense thereof, when you please, without
showing warrant so to do. Finally, the Minister says, ibid. lin. 27. That
(...), signifies to be written before, not to be painted before. This is his
last, yet a desperate shift. First all Lexico^s eue^ those of Protestants say,
that as (...), signifyes before, so (...), signifyes to paint, or make figures,
and because writing is a kind of painting or making of Characters, hence (...)
also signifyes writing. For is not (...), a painter, (...), a pe^sill, (...),
painting to the quick, and (...), painting in wax, and innumerable other
words as well single as compound, that testify how (...) signifies to paint?
Secondly, not only Beza, and Erasmus so translate, and the French Geneuian,
Pourtraye deuant les yeux, Christ Jesus pictured before the eyes; but also
Calvin in his comment upon this place says expressly, depictus meo iudicio
optime quadrat, the best translation in my Iudgenent is depainted, adding, the
Apostle does here signify, that there was amongst the Galathians non nuda
doctrina, sed viua and expressa Christi crucifixi Imago, nor the mere
preaching, but also lively and express picturing of Christ crucified. Finally,
the Minister who here says that, (...) does not signify is depainted,
elsewhere page 213. lin. 26. says the contrary, to wit, that S. Paul does
testify, Galat. 3.1. That by the Gospel Christ Jesus IS DEPAINTED before the
eyes of the soul. Now, how can this be true, except (...) properly signify is
depainted, and be thence transferred by metaphore unto preaching?
senseless. And of this material picturing of Christ crucified Athanasius
expounds this place, whom Turrianus cites [ De Dogmat. charact. l. 4.]
Wherefore I may justly say, that we have more clear and express Scripture for
the use of images, then have protestants for their Translations.

And therefore the danger of ignorant people erring by images, is without
reason so much insisted upon by Protestants, their English translations being
(as I have showed) a more dangerous block for fools to stumble at, and so
fall into damnable errors. If they presume that by diligent instruction they
may, and would have us think, that they do preserve their people from that
error, why should they not think that the Roman Church, being so potent with
her children, can keep them from the foolish error of attributing life and
divinity unto dead and dumb images? and that she will so do, being so strictly
commanded by the Sess. 2. Diligenter doceant Episcopi.
Council of Trent, to use her greatest diligence in this point, that ignorant
people fall not into error by any image, which otherwise have many profits and
vtilities? About which I will not enlarge my self, but only mention some of
them. The first is an easy and compendions way of instruction, in which respect
they are termed by S. Gregory Lib. 7. Ep. 109.
the books of the unlearned: and as another Gregory Nissen. ^rat. in Theodorum.
says, the silent picture speaks on the wall and profits very much. The
second is to increase in men that keep and honor them, the love of God, and of
his Saints; which effect S Orat. Quod veteris and noui Testamenti vnius sit
mediator.
Chrysostom experienced as he testifies saying, I loved a picture of melted
wax full of piety. And S. Lib. 7. epist. 53.
Gregory the Great says, they inflame men that behold them in the love of
their Lord and Savior.

The third is, to move and incite men to the imitation of the virtues of Christ
and his Saints, which vtility S. Basil Basil. homil. in 40. Martyrs.
does declare and highly esteem in his Sermon of the forty Martyrs. And
examples might be brought of me^ reclaymed by sight of godly images even in the
heat of sinful affection. The fourth is to stay our thoughts upon Christ and
his Passion, that our imaginations in prayer may not so easily wander, which
use of images catholics in their devotions do often experience. Finally that in
his image we may honor Christ, the honor of the image redounding to the
Original: And who so crowns the Kings image honors the King whose image
it is, says S. Ambros. sermon. in Psalm. 118.
Ambrose. In which kind memorable is the devotion of our Victorious and
Religious King Polidor. l. 7. Histor. Anglor.
Canutus, who took the diadem that he used to wear on his own head, and
therewith crowned an image of Christ Crucified, which in his days was devoutly
Harpesfield Eccles Hist. Saeculo 11. cap. 2.
reserved in the Church of S. Peter and S. Paul in Winchester, and afterward
would never have any crown come on his head, out of humble reverence to his
Crucified Lord. The Minister concludes this disputation with saying. page 289.
lin. 10. Let it be noted that our Adversary has manifested wondrous weakness.
For he has not throghout his whole disputation produced one plain Text of
Scripture or clear sentence of antiquity for Iconolatry. I answer. That
Iconolatry signifyes divine worship of Images which the Answerer did not intend
to establish, yea the Minister himself p. 245. lin. 1. says that Iconolatry
or divine worship of Images is impertinent, or heretogenious ^o this
disputation. Wherefore the Minister herein shows wondrous defect of judgment,
who thus by his own confession flies the question. Nor has he been able to
bring one example or text of Scripture, I do not say plain, but with a little
show, to prove the question in hand, that the proper images of adored persons
that be lawfully made, may not lawfully be adored. On the other side, such
images of adored persons if they be made that they must be adored, the honor
done, or denied to the Image redounding to the person, the Jesuit has proved
by the force of the nature of images, by the Analog^ unto images of humane
adored persons, by the Prophet David his practice of this principle, by the
prime article of Christianity, by testimony of Fathers, and by all kind of
Theological proofs. The testimonies of the Fathers more in particular
concerning the adoration of Christ his image, and material Cross, as being
unto al learned men vulgarly known and notorious, the Answerer did not produce,
further then was necessary to prove that Protestants cannot truly assign the
time when the bowing unto the image of Christ was brought in among Christians,
but by the Apostles. Else what more easy then to have brought testimonies for
this point in every age upward from the eight, where the same was defined by
the General Council of Nice, as appears by this Catalogue of four in every
age, which is one above the highest number of witnesses required to make a
matter of fact firm and certain.

In the seventh age, the sixth General Council canon. 73. says, We that are
saved by the Cross ought to use all diligence to give it due honor, to wit,
Adoration with mind, with speech, with gesture. For which cause we decree, that
no Images of the Cross be made on the floor. S. Maximus martyr, lib. cui
titulus, ex dogmat. inter Maximum and Theodos. writes, that diverse persons of
worth, and amongst them the Bishop of Caesarea, being converted from the Heresy
of Monothelisme did with tears of joy and penance go to the Church, where
they saluted (that is bowed unto) the holy Images of our Savior, and of our
Lady mother of God, and laying their hands upon them abiured their Heresies. S.
Sophronius Homil. in laudem Sanctae Crucis: In the midst of Lent (says he) the
Venerable Wood of the vital Cross is adored, seeing our Lord has appointed
this way for us to get pardon of our sins, according to the Tradition of holy
Fathers. S. Leontius lib. 5. aduersus Iudaeos: The Jews deride us who have in
honor and esteem, and do wor^hip the holy Cross, and sacred images, tearming
us worshippers of wooden Idols.

In the sixth age, S. Gregory l. 7. Epist. 5. says: worship and veneration is
due to the holy Cross, and image of the Blessed Virgin. Procopius Gazensis in
cap. 20. Isaia writes that, the Christian custom was to paint the images of
the holy Martyrs on the prores of ships, for defense and protection. Euagrius
l. 4. c. 26. relates miracles done through the worship of Images. S. Simeon
Stylites Epist. ad Justin. Imperat. says: If according to your sacred Laws
they that offer dishonor unto the statues and images of the Emperor be worthy
of death, what punishment do they deserve that with barbarous fury have defaced
the Image of our Lord, and his blessed Mother?

In the fifth age, S. Cyril. Homil. cont. Nestor. in Council. Ephesin. says, the
Cross is adored over the whole world. S. Sedulius lib. 4. Paschal. no man is
ignorant that the image of the cross is to be adored. S. Chrysostom in
Liturgia: Let the Priest as he goes to the altar bow his head to the image of
the Cross. S. Hierome in Epitaph. Paulae, commends the devotion of S. Paula in
that she did lie prostrate before the Cross, and kissed the same with great
faith, adoring Christ therein as if she had seen him present on the Cross. S.
Paulinus Epist. 11. writes that the print or image of our Saviors feet on the
mount Oliue^, was miraculously conserved and adored, as also the holy Cross
yearly at Easter, the Bishop himself being the principal adorer.

In the fourth age, Prudentius l. 2. Cont. Simmach: The Roman Emperor lies
prostrate in the Church of Christ, and the Governor of the world adores the
standard of the Cross. S. Athanasius q. 15. ad Antiochum, writes, That
Christians worshipping the image of the Cross, if Heathens accuse them of
adoring the wood, may presently dissolve the Cross, and cast away the wood.
Helladius successor of S. Basil, writes of S. Basil, how he did kneel and
pray suppliantly before the image of our B* Lady against the threats of Julian
the Emperor. Julius Firmicus de error. profan. Religion. c. 22. says; What do
these horns signify but the Venerable figure of the holy cross etc? unto
these horns fly with humble veneration.

In the third age before Constantine, Lactantius lived, through he saw also the
beginning of Constantine his raygne. This Father in carm. de pass. testifyes
that at the entrance of Christian Churches was placed a fair image of Christ
Crucified; and showing how men ought, and how Christians behaved themselves
toward it says, Flecte genu, lignumque Crucis venerabile adora: Bow knee,
adore the Crosses sacred wood. Origin Homil. 6. in Epist. ad Romans So great is
the power of the Cross, that if it be placed before the eyes, and faithfully
retained in mind fixed upon the death of Christ, the army of sin and flesh is
conquered. S. Gregory called Illuminator, who converted Armenia, did (as
Euthim. panop. part. 3. tit. 20. relates) place wooden Images of the Cross
upon the shrines of Martyrs, bidding the multitude of people that thither
resorted to give worship unto God by the Adoration of the Cross. S. Procopius
Martyr, as does witness Nicephorus l. 7. c. 15. did adore a golden image of the
Cross of Christ crucified, and by it got great victoryes.

In the second age, in the beginning whereof some of the Apostles lived,
Tertull. in Apol. c. 44. writing against Heathens that objected that Christians
were worshippers of the wooden image of the Cross, graunts the thing to be
true, and defends the same. Yea the Protestant Magdeburgians Centur. 5. c. 6.
acknowledge that such Crosses of wood were then amongst Christians frequently
used and set up in Churches. S. Ignatius epist. ad Philip. does acknowledge
divine power and virtue in the image of the Cross. It is (says he) the
victorious trophey, or the monument of Christ's victory against the Devil quod
vbi viderit, horret. S. Martial. Epist. ad Burdeg. l. 8. exhorts Christians
still to have the Cross before them, in mente, in ore, in signo, in mind, in
mouth, in the image thereof, this being the invincible armor of a Christian
against Satan. The Canons of the Apostles have been ever famous in the
Christian Church, whereof one is cited in 2. Nicen Synod which says: Let not
the faithful be deceived by Idols, but paint the divine humane unmingled
image of the true God our Savior Jesus Christ and of his servants against
Pagans and Jews, that so they neither go astray unto Idols, nor be like the
Jews. Finally, that these images of Christ crucified were used in the Apostles
time by their allowance, the Jesuit proves by the text of S. Paul to the
Galathians 3.1. so clearly, as you are forced to say, that (...) does not
signify to depaint, against all Lexicons, against the principal Protestants
that so translate, yea against your self; and yet you wonder at your
adversaries wondrous weakness.




THE SECOND, AND THIRD POINT.
2. Prayings, and offering Oblations to the B. Virgin Mary.

3. Worshipping, and Invocation of Saints, and Angels.

I Have joined these two Controuersyes together, hoping I might do it with
your Majesty's good liking, the maine difficulty of the^ both being the same,
to wit, worship and Invocation of Angels and Saints. For I am fully persuaded,
that if your Majesty did allow of Invocation of any Saint, you would never deny
that devotion unto the B. Virgin mother of God, Opera Regia. Respons. ad ep.
Card. Peron. p. 402.
whom you honor and reverence above the rest, though perchance you may
dislike some particular forms of our prayers, that seem to give her Tytles
above that which is due to a creature, about which I shall in the end of this
discourse endeavor to give your Majesty satisfaction. In which question I will
suppose without large and particular proof (being able to prove it, by
testimonies undeniable if need be) that Worship and Invocation of Saints has
been generally received in the whole Christian Church, at least ever since the
days of Constantine.

HERE the Minister, either out of ignorance, or rather out of desire to
outface the truth writes in this sort, page 290. You presuppose that which
notwithstanding your outfacing, you will never be able to prove, that
Invocation of Saints was universally received as an article of faith, This
Discourse following, is an addition, wherein is declared that the Ancient
Fathers held Invocation of Saints, as a matter of Faith.
ever since the days of Constantine. Thus he. Wherefore as well because the
matter is important, as also to take away this tergiuersation, I will here
make good the Answerers word, and demonstrate that all the Fathers some one way,
some another have testified to the world, that they held Invocation of Saints
as a matter of Christian faith and Religion.

An eleauen Demonstrations, that the Ancient Christian Church did ever hold
Invocation of Saints, as a matter of Faith, and Religion. 1.
TO accomplish this more clearly, and with less tediousness unto the Reader I
shall reduce the Fathers saying unto an eleauen heads, and which may serve as an
eleauen different arguments and demonstrations of this truth.

The first Demonstration.
If the Fathers held the doctrine that Saints are to be inuocated, and that men
are aided by their merits, as certain and infallible, then they held it, as a
point of faith, or a revealed truth; for on what other ground but the word of
God could they pretend to hold it as certain, the same not being evident in
the light of nature? But the Fathers teach this doctrine as a matter certain,
and infallible, and not to be doubted of by Christians as their words declare.
S Augustine: Augustine de cur^ pro mortuis cap. 16. Illa quaestio vires superat
intelligentiae meae, quemadmodum Martyrs opitulentur ijs, quos per eos CERTVM
est adiuuari.
This question is beyond the reach of my knowledge, how martyrs help them,
whom it is CERTAIN that they help. And again. Idem sermon 244. Tunc pro nobis
absque vlla dubitatione Sancti Martyrs intercedunt.
Then WITHOUT ANY DOUBT the holy Martyrs intercede for us, when they find in us
some part of their virtues. S. Ambrose: Ambros. ser. 91. Quid non credunt?
vtrum quod a martyribus possunt aliqui visitari, hoc est, Christo nou credere:
ipse enim dixit, Et maiora his facietis.
Not to believe that Martyrs may visit and relieve men living in this world, is
Not to believe in Christ, seeing he said, you shall do yet greater things.
Nectarius speaking unto Saint Theodore Martyr: Nectar. orat. in primu^ Sabb.
sanctorum Ieiuniorum in S. Theodorum, Te post mortem viuere CREDIMVS; vt ergo
in Christo viuis and stas prope eum, precibus tuis propitium eum read famulis
tuis.
We believe that thou do live in God, a life without decay or end. Therefore
as thou do live in Christ, and stands by him, so make him by thy prayers
propitious and merciful unto us thy servants. What is this, but to say that as
certainly as Saints see God, so certain it is that they pray for us, and hear
our prayers? S. Gregory Nazianzen: Gregory Nazianzen orat. 26. in patrem suum
Apostolium fere ab initio. NEC DVBITO quin hoc nunc quoque magis faciat
postulatione sua, qua^ prius doctrina.
I do NOT DOUBT, but this blessed Saint in heaven does now more help us with
his prayers, then ever he did on earth by teaching. And again Idem. orat. in
appulsu Episcop. Egypt. post paginam fere a principio. Res nostras vt
persuasissimu^ habeo caelitus inspicit, and virtutis causa laborantibus manum
porrigit.
: Holy Athanasius now after victory in so many conflicts does from heaven
((...), I know it well, or certainly) look down upon our affairs, and
reaches out his hand to them that labor etc. S. Sabinus Sabin. Epistol. ad
Polib. Scio and Credo etc.
Bishop says of the holy Father Epiphanius: I KNOW and BELIEVE, that as thou
did obtain of God favors yet living in this world, so likewise that now
thou can do the same and much more. Theodoret: Theodoret. in Theophil. cap.
5. Plane scio quod si Sanctorum memoriam fecero in hominibus etc.
I KNOW CERTAINLY that if I make commemoration of Saints upon earth, they will
be mindful of me unto God.

The second Demonstration.
If the Fathers commend Invocation of Saints and confidence in their merits as
an act of Christian Religion, promising assured comfort to them that do it with
faith, they held the same as a matter of Faith, and as grounded on the word of
God. For what but Gods word can be the ground of assured confidence about
divine and supernatural graces? But the Fathers teach this Invocation as a
matter to be done in the assurance of faith and Christian piety, wherein their
words are most clear. S. Gregory Nazianzen Nazianzen orat. in S. Cyprian, non
long a fine. Omnia potest Cyprianus, and puluis eius cum fide.
exhorting people to ask al things of S. Cyprian says: Cyprian and his dust,
or sacred Reliks, joined WITH FAITH can do all things. S. Prudentius says
Prudent. Him. in S. Agnete^. Protegit puro and fideli pectore supplices.
that, S. Agnes protects, and delivers all that with pure and FAYTHFVLL hearts
are SVPPLIANTS unto her. S. Chrysostom: Chrysostom. homil. in Sanct. Iuuentium
and Maximum Mart. Magna Fide reliquias eorum contingamus, vt inde benedictionem
aliquam consequamur etc. quaecunque voluerint apud Regem caelorum impetrare
possunt.
Let us often visit the Martyrs, let us adorn their shrines, let us WITH GREAT
FAITH touch their Relics, that thence we may receive some benediction, for
they impetrate of the heavenly King, by showing their wounds, and in their
hands their heads cut off, whatsoever they will. Therefore let us with Great
Faith, and alacrity resort unto them. And in another place he thus exhorts:
Idem. homil. post. reditum ab exilio. Credimus nos iuuari illorum meritis.
Let us go to Timothy a new Paul, unto Andrew another Peter, WE BELIEVE that we
are helped by their prayers. Let us go to their holy bodies which carried our
Saviors marks. S. Basil: Basil. Homil. in 40. Martyrs. Vbiquadraginta, quis
dubitet Deum esse praesentem? Qui aliqua premitur angustia, ad Hos confugiat.
Who can doubt but God is present with these forty Martyrs who promises to be
where two or three are gathered in his name? whosoever is in any distress, let
him FLY unto them, and whosoever is in comfort, let him PRAY UNTO THEM, the
one, that he may be freed from misery, the other that he may be preserved in
prosperity. S. Gaudentius: Gaudent. homil. de Apost. and Mart. Tot Sanctorum
patrocinijs adiuuandi, tota Fide and omni desiderio supplices etc. vt ipsis
intercede^tibus VNIVERSA quae poscimus adipisci mereamur.
We shall be helped by the Patronage of so many Saints, let us then with FVLL
FAITH, and all devotion be supplyants unto them, and run after their steps;
That by their intercessions we may obtain ALL we request. S. Maximus: Maximus
sermon. de. SS. Nazario and Celso. Si martyribus regionis externae pia votoru^
debita redderemus etc. Fides eos Nostros faceret.
If unto Saints whose bodies be remote from us we offer the PIOUS DVTY of
VOWS, FAITH will make them ours, and how distant soever their bodies be from
us, they will affoard us their Patronage we hope for. And again: Ibidem.
Inuocastivbique Martyrem? vbique te exaudit, ill^ qui honoratur in Martyr.
Moderante vtique eo qui pensat vota tua, and dispensat munera sua in tantum
vicina praesentia efficacis praebitur aduocati, in quantum fuerit Fides Deuota
succepti.
Do thou invoke the Martyr EVERY WHERE? He that is honored in the Martyr
does hear, and will grant thy prayers every where etc. And by how much the
FAITH of the Clyent shall be more DEVOVT, by so much the assistance of the
PATRON will be more efficacious and present. Theodoret: Theodor. lib. 8. de
curand. Graec. affection. Gratia enim quae fectis eorum corporibus pollens
vigensque persistit petentibus dona distribuit Fidei supplicantiu^
liberalitatem suam co^mensa.
The bodies of the Martyrs being divided into parts and dispersed over many
Towns and Cittyes, yet the grace and power remaynes entyre and vige^t in every
particle, and they distribute gifts unto petitioners, measuring their
liberalities according to the FAITH of the SVPPLIANTS. And again: Ibid. PIE
and FIDELITER precatos.
They who pray unto the Martyrs piously and with FAITH, obtain the things they
most desire, as do testify the gifts they being bound by vow offer at their
Tombs, manifest tokens of health obtained. S. Gregory the Great: Gregor.
Dialog l. 2. c. vlt. Vbi sancti Martyrs in suis corporibus dubium no^ est quod
multa valiant signa demo^strare, sicut and faciunt, and innumera miracula pura
mente quaerentibus ostendunt.
No doubt but Martyrs at their to^bes show innumerable miracles to them that
seek with pure heart, but because weak Faith may doubt whether they be
present, so that they can hear where their bodies are not, therefore
oftentimes greater miracles are done where their bodies are not: but Men's in
Deo fixa tanto maius habet fidei meritum, quanto illic eos and nouit non iacere
and tame^ credit non deesse ab exauditione.
they whose mind is fixed on God have the greater MERIT OF FAITH in that they
believe the Saints to be there present to hear men's prayers, where they know
they are not present in their bodies.

Behold how fully, expressly, and constantly, the Fathers affirm Invocation of
Saints with confidence in their merits, and that they hear our prayers to be
MATTER of Piety and DIVINE FAITH.

The third Demonstration.
That devotion which the Fathers praise, honor, and admire, as divine and
supernatural, and as a testimony that Christ is God that could plant the same
in the world, this they hold as a point of Christian Religion, and as an
excellent part thereof. But the Fathers so esteem of Invocation and worship of
Saints as their words do witness. S. Gregory of Nisse Nissen. orat. in S.
Theodor. Martyrem. Aliorum enim reliquiae vulgo detestabiles sunt, nullusque
volens ad eorum tumulum accedit etc.

His operibus oculos oblectantes cupiunt loculo reliquas corporis parts
admouere. Etenim ipso contactu, sanctimoniam credunt and charitatem excitari
etc.

Ipsum corpus perinde ac si viuum florensque esset amplectu^tur, and
deosculantur, oculis, ore, auribus omnibus denique sensibus adhaerent,
lachrimasque pietatis and affectionis indices effundunt etc.


proves this worship to be supernatural and divine, as being beyond the
custom of men and instinct of nature. The Relics (says he) of other dead
me^ be detestable, and men feel horror at their sight, whereas men desire
nothing more then to touch the shrine of Martyrs with some part of their
bodies, BELIEVING that by the very touch, sanctimony, and charity is engendered.
They Martyri supplicant qui quando vult, inuocatus munera impetrat. Corpora
aliorum etc. proiecta iacent; quae vero Martyrij gloriam obtinuerunt, amabilia,
iucunda, and omnium studiis certatim complectenda.
CALL ON the Martyr as on Gods Ministe, who being INVOCATED by men, is able to
impetrate for them what favors he pleases. Hence pious people learn how
precious in the sight of God is the death of his Saints, that whereas the bodies
of other men are horrible, the bodies of them that were adorned with Martyrdom
be dear, and amiable, and embraced, and worshipped of all.

Saint Chrysostom proves Christ to be God, in that he was able to plant
Invocation of Saints in men, specially in the Kings and Emperors of the world;
Chrisostom. homil. 66. ad populum Antioch. Stat sanctis supplicaturus vt pro se
intercedant apud Deum. Audebis igitur quaeso horum Dominu^ mortuum appellare,
cuius serui, vel mortui, terrarum orbis Regum sunt protectores? Vide eundem
orat. in S. Babilam.
Even he that is clothed with the Imperial purple comes to worship, and
embrace these shrines, and laying aside pride and pomp, becomes supplyant unto
Saints, that they will intercede for him unto God: So he that wears the
diadem of the Empire, prays the Tent-maker and the Fisherman to be his
protectours. And dare thou term that Lord a dead man, whose servants though
dead are the protectours of the Kings of the whole earth?

S. Augustine in like manner proves the Divinity of Christian Religion by the
Christian practice of worship and invocation of Saints: Augustine. epist. 42.
Huius saeculi potestates non a repugnantibus sed a morie^tibus Christianis
victae, contra simulachra impetus suos legesque verterunt, and imperii
nobilissimi eminentissimum culmen ad sepulchru^ piscatoris submisso Diademate
supplicat.
Eue^ the most emine^t head of the noblest Empire that ever was, bowing down
his Imperial diadem, is suppliant at the shrine of the Fisherman Peter. The
same dignity of Christian Religion is noted by Saint Ambrose: Ambros. l. 10. in
Lucam c. 21. Regibus martyrs caelestis gratiae honor succedunt, and illi
fiunt Supplices, hi Patroni.
The Martyrs by the honor of heavenly grace are instead of Kings, yea Kings be
suppliants unto Martyrs, as unto their Patrons. Theodoret spends one whole
book of his eight against Graecians, or Heathens, in this argument, showing
the glory of Martyrs, in that people of all nations, in all occasions, invoke
them, and they bestow favors on their suppliants, co^cluding Theodoret. lib. 8.
aduersus Graecos. Haec quae sit Sanctorum Martyrum virtus ostendunt. Martyrum
vero virtus, quem coluerunt verum Deum esse declarat.
thus: These things show how great is the power of Martyrs, and the power of
Martyrs proves Christ whom they worshipped to be God.

The fourth Demonstration.
That piety and devotion which the most holy Fathers taught as an assured
means of Remission of sins, of appeasing Gods anger and of salvation, was by
them held as a matter belonging to Christian Religion and faith. The holy
Fathers taught worship and Invocation of Saints with confidence in their
merits, as a means of appeasing Gods Anger, of Remission of sin, and of
salvation. This appears by their words. Origin says: Origin. homil. 27. in
Matthew. Intercedunt and prouocant Christum, ne deserat genus humanum propter
peccata eorum.
the Saints before the throne of Christ intercede, and stir him up not to
forsake mankind for their sins. S. Cornelius Pope: Cornel. Epist. 1.
Intercedentibus Sanctis Apostolis purget maculas peccatorum.
Pray unto our Lord Jesus that the holy Apostles interceding, he will PVRGE the
STAINS of our sins. S. Cyprian: Cyprian. de stella and magis. Veniam
obtinentes immeritis.
they being Judges and Senators of the heavenly Court, obtain Pardon for many
that are unworthy. S. Gregory Nissen: Nissen. orat. in S. Theodor. Preces
Iustorum crimina diluunt.
The prayers of many martyrs wash out the CRIMES of Nations and countries. S.
Ambrose: Ambros. lib. 5. de vid. Pro peccatis intercedere possunt.
They can intercede for our SINS, who wash awayt their own with their blood.
Prudentius: Prudent. Hymn. de S. Laurent. Indignus quem Christus audiat, sed
per patronos Martyrs potest salutem consequi.
he that is unworthy, may, having Martyrs to be his Advocats and Patrons,
obtain salvation. Nectarius Nectar. orat. in S. Theodor. Placatum famulis tuis.
Oh thou that stands by the throne of Christ, appease his Anger, and make him
mild and gentle unto his servants. S Hierome: Hierom. epist. 25. de obitu
Blesill. Veniam impetrat peccatorum.
holy Blesilla prays for me, and as I am sure obtayneth for me remission of
my sins. S. Sever. Sulpit. Epist. ad Aurel. Peccati moles negat ad astra
conscensum, saeua miserabilem ducit ad tartara; spes tamen superest illa, sola
illa postrema, vt quod per nos etc. orante Martino mereamur.
Seuerus Sulpit. An heavy load of sin weighs me downward even to the very
pit of hell, yet this hope remains, this my only last hope, that what we are
not able to obtain by our selves, we may merit to obtain by the prayers of
holy Martin. S. Paulinus: Paulin. de S. Faelic. Not. 8. Exorare Deum pro
peccatoribus aegris, vique boni meriti meritum superare sinistrum.
It is the custom of Saints to pray for distressed sinners, by the force of
their good merit, ouercoming the strength of evil merit. S. Chrysostom:
Chrysostom. homil. 41. in Genesis Author salutis his qui sua se perdiderunt
desidia.
God often for the merits of Saints deceased, has mercy of the living that
otherwise are unworthy. David deceased many years before was the Author of
SALVATION unto them that had lost themselves by their sloth Homil. 2. in Psalm.
50. David mortuus est, sed merita eius vigent. homo mortuus viuo Patrocinatur.
. David is dead, but his merits live, the dead man is the patron of the living;
Sermon. de virtute and vitio. Ad mortuos confugie^s propter eos peccata remittit.
for their sake that are dead, God forgiueth sin. S. Ephrem: Ephem. sermon. de
Lau. SS. Martyrum. Vt vestris precibus saluari merear.
Assist me, o holy Martyrs, before the throne of the divine Majesty, that by
your PRAYERS, I may be SAVED. S. Augustine: August. lib. qq. in Exodus q. 108.
Significa^tur Martyrs sancti quoru^ orationibus propitiatur Deus peccatis
populi sui.
By the red skins of the wheathers wherewith God would have the v^yles of the
Tabernacle covered, we presently understand our Savior made red and purpled
with his blood in his passion. But they likewise signify the holy Martyrs, by
whose prayers God is propitiated and appeased for the sins of his people. S.
Maximus says: Maximus sermon. de martyr. Tauric. Euadimus inferni tenebras
propriis eorum meritis, attamen consocii sanctitate.
By devotion unto Saints we avoid the pains of hell, by their very merits,
being their fellows in sanctity. S. Euthymius: S. Euthym Monach^^ in encomio
ad beatam Virginem Mariam. Dum hic manemus nos protegas supplicamus, and vt
nobis parcat filius tuus and Deus perennibus tuis precibus.
O vnspoted virgin mother, thy Son and God pardon us our sins, by the
incessancy of thy praying for us. And could the holy Fathers think worship and
invocation of Saints, with confidence in their merits, not to be a matter of
faith which they so constantly teach and commend to be a means of salvation
and remission of sin?

The fifth Demonstration.
That which the Fathers did practice in their greatest needs, and in the
chief acts of Religion, when the use of true Christian devotion was most
necessary, that they hold as assured and certain devotion, and exercise of
divine faith, and Christian piety: Such is the worship and Invocation of
Saints, with confidence in their merits, unto which the Saints of God did fly
in their greatest distresses. S. Iustina Virgin and Martyr, being strongly
assaulted with fleshly temptations caused by magic incantation, fled (as S.
Nazianzen writes) Nazian. orat. in S. Cyprian. Mariam Virgine^ rogauit, vt
periclitanti Virgini opem ferret.
unto the protection of the B. Virgin, entreating her to assist a Virgin that
was in that danger, whereby she got the victory. S. Nazianzen himself being in
the like affliction, with great humility, openly in the Church prays unto S.
Basil: Idem orat. in S. Basil. O Sacrum and Diuinum caput! carnis stimulum etc.
tuis siste precibus etc.
O dear Saint, look down on us from heaven, and either stay with thy prayers
this sting of the flesh given me of God for my instruction, or else encourage
me manfully to resist it. Theodosius Ruffin. l. 2. Histor. c. 33.
Emperor being to go in expedition against Eugenius the Pagan Tyrant, made
together with the Bishops, Clergy, and people solemn Letanyes and processions
unto the Tombs of the Apostles and Martyrs, where prostrate on the ground
before their shrines, auxilia sibi fida intercessione Sa^ctorum poscebat;
craved assured assistance by the intercession of Saints. General Counsels
being to decide controversies about the highest mysteries of Religion, Council.
Chalcedon. can. 11.
the whole council prayed unto Saints, as that most holy Council of
Chalcedon: Holy Flauian lives with God, the Blessed Martyr pray for us. As
also did S. Augustine, Augustine lib. 5. de Baptism. contr. Donatist. cap. 2.
Adiunet nos Cyprianus orationibus suis.
entering into the discussion of a most difficill controversy, prefixeth this
Devotion: Holy Cyprian help us with his prayers. In the very act of Martyrdom,
when they were presently to go out of this world, they did Invoke Saints, as
did Saint Acyndimus. Finally the whole Christian Church at the sacrifice of the
Mass still has used the same, as appears by all ancient The Roman, that of
Jerusalem, the Ethiopian, Anaphora Syriaca, that of Millan, S. Basil, S.
Chrysostom.
Lyturgies that are extant: for though the Priest in the act of sacrifice do
not invoke Saints by direct and formal prayer, as says S. Augustine,
August. l. 8. De ciuit. c. 27. Quis audiuit stantem sacerdotem ad altar etc.
dicere in precibus, Offero tibi sacrificium Petre?
Who ever heard the Priest being at the Altar to say, I offer sacrifice to thee
Peter, or to thee Paul? yet the same Idem tract. 8. in Joan. Sic eos
commemoramus vt magis orent ipsi pro nobis, vt eorum vestigiis inhaereamus. and
sermon. 27. de verbis Apostol.
S. Augustine does witness, that at the holy table commemoration is made of
Martyrs, that they will pray for us that we may follow their stepps. And S*
Cyrill of Jerusalem before S. Augustine: Cyrill Hierosol Cathec. 5. Cum hoc
sacrificium offerimus, memoriam facimus etc. primum Patriarcharu^, Prophetarum,
Martyrum, vt Deus orationibus illorum and deprecationibus suscipiat preces
nostras.
When we offer sacrifice we make co^memoration of Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs etc. that God by their prayers and supplications will admit
of our petitions. Wherefore seeing the most holy and ancient Fathers in their
own most grievous distress, in the greatest necessityes of the Church, in
businesses of highest universal importance, in the time of the most dread
Christian sacrifice did use prayers and Invocation of Saints with assured
confidence in their merits, who can doubt but they held the same as a point of
Christian Religion, whereof they were assured by faith and Gods express word,
delivered by Tradition?

The sixth Demonstration.
What the Fathers held as a Christian custom and doctrine, confirmed by most
certain and evident miracles, that they held as a divine and supernatural
truth. The Fathers held worship and Invocation of Saints, with confidence in
their merits as a Christian devotion, confirmed by most manifest and certain
miracles, as August. lib. 22. de ciuitat. c. 9. etc. 10.
S. Augustine says: Miracles are done by the intercession and impetration, if
not also by the immediate operation of Saints. And again: Martyrs do Miracles,
or rather God for the prayers and intercessions of Martyrs. In confirmation
whereof the testimonies of S. Basil, Nazianzen, Nissen, Chrysostom, Ambrose,
Hierome, Augustine, Prudentius, Paulinus, Gregory the Great, Gregory
Turonensis, and others might be plentifully alleged.

The seventh Demonstration.
What the Fathers taught as a necessary supernatural duty of Christian
humility, they taught as a matter of faith. The Fathers taught praying unto
Saints as a necessary supernatural duty of Christian humility. For though
Invocation of Saints be not so simply necessary but a man may in some cases be
saved without the exercise thereof, yet because they that pray unto God, feel
by his holy inspiration their own unworthiness, he moves them to aid
themselves, by the comprecations of blessed Saints, as it were saying unto them
what he said to the friends of Job: Go to my beloved servants, that they may
interceede for you. Hence men do not ordinarily obtain what they desire of God
without this humility of craving the Intercessio^s of Saints. To this purpose
S. Greg. Nissen Orat. in S. Theodor. Quod si maiore opus sit auxilio, Martyrum
adhibe chorum, and vna cu^ omnibus supplica.
says, that sometimes, Maiore opus est intercessione; there is ^^ed of greater
intercession, and to invoke or advocate the whole quire and company of
Saints. To this purpose S. Augustine writes that August. sermon. 17. de verbis
Apostoli. Iniuria est pro martyr orare, cuius nos Debemus orationibus
commendare.
Debemus etc. we must recommend our selves unto the prayers of Martyrs: yea
that we are taught by the holy Scripture, that Idem. q. 149. in Exodum.
Releuari apud Deu^ meritis nos posse eorum quos diligit.
when we feel that our bad merits weigh us down that we be not beloved of God,
we may be relieved by the merits of them that are gracious in his sight. This
humility of flying to the merits of deceased Saints, S. Chrysostom shows to
be taught us in the holy Scripture by the example of the three children praying
in the furnace: Chrysostom. homil. 84. in Matthew. Quoniam semetipsos ad
impetrandam populo venia^, sufficere non credunt, AD PATRVM MERITA confugiunt.
For (says he) because they did believe themselves not to be sufficient to
obtain pardon for the people, they fly to the MERITS of their Fathers,
confessing themselves to bring nothing with them worthy of regard, besides an
humbled and contrite heart, saying, for Abraham thy beloved, for Isaac thy
servant, and for Israel thy holy one [Dan. 3.35. Finally S. Ambrose; Amb. l de
vid. Magno peccato obnoxia minus idonea est quae pro se precetur, certe quae
pro se impetret. Adhibeat igitur ad medicum alios precatores etc. Obsecrandi
sunt Angeli pro nobis qui nobis ad praesidium datisunt: Martyrs obsecrandi
etc. isti sunt Dei Martyrs, nostri praesules, speculatores vitae actuu^que
nostrorum.
The soul (says he) that is guilty of great sin, is less fit to request,
or at least to obtain the remission thereof for herself: Therefore let her
use the intercession of others unto her heavenly Physician. The Angels are to
be beseeched that are given us of God for our guard. The martyrs are to be
beseeched in whose patronage we may seem to claim interest by the pledge of
their bodies. They may intercede for our sins who washed out their own with
their blood. These be the Martyrs of God, our Governors, the overseers of our
life and actions.

The eight Demonstration.
That doctrine and devotion which is delivered by full Tradition from the
Apostles as practiced in all ages since them, as an exercise of Christian piety,
is a part of Christian faith and Religion. But such is the worship and
Invocation of Saints. For not only in the third age there be not obscure but
manifest steps of this practice, as the Centurists Magdeburg. Centur. 3. c. 4.
colum. 83. Videas in Doctorum huius saeculi scriptis no^ obscura vestigia
Inuocationis sanctorum.
acknowledge, but also in the second which was immediate upon the death of the
Apostles. First, Saint Aurelian disciple and successor of S. Martial In vita
S. Martialis. Adsit nobis qui in orb extitit pius Pastor, vt eius orationibus
muniti, mereamur aeternae haereditatis participes fieri etc.
in his life prays unto him. Saint Dionysius Dionysius Eccles. Hierarch* c.
3. Impositis altari venerabilibus signis, adest protinus sanctorum Catalogus
etc.
says: When the sacred and venerable signs in which Christ is ^ignifyed and
taken, be laid on the Altar, pres^ntly there follows the Catalogue or
commemoration, of Saints. And again, Idem Ecclesiastic. Hierarch c. 7.
Superflua spe ille suspensus est, qui sanctorum flagitat preces, and naturae
ipsorum consentaneas sacras operationes abigit.
he feeds upon vain hopes that craves the prayers of Saints, and does not
actions that agree with the nature of Saints. S. Ireneus: Iren. cont. haeres.
l. 5. c vlt. Virginis Euae virgo Maria fieret aduocata.
The Virgin Mary is made advocate of Eve: which words the Centurists censure
as hard and incongruous. Magdeburgens. Centur. 3. c. 6.


Secondly, the use of Procession was frequent in the second age presently upon
the Apostles death, as does witness Tertullian Tertullianus lib. 2. ad vxorem c.
4. Si Procedendum erit, nunquam magis familiae occupatio tenebit.
; but procession was joined with prayer unto Saints, and visitation of their
Relics, as appears by Eusebius who describing this practice says Eusebius.
lib. 13. de praeparat. Euang. c. 7. Monumenta eorum accedimus, votaque ipsis
facimus tanquam viris sanctis, quorum intercessione ad Deum non parum iu^ari
profitemur.
: we visit the monuments of Martyrs, and offer vows and prayers unto them,
professing that we are not a little aided with God by their Intercession. The
same is also testified by S Chrysostom Chrysostom. homil. in SS. Inuentium and
Maximum. Saepe eos nuisamus, tumulos adornemus.
, and S. Jerome plainly signifyes it, who exhorting a consecrated Virgin not to
leave her retyrement upon occasion of Processions, says: Hierom. 22. Epist. ad
Eustoch. de custodia virginit. c. 6.
Martyrs tibi quaerantur in cubiculo, numqua^ deerit occasio procedendi, si
quoties fuerit necesse processura sis: Visit the Martyrs (by devout
imagination) within thy chamber, thou will never want occasion to go in
procession, if thou go as often as this will be needful and requisite, in
respect of visiting the Relikes and tombs of Martyrs.

Finally, in this primitive age the custom was frequent to pray at the Shrines
of Saints, and keeping their Aniuersary festiual days, as appears by the
Epistle of the Church of Smirna Epist. Smirn. apud Eusebius. lib. 4. Histor. c.
15. Ambusta ossa ( S. Policarpi) pretiosissimis ge^mis chariora etc.
collegimus, and sicu^ conueniebat ex more co^didimus. Quo in loco sole^nes
agimus celebresque conuentus, maxim in die passionis eius.
, and by Tertullian: Tertull. de corona militis. c. 2. Pro Natalitijs annua die
facimus.
Now it is evident that this praying at Saints Tombs, and the keeping of their
feasts, was to the end that Christians should crave their intercessions, as
does witness S. August. lib. 20. contr. Faust. c. 22. Populus Christianus
memorias Martyrum religiosa solemnitate concelebrat, and ad excitandam
imitationem, and vt eorum meritis atque orationibus adiuuetur.
Augustine and others. In which kind notable is the testimony of Origin Origin
homil. 3. in diuersos. Been ergo, and secundum Dei voluntatem eorum memoriam
celebrari Sancti Patres mandarunt etc. vel pro ipsis parentibus, vt qui nimio
dolor percutiebantur, ijs intercessio filiorum apud Deum prodesset.
, who says that amongst the reasons, why the Holy FATHERS commanded according
to the will of God that the memory of the Innocents should be kept festival in
the Church, one was pro ipsis parentibus, in regard of their parents, that
seeing their parents were grieved excessiuely at their death, the intercession
of their children might be auaylable with God for them. Thus Origin, by whose
testimony two things are evident. First, that the Apostles were the holy
Fathers that did command the feast of the Innocents to be kept, and this whiles
some parents of the said Innocents were yet alive. Secondly, that the Apostles
taught prayer and Invocation of Saints, and did institute festival days, that
men might crave their intercessions.

The ninth Demonstration.
The Ancients taught Invocation of Saints so fully and clearly, as Protestants
are forced to confess that it was the certain and full belief of the grauest
Fathers. Chemnitius Chemnit. Examen Co^cilij Tridentini part. 3. page 200.
writes in this sort* Most of the Fathers, as Nazianzen, Nissen, Basil,
Theodoret, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, did not DISPVTE, but AVOVCH the souls
of Martyrs and Saints to hear the petitions of those that prayed unto them:
they went often to the monuments of Martyrs, and Inuocated martyrs by name.
Thus he. And Doctor Whitegift Archbishop of Canterbury, Defense page 473. All
the Fathers of the Greek Church, and of the Latin also for the most part were
spotted with Invocation of Saints. Fulke reioynder to Bristow page 36. I
Confess Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, held Invocation of Saints. The
Magdeburgians Centur. 3. c. 4. Coll. 83. acknowledge, that in the Fathers next
unto the Apostolical times were found, Non obscura vestigia inuocationis
Sanctorum; manifest marks of Inuocations of Saints.

The tenth Demonstration.
That which the Fathers held so constantly as they condemned the denyers
thereof as Heretics, they held as matter of faith. The Fathers held worship
and invocation of Saints in this manner, condemning the contradictours thereof,
as Nouellists, and Heretics, to wit, Aerius, and Vigilantius, as is confessed
Sarauia in defens. de diuersis page 349. and Beza against who^ he writes ibid.
Fulke in his Answer to a counterfayte p. 46.
. This Argument as also the Nynth were brought by the Answerer, and unto it the
Minister says, page 262. Our adversary shows himself a weak antiquary when
he affirms that Aerius and Vigilantius were condemned of heresy, because they
denied Invocation of Saints deceased. I Answer. The Minister here shows
himself both a weak antiquary and a weak respondent. A weak respondent,
because his adversary did not only say, but also proved by the confession of
Protestants, that Aerius and Vigilantius were condemned for denying Invocation
of Saints. For Sarauia, and Beza are cited as saying of Aerius, that he was
condemned for affirming, that SAINTS DEPARTED are not to be PRAYED unto. Fulke,
and the Centurists are cited affirming the same of Vigilantius, as also does
Centur. 4. l. 4. page 506.
Osiander. Now unto this Argument the Minister has not replied a word.

Secondly, he shows himself a weak Antiquary in denying that Vigila^tius
was condemned of heresy for his opposing and deriding Invocation of Saints. For
S Hierome writing against Vigila^tius, relates his scoffing at Invocation of
Saints, and his saying, Ergo Cineres suos circumuolitant, ne forte si precator
accedat, absentes audire no^ possint. For which saying S. Jerome exclaimes
presently against him: O porte^tum in vltimas terras deportandum! Aerius also
is condemned by the Fathers, as an Heretic for his denying commemoration of
Saints in the holy sacrifice of the Eucharist as it was then used by the
Church, as does witness Epiphanius Epiphan. haeres. 77.
. But that co^memoration of Saints deceased and glorious in heaven, was joined
with recommending our prayers unto God by their Intercessions and
Supplications, as does testify S. Cyrill, Cyrill. Cathec. 5.
who lived at that time.

The eleauenth Demonstration.
What the Fathers taught with full consent and constantly without doubting or
gain saying one another, that they held not as a probable and disputable
point, but as matter of faith. The Fathers in this co^^enting manner, taught
worship and Invocation of Saints. Howsoever Protestants not able to deny this
to have been their doctrine, seek to discredit them, as if they had been
various, uncertain, contradictious in this point.

But seeing Christian antiquity that has perused their works now more the^
1300. years, never noted such contradictions in them, Christian piety and
charity will never be so persuaded of the Fathers by Protestants, specially
their allegations being ^^ch as may easily be explicated, so as they make
nothing at all against this Catholic custom.

For all they say in this kind is reduced to one of these heads. First that
Angels are not to be honored as The Minister here says: Some Fathers prove
Christ to be God and others that the Holy Ghost is God, because he hears the
prayers of them, that Invoke him every where. Answer. This is false; they
prove Christ and the Holy Ghost to be God because they are every where by
natrue. See S. Basil. de sp. Sancto. c. 22. whom the Minister falsifyeth
egregiously.
Gods, nor by sacrifices in the heathenish manner. Orig. lib. 5. cont. Celsum.
and lib. 8. circa finem. Epiphan. haeres. Sit in honor Maria, Deus adoretur.
Theodoret. in c. 2. ad Coloss. and Council. Laodicenum c. 35.

Secondly, that Saints are not to be inuocated by Faith, as In this manner is
understood the testimony of S. Athanaes. orat. 2. contra Arianos. cited by the
Minister. page 295. ad lit. B. Sanctos non a Creato postulare vt auxiliator
sit. S. Athanasius speaks of this prayer of David, Fias mihi in Deum
adiutorem, be thou made unto me an helding God, he says, that Saints in this
manner do not ask help of Creatures, to wit, as of their helping Gods and as
Authors of benefits, otherwise S. Athanasius could not but know that the
Scripture is full of examples wherein holy persons did ask the help of
creature, as the Sanamite of Elizaeus, and the woman of Sarepta of Elias, and
many the like*
authors of the benefits we crave. Romans 10.14. Ambros. de obit. Theodos. Nor
as the sanctifyer of our soul dwelling in the same by grace. Hierom. in
Proverb. c. 2. Nullum inuocare, id^^ intus orando vocare, nisi Deum debemus.

Thirdly, that the Priest does not invoke Saints by direct prayer in the
Lyturgy of the Mass, which being a sacrifice the devotion thereof is to be
directed to God only. Augustine lib. 22. de ciuit. c. 10. Carthag. 4. c. 23.

Fourthly, that our friends that are deceased do not now hear us in the
familiar manner they were wont conuersing with us. Hierom. ad Heliodor. de
obitu Nepotiam whatsoever I write seems to be dead and (...) because Nepotian
does not hear it, to wit, i^ visible manner, delighting therein and applauding
the same as he was accustomed to do in his lifetime. Hence appears the
impertine^cy of the Minister that so often urges this place of S. Hierome page
29.2. lin. 22. Orthodoxe. pa. 54. li. 6.


Fifthly, that they do not know what is done in this world by their natural
forces. Augustine de cura pro mortuis c. 16. Per diuinam potentiam Martyrs
viuorum rebus intersunt, quoniam defuncti, per naturam propriam, viuorum rebus
interesse non possunt.

Sixthly, speaking unto some deceased persons, they make an If, whether they
hear them or not, because they speak unto such as they knew not certainly to
be Saints. Nazianzen orat. 3. in Julian. The Minister here says, Did not the
Fathers reckon Constantine to be in joy and glory? and yet Gregory Nazianzen
using an Apostrophe to him, says. (...). Hear, o thou Spirit of Great
Constantine, if thou have any notion of these things. I Answer, you falsify
the text of Nazianzen, both in the Greek and in your English translation. For
his words are, Hear o thou Spirit of Great Constantius, if thou have any
notion of these things. Yea that we might see you corrupt the text wil^^lly
and against your conscience, even in this very Reply, and in this point ^f
controversy you cite the same page 359. lit. a. in this manner. Audi etiam
(...) Constantij magni anima, siquis mortuus sensus est. Hear o thou Spirit of
^reat Constantius etc. Now, Constantius was an Arian, and a persecutour of
Catholics unto his dying day, though on his death bed (it was said) ^e made
some kind of repentance. Hence S. Gregory Nazianze^ might doubt ^f his being in
Glory, and say, Hear if thou have any notion of these ^^inges. The same Father
in his funeral Oration for his sister Gorgonia, where he says: Sister admit
of this oration in lieu of many funeral offe^^ngs, If this reward be given to
holy souls to feel these things; he does not doubt of her hearing his
prayers, but only whether she received an humane natural content, in that his
affectuous Panigyricall made in her praise.


THIS truth supposed, I cannot but conceive that your Majesty professing so
much love to the first primitive ages, may ^eceaue satisfaction about this
point; the causes of Protestants dislikes being weak, and not to be opposed
against the strength of so long continued authority, as I shall endeavor to
demonstrate in their eight usual Exceptions.

Invocation of Saints not to be disliked, because not expressed in Scripture..
2.
AND first I must satisfy the transcende^tall cause of their dislike, Confess.
August. art. 12. Fulke against Rhem.
which is, that worship and Invocation of Saints deceased, is no where
expressly set down in Scripture, without express warrant whereof nothing may
lawfully be done that belongs to Religion. But this though carrying a show of
devotion in the conceit of common people, is altogether unworthy of the
erudition of any learned Protestant. For howsoever in the beginning of their
separation, they did Luther. l de seruo arb. and sermon. de Cruce, sieve expresso
Dei mandato.
cry for express Scripture, express Commands o^ the Written Word; yet now
they are (...) gone Wotton in his Trial page 89.
from that principle, as they are exceeding angry John White in his defense
page 228.
with us, that w^ should think that any of theirs were (...) any time
broachers of such an absurdity Wherefore in their written books (wh^^ they
teach in Pulpits I know not) they D. Field of the Church. l. 4. c. 20. Whitaker
de sacra. Scrip. cont. 1. q. 6.
disclaim from express Scripture, and think it a sufficient warrant of a
Christ^^^ custom that the same be Note that it is one thing to be expressed in
Scripture, and another to be grounded on Scripture. All Christian doctrine is
not expressed in Scripture, yet every Christian doctrine is so grounded on
Scripture, that it may in some sort or other be proved from Scripture.
grounded ^^ Scripture, that is, may be deduced by good discourse from truths
revealed therein, (...) be proved consonant to the rules and principles thereof,
according to which ample extent of Scriptures unto things deducible from them,
or consonant unto them, there is no Catholic custom that has not warrant in
Gods word, as we are able to show. This only we require, that ignorant people
be not Judges of such inferences; an office so far above their capacity, as I
am persuaded no unlearned man that has in him any spark of humility, or any
mediocrity of Judgment, will undertake it. For no man is competent to judge
assuredly of arguments by deduction from Scripture, that has not exact skill
of Scripture to know the false sense from the true, as of Logic, to
distinguish Syllogismes from Paralogismes, being able to give sentence of the
truth of principles by the one, and of the inferences by the other; A thing so
hard as even learned Deuines do much suspect their own sufficiency to judge of
deductions, and dare not absolutely pronounce their sentence, but refer the
same to definitions of authority, which besides skill of Scripture and Logic
has the promise of Gods perpetual assistance in teaching the Christian
Church. Wherefore if Protestants will bind us to bring express Scripture for
the worship of Imags, Adoration of the Sacrament, Invocation of Saints, they
must themselves likewise be bound to bring express Scripture against
Anabaptists for D. Field l. 4. of the Church c. 20. says. It is no where
expressly delivered in Scripture.
christening of Infants, and for the keeping of the Sunday in lieu of the
ancient Sabboath Day, for their dedicating of Concerning the Protestants
keeping festival days of Saints with religious solemnity, the Minister says
not a word, which is tacitly to grant that this duty of Religion is used
piously by the English Church although the same want the warrant of Scripture;
why then may not Catholics pray unto Saints, though there were no warrant in
Scripture for such practice?
Days in memory of the Apostles with religious solemnity, for the Concerning
the Cross in baptism, the Minister says page 302. that it is a thing
Adiaphorous, and therefore express scripture is needles to warrant it. But I
ask him, whether it be Adiaphorous to think and to say, that the use of the
Cross in baptism is superstitious, impious, Antichristian? if it be
Adiaphorous so to think and to say, why condemn they the Puritans in this
respect? if it be wicked and impious so to think and speak, then is it
impious and unchristian to reject deuotious and religious offices practiced in
the Sacraments, upon pretense that they be not prescribed by Scriptures. And
then further it is consequent, that Protestants who condemn Invocation of
saints as impious, superstitious, antichristian, cannot excuse themselves from
impiety, though the same were not in Scripture; how much more being not only
perpetual Tradition unwritten, but also conform unto Scripture, and proved by
principles set down therein, as will appear.
cross in Baptism, and other such things observed in their religion, not
expressed in Scripture. And if deductio^ from Scripture, or consonancy therewith
be sufficient to warrant these customs, why should they mislike the Worship,
and Invocation of Saints, for which (besides the Judgments of the most
flourishing and learned Antiquity that ever was since the Apostles days, to
wit the Fathers of the fourth Age confessedly consenting with us) we bring more
clear warrant from Scripture, then they can bring for the before mentioned
observation of them religiously kept?

Knowledge of prayers made to them communicable, and communicated unto Saints..
3.
THE second cause why Protestants dislike praying to Saints, is, for that they
think by teaching, that Saints hear our petitio^s, we attribute unto the^
knowledge proper to God only. For Saints cannot know all prayers made to them
without seeing at once what is done in every part of the world, nor know the
sincere devotion wherewith they are done, without seeing the secret affection of
men's hearts. But to know what is done in all parts of the world, and the secrets
of hearts, is knowledge proper to God.

To this exception answer is made, that knowledge proper to God is of two
kinds, the one so proper as it is altogether inco^municable with any creature,
and such is the comprehension of his divine Essence. The second is proper so,
that naturally creatures are not capable thereof, yet the same may be imparted
unto them by a supernatural light, eleuating them to a high and divine state
above the possibility of nature. In this kind is the vision of the divine
essence face to face, which being by nature proper unto God only, is by grace
granted unto Saints. And if this vision be communicated unto Saints, the sight
of the inferior world, and of the secrets of heart, is without cause reputed
incommunicable with them, according to the saying of S. Prosper: De vita
Contempl. l. 5. c. 4. Non latebit beatos aliquid secretoru^, quod est long
praestantius puris cordibus visuri sunt Deum.
Nothing is so secret as the knowledge thereof may be denied unto the perfectly
blessed, their seeing God with pure understanding being without comparison a
thing more excellent.

Thus S. Prosper, whose argument does convince that Saints may know both what
is done in the world and the secrets of hearts. First, as concerning the world,
to see the whole world and all in it, is not higher knowledge, nor requires a
more perfect understanding, then to see face to face the di^^ne Essence,
immense and incomprehen^^ble, before whom the world is no more ^^en Sap. 12.
^. 2^.3.
momentum staterae, and gutta roris antelucani. But the Saints of God
(according to Christian faith) have an elevated understanding, able to behold
1. Cor. 13.12.
clearly and distinctly the divine Essence, with the infinite Joan. 3.2.
beautyes and perfections thereof. How then can a Christian conceive so meanly
of them as to doubt whether they have sufficient These arguments are brought not
to prove that the Saints have this knowledge, but only that this knowledge is
not so proper of God, but creatures may by grace be participant thereof.
Wherefore the Minister seeing the Jesuit to demonstrate his purpose against
Protestants, to wit, the knowledge of things done in all parts of the world,
and of secrets of heart to be co^municable unto B. Creatures, and this so
clearly as he had not what to reply, he peruerteth all these arguments,
affirming page 305. l. 1. That the Jesuit argues in this sort: Saints see the
face of God. Ergo, They behold the secrets of hearts. and lin. 17. That his
argument is, They which know or see the greater, understand and behold the
less. But the Saints behold the Essence of God which is greater. Ergo. These
be the Ministers fictions, not the Jesuits arguments. For to prove that the
blessed may see secrets of heart, and all things done in the world, the Jesuit
argues in this manner unanswerably. They that have sufficient understanding
for greater and more excellent knowledge, have sufficient understanding for
lesser knowledge; and if greater knowledge be not above the elevated capacity
of a creature, then lesser is not. But Saints have sufficient understanding for
the clear vision of God, and so this knowledge, the greatest of all others, is
not perfection above that of which creatures are capable by grace. Therefore,
knowledge of all things done in all parts of the world, and of secrets of heart,
which is less high, excellent, and difficill then the vision of God, is
communicable by grace unto creatures: and consequently the Protestants vulgar
Argument, that Catholics make Saints equal unto God, by teaching that they
see men's hearts, and all things done in the world, is frivolous.
understanding to behold things done in this inferior world, as far as they
belong to their state? Secondly as for the secrets of hearts, God is without
comparison more spiritual, more secret, more invisible, and out of the sight
of natural understanding then is any the most secret thought of man, or
Angel; and yet the Saints have so clear penetrating, and all discovering
light, as they do most perspicuously discern the divine, hidden, and
unsearchable Essence. What reason is there then why Christians should think the
secrets of men's hearts invisible and unsearchable unto them? If we look into
Scripture, as the heart Hierem. 17.9.
of man is said to be unsearchable but to God only, so God likewise is said to
be Coloss. 1.15.3. 1. Timoth. 1.17.
invisible, but only to himself; so that to Saints, together with the sight
of hearts, we must deny the sight of God, or else interpret the sayings of
Scripture, that man's heart, and God are invisible, to wit, by mere natural
light, and that both are visible unto Saints, by that light whereof the Prophet
said; Psalm. 35.10.
In thy light we shall see the light. If there were a This doctrine of the
Glass, or Mirror, is brought to show the possibility how things may be seen
in God, not to prove that of necessity they are seen: and so the Minister
might have spared the paper in citing the opinions of Schooleme^ concerning the
doctrine of the Volu^tary glass.
glass of diamant so clear and excellent that whatsoever is done in London in
secretest corners should therein particularly and distinctly appear, surely he
that has eyes to see that glass, may likewise discern what is done over the
City. Now, most certain it is, that in God all creatures, all actions done in
the world, and all the most secret thoughts of hearts, so perspicuously and
distinctly shine as they are in themselves. So that the Saints having light to
see the divine Essence, may in him clearly discern whatsoever is done in the
world belonging to their state though never so secret, according to the saying
of S. Basil. lib. de Virgin.
Basil; There is not any Saint which does not see all things that are done any
where in the world. And of S. Greg. hom. 40. Qui creatoris sui claritatem
vident, nihil in creatura agitur, quod videre non possint.
Gregory: Nothing is done about any creature which they cannot see who see the
clarity of their Creator. And again; Lib. 12. Moral. c. 13.
We must believe that they who see the clarity of the omnipotent God within
themselves, are not ignorant of any thing that is done without. Which doctrine
of the Fathers, that Protestants may the less dislike, I prove to be grounded
on the Scriptures.

First, if Saints by reason of their blissful state do so participate of the
divine nature and wisdom, About the first Argument.
as they communicate with him in the power of governing the nations of the
world; This argument is strong, and you by struggling make the strength thereof
more appear. You have devised 3. solutions. First you say page 311. lin. 10.
That the Jesuits exposition is novel, and never heard of in the ancient
Church. Answer. It is ridiculous when you are pressed with the clear text of
Scripture to call upon the ancient Church; you I say, who still, specially in
this question, appeal from the ancient Fathers unto the Scripture, as page
302. and 298. you say that it is not just to make ancient custom a law and
rule of right doctrine. And if you will stand to the rule of antiquity, I can
produce more then fifty ancient Fathers that in express terms teach the
doctrine the Jesuit does establish by the literal sense of Gods word, to wit,
that saints deceased are rulers and governors of men's actions and lives.
Secondly, you say page 309. that the text of the Apocalypse, To him that shall
have conquered I will give him power etc. is not understood of Saints deceased,
but of living Saints. Answer. This to be false is apparent, by the very words
which are these. Apoc. 226. He that shall have conquered and kept my words
UNTIL THE END, to him I will give power over nations etc. But it is clear that
living Saints cannot be said to have conquered, much less to have kept the
word of God until ^he end. Therefore these words are violently wrested unto
living Saints. Thirdly, you say page 320. lin. 3. That the promise, I will give
them power over ^ations, is understood only of judiciary power in the day of
judgment. Answer. This ^o be false, is proved by the rule of interpretation of
Scriptures, which ^rotestants commend and praise above all other, to wit, when
a text is ^oubtfull, the same must be expounded by another which speaks of the
^^me matter, specially when the dark text does expressly allude unto ^he
cleerer. This place of the Apocalips about Saints, I will give them power ^uer
nations, and they shall rule them in a rod of iron, and they shall be broken in
pieces ^^ke pots of clay, seems dark unto Protestants, and the question is,
whether this be spoken of Saints power in the militant Church, or only of ^he
day of Judgment? To clear this doubt, there is another text of Scripture
uttered in the same words, to wit the second Psalm, which says of Christ,
That his father shall give him nations to be his inheritance, and he shall
(...) them in a rod of iron, and shall break them as pots of clay. To this
text of the Psalm the place of the Apocalips does allude. For our Lord in the
Apocalips promises that he will give to Saints power to govern in a rod of
iron nations and countries, as his father promised, and gave the same power
unto him, to wit in the aforesaid Psalm. But that place of the Psalm is
without doubt to be understood of Christ's power of government in this world,
and of his ruling in the militant Church, as Protestants grant, and it
appears by the words precedent, I will give thee nations to be thine
inheritance, and thou shall rule them in a rod of iron. Ergo, the power of
governing i^ a rod of iron promised to Saints, must be understood, of
government in this world and in the militant Church.
then Saints have knowledge of things that are done in this world, else how
could they be able to govern and rule it? But Scripture in plain and express
terms make Saints participate with Christ in the rule and government of the
world, according to his promise Because the Minister does so much insult that
the Jesuit has not proved any thing by Scripture, I will (that his folly may
appear) examine particularly his answer unto these texts.
Apocalip. 2.26. To him that conquereth I will give power over nations, and he
shall rule them with a rod of iron, that is, with power of inflexible equity.
And Apocal. 3. v. 12. I will make him a pillar in the Temple of my God. And the
blessed say of themselves Apoc. 5.10. that they were chosen out of countries
and nations to be Priests of God, and that they should rule with him upon the
earth. Therefore they know what is done upon earth, so far forth at least, as
the affairs of earth do specially appertain unto them; and such without
doubt are our devotions toward them.

Secondly, S. Paul Cor. 14.26. says: Now we know but in part, we prophesy but
in part, but when that of perfection shall come, that of part shall be
euacuated: I know now but in part, the^ I shall know as I am known. By which
words the Apostle signifyes that all knowledge both humane and divine,
particularly the gift of Prophesy is contained eminently in the beatificall
^ight; so that the blessed Saints have the gift of Prophesy in a more excellent
degree the^ had the Prophets in this world. But by the light of Prophesy holy
men united with God, could see the secrets of hearts, as S. Paul says 1. Cor.
14.15. By the gift of Prophesy the secrets of hearts are manyfested; and also
see things absent being present by light of understanding, from whence they
were absent according to their substance The Minister seeks two ways to
euade. First by denying that blessed Saints have the knowledge of prophesy in a
more excellent and permanent manner then have the Prophets in this life. This
is plain against the words of the Apostle cited by the Answerer. For the
Apostle affirm^ that the gift of Prophesy in this life is but ex part,
imperfect in respect of the Prophesy and knowledge of the next, which the
blessed enjoy. Ex part prophe^^mus, tunc cognoscam sicut and cognitus sum.
Secondly, he says, though the blesed have the gift of Prophesy eminently, it
does not follow that the^ have the exercise thereof according to every
material object it had in th^^ life. I Answer, that the Saints of God having
the gift of Prophesy pe^manently and eminently, and as knowledge pertinent unto
their Blisseful state must thereby know any secret they desire to know, and
which belongs to their state, and such are the prayers of the living made
unto them
The Prophet Elizaeus 4. Reg. 5.16. saw in absence what passed betwixt his
servant Giezi, About the 2. Argument.
and Naman, to whom he said, My heart was there present with thee. With far
great reason (says Saint Videbunt sancti omnia clausis oculis, etia^ vnde
sunt corpore absen^^^
Augustine l. 22. de ciuit. c. 29.) The Saints of God even with eyes of body
closed up shall see all things, not only present, but also from which they are
corporally absent; for then shall be that perfection where the Apostle says,
we now prophesy but in pa^^ ^ut then the imperfect shall be euacuated To
Answer the Ministers Cavil, that the place of S. Augustine is understood
only of Saints after their resurrection; Note, that although the Father name
the Saints in their glorified bodies, yet his reason conuinceth the same of
souls that be blessed before the resurrection. For his reason why the Saints
after the resurrection shall see the secrets of hearts, and things from which
they are substa^tially distant, is because the^ they shall Prophesy, not in
part but fully, and euacuabitur quod ex part est, all imperfection of
knowledge shall be euacuated; but the deceased souls of Saints now before the
resurrection do Prophesy not in part, but know as they are kowne, all
imperfection of knowledge being euacuated from them. Ergo, they see things
absent, and secrets of hearts now, no less then they shall do then.
. This is that which S. Hierome does defend To earnestly against Vigilantius,
that the souls of the Martyrs are present where their shrines and relics
are, and never absent but still ready to hear the prayers of their supplia^ts,
not thinking that they are present in so many places substantially according to
their souls, but that they are present, as Elizaeus was present unto Giezi in
Spirit, beholding what passed as clearly as if they were corporally present.

Thirdly, it is clearly to be proved by Scripture, that holy Angels see the
prayers and actions, and affections of men. In the Apocalip. c. 8.4. An Angel
offered unto God the prayers of men, which he could not have done, had he not
known them The Minister page 314. lin. 12. says, this place is understood not
of an Angel by nature, but of an Angel by type. Answer. We must understand
the word of God in the literal sense, except we can clearly demonstrate by
Scripture the literal sense to be absurd. And this obligation does more
specially lie upon Protestants, who from perpetual Tradition appeal unto
Scripture understood by exact conference of places, as unto the last and
supreme Judge. But you bring not one word of Scripture to prove that in this
place an Angel by nature cannot be understood, therefore you run to types and
tropicall senses without warrant of Scripture, by which yet you pretend you
will be finally tried. Are you not then a ridiculous, and vain Appellant?
. Our Savior witnesses Luc. 15.10. That the Angels rejoice at the conversion
of a sinner. So they must needs know it, nor can they know it without knowing
the sinners heart The Minister page 315. lin. 15. objects against this argument
that holy men on earth rejoice at the conversion of sinners, yet they know not
secrets of hearts, therefore this argument is not good: Angels rejoice in the
conversion of sinners: Ergo they know the secret pious affections of men's
hearts. Answer. The joy of just men in this life is imperfect and mingled with
fear, nor do they rejoice in re, in the thing, but in spe, in the hope that
men's co^uersions are sincere, and in the outward signs thereof. But the blessed
Angels joy is perfect, deuoid of fear, and they rejoice not in the hope but
in the thing and conversion it self. Therefore they must know the inward piety
and devotion of the soul.
, Conversion not being true, no^ worthy of joy, except it proceed from the heart
Although the places speak directly of the Blessed, that they shall be like unto
Angels in incorruption of body, yet it proves the same of beatitude of
souls. For seeing the glory of body flows from the glory of the soul,
Blessed Saints should not be like to the Angels in glory of body, were they
not like, and their equals in the blessed sight and vision their souls have
of God, and of things contained in him.
. S. Paul says we are made a spectacle unto God and Angels, and he adiureth
Timothy by God and his Angels, which shows that we live in the sight of
Angels, and that they behold what we do, and hear what we say even in our
hearts. But as the same Scripture Luc. 20.36. Math. 22.30. auerreth, the Saints
are like unto the Angels, and equal unto the Angels. And in heaven the same
is the measure of a man and of an Angel, Apocal. 21.17. Aug. ep. 112. Ergo,
knowledge of our prayers is not to be denied to glorious Saints the fellows of
Angels. Neither could Saints without knowledge of humane affairs be perfectly
blessed, Blessedness being a state wherein all just and reasonable desires of
nature are satisfied with uttermost content, according to that of the Psalm.
16.15. Satiabor cum apparuerit gloria tua. And who can think that Saints full
of glory and charity do not earnestly desire The Minister against this replies
page 319. saying: That the Saints desire to know no more then it is Gods will
they should know. But it cannot be proved by Scripture, that it is Gods will
they should know the things done on earth. Answer. We must still suppose that
the courses, and wills of God be suitable to the nature of things, except the
contrary be clearly proved. The nature of charity is to desire to know the
state of our friends and their proceedings, and affections toward us. Ergo,
the Saints being full of charity are to be supposed to desire to know the state
of their ^reinds they left behind them upon earth, and for whose salvation they
^e sollicitous; except our Minister can clearly demonstrate the con^^ary. And
if they desire to know, then they know the particulars. ^or what our Minister
says page 319. lin. 20. That a father in Lon^^n may be solicitous about his
sons safety that is at Constantinople, and yet not ^^ow the particulars, is
frivolous: for this London Father is not blessed, and (...) he may be desirous
to know particulars and not know them, and so be ^erplexed for want of his
knowledge. The Saints in heaven are blessed and so desire not to know any
thing, but they know it. Therefore seeing according to the instinct and
inclination of solicitous Charity, they cannot ^ut desire the knowledge of
their friends affairs, they must (if they are ^erfectly blessed) be satisfied
in this their charitable desire.
to know such things as may concern their honor done upon earth, and the
state of their friends and ^ouers living in danger, to succor them by their
intercessions, of whose salvation they be still sollicitous, though secure of
their own, as S. Cyprian writes.

Wherefore our doctrine, that Saints see our prayers, being delivered so
constantly by the Ancient Fathers, so conformable unto the principles of
Christian belief about the blessedness of Saints, so consona^t unto express
passages of Scripture, we may justly expect, that unto Protestants it would not
be displeasing did they look on it with impartial eyes: Specially they having
no Text of Scripture that may make so much as a show of direct opposition
against it. The place continually objected out of the Prophet Esaias 63.16.
Abraham knew us not This place is impertinent also, in regard that Abraham and
Jacob, were not the^ Blessed nor saw God, from which Blessed vision the
knowledge of things done in this world flows as a sequel in the triumphant
Saints. It is understood by S. Hierome in c. 63. Isa. de scientia
approbationis, that Abraham and Jacob did not know, that is, esteem and
approve the proceeding of their children the Jews.
, Israel was ignorant of us, thou O Lord art our Father, thou our Redeemer,
has this sense: Abraham and Jacob, when they lived upon earth, and carnally
begot children, did not know particularly their posterities, and so could not
bear them such particular affection; whereas God can, and does distinctly see,
and know their necessityes aforehand, yea before men are borne, and prouides
against them, delivering his children out of the^. And therefore he is the only
Father, the only Redeemer, Abraham and Jacob not deserving the name of Father,
in comparison with God. Makes this against the Saints hearing our prayers I
desire the Reader to note on the one side how Protestants boast of Scriptures,
and on the other how unable they are to bring one probable text against
Invocation of Saints. Whereas contrariwise the places for the Catholic
doctrine that Saints (...) our prayers are so clear as Protestants fly to
their types and tropes, leaving the literal sense without warrant from the
said Scripture, and so by casting a figure euade from Gods clear word.
Wherefore the cause they appeal unto Scriptur, is not, because they think the
Scripture is clear for them, and not much cleerer for us; But because by
Scripture they cannot be so clearly confounded as by Tradition. For about
Scripture Heretics ever wrangle, pretending that by deductions and inferences
they prove their doctrine being destitute of formal Scripture, whereof
ignorant people cannot judge. For what know they when deductions are good? But
when they were urged by Tradition to show the Pedigree of their Professors,
they were as dumb as ours now are, that the Fathers said unto them, Confingant
tale aliquod, let the^ if they can feign and devise a pedigree of professors
agreeing in the same form of Faith whereof the first was an Apostle, and the
last a Protestant?
?

The worship in Spirit and Truth, with outward prostration of the body due unto
Saints.. 3.
THE third cause of their dislike is that we give the honor of the Creator
unto the Creature, honoring Saints with Religious worship in spirit and truth,
even to the prostrating of our bodies before them, whereby we give them honor
due to God only, and bring in many Gods, as the Heathens did.

To this Objection made long ago by Faustus the Manichee, S. Augustine lib.
20. cont. Faust. c. 22. answers in these words: The Christian people does
celebrate with Religious solemnity the memoryes of Martyrs, to the end to
stir up themselves to their imitatio^, and that they may be assisted with
their prayers, and associated unto their merits etc. But with the worship
termed in Greek Latria, and which the Latin language cannot express in one
word, being a certain subjection, and servitude due properly to the Deity
only, we do not honor any but only God, nor think that this honor ought to
be given but only to him. These words of S. Augustine show, that worship of
Saints to be on the one side more then Civil, and on the other side less then
divine; more then civil, as proceeding out of acknowledgement of the
excellency Saints have superior unto all natural, by which they be partakers
of divine perfection in that high degree as no substance can by nature
participate thereof, and therefore S. Augustine with good reason terms it
religious The Minister page 312. contrary to his custom proposes this
argument truly: To every kind of excellency there is a worship due
proportional to that excellency: but the blessed Saints and Angels have a
special kind of excellency, which is supernatural, superhumane, more then
civil. Therefore special honor proportional to the excellency, and superior
unto humane and civil, is due unto them. To this argument he answers, That
in Saints there is dignity of grace and glory, and honor is due in respect of
the same, but not religious worship. Thus he: what is this but to trifle and
talk in the air? who doubts ( M. White) but there is the dignity of grace and
glory in Saints, and honor due unto it? Speak plainly and mutter not betwixt
the teeth. Is the honor due to Saints proportional to their excellency, that
is, more then civil? Is it superhumane and supernatural as their excellency
is? Is it superior unto that kind of honor which is due unto civil
magistrates and other human honorable personages in regard of mere natural
perfection? If you grant, that worship superhumane, and more then civil is due
unto Saints, you grant as much as we desire to prove. The term of Religious
worship is ambiguous. Sometimes religious worship is taken for that which is an
elicitiue and formal act of Religion, and of divine worship due unto the
increated excellency of the Creator. In this sense the worship of Saints is
not religious. At other times it is taken for worship which is an imperative
act of Religion, that is, worship done to Saints out of inward Religion and
devotion toward God, whose servants and friends they are. In this sense the
worship of Saints is Religious, because it does still proceed, and must needs
flow from inward reverence toward God. For how can one worship Saints purely
and only as they are the friends, servants, and temples of God, but out of the
instinct of Religion unto God? Hence S. Augustine terms the honor of Saints
Religious solemnity. And S. Chrysostom says Sermon. de Martyr. 69. That we
admire their merits with Religious charity.
. Less then divine, as proceeding from persuasion of excellency though
super-human yet infinitely inferior unto the increate and immense excellency of
God, yea depending essentially thereof. So that honor that is given to the^
depends of God, as being superexcellent participants of his perfection, and
his singular friends.

Now, that men may worship Angels and Saints in this sort with true affection
of spirit, even to the prostration of their bodies may be proved out of holy
Scriptures, supposing what is already showed, that they see our actions. For if
Saints see our actions we may as lawfully and as profitably bow, kneel, and
prostrate our bodies unto them, as unto Saints living on earth. But it is
lawful to honor living Saints with bowing, and kneeling, and prostration of
body as may be proved by many examples. 3. Reg. 18. Abdias an holy man Timebat
Dominum valde.
, adored Elias Cecidit super faciem suam.
prostrate on the ground, not for any humane excellency or respect, but because
he was a Prophet, and a singular Saint of God. The Children of the Prophets 4.
Reg 2.15. Adorauerunt proni in terra^.
seeing signs of supernatural and divine power in Elizaeus, coming unto him
adored him prostrate on the ground. The Sunamite woman her Son being dead
went presently unto Elizaeus, fell down at his feet, suing not so much with
words, as with tears and mournful complaints for the resuscitatio^ of her
dead son 4. Reg. 4. Cor^uit ad pedes eius, and adorauit super terram.
. We read also, that holy men have adored with kneeling and prostration of
their bodies holy Angels appearing unto them, as Abraham Genesis 18.3. Adorauit in
terram.
, Loath Genesis 19.19. 4. Adorauit pronus in terram.
, Balaam Number. 22.
, Iosue Iosue. 5.15. Cecidit pronus in terram adorans.
, so that this Adoration of Saints and Angels The Minister says page 325.
That Elias, Elizaeus, and the Angels were present visibly and sensibly, but the
Saints are not sensibly present, and so we must not bow unto Saints deceased,
as Children kneel not to their parents when they are absent. Answer. We have
proved by the word of God that to be true which the Fathers teach with full
consent namely S. Basil de Virgin. c. 16. Every Angel and holy Spirit of
Saints, see what is done every where. And if this be true that they are present
unto us, and we a spectacle unto them, why should we not worship the^ as much
as if they were sensibly present? Not sense, but faith is the ground of our
devotion toward Saints. May we worship Saints that are present to us according
to the judgment of flesh, and not worship them that are present according to
the Judgment of faith, and the truth of Gods word?
with more then human and natural respect, and with acknowledgement of more
then humane and natural perfections in them, is clearly deduceable from holy
Scripture. Neither have Protestants reason to stand against so many pregnant
examples of Scriptures upon the one example in the Apocalypse of the Angel
refusing to be adored of S. John, saying: See thou do it not, I am one of thy
fellow servants, adore God, specially this place being explicated long ago by
the Fathers, as not against the custom of Christian Saint-worship; for either
the Angel so appeared as Saint John took him to be God, and would have adored
him as God, whereof the adorer was to be warned as S. Augustine S. August. q.
61. in Genes. Corrigendus erat adorator.
expounds, or rather the Angel for bad that worship, not as injurious unto
God, but only as coumbersome to himself, being loath (as S. Gregory notes)
after the incarnation of the Son of God to see a man lie prostrate unto him,
specially so holy a man and so special a friend of Jesus. And the words, Do it
not, adore God, import no more, which I declare. Suppose that one praise a
Preacher to his face for an excellent sermon he has made, and the Preacher out
of modesty say, Praise not me, I am an unworthy instrument of divine wisdom,
praise the author of all: This his speech does not import that he thinks to
commend a Preachers sermon to be Idolatry, and giving away the glory of God to
a creature, but only that modesty makes him wish that men would not praise him,
but rather turn all the praise and glory of that sermon upon God. In this sort
the Angel seeing the great and glorious friend of Jesus prostrated at his
fee^e, requested him to rise up, not condemning that adoration as Idolatrous,
but refusing it as an actio^ (though in regard of the offerer pious and godly,
yet to him the receauer cu^bersome) which he could not without some
unwillingness behold, in regard of the dignity of the person he saw prostrated
before him The Minister in this place is large in bitterness against us, because
he knows not what to say, or how to frame an argument against us out of this
text of the Apocalips. For if S. John did give divine and religious worship to
the Angel due to God only, the example is not to the purpose. For we say
Saints are not to be honored as Gods. If he did only offer honor more then
civil unto the Angel in respect of his supernatural dignity, with
prostration of body, then the same was not unlawful. For the Minister page
336. lin. 30. forced by the Jesuits arguments, does acknowledge such
obe^sances, and reverent comportments may, and must be done to Saints and
Angels, when they are corporally and visibly present, as his Angel was visibly
and corporally present to S. John. Now that this great Apostle of Christ was
more ignorant then any Triuiall Minister, that he knew not what was due unto
Angels better then they, who will believe? It is evident that he offered no
more then he might without injury unto God, else being warned he would not have
offered it the second time. Therefore it was honor that might piously be given
unto an Angel, though that Angel did in modesty forbid him, to show the
respect he bare to that great Apostle and friend of Jesus, as the Jesuit
argues, to which the Minister replies not a word, but only rayleth.
. This is evidently gathered out of the sacred text, seeing S. John after this
prohibition did the second time offer the like honor to the same Angel; which
he would never have done, had he not known adoration of Angels by mortal
men, to be pious and religious on their parts, howsoever the Angels sometimes,
for just respects, may in modesty refuse it.

Praying to Saints not injurious to Gods mercy, but rather a commendation
thereof.. 4.
THE fourth cause why Protestants out of their zeal refuse to invoke Saints
is the high conceit of Gods mercy. For seeing he calls all men immediately
unto himself, Matthew. 11.18.
Come unto me all you that labor and I will refresh you, we wrong his infinite
goodness in not approaching unto him by prayer, without the intercessions of
Saints.

This their zeal is not joined with Science of the course of Gods merciful
providence, whose divine wisdom prescribes certain bounds, and as it were
Laws to the infinity of his mercyes. These orders and prescripts whosoever
does neglect, and yet hopes to obtain favors, does not truly confide but
erroneously presume. God is infinitely merciful, and says, Come to me all
that labor, yet the man that should seek to him for remission of sins, and
would not submit himself to the Sacrament of water, should hope in vain, and
to no purpose challenge him of his promise, Come to me all. Wherefore it
imports us very much to know, and to use those means of approaching unto God
that he has appointed. Now, that the intercession of Saints is one means
without which God will not bestow many graces and favors as well spiritual as
temporal, Christian Tradition does deliver unto us. This Tradition is also
suitable with the bountiful and noble disposition of God, which is not only to
1. Reg. 2.30.
honor and glorify those that have been zealous of his honor to the effusion
of their blood, but also to make the world know and understand that he does
honor them Psalm. 1.38.17.
; for this knowledge is both for his glory, and also for the good of men, that
seeing how highly God honoreth his constant friends they be provoked to
endeavor by pure life to gain his favor.

If revealed doctrine coming by succession of Bishops from the Apostles to us
will not alone wyn belief in this point, even the Scriptures affoard us
sufficient testimonies thereof. When Abimelech King of Gesara, had offended God
by taking away from Abraham his wife Sara, and penitent of the fact, (though
committed but in ignorance) sought for pardon, did not God himself send him
unto Abraham, saying, Genes. 20. verse. 8.
Restore his wife unto the man for he is a Prophet, and he will pray for thee,
and thou shall live? By which example we see, that Gods infinite mercy, who
says, Come to me all, will not many times bestow graces and favors, without
intercession of his Saints, that men may know he loves and respects his
friends. When he was offended against Eliphas and his companions, did he not
send them unto his singularly beloved servant The example of the friends of Job
is not particular, but for the instruction of all, as S. Paul says; Whatsoever
is written, is written for our instruction, and comfort. Romans 15.4. Hence it
follows that whatsoever is said to one person in Scripture is said to every
one of the same state in whom the same circumstances do concur, whether it be
spoken by way of promise, or warning, or threate. The promise made unto Abraham
Genesis 15.2. I am thy protector, agrees unto all men that are as he was, devout
worshippers of the true God. What the Angel spoke unto Agar, Genesis 16.9.
Return unto thy Mistress, and be humbled under her, is also spoken unto every
proud fugitive servant. Now these words spoken to the friends of Job, Go to my
servant, and my servant shall pray for you, and his presence I will regard,
were spoken to them in regard they had offended God, and did find that God
would not hear their single prayers. Therefore this precept belongs unto all
men that know they have offended God and find their prayers not to be heard,
and together feel the instinct of sacred humility to seek access unto God
by some of his servants, whom they know to be more gracious then themselves,
and able to help. And who more gracious with God and able to help us then
tryumphant Saints, as has been proved? Therefore this precept is a warrant and
an order unto all men being in the same state and circumstances of Gods offense
as the friends of Job were, to seek and require the assistance and
intercession of Gods Blessed Saints. What the Minister here discourses is all
spoken in the air upon his own foolish imagination and fancy, against the
full Tradition of the Church, and plain Scripture, to wit, that Saints
deceased be not the friends and fauorits of God, that can help us with him.
Job, that he might be a mediator for them? Ite ad seruum meum Job, and
offerte holocaustum pro vobis; Job autem seruus meus orabit pro vobis, faciem
eius suscipiam vt non vobis imputetur stultitia. Job. 42. verse. 8. Out of which
place two things are clearly gathered. First, that though Gods mercy be
infinite, yet many times he will not grant our prayers, but in such manner as
he will make us beholding to his Saints. Secondly, that we ought to prostrate
our prayers unto him, as with great confidence in his goodness, so likewise with
a most feeling humble distrust of our own worthynes; which affection cannot
but move us to seek the intercession of them we know to be most highly
gracious in his favor. So that upon pretense of Gods great mercy, to reject
the mediation of Saints, is zeal without Science, devotion not thoroughly
instructed about the laws and orders that God has prescribed unto his
measurelesse mercy, by his incomprehensible wisdom. And if we grieve to humble
our selves unto Saints and repine at Gods providence, that he will not many
times grant our supplications without honoring his Saints, and making us bound
unto them, we may justly expect to hear what he said to one in like case:
Friend, I do thee no wrong, may I not dispense my mercyes as I please? If I
will bestow them in such sort as to join together with thy good the honor of
my friends, Is thine eye evil because I am good, and courteous to the^ that
have loved me more then their own lives The Minister page 334. lin. 6.
cauilleth, That the Jesuits discourse is such as one may wonder, and ask
whether such discoursers ever heard that the son of God was crucified for us?
Answer. This cavil is at the least idle, if not impious, for it makes as much
against the discourse of God himself, who said to the friends of Job, Go to my
servant Job, and he shall pray for you, and him I will regard in your behalf,
without mention of Christ Jesus. Will the Minister here wonder and ask,
whether God did know and remember that his Son was to be crucified for men,
and that me^ could obtain nothing of him but in regard of his future passion
and merit? God forbid he should be so captious. For the merits and
intercessions of Saints be no dishonor to the only merit and mediatio^ of
Christ, yea they all flow from it. Hence the merit of Christ is ever supposed
and inuolued in all means and helps of salvation, nor is it necessary every
where to name it.
?

Invocation of Saints not an injury but an honor to Christ the only Mediator..
5.
ANOTHER show of piety is pretended against prayer unto Saints, that it seems
to overthrow the mediatourship of Christ, which Saint Paul 1. Tim. 2.3.
commends as only, vnus mediator Dei and hominum Christus Jesus. But in showing
the vanity of this shadow, I shall not need to be long, seeing this respect
would also make us neglect and not use the mediation of living Saints out of
fear of disanulling the only mediatourship of Christ. It is no more against
the honor of the only mediatourship of Christ to pray unto Saints deceased,
then unto Saints living; yea the praying unto these kind of Saints may seem
more dishonorable, because we join with him men imprisoned in mortality,
militant in dangers, and not wanting some blemishes and defects. Whereas the
other Saints are glorious, pure from any the least imaginable spot settled in
the consummation of ineffable bliss. But the Scripture [ Romans 15.30. Job.
42.8.] allows, yea commandes prayer unto living Saints, and consequently
praying unto them is not injurious unto the only mediator Christ. Therefore the
praying unto Saints deceased that are in glory with God, is not injurious unto
the only mediatourship of Christ The Minister is here page 335. vexed; for this
argument of praying unto living Saints and craving their intercession
co^uinceth and stops our Adversaries mouths when they urge that praying
unto glorious Saints destroieth the only mediatour-ship of Christ. Why should
praying unto glorious Saints and to seek their mediatio^ be injurious unto the
only mediatour-ship of Christ, rather then the mediation of living Saints?

His answer is large, but all is reduced to six euasions. First he says, that
we may request the prayers of living Saints but not invoke them: this is
ridiculous. For what is it to invoke but to call upon, but to implore, but to
request? specially with submission, and acknowledging of superhumane dignity in
the person prayed unto. Do not Protestants themselves translate Invoke, to
call upon? Romans 10.14. when the holy Sunamite with humble obeisance, prostrate
on the ground, requested Elizaeus for the resuscitatio^ of her Son, did she
not invoke him? Secondly he says: That the living Saints be present with the
living. What is this to the purpose? be not many mediators present, more then
one only, as well as many mediators absent? If the only mediator may have
many subordinate mediators present, without prejudice unto the onelynes and
singularity of his mediatour-ship, why not many subordinate mediators absent?
Nor is it true, that glorious Saints be not present unto us, seeing they see as
has been proved, all things done in the world that belong to their state; in
which respect the holy Fathers of better credit then any Minister, say,
Vniuersi sancti vbique sunt and omnibus prosunt. S. Maximus de Martyr.
Tauricis. Hieron. aduersus Vigilant. and Basil. de Sanct. virgin. c. 8. Angeli
vbique praesentes sunt, and quae hic geruntur inspiciunt. Saints and Angels
are every where present, because from heaven they behold what is every where
done. Fourthly he says, That Papists make Saints mediators that see the
secrets of hearts. This is also seely. For where does the Scripture say that
Christ is the only mediator that knows the secretts of hearts, but that
besides him there may be other mediators, so they see not the heart? If Christ
the only mediator may have the company of many subordinate mediators, that be
clothed with misery and ignorance, why not the company of many glorious
mediators that see God and in God our hearts? How many living Saints did by the
gift of prophesy see the secret thoughts of men, and yet did pray and intercede
for men that craved their patronage? Did they thereby overthrow the only
mediatour-ship of Christ? God forbid. Fifthly he says, that as it is an injury
to the supreme Magistrate, for any of his subjects to co^stitute a Master of
Requests without his authority; so likewise it is an injury to Christ for us
worms of the earth, without warrant from Gods word, to constitute Saints and
Angels mediators of our prayers. Answer. The Minister is very simple i^ he
cannot discern the difference betwixt a master of Requests, and a mediator
to the King by way of favor. The Master of Requests, is an office of
authority made by the kings authority, without whose special order he cannot be
appointed. But the office of mediator, that is, of a friend for us with the
king, is an office of grace and favor, and made by the kings grace and favor,
bestowed on a man without any further authority. Hence if the king make one his
familiar Friend or Favorite, we may (if we can) make him our friend and
mediator unto the king, without further warrant or authority. Yea sometimes
Kings are not willing that their Favorites should have so many suitors, which
yet they cannot hinder if they will have Favorites, the right of being
mediators for others to the King, being inuolued in the grace of Princely
favors. Now to say, that men seeking grace of the king by his Favorite, do
constitute without his order a Master of Requests, is ridiculous. Yea rather
it were folly, presumption, clownishnes for a poor beggar unknown in the
Court to intrude his suites into the Kings audience without the mediation of
some that are familiar about him. Wherefore seeing God has made Saints his
especial friends, and heavenly favorites, and able to help us, what further
warrant is needful, besides our own necessityes, to seek their intercession?
Sixthly, the Minister says, That living Saints are ioint-suitors with us, who
likewise pray for their own needs, and so are not mere mediators. But
Saints deceased be not ioint-suitors, but mere mediators, because they pray
and intercede for us, and not for themselves. Answer. First the Saints in
heaven do pray for themselves, to wit, for the glorious resuscitation of their
bodies, and that God will reueng their deaths upon their persecutours, Apoc.
5. Secondly, though Saints do not deprecate for their own sins, and needs,
this does not show that they are mere mediators and suitors of higher kind
then living Saints, but only that they are grown unto greater perfection in
the same kind of grace, and unto the consummation thereof, unto which we are not
yet arrived. Even as a grown man does not need so many things as does the
Child, and yet is he a creature of the same nature and ^ind as the Child.


.

I add, that to make Saints mediators subordinate unto, and dependent of
Christ, is to increase his glory. For first, if only Christ Jesus is worthy to
have immediate access unto God, and all other Saints men and Angels be
mediators and intercessours, not having access unto God but by him, then
certainly that Saints mediate and intercede for us, is exceeding glorious unto
Christ Jesus. But Catholics teach that Saints be such intercessours as have no
access unto God, but through Christ Jesus, by mediation of his merits,
passion, and death, there being no other name in heaven or in earth by which we
are to be saved. Therefore the doctrine that maks Saints subordinate mediators
unto Christ by him approaching unto God, does magnify and extol the supremacy
of Christ's mediatourship, more then if in this kind of mediation he had none
depending on him.

Whence I infer, that Protestants mistake our doctrine when they say we teach
that Saints are fellow-mediatours with Christ, and that we bring them in to
supply the defect of his intercession that otherwise would not be sufficient.
This we do neither teach, nor believe, but that the merits of Christ are
infinite, every drop of his precious blood able to pay the full ransom of a
millio^ of worlds. That the Saints mediate and intercede for us unto Christ, is
for his greater glory, by whose merits they are made worthy of that dignity,
and whom by their intercessions they acknowledge to be the fountain of all
good that comes unto mankind. If it be a glory to the root of a tree to have
many boughs and branches laden with excellent fruit, the Saints being but
branches of Christ Jesus the true Vine-tree, John 15.15. surely the honor of
all their meritts springs originally, and is referred finally unto him. And as
it is impossible to honor and praise the boughs without honoring and
praising of the root: So likewise it is not possible that Catholics, who
acknowledge that Saints have all their grace merit and favor with God from
Christ Jesus, should honor them, or pray unto them, without honoring Christ,
and without praying finally ever unto him.

Wherefore Saints when they pray for us that God would forgive us our sins,
grant us favors that help us toward eternal life, they do not allege their
merits as a sufficient motive of the grant, but the merits of Christ. And when
holy ancient Fathers in their prayers allege unto God the merits of Saints,
this is because their merits make them gracious in Gods sight, and worthy that
the graces they crave for us be granted unto us, not by the application of
their merits, but only through the application of the merits of Christ. Put
case, that a Prince should ransom a great multitude of his subjects taken
prisoners, and held in miserable thraldom, paying for them a sufficient and
abundant ransom, yet so, that none should have the fruit of that Redemption
but those whom the King should singularly choose, and make worthy of that
favor. Suppose that some noble man in the Court (whom his Merits made
gracious with the King) should by his interceding obtain that the benefit of
that ransom should be extended to some one whom he particularly affects:
Surely this Captive should be redeemed and delivered through the ransom paid
by the King, not by the merits of the Noble man interceding for him, whose
merits concurred thereunto only remotely, and a far off.

To apply this similitude, Christ Jesus has paid an abundant price for man's
redemption, yet none enjoy the benefits thereof, but they to whom by special
grace he applies the same. Sinners beseech him by the merits of Saints that
made them gracious in his sight, that he will vouchsafe to apply the merit of
his Passion unto them for the obtaining of favors conducing unto eternal
life. Christ grants their petition and request, and thereupon applies his
merits unto them: These men cannot be properly said to be saved through the
merits of Saints, but only through the merits of Christ, specially because even
the merits of Saints that concurred thereunto, proceed originally from the
merits of CHRIST.

How it is lawful to appropriate the obtaining of graces, and cures unto
Saints.. 6.
OUR Adversaries finding our Invocation of Saints for substance practiced in
Gods Church ever since her primitive times, take exceptio^s at some
circumstances thereof, which they think new, and not justifiable by Antiquity,
which are principally three, whereon are grounded other three causes of their
dislike.

So the sixth reason of their dislike is, that we distribute amongst Saints
offices of curing diseases, and seek some kind of favor of one, some of
another, of which practice there is no example in Antiquity; yea it seems to
resemble the leuity of heathenish superstition, who did multiply Gods according
to the multitude of the things they sought to obtain of them.

I answer, that to seek some favors by the intercession of one Saint rather
then of another, was the Judgment The Minister says The Jesuit by Fathers,
means the Trident Fathers not the ancient Fathers. This is ridiculous, for
the Jesuit says the ancient Fathers in S. Augustines time, that is, 12.
hundred years before the Council of Trident. And the Minister cannot find one
Syllable in the Counsel of Trent for this appropriatio^, that may breed
suspicion that the Jesuit means them, whereas he brings the practice and
patronage of Saint Augustine himself, proving by Scripture this appropriation
of miraculous benefits, to one place, and Saint, more then to another. And S.
Paul ad Hebr. 2.10. saying, wherein himself suffered, and was tempted, therein
he is potent to help them that are tempted, shows a reason why we should
invoke in some temptations, rather some Saint then another, as S. Laurence
against fire, S. Apollonia against the toothache etc. because wherein
themselves were tried they are specially able to help others.
of the Fathers in S. Augustines time which he himself practiced upon this
occasion. In the town of Hippo, one of the family of S. Augustine accused a
Priest of an heinous crime, making his accusation good by oath, which the other
did reject, in like manner purging himself by oath. The fact being open and
scandalous seeing of necessity one of them was perjured, S. Augustine sent them
both into Italy to the shrine of Saint Felix of Nola, at whose relics
perjured persons were usually discovered. In defense of which fact he writes an
Epistle to his people of Hippo, allowing of this proceeding, showing that to
seek recourse rather to one Saint then another is pious and godly, wondering
at the secret providence of God therein: The Minister says, that this
narration is not to the purpose, because there is no mention of Invocation of
S. Felix, or of oblation to him. Answer. This is idle. For we have proved by S.
Augustine, and Fathers, and Scriptures that Saints are to be prayed unto: only
the question now is, whether it be lawful to seek some benefits at one place,
and by one Saint, rather then another: which to be lawful S. Augustine
affirms and proves by deduction from Scripture, showing it to have bee^ the
practice of his age, and not heathenish superstition. And though the Minister
rail against this practice, with many bitter new coined phrases, it makes no
matter; for what wise man will prefer words before proofs? a Minister before
S. Augustine? As for the Invocation of S. Felix in particular, with vows and
oblations at his Tomb, many testimonies of S. Augustine, S. Paulinus, and
Seuerus Sulpitius might be brought if there were need.
Although (says he) men by experience see this to be true, yet who is able to
discover the Counsel of God, why in some places such miracles are done, in
other places they are not? For is not Africa stored with shrines of blessed
Martyrs? and yet do we not know any such miracles to be done here by their
intercessions. For seeing, as the Apostle says, all Saints have not the gift of
curing diseases, not all the knowledge to discern spirits; so likewise at the
shrines of all Martyrs these things are not done, because he will not have
them every where done, who gives to every one particular gifts, according to
his pleasure.

This being the practice of the pure Christian Church, defended by the
learned Father, and worthyest Divine that ever Christianity bred, by him
grounded on the Scripture, and on the unsearchable course of the divine
Providence, never censured nor condemned by any Father, we need not fear
superstition in seeking some kind of favors and benefits by the peculiar
intercession of certain Saints, specially seeing this was usual in the Church,
confirmed by many miracles, recorded by most learned Saints that lived in the
purest Christian ages. S. Aug. in his 22. book ciuit. c. 8. and in tom. sermon.
fol. 182. edit. Louan. relates, the History of two cured at the to^be of Saint
Stephen at Hippo, that could not be cured at any other shrine of Saints. Alibi
curari non potuit, imo facillime potuit, sed non est curatus; huic loco
curandus diuina praedestinatione seruatus. Saint Lucy went on pilgrimage unto
the body of Saint Agatha, for help of her mother, putting peculiar confidence
in her intercession as being a Christian Virgin of her country and profession.
S. Iustina Virgin being by the Devil tempted against Virginal purity, fled to
the most glorious of Virgins: Virginem Mariam rogauit vt periclitanti virgini
opem ferret, (...) S. Nazianzen Greg. Nazian. orat. in S. Cypr.
writes. S. Martinian (as Paulinus Paulin. Epist. ad Cytherium.
records) having suffered shipwreck, called with peculiar devotion and trust
upon S. Paul, whose Epistles he did highly honor, remembering that the same
Saint yet living, delivered an hundred and seauenty souls from the like
peril; neither was his petition frustrate. Notwithstanding we confess that
herein a discreet mediocrity is to be observed. And if abuses be crept in
amongst common people, we desire they should be reformed, but so, that paring
away the abuse, we take not away the substance of a pious Christian custom.
For we cannot expect that simple people in matter of Religion will not
sometimes foolishly and superstitiously mistake; which when it happens, we must
(as S. Augustine August. de moribus Ecclesiae. c. 10.
says) Ignorantiam instruere, pertinaciam deridere.

Concerning oblations made unto Saints.. 7.
THE seventh cause of dislike, is our offering oblations unto Saints, which
your Majesty does object peculiarly as done to the Blessed Virgin MARY.

I answer, if any Catholic should offer to the blessed mother of God by way
of sacrifice any the least thing, he were severely to be rebuked, and better
instructed. For sacrifice Nulli Martyrum sed ipsi Deo Martyrum, quamuis in
memorias Martyrum co^stituimus altaria. Augustine. contra Faust. l. 20. c. 12.
is a religious homage due to God only. In which respect the sacrifice of the
holy Eucharist is never offered unto any but unto God, in memory and honor of
Saints. Herein the Collyridians women-Priests did err, who did sacrifice a
wafer-cake unto the blessed Virgin; which kind of worship under the title of
Adoration Saint Epiphanius Epiph. haeres. c. 9.
reproues, allowing the Catholic worship, there tearming her honorable
Virgin, not for humane or civil, but for divine and supernatural respects.

True it is, that in Catholic countries people offer They are said offered
unto Saints, not because they are given unto them immediately in their own
persons, but because they are offered at their shrines and Images, as ornaments
or monuments.
unto Saints, Lights, Flowers, and chains, not as sacrifices but as ornaments
to set forth their tombs and shrines, wherein they do not dissent from
Antiquity, nor from Gods holy will, who has confirmed such devotions by
miracle, as diverse Authors worthy of all credit relate, particularly. S.
Augustine by Calvin. instit. l. 5. c. 4.
Protestants allowed, as the most faithful witness of Antiquity August. l. 22.
de ciuit. c. 8.
. He tells of a woman stark blind that recovered her sight by laying to her
eyes flowers which had touched the shrine wherein were carried about the
relickes of the most glorious martyr S. Stephen The Minister says that S.
Augustine does not affirm that flowers, and the like were offered unto Saints.
I Answer, if offering, signify Sacrificing, neither does S. Augustine mention
this as done in his age, nor do we practice it in ours. But if offering be
taken (as we take it) for laying flowers and other such things on the Tombs of
Martyrs to adorn and beautify their shrines, S. Augustine does mention
oblatio^s of flowers, and suck like ornaments to have bee^ made unto the Tombs
of Martyrs, and this devotion to have been confirmed by miracle, as is manifest.
. A more wonderful example in the same kind he relates done upon an old man
of good note, who being sick and ready to dye, did yet very obstinatly refuse
to believe in Christ, and leave his Idolatry, although he was very earnestly
moved thereunto by his children that were zealous Christians. His Son in law
despayring to prevail by persuasion, resolved to go and pray at the Tomb of
Saint Stephen, and having performed his devotions with burning affection, with
many groans and tears, being to depart, took with him some flowers that were
on the shrine, and laid them secretly under his Father in Law his head the
night as he went to sleep. Behold the old man next morning awaking out of his
sleep, cries out, desiring them to go straight to call the Bishop to baptize
him. He had his desire, he was baptized. Afterward as long as he lived, he had
this prayer in his mouth, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, being altogether
ignorant that prayer was the prayer, and last speech of Saint Stephen when he
was stoned to death by the Jews, which also were the last words of this happy
old man, for not long after pronouncing those words he gave up his soul.
Other oblations also Catholics use to offer unto Saints, not as sacrifices,
but as memoryes and monuments of benefits received, as pictures of Lymms by
Saints prayers miraculously cured. That therein they do not deflect from
ancient Christian devotion, and that the Christian Church in her best times
used universally to make such oblations, Theodoret Theodoret. de curandis
Graecorum affect. l. 8.
is a sufficient witness, who writing against the Gentills, alleges as a
manifest sign of Christ's Godhead and Omnipotency, that Idols being excluded he
brought in Martyrs to be honored in their room, not superstitiously as Gods,
but religiously as divine men, and Gods special friends. Christian people
(says he) present themselves unto Martyrs, not as unto Gods, but as unto the
Martyrs of God, and divine men, inuocating and beseeching them to be
intercessours for them unto God. And those that piously, and with Faith pray,
obtain what they desire, as testify the oblations which they (being thereunto
bound by their vows) present in the Chappells of Saints, as tokens of health
recovered. For some hang up Images of eyes, others of ears, others of hands,
some made of gold, some made of silver The Minister also here denies that
these ancient Christians did offer these oblations at the shrines of Martyrs in
token of gratitude, for benefits receued. Whereas Theodoret says expressly,
that they were vows which they had made, and were bound to pay unto the
Martyrs, that is, unto their shrines, as monuments of their power in curing
them.
. Thus he, so general and notorious, even unto Infidels, was this Christian
deuition.

The Roman Church set forms of Prayer, without cause misliked.. 8.
FINALLY Protestants dislike the circumstance of praying in a set form unto
Saints, and that we appoint a particular office unto the Blessed Virgin Mary,
which cannot be proved to have been used in the Primitive Church The Minister
page 353. brings prayers used in the Roman Missalls as though they were
absurd, Call upon the sweet name of Mary. Saints interceding we may deserve to
be delivered from all necessityes. The Saints merits interceding, Lord absolve
us from all sins. I Answer: all these speeches are the very words used by
the full consent of ancient Fathers, as you may find in the fifth
Demonstration. Does the Minister expect that for fear at his railing we should
leave all antiquity? We must not do so, nor do we, nor may we fear the
bitterness of man's tongue in so high degree.
.

I answer, that the Primer, or Office (so termed) of our Lady, is not an
office properly and principally directed unto her, but an Office containing
praises of God, taken out of holy Scripture, wherein commemoration of her is
made. So as I dare say that the prayers of that office of our Lady that are
directed unto her, make not the hundred part thereof. And seeing it is most
certain that the Christian Church in her best times did frequently pray unto
Saints, what reason have we to think that in her set form of prayers, she did
not use to crave their intercession?

If it be lawful, pious, and profitable when we pray unto God, to pray also to
Saints by their mediatio^ offering our prayers to him, why should any mislike
the doing of this in a set form that is allowed by the Church? why should this
displease, rather then an extemporall form?

But further we ca^ prove that the Church in her best The Minister here
questioneth our meaning by the word primitive. I answer, that we hold, that
true Christian Religion planted by the Apostles, was not a mere shadow that
vanished away in a trice, but that the belief and practice thereof continued in
the world after their decease. This Religion in respect of being in the world
was primitive in the days of the Apostles, and of them that saw the Apostles
and were converted by them. But in respect of free public profession, the same
was never Primitive, till the fourth Age, that is, under Constantine. Now, the
monuments of the first and second Age after the Apostles in regard of
persecution are few, and many Christian Historyes and monuments, yea in a
manner al, were made away by Dioclesian. So that the best way to know what
Religion was professed immediately upon the death of the Apostles, is to
examine what form of Religion in the days of Constantine came from under
ground, and secret meetings, into the free view of the world. For no doubt but
that Religion was freely professed under Constantine, that was cruelly
persecuted, and the monuments thereof abolished by Dioclesia^ Constantine his
Predecessor, and the other Pagan Emperors before him. But the Christian
profession of Constantines age is so clearly Catholic, as our Ministers fear
trial thereby, and would rather have all reduced unto those ages whereof the
monuments are scarce, for therein they hope to find best patronage for their
negative religion, and for their Invisible Perpetual, Namelesse Notorious
Professors.
times, did pray unto Saints in set forms, as Catholics now do, even with a
form of prayer, acknowledged and confessed by the Magdeburgia^s Cent. 4. c. 4.
to have been in use eue^ in the fourth age after Christ, in which the four
first general Councels were held. But if they will perchance say that they do
not so much dislike set forms unto Saints, as some Phrases or speeches in our
Prayer-bookes, that seem to give too much unto Creatures, as our calling the
Blessed Virgin Mother of Grace, Mother of mercy, saying to her, Lady protect us
from the Devil, receive us in the hour of death, give light to the blind,
pardon to the guilty, remove from us all evil etc. I answer, these speeches
cannot justly be disliked, because they are understood in a pious sense known
to Catholics; a sense obuious and plain according to the phrase of Scripture,
and which the words may well bear even according to the custom of speech. The
nature of things being various, and the answerable conceits of men copious,
but words to express such conceyts scant and in great paucity, necessity does
enforce us to use words applyable to diverse senses. For example, one man may
deliver another from death, either by authority pardoning him as do Kings, or
by Justice defending him as do Advocates, by force taking him out of his
enemies hands as do Soldiers, or paying his ransom to them that keep him
captive, as Almoners, finally by begging his life of them that have power to
take it away, as intercessours. These be very different ways of relief, yet
have we but one word to express them all, to wit, to save a man's life, which
therefore is to be understood according to the subject it is applied. And if
men want understanding, or will not take our words according to the matter they
are applied unto, there can never want Cauils, unless we either speak not at
all, or when we speak still use long circumlocutions, which were ridiculous,
and in verse impossible, the meter not permitting it. And yet the aforesaid
misliked phrases in the office of the Blessed Virgin are taken out of the
Hymns and Verses thereof. If they that by begging obtain of the king the life
of one condemned to death, may be, and are commonly Our Adversary in this place
plays the right Minister, according to the new order, and very hansomely
tells a lie saying to the Jesuit; You labor to qualifye your blasphemous
words by a^ honorable exposition, pretending you SAY one thing, and MEAN
another. What boldness is this? does not the Jesuit say, that they not only
mean well, but also speak well, and according to the rigor of speech, the
phrase of Scripture, and holy Fathers? How then does he pretend that we say one
thing, and mean another?
said to save his life, though they saved him by intercession, not by their
proper authority; why may not Saints be said to give us the things which by
their prayers they obtain for us? Why may not the Church speak in Hymns, and
in Verse, as the learned Fathers spoke even in Prose, never imagining that
any would mistake their meaning? Saint Gregory Nazianzen, for his excellent
learning termed by the Grecians The Divine, thus prays unto Saint Cyprian.
Look down on us from heaven with a propitious eye, guide our works and ways,
feed this holy flock, govern it with us, dispose some of them, as far as is
possible, to a better state. Cast out importune and troublesome wolves that
cavil and catch at sillables, vouchsafe us the perfect and clear splendor of
the B. Trinity, with whom thou art already present The Minister here says
the Jesuit cannot prove that Gregory Nazia^zen did Invoke S. Cyprian, but
only made an Oratoriall Apostrophe unto him: As Papists say in their hymn, al
hayle o Cross, and yet they do not pray to the wodden Cross. This is vanity.
For, that S. Gregory Nazianzen did properly invoke S. Cyprian. I prove by
this demonstration. For one to call upon some person for aid, thinking him
that he does hear him, and is able to help, is to Invoke him. S. Gregory
Nazianze^ did call upon S. Cyprian for help, thinking he heard him, and was
able to help him; for he says (...), I know well that Blessed Saints hear
me, and are ready to reach out their hand to such as need their help. Ergo, he
did properly Invoke him, and pray unto him.
. And not only Fathers but also Scriptures speak of Saints in the same sort,
our Savior saying; Make to your selves friends of the riches of Iniquity,
that when you dye, they may receive you into the eternal tabernacles. If then
the Saints of God by the mouth of Verity it self be said to receive their
friends when they dye into the eternal Tabernacles, because God moved by
their prayers, admits them into the Blissful vision of his essence; why may
not the Church and her children crave the Blessed Virgins intercessions in
these words: Mother of Mercy, receive us in the hour of death? And seeing God
in Scripture is termed Mercy, why should not she be styled mother of mercy,
that is undoubtedly mother of God, especially seeing that in, and of her the
Author of mercy and grace was conceived and borne, and she filled with grace
and charity above all other Creatures The seely Minister not knowing which way
to turn himself to find some seeming ground of carping at the forms of the
Catholic Missals and Roman Liturgy, he goes catching at the phrases of
private writers. To what purpose? If the Authors cannot iustifye their phrases
and Metaphores, let him dislike them in Gods name. What is this to the
Catholic Church; Some writer did not apply his Metaphore fitly: Ergo, the
Roman Church is Idolatrous?
?

That other phrase much disliked by your Majesty, that God reserving Justice to
himself, has given away mercy to his mother, is not used by the Church in any
of her prayers, nor allowed of by Catholic Deuines, nor will we justify it,
being an harsh and unfitting Metaphore, though thereby the Authors thereof
express a truth, to wit, that the Blessed Virgin is exceeding gracious with
her Son, and her intercession very pote^t, alluding to a phrase of Scripture
used Hester cap. 5.3.6. and cap. 7.2. Mark 6.23. whereby such as are gracious
with a prince are said that they may have any thing, though half of his
Kingdom: so, dividing Gods Kingdom into Justice and Mercy, to show how
gracious the Blessed Virgin is with her Son, they say, God has given her one
half of his Kingdom, to wit, his Mercy, which is a Metaphore far fetched, not
to be used, howsoever in charity it may be excused.

THE FOVRTH POINT.
The Liturgy, and private prayers for the Ignorant, in an unknown tongue.

THE custom of the Roman Church in this point is agreeable to the custom of
the Church in all Ages, and also of The Minister page 356. lin. 22. It is false
according to the Tenet of Bellarmine himself, that all other Churches which
differ from Protestants have their public service in Hebrew, Greek, or
Latin. Answer. This is your fashion when you have not what to reply, you
impose your sayings upon your Adversary, and then urge they are false. The
Answerer never said that al Churches which differ from Protestants, have their
service in Hebrew, Greek or Latin, for this he knew to be false in the
Maronits, Armenians, Egyptians, Aethiopians, Russians: But he said, they all
agree with the Roman, in that they have their divine service in a language not
vulgar, nor commonly known of the people: this is true, for the forenamed
Christians have their Lyturgies in a special language which is not their
vulgar.
all Churches now in the world bearing the name of Christian, though opposite
unto the Roman (only those of the pretended Reformation excepted) which
constant concurrence is a great sign that the same is very conform unto
reason, and not any where forbidden in Gods word, which will easily appear if
we look particulerly into the same.

For we may imagine a triple state of Liturgy in an unknown tongue. The first,
in a language altogether The Minister page 369. says: This is a Chimera, and
Non Ens, because there was never such a Liturgy in the Church. Answer. In the
beginning of the Church there was not any set Form of public prayer, but the
sacred Minister did extemporally make prayers at meetings. And that some then
did use to make extemporall prayers in languages altogether unknown, even to
themselves, appears by the Apostle 1. Cor. 14. Nor is it enough for a Minister
to say, that this is a Non Ens, and a Chimera, because it never was. For first,
though it never were, yet it might have been; and things that be possible, and
might have been be not Chimera's. Secondly, that in meetings some did use a
language altogether unknown at prayer, S. Paul does witness, who (I trow) is to
be believed before a Minister. He forbids the speaking in the Church with an
unknown tongue, when there is none present that can understand and interpret,
1. Cor. 14.27.28. which he would not have done, had it not been used. Therefore
some did use prayers in public Church-meetings in a language so unknown, as
no man present could understand and interpret the same, no not themselves, and
so the Fathers interpret S. Paul. S. Augustine de Genes. ad liter. lib. 12. c.
8. and 9. S. Ambrose, Theophilact, specially S. Chrysostom. Erant, says he,
multi qui precabantur and lingua sonabant, mente vero quid dixissent non
intelligebant: There were many that sou^ded prayers in an unknown tongue which
eue^ themselves did not understand.
unknown, in the which no man in the Church speaks, no man understands
besides the Celebrant himself, nor he neither, but by Enthusiasme or
inspiration of the holy Ghost: Without question it is inconvenient that public
prayer should be said in a language in this sort unknown, and this is proved
by the reasons the Apostle brings 1. Cor. 14. against an unknown tongue in the
Church. Secondly, in a language unknown to most, eue^ of the better sort of
the Church, yet some know it, and others with facility may learn it. To use a
language in the Church for public prayer in this sort unknown cannot be
proved unlawful, nor forbidden by the Apostle, seeing the reasons brought by
him against a language unknown make not against this. For Saint Paul
reprehends in the public Liturgy a language so unknown, as the Minister or the
Church that supplies the place of the Idiot and Ignorant, cannot upon his
knowledge of the goodness of the prayer say thereunto Amen, in the name of them
all. But when the language is known by some of the Church and may with
facility be learned by others, there is, or may easily be found one able to
supply the place of the Idiote and ignorant, and answer in their person Amen,
out of his intelligence of the prayer in that unknown tongue.

Notwithstanding the Roman Church does not approve the use of a language in
this sort unknown, as appears by the late dispensation of Paulus the fifth,
unto Jesuits to turn the Liturgy of the Mass, into the vulgar language of
China, and to use the same till the Latin language grow more known and
familiar in that country. For though public prayers in a language thus
unknown cannot be proved unlawful, yet it is indecent to use a language which
to the whole multitude of hearers, may seem barbarous and uncouth. Thirdly, a
language may be termed unknown, because it is not the vulgar The Minister
page 370. argues in this sort. The old rule was, Barbarus hic ego sum qui non
intelligor vlli; and accordingly your Massepreists are mere barbaria^s to the
ordinary sort of people. Answer. If he be a Barbarian that is not understood,
the Minister should be a Barbarian to himself, who understands not himself.
Did he understand what he says, he would understand that this argument proves
the contrary to what he intends. For his old rule, Barbarus hic ego sum, quia
non intelligor vlli, in English sounds thus, I am a Barbarian, where I am
understood of no man, non intelligor vlli. But the Catholic Priest saying the
Latin mass in the Latin Church is understood of many. How then can he be a
Barbarian by this old rule? The latin tongue is known of the best, most
civil, and most principal persons in the Western parts of the world.
Wherefore he that speaks it is not Barbarous, but accounted rather learned to
him that understands not Latin: for the cause why the Latin in these parts is
not understood is not the strangenes of the language, but the rudenes of the
hearer, and want of the best education. But in a country where the best,
ciuillest, and most learned know not Latin, the Latin is Barbarous.
, though most men of better sort understand it. Such was anciently the latin
language in the whole Roman Empire, and now is in the Latin Church. For not
only Priests understand the same (or if some few do not, it is the fault of
Bishops that ordain them) but also an innumerable company of Laymen, not only
addicted to learning, but also other gentlemen, yea many of the vulgar, partly
by reason of the affinity their mother tongue has with the Latin, partly out
of education, which commonly when they are children they have What the Minister
here brings out of Suarez that it is not necessary the Minister or Priest
understand the language, in which mass is said, is misunderstood by him. For
Suarez does not mean that the Priest may lawfully be ignorant of the language
of the mass, or that he does not sin in saying mass without knowledge of
the tongue; but only, that such prayers are notwithstanding available unto
others that pray with the Minister, and offer them unto God in the faith of the
Church. For if the understanding of the Minister were necessary to make the
public prayers pleasing to God, and available, the^ if the Minister chance to
be distracted, and have his mind on other matters the people should leese the
fruit of public Service.
: How then can the service, or the Liturgy in Latin be said absolutely to be in
an unknown tongue which the most part (besides women) in some sort understand?
Moreover the prayers which S. Paul speaks of were extemporall, made in
public meetings, according to the devotion of the speaker. Therefore it was
necessary that he should pray in a known language, that those who heard him
might know when to say Amen, and whether the prayer for matter was such as they
might lawfully say Amen thereunto. But now the service and Liturgy of the Church
has set offices for every festival day approved by the Church, which by
continual use are made so known, and so vulgar unto common people, as no man
is so ignorant that using diligence or attention may not in short time come to
understand them. And hereunto serve Exhortations, Sermons, Catechismes, private
Instructions, Manualls and Primers in vulgar Languages, where the prayers used
for the Church are found, which show that the Latin service cannot be unknown
to any that will use diligence to understand it; neither can any doubt, but
that he may lawfully say Amen unto it The Minister page 369. and 377. argues
in this manner: That is forbidden by the Apostle to be used in prayer whereby al
sorts of people being of ripe years may not be edified in their understanding,
and to which they are not able to say Amen having some distinct understanding
of the things spoken. Answer. First not only the learned, but also the
unlearned have or may have some distinct knowledge of the set Offices of the
Church, of the prayers, Gospells, and Epistles read, and other devotions said
in secret, they being so often and yearly repeated, yea some for the most part
daily. Secondly, it is false, that the Apostle does prohibit all prayer that
does not edify the understanding. For though the Apostle prefer prayer that
does edify the understanding, yet does he not prohibit prayer of mere
affection without new instruction of the understanding, but says that in such
prayers men pray with their spirit and affection, though not with their
understanding.
.

Now that S. Paul did co^ma^d that service should be in such a language as
every woman in the Church might be able to understand it word by word The
Minister says page 374. that Ignorance of the distinct notion of every word,
hinders not sufficient edification, when the ordinary necessary, and common
passages of the public service are intelligible. Thus he. Now I subsume. But
people who understand not latin distinctly may by instruction through books,
Sermons, and Cathechismes understand the ordinary, necessary, and common
passages of the public service, specially by the help of use and custom, as
experience shows. Ergo, public prayers in latin may yield sufficient
edification, and so are lawful.
is incredible, nor are our Adversaries able to prove it; neither can they show
by any Records of antiquity that such a custom was in the Primitive Church:
yea the contrary may more then probably be showed, because the drift of the
Church in appointing Lyturgies, or set forms of public Prayer at the oblation
of the Eucharisticall sacrifice, was not for the The Minister says that indeed
the end of public service is not to instruct People, yet the prayers must be
said in a language understood of all, because they which come to God with sound
of words, without understanding, offer the sacrifice of fools. Answer. He
that offers unto God vocal prayers full of devout and pious affection,
knowing only in general that they be pious devout and expressing such
affections, offers a grateful sacrifice unto God, though he do not distinctly
understand the words and parts of the Prayer. For example, if one that
understands not Latin believe the Psalm Miserere to be full of penitent
affections, and say the same with many tears of inward sorrow and contritio^
for his sins, whosoever will say that this man offers unto God the sacrifice
of fools, is himself an Infidel, or Fool. For what greater folly then to
think that prayers of pious affection please not God, except the affection
correspond mathematically to the words?
peoples instruction, but for other reasons. First, that by this public
Service a continual daily tribute or homage of prayer and thanksgiving might
be publicly offered and paid unto God. Secondly, that christians by their
personal assistance at this public service might protest, and exercise
exteriourly acts of Religion common with the whole Church, represented by the
Synaxis, or Ecclesiastical meeting of every Christian parish. Finally, to the
end that every Christian by his presence, yielding consent unto the public
prayers, praises and thankesgiuings of the Church, and as it were subscribing
and setting his seal unto them by this assisting at them, might ordinarily
participate of the graces, benefits and fruits which the Church does obtain by
her Liturgyes and public oblations. Now, for this end there is no need, that
every one should understand word by word the prayers that are said in the
public Liturgy, but it suffices that the Church in general, and in
particular Pastors and Ecclesiastical persons dedicated unto the Ministeryes
of the Church, and who watch, being bound to give an account of souls
committed to their charge, have particular notice of all the prayers that are
said, and that all who will may be taught and instructed in particular, if they
will use diligence and desire it.

Moreover the Churches anciently even in the purest times of Christianity, had
Chancels unto which Laymen might not enter, and so could not particularly and
distinctly understand It had been folly for the Church, intending her Liturgy
for the instruction of laymen, to have excluded them out of the Chancells: and
though our Adversary say, that the Priest read service in so audible a voice,
as he might be heard from the highest of the Cha^cell where the Altar was
placed, unto the body of Church; yet this he might better have spoken unto
fools, then unto men of understanding, that know how great the Chancells of
many Churches are, and how far distinctly audible a man's voice ordinarily is.
the prayers said by the public Minister of the Church. Within the said
Chancells they did also use to say a good part of the Liturgy Vide Liturgias
impressas anno Domini 1568. Basil. in Liturg. fol. 34.
secretly, so that their voice was not audible unto any. Yea the Greek Church
did anciently use a Veyle Basil. ibidem fol. 34.38.41.43.46. and Chrysostom.
Liturg. fol. 55. and hom. 61. ad Pop.
wherewith the Priest was for the times of the sacred Oblation compassed, which
are manifest signs, that the Church did never think it necessary that all the
public Liturgy should be heard, much less word by word understood by the
whole vulgar multitude present thereat.

Besides, it is certain that the Scripture was not read in any language but
Greek over all the Churches of the East, as S. Hierome Hieron. praefat. in
Paralip.
witnesses. Also the Greek Liturgy of Saint Basil was used in all the Church
of the East, and the Grecian was not the vulgar language of all the Countries
of the East, as is apparent by manifest testimonies, particularly of the Basil.
de Spiritu sancto c. 19.
Cappadocians, Hieron. in Prooem. 2. lib. com. ad Galat. and Act. Apost. c. 1.
v. 10. and 11.
Mesopotamians, Hieron. in Prooem. 2. lib. com. ad Galat. and Act. Apost. c. 1.
v. 10. and 11.
Galathians, Theodoret. in histor. SS. Patrum hist. 13.
Lycaonians, Hieron. de script. Eccles. in Anton.
Egyptians, Syrians; yea that all these Countries and most of the Orient had
their proper language distinct from the Greek is manifest out of the Acts of
the Apostles. No less manifest is it that the Latin Liturgy was common
anciently for all the Churches of the Western parts, even in Afric, as
appears by testimonies of S. August. Epist. 57. de doctrine. Christian. l. 2.
c. 13. August. in Psalm. 123. and in exposit. Ep. ad Romans and epist. 173.
Augustine. But it is manifest that the Latin was not the vulgar language for
all nations of the West; and though the better sort understood it, yet some of
the Although the Fathers say that the Greek Liturgy and translation did serve
all Asia, and the East: Although likewise they affirm the same of the Latin
for all Africa and the Occident, yet our Minister says to the contrary pa.
379. and 380. that all people had their Liturgyes in their native tongue, which
he proves, because the people did then praise God in all languages, and did
pray, according to S. Iustine and Tertullia^, together with the Priest. Ergo,
the public Liturgy was read in the Church in all vulgar tongues. As his
denying what so many Fathers affirm is impudent, so his arguing is frivolous,
as every man may see. For Catholics praise God in all languages, and meet to
pray with Priests as much as Protestants, and yet our public service is not
said in all vulgar tongues. More impertinent are his allegatio^s of Fathers,
speaking against distraction of mind, and men's not hearing themselves in
prayer. As though men could not be recollected in prayer by attentio^ unto God,
unto their own needs, and the substance of their prayers, though they do not
understand the^ distinctly word by word.
vulgar multitude only knew their own mother tongue, as may be clearly
gathered out of the same Saint Augustine, who writes that he pleading in Latin
against Crispinus a Bishop of the Donatists for possession of a village in
Africa, whereunto the consent of the Villagers was required, they did not
understand his speech till the same was interpreted unto them in their vulgar
African language. So that the Christian Church did never judge it requisite,
that the public Liturgy should be commonly turned into the mother language of
every nation, nor necessary that the same should presently be understood word
by word by every one of the vulgar assistants, neither does the end of the
public Service require it.

As for the comfort that some few want, in that they do not so perfectly
understand the particulars of divine Service, it may by other means abou^da^tly
be supplied without turning the publik Liturgyes into innumerable vulgar
la^guages, which would bring a great confusion into the Christian Church.
First, The Church should not be able to judge of the Liturgy of every country
when differences arise about the Translation thereof. So diverse errors and
heresies might creep into particular countries, and the whole Church never
able to take notice of them. Secondly, particular countries could not be
certain, that they have the Scripture truly translated, for thereof they can
have no other assured proof, but only the Churches approbation, nor can she
approve what she does not understand. Thirdly, were vulgar Translations so
many as there be la^guages in the world, it could not be otherwise, but some
would be in many places ridiculous, inco^gruous, and full of mistaking, to the
great prejudice of souls, specially in languages that have no great extents,
nor many learned men that naturally speak them. Fourthly the liturgy would be
often changed, together with the language, which does much alter in every age.
Fifthly, in the same Country by reason of different dialects, some Provinces
understand not one another. And in the Island of Iaponia, (as some write) there
is one language for Noble men, another for Rustikes, another for men, another
for women; Into what language should then the Iaponian Liturgy be turned?
Finally, by this vulgar use of the Liturgy the study of the learned languages,
would be given over, and in short time come to be extinct, as we see that no
ancient language now remaynes in humane knowledge, but such as have been (as it
were) incorporated in the Liturgyes of the Church; and the common use of
learned tongues being extinct, there would follow want of means for Christians
to meet in General Counsels to communicate one with another in matters of
faith. In a word extreme Barbarism would be brought upon the world.

Private prayers The Minister having nothing to say, rayleth and boasts that
the opposition of Protestants, forsooth, has brought us to allow private
vulgar prayers by force, as we translate Scripture; and that were our kingdom
as absolute as ever, we would return to our Center. Thus he Prophesies, but
so, as he may easily be proved a false Prophet. For (to omit that diverse
Councels many ages before Luther was borne, command the knowing of the Pater,
Aue, and Creed in the vulgar tongue) where is the Popes kingdom more absolute,
or Protesta^cy less known then in Italy and in Spain? And yet no where are
prayers in the vulgar tongue more used then in Italy and Spain. You shall
hardly there find one woman, one Layman which says not their private
deuotio^s in the vulgar. Whereas thousands in Germany, Low countries, Polony,
England both men and women, love to say their prayers rather in Latin, to show
their oppositio^ against Protestants that fondly condemn such prayers, and be
so void of judgment as to think that pious thoughts and affections upon the
Pater noster please not God, except we understand the words, and measure our
pious thoughs and affections Geometrically unto the same: so that a woman
saying with much devotion Pater noster, if percha^ce she think that Pater
signifyes our, and Noster Father, her prayer is marred. Wherefore your
Protestant imprudent opposition is the cause that many pray in Latin, which
otherwise perchance would not.
for ignorant people in their vulgar languages we practice, we allow; yea the
Pater Noster, and the Creed, are to be known of all in their Mother tongues,
which two forms contain the whole substance of prayer. For the end of Prayer
being threefold, To praise God for his infinite perfectio^s, To give him thanks
for his benefits bestowed upon us, To demand of him such necessaryes as we
want, as well for the maintayning of this present, as for the attayning unto
eternal life; the Creed being a Sum of the perfections of God, and his
benefits toward man, affoards sufficient knowledge to comply with the two
former ends of prayer. The Pater Noster, being an abridgeme^t of al those
things which we need, co^teines a full instruction for the third. Other prayers
do but more plainly express things contained in the Pater Noster, and the
Creed, and our many books do show, that these kind of prayers in vulgar
languages are by us written, esteemed, practiced. We add that ordinarily
speaking, common people do more profit by saying prayers in their mother
tongue then in the Latin, because not only their affections are moved to
piety, but also their understanding edifyed with knowledge. Notwithstanding
some prayers though translated into English be so difficill to be understood as
they will rather distract ignorant, especially curious people, then instruct
them, of which kind are many Psalms of David, and these prayers (as we think)
may more profitably be said in Latin. So that I see no great difference either
in practice or in doctrine between Protestants and the Roman Church, concering
private Prayers in a language unknown.

THE FIFTH POINT
Repetitions of Pater Nosters, Aues, and Creeds, especially affixing a kind of
merit to the number of them.

I AM persuaded that your Majesty does not intend to dislike Repetition of
Prayers, so the same be done with reverent Devotion and Affection. For this
repetition is justified, not only by the example of the blind man, who still
cried upon our Savior, with repetition of the same prayer, Math. 20. Marc. 10.
Luc. 18.
Jesus Fili David miserere mei, by which repetition he obtained his sight; nor
only of the princely Prophet, who in his 135. Psalm repeates 27. times,
Quoniam in aeternum misericordia eius; nor only of the Isa. 6.6.
Seraphims, who in praising their Creator repeat three times over the same
word, holy, holy, holy: but also by the example of our Blessed Savior
himself, who thrice (at least) in the garden repeated the same prayer, Matthew.
26. v. 4. Marc. 14. v. 39. Eumdem sermonem dicens. Luc. 22. v. 42.
Pater, si fieri potest, tra^seat a me Calix, verumtamen non mea voluntas, sed
tua fiat.

Wherefore to repeat the same prayers is very good and pious, so the same be
done with new devotion; which new devotion that it may not be wanting in our
Repetitions, there is appointed for every Pater, Aue, and Creed, a special
meditation, that may stir up devotion at every repeated prayer. And seeing we
cannot pray long but we must needs repeat over the Pater noster in sense,
(for what can we demand of God that is not there contained?) why may we not
also repeat the same in words? If any think to merit by reason of the number
of his prayers, he is ignorant of the doctrine of the Catholic Church, which
attributes The Minister page 385. writes in this sort: I grant repetitions in
prayer, and thankesgiuings which agree with the examples of Scripture to be
pious and lawful; but the illation from these to the Roman Battalogy is
inconsequent. First, their prayers are in part directed to Creatures. Secondly,
they are multiplied to an excessive and portentuous number. Thirdly, the Creed
is no prayer or tha^ksgiuing formally or virtually. Fourthly, they think
praying without understanding the words, without present actual attention, to
be pious and effectual. Answer. To avoid the shame of not being able to reply
something, at least in show, you run directly upon his Majesty and disgrace
his questions. His Majesty proceeding most iudiciously, knowing the Pater noster
to be pious devotion; first questioned the Aue Maria, or praying unto Saints,
and also praying in an unknown tongue, and then supposing by way of argument,
that the saying of Paters Aues and Creeds is pious, he doubts about repetition
of them in certain numbers, as judging repetitio^ even of pious and Godly
prayers, in a fixed number, to be questionable, specially affixing merit unto
the number. You convinced by the Jesuit, grant repetitio^ of pious prayers in
certain numbers to be pious, and so have granted what his Majesty questioned;
and yet not to seem to grant it, you make his Maiestyes question to be,
whether repetition of unlawful prayers in an excessive number, without
attention, be lawful? Which question is unworthy of his Maiestyes Judgment;
yea his Majesty seeing the impertinency of this question did first move doubt
about the lawfulnes of Invocation of Saints, that the lawfulnes thereof might be
supposed in this question, knowing the question without this supposition to be
senseless and foolish. Secondly, according to your reply, his Majesty does not
dislike our saying 33. Pater nosters, in memory of 33. years our Savior lived
upon earth, affixing merit unto that number. For neither is the number
excessive, nor the prayer unlawful, nor is there any amongst us that does not
understand the sense thereof. And yet I think his Majesty was not of this mind,
which shows that he questioned repetition of pious prayers in a fixed number,
and so your Reply grants what he questioned. Thirdly, the Aue Maria is not a
prayer directed unto any Creature, as prayer signifyes petition of grace and
favor, because in the Aue Maria we ask not grace, nor any gift of the B.
Virgin, but only that she will pray for us, Holy mary pray for us, now and in
the hour of death. If petition made unto Creatures that they will be
comprecants with us, be prayer directed unto Creatures; then is craving the
comprecation of living Saints, prayer finally directed unto a Creature.
Fourthly, your saying that the Creed is no prayer neither formally nor
virtually, is the bare word of a Minister against the perpetual practice of
the Christian Church, which used the Creed as a prayer a thousand years ago,
defining it in Council. Quinosexto Can. 7. Let every Christian pray, at the
least twice a day, saying the CREED, or the Lords Prayer, or, Qui plasmasti me
miserere mei, or, Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori. Thus the Council. And
who does not see the Creed, said unto God with inward devotion of faith, about
his divine perfections, and mercyes toward mankind there declared, to be a
prayer either of praise, or thanksgiving, or obsecration, according to the
affection of him that prays. Finally, your Cavil that our prayers are said
in a tongue unknown, and so without present attention, is in your supposition
often false (seeing they that pray in these numbers most commonly either
understand Latin, or else pray in the vulgar tongue) and in the illation
ridiculous: For they that understand not the Pater, Aue, and Creed in Latin,
may by memory know the substance thereof, and so be actually attent.
no merit to prayers in regard of their number, further then the number awakes
in us devout thoughts, which is the only thing that by the number we aim at.
We say Paters, Aues, Creeds, to the number of three in memory of the Blessed
Trinity, seeking Gods favor and grace by glorifying that incomprehensible
mystery. To the number of five, in memory of the five special wounds our
Savior received, that pierced into, and through his sacred body. To the number
of 33. in remembrance of 33. years our Savior wrought our Salvation upon
earth, giving him thanks for all his labors, desiring the application of his
merits, stirring up our selves to the imitation of his virtues. The like reason
moves us to pray in the number of 63. Angelical salutations, to call to mind
the years the Mother of God lived, according to one probable opinion. And
because the opinion that she lived 72. years now begins to be much followed,
many Catholics, particularly in Spain, have thereupon increased the crown of
our B. Lady to 72. Aue Maria's: A manifest sign that they never attributed
merit unto the number of 63. but only to the devout memory of the B. Virgins
virtues exercised in the years she conuersed in this world, giving God thanks
for his graces bestowed upon her. The Psalter of our Lady, and the Jesus
Psalter contain one hundred and fifty repetitions of prayers, the one of Aue
Maria's, the other Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, in imitation of the devout Royal Prophet,
whose Psalter contaynes Psalms in Gods praise, to the same number.

Neither are we in this point of repeating prayers upon Beads, or little
stones in a The Minister says, that his Majesty in his dislike of our affixing
merit to the Repetition of prayers in a certain number, meant to deny the
merit of condignity, not the merit of congruity or Impetration. I Answer. If
you had studied of purpose to make his Majesty ridiculous in his proposition of
questions, you could not have more fondly sensed them. For his Majesty speaking
of prayers, and denying merit unto the repeating of prayers, what (according to
sense) could he mean, but the merit proper of prayers, which is to impetrate
or obtain? And so the Jesuit proving the special merit of Impetration, has
proved what his Majesty questioned. As for your self, seeing you deny not that
unto repetition of prayers special merit of Impetration is affixed, I do not
doubt but you yield the very Doctrine his Majesty disliked, to wit, that
repetition of prayers in a fixed number, has special force and efficacy to
impetrate.
certain number (for the causes before mentioned) destitute of the example of
Saints, that lived in the best ages of the Church. Palladius in his history
cap. 14. and 25. sets down some examples of Saints praying in this kind.
Yea the Century-writers Cent. 4. col. 1329. and Osiander, acknowledge the
example of Saint Paul, a most holy Monk, living in the fourth age after
Christ, that, In dies singulos trecentas orationes Deo velut tributum reddidit;
ac ne per imprudentiam in numero erraret, trecentis lapillis in sinum
coniectis, ad singulas preces singulos eiecit lapillos: consumptis igitur
lapillis, constabat sibi orationes lapillis numero pares abs se expletas esse.
Which example of so great a Saint, so known and notorious The Minister
answers, that singular examples are no rule, for Ammonius being solicited to
be a Bishop, cut of his own ear, and yet he is not imitable herein: so
neither is S. Paul's example, in saying prayers upon Beads to be followed. I
Answer. Some things are such of their own nature as they cannot be done
lawfully and with out sin, but by special revelation, as the killing and
mayming himself, in which kind examples in Scripture, or else where related,
are admirable, not imitable. But when the thing used by some singular Saint,
is not against any law of God or man, but a thing that may be done without
special revelation, the same is imitable by all others in due circumstances.
Now, what law divine or human, forbids a man to say three hundred prayers a
day, one hundred to each of the three Divine Persons? Or what law does prohibit
him to use 300. little stones or beads, in numbering them, for help of Memory?
Or why may we not help our memory in numbering our devotions, by calculation of
Beads, if S. Paul's example be pious and laudable? If to say Prayers in a
certain number upon beads be intrinsecally evil, it cannot be done piously
by the singular instinct of Gods Spirit, seeing God can never inspire men to do
any thing that is essentially evil. If it be not of it self essentially
evil, why should Protestants forbid men to use such helps of our devotion?
except they can show, an express positive Divine law in Scripture, against it.
, and never censured by any Father, may more then abundantly suffice for
satisfaction in a matter of no more moment then this. For we are not curious in
this Point, nor do require of any man, that he say his prayers in a certain
number, so that he may not say more or less, as his devotion serves him.

THE SIXTH POINT.
The doctrine of Transubstantiation.

YOUR Excellent Majesty, submitting your Judgment to Gods express word does
firmly believe the body of Christ to be truly present in the most venerable
Sacrament of the Altar; which doctrine does naturally and necessarily infer
whatsoever the Church of Rome holds as matter of Faith, concerning the manner
of this Presence.

To declare this, and together answer an Objection much urged by some
Protestants, that they believe the body of Christ to be in the Sacrament, but
are not bound by this, to believe the Manner, that not being expressed in
Scripture: We must note, that men are bound firmly to believe the manner of a
mystery revealed, when the same belongs to the substance thereof, so that
rejecting the manner, we reject the belief of the substance of the mystery.
This is evident, and may be declared by the example of the mystery of the
Incarnation, the substance whereof is, that in Christ Jesus the nature of God,
and the nature of man are so united, that God is truly Man, and man verily God.
The manner of this mystery is ineffable and incomprehensible, yet we are bound
to believe three things concerning it; which if we deny, we deny the mystery
in substance, howsoever we may retain the same in words. First, that this
union is not only Metaphorical Non affectualis vnitas, sed secundu^
subsistentiam. Synodus 5. Generalis quae est Constantinop. 2. Can. 4.
by Affection, as two persons that are great friends may truly be said to be
all one; but also true, and Real. Secondly, real Union of natures, is Qui no^
confitetur Dei verbu^ substantialiter VNIRI carni, Anathema sit. Synod. Chal.
act. 5. Synod. quinta General. can. 5.
substantial, and not accidental, so that thereby the nature is not only
accidentally perfected by receiving excellent participations of the divine
nature, power, wisdom, and Majesty, but also substantially, the very fulness of
the Godhead, dwelling corporally and substantially in him. Thirdly, that this
substantial Union, is not according to the Natures, so, that the nature of
God, and the nature of man became one and the same nature, as Eutiches taught,
but Ex duabus naturis secundu^ substa^tia^ vnitis, vnum and eumdem Christu^ qui
non confitetur, conde^natus est. Council. Lateran. sub Martin. 1. Can. 6.
Hypostaticall, whereby God and Man became one and the same person. These
particulars about the manner of the Incarnation, though high, subtle, and
incomprehensible to reason, Christians may, and must believe, because they
belong to the substance of the Mystery, and are declared by the Church in
general Councels, though the vulgar be not bound explicitly to know them.

In this sort we say, that the manner how our Saviors Body is in the Sacrament
of his last Supper, must be believed, and may not be denied as far as it
concerns the very life, being, and substance of the Mystery revealed. Which
mystery in substance is, that the Body of Christ is present in the Sacrament in
such sort, that the Priest minister thereof, demonstrating what seems bread,
may truly say thereof in the person of Christ, This is my body. This supposed,
as the substance of the mystery, I infer that two Catholic doctrines
concerning the manner of this mystery, belong to the substance of this mystery,
and cannot be called in question without danger of misbeliefe. First, the Real
Presence of the whole body of Christ, under the forms of bread. Secondly, that
this is done by Transubstantiation.

An Addition proving the Catholic Real Presence, according to the litterall
Truth of Gods Word; against Ministerial Metaphores, Figures, and Shifts.
HIS Majesty in questioning only Transubstantiation, seems to suppose the
Real Presence of the Body and Blood of our Savior, under the Sacramental
signs, and that the words of our Savior, This is my body, be true in their
proper and litteral sense. This was the reason that the Answerer omitted to
prove largely this Catholic Doctrine. Now the Minister finding himself
unable upon this supposition of his Majesty to answer the Jesuits arguments
for Transubstantiation, yea Page 397. affirms, that unless
Transubstantiation be granted, the words of our Savior cannot be true in
their proper and litterall sense. Hence he denies the presence of the body of
Christ Substantially within the sacred sign, and labors to prove, that the
words of the Supper are figuratively, and not properly to be understood. He
grants a Real, and True Presence of Christ's body in words, but so obscurely,
as no man is able to understand his meaning.

Wherefore to clear this matter, wherein Ministers desire to be dark, that men
may not see the gross infidelity of their heart against Gods express word, I
shall show 3. things. First, what Zuinglians and Caluinists hold in this point.
Secondly, how the Doctrine both of Zuinglius and Calvin is against Gods word.
Thirdly, that their reasons not to admit of the literal truth of Christ's word,
be vain and idle.

The Zuinglian and Caluinian Religion about the Sacrament.. 1.
A Threefold presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, is confessed on all
sides. The first, Figurative, or in a Sacramental sign, bread signifying his
body, and wine his blood. The second, Imaginatiue, or by the pious apprehension
of the faithful receauer, who for more devotions sake does, or may imagine as
if he saw the body of our Lord in the Eucharist truly, really, and bleedingly
present, under the signs of bread and wine. The third, Effectual, or
according to the Spiritual effects of grace purchased by the Body and Blood of
our Savior, and given by virtue of this Sacrament unto the soul, to nourish
the ghostly life thereof.

As all proceed thus far, so Zuinglians will proceed no further. They grant
the body and blood of Christ to be present in the Sacrament figuratively in a
sign, imaginatiuely by faith, effectually by grace; but deny them to be
present according to their corporal substance, or further then in the outward
sign to the mouth, and in the inward effect to the soul. So that they grant
the Sacramental sign to be bare and empty in respect of containing the body
of Christ, though full and effectual in respect of affoarding soule-nourishing
grace.

Caluinists seem in their words to maintain a more real presence. For though
they maintain the substance of the body of Christ in respect of place, to be
in heaven only and not in the Sacrament, yet they teach that the same body
without being present upon earth is given us on earth, not only by the
apprehension of faith; Non solum dum fide amplectimur Iesum Christum pro nobis
crucifixum, and a mortuis excitatum; Not only in the inward spiritual effects
of soule-nourishing grace, purchased by the death of his body; Non solum dum
bonis eius omnibus quae nobis acquisiuit corpore suo efficaciter communicamus,
but realiter, really, and truly; Dum habitat in nobis, dum vnum fit nobiscum,
dum eius membra sumus de carne eius, dum in vnam, vt ita loquar, cum ipso
substantiam coalescimus. Calvin. in cap. 11.1. ad Cor.

Hence we may discover the Caluinian iugling, and playing fast and loose about
this Mystery, when they so often say that the body of Christ is really present,
but Spiritually: for the word Spiritual may be used in this Mystery for two
ends. First, to express the substance of the thing present, and to signify the
real Presence, not of the corporal substance of our Lords body, but only of
the spiritual effect thereof, to wit, of soule-feeding grace. This sense is
false, as shall be proved, and the very same which Calvin does condemn in the
Zwinglians, as execrable blasphemy, opusculo de Coena Domini. Secondly, to
express the manner of the Presence, and to signify that the corporal
substance of our Lord is present truly, yet in a spiritual, that is, secret,
invisible, and indivisible manner; this doctrine is true, and herein not
differing from the Catholic. In like manner their Phrase of Presence by Faith
is equivocal, and may have a threefold sense. First, Presence by Faith, may
signify Presence by pious imagination of Faith, the Receauer conceauing the
body of our Lord, as if he saw the same corporally and bleedingly present. If
by Presence by faith, Caluinists mean no more then this, then they do not
differ from the Zwinglians, nor do they put any more real presence then
imaginatiue, that is, presence of things according to pious representation and
apprehension, though not really and in truth. Secondly, Presence by Faith may
signify, that Faith, does dispose and prepare the soul, and that then, unto
the soul prepared by Faith our Savior is united really and truly, not
according to the corporal substance of his body, but only according to the
spiritual effect of his grace. This sense is also Zuinglian, and condemned by
Calvin, as has been showed. Thirdly, Presence by Faith, may signify, presence
according to the judgment of Faith, or a presence which only Faith can find
out, feel, and behold. This sense is true, and Catholic, and does suppose the
body of Christ to be present absolutely, and independently of Faith. For were
not the body of Christ before hand present, Faith should not be true, that
judges his body to be present.

Whether our Minister be Zuinglian or Caluinist in this point, God only knows,
he speaks obscurely of purpose. He never says as Calvin does li. 4. Institut.
c. 17. n. 7. That by substantial communication the body and blood of Christ
are under the signs of the supper delivered unto the faith full, yet he says
and often repeates, that the body of Christ is truly, really, and effectually
communicated. These words savor more of the Caluinian then of the Zuinglian
phrase. Notwithstanding his adding effectually, after truly and really may draw
the speech to be Zuinglian in sense, to wit, that the body of Christ is given
truly really effectually, that is, really according to the truth and reality
of the Spiritual effect, not really according to the truth and reality of the
corporal substance.

The Zuinglian and Caluinian Presence confuted.. 2.
THE Zuinglian doctrine that the body of Christ is present only in an
effectual sign of grace, not in substance, is against the plain and express
words of our Savior. For he did not say this is the sign or figure of my
body, nor this is the benefit or effect of my body, but, this is my body, and
consequently it is his body in substance and essence, if the substantial Verb
Est, do signify substance and essence. Hence Luther ( Epist. ad Argent.) says,
that the words are nimis clara, toto clear, and much more clear then he could
have wished. Calvin also in cap. 11.1. ad Cor. I hear (says he) what the
words of the supper import. For Christ does give us not only the benefit of his
death and resurrection, but also the very body wherein he died, and arose again
from death. Yea libro de Coena, inter eius opuscula page 133. he says, that,
Negare veram corporis and sanguinis substantiam, to deny the true substance of
the body and blood of Christ to be given in the supper, is execrabilis
blasphemia, auditu indigna, an execrable blasphemy against which we ought to
stop our ears.

The Caluinian Doctrine, that Christ's body being only in heaven is Spiritually
present, not only by faith, not only according to the effects of his grace, but
also in his bodily substance, yet only unto the faithful receauer, not unto
the Sacramental sign, is both against Gods word, and implicatory in reason.
First, it is no less then the Zuinglian against the plain and express words
of our Savior. For our Savior by saying, Take, eat, this is my body; drink
ye all of this, for this is my blood (Matthew. 26.) does auerre the Sacrament to
be his body and blood, in respect of that taking and eating, unto which by
these words he does inuit and exhort. But by this speech he does inuit, and
exhort unto Sacramental and corporal taking and eating. This appears by
the immediate practice of the Apostles, who upon these words of our Lord took
the Sacrament with their corporal mouth. This also our adversaries cannot
deny, seeing they urge by virtue of these words corporal receiving in both
kinds. Therefore the words of our Savior auerre the real presence of his body
in substance in respect of corporal taking and eating with the mouth of flesh,
which Doctrine Caluinists stiffely deny, only holding the substantial
communication of Christ's body, in respect of spiritual receiving by the
facultyes of the soul.

Secondly, their Real Presence is a fiction to no purpose. For there is no
reason to put the Real Presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, but only in
respect of verifying the word of our Savior, This is my body, in a true, and
real sense, so making the thing Christ had in his hand, and which was
demonstrated by the Pronowne This, to be truly and really his body. But
Caluinists put not a Presence, which makes the thing Christ had in hand, and
demonstrated by the Pronowne This, to be truly and really his body, but only by
figure. This I prove. That which is the body of Christ in figure and show, and
not in substance, is not truly, and really Christ his body. Even as what is a
man in show and figure not in essence and substance, is not truly and really a
man. But Caluinists say that This, or the thing which Christ has in his
hands, was Christ's body in show and figure, and not in substance. Ergo, they
put not a Real presence which makes that which Christ had in his hand, and did
demonstrate by the particle This, to be truly his body. It is therefore a
fiction devised to satisfy the Caluinian fancy, not the Christian faith, or the
rigurous truth of Gods word.

Thirdly, by this Doctrine they bind themselves and others to believe an high
and incomprehensible Mystery, without any necessity or compulsion from Gods
word. For what can be more unintelligible, then that there should be true and
real union according to substance, betwixt two distinct individual
substances, that be distant the one from the other, as far as heaven is from
earth. Hence Calvin says libro de Coena, that this is sublime and arduum, quod
neque quidem cogitatione complecti possimus. and in Cap. 11.1. ad Cor. arcanum
and mirificum Spiritus sancti opus, quod intelligentiae nostrae modulo metiri
nefas sit. But the word of God does not enforce this Caluinian Mystery, nor is
there sufficient ground to affirm it. This is proved, because the mystery of
their Real Presence either has no ground in Scripture, or is grounded on
these words of the Institution Take eat, this is my body. But Caluinists on
these words cannot ground the incomprehensible mystery of their real presence:
For they understand these words of our Savior in a Figurative sense, and say,
that they are not true properly, and literally. Now a mystery of Faith cannot
be grounded upon the Figurative sense of a place of Scripture, yea upon mere
Figurative construction of Scripture, to obtrude unto others an article of
necessary belief, is impudency, as says S. Augustine Epist. 68. Non nisi
impudentiss me nititur quis aliquid in Allegoria positum pro se interpretari,
nisi habeat and manifesta testimonia, quorum lumine illustrentur obscura.
Therefore the Caluinian Real Presence is a mystery incomprehensible, grounded
on mere figurative construction of Gods word, not backed by any literal text,
and consequently it is believed without necessity, or any Divine and
supernatural warrant.

Hence I Infer two things: first, that the belieuers of the Caluinian Real
Presence are unwise. For what greater folly then for men to deny their wits,
and break their heads, to believe an hard and difficill matter, in believing
whereof there is no merit of faith? In believing the Caluinian Real Presence
there is no merit of Faith: For the merit of Faith is to captiuate our
Understanding unto mysteryes, clearly delivered by the word of God, not unto
man's figurative expositions thereof, yea no figurative exposition above reason
is to be believed, except it be proved by some literal text, or be delivered
by the full Tradition as Gods word unwritten.

Secondly I infer, that Caluinists bear more reverence unto John Calvin,
then unto Jesus Christ: for Caluins mystery is believed by Caluinists being
confessedly a Doctrine most hard, difficill, incomprehensible, and yet not the
literal sense of Gods word, but Caluins figurative comment ther-vpon: On the
other side, Transubstantiation being acknowledged by them to be the litterall
and proper sense of the word of Christ Jesus, so that without
Transubstantiation, his word, this is my body, cannot be literally true, as our
Minister does confess page 397. yet because it is hard, difficill,
incomprehensible, Caluinists cannot be brought to believe it. What is this but
to be more ready to believe Calvin then Christ? Specially seeing the mystery of
Christ's literal sense is not so hard and vn-intelligible as Caluins figurative
construction. For one may more easily conceive a body to be in two places at
once, which the litteral sense of Christ's word does enforce, then a body to be
truly and substantially given, where truly and substantially it is not, which
is the article of faith by Caluins figurative construction obtruded.

The Arguments against the litterall sense of Christ's Word, vain and idle.. 3.
THE Minister to prove that the words of the institution are to be
figuratively understood, brings seven Arguments page 391. and one page 401.
and three other page 418. but the first and third of these three are the same
with the second and last of the seven, so that his arguments are Nine in all.
These being the sum and substance of all his disputation, I will here set
them down and answer them, one by one, that the Reader may see upon what
frivolous reasons these men are moved to reject the literal sense of Gods
word, concerning the highest mysteryes of Faith.

His first Argument, page 397.
If the substance of bread and wine do remain, Christ's speech, This is my
body, This is my blood, cannot be properly true, because one individual
substance cannot be predicated of another properly. But it shall be afterward
by Fathers and Scriptures proved, that the substance of bread and wine remaynes.

ANSWER.
You will prove the substance of bread, to remain in the holy Eucharist, ad
Kalendas Graecas; the mean while, out of what you here confess, I argue
against you. You grant that, except Transubstantiation be maintained, the words
of Christ, This is my body, cannot be true in the literal sense. But they must
be understood in the literal sense, for on these words the Church of God does
ground a chief mystery or Sacrament of Faith. But (as has been proved) no
figurative text can be the ground of our belief concerning any Sacrament, or
mystery of Faith.

The second Argument, page 397.
The words whereby the wine is consecrated, Luc. 22.20. are Tropicall, by the
confession of our Adversaries.

ANSWER.
First it is not absurd that our Savior delivering some precept, article, or
Sacrament, should use words that are figurative and exorbitant, according to
the rules of Grammar, if they be not figurative nor unusual, but ordinary,
plain, manifest, perspicuous, according to the common phrase and vulgar manner
of speech. This speech, This is the cup of my blood which is shed for you, if
it be figurative according to Grammar, yet is it plain, easy, and clear
according to common speech; for no man hearing these words This is the cup of
my blood shed for you, can think, that the cup, and not the blood contained
therein, was shed for us.

Secondly, I deny that any word of this speech, This is the cup of the new
Testament in my blood which is shed for you, is figurative. This is the cup of
my blood, is not figurative, seeing Christ had in his hand a true cup, not the
figure of a cup, and the thing contained therein was truly and properly blood.
The blood of Christ is also truly and properly said to be the new Testament,
for it is the thing required by the new Testament, and Covenant for the
remission of sins; but commonly and vulgarly men say of the thing required by
Covenant, this is our Covenant. Finally, the cup in his blood is properly said
to be shed, seeing the blood was truly and properly shed, and so the cup
properly shed in that respect, as to say of a cup of wine, this cup is spilt in
the wine thereof, is not figurative, but rather a speech unnecessarily plain.

The third Argument, page 397.
If the words be taken properly, then the body and blood of Christ is delivered
and received without the soul and Deity of Christ, for in propriety of speech
the Body is a distinct and diverse thing from the soul, and likewise from
Blood.

ANSWER.
Thousand instances might be brought that show your gross Ignorance in
Theology who thus argue. For example, the Gospel John 1.10. says, the Word
was made flesh. Is this Argument good, Flesh, in the propriety of speech, is a
distinct and diverse thing from blood and from soul, Ergo, either these words
be figurative, and do not prove that the word took substantially Flesh, or
else we must say that he took dead flesh without blood and soul? S. Peter
says, that Christ did bear our sins in his body upon the wood, were he not
simple that would argue as you do, Body in propriety of speech is a thing
distinct from the soul, and from the Godhead; Therefore either the words are
figurative, and do not prove that Christ did truly suffer in body, or else we
must say that his body without soul, and without his Deity suffered on the
Cross. Not so: For though the body be a thing distinct and diverse from the
soul, yet it is a thing united and joined with the soul, when the person
lives, and so the body of a living person cannot be given except the soul be
given consequently, or by concomitancy therewith. Ordinary Philosophy might
have taught you this, where it is commonly said, that though the Body be
distinct from the Soul, yet cannot the body be moved or removed, delivered
and received without the soul, the same going from place to place, per
accidens cum corpore, by concomitancy together with the body.

The fourth Argument, page 397.
Seeing Christ, as Saint Hierome, Saint Chrysostom, and Euthimius affirm, did
himself Sacramentally eat and drink what he gave to his disciples, if the
words be literally understood, then he did eat his own body, and drink his
own blood.

ANSWER.
You would have us believe, that it is ridiculous and foolish to say, that
Christ did eat his own body, which yet you durst not utter in plain words:
For if Christ (as you affirm) did eat what he gave to his disciples, either
he did eat his own body, or else his word in rigor is false, whereby he said
of what he gave to his disciples, Take eat, This is my body. Hence the
Fathers, who affirm that Christ did eat what he gave, affirm that Christ did
eat what he gave his Apostles, consequently enforced by the evidence of Gods
word expressly auerre, that he did eat his own body, as Saint Hierome ad
Hedib. q. 2. Christ in his supper was the eater, and the meat that was eaten.
Saint Chrysostom homil. 83. in Matthew. That the Apostles might not fear to do
the same, Christ himself first drank his own blood. Yea S. Augustine Concion.
1. in Psalm. 33. says, that Christ in his last supper carried himself in his
own hands, secundum literam, according to the letter, which David neither did,
nor possibly could do.

The fifth Argument, page 398.
If the words be understood literally, then Christ gave his Disciples his
passible and mortal body. But I trow no Jesuit will maintain, that a body
mortal and passible can be in many hoasts, or mouths at once, nor can the same
be corporally eaten, without sensible touching.

ANSWER.
You might truly have said, I trow no Caluinist will believe that a mortal and
passible body can be in two hoasts or mouths at once, let the word of God say
it never so expressly, and even as expressly as these words import, Take,
eat, this is my Body, which shall be delivered for many unto death, which
shall be broken for you on the Cross. If Christ gave his body that was to
suffer and dye, he gave his body that was then passible and mortal in many
hoasts at once, unto the mouths of the twelve. Now this being the plain
express and litterall truth of the word of Jesus, what reason could you have,
to trow, as you do, that no Jesuit will maintain it? What Jesuit can you name
of so many that have written of this matter, that does not expressly maintain,
that Christ in his supper gave his mortal and passible body, though after an
immortal and impassible manner? Hence though in the host his body could
neither be sensibly felt, nor suffer, yet otherwise the same might then suffer
in the place where it did exist, according to the natural and proper manner of
bodies. See Bellarm. lib. 3. de Euchar. c. 12. Suarez, Vasquez, Valentia, and
innurable others.

The sixth Argument, page 398.
If our Saviors words be literally expounded, then Infidells, dogs, and
swine, may eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Son of man. But all
that eat the flesh, and drink the blood of the Son of man, have everlasting
life. John. 6.49.50.51.

ANSWER.
I wonder you dare with such toys oppose the literal truth of Gods word. You
may see the idleness of this your argument in the like. S. Paul says 1. Cor.
12.3. None can say Lord Jesus, but in the Holy Ghost: Should one argue that
these words are not properly to be understood, because Parrats may be taught to
say Lord Jesus, and so if these words, None can say Lord Jesus but in the holy
Ghost, be properly expounded, then Parrats should be inspired with the holy
Ghost. Were not this disputant to be laughed at? Are you a Doctor, and do not
understand that external actions unto which divine promises are made, must be
not only humane proceeding from man as he is man, that is from reason and
freewill, which cannot be ^n dogs and swine; but also Christian, that is
proceeding from devotion and ^ayth in Christ Jesus, which is wanting in
Infidells?

The seventh Argument, page 398.
If our Saviors words were literal, plain, and regular, then Papists could
not be di^^racted about the sense thereof: but they are notoriously divided.
For some say the Pro^owne (this) signifies nothing; others say it signifies
bread; some say, it signifies ^^e accidents of bread; others it signifies the
body of Christ etc. Touching the body, ^^me say it is materia prima etc.

ANSWER.
This argument proves nothing but your Ignorance, who know not ^ow to
distinguish division about the sense of a speech, from division a^out the
Logical resolution of the single words of a speech. All know that have any
learning, that learned men are divided about the Logical ^esolution of many
propositions vulgar and plain, about the sense wher^f there neither is, nor
can be doubt. This speech, Peter is a man, A man ^unneth, The wall is white,
are most plain, nor are men divided about their sense. And yet he deserves not
the name of a Scholar that does not ^now there be solemn dissensions in
Logic amongst learned men, a^out the resolution of these speeches, that is,
about the precise and punctu^^l signification of every single word.

All Deuines agree in the sense of Christ's speech, This is my body, that it
imports, the thing he held in his hands, was in the end of the prolation of his
speech, essentially and substantially his body, as the substantive verb Es^
does import. But they dispute about the Logical, and precise signification of
the single words, what is designed punctually by the demonstratiue Pronowne
this, what by Body, which are mere Logical and Philosophical subtilties,
common to all propositions where the same words are used. So that to mention
these differences as matters of moment, is a manifest sign that Heretical
Ignorance being out of love with the literal sense of Gods word, and resolved
not to believe it, seeks the veil of every idle pretense to hide the
Infidelity of his heart.

The eight Argument, page 413.
If the said words be understood literally, then the body of Christ is properly
broken and his blood properly shed in the Eucharist, for Saint Paul says, This
is my body which is broken for you, 1. Cor. 11.24. Saint Luke says, This is
the Cup the new Testament in my blood which is shed for you. But the body of
Christ is not properly broken, nor his blood properly shed in the holy
Eucharist.

ANSWER.
The word of God does not say, that the body of Christ is broken and his blood
shed in the Eucharist, but only that the Eucharist is his body which is broken
and his blood which is shed for us, for many, for the remission of sins.
Calvin c. 11.1. ad Cor. does expound broken and shed for us on the Cross,
where Christ's precious blood was properly shed, his sacred body broken in the
flesh, and veins thereof which were there rent into pieces. Besides to be
broken for us, and shed for the remission of sins, in this place signifyes to
be sacrificed for us unto God, as Calvin says in the former place frangi
interpretor immolari. In which sense the body of Christ is broken properly, not
only on the Cross, but also in the Sacrament, this being a true Propitiatory
Sacrifice, as Catholics teach. Now take what part you will, let the Sacrament
be the body and blood of CHRIST broken and shed for us, that is sacrifyced for
us on the Cross, or broken and shed, that is sacrifyced for us in the
Eucharist, still it follows that the Eucharist is the true body and blood of
our Lord, and not bread and wine, seeing Christ neither in his Supper, nor on
his Cross did sacrifice bread and wine, for the remission of sins, but his
body and blood only.

The ninth Argument, page 401.
Many Fathers treating of the Sacramental signs, call them, figures,
representations, memorialls, antitypes of the body and blood of Christ. But
that which is a figure, similitude, representation of a thing, is not properly
the same.

ANSWER.
First the Mayor proposition of your Argument is false. For not one Father of
the many you cite does say, that the Eucharist is the figure of the natural
body and blood of Christ, but all they say, is; First, that the Eucharist is a
figure, memorial, and antytype of Christ's passion and death. So S. Aug l. 3.
de doctrine. Christ. c. 16. Secondly, that it is a figure of his mystical body
and of the unity thereof, Origin in c. 15. Matthew. Aug. in Psalm 3. Thirdly, the
bread and wine before consecration be figures of his body and blood, as S.
Ambros. l 4. de Sacram. c. 5. Druthmarus in c. 26. Matthew. Fourthly, that Christ
did in the Eucharist represent his body, where they take, representation, for
the Real exhibition of the thing promised, as we commonly say, that the
debtour on such a day is to represent the money, that is, real^y deliver, as
Tertul. cont. Marci. l. 1. c. 14. glossa. de Consecrat. d. 2. Fifthly, they ^ay
that the sacred vessels in the old law contained only a figure of the body and
blood of Christ, as the Author of the Imperfect upon S. Mat^hew. Finally, for
want of better testimonies you bring some that pro^esse against you, that the
body and blood were given in the shape of ^read and wine, as Venerable Bede in
c. 22. Luc. out of whom you cite ^hese words, substituting his body and blood
in the FIGVRE of bread and wine. What is this, but that the figure and shape of
bread remaynes, the body of our Lord being present in lieu of the substance
thereof?

Secondly, your Minor assertion that the figure of a thing is not the ^ame with
the thing figured, is impious and directly opposite unto Gods word. First,
Christ Jesus is a figure of his Fathers substance, Heb. 1.3. and yet is he the
same substantially with the Father, John. 10.30. Secondly, S. Peter, fishing in
the sea, and catching a great multitude of fish, is a figure of himself
preaching in the world and converting souls unto Christ, Luc. ^.10. and yet
Peter fishing, and Peter preaching, is substantially the same person. Thirdly,
Christ as found in the temple on the third day after his ^eesing, was a figure
of himself rising after the third day of his sepulture, Ambros. in cap. 2.
Lucae. Also Christ as making a show to go further in his Journey to Emmaus,
represented himself as mounting to heaven, August. cont. mendac. c. 13. and
yet Christ found after three days, and Christ rising after three days, Christ
making a show to pass on, and ascending to his Father is substantially one,
and the same person. False then and impious is your assertion, that the figure
of a thing cannot be the same with the thing figured, and consequently this
your Argument, The Eucharist is termed by the Fathers the figure of Christ's
natural body; Ergo, it is not substantially, and properly his body, is idle.
Hence the final conclusion is, that you have no ground in Scripture not to
take these words of our Lord, This is my Body, in the litterall sense, and that
the true reason you do not literally understand them, is the difficulty of the
matter, and the Infidelity of your heart. Now let us return unto the Jesuits
discourse.

That the Real Presence of the whole Body of Christ, under the forms of
bread, belonges to the substance of the Mystery.. 1.
TO prove this, I suppose as certain, that the body of Christ is truly and
really in the Sacrament of his supper. This I may justly suppose, seeing your
Majesty does profess to hold a presence Praesentia^ credimus non minus quam
vos veram: haec fides Regis and Regia. Resp. ad Card. Peron. in oper. Regis
page 399. and 400.
of the body of Christ in the Sacrament, no less true then we hold, and
consequently you will not understand the words of Christ figuratively as
Sacrame^taryes do. For they make the body of Christ, present in the
Eucharisticall bread, but as in a figure, holding not a true, nor a real
presence, but only a presence by Imagination and conceypt, This was supposed by
the Jesuit as clear, and has been proved in the former addition against the
Ministers Cauills.
as is evident; wherein (as your Majesty knows) they contradict the ancient
Church, which teaches expressly that Christ Euthym. panop. pa. 2. tit. 22.
Theop. in Marc. c. 14. Damascen. Orthod. fidei l. 4. c. 14.
did not say, This is a figure of my body, but, this is my body, and exhorts us
to believe Christ upon his word. He said, This is my body, Gaudent. tract. 2.
in Exodus Chrysostom. in c. 26. Matthew. hom. 83. Ambros. de ijs, qui mysterijs
iuitiant. c. 9. Epiph. in anchorato. Hilar. l. 8. de Trinit. Cyrill. Hieros.
Cateches. 4.
I pray you let us believe him whom we have believed, Verity cannot utter
untruth. And herein they acknowledge with your Majesty, a most high and
incomprehensible mystery, which were no mystery at all, the words being
understood in a mere figurative sense.

As for some places of Fathers brought to the contrary, how they are to be
understood, your Majesty is not ignorant. S. Augustine August. in Psalm. 3. Ide^
cont. Adimant. c. 11.
saying, that Christ gave to his disciples a figure of his body and blood,
spoke not of a bare empty figure, but of the figure of a thing really present.
As likewise in another place when he says, Christ affirmed it was his body,
when he gave a sign of his body; though here he may seem to speak in the
opinion of the Manichees who held that Christ had not true flesh, but a mere
figure, shadow, and shape of flesh. Against who^ in that place he undertakes to
prove that the figure of a thing may be termed the thing it self, alleging,
argumento ad hominem, that Christ said, This is my body when he gave but a
figure of his body, to wit, Had not S. Augustine argued in the opinion of
Manichees that hold the flesh of Christ was not true, but only a figure of
flesh, the Manichees might have denied this his example, seeing both the Gospel
and the Fathers say the Eucharist to be truly Christ's body, and not a mere
figure.
as you think.

Tertullian Tertul. li. 4. cont. Marcion.
has this speech: Christ taking bread into his hands, and distributing it to
his disciples, made the same his body saying, Hoc est corpus meum, id est,
figura corporis mei. Where figura corporis mei is referred not unto Corpus
meum, as an explication thereof, but unto hoc, in this manner, hoc, id est,
figura Corporis mei, est Corpus meum. This to be Tertullian his meaning,
appears by the drift of his discourse in that place. For Tertullian is to
show, that whereas in the old Testament bread was a figure of the body of
Christ, as appears by the words of the Prophet Mittamus lignum in panem eius,
id est, crucem in corpus eius; Christ in the new Testament made this figure to
be truly and really Tertullian in saying that Christ made bread his body, does
thereby declare the conversion of bread into his body, even as the Evangelist
does signify the conversion of water into wine, in saying, Our Savior made
water wine. John. 2.9.
his body, taking bread into his hands, saying, this, that is, the figure of my
body in the old Testament, is my body truly and really in the new; which is
as much as if he had said, Bread which anciently was a figure of my body, I do
now make to be truly and really my body. And this is usual in Tertullian, who
not to interrupt the words of Scripture, adds his explication of the subject,
not presently but after the Attribute Tertul. contr. Praxeam c. 29.
, as when he said, Christus mortuus est, id est, vnctus; the sense whereof is
Christus vnctus mortuus est.

This supposed, I infer that the body of Christ is present in the mystical
supper, not only to the faithful that receive the Sacrament, nor only to the
place, or church where the holy Synaxis is celebrated, but under the forms of
bread in the very same place therewith. This manner of presence is clearly
consequent upon the precedent, and that granted, this cannot be denied. For
the reason upon which Christians hold the body of Christ to be really and truly
present in the Sacrament, is, because they cannot otherwise in proper and
plain sense verify the word of Christ, who said of bread, This is my body?
Wherefore we must either put no Real Presence at all, or else put such a Real
Presence as is able to verify the foresaid speech in proper and rigorous sense.
But if the body of Christ be not in the same place with the consecrated bread,
contained under the forms thereof, it cannot be said to be verily and really
the body of Christ. For though we should suppose the body of Christ to leave
heaven, and to be substantially present in the Church where the Sacrament is
given, yet this supposed Presence would no ways further the verifying of the
words of Christ, This is my body, except his body be veyled and covered with
the sensible accidents of bread, so that it be demo^strated by them, and
pointing unto them one may truly say, This is the body of Christ. For why
should consecrated bread be termed truly and substantially the body of Christ,
if his body be not so much as in the same place with The Ministers folly who
does in this place affirm, that things distant may be truly and really
united, is refuted in the Censure. Sect. 3.. 5.
it? Wherefore the Fathers affirm that Christ is so in this Sacrament, as he
is veiled with the semblances of bread. As Saint Cyrill of Jerusalem in his
book highly commended by D. Whitaker, Whitakerus de sacrae Scriptura q. 6. c.
11. Cyrill. Cathec. 4.
says, Under the form of bread is given thee his body. Yea Master Calvin. in
ep. ad Cor. c. 11. Instit. l. 4. c. 17.. 32.
Calvin says, In the supper CHRIST JESUS, to wit, his Body and Blood, is truly
given, under the signs of bread and wine.

Whence it is also consequent, that the whole body of Christ is contained under
a consecrated host, be the same never so little. For, in this mystery the body
of Christ is demonstrable by the sensible accidences, so that consecrated bread
may be termed truly, really, and substantially the body of Christ, not a
parcel or part thereof only. But were not the body of Christ wholly and entyrely
under the forms of bread, consecrated bread could not truly, and properly be
termed the body of Christ but a sole part and parcel thereof. Again, we have
no reason to believe that the body of CHRIST is truly, and really, in the
Sacrament, but only to the end that it may in the Supper be truly, and really
Augustine. cont. aduersus Legis and Prophet. c. 9. Fidele cord and ore
suscipimus Cyprian. de lapsis. Tertullian. lib. de resur. Caro corpore Christi
vescitur. Iren. l. 5. c. 2. Nissen. orat. Cathec. Chrysostom. homil 83. in 1. ad
Cor. Leo sermon. 6. de ieiunio 7. mensis.
eaten, to nourish, and feed men's souls. And if it be eaten only mentally by
faith, we have no ground to think that it is present more then mentally by
faith, this presence being ordained unto the ma^ducation thereof; for else why
did Christ institute this Sacrament under the elements of bread and wine? But
if Christ be not present wholly and totally under the form of bread, he cannot
be truly, and really eaten; why then is his body brought from heaven to be
there really present? Or how can the body of Christ being coextended in place
according to the natural dimensions thereof, enter into the mouth of the worthy
receauer, yea in at the mouth of the When some Fathers seem to say, that the
wicked eat not Christ's body, they mean, they do not eat it fruitfully, or
thrive in soul by the eating thereof. As we commonly say of me^ that thrive not
by eating, that they do not eat their meat* as Beda super Exodus Infidelis
carne Christi non vescitur. S. Cyrill, Hilary, Chrysostom, Origin, and others
quoted by the Minister p. 407. speak not of mere corporal eating, but of
eating by Faith and thus Infidells and wicked persons do not eat the body of
Christ. S. Augustine. in Joan. tract. 27. saying, that the wicked receive not
rem Sacramenti, the thing of the Sacrament, by the thing of the Sacrament,
means grace, not the body of Christ. And tract. 59. saying, that Judas did
eat panem Domini, the bread of the Lord, non panem Dominum, not bread that was
the Lord, he means that Judas in his own persuasion and faith did not eat
the bread that was the Lord, yet he did eat the bread that was the Lord
according to truth, and in the faith of the Church. Judas (says he Ep. 162.)
took that which the FAITHFVLL know to be the price of their Redemption.
wicked and unworthy receauer, as Fathers teach?

Wherefore, seeing we must of necessity grant as I have proved, that some part
of the body of Christ is under consecrated bread penetrating the same, and
occupying the same place with it, why should we doubt to believe the whole body
of Christ to be wholly, and totally, in every consecrated host? For if we can
believe that two bodies be in the same place at once, we may as easily believe
the same of twenty. And if we grant, that one part of Christ's body does
penetrate, that is, does occupy the same room with the quantity of bread, why
should we not think that the rest of his parts may also do the like? Our
Savior says, Matthew. 19. That it is more easy for a Camel to pass through a
needles eye, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven, adding,
though these things be impossible unto men, yet all is possible unto God. If
then God can put a whole Camel into the eye of a needle, is not he able to put
the whole body of Christ within the bigness of a consecrated host? The body of
Christ, which being mortal and passible, could penetrate the body of his
mother, and come out of her womb through the same, still remaining entyre, as
we profess in the Creed to believe, Natum de Maria Virgin; why may not the
same body being now glorious, immortal, and as the Apostle speaks,
spiritual, penetrate the quantity of bread, and enclose it self wholly, and
entierly within the small compass thereof? Christ, that made heavy things not
to weigh, as the body of Peter walking on the water Matthew. 14.16. colored
things not to be seen, as his own person which he so often made invisible to
the Jews; bright things not to shine, as his body after his Resurrection more
bright then the Sun, did not shine in so many apparitions to his disciples;
finally, a flaming furnace not to burn the bodies of the three children cast
into the midst thereof: why may not he keep a body from occupying a place, or
from extruding another body from the place where it is Read S. Augustine de
Agone Christiano c. 24. and sermon. 160. who by these examples proves that a
body may penetrate with another, where he says: Show me the weightines of
flesh in the body that walked upon the waves, and I will show the true massines
and solidity of flesh in the body that came in the doors being shut, and was
borne into the world without undoing his mothers integrity in his birth.
? For to occupy a place, or to extrude thence another body, is but an effect
consequent, and flowing from the nature of a quantitiue substance; as to weigh,
to be seen, to shine, to burn, be the natural and necessary effects of
heavy, colored, bright, and fiery things.

Transubstantiation belonges to the substance of Real Presence.. 2.
THIS I prove. That belonges to the substance of this Mystery, which being
denied and taken away, the words of Christ This is my body, cannot be true
taken in the literal sense, in which sense they are to be taken, as has been
showed. But without granting Transubsta^tiation the words of Christ cannot be
true, taken in the literal sense, Ergo, transubstantiation belongs to the
substance of this mystery of the Real presence. The minor is proved, because
the speech, This is my body, does signify that the thing the Priest holds in
his hands is truly, really, and substantially the body of Christ. For in the
proposition, This is my body, the verb Est signifyes a conjunction between
This in the Priests hands, and the body of Christ; and being a Verb
substantive, in his proper signification, signifyes a substantial Identity
between This in the Priests hands, and the body of Christ. But This in the
Priests hands being before consecration bread, a thing substantially distinct
from the body of Christ, cannot by consecration be made substantially the body
of Christ (as the Fathers teach it is) without some substantial alteration, or
change. And what other substantial change can make bread to become truly the
body of Christ besides substantial conversion of the same into his body The
Minister flies unto the figurative sense, choosing rather to deny the truth of
Gods word according to the letter, the^ admit Transubstantiation. Against which
he has three arguments scattered in his Reply, which I will here join together
and answer. The first is pa. 434. the consecrated bread is termed very bread,
1. Cor. 10.16. and 11.26.28. Answer. This is a very untruth. For it is still
in those places, termed bread, cum addito, with such an addition as signifies
that it is not properly bread, but our Saviors body, 1. Cor. 10.16. The bread
we break, that is Sacrifice unto God, is the communication of the body of our
Lord. And 1. Cor. 11.26. as often as you eat THIS bread, and 27. Whosoever
shall eat THIS bread unworthily. and 28. So let him eat of THAT bread, to wit
whereof he had said before, that Christ by the verity of his word does make it
his body. Now he that eats bread turned into Christ's body, or made his body
does not truly eat bread. As the Master of the Marriage Feast in Cana, who
tasted water made wine, John. 2.9. did not taste water truly. For as water made
wine is not water, even so bread consecrated and made our Lords body, is not
bread.

The second is page 447. which he sets out magnificently in a distinct
letter, and each proposition in a several line. The substance is this: If the
words of our Savior, This is my body, change the substance of bread into his
body, then also they change the quantity and accidents: For our Savior took
the whole bread into his hands, and said, this is my body, as well upon the
accidents as upon the substance of bread. But they prove not the conversion of
accidents. For Popish Tra^substantiatio^ is only a conversion of substance not
of accidents. Therefore they prove not the conversion of the substance.

Answer. The words of our Savior this is my body, change not every thing
into his body over which they be spoken by way of breathing, (for then they
should change the air into his body) but only that, over which they are so
spoken by way of signification that their signification can not be true in the
litteral sense, except that be hi^ body. Now, the words of Christ This is my
body, cannot be true in the litterall sense, except the substance of bread be
changed into his body, as the Minister does confess page 397. lin. 17. But
they may be true according to the letter, the substance being changed though
the accide^ts remain. For if the Sacrament outwardly clothed with the forms
and accidents of bread, be inwardly in nature and substance Christ's body, then
is it truly and substantially his body, and may be said to be his body, taking
the word, to be, in the proper sense for substantive being: even as Jacob
clothed with the garments of Esau was truly and substantially Jacob, and not
Esau, though in outward show and shape he seemed Esau. Therefore the litterall
truth of Christ's words, this is my body, inforceth us to say, that the
substance of bread is changed into his body, but not that the quantity of bread
is so changed. And thus the magnificence of your argument is marred and proved
to be but an empty show.

The third argument is page 422.423. In all miraculous substantial conuersions
a new substance is produced, but the body of Christ does preexist and so cannot
be produced. Answer. The mayor is false, as appears by millions of miraculous
co^uersions which partly have been, partly shall be. For in the resuscitation
of the dead when carcasses are converted into men, no new thing is produced,
but old things and substances which formerly had been, are reproduced. It is
true, the power of nature being limited according to time and place, cannot
reproduce, but only produce at one time, and in one place. But the power of
God being infinite, eternal, immense and independent of time and place, can
reproduce things that preexist, according to different times and places, as
often, and in as many places, as he is pleased. Hence he can, and does
reproduce upon earth the body of our Savior preexisting in heaven, as the
Fathers auerre. S. Ambros. l. 4. de Sacra. c. 4. When consecration is done, the
body of Christ is MADE of bread. And S. Cyprian sermon. de coena. Vsque hodie
Diuinissimum and Sanctissimum corpus CREAT. S. Gauden. homil. tract. 2. in
Exodus Quia potest, and promisit, de pane corpus suum EFFICIT. S. Hierom. ep. ad
Heliod. Sacerdotes corpus Christi proprio ore CONFICIVNT.


?

But some may object, that as a man showing a Leather-purse full of gold may
truly say, this is gold; or a paper wrapped up full of silver, may say, this is
silver; so the body of Christ being under consecrated bread, we may truly say,
this is the body of Christ, though the substance of bread remain I answer,
that when substances are apt of their nature, and ordained by use to contain
other substances, then showing the substance which contains, we may signify
the substance contained, as in the former examples. The reason is, because
their natural aptitude to contain other things being vulgarly known, man's
understanding straight passes from the consideration of the substances
containing, to think of the thing contained therein. But when substances are
not by nature and custom ordained to contain others, we cannot by showing
them demonstrate another, because their outward form, signifyes immediately the
substance contained in them. For example, one puts a piece of Gold in an apple,
and showing it, cries, this is Gold; in rigor of speech he says not true,
because the sense of his words is, that the thing demonstrated immediately by
the forms and accide^ts of that apple, is Gold; yea put case that one should
say, this is gold, showing a piece of paper unfolded, in a manner not apt to
contain any thing in it, he should not say true, though by some devise he had
put secretly into it a piece of gold. Because when the paper is showed
displayed, and not as containing something in it, and yet is termed Gold, the
proper sense of that speech is, that the substance immediately contained under
the accidents of paper, is gold, although it be covered with other accidents
then those that usually accompany the nature of gold.

Wherefore the proposition of Christ, This is my body, being spoken of a thing
that naturally is not apt, nor by custom ordained to contain an humane body,
it cannot be understood literally but of the subject immediately contained
under, and demonstrated by the accidents and outward semblance of bread. Now,
the thing that lies hidden immediately under the accidents of bread, which was
once substantially bread, cannot become substantially the body of Christ except
it be substa^tially converted into his body, or personally assumed by the same
body. And seeing this second manner of union between bread and Christ's body is
impossible, and rejected by Protestants as well as by Catholics* we may conclude
that the mystery of Christ's Real presence cannot be believed in truth by them
that deny Transubstantiation; Specially seeing our Savior did not say, Here is
my body, which speech may be verifyed by the Presence of his body locally
within the bread, but, This is my body, which imports that not only his body is
truly, and substantially present, but also that it is the substance contained
immediately under the accidents of bread.

If any man say, that by this argument it appears that the doctrine of
Transubstantiation is not expressed in Scripture, but from the words of the
Institution subtly deduced, and so may perchance be numbered inter scita
Scholae, not inter dogmata Fidei. I answer that the co^seque^ce of this
argument is not good, as is evident in the example of the Incarnation. The
doctrine that the union of natures in Christ is proper not metaphorical,
substantial not accidental, personal not essential, is no where expressly
set down in the Scripture, but by subtle deduction inferred from the mystery
which Scripture and Tradition deliver. Notwithstanding, because these subtle
deductions are proposed by the Church as pertinent unto the substance of the
aforesaid mystery, they cannot be denied without prejudice of faith. In this
sort the doctrine of Transubstantiation, though not in terms delivered by the
Scripture, but deduced by subtle and speculatiue inference, may not be denied
by them that will be perfect Belieuers, because the Church has declared the
same to pertayne to the proper sense of Christ his words and substance of the
mystery. Council. Romanum sub Nicolao 1. and Lateranense sub Innocentio 3.

Transubstantiation was taught by the Fathers.. 3.
IT is certain the Fathers acknowledge a transmutation of bread into the body
of Christ; and that they meant Transubstantiation, that is, not only a
mystical and significatiue, but also a Real and substantial change, appears
by these 5. circumstances of their doctrine in this point. First The Marginall
Annotations corresponding to these ensuing Numbers, follow afterward together.
by the expressenesse of their words, for there can be no words more
significant and expressiue of a substantial change between bread and our
Saviors body, then those the Fathers use. Saint Orat. Cathechis. c. 34.
Nissen; That the word made flesh is inserted within every faithful man, by his
flesh taking his consistance of bread and wine, Consecration [II.]
transelementing the nature of things appearing into the same flesh. S. Cyrill
Cyrill. Ep. ad Calosyrium. Influit oblatis vim vitae, conuertens ea in
veritatem propriae carnis.
says: That we might not feel horror seeing flesh and blood on the sacred
Altars, the Son of God condescending to our infirmityes, does penetrate with
the power of life into the things offered (to wit bread and wine) [III.]
Converting them into the verity of his own flesh, that the body of life, as it
were a certain seed of vivification might be found in us. Saint Chrysostom.
hom. de Euchar. in Encoen. Nihil substantiae remanet, nihil superfluit.
Chrysostom: When wax is put into the fire, nothing of the substance thereof is
left, nothing remaynes unconsumed; [IIII.] so likewise do thou think that the
mysteryes are consumed by the substance of the body of Christ Ambros. de
initian. myster. c. 9. Non hoc quod natura formauit, sed quod benedictio
co^secrauit. Benedictione enim ipsa natura mutatur.
. S. Ambrose: What arguments shall we bring to prove, that in the Sacrament is
not the thing which nature has framed, but that thing which benediction has
consecrated; and that greater is the force of benediction then of nature, seeing
by the benediction even Nature is changed [V.]

Secondly, they require that the Author that changes bread into Christ his
body, be [VI.] Omnipotent, and consequently the change not merely
significatiue but substantial [VII.] Saint Cyprian Cyprian. de coena Domini.
Panis non effigy, non natura mutatus omnipotentia verbi factus est caro.
: This bread changed not in shape but in nature, by the omnipotency of the word
is made flesh. S. Cyrill Cyrill. orat. 4. mystagog.
: He that in the marriage of Cana changed water into wine by his only will, is
not he worthy that we believe him, that he has changed wine into his blood? S.
Gaudent. tract. 2. in Exodus
Gaudent: The Lord, and Creator of natures, that of earth made bread, again
(because he can do it, and has promised to do it) makes of bread his own
body; and he that of water made wine, now of wine has made his blood.

Thirdly, the instrument by which God works this Transubstantiation, is by
them acknowledged the most efficacious that may be, to wit, the word not of
man, but of God. S. Ambrose Ambros. de ijs qui mysterijs initiantur. cap. ^.
: Moses his word changed the waters of Egypt into blood, and again turned
them from blood into water. If so great was the benediction of man, what may we
think of divine consecration, where the very words of our Savior work? The
word of Elias had power to bring down fire from heaven, and shall not the
words of Christ have force to change the kinds of the elements? Again Ambros.
lib. 4. de S^cram. cap. 4.
: Thou see how working and efficacious is the word of Christ. If therefore
such virtue is in his word, that thereby things that are not, receive being; how
much more has it power, that the things that are still, remain (in the
general latitude of being, and according to the sensible accidents) and be
converted into another substance? [VIII.]

Fourthly, the effect of this transmutatio^ taught by the Fathers, is the
presence of the substance of Christ's body, and the absence of the substance of
bread, binding us to abnegate our senses, and not to believe what we seem to
see with our eyes. [IX.] Theophilact Theophilact. c. 4. 26. Matthew.
: Bread is transelemented or transformed by an ineffable operation, although to
us it seem bread, because we are weak, and have horror to eat raw flesh,
especially the flesh of man; for this reason bread appears, but in essence
and substance it is not bread. Saint Cyrill Cyrill. Hieros. Catech. mystagog. 4.
: Come not therefore as unto simple bread and wine, for it is the body and blood
of Christ, according to the affirmation of our Lord, for although sense suggest
the contrary, yet let faith confirm thee. Judge not of the thing by taste, but
indubitably, and with full faith believe, that thou art made partaker of the
body and blood of Christ. And again: Know this, and with full certitude
believe, that the bread seen is not bread, though it so seem to the taste, but
the body of Christ; and that wine seen is not wine, though taste judge it to be
wine, but the blood of Christ. [X.]

Finally, that the Fathers held Transubstantiation, is proved by the
continuancy which they taught of Christ's body in the Sacrament, so long as the
accidents of bread last, as appears by their reserving of the same. For
reservation to have been the custom of the primitive Church Protestants grant.
That Habent veteris Ecclesiae exemplum fateor. Calvin. Instit. l. 9. c. 17.
sect. 39.
the Sacrament was (of some) reserved in the elder days of the Church, is not
(says Fulke against Heskins, Saunders. p. 77.
M. Fulke) so great a question, as whether it ought to be reserved. And
Chemnitius Chemnit. in exam. Con. Trid. p. 2. p. 102.
grants that in this point on our side stands Antiquitas consuetudinis late
patentis, and diu propagatae. And whereas he adds, haec tamen veritati
praescribere non debet, he accuses the Primitive Church, and opposes no less
against them, then us. And I am sure your Majesty knows, that the primitive
Fathers did use to send the Sacrament unto them that were lawfully absent from
Church, as does witness S. Iustine Justin. Apol. 2. fine.
, and unto the sick, as Dionys. Alexand ep. ad Fab. apud Eusebius. l. 6. cap. 36.
Chrysostom. Ep. 1. ad Innocent.
Dionysius Alexandrinus writes of Serapion: That Christians carried the same to
their private houses, to take in the morning before other meat, as testifyeth
Tertullian Tertul. l. 2. ad vxorem. Gregor. Nazian. orat. de Gorgon.
: That many times they did wear the same about them for protection, as Ambros.
orat. in obit^^ fratris Satyri.
Satyrus brother to Saint Ambrose going to sea, carried it in a stole, by
virtue whereof he was saved in shipwreck: That Martyrs had the same frequently
for their Viaticum, as Simeo^ Metaphrast. vitae S. Stephani Papae and Martyris.
cap. 17. Vsuard. in martyrolog. Guitmund. de corp. and sanguine. l. 2.
Tharsilius a most glorious Martyr, who being taken with the Sacrament about
him, permitted himself rather to be bruized with stones to death, then
disclose it unto the Persecutours, whom when they had crowned, thy searching
curiously for the Sacrament in his clothes and about his dead body, found
nothing; God by miracle keeping the same out of their impious hands. Saint
Cyprian. sermon. de Lapsis.
Cyprian records diverse miracles done in the confirmation of this our Saviors
permanent presence in the Sacrament namely of a woman unworthily approaching to
the chest where the same was kept, that was frighted back with fire that
thence flashed out, tanta est Domini potentia (says Saint Cyprian) ta^ta
maiestas. And so fully were they persuaded in this opinion that Christ's body is
permanently in the Sacrament, that Cyrill Cyrill. Alex. ep. ad Calosyr.
dares say: Insaniunt qui dicunt benedictionem a sanctificatione cessare,
siquae reliquiae remanserunt eius in sequentem diem. Non enim mutabitur
Sacrosanctum corpus Christi, sed virtus benedictionis, and viuificatiua gratia
iugis in eo est. They be mad with heretical folly who say, that the blessed
Sanctification of the Sacrament cease if the same be reserved until the next
day: For thereby the sacred body of Christ is not changed, but the grace of
benediction and vivification is perpetual in it. Now what reason could the
Fathers have thus constantly to defend this continuation of our Savior in the
Sacrament, but that they believed bread to be changed into his body, remaining
demonstrable by the forms and accidences thereof, so long as they remained
entyre, and were not changed into the accidences of some other substances? [XI.]

A Refutation of the Ministers Shifts, to elude the former Testimonies of the
Fathers, according to the reference of the precedent Numbers.
[I.] NO words of Scripture, or Christian Antiquity can be so clear and
evident, which Heretical obstinacy will not wrest against the truth, yea rack
till they rent them in pieces by violent interpretations, as says S. Ambrose
Ep. 17. In which kind be the Ministers Replies unto these express and pregnant
testimonies of the Fathers for Transubstantiation, as will appear by the
confutation which here ensues.

[II.] Transelementing. The word (...), Transeleme^tation (says the Minister
page 421.) proves not Transubstantiation. For in Transubstantiation the matter
is destroyed, and the quantity and accidents remain; and in Transelementation
the matter remains, and the essential and accidental forms are altered.

Answer. The falsehood and inanity of this Shift is convinced by these four
arguments, which show Transelementation to import the same as
Transubstantiation.

The First is drawn from the notion of the word Elements, and
Transelementation. For Transelementation of bread and wine, into the body and
blood of our Lord, signifyes, that there is a change betwixt them according to
their elements. Elements import the primordiall simples, the original
principles, the substantial parts of which a thing is fundamentally composed.
Hence Fire, Air, Water, Earth, as also the Letters of the Alphabet be termed
Elements, because both are primordiall simples and substantial parts, the one
of mixed substances, the other of words and sentences. Now, the body and blood
of Christ, as also bread and wine being corporal substances, the primordiall
simples and substantial principles whereof their nature is originally composed,
be substantial matter and form, as every Philosopher knows. Ergo,
Transelementation of bread and wine into Christ's body and blood, does import
that bread and wine be changed into Christ's body and blood, according to their
Elements, that is, matter and form. Is not this Transubstantiation?

The second reason is, because in Transelementation matter does no more remain
then in Transubstantiation: and so your devised difference betwixt them is
false. For as when Transelementation is partial, that is, according to form
only, the matter remaynes; so likewise in Transubstantiation. For example, when
wood is turned into fire, the form being destroyed, the matter remains. As
wood by this change may be said to be Transelemented into fire, because it is
changed into fire according to the form, which is one element of wood; so
likewise, it may be said to be Transubstantiated into fire, because it is
changed into fire, according to the form which is one part of the substance of
wood. Though Christians do not use so to speak, because as well the word (...)
by the Grecian Church, as the word Transubstantiation by the latin, be
consecrated to signify the substantial change in the Eucharist, which is
total according to both elements and substantial parts.

Thirdly, I thus argue. The Minister grants, that Transelementation does import
an esse^tial change, or a change according to the essential form of bread
into Christ's body; but this cannot be according to the essential form only,
and not also according to the essential matter of bread, else the body of
Christ should be made bigger by the matter of bread changed into it, as we see
the fire to be made bigger by the matter of wood remaining after the conversion
thereof into fire. Ergo, seeing the Minister grants that Tra^selementation
imports an essential change, he must (if he will not be ridiculously absurd)
consequently grant, that this change is to tall; else the body of Christ shall
be augme^ted by the material addition of bread unto it.

Fourthly, this is proved by the Fathers appropriation of this word unto the
mystery of the holy Eucharist. For did not Transelementation of bread and wine
into Christ's body and blood import a substantial change, but only an
accidental, mystical, and significatiue conversion of them, I ask; First, why
do the Fathers never say, that the water of Baptism is Transeleme^ted into
Christ's blood, as well as they say, that wine is Tra^selemented into his blood?
For thus they might have spoken of Baptism as well as of the Eucharist, had
they been of the Protestants Religion, which is, that water is mystically and
significatiuely made Christ's blood in Baptism, as much as wine in the
Eucharist. Secondly, why do the Fathers never say, that our bodies in the day
of judgment are Transeleme^ted into Christ's body, but only (as the Minister
cites S. Nissen. orat. Catechist. c. 34.) transmutantur, they be transmuted?
why this, but because transmutation being a General term, signifyes any
mutation whether substantial or accidental; whereas Transelementation cannot
import but a substantial change? Finally, why do the Fathers never say, that
man's soul is by grace and charity Transelemented into Christ, into whom the
same is mystically changed? Theophilact indeed cited by the Minister in Joan.
c. 6. v. 56. says, that a man is (...), in a manner Transelemented into
Christ, as he might no less truly have said, in a manner Transubstantiated
into Christ; but that men are by grace Transelemented into Christ, they never
say. Which be manifest signs, that the Fathers understood by
Transelementation, according to the proper and natural signification of the
word, a substantial conversion, and not only an accidental, much less a mere
mystical change.

[III.] S. Cyrill (says the Minister) by the words, Converting bread and wine
into the verity of his own flesh, understands not Popish Transubstantiation,
but mystical and Sacramental Conversion, to wit, Conversion of signification,
use, and operation. For he speaks of bread and wine, according to their whole
nature containing substance and accidents, but the accidents are only
mystically converted into Christ his body. Answer. This mist which the
Minister would cast upon this matter by the term of mystical conversion,
serves only to catch Woodcocks; for every man of judgment may presently see,
that this sense cannot stand with the words of S. Cyrill.

For S. Cyrill says, that did men see and feel what is inwardly done in
consecrated bread and wine, men should find horror to feed thereon, because
they should see and feel, that they eat and drink flesh and blood. Hence
that this may not be perceived, he says, the conversion of bread and wine, is
done inwardly by Christ's penetratiue power, converting them into the verity of
his flesh and blood. But did men see, what is inwardly done in bread and wine
by the Protestant significatiue conversion, they would feel no horror: for in
their Tenet, no change at all is made inwardly in bread, but the whole outward
substance is assumed as an Instrument to sanctify the soul. If a Christian
should see this conversion of use and operation; should he see, I say, that
bread is elevated to produce sanctifying grace in his soul, why should he
feel horror to feed thereon? So that it is not only willfulnes against the
light of truth, but also folly to expound this place of S. Cyrill, of mere
mystical and significatiue change.

[IIII.] Unto this Testimony of S. Chrysostom, the Minister replyeth in these
words. The Father says not, that nothing of the substance is left, but the
clean the contrary (...), Nothing of the substance goes away: and the words
which follow (...), are falsely translated, for they are not, Is consumed by
the substance, but, Is coabsumed with the substance. Also the substance of
bread is not consumed by the body of Christ, according to the Tenet of many
Scholemen. The substance of the external elements passes into the body of the
receauer, and is consumed, or united to the flesh of the receauer.

Answer. This your Reply touches two points, first the Translation, secondly
the sense of this place. I will discover your vanity about both. As concerning
the first, you show your self to be a wrangler, and given unto (...) condemned
by S. Paul, laboring to make those sayings to be dissonant and contrary,
betwixt which there is not any difference in respect of sense. What
disagreement in respect of sense is there between these two sentences which you
say be contrary; When wax is put into the fire, nothing of the substance
thereof is left; When wax is put into the fire nothing of the substance thereof
goes away? Certainly they disagree as much as these two, which for sense are
just the same; When meat is set on the Table before the hungry persons nothing
is left; When meat is set on the table before hungry persons, nothing goes
away. For when S. Chrysostom says, wax being put into fire, (...), nothing
of the substance goes away, you cannot (except you would have him seem a
^oole) make him mean, that nothing of the wax goes away by consumption, and
metling into the fire, (for every child knows this to be false.) His meaning
the^ is, nothing of the substance goes away from the fire unconsumed, but the
whole substance is converted into fire, as the Jesuit expounds.

Also what difference betwixt these two translations which you make Contrary;
The mysteries are together consumed by the substance of the body: The
mysteries are coabsumed with the substance of the body? They be punctually the
very same in regard of sense, as much as these two are; Wood and Coal are
coabsumed with fire: Wood and Coal are together consumed by fire. For without
question S. Chrysostom saying, that the mysteries are consumed with the
substance of the body, as wax is by fire, does intend, that the body is the
Instrument whereby the mysteryes are consumed, as fire is the Instrument to
consume wax.

As concerning the sense of this place, that S. Chrysostom does intend to
teach that the substance of bread is consumed by the body of Christ, not by the
body of the receauer, is evident by the drift of his discourse. Which because
it is clear and pregnant for Transubstantiation, I will set it down in
Greek, as it is in M. Sauells Edition, in the 7. To me amongst S. Chrysostomes
Genuine works, Homil. 6. de poenitentia page 690. where S. Chrysostom
reprehe^ding them who having spent the morning of festival days in ridiculous
vanities and toys, yet come to the holy Sacraments, says: (...). Which is in
English.

After (these vanities) with what confidence do thou approach unto the
Mysteries, with a conscience so polluted? If thou did hold dunge in thy
hands, durst thou touch the hemme of the garment of an earthly King? No, thou
durst not. Do not regard that it is bread (in outward show,) do not think that
it is wine, for it is not meat that is cast out by egestion as others are. God
forbidd, do not so think. But as when wax is joined to the fire, nothing of
the substance thereof goes away (out of the fire inconsumed;) so do thou
think the mysteryes are consumed by the substance of the body. Wherefore
coming to receive, do not think you take the divine body as from the hand of
a man, but as fire from the tongues of the Seraphim.

Thus S. Chrysostom, affirming, and proving that the mystical bread and wine,
be not in truth and substance bread and wine, but the body of Christ, because
as wax is so consumed by fire as nothing of the substance thereof escapes, or
goes away; so the substance of bread and wine is consumed by the substance of
Christ's body.

The conceyt insinuated by the Minister, that S. Chrysostom means that the
mystical Elements, are indeed consumed, but by the body of the receauer, is
most seely. For S. Chrysostom, because the Sacramental bread and wine be
consumed by the substance of the body, concludes that therefore when we receive,
we must not think we receive bread and wine in truth, nor ordinary meat such
as is cast out by egestion. What discourse can be more sottish then this of S.
Chrysostom, did he mean, as you would make him, that the mystical elements
be by digestion consumed into the flesh of the receauer, and that therefore
when we take them they be not truly bread and wine, nor such meat as is cast
out by egestion; for his reason concludes the plain contrary of what he would
prove. Again, S. Chrysostom having said, that the mysteryes are consumed by
the substance of the body as wax is by fire, inferres that therefore when we
receive, we ought to receive Christ's divine body, as FIRE from the hand of the
Seraphim, which clearly shows, that the divine body of Christ is by him said
to be, as FIRE consuming into it self the substance of bread and wine, and not
the body of the receauer. Where note that this holy Father does not say, that
we should think the Sacrament to be a coal of fire taken from the hand of the
Seraphim, but ((...)) think, as if we received a coal of fire from the
tongues of the Seraphim: whence is answered the seely objection the Minister
makes, that if we take the words of S. Chrysostom as they found, we must say
that the Sacrament is fire, and not given by the Priest, but by the Seraphim.
For Saint Chrysostomes words neither have this sense, nor sound.

Finally, what he says, that the substance of bread is not consumed by the
body of Christ, according to the Tenet of many Scholemen, shows his want of
skill to understand Scholasticke Authors. For they all agree, that the body of
Christ made present in the Eucharist by vigor of his word This is my body,
does destroy and consume the substance of bread, at the least morally, that is,
by binding God to destroy it, that his word may be true, which without the
destruction of bread, cannot be true in the sense by him intended. Only the
question is, whether the body of Christ as present, have also physical
opposition with the substance of bread, destroying the same by physical
impression made upon it; wherein some hold the affirmative, some the negative
part, whom the Minister in his margent cites saying, substantiam corporis
Christi non pugnare cum substantia panis SVAPTE NATVRA. Is not this impertinent?

[V.] The Minister here says: It is inconsequent to argue, they are changed
in nature: Ergo, their natural substance is destroyed. For S. Peter speaking
of Regenerate persons 2. Pet. 1.5. says, they are made partakers of the Divine
Nature, and yet his meaning is not, that their former substance is abolished.

Answer. First the Minister does not set down the true force of the argument:
For the argument is not, Bread is changed in nature, Ergo, the substance
thereof is destroyed; but thus we argue. What is so changed in nature, that it
is no longer the thing or substance nature framed, is destroyed according to
the substance thereof. This is manifest, for were not the nature thereof
destroyed, it should be still the thing and substance nature framed. But S.
Ambrose says, and brings many conuincing arguments out of Scripture to
prove, that by consecration bread is so changed in nature, as, Non est quod
natura formauit, it is no longer the thing and substance nature framed, but the
body of Christ: Ergo, according to Saint Ambrose, bread in the Eucharist is so
changed, as the nature thereof is abolished into the body of Christ.

Secondly, the example you bring about Regenerate persons, is by you used
impertinently; and truly pondered and applied, serves our purpose. For in
Regeneration the substance of man is not abolished, because by Regeneration man
is changed to be participant of the Divine Nature, not from what he is
originally by the constitution of nature, but from what he is by the corruption
of the Devil and sin. Hence by virtue of Regeneration a man cease to be,
not according to the substantial Origin of his nature, but only according to
the superinduced peruersion thereof by the Devil. But in the Eucharist Saint
Ambrose says, that bread by consecration passes into the sacred body of
Christ, from the thing it was by the framing and constitution of nature: Ergo,
bread according to S. Ambrose cease to be according to the thing it is, by
the framing of nature, to wit the essence of bread.

[VI] The Minister Replies: That to a mystical change the omnipotency of God
is required, as appears in Baptism. Therefore, although some Fathers require
an omnipotent power to eleuate, and change the creatures of bread and wine, yet
it follows not, that they maintained Transubstantiation.

Answer. The Fathers indeed require the omnipotency of God in Baptism, not to
change the nature of water into the nature and verity of Christ's blood, but to
the end, that water remaining water unchanged in nature, be elevated to produce
sanctifying grace in the souls of men. Thus Saint Leo (by you often cited)
sermon. 4. de natiuit. says, Virtus altissimi quae fecit vt virgo pareret
Saluatorem, eadem facit vt regeneret vnda credentem. He does not say (as you
would make fools believe the Fathers use to speak) that the Divine
omnipotency does change the water into the nature and verity of his blood; but,
That the same power of the Highest makes water, being water, to bring forth
regenerate persons, which caused a virgin, remaining a virgin, to bring forth
the Savior.

But about the holy Eucharist the Fathers speak in another manner: They
require the Omnipotency of God, not to eleauate bread and wine, that remaining
still in nature bread and wine, they may sanctify men's souls, but to change
them into Christ's body and blood, by which change they become in themselves
without further elevation, proportioned means to sanctify souls, as
co^taining within themselves the fountain of grace. Yea the Fathers speeches
about the water of baptism, be so different from their speeches about the
bread and wine of the Eucharist, as this alone might suffice to convert the
Minister were he not obstinate. What Fathers say, that Christ at the Marriage of
souls with him in Baptism can, and does convert water into his blood by his
omnipotency, as he could, and did convert water into Wine at the carnal
Marriage of Cana, as S. Cyrill, and S. Gaudentius cited by the Jesuit, say of
the wine of the Eucharist? What Father does say, that water changed not in
shape but in nature, is by the omnipotency of the word, made his flesh, as is
said of the Eucharisticall bread by the Author of the book De Coena Domini?

[VII.] Though some question be made, whether this Author was S. Cyprian, yet
learned men both Catholics and Protestants agree, he was an holy ancient
Father: The Author of the book de Coena Domini (says M. Fulke against the
Rhem. Testam in 1. Cor. 11. fol. 282.) was not in time much inferior to
Cyprian. Erasmus in his Annotatio^s upon S. Cyprian printed at Basil Anno
1558. fol. 287. says: The Author was some learned man of S. Cyprian his age,
as Pamelius does demonstrate by many evident reasons; so that we have
Transubsta^tiation as ancient as S. Cyprian. For what the Minister says that
this Author means only a mystical and Sacramental change to be made, is
idle, as I thus demonstrate. The change this holy Father teaches, is made not
in the shape, quantity, and accide^ts of bread, but only in the inward nature
and essence thereof, panis non effigy sed natura mutatus. But the Ministers
mystical conversion is made upon the shape, quantity, and accidents of bread,
as he says page 425. it passes upon the quantity and accidents of bread, as
well as upon the substance. Ergo, the conversion of bread into Christ's flesh
taught by this holy ancient Father, is an inward substantial conversion, and
not the Ministers mystical change.

[VIII.] What the Minister says to this Argument, that the Fathers affirm,
the water of Baptism to be changed into Christ's blood, by the virtue of his
word, is false; nor has he cited any Father that does so affirm. Yea such
speaking of the water of Baptism were ridiculous, or rather impious, as
affirming things about the mysteryes of Religion, which may make them seem
senseless and ridiculous, without any ground so to affirm in Gods word. For
Christ never says of the water of Baptism, Be washed herewith, for this is my
blood, as he says often in Scripture of the wine of the Eucharist, drink ye
of this, for this is my blood.

[IX.] To the fourth argument the Minister replies, that, the Fathers exhort
People to abnegate their senses in Baptism, wherein they mantayne no
Transubstantiation. I Answer. The Minister still singes the same song that
the fathers speak in the same manner of the conversion of water into Christ's
blood in Baptism, as they speak about the conversion of wine in the
Eucharist, which is most false; and the Minister has not cited the words any
Father so affirming. The Fathers about Baptism, exhort men to believe that God
can by water wash and purify the soul, and this to be a supernatural work
above the natural force of water, which one may believe without contradicting
the evidence of any of his senses, yea without any great difficulty in reason.
For what great matter is it to believe, that God being omnipotent, at the
presence of water washing the body, can inwardly by grace wash the soul? But
about the Eucharist they say, that we must firmly and indubitately believe,
that that which seems bread and wine is not bread and wine, but the body and
blood of Christ, so that under the form of bread and wine is given us the
blood of our Lord; and though sense suggest the contrary that it is wine, we
must abnegate, and not believe our senses herein: Show one Father (I say) that
does thus affirm of the water of Baptism, that we must firmly, and
indubitately believe the same not to be water in truth, though it be water in
show; and because our sight, feeling, and taste suggest that it is water, that
we must with full Faith abnegate and deny this judgment framed by sense.

[X.] The Minister here page 429. brings three triuiall arguments, to prove
the Fathers held the substance of bread to remain after consecration, which
are not worth the answering; yet I will say a word to each of them, not to omit
any thing that may seem substantial in his Reply.

The first, The Fathers teach that the creatures of bread and wine remain, but
the abstracted shapes of bread and wine be not Gods creatures, but Popish
fancyes. I Answer, the force of this argument does consist in two lies, the
one imposed upon the Fathers, the other upon us. For first, the Fathers you
cite do not say that the Creatures of bread and wine remain in the Eucharist
after consecration, but that the holy Eucharist is made of the Creatures of
bread and wine, they being converted and turned into the body and blood of
Christ, saying: Before consecration it is bread, but after Consecration, of
bread is made the flesh of Christ. Ambros. lib. 4. de Sacram. cap. 4. Secondly
we say, that the true, solid, and real quantity of bread, endued with all the
true qualityes and natural propertyes remain, and not only abstracted shapes
and fancyes, as you maliciously or dreamingly misrelate our Doctrine. Hence
true is the saying of Irenaeus (l 4. c. 34.) that the holy Eucharist is
composed of two things, the one heavenly, to wit the body of Christ, the other
earthly, to wit the quantity of bread endued with the sensible and earthly
propertyes thereof.

The second, The Fathers teach, that the signs and elements are present, and
have power to feed, and nourish the body; but Mathematical bread and wine
have not power no nourish the body, for there is in them only the shadow of
grain and grapes; and Papists may as well say, That painted bread has power
of feeding. Answer. This argument is like the former, grounded on the
Ministers false slandering o^ dreaming misprision of our Doctrine. For we hold
that the quantity of bread, endued with the sensible virtues, and qualityes of
bread remaynes truly, really, substantially, and not only in a shadow and
picture of bread. Now the quantity of bread and wine endued with the active
qualityes, can please, delight, alter and change the body of the receauer, and
be again altered and changed by the nutritive power thereof, and so nourish the
body, as the Jesuit has declared in the second Consideration.

The Third, The Fathers affirm, that the elements of the Eucharist, resemble
the mystical union betwixt Christ and Christian people, to wit, bread
confected of many graynes of wheat, and wine of many grapes; but Popish
fictions, and Mathematical shadows of grain and grapes, cannot resemble this
mystical union. Answer. The Fathers do not say, as you impose upon them, that
the Eucharisticall bread and wine, resemble the mystical union betwixt Christ
and Christian people, but the union Christians must have betwixt themselves,
that they may be united unto Christ, as the mystical body to their head. To
represent this union, the sacred signs must be truly bread and wine, not after
consecration, but before. For as no substances be conuerred into the natural
body and blood of Christ, but such as are made of many graynes and grapes
united together in one mass, so none can be united unto Christ by grace, and
made partakers of his saving gifts, but such as being many by nature, are
united by Charity, concord, and due subordination in one mystical body, the
holy Church. So that not the Eucharisticall signs, but your arguments be
fictions and shadows, without any truth, substance or solidity in them.

[XI.] To the fifth argument, the Minister says; Because this Jesuit produces
no new matter, but only repeateth what we have formerly confuted; and
especially because Reservation concludes not Transubstantiation, I forbear
further examination of the particular Testimonies produced by him.

Answer. With what forehead could you say, that this Jesuit here produces no
new matter, but ONLY repeateth what you have formerly confuted? Might not I
with truth say, this is more then only? For where have you answered formerly
the testimonies of the Fathers here cited by the Jesuit, that hold the
Eucharist to remain the body of Christ out of use; and that it is to be
worshipped and adored as such? Where have you answered the Confession the
Jesuit does here produce of Protestants, even of your Kemnitius (to whom you
here refer us in your margent,) affirming, Reservation of the Sacrament (which
you detest as Idolatry) to have been the continual custom of the primitive
Christian Church largely diffused over the world, Antiqua consuetudo late
patens and diu propagata; thereby granting Christian Antiquity, Universality,
and Continuance to stand for us, against you?

But you say, that Reservation concludes not Transubstantiation. This proves
your shallow insight into these matters, as by these two arguments I show.
First, the Fathers reserving the Sacrament, show they held such a Real
Presence, as by virtue thereof the body of Christ must of necessity be present
so long as the accidents of bread remain: For they would not have bound
Christians to adore the Sacrament as Christ's body, so long as the proper
accidents of bread remain, had they not held, that the same is the body of
Christ infallibly, and by divine Institution, so long as the foresaid
accidents remain. But neither the Zuinglian presence by figure, nor the
Caluinian presence by Faith, nor the Lutheran presence by Consubstantiation,
does (as themselves teach) of necessity enforce the Sacrament to be the body of
Christ so long as the accidents of bread remain, but only the presence by
Transubstantiation has this nature and force: Ergo, the Fathers held neither
the Zwinglian, nor the Caluinian, nor the Lutheran Presence, but the Catholic
Transubstantiation.

Secondly, the Fathers as has been showed, do perpetually affirm that bread
and wine are converted, transelemented, changed into the nature and verity of
Christ's flesh and blood, so that Protestants have no shift to avoid the
evidence of this their Christian consent for our Religion against the^, but by
saying they speak only of mystical conversion, to wit, of signification, use,
and operation, as says our Minister page 422. lin. 1. But their reserving the
Sacrament, and adoring the same reserved as Christ's body, permanently and out
of use, does convince, that they mayntayned another conversion then mere
significatiue of operation and use, as is manifest. Ergo, the Fathers by
reserving the Sacrament show manifestly, two things. First that they held the
Catholic doctrine of substantial conversion: Secondly, that Ministers
willingly, and against their conscience expound their sayings as teaching no
more but Conversion, of mere signification, use, and operation.

Against this consent of Fathers Protestants object the testimony of Theodoret
Theodoret. Dialog. Inconfusus.

Gelasius de duabus naturis aduersus Eutichet.


and Gelasius, who in plain terms affirm that the substance of bread and
wine remains in the holy Eucharist, bringing this as an example of the
Incarnation, where the natures of God and Man remain in Christ: Signa mystica
(says Theodoret) post sanctificatione^ non recedunt a sua natura. And
Gelasius, non esse desinit substantia vel natura panis and vini.

I answer, that these Fathers by the nature of bread and wine, understand the
natural qualityes that flow form the nature and essence of bread and wine By
substance also, they understand not the inward substance, but outward
corpulency and massines of bread and wine.
; for ordinarily and in common speech, the natural accidents and proprietyes
of a thing are termed the nature of a thing. Thus we say, to be heavy and fall
downward is the nature of the stone, to be hot and to burn, the nature of
the fire, which are but natural qualityes of stone and fire. By this, or
rather by a more strange manner of speech S. Theodoret Bishop of Ancyra Hom. de
natiuit. Saluatoris, in corr. Epiph. p. 3. c. 9.
to explicate against Nestorius, and Eutiches, the conjunction of two Natures
in one Person, by the example of the water that Moses converted into blood,
says, That the water was not changed in nature, nor did cease to be water;
which in rigor of speech, taking the nature of water for the inward substance
thereof, as co^distinct from the natural qualityes, is not true. But because
water changed into blood, remaynes according to some natural qualityes and
propertyes which it has common with bread, as moisture, liquidnes, and the
like, he the better to fit and accomodate the similitude says, The water
remained according to the nature, that is, according to some natural qualityes
thereof. For these Fathers These Fathers understood not the inward Nature of
bread and wine to remain, nor the inward substance, because they say, that the
mystical signs pass by the working of the holy Ghost, into another substane,
and yet remain in the propriety of their nature. So says Gelasius; which
cannot be understood otherwise then that according to their outward nature and
substance they remain, though in their inward nature and substance they be
changed, and passed into the substance of Christ's body and blood.
bring those similitudes to declare the mystery of the Incarnation against the
Heresy of Eutiches, who denied the natural qualityes and propertyes of the two
Natures of God and Man to remain distinct in the person of Christ. This error
they rejected by the example of the Eucharist, where the natural qualityes of
bread, remain together with the body of Christ in the same Sacrament: which
natural qualityes of bread they term the nature of bread (as in some sense
they may be termed) to the end that the phrase, of two distinct natures
remaining, might be common to the mysteries of the Incarnation and Eucharist,
and so the similitude seem more fit and proper. Yet the Fathers know well,
that the phrase did not agree to both mysteryes equally in the same sense. And
this obscure uttering of his mind is the less to be wo^dered at in Theodoret,
because he does profess in that place not to speak plainly, as fearing that
some Infidells or Gatechumens were present, to whom the mystery of
Transubstantiation was not to be revealed. Non oportet (says he) aperte
dicere, est enim verisimile adesse aliquos non initiatos.

Much less cause have they to stand upon the words of Saint Augustine,
August. sermon. ad Infant. apud Bedam in cap. 10.
Quod videtur, panis est, quod etiam oculi renu^tiant; quod autem fides
postulat, panis est corpus Christi. For the sense is, that consecrated bread is
bread in outward appearance, and the natural accidences of bread truly remain
as the eye does witness, but in wardly and according to the substance it is
not bread, but the body of Christ, as faith requires we believe. And it is to
be noted that these words are not extant in the works of S. Augustine, but
alleged by Venerable Bede a follower of Saint Augustines doctrine, and so it
is not likely they are to be understood, but as Bede understood the^, who sets
down his mind in these words: Beda de mysterio missae apud Thom. Waldens. Tom.
2. c. 8. 2.
The form of bread is seen, but the substance of bread is not there, nor any
other bread, but only that bread which came down from heaven. The Minister
page 435. to make a show of many Fathers, adds unto Theodoret and Gelasius
the testimony of Bertram, S. Chrysostom in epist. ad Caesarium Monachum. S.
Irenaeus, S. Damascen. Answer. The book of Bertram is of no credit, being set
forth with many Protestant additions, as themselves confess, and you may see
proved in a Treatise termed The Plea for the Real Presence against Sir
Hu^frey Lynd his Bertra^. The Epistle ad Caesariu^ Monachum is not S.
Chrysostomes. S. Irenaeus his testimony has been already showed to be
impertinently alleged. S. Damascen is by you grossly abused, as being
brought quite contrary to his mind. For when he says ( l. 4. de fide c. 14.)
As a fiery coal is wood and fire, so the bread of the holy Communion is not
only bread, but bread united to the Divinity, he means by the bread of the
holy Communion, not bread remaining bread, but bread changed into Christ his
flesh. To say that bread remaining bread in substance, is united personally
unto the Deity, is impious; and S. Damascen, in that place, does most clearly
show, that he speaks of bread changed into flesh. For thus he writes: Christ
did conioyne his divinity with bread and wine, that so by things that are
common, and to which we are used, we may attain to things divine and above
nature, for verily the body borne of the Virgin, is a body united unto the
Deity, not that his body assumpted into heaven does again descend (in the
Eucharist) from heaven, but that bread it self, and wine are converted into
the flesh and blood of God. And a little after: A coal is not only wood, but
wood joined to fire; so the bread of the holy Communion is not simple bread,
but bread united unto the Deity. But the body united to the Deity, is not any
single nature, but the nature of flesh and the nature of the Deity be conjoined
together in it. Thus he, most clearly showing, not that the bread of the holy
Communion, remaining bread in nature, is united to the Deity, to make together
with it a personal compound of two natures (it were blasphemy so to think)
but that bread changed into Christ's flesh, is united to the Deity, because the
flesh into which it is changed is not mere and only flesh, but also flesh
united with the Deity. How intolerably is S. Damascen falsified by you? Being
truly and fully cited how fully does he teach Transubstantiation? But such is
your Religion you must make a show of the Fathers to be on your side, though
you know in conscience they make against you: you must patch together some of
their mangled sentences to make a gay fooles-coate for your seely Credents,
least they seem naked.


The seeming repugnances this mystery has with sense, should incline
Christians the sooner to believe it.. 4.
THE former proof of Transubstantiation might satisfy, were this mystery not
accompanied with many seeming absurdityes and repugnances against sense,
particularly these four. First, that a body as big as our Saviors, remaining
still truly corpulent in it self, should be contained within the compass of a
round Host scarce an inch long and broad. Secondly, that a body so glorious
should be combined unto corruptible elements, and so made subject unto the
indignityes and obscenityes that may befall unto them. Thirdly, that the body
may be in heaven and on earth, in innumerable places at once. Fourthly, that
the substance of bread being converted into Christ's body, the sole accide^ts
remain by themselves performing the whole office of substance, no less then
if it were present even to the nutrition of man's body. These difficultyes so
scandalize Protestants that some condemn Tra^substantiation as impossible yea
as Field of the Church lib. 3.
absurd, ridiculous, barbarous: Others profess they cannot subdue their
understandings to believe it as a matter of Faith. To give full satisfaction in
this point, I set down this proposition that these seeming absurdityes should
not auert, but rather incline a true Christian mind to believe this mystery. In
proof whereof I present unto your Majesty these three Considerations. The
Minister here says, that this long tract about Gods omnipotency is
impertinent, because Protestants deny not Gods omnipotency. But this Cavil is
refuted in the Censure, Sect. 3.. 3. where it is showed that to deny the
litteral sense of Gods word about the mysteryes of our faith to be possible
unto God, is Infidelity. Now Protestants grant the holy Eucharist to be a
chief mystery of faith, and Transubstantiation to be the literal sense of
Gods word about the same: wherefore this tract about the Divine omnipote^cy is
pertinently brought against them.


The first Consideration.
The first is grounded upon the supposall of two things most certain. First,
that the Primitive Church preaching unto Pagans, Jews, and other Infidells the
rest of Christian mysteryes, as the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Resurrection
of the body, did most carefully keep as much as might be from their knowledge
the mystery of the Eucharist, yea Catechumens and Nouices were not before
Baptism fully taught or instructed therein. Secondly, the reason moving the
primitive Church to be careful in this point was, least Catechumens and
Infidells being fully acquainted with the whole mystery, the one should be
scandalized, and the other mock thereat. Hence it was accounted such an heinous
offense that Christians should discover unto Infidels, or dispute about the
difficultyes thereof in their presence.

The Council Council. Alexand. apud Athanas. Apolog. 2.
of Alexandria relating the crimes of Arrians, number this as one of the
greatest: They were not ashamed in public, and as it were upon a scaffold to
treat of the mysteryes before Catechumens, and (which is worse) before Pagans.
And a little after: It Epist. Iulij apud Athanas. Apol. 2.
is not lawful to publish the mysteryes before them that are not initiated,
for fear Pagans out of ignorance mock, and Catechumens entering into
curiosityes be scandalized. And again: Before Catechumens, and (which is more)
before Jews and Pagans blaspheming Christianity they handled a question about
the body and blood of our Savior. And to the same purpose Saint Ambrose
Ambros. de myster. initian. c. 1.
says: To declare the Mysteryes unto them that be Catechumens, is no
tradition, but prodition, seeing by such declarations danger is incurred, least
they be diuulged unto Infidells that will scoff at them. This supposed, I
infer that the seeming absurdities of the Catholic real presence, should
encourage a true Christian mind to believe it. For a true Christian desires to
believe, and firmly cleave unto the real Presence that was believed by the
primitive Church. But this was a real Presence accompanied with many (seeming
gross) absurdities that the Church had no hope to satisfy Infidells therein,
or to keep them from blaspheming, but by concealing the mystery from them, and
consequently they held the Catholic, not the Protestant doctrine in this
point.

The Protestants The Minister page 442. lin. 12. says, that Protestants hold
the elements of bread and wine to remain, to be instruments of our conjunction
by grace unto God, and that this is a mystery incomprehensible. Answer. First
Protestants do not hold the elements of bread and wine to be proper instruments
infusing grace into man's soul, but that men are justified by their faith
only* and that this Sacrament is a mere sign and seal thereof. Secondly,
though Sacramental influence of grace into the soul be a thing supernatural,
yet no mystery of extraordinary difficulty to be believed, nor absurd unto
sense. For this is no more the^ that upon our eating and drinking of bread and
wine in remembrance of Christ's body broken, and of his blood shed on the
Cross, God infuse soule-nourishing grace into the worthy receauer. Now, what
difficulty to believe this? or what seeming absurdity therein? This is no
greater mystery, then that upon the washing of the body with the element of
water, God inwardly wash the soul with grace. Wherefore, seeing Protestants ca^
find in their Eucharist no mystery more hard, and seemingly absurd, the^ in
Baptism, doubtless it is not the mystery of the Primitive Church concealed
from Infidells, in regard of the seeming absurdity and immanity thereof unto
carnal imagination: whereas Baptism was not conceived to be of that seeming
absurdity, nor concealed.
doctrine that makes Christ's body present spiritually by faith unto the devout
receauer, that communicating thinks sweetly of Christ's passion and death,
contaynes no mystery to be co^cealed in respect of the seeming absurdityes; yea
the Fathers did not fear to declare to Catechumens this Sacrament, so far as
it was commemoratiue of Christ and his passion, as appears by the treatises of
Saint Augustine upon S. John made before Catechumens; out of which Treatises
Protestants for their mere commemoratiue Presence allege many sentences to
little purpose. For, he there explicates spiritual manducation by faith, and
he excludes the gross imagination of eating Christ's body in his proper shape,
tearing it in pieces with the teeth; but denies not, yea rather insinuates
another kind of spiritual manducation, not only by faith, but by real
sumption, though to conceal the mystery from Catechumens he speaks not so
clearly thereof. Wherefore as the Palmtree the heavier the weight is that is
laid upon it, the more it rises upward, as it were ioying in difficultyes: So
a true Catholic Christian feeling in the doctrine of Transubsta^tiation many
seeming absurdityes that press carnal imagination to the ground, grows
thereby more strong to believe it, embracing these difficultyes as manifest
signs, that this doctrine was believed by the Primitive Apostolical Church.
On the other side, the Protestants finding the Presence of Christ's body by
faith to be deuoyd of such difficulties, may by the very lightness thereof
suspect it is not the doctrine which the Fathers concealed from Infidells, as
more absurd to humane imagination then any other Mystery of Christian Religion.

The second Consideration.
This consideration is drawn from the quality of the difficultyes objected
against this mystery, which be such, as a Christian in honor should neglect
them Unto this argument, showing God ca^ cover the face of the whole world with
thinner and thinner parts taken out of a flies wing, every Puny in our
Universities says the Minister. page 448. can distinguish betwee^
mathematical and potentiall division of a body, and physical and actual;
Aristotle him self teaching us, that there is minima Caro, though there be not
minimum corpus. Answer. By this reply you show your self to be not so much as
a Puny in Philosophy. For not knowing what you say, you grant unto your
Adversary as much as he would prove, because you understand not the
Philosophical terms you use. He did not say that the winge of the fly, is
physically or actually divided into so many thin parts, as would cover the
world, but only, that it is diuisible into so many thin parts; but you do not
deny, but there is so much potential or possible division in the flies winge.
And if the division of a flies winge into so many thin parts as will cover
the world, be potentiall and possible, I hope you will not deny but God can
make the same actual; except you will say, that there is in the quantity of a
flies winge more potentiality to be divided, then in God power to divide, so
denying him to be Omnipotent.

Secondly, your coming forth with Aristotle's minima caro, sed non minimum
corpus, does more and more bewray your Ignorance. For the Philosophical
disputation de termino paruitatis, is de minimo naturali, whether a thing
homogeneous, that is, whereof every particle is of the same kind with the
whole, as water, fire, flesh, can be so little as it cannot be lesser or
thinner by the course of nature; wherein many learned Deuines hold the Negative
part, that no flesh is so little, but it may be less by the course of nature.
But in respect of the Divine power, no Christian Philosopher does hold there is
minima caro, flesh so little and thine, that God can not make the same lesser
and thinner without end, and so with a flies winge cover the world. And whereas
you iestingly require you may have respite not to believe Transubstantiation,
until this vast worlds Capcase be made of a flies winge; you may have your
desire, so you ca^ be content the mean time, to undergo the punishment they
must endure, who will undertake to comprehend the Omnipotency of God within the
CAPCASE of their idle brain.


. For if it be the part of a prudent and intelligent man, not to permit
imagination to prevail against his reason, what a disgrace is it for a
Christian that his faith should be conquered by these kind of difficultyes? For
that the seeming absurdityes of this mystery be not in respect of natural
reason, but merely of imagination, may hence appear, that some natural
truths be in a manner as difficill and incredible; which will be seen, if we
compare the four above mentioned difficulties, with the difficulties some
truths, evident in nature, have.

First, we cannot imagine, that the whole body of Christ can be contained in
the compass of a small host. But it is not more incredible, that in a thing
of small quantity, for example in the winge of a fly, there should be so many
parts, as unfolded and laid together would cover the whole face of the world,
both of heaven and earth: And yet it is demonstrable in Philosophy, that even
in the wing of a fly, there are so many parts, as broad and long as the wing,
though still thynner and thinner, that Almighty God separating and unfolding
the^, may therewith cover the whole world. For certain it is, that some finite
number of such parts so separated, each of the^ as long, and as broad as a
flies winge, would cover the face of the whole world. Certain also it it that
the winge of a fly is still diuisible into more and more such parts that no
finite number of them is assignable, but God may still separate from that winge
a greater number without end. Therefore it is certain, that in the wing of a
fly there is so much quantity as is sufficient to cover the face of the whole
world both of heaven and earth, if God would but separate and unfold the same.
Is not this secret of Philosophy as incredible to carnal imagination, as the
being of Christ's body within a small host? We that cannot comprehend things
we see with eyes, and feel with hands, certainly we shall have much ado at
the day of Judgment to justify our not believing any part of Gods word, by
reason of the seeming absurdityes thereof.

Secondly, we cannot imagine the body of Christ to be really combined unto the
consecrated forms, and not to be polluted by such indignityes as may happen
unto the forms; yet we have seen, or may see things able to make this not to
seem incredible. For holy men often by prayer so purify their souls, and by
contemplation bring their spirits to such an independency of their senses, that
neither bitter meats offend their taste, nor loathsome sents their smell, nor
shrill cries their hearing; yea burnings and torturings are not perceived,
their spirit being eloyned, through divine unpolluted affection from the
co^tagion of the body, unto the substance whereof it still remaynes most really
united. This being so, cannot the glorious body of Christ (graced with most
divine ornaments, flowing from the excessive bliss of the soul, and and
thereby made spiritual, impassible, and unsearchable) be really present unto
the forms of consecrated Bread, and yet immune, free, and wholly independent of
any contagion or corruption that may happen to the forms, specially the body
of Christ not being so strictly and substantially tied unto the forms, as the
spirit to the body it informs, but is present unto them as an Angel
assista^t is to the body wherein he works; what dishonor can it be to
attribute unto Christ's most venerable body this spiritual manner of Angelical
presence, yea rather a participation of the divine immensity? For as God by his
incomprehensible imme^sity existes every where no less pure in the sink, then
in the sun, no less sweet in the dungehill, then in a garden of odoriferous
flowers: So the body of Christ by supernatural participation of his divine
presence, is really upon earth in things visible invisible, in things hurtful
impassible, in things noisome inviolable, in things impure immaculable, to his
friends that receive him with love most sweet and comfortable, and ouerflowing
in graces; but to the unworthy receauer present in a manner dead and senseles,
as if he were not there at all. And as he that receives into his arms a body,
wherein the spirit absorpt in contemplation, neither feeling nor felt, lies
enclosed, may be said to embrace the body without the spirit, which is in that
body insensible, and as good as if it were not there: So they that receive
unworthily, are sometimes said by the Fathers August. tract. 26. in Joan. and
25. Caeteri Apostoli manducauerunt panem Dominu^, Judas aute^ panem Domini.
, to receive the Sacrament without the body of Christ, because though the body
of Christ be really in the Sacrament they receive, yet he is there in a dead
manner in regard of them, as if he were not there at all, because he stirs
not up heavenly affections in them, nor makes them feel the workings of his
grace, and love.

Thirdly, we cannot imagine the same body can be in many places together at
the same time, it is true; but as hardly can we imagine the soul to be in the
head and in the feet of a man, one and the same, without division in it self;
or, an Angel to be in two Towns of the Country whereof he is President, as
far distant one from the other, as York from London. Also who can conceive
God who is infinitely one and indivisible, to be both in heaven, and on earth
at once? Of which incomprehensible manner of presence Saint Augustine says
August. ep. 3. ad Volusian.
: Miratur hoc meus humana, and quia non capit, fortasse non credit. What
marvel that imagination fayles us to apprehend the multiplied Presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament, which is spiritual, Angelical, and
supernatural, comparable with the divine, that S. Gregory Nissen Greg. Nissen
in orat. de Pasch.
sticks not to say: Sicut Diuinitas replet mundum, and tamen vna est, ita
innumerabilibus locis offertur, and tamen vnum corpus est? The body of Christ
being glorious, is for operation as swift and agill as any thought, but a man's
thought is so quick, that one may be by thought in two disioyned places at
once, for example in London, and at Rome. Some Deuines Caiet. 1. p. q* 52. art.
2. Ferrar. 3. contra Gent. ca. 65. Marsil. in 2. q. 2. ar. 2. Dionys. Cister.
in 2. did. 6. q. 1. art. 1. conclus. 6.
give such agility to Angels, that they can place themselves substa^tially
where they please by a thought, and think that as their thoughts, so likewise
their substances are so independent of corporal state, that they can be
naturally in two distinct places, without being in the spaces interiacent But
the agility of Christ's glorious body is more excellent and perfect as being
supernatural, then the natural agility of Angels, yea then of thoughts; why
then should we make any doubt, but he may be in disioyned different places at
once?

Fourthly, we find difficulty to conceive, that accidents existing separated
from any substance, can perform the office of substance even to the
nourishment of man's body: but we should perchance find as much difficulty to
believe, that of a little Kernel of an apple a great Tree may be made, and
nourished by the force and vigor proceeding from the same, did we not see by
daily experience the same to be true? That ashes may be made glass; that
stones in the stomach of a Dove; iron in the belly of an Ostridge be turned
into flesh; that of a rotten bark of a tree falling into the water, should be
bred and produced a perfect bird to me seems more incredible, then that God
should make the accidents of bread separated from their substance to nourish
man's body The Minister here labors to show a difference betwixt the wonders
of Nature, and the Miracles of the holy Eucharist, which is impertinent. For
the Answerer does not intend, that there is the same kind of stra^genes in
both, but argues, That seeing in Nature such incomprehensible things be found,
we ought not to deny the litterall sense of Gods Word, for any difficultyes
that may occur.
. For the dead bark of a tree may seem to have no more efficacy of it self
to produce a living creature, specially so perfect a bird as a Barnacle, then
have the accidents of bread to feed and breed the flesh of a living man: yea
many Philosophers teach, and in my judgment convince, that in substantial
generations where no cause coequall in perfection to the effect produced is
present, God by the secret operation of his power, supplies the deficiency of
natural causes; Why then should any man so much mislike our doctrine, that, in
this mystery, where the substance of bread is wanting, God by the secret
operation of his power, supplies the defect thereof; seeing by the opinion of
many learned Philosophers, his Providence by the like secret special working,
does ordinarily, daily, and hourly supply the manifold defects of substantial
secondary agents. Neither is the manner how God can do this, difficill to
explicate. For he may enable the quantity of bread to receive and sustain the
working of man's nutritive power, and when in that quantity there is the last
accidental disposition to the form of flesh, he can secretly produce again
materia^ prima^, that was of the bread, and combine the same with the prepared
quantity, and the substantial form of flesh; what reason is there, why God
may not do this, yea do it sooner then we speak it?

Wherefore the seeming absurdityes of this mystery, being (as I have showed)
merely imaginary, and not like those against the Trinity, and the Incarnation,
wherein not so much imagination as reason finds difficulty; it is the part not
only of sincere Christian Faith, but also of a clear excellent wit, to
contemn them, and not to permit wandering unruly fancy destitute of reason, to
control our belief about the The Minister here page 454. rayles lustily,
saying: That the Romists presu^ptuously forming Chimera's and Idols in the
forge of their own deceived breast, deserve to be fed only with accidents, as
the birds that pecked at painted grapes. All which is both blasphemous and
simple: for what more impious then to term the litterall sense of Gods word
concerning the mysteries of faith, such as our doctrine about the same is
confessed to be, a Chimera and Idol, framed in the forge of a deceived breast?
What more seely, then to think the Protestants Sacrament, being a figure of
Christ's body, and in substance but bread, a more substa^tiall food of the
soul, then the Catholics, which is in shape and show bread, in essence and
substance the precious flesh of the Savior? Be not Protestants rather the
birds that peck at the picture figure, and shape of their souls food? Is not
the soul better fed with the litterall, plain, and substantive sense of Gods
word, the^ by the figurative comments of men?
literal sense of Christ's words so many ways by the grauest testimonies of
Antiquity recommended unto us.

The third Consideration.
Thirdly, to make Christians incline to believe this mystery so difficill to
carnal Imagination, this Consideration may be very potent, to wit, that in
believing the same on the one side there may be great merit and excellent
Faith, if it be a truth, and on the other side, though (which is impossible) it
should be false, yet in believing it, we shall not fall into any damnable
error. For although we suppose this impossible case, yet what can be laid to
our charge which we may not defend, and justify by all the rules of equity and
reason? If we be accused, that we took bread to be the body of Christ, adoring
the same as God, so committing Idolatry, we may defend, that both for soul and
body we are innocent heerin. For seeing the body is not made guilty but by a
guilty mind, even our body may plead not guilty, seeing our mind, our thoughts,
our devotion were totally referred unto Christ, whom we truly apprehend by
faith, as veyled with the accidents of bread, and so may repel the reproach of
(...), bread-worshippers, with saying, -- Quae vouit men's est, pani nil vouimus
illa.

Neither did we believe that the bread was changed into Christ's body upon
slight reasons, or moved by the fancyes of our own head, but contrary to our
fancyes, out of reverence to the The Minister here contradicting himself
says, that Tra^substantiation is not inuolued in the litterall sense of Gods
word. And further, that the same was never defined in General Counsels. For
as the Aria^s would allow no Council to be lawful which condemned Arius, so
with these me^ no Council is lawful upon which John Calvin will not bestow
his Blessing. Otherwise, why should not the Lateran Council under Innocent the
third, and the second Council of Nice celebrated above eight hundred years
ago, where the substa^tiue real presence is defined, and the figurative
condemned, be lawful and general, in which both the Latin, and Grecian Church
did concur to define?
express words of Christ, This is my body: A sense declared by most ancient
Fathers, defined by many General Councels, delivered by full consent of our
Ancestors, so practiced in the Church for many ages, without any known
beginning; Finally, confirmed with the most credible and constant report of
innumerable The Minister says, that these Miracles be but the lies of Friars,
which he proves by a jest that was rife in the mouth of Wickliffifts, Est
Frater, Ergo mendax. Answer. The miracles done in proof of the Corporal and
substantial permanent presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist, are related
by most ancient Fathers and writers, of which many whole Towns, Cittyes, and
Countries have been eye witnesses, as it were madness to question the^. These
may be read in Ioannes Garetius, who has gathered them together, as also in
Iudocus Coccius. The Proverb He is Friar, Ergo a liar, is true of such Friars
as Martin Luther, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Friar Barnes, and the like founders and
pillars of the fifth Gospel. And if the matter be looked into without passion,
this inference, Est Minister, Ergo me^dax, will seem more justifiable; even in
Caluins judgment, who says, that most of them that show most zeal, are full
of falshod, fraud, and lying. Hierom Zanchius a famous Protestant in the
Preface of his book contra Arianum Anonymu^, says of Ministers; That even
they who are termed Pillars of the Gospel, are for the most part impudent
lying companions, that outface the truth every way; thereupon exclayming, O
Tempora! O Mores!
most evident miracles. Can a Christian believe any point of religion upon
surer grounds? And if God at the day of Judgment will condemn none, but such
as living in this world, wronged him in his honor; why should Catholics fear
any hard sentence in respect of their pro^pt credulity of Transubsta^tiation,
that is, of Gods word taken in the plain proper sense? Is it any injury to his
verity, that they deny their senses, correct their imaginatio^s, reform their
discourses, abnegate their judgments, rather then not to believe what to them
seems his word? Is it injury to his power to be persuaded that he can do
things incomprehe^sible without number? put the same body in innumerable places
at once? make a body occupy no place, and yet remain a quantitatiue substance
in it self? Is it injury to his charity to think, that love unto men makes
him unite himself really, and substantially with them, and to be (as it were)
incarnate anew in every particular faithful man, entering really into their
bodies, to signify efficaciously his inward conjunction by spirit unto their
souls? Finally, is it any injury to his wisdom to believe, that to satisfy on
the one side the will of his Father, that would have him ever in heaven sitting
at his right hand; on the other side, the ardency of his own affection unto
men, desiring to be perpetually with them, he invented a manner how still
remaining glorious in heaven, he might also be continually on earth with his
Church; secretly, not to take from them the merit of Faith, yet to affoard full
satisfaction to his own love; really, by continual personal presence, and
most intime conjunction with them?

On the other side, it imports them that think Transubstantiation impossible,
or that God cannot put the same body in different places at once, to consider,
if they err (easy it is for men to err that with the compass of their
understanding measure the power of God) how dangerous and inexcusable their
error will prove, when they shall be called to give unto their omnipotent maker
a final account, particularly of this doctrine, so much derogating from him?
Let them think how they will answer if God lay to their charge the neglect of
that most prudent and reasonable advise which S. Chrysostom [ Homil. 83. in
Mat.] gives: Let us believe God, (says he) let us not resist his word, though
the same seem absurd unto our cogitation and sense, for his speech does
surpass our reason and sense, his words cannot deceive us, but our senses be
deceived easily and often. How will they reply, if they be pressed with the
interrogatory which S. Cyrill l. 12. in Joan. makes unto such unbelievers: If
thou could not comprehend the divine operation of God, why did thou not
accuse the imbecility of man's wit, rather then the omnipotency of God? Or how
(disputing and proposing so many Arguments against Gods power, rejecting or
questioning the same, because they could not understand it) never called they
to mind the saying August. lib. 12. de Ciuit. c. 11.
of Saint Augustine: Ecce quibus argumentis Diuinae omnipotentiae humana
contradicit infirmitas, quam possidet vanitas?

THE SEVENTH POINT.
Communion Note, that the holy Eucharist is both a Sacrifice, and a Sacrament.
A Sacrifice as offered unto God for thansgiuing, and remission of sins. A
Sacrament as received by me^ for the food and sanctification of their souls.
It is a Sacrifice, because a lively and express representation of Christ's
bloody Sacrifice on the Cross. It is a Sacrament, because representing, and
exhibiting Christ Jesus, as the full, and all-sufficient food of the soul.
Hence the Eucharist, as a Sacrifice (...) entyre in the (...) oblatio^ under
the form of bread, without oblation in the form of wine, because the oblation
in the form of bread without wine, does not expressly and distinctly
represent Christ's Sacri^^ce on the Cross by the effusion of his blood. But the
Eucharist, as a Sacrament, is entyre in one only kind, to wit, under the form
of bread, because the form of bread only does represent, contain, and
exhibit the true body of our Lord, which is a full and all-sufficient food to
nourish the soul unto eternal life, as says our Savior: He that eats this
bread lives for ever. Joan. 6.59. By this the Ministers Cauilling page 460.
and 461. and throughout this whole Controversy, is answered; for he only proves
(at the most) that the Eucharist as a Sacrifice, is not entyre in one kind.
under one kind: and the abetting of it by Concomitancie.

YOUR most Excellent Majesty in the proposition of this Controversy shows your
deep insight into Theological difficultyes, perceauing the main ground
whereon the Catholic opinion of the lawfulnes of communion under one kind
stands, to wit, Concomitancy, which being granted, Communion under one kind
is justified.

The doctrine of Concomitancy proved.. 1.
THE doctrine of Concomitancy is, that under the form of bread, not only the
body of Christ, but also his precious blood and blessed soul are truly, and
really contained; the body directly and by virtue of the words of
consecration, the blood and the soul consequently. For being contained within
the body of Christ, they must needs concomitate, that is, follow the body in
what place soever the same be The Minister page 460. says, The blood of Christ
cannot properly he said to be in his body by Concomitancy, (for then it were
accide^tally therein) but as a part in the whole. Answer. We do not say, blood
is accidentally in the body of Christ or by concomita^cy, but that it is by
concomitancy in the same place with the body. As the soul is not by
concomitancy in the body of a living man, but as a part in the whole, yet as
Philosophy teaches Mouetur per accidens cum corpore, it is moved, and removed
accidentally, and by concomitancy with the body; You must then distinguish, To
be in the body, from To be in the same place with the body. The soul is in the
body by direct substa^tiall union therewith, but in the place of the body the
soul is not directly, but by concomitancy, in regard of her conjunction with
the body, which is directly in place. In this manner the soul, and blood of
Christ's be directly and substantially in his body, yet only by concomitancy in
the Sacrament under the form of bread, where the body only is directly by
virtue of the words. In this sense also the Deity is in the Sacrament by
Concomitancy. For the Deity is not expressly signified to be in the Sacrament
by virtue of the words, which only affirm Christ his body to be present; yet
is the Deity present unto, and united with the body present by the virtue of
the word. Hence the Deity is present by Co^comitancy, so that though otherwise
it were not present, yet should it be here present by Concomitancy, because
inseparably joined with a thing that is present.
. Neither can any that acknowledges the Real presence, deny this Concomitancy
without falling into many absurdities, as I prove by three Arguments.

First, he that acknowledges the Real presence of Christ's sacred Body under
the form of bread, and denies Concomitancy, does in his belief separate the
blood, and soul of Christ from his body: But to separate either Christ's
Divinity from his Humanity, or soul from his body, or his blood from his
flesh, is unlawful. For such a belieuer does dissolve and destroy Christ
Jesus, and so is one of the number of them that Saint John condemns, Omnis
spiritus qui soluit Iesum non est ex Deo, and hic est Antichristus 1. Joan. 4.3.
. And this Argument has greatest force in their opinion, who shall think that
Christ leaves heaven for the time, and comes down really according to his body
and blood; for how can the body of Christ come down from heaven without blood
and soul, unless he come down dead? And so Christ should be not only mystically
and figuratively, but truly and really massacred in the Sacrament, and the
Eucharist be a bloody sacrifice, and not incruent, as the Fathers term it.

Secondly, the Priest in the person of Christ who is glorious in heaven, or
rather Christ being glorious in heaven, by the mouth of the Priest, says, This
is my body: but a body deuoyd of blood without soul, and consequently dead and
senseless, is not the body of Christ as he is now glorious in heaven, which
has blood in the veins, and is informed and glorified by a most excellent
soul. Therefore Christ glorious in heaven cannot say truly, that a body void of
blood sense and soul is his body, but soul, life, and blood must needs
follow, and concomitate his body wheresoever it be.

Thirdly, if under the form of bread were only the body of Christ, and his
soul and blood were not by Concomitancy there, the Communicants should receive
the body of Christ, but not truly Christ, as our Adversaries grant; Calvin
specially saying; Calvin l. 4. Instit. c. 7. n. 35.
Quis sanus and sobrius, Christi Corpus Christum esse sibi persuade at? And
again: Ibidem n. 74.
Ne fando quidem auditum est corpus Christi aut sanguinem, Deum and hominem
appellari. But Ambros. l. de ijs qui i^it. In illo Sacramento Christus est.
Fathers affirm most constantly that not only the body of Christ, but also
Christ Hilarious l. 8. de Trinit. Nos vere verbum carnem cibo Dominico sumimus.
himself is in the Sacrament; That we take in the Dominicall refection, the
Word made flesh; That Cyrill. Alexand. l. 4. in Joan. c. 15. Per hanc
benedictione^ mysterij ipsum filium Dei suscipimus.
by the consecration of the mysteryes we receive the very Son of God; That
Cyrill. Hieros. Catech. 5. mystag.
under the form of bread we lodge within us the soueraygne King; and that
Chrysostom. homil. 83. in cap. 26. Matthew. and hom. 24. in 1. ad Cor.
we see Christ, feel Christ, eat Christ, non regium puerum, sed ipsum
vnigenitum Dei Filium. An hundred other places might be brought where the
Fathers call the consecrated bread Christ, and consequently they did not think
there was the mere body without blood and soul, seeing, as Calvin does
confess, It is an absurd manner of speech to term Christ the mere body of
Christ: And such a form of speech was never heard of hitherto in the world.
Ergo, Concomitancy, that is, Christ's real and entyre body, soul, flesh, blood
to be under the form of bread, was acknowledged by the Fathers. The Minister
page 462. proposes this argument against Concomitancy, which he thinks to be
so strong and glorious, as he sets the same in a distinct letter, and each
proposition in a distinct line, to call the eye of the Reader upon it.

Whatsoever is received in the Sacrament was before offered to God on the
Cross. But the body of Christ having soul and blood in it by Concomitancy was
not offered to God upon the Cross. Ergo, at this day soul and blood be not in
the body of Christ by Concomitancy etc.

I answer. This argument serves as a myrrour, wherein Learned men may see and
admire our Ministers want both of Philosophy, and Logic. His want of
Philosophy in not distinguishing the being by Concomitancy in the body, from
being by Concomitancy in the place where the body is. The body of Christ
neither on the Cross, nor in the Eucharist has soul and blood in it, and
united with it by Concomitancy, yet the body of Christ not only in the
Sacrament, but also on the Cross had soul and blood present with it by
Concomitancy, or consequence. For the soul being substantially united with the
body, and blood contained within the body, they were consequently enforced to
be together with the body in the same place on the Cross.

Hence the Ministers argument is turned against himself: That body is received
in the Eucharist, which was offered to God on the Cross; but Christ's body
having soul and blood in the same place with it by Concomitancy, was offerred
to God on the Cross. Ergo, the body of Christ having soul in the same place
with it by Concomitancy, is in the Sacrament.

His ignorance in Logic is likewise very specious and notable, to present
unto the world, with so great solemnity, an idle Sophisme, and Fallacy, termed
by the Logitians, Figurae dictionis. Of which fallacy one kind is, when from
the substantial word one argues unto the accidental. As for example, this
Sophisme: What meat soever thou did buy in the market, thou do eat at
dinner: but thou did buy raw flesh in the market: Ergo, thou do eat raw
flesh at dinner. And this likewise: What fingers soever thou had being a
Child, thou have now being a man: thou had little fingers being a Child:
Ergo, thou have little fingers now being a man. Just of the same frame and
fashion is our Ministers argument. What soever is received in the Sacrament was
offered on the Cross: A body that had not blood in it by Concomitancy, was
offered on the Cross: Ergo, a body not having blood in it by Concomitancy is
received in the Sacrament. If this form be good, one may prove that we do not
now receive the body of Christ risen from death. Whatsoever is received in the
Sacrament was offered on the Cross: A body having soul and blood in it by
virtue of resurrection from death to life, was not offered on the Cross: Ergo,
a body risen from death, or having soul and blood in it by virtue of
resurrection from death, is not received in the Sacrament. Here your Ladies may
see with what Baberyes you delude their Ignorance arguing from the Substantial
unto the Accidental term. For though Christ's body received in the Sacrament
be the same that was offered on the Cross in respect of substance, it does not
follow that therefore it is the same also in respect of accidents, qualityes,
and circumstances. Hence his body may now have blood and soul by Concomitancy
with it in the Sacrament, though it had not had blood and soul by Concomitancy
with it on the Cross.




This principle supposed, which is no less certain then the true real
presence, I infer the lawfulnes of Communion under one kind (to wit under the
sole form of bread) by this Argument. If communion under one kind be not
against the substance either of Christ's institution, or of his Sacrament, or
his precept, or of the practice of the primitive Church, it is lawful,
justifiable, and for just reasons may be commanded by the Church. This
proposition is true* because there neither are other causes of dislike that may
not be reduced to these four; neither does Christ's Institution, or Precept, or
the Primitive practice bind us to keep them, further then in substance, the
accidental circumstances of institutions, Sacraments, precepts, primitive
Customs being variable according to the variable disposition of things unto
which the Church militant in this life is subject. Now I assume, Concomitancy
being supposed, it may be made evident that Communion under one kind is not
against the substance either of Christ's institution, or of the Sacrament, or of
his precept, or of the primitive practice. For the substance of these four
obligations is one and the same, to wit, that we be truly and really partakers
of the body and blood of our Savior, which is The Minister p. 467. says:
Though Concomitancy be granted, yet Communion in one kind, is not justified,
because the blood by Concomitancy is received in the veins of the body, not as
shed out of the veins: But people must receive the blood of Christ represented
as shed, which is not done, but by receiving the Cup. Answer. The essence of
the Eucharist as it is a Sacrifice, is to represent the effusion of our Lords
blood, and so can not be entyre in one kind. But the essence of the Eucharist
as a Sacrament is to represent the body and blood of our Lord, as the food of
the soul. But in either kind, the body and blood to be sufficient food of the
soul, the Jesuit proves: so that people be not bound so receive the blood
represented distinctly, and expressly as shed, but only the Priest that does
sacrifice.
fully done by Communion under one kind, as I will show in the four consequent
Sections.

Communion under one kind not against the substance of the Institution of
Christ.. 2.
DIVINE Institution is an action of God, whereby he gives Being unto things,
with reference unto some special end. This end is twofold, the one corporal
and temporal for which God has instituted agreeable and convenient means.
That men may be borne into this world, he did institute marriage: and for
maintenance of the said life being had, he ordained many sorts of meat. The
other end is spiritual, for which God has instituted Sacraments; as, for the
first obtaining of grace and spiritual life, the Sacraments of Baptism and
Penance; for the preserving of grace and increasing therein, particularly the
Sacrament of the Eucharist.

That a man be bound to use the Institution of God, two things are required.
First that the end thereof be necessary, and he bound to endeavor the
attayning thereof. Hence it is that though marriage be the institution of God
appointed to propagate mankind; yet every man is not bound to marry, because he
is not bound to propagate mankind, when there be others that do abundantly
comply with that duty to which mankind is in general bound, Multiplicamini,
and replete terram [Gen. 1.18.] Secondly, where the end of the institution is
such as every man must endeavor the atteyning thereof, to the end that a man
be bound to use that institution, it is further required, that the thing
instituted be necessary for atteyning of that end. For if there be other means
ordained sufficient for the atteyning of that end, a man is not bound to use
such particular divine institutions. For example, man is bound to mainteyne his
corporal life so long as Nature will permit, and to this end God created
variety of fruits, yet no man is bound by divine institution to eat fruits,
there being other means instituted for the maintenance of life The Minister
not being able to refell, what the Jesuit here says, That because Christ did
Institute the Sacrament in both kinds for the refectio^ of souls, it does not
follow that me^ are bound by force of this Institution, to receive in both
kinds, as men are not bound to eat both fruit and flesh, though God did
institute both, for the maintenance of man's life: Not being, I say, able so
refell this, he labors to prove, that Communion in one kind is against the
substance of the Sacrament: which is impertinent in this place, that
controversy being handled in the next Paragraffe; and what the Minister here
says is there answered, as in the proper place.
.

Applying this to our purpose, It is apparent, that by the force of divine
institution no man is bound to use Communion under both kinds. For though the
end why Christ did institute the Sacrament in both kinds be necessary, and all
must endeavor the atteyning thereunto, to wit, mayntenance, and increase of
grace the life of the soul, yet there be other means by which we may atteyne
to this end. Whence it is, that learned Deuines hold that the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, is not necessarium, necessitate medij (as they speak) that is, the
use thereof is not a necessary means for the maintenance of spiritual life,
but a man wanting means of sacred Communion may by other means preserve
himself in the state of grace. And though we should suppose that actual
communion were a necessary means to preserve spiritual life, yet communion
under one kind is abundantly sufficient thereunto. For the Sacrament in the
sole form of bread, containing the Author and fountain of life, whole and
entyre according to body, soul, blood, and his infinite person, is abundantly
sufficient for the refection of the soul, yea no less sufficient then
Communion under both kinds. For this one kind conteyneth within it nothing
less then what is contained in both, and Christ promises life to sole
manducation Joan. 6. v. 58.
: Qui manducat me, and ipse viuit propter me; And unto the sole reception of
his body under the form of bread Ibid. v. 55. and 59.
: Panis quem ego dabo caro mea est pro mundi vita, and qui manducat hunc panem
viuet in aeternum. If the tree of life in the midst of Paradise Genesis 2.9.
, if the Manna Exodus 16.15.
of the Jews, the bread of Angels did suffice to nourish the body without
drink, why should any deny this soule-nourishing sufficiency unto the sole
body of Christ, were the same alone in the bread, but specially, being there
conioined with his soul and his most precious blood?

Hence it is apparent, that without any just cause some Protestants inueigh
against the Council of Constance, as professing to co^tradict the precept of
Christ, because it decreed Sess. 13. That the Sacrament may be lawfully given
under one kind, The Minister here spends two pages in railing against the
Council of Constance, but has not one word of reason in his discourse. He
supposes without proof, what the Jesuit has by many reasons refelled, that
Christ commanded Communion in both kinds, and that the Jesuits distinction of
Institution from Precept is vlcerous, and a plaster of fig leaves and the
like words. He says also that Christ's Institution is a virtuall precept: which
is true, in respect of things pertaining to the substance of the Sacrament;
but both kinds be not of the substance of the Sacrament, as the Jesuit in the
next Paragraffe, does demonstrate.
Non obstante quod Christus in vtraque specie illud instituerit, and Apostolis
administrauerit: Notwithstanding Christ's institution, and administration
thereof in both kinds to his disciples. This their bitterness proceeds from
zeal without knowledge, not distinguishing the Institution of God, from his
Precept, which are very distinct. For the precept of both kinds (if Christ gave
any) does bind, whether both kinds be necessary for the maintenance of man's
soul in grace or no: but the Institution of both kinds for the maintenance of
spiritual life, does not bind further then the thing instituted, to wit,
Communion under both kinds is necessary for the mainteyning of spiritual
life; for which end one kind being sufficient, as I have showed, Christ's
institution of both kinds does not enforce the use of both. If God should have
commanded, the use both of meat and drink to every man, then every man should
be bound not only to eat, but also to drink, though he had no necessity
thereof: but now, seeing God has not given such a precept, a man that can live
by meat without ever drinking, is not bound to drink, non obstant^, that God
did institute both eating and drinking, for the preservation of life in every
man.

Communion under one kind, not against the substance of the Sacrament.. 3.
A Sacrament of the new Testament being a visible efficacious sign of
invisible grace, four things are necessary to concur to the substantial
constitution thereof, which I will set down in order, and together show that
they are all found in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, given under one kind The
Minister page 4^6. says, this quadripart argument is Sophistical as if the
^esuit should argue thus: Head, breast* back, legs and arms are not of the
substance of human nature. Ergo, a man without legs and arms is a perfect man,
according to the first creation of ma^-kind. I need add no more, but smile.
Answer. You smile when you should rather blush for shame, in not having so
much judgment as to conceive your adversaries co^uincing argument. For he does
not dispute as you faygne, but in this sort. As he that has soul and body,
with members and organs for all the ends and functions of man, is a perfect and
entiere man; so the Sacrament in one kind, if it have matter and form
sufficient for all the ends and functions of the Sacrament, is a full and
entyre Sacrament. But such is the Sacrament in one kind, as he does largely
prove, descending unto the particular ends. Is this a discourse to be smiled
at, or answered by laughing?
.

First, there is required some Element that is, a visible and sensible thing or
action without which no Sacrament can subsist, termed by Deuines Materia
Sacramenti. This substantial part is not wanting in the Sacrament given in one
kind, in which there is consecrated bread visible and sensible in the accidents
thereof, and manducation, an action also visible and apparent to sense.

The second thing required to the substance of the Sacrament, is Verbum, the
word, that is, a form of speech showing the divine and supernatuall purpose
unto which the element is consecrated. Neither is that part wanting in the
Sacrament given under one kind, which is consecrated by the words of Christ,
This is my body, and the Theological principle taken out of Saint Augustine
verifyed, accedit verbum ad eleme^tum, and fit Sacramentum.

The third thing is Signification, every Sacrament signifying some divine
effect of grace, which God works by the application thereof, and the sensible
sign even by nature has, as Saint Augustine [Epist. 23.] notes, some
proportion, and analogy to signify that divine effect which to produce, it is
assumed by Gods omnipotency as an instrument. This sacred signification which
the holy Eucharist has, is of three kinds, and all three are found in the
Sacrament given under one kind. First this Sacrament is a sign of spiritual
food for the nourishment, and refection of the Soul, which signification is
manifestly found in Communion under one The Minister very often (though out of
place as page 470. li. 20. and pa. 442.) objects. If Communion in both kinds,
be not of the substance of the Sacrament, why should Communion in bread, or
wine be of the substance of the Sacrament? Why may not Communion in Cheese be
truly a Sacrament, as well as Communion in one kind? Answer. First diverse
Protestants namely Beza and Calvin (see Beza epist. 2. and epist. 25.) teach,
that though Christ did institute the Sacrament in bread and wine, yet in case
that bread and wine be wanting, one may use some other proportionable Element,
as Cheese and Beer. Might you not employ your talent in railing upon these
men, better then on the Council of Constance?

Secondly, The Protestants allowing of Cheese in lieu of Bread, and beer in
lieu of wine, is to change the substance of the Element, wherein Christ did
institute the Sacrament, and consequently to change the substance of the
Institution and Sacrament, bringing in an Institution and Sacrament of another
substance. But to receive the Sacrament in the kind of bread without wine, is
not to change the substance of the Element, but only (whereas the Sacrament for
more complete signification was instituted in two elemte^s, as for the same
reason it was instituted after supper) to use the one element without the
other, the whole nature of the Sacrament sufficient for all the functions
thereof, being found in one kind, as the Jesuit does here demonstrate.


kind. For the Eucharist does signify this effect of spiritual nutrition,
because it is a sign of Christ, the bread of life, the food of Angels, the
fountain of grace; but by the sole form of bread Christ is signified, as
present according to his most Sacred body, and consequently as most sufficient
to feed and refresh the soul.

Another signification of this Sacrament, is union and conjunction between the
faithful, as being members of the same body whereof Christ is head, and
fellow-me^bers one with another, as S. Paul declares [ Romans 12.4.] which
conjunction the Sacrament in the form of bread does signify. For bread being a
compound of many graynes of wheat massed together in one loaf, and also made
of flower and water mingled one with another, signifyes the perfect union both
of the Church with Christ, and of the faithful that are in the Church one with
another, as Saint Paul 1. Cor. 10. testifyes, vnum corpus sumus quotquot de vno
pane participamus, where he makes no mention of Wine, the Sacrament in the
form of bread being alone able to show and work this signification.

This Sacrament does also signify the passion and death of our Savior, which
death and passion is showed and represented by Communion under one kind The
Minister says page 479. That both kinds do more lively represent Christ's
Passion, then one only. Answer. What is this to the purpose, to prove the
Sacrament in one kind substantially imperfect? Baptism by plunging the Child
into water, represents Christ's death and resurrection, more lively the^
Baptism by sprinkling; yet is Baptism by aspersion a full and entyre
Sacrament.
. For receiving the Sacrament in the form of wine only, we have a sufficient
ground to remember the blood of Christ that was in his passion shed, and
separated from his body. Likewise by participating of the consecrated bread we
may lively conceive the body of Christ, as it was deprived of the most precious
blood by the effusion thereof on the Cross; whereupon Christ (as Saint Paul 1.
Cor. 11. v. 14.15.
testifyes, did after the consecration of each kind, particularly recommend the
memory of his passion, as knowing that in each of them alone was a sufficient
monument and memorial thereof.

The fourth thing required to the substance of a Sacrament, is Causality, to
wit, to work in the soul the spiritual effects it signifyes. This Causality
cannot be wanting to the Sacrament under one kind, wherein is contained the
fountain of spiritual life. For the cause why the Sacrament in both kinds
gives grace and refreshes the soul, is, that Christ is assistant unto them,
bound by his promise at the presence of sensible signs, to work
proportionably spiritual effects in disposed souls. But Christ is in the
Sacrament under the form of bread, and he is able through infinite power, and
bound by inviolable promise, to work the effect of grace, preserving unto life
eternal the worthy participant of this Sacrament Hence is refuted what the
Minister says page 478. without any proof: That the promise of grace is not
made to one kind only.
under the form of bread, Qui manducat hunc panem, viuit in aeternum. Joan.
6.55. Not any doubt then may be made, but the Sacrament in one kind is full,
entyre, complete in substance, and by participation thereof prepared
consciences do receive the benefit of celestial favor that conserueth the
life of the soul, with daily increase in perfection The Minister very often
obiecteth as page 479. and 502. and elsewhere: That according to the Tenet of
some Scholemen, greater benefit of grace it reaped by communion in both kinds.
Answer. First Catholic Deuines of greater number and learning hold the
contrary. Secondly, This is impertinent: for the question is not whether
Communion in both kinds be of greater perfection, but whether it be necessary
unto Salvation. Thirdly, if Communion in both kinds give more grace, yet this
excess may be easily equalled by other diligences, as by often receiving in
one kind, and by obedience to the Church etc. The Minister 472. proves
Communion in both kinds to be of greater profit, because it is an act of
obedience unto Christ's precept, Drink ye all of this, but obedience is better
then Sacrifice, 1. Sam. 15. 22. His argument supposes, without proof, what
the Jesuit has showed to be most false, and so may be with more truth turned
to the contrary: for to receive in one kind is an act of obedience unto the
Church, whereof Christ says, He that hears not the Church, let him be to
thee as an heathen and a publican. But obedience is better then Sacrifice:
Therefore more spiritual profit, and merit is gotten by Communion in one kind.
.

Communion under one kind, not against Christ his Precept.. 4.
ALTHOUGH Communion under both kinds pertayne not to the substance of the
Sacrament, yet if Christ did specially command the same, we are bound to that
observance, and should by communion under one kind sin, not against his
Sacrament and Institution, but against a special divine precept.

Hence we may probably infer, that Christ gave no special precept thereof,
because Christ has commanded no more concerning the use of the Eucharist,
then what by the substance of the institution and nature of the Sacrament we
are bound unto, leaving accidental circumstances belonging thereunto to be
ordained by the Apostles and Pastors of the Church, as S. Augustine notes
saying Augustine. ep. 118.
: Our Lord did not appoint in what order the Sacrament of the Eucharist was to
be taken afterward, but left authority to make such appointments unto his
Apostles, by whom he was to dispose and order his Churches. So clearly does S.
Augustine speak, that Christ gave no commandments to his Church, concerning
the use of the Sacrament, besides such as are contained in the substance of the
Institution, and of the Sacrament; of which kind Communion under both kinds
cannot be, as has been proved, which will further appear by po^dering the
places alleged to prove a Precept.

The words of Christ, Do this in remembrance of me, do no ways infer a
Precept of both kinds. First, because he said, Do this in remembrance of me,
absolutely only of the Sacrament in the form of bread, of the form of wine not
absolutely, but conditionally, Do this as often as you drink in memory of me,
that the Adversaries of the Church might not have any the least plausible show
to complain of her neglecting Gods Precept The Minister in this place is very
bitter, tearming the Jesuit Vermin, infatuated Romanist, and the like. But in
lieu of answering his argument, he confirms the same, as is showed in the
Censure, Sect. 4.. 5.
. For this precept Do this, being the only precept given by Christ to his
Church, as shall afterward appear, and given absolutely of the form of bread,
conditionally of the form of wine, there is no color to accuse the Church of
doing against Christ's precept by Communion under one kind. Secondly, suppose
Christ spoke these Imperative words Do this, after the giving of the Cup, yet
are they to be understood with this restriction, Do this, that is, all things
that belong to the essence and substance of this action in memory of me. For if
we extend the precept Do this, further then the substance of the action, unto
the accidentary circumstances thereof, in which Christ did then institute and
give the Sacrament, many absurdityes will follow. For, by this rule we must
always celebrate and receive the Eucharist after supper as Christ did,
specially seeing this circumstance of after supper, was chosen of Christ, as
being very proper and mysterious. For thereby is signified, that this is the
sacrifice which succeeds the Paschall Lamb, that was offered in the Evening,
the sacrifice whereof the royal Prophet says Psalm. 140. v. 2.
in the person of Christ, Eleuatio manuum mearum sacrificium vespertinum: The
sacrifice, which instituted in the evening of the world, was to continue until
the end thereof. We should also by this rule be bound, still to celebrate in
Azime, that is, unleavened bread, in which Christ did celebrate, and give the
Sacrament, saying, Do this; which circumstance was also mystical and signifyes
the purity of our Saviors virginal body and person, which was without any
Leaven of sin. And besides, the Priest might not give the Sacrament unto any
but such whose feet he had washed before, seeing Christ gave the Eucharist with
this preparatiue circumstance, which doubtless is very pertinent and
mysterious to signify, with what purity of conscience me^ ought to approach
unto the sacred Table. If to bind men to observe these circumstances of our
Saviors action, though mysterious and Sacramental, were absurd (as without
doubt it is most absurd) then we must not extend the precept Do this, to the
circumstances of Christ's action, but acknowledge that the precept Do this, only
includes the doing of that which pertaines to the substance of the Sacrament,
and so not to the giving of both kinds, the substance thereof being entyre in
one only kind, as has been proved. The Ministers ignorance and simplicity in
answering these arguments is discovered in the Censure, Sect. 1.. 2.


The second text much urged for the giving of the Cup unto all men, is the
words of our Savior, Bibite ex hoc omnes, wherein some note our Saviors
providence saying, that he foreseeing that some would take the Cup from the
Laity, granting them the consecrated bread, said of the Cup Bibite ex hoc
omnes, but not of bread Manducate ex hoc omnes. I answer; the words of our
Savior be plain, Drink ye all of this. But the difficulty is to who^ they are
spoken, and who are those all? Luther would have all men for whom the blood of
Christ is shed, whence it follows, that as the blood of Christ was shed for
all men, even Infidells, Jews, Turks, Infants, the Cup also should be given
unto all these, which to say were very absurd. Others restrain the words All,
to the faithful come to the years of discretion, who must drink of the Cup
all of them. But what shall we say of them that are by nature Abstemij, who
cannot endure the taste of any wine, yet are not to be excused from the
Sacrament?

Wherefore the truth is, that these words were spoken unto all the Apostles, and
to them all only. And though it be enough for Catholics to say it, and put
their adversaries to prove their pretended Precept, which they call of the
eternal King, for the Cup; and so long as they cannot clearly convince the
contrary, good reason the word of the Church defined by Counsels should stand:
yet ex abundanti, we can very probably show out of the sacred Text, that the
particle all concerns all the Apostles only. First, what one Evangelist [Mat.
26.27.] says, was commanded unto al, Bibite ex hoc omnes, drink ye all of
this, another relates to have been answerably performed by them all [ Matthew.
14.23.] Biberunt ex eo omnes, all drank thereof; but the second all, is
restrained to all the Apostles and to them all only. What reason then is there
to extend the words, Drink ye all of this, further then to all the Apostles?
Secondly, these words, Accipite, The Minister p. 490. says, If Bibite do not
import a precept, that the people receive the Sacrament in the form of wine,
the^ Ma^ducate does not enforce a precept, that they receive under the form of
bread, and so they shall be bound to receive neither in one kind nor in both.
Answer. The word Manducate, was spoken personally to the Apostles only, as
much as Bibite, and so by virtue of this word we cannot bind the people to
receive under the form of bread. Notwithstanding by other texts of Scripture
we prove the^ to be bound to receive by eating the Sacred bread. For the
precept do this in remembrance of me, was spoken only after the consecration
of the bread, as appears by the Gospel, But your self say page 490. lin. 7.
That these words were spoken to the People respectively, and in part, to wit,
that they receive, though not consecrate, and administer the Sacrament in the
form of bread. Therefore though the word Manducate, do not, yet other words
of the Institution do enforce a precept to receive in the form of bread.
manducate, bibite; Take, eat, drink, were certainly spoken unto the same
persons; and they run so together in rank, that no man can with probability
make the one outrunne the other. But the Command Accipite, which signifyes
take with your hands (for it is a precept distinct from ma^dacate, which is,
take with your mouth) was given to the Apostles only, not unto all the
faithful; else we must say, that all Communicants are bound to take the
consecrated bread and Cup with their hands. Who ever heard of such a precept in
the Christian Church?

The third reason is, because there was a peculiar, and personal cause, why
Christ should give that peculiar counsel or admonition (for the Imperative
word does not ever signify a precept, but often an advise, or a permission, as
your Majesty well knows) to his Apostles at that time When the final cause
and end of the precept is personal, then the sense of precept is personal.
The end of Christ's saying, Drink ye all of this, was personal, to wit, that
all the Apostles should drink of the same individual Cupp, without new
consecration and filling. Ergo, the sense of the precept is personal, and only
concerns those twelve persons.
, to wit, because he would have them all not only drink of his blood, but also
would have them drink of the same Cup, without filling and consecrating the
same anew. This is more manifest in the Protestants opinion, who think the
Chalice whereof Christ said in S. Matthew, Bibite ex hoc omnes, to be the same
whereof he said by Luc. 22.18.
Saint Mark, Accipite, diuidite inter vos, non enim bibam amplius de hoc
genimine vitis. For this being supposed, Drink ye all of this imports the
same, as, Divide this Cup amongst you: But, divide this Cup amongst you, was a
personal precept given to all the Apostles, importing that every one should
drink but a part of that Cup, and that also in such a measure, as the Cup
without new filling and consecration, might suffice for all to drink thereof
What the Minister says, That the precept is, that all men drink not of the
same individual, but of the same specificall Cup, is idle. For Christ's words,
divide this Cup amongst you import drink ye all of this individual Cup. If
one should bestow a quart of wine upon 4. persons, saying; Divide this amongst
you, were it not ridiculous to interpret his speech, that he means not,
Drink ye all of this indiuidual quart, but, of a quart of the same kind? If
two of the company should drink up that whole individual quart, and being
challe^dged by the other to have done against the order of the giver, who would
not laugh, should they answer (as our Minister teaches them) that Divide this
Cupp amongst you, imports not, drink all of this individual Cupp, but of a
Cupp of the same kind? So that howsoever the Minister in this place do rail
bitterly, and bragg mightily, yet his Reply is ridiculous, and against common
sense.
. What, all men in the world? Or all Christians that should succeed them to the
worlds end? Christ never intended that one Cup for all, nor is it indeed
divided, or parted with us, but the Apostles drank it up amongst them.
Wherefore referring my sayings to your Majesty's learned censure, I conclude
that to me it seems clear, that the precept, or rather direction, Drink ye
all of this, was but personal, confined unto the number of all there then
present. The Minister page 489. bringes four arguments to prove that the
words of Christ, Drink ye all of this, command all the faithful to drink:
which arguments though very poor ones, shall be answered. The first is, What
Christ said to the Apostles, Paul said to the whole multitude of the faithful,
1. Cor. 11.28. Answer. S. Paul never said the words, drink ye all of this
to all the faithful, yea the same are not found in all the Epistles of S.
Paul: for 1. Cor. 11.28. he only says, let a man prove himself, and so eat
of that bread, and drink of that Cupp, which words (as every man in his
senses must needs perceive) do not import a precept to receive in both kinds,
but only that no man receive in both kinds, or in one kind, without first
trying himself, whether he be worthy. What you cite out of S. Hieroms
commentary, Coenam Domini oportet esse communem, only signifyes that the
Sacrament is for all men, as well for the poor as for the rich, against which
some Corinthians erred, scorning to receive in the Company of the poor.

The second. If Communion in both kinds has no foundation in Gods word, then
Communion in one kind has no foundation in Gods word. Answer. The lawfullnes
of Communion in both kinds, and the lawfullnes of Communion in one kind, have
foundation in Gods word, and so to use the one or the other is not against the
Divine law. But a Divine precept to receive in one kind, or in both kinds has
no foundation in Gods word, as being but a fond Ministerial fancy. The word of
God does command to receive, at least under the form of bread, but to receive
in the same only without the Cupp, is no Divine precept.

The third Argument. If the reason why the Apostles received the Cupp was,
because they were Priests, then all Priests being present at Communion ought to
receive in both kinds though they administer not. Answer. If the reason why
the Apostles received the Cup, was not because they were Priests, but as the
Jesuit proves by the Gospel, because Christ would have it so, saying unto
them, Drink ye all of this individual Cupp, then is the Ministers argument
idle and impertinent. Such also is his fourth argument wherein he would prove,
that the Apostles were not made Priests by the words Do this: For suppose
they were not made Priests by that speech, how will he thence conclude that the
words Drink ye all of this, were not spoken personally unto the twelve,
commanding them to drink all of the same indiuidual Cupp? Besides in the two
arguments to prove the Apostles were not made Priests by the word Do this, he
shows intolerable ignorance.

The first is, what force is there in these words, Do this, to conclude
Priestly ordination? Answer. Are you a Doctor, and do not know that the word
of the Almighty has force to give men power, commission, authority to do what
he does command them to do? Christ by the word Do this, commanded the
Apostles, to do what he had done, that is, to consecrate bread and wine into
his body and blood, to receive and consume the same, to give them to the
faithful. Ergo, by saying Do this, he gave them power commission, authority,
not only to receive themselves, but also to consecrate, and give unto others
his holy body and blood, which is the power and office of Priesthood.

Secondly, If (say you) Do this, proves Priesthood, then lay men are Priests
when the words Do this, be spoken to them in part, or respectively. Answer.
Do not you feel, how you bewray the weakness and vanity of your argument in
your very proposition thereof? You say the words Do this, be spoken unto lay
men but in part, that is, they command them to receive, but not to consecrate
and give the Sacrament unto others. But the power, or commission only to
receive the Sacrament is not Priesthood, but the commission to consecrate and
administer the same unto others. Therefore the words Do this, do not make
them Priests, to whom in part and respectively, but to whom they are spoken
absolutely, and in the full sense.




Another text of the Scripture some urge to prove, that Communion under one
kind is commanded, to wit, the famous place out of S. John Joan. 6.59*
: Except ye eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Son of Man, you shall
not have life in you. Where our Savior, under the penalty of loosing eternal
life, commau^ds not only eating, but also drinking. Perchance your Majesty does
not stand much upon this, as not believing that Chapter of Saint John to
concern the Sacramental sumption of our Saviors flesh, as also some learned
Catholics hold: Notwithstanding though we grant that Chapter to concern the
eating and drinking in the Sacrament, as most of the Fathers teach, yet this
objection may be easily satisfied by the former Principles. For, as we
distinguish in the Sacrament, the substance and the manner, the substance being
to receive the body of Christ, the manner, in both kinds by formal eating and
drinking: So the same distinction is to be made in our Saviors precept about
this Sacrament. For howsoever his words may sound of the manner of receiving in
both kinds, yet his intention is to command no more then the substance, to
wit, that we really receive his body and blood, which may be done under one
kind. This may be made clear by the Precept our Savior has given about
another Sacrament, to wit Baptism, where though his words seem to define the
manner, yet his mind was but to determine the substance. He says Matt. 28.18.
to his Apostles. Baptize all nations in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. To Baptize signifyes the same, that the Greek
word (...), which is, not to wet, or sprinckle with water, but to put and
plunge into water by immersio^, bathing them in water, in which respect
Baptism is termed by the Apostle Tit. 3.4.
the Lauer, or bath of the renouation of the holy Ghost. And yet because the
Church teaches Baptism by aspersion or sprinckling to be sufficient, and
substantial Baptism, no less then Baptism by immersion, christians must,
and do interpret the words of Christ, Baptize, that is, plu^ge into the water
all Nations, to command only cleansing and washing in substance, not the manner
thereof by immersion as his words may seem to import, and the Primitive Church
did the first 600. years practice.

In like sort the words, Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, you shall not have life in you, be preceptiue no further then
they signify real receiving of his body and blood, not the manner of both
kinds, as may appear by the intention of the commandment. For, as Christ
gave this precept of eating and drinking, only to the end that we might have
life in us; so likewise he meant to command the same no further, then it was
necessary to this end. But eating formally the body of Christ under the form
of bread, and What the Minister says, that the receiving the blood of Christ
Virtually, as being by Concomita^cy joined with the body, is spiritual
receiving, and not Sacramental, is false. For only just and holy men receive
the body of Christ spiritually. But wicked me^ receive the blood of Christ
together with his body by Concomitancy. Therefore this virtuall receiving of
Christ's blood, is corporal and Sacramental, and not only spiritual.
virtually and implicitly his blood as contained within his sacred body,
suffices that we may have life in us, as he promises in the same place v. 59.
He that eats this bread shall live for ever; what necessity then is there to
understand this precept of formal receiving in both kinds?

But further I add, the coniunctiue particle Et (and) frequently signifyes
disiunctiuely the same that vel (or,) as, Argentum and aurum non est mihi Act.
3.6.
, and particularly of this Sacrament 1. Cor. 11.20.
, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation, the
sense is disjunctive, Eats or drinks unworthily? In this sort: Except you
eat and drink, is to be understood disiunctiuely, Except you eat the flesh,
or, drink the blood of the Son of man, you shall not have life in you. Which
disjunctive sense to be the sense intended in this place, may be proved,
because else Christ should be contrary to himself. For, seeing in the verse
59. of this Chapter he promises life eternal to eating only, Qui ma^ducat
hunc pane^, viuit in aeternum. If in the 94. verse of the same Chapter, he
require unto life everlasting eating and drinking both, he should in the space
of a few lines speak contraryes. And because this is impossible, THIs last
answer is truest, and may be inuincibly proved by Scripture. First, it cannot
be denied that in Scripture the particle Et, and is taken disiunctiuely as the
Jesuit proves in the text, and the Minister grants. Secondly, whenever two
things are required to one and the same end, for which each a part is
sufficient, then the particle Et, and, must needs be understood disiunctiuely
to signifye the same as Or. Because to strike Father apart, and to strike
mother apart is worthy of death in a son, therefore the Scripture Exodus 21.
saying, He that strikes his Father and mother let him dye the death, is to be
understood disiunctiuely, his Father or mother. This might be proved by other
innumerable instances, nor can so much as one example be brought where this
rule fails.

This supposed, I assume: But the Scripture teaches that the eating of Christ's
body a part by it self is sufficient unto eternal life, John 6.52. The bread
which I will give is my flesh, for the life of the world. And 58. he that
eats me shall live by me: and 59. he that eats this bread shall live for
ever. Ergo, the precept, Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood you shall not have life in you, is understood disiunctiuely,
Except you eat his flesh, or drink his blood.

Hence the Fathers when they say, the Gospel commands drinking of blood, they
mean disiunctiuely, because they ground the precept upon this text. The
Author of the book De Coena Domini says, the law forbad the eating of blood,
but the Gospel commands drinking thereof, to wit disiunctiuely: and S.
Austine. q. 57. In Leuit. In the law men are forbidden so taste of the blood of
the Sacrifices, but in the new law from taking the blood of our Sacrifice by
way of nourishment, no man is forbidden, yea rather all are invited thereunto
that will have life, to wit disiunctiuely, that is, they are invited, if they
will have life, to eat the flesh, or drink the blood of our Savior. Other
places brought out of the Fathers by you, are partly from the purpose, partly
falsified. From the purpose are the places which affirm no more, then that the
body and blood of Christ be given in the Sacrament unto all. Chrysostom. hom.
18. in ^. ad Cor. the Cup as distributed unto all. Ignatius epist. ad
Philadelphenses etc. Falsified is the Testimony of S. Iustine, page 497. but
specially page 482. for thus you cite it. Justinius Martyr says, That
Christians in his age distributed the sanctified bread and wine to every one
present: and he adds further; The Apostles taught that Jesus did command them
to do thus. You have corrupted his testimony two or three ways. First by
omission, for S. Justin does mention not only wine, but also water. The Deacons
(says he) distribute unto every one present consecrated bread, wine, and
water, (...): Wherefore if by this testimony you can prove it is a Divine
precept to give wine, you prove also that it is a Divine precept to give water,
and consequently your selves to be tra^sgressors of the Divine precept who give
it not. That this your peruersity to urge us with the testimony of S. Justin,
which makes not to the purpose, or else by the same your self are condemned,
might not appear, you falsified the place, citing what pleased you, and
leaving out what served not your turn. Secondly, these words of S. Iustine,
The Apostles taught that Jesus commanded them so to do, are not joining upon
the words that mention the giving of consecrated bread, wine, and water, as
you would have men believe, but follow some 16. or 17. lines after, and are
referred to another matter, to wit that Christ gave a Command to believe the
real presence. S. Iustine his true words are these: We are taught, that as
Jesus Christ is made truly flesh by the word of God, in the same manner the
Eucharisticall food, by the prayer of the word proceeding from him, is the
flesh and blood of Jesus incarnate: for the Apostles in their writings termed
the Gospells, do deliver, that Jesus gave that preception unto them. For taking
bread into his hands, and having given thanks he said; Do this in remembrance
of me, this is my body. In like manner taking the Cup after thansgiuing he
said; This is my blood. Thus S. Iustine, by which it is evident that he says
that Jesus gave a precept not of communion in both kinds, but of believing the
Real Presence. Whence your third corruption is discovered, making S. Iustine
to say, that Jesus commanded to do thus; for, to do thus is added unto the
text against the drift thereof, which manifestly speaks of a precept to
believe thus, not to do thus.

In like manner you falsify S. Cyprian. Page 497. you produce these his words
as making against Communion in one kind: In consecrating and administering the
Cup unto the people, some do not that which our Lord did appoint and commanded:
As who should say, these men did transgress the Divine precept, in that they
gave not the Cup unto laymen. Had S. Cyprian mea^t this, he should not have
said they sin in administering, but the contrary, they sin in not administering
the Cup to the people. But S. Cyprian presently declares wherein they did
transgress the Divine precept, to wit, in that some did consecrate pure water
without wine, and others mere wine without water, and gave the same to the
people. What is this against Communion in one kind? This place proves they
sin against the Divine law, who consecrate pure water in lieu of wine (as
some Protestants teach men to do;) and also, that they transgress the Divine
precept who offer unto God, and give to the people pure wine without admixtion
of water (as all Protestans commonly do.) But that Priests are bound by Divine
precept to give consecrated wine to the people, this place does not so much as
insinuate, nor will any learned man cite it for the necessity of the Cup,
except he have drunk too much of the Cup.


we interpret the place disiunctiuely, The place of S. John explicated, with
an Answer to the Testimonies of the Fathers.
Unless you eat or drink etc.

Communion under one kind not against the practice of the Primitive Church.. 5.
CERTAIN it is, that the Primitive Church did very often and frequently use
Communion under one kind, so that Laymen had by prescription a Right Ad
bibendum pocculum Dei iure communicationis admittimus. Cyp. l. epist. 2.
to receive in both kinds, yea they were bound thereunto by the obligation of
Custom, not by divine precept. Also because the Manichees being impiously
persuaded that Wine was the Aug. de haeres. 46.
gall of the Prince of darkness, did Leo sermon. 4. de Quad.
superstitiously abstain from the Chalice, the Church in detestation of this
error commanded, for a time, Communion under both kinds; upon which occasion
Gelasius Pope made the Decree Gelas. apud Gratian. de Consecrat. cap.
Comperimus.
recorded by Gratia^, Aut integra Sacramenta suscipiant, aut ab integris
arceantur. And why? Because such Abstinents, nescio qua superstitione docentur
astringi, that is, were superstitious, not absteyning out of any devotion, but
out of an impious persuasion of the impurity of Gods creature. Wherefore the
crime with which some Protestants charge us, that our receiving under the sole
form of bread, is to iumpe in opinion with the Manichees, we may (as D. Morton
confesses) reject as injurious, saying; That it was not the Manichees
abstinence from wine, but the reason of their forbearance, that was judged
heretical. Morton Protestant. Appeal. lib. 1. cap. 4. page 140. Against this
explication of the place of Gelasius, it is objected, that the same does not
agree with the reason of the Canon. For Gelasius says, men are not to be
permitted to receive but in both kinds, because the division of one and the
same Sacrament cannot be done without sacrilege. The whole decree is this: We
find that some men having taken the portion of our Lords body, refrain from
the Cup of the holy blood. Which men (because they are imbued with I know not
what superstition,) let them without any question receive the whole Sacraments,
or nothing at all, for the division of one and the same mystery cannot be used
without a great Sacrilege. I Answer: first Gelasius does not say, no man is
to be permitted to receive in one kind, but only no superstitious abstinent,
Secondly, his reason is not only because the dividing of the Sacrament is
Sacriledg, but quoniam nescio qua superstitione docentur astringi, because they
are proved to be imbued with a certain superstitious opinion, to wit, that the
creature of wine is impure. The discourse then of Gelasius is, because these
men are superstitiously conceyted, that the creature of wine is the Devils
gall, therefore by them the dividing of the holy mystery, receiving the
consecrated Bread without the Cup, sine grandi sacrilegio fieri non potest,
cannot be done without great Sacrilege. Whence he concludes, proculdubio
arceantur, let such men be kept from Communion in one kind without any
question, mercy, or indulge^ce: As if he had said, Unto men Orthodoxally
conceited about the creature of wine, Communion in one kind may be granted
sometimes upon just causes, as if they be by nature abstemij, that cannot
endure wine: But men that be superstitiously persuaded against the nature of
wine, proculdubio arceantur, let Communion in one kind be denied unto them
without question, and granted in no case, because in respect of them Communion
in one kind is ever Sacrilegious.

The Minister also in this place keeps a stir, and would make the world
believe, that the Jesuit Vasquez does maynly oppose himself against the Jesuit
Answerer, about this place of Gelasius. The Jesuit (says he) is confuted by a
learned and intelligent man of his own Society, to wit Vasquez, who says,
that some of his party apply the place of Gelasius against Manichees, but this
exposition agrees not with the last clause of the Canon. Answer. You show
great desire to discredit your adversary, yet cannot you do it, so much as in
this trifle, with truth. For in citing the censure of Vasquez you leave out the
principal word, which being set down would have marred your market. Vasquez not
only says, that some of his side explicate the place of Gelasius of lay
Manichees, but also adds his Judgment about the same saying, probabiliter
explicant, this their explication is probable. Do not you see your falsehood in
citing and vanity in urging this censure of Vasquez? If this explication be
probable even by the Judgment of Vasquez, how is the Jesuit confuted by Vasquez
of his own Society, as not answering your argument sufficiently? Is it not
sufficient, that Catholics bring probable solutions unto your arguments
against Christian customs defined in Counsels and received in the Church
before you, or your Luther were borne? You your self say page 11. That no man
is to reject the Doctrine and custom of the Church, or the exposition of
Scripture, commonly and anciently received upon uncertain and probable
reasons. If the Jesuit has answered your arguments probably, as even by this
censure of Vasquez he has, then be your arguments at the most but probable,
and consequently your revolt from the Church of Rome grounded thereon damnable.
Who now is condemned by Vasquez his Censure?

But Vasquez says, that the Jesuits explication, though it agree fitly to the
rest of the decree of Gelasius, yet cannot be fitted to the last branch
thereof, where Gelasius says, that the division of the one and same mystery is
Sacrilegious in it self, and in nature: Quare mihi magis placet altera
explicatio: Wherefore, says Vasquez, unto me another explication seems more
probable. I Answer. First Gelasius does not say, that the division of the
mystery is in itself and in nature a Sacrilege, nor can it be very probably
said that he did so mean. For what sense is there in this discourse, To divide
the Sacrament by receiving in one kind is a Sacrilege of his own nature, and
absolutely in it self, therefore let not these men be permitted in any case to
receive in one kind, quoniam nescio qua superstitione docentur astringi,
because they are convinced to hold superstitious Doctrine about the impurity of
the creature of wine? Besides, had Gelasius meant that Communion in one kind is
a sacrilege absolutely in it self, he would have decreed that not only
superstitious me^, but absolutely all men should be kept from the same
proculdubio, without any question. Wherefore Gelasius his decree cannot be
better sensed then thus. Because these men are conceyted superstitiously
against the creature of wine, their receiving in one kind without the Cup, can
not but be impious; Therefore proculdubio arceantur, let not Communion in one
kind be given unto them in any case, though unto Orthodoxe people upon just
reasons the same may be granted. Secondly, suppose all that Vasquez would
conclude, to wit, that another exposition is more probable, what have you
gained? Surely nothing; for this other exposition better liked by Vasquez is,
that Gelasius spoke not of laymens receiving, but of Priests that celebrate and
consecrate, affirming, that it is sacrilegious in it self for Priests to
consecrate without receiving in both kinds. If the Jesuit Vasquez in this
exposition and doctrine seem to you learned and intelligent, be it so in Gods
name, you are satisfied, and your Adversary contented; for he did never mean
to say, that this explication is improbable, specially the same being given by
Gratian, who read that Epistle of Gelasius, which now it not extant.




This custom was the cause that Cyprian Cyprian de Coena Domini.
says, that the Law forbad the eating of blood, but the Gospel commands the
same should be drunk, not only because some Christians, to wit Priests, are
bound to drink the blood of Christ, but also because Christ in his Gospel
did institute the Sacrament of his body and blood in both kinds; whence grew
the Custom of the primitive Church to receive in both kinds, and by custom
there grew further an obligation to drink of the cup, except there were some
just cause of abstinence, as in the sick, and in them that by nature loathed
wine.

And as this is certain, and granted on our part, so it is no less certain
that the Primitive Church did never practice the use of the Cup, as pertaining
to the essential integrity of the Sacrament, or as commanded by divine
precept, but thought the receiving under one and both kinds a thing
indifferent. This may be proved by the consideration of the time since Christ,
ascending from our days upward; whence I gather five Arguments.

First, is the Confession of our Adversaries, amongst whom a Bohemian
Protestant Joan. Przibrau. confess. Fid. Cath. c. 19.
does profess that, having the fear of God before his eyes, he dares not
censure the Roman Church of Heresy in this point Hospin. Histor. Sacram. p. 2.
fol. 112.
. Hospinian writes, that some Protestants confessed, that whole Christ was
really present, exhibited and received under every kind, and therefore under
the only form of bread, and that they did not judge those to do evil, that
Communicated under one kind. Melanct. in 2. edit. Comm. impress. Argent. an.
1525. fol. 78.
Melancthon: As to eat or not to eat swines flesh is placed in our power, and
a thing indifferent; so (says he) I Judge of the Eucharist, that they sin
not who knowing and believing this liberty, do use either part of the signs.
And Luther: Luther. de Captiu, Babylon. cap. de Eucharistia.
They sin not against Christ, who use one kind, seeing Christ does not
command to use both, but has left it to the will of every one. And Hospinian
alleges Hospin. Histor. Sacr. p. 2. fol. 12.
Luther, affirming it is not needful to give both kinds, but the one alone
suffices. The Church has power of ordeyning only one, and the people ought to
be content therewith, if it be ordained by the Church. The Minister p. 500.
says: Concerning Luther, Melancthon etc. I answer that your benefactour
Coccius (to whom you are perpetually obliged for your readings) alleges some
such sayings, but how truly it is uncertain. Answer. The Jesuit read the
sayings he cites in Luther, Melancthon and Hospinian, not in Coccius, unto
whom he is not so much beholding for his readings, as you are unto Chemnitius
for yours; yea he durst engage his credit, that you cannot show some of the
testimonies by him cited, in Coccius, which shows your want of reading, and
that your desire to cavil is greater then your wit. What you add, that these
sayings are not now found in Luther and Melancthon, is as much as to confess
that, whereof the Lutherans accuse you of the Sacrame^taria^ brood, that you
have most impudently falsified the works of Luther, though also Hospinian, a
Sacramentarian as you are, has these sayings both of Luther and other
Protestants, censuring them in this respect.


But these testimonies, though they may serve to stop the mouth of a clamorous
Adversary, yet be they not sufficient to satisfy any judicious man, in regard
their Authors were men most uncertain and various in their doctrines about
Religion, now auerring as Orthodoxe and divine truth, what soon after they
fell to abhor as heretical and impious. I add secondly, the definition of
three general Counsels celebrated before the breach of Luther from the Roman
Church. The Council of Florence Council. Florentin. in decreto Eugenij 4.
wherein were present the Grecian and Armenian Bishops, where Concomitancy is
defined, That Christ is whole under each form. The Council of Basil Council.
Basilien. Sess. 30.
, though they allowed the use of the Cup unto the Bohemians, defined the
lawfulnes of Communion under one kind. The Council of Constance Council.
Constantiense Sess. 13.
gave example unto both the former Counsels being the first that defined this
truth.

The third Argument is, the received and allowed general Custom of the
Church, which spontaneously even before the Counsel of Constance, did abstain
from the Cup, as the said Council does acknowledge, which may be proved by the
testimonies of many that lived before the Council of Constance: yea Alexander
Halensis Halensis 4. p. q. 11. in 2. a. 4. sect. 3.
who lived two hundred years before the Counsel of Constance, says, That
almost every where, Laymen received under the sole form of bread. And
Venerable Bede Beda. Histor. Gent. Angl. l. 2. c. 5. and l. 4. c. 14.
does signify that in the Church The Minister page 502. You are guided by that
spirit which is mentioned 3. Kings 22. v. 21. when you affirm, that Venerable Bede says, in the Church of England ever since her conversion under S. Gregory
Communion in one kind was in use; for no such report is found in him. Answer.
Take heed, you be not guided by the spirit mentioned. Reuelat. 12.11. who so
perpetually calumniate your adversary. For he did not affirm that Venerable Bede did so say, as though he had made mention thereof in express terms, but
that he does so signify, or insinuate, which is true: for l. 2. c. 5. Histor.
Anglor. he writes how the sons of a certain Christian King that was deceased
being yet Pagans, said unto a Bishop: Why do thou not give us that white
bread, which thou were wont to give to our Father, and do still give to the
people in the Church? Which speech they did often at sundry times repeat
without any mention of the Cup. What you bring as contrary to this, that l. 4.
c. 14. he writes, that a certain man according to a revelation did presently
dye, the mass being ended, viatico Dominici corporis and sanguinis accepto, is
idle. For the Sacrament in one kind containing in it Christ's body and blood
both, may be termed Viaticum Dominici corporis and sanguinis, the food of the
body and blood of our Lord.
of England, ever since her first Conversion, under Saint Gregory, was used
Communion under one kind for the Layty; which could never have entered into the
Church without being noted and marked as an Heresy, had not the Church ever
held Communion under one, or both kinds, as a thing of indifferency.

The fourth Argument is drawn from many signs and tokens, that the primitive
Church did sometimes use Communion under one kind. First, the sick received
under the only form of bread, as may appear by the History of Serapion
related by Eusebius. l. 6. Histor. c. 36. ex ep. Dionys. Alexandrin. ad Fabium.
Eusebius; and the Grecians at this day Genebrardus.
though they give the Cup to the Communicants in the Church, yet to the sick
they send the Sacrament under one kind: yea Saint Ambrose, as Paulinus Paulinus
in vita Ambrosi^.
relates in his life, at his death received the Sacrament under the sole form
of bread, and straight after the receiving thereof gave up his soul. Secondly,
it was an ancient custom in the Church to give the Sacrament unto Laymen
Tertullian. ad vxor. c. 55.
, especially unto Basil. epist. ad Caesar. Patritium. Pratum Spiritual. c. 79.
Eremits to be carried in most pure linen Corporalls home to their houses, to
be taken in the morning before al other meats. But there is no sign or token
in Antiquity that the faithful together with the consecrated bread, did carry
away with them consecrated wine; yea diverse historyes show the only form of
bread Minister page 504. It was an ancient custom to send the Communion to
persons absent in both kinds, as appears by Exuperius in S. Hierome, Tom. 1.
Epist. 4. and S. Gregory Nazianzen of his sister Gorgonia. Answer. Exuperius
(no laymen, but Bishop of Tholosa) having sold the silver Ciboriums and
Chalices of his Church to mayntaine the poor, was forced through poverty to
keep the Body and Blood in a basket of Osier, and in a glasse-Cup, so carrying
them about when he did administer the same in the Church to the people. But
that he carried the blood of our Savior in a glass out of the Church about
him, S. Hierome does not say, yea he signifies that this use of Osier-baskets,
and glasse-Cups was in the Church, saying, Nihil ditius Exuperio nostro, qui
corpus Domini canistro vimineo and Sanguine^ portat in vitro, qui auaritiam
eiecit ETEMPLO: nothing is more rich then Exuperius who does carry the body of
our Lord in an Osier-basket, and his blood in a glass, who has cast
Covetousness out of the CHVRCH. Nor is it probable that he carried the blood
about him in a glass, when he went any journey, exposing the same to manifest
danger of being irreuerently spilled, specially glass being so brittle and
easily broken, and the ancients exceeding sollicitous and anxious, that the
blood might not be shed, nor any particle of the sacred bread fall to the
ground. S. Gregory Nazianzen, says of his sister Gorgonia praying earnestly
for the recovery of her health, That whatsoever of the Antitypes or Images of
the precious body and blood her hand had hidden, that she did bath and mingle
with her tears: which place Vasquez whom you so commend, as learned and
intelligent, does show to be spoken of holy Images of Christ's Passion and
death, not of the blessed Sacrament. For Women were never permitted to touch
the sacred Chalice with their hand, nor to keep consecrated Cups in their
houses for the blood, but only white linen corporalls for the body. It had been
also against the Reverence ancient Christian devotion did bear to the precious
blood of our Savior, for her to have powered her tears into the sacred
Chalice, mingling them with the precious blood: so that there is no sign in
Antiquity that laymen did keep in their private houses, or did carry about them
the blood of our Savior in the form of wine. Therefore in their private
houses, and out of the Church they still received in one kind.
was carried away, and consequently that the Church did not then esteem of
Communion under one kind, as of a sacrilegious mayming of the Sacrament, as
Protestants now do. Thirdly, it was an ancient custom in the Grecian Council.
Loadicen. can. 49. and Trullen. can. 52.
Church to consecrate the holy Eucharist on Saturdayes and Sundays, and on the
other days of the week to Communicate ex praesanctificatis, of the
presanctifyed forms, that is, consecrated on the Saturday or Sunday before.
Now, it is not probable that they did consecrate wine to endure five or six
days long, for fear (specially in such hoate Countries) the same should grow
sower. Wherefore for the most part they did Communicate under one kind.
Fourthly, the Leo. sermon. 4. de Quadrag.
Manichees lived in Rome and other places, shrowding themselves amongst
Catholics, went to their Churches, received the Sacrament publicly with them
under the sole form of bread, and yet they were not noted, nor thereby
discerned from Catholics. A manifest sign, that Communion under one kind was
publickely in the Church permitted, at the least upon some just causes that
might be pretended. For how could the Manichees still refusing the cup, have
been hidden amongst these ancient Christians, if they had been persuaded as now
Protestants are, that receiving under one kind is a sacrilege. If one in the
Church of England should refuse the Cup but once in a public Communion in the
Church, would he not be incontinently noted? The Minister page 560. First the
Manichees were espied, else how could the Pope reprove their practice Secondly
Vasquez the Jesuit says, That these Heretics received the Cup into their
hand, but drank no wine: And among a great multitude, some few might hold the
Cup to their mouth, and make show of drinking, and yet receive no wine.
Answer. The Pope did reprove that practice of the Manichees, because he knew
it was their Heresy so to do, in that they held wine to be the gall of the
Devil, and that Christ did not shed his blood on the Cross; which also to be
their practice such as were converted from that heresy did witness. Vasquez
does not say, that the Manichees did only put the Cup to their mouth without
drinking, and so lay hidden and unknown; (for he was not so simple, but he did
see this could not be done, but the Deacons that gave the Cup to the
Co^municants one by one, would presently have perceived it.) He says that they
did drink of the consecrated wine, but kept the same in their mouth, till they
came to some place, where without being noted they might spit is out. Which I
can not think to be probable. First the Manichees holding wine to be a thing
so impure and detestable as the Devils gall, how would they take the same into
their mouth? Secondly, how could they keep the wine in their mouth so long,
but that some part thereof would go down? Thirdly, S. Leo bids Catholics to
note the men that omnino, altogether refrain from the Cup, signifying that
they might by this their perpetual abstinence be distinguished from
Catholics, that sometimes refrayned. But if they took still the wine into
their mouth, kept the same there till they came to a solitary place, where they
might spit it out securely, how could they be discerned by their abstayning
from the Cup, more then any other Catholics did use to do? Hence even Vasquez
does acknowledge, that this argument drawn from the dissimulation of
heretics, namely of the Macedonian woman related by Sozom. l. 8. c. 5. is
probabile, and valde apparens, probable and very apparent to prove that
Communion in one kind was arbitrary, and a thing indifferent in the ancient
Church.


The last Argument, is practice of the Apostles, that is, of the first
Christians under them, of whom we read in the Acts of the Apostles Act. 2.42.
, Erant perseuerantes in doctrina Apostolorum, and communicatione fractionis
panis, and orationibus, speaking of sacred Eucharisticall bread, the taking
whereof was joined with prayer, which unto the newly baptized was straight
given after Baptism: And yet there is no mention of wine. So that Protestants
if they will have these Christians to have wine, they must out of their own
liberality, by way of interpretation bestow it upon them, seeing the words of
the text do not affoard it them The Minister page 507. objects, That sundry
Fathers and Authors do not understand these places about Christ and the
Apostles, mentioning the receiving of bread without wine, of Sacred Communion.
I Answer. Diverse Fathers as the Jesuit shows understand these places
me^tioning Communion of bread without wine, of Sacramental Communion, and
consequently they hold Communion in one kind to be conformable to the example
of Christ and the Apostles. And though some Fathers hold that these mentioned
Communions of bread without wine, were not sacred, yet their reason is not
because Communion in one kind is unlawful, which reason yet they would have
alleged, had the same been the doctrine of the Christian Church.
. To this Apostolical practice we may add the example of Christ, who gave to
his two disciples in Emaus the Sacrament under the sole form of bread Luc. 24.
Accepit panem and benedixit and fregit.
. That the bread Christ gave was Eucharisticall and consecrated, the words of
the text insinuate, some learned Fathers Aug. lib. 3. de consens. Euangel. c.
25.
affirm, and the miraculous effect of opening their eyes to know Christ, and
to return to Jerusalem, and the Church of the Apostles in all have, confirms
it. That they received at the hands of Christ the Sacrament under one only kind
of bread, is evident by the context of the Holy narratio^, which says, that
upon our Saviors breaking and giving them bread, they knew him, and he
straight vanished out of their sight. So that here also, if Protestants will
have wine given to these Disciples, they must by the superabundance thereof in
their expositions, supply the want thereof in Scripture; yea the Scripture in
this place is hardly capable of that Exposition, the Apostles acknowledging of
Christ in the very fraction and giving of bread, and our Saviors departure in
the same moment, leaves no time for him to give them wine after the bread. Beda
and Theophil. in Lucam. Hier. in Epitaph. Paulae. Isych. l. 2. in Leuit. cap. 9.


These be the warrants that Communion under one kind has, being the greatest
that may be: whereby appears that the Roman Church is furnished with all kind
of proof in this point, in which she does seem to her Adversaries to be most
forsaken by Antiquity; which with all humblenes I submit to your Maiestyes
Judgment. For supposing Communion under one kind to be good and lawful, that
the Church could prescribe it, and that she had just reasons to prescribe it, I
will let pass without proof, as a thing not doubted of by your Maiestyes
Excellent Wisdom.

THE EIGHT POINT.
Works of Supererogation, specially with reference to the treasure of the
Church.

IT is hard, if not impossible to give satisfaction in this point unto any that
is not aforehand persuaded of the Catholic Doctrine of Merit. THE Minister
though he speak raylingly against our doctrine of merit, yet not knowing what
he says, teaches as much Merit as we do. He graunts a Merit of Congruity in
words, and Merit of Condignity in truth. For a work may be Congruous unto the
Reward two ways. First, merely of Gods mercy and goodness, not out of any
intrinsecall worthynes thereof. This the Deuines term Merit of Co^gruity, or
of mere Impetration.

Secondly, the work may be congruous in respect of intrinsecall honor and
dignity, regarded of God and moving him to recompense the work according to
the measure and quantity of this goodness. This is properly the merit of
Condignity, or which is all one of inward Congruity of the Work with the
Reward. Now, that the Minister gra^ts this merit of inherent Congruity and
worthynes unto good works, his words manifest. First, he says p. 169. lin.
26. That the merit of Christ does by grace give true INHERENT sanctity and
purity unto men's souls and actions. Secondly, page 170. lin. 26. That good
works are an ACCEPTABLE sacrifice unto God, and the same are TRVLY good, not
only comparatively, but according to the rule of virtue. Thirdly, page 174.
lin. 25. That in all good works there is a DIGNITY of grace, Divine similitude,
goodness, and honor. Fourthly, page 174. lin. 40. That the reward of good
works is called a Crown of righteousness 2. Tim. 4.8. because it is bestowed
on them that exercise righteousness, in REGARD of their righteousness. Fifthly,
page 174. lin. 18. That God in giving the reward considers the mind and
quality of the Doer, the integrity, MEASVRE and QVANTITY of the work. Thus
much the Minister grantes. Now is this the merit of mere impetration and
extrinsecall congruity in respect of Gods goodness, and not the merit of
INHERENT RIGHTEOUSNESS, Sanctity, purity, dignity of works, God having promised
to reward them, with regard had even unto the MEASVRE and quantity of that
their inherent goodness? Surly M. White, no judicious Protestant will grant thus
much as you have done; or if he do, he will never deny merit of condignity, or
inhere^t justice to be found in good works. And if you grant, unto Good works
the merit of inherent Justice, you grant the thing of merit condign; which
granted it is idle to contend about the name, specially seeing the title of
Merit of condignity is not defined by the Church of Rome.




The Doctrine of Merit declared.. 1.
THIS doctrine is much misliked by Protestants, as Concerning Merit.
proud, and arrogant, yet not so much misliked as misunderstood, their dislike
growing from misconstruction thereof. For Catholics hold that no work is
meritorious with God of it own nature, but to make the same meritorious many
graces are required and those most divine and excellent, particularly these
seven.

The first grace is divine Preordination, because God out of his own goodness
ordained man and his actions unto a supernatural last end, above that he might
attain unto by mere nature, without which ordination no work would have
reference or correspondency with heavenly glory.

The second is, the grace of Redemption by Christ Jesus, without whom we and
our works are defiled, we being by nature the children of wrath, and should be
so still, had not he by his passion and death appeased God, giving us the
inestimable treasure of his merits, so that, In illo benedixit nos Deus omni
benedictione spirituali in caelestibus, in quo habemus redemptionem per
sanguinem eius, secundum diuitias gratiae suae, quae superabundauit in nobis.
[Ephes. 1.3.]

The third is, grace of Adoption in Baptism, whereby souls are supernaturally
beautifyed by participation of the divine Nature. Whence a tryple dignity
redounds unto works, one by the grace of adoption from God the Father, who in
respect of this Adoption regardes good works, as the works of his Children. [
Romans 8.14.] Another is from God the holy Ghost dwelling in us, by whom good
works are honored as by the principal author of the^. So that he rather
then we does the works, who therefore is said to pray for us with unspeakable
groans. The last dignity is from God the Son Christ Jesus whose members we
are made by grace, so that the works we do, be reputed not so much ours as his,
as the work of the particular member is attributed principally unto the head.

The fourth is, grace Preuenient, whereby God stirs up in us thoughts and
affections to good and pious works, and grace adiuuant to help us in the
performance of these desires, making our Freewill produce works that are
supernatural in their very substance, and above the capacity of man.

The fifth is, the grace of of merciful Indulgence, in not using with us the
rigor of his justice. For God might wholly require the good works we do as
his own, by many tytles; as by the title of justice being works of his
servants, by title of Religion being works of his Creatures, by title of
gratitude as being works of persons infinitely obliged unto him. By which
tytles, if God did exact upon works with uttermost rigor, no goodness would be
left in them to be offered for the meriting of heaven. But his infinite
benignity remitting this rigor, moved thereunto through the merits of Christ,
is content that we make use of our good works for the gayning of glory, and
does not exact them wholly and totally, as otherwise due.

The sixth is, the grace of liberal promise, by which he obliges himself to
reward the good works of his Children according to the desert of their
goodness. Did not God bind himself by his word in this manner, no work of
Saints, though never so perfect and excellent, were able to bind him to reward
it, as all Deuines teach, though some disputation be, whether, Gods liberal
premission supposed, the goodness of the work concur partially with his
promise to oblige him, which is a disputation of no great moment.

Finally, that Merit attain reward, is required the grace of Perseverance,
without which no man is crowned. And though good works strengthened with so
many supernatural excellencyes be good stays of conficence in themselves
considered, yet because we are not sure of our perseuera^ce, no nor altogether
certain that we have good works adorned with the former perfections, THE
Minister pa. 511. Can any thing be more arrogant and foolish then for miserable
beggars and sinners to mintayne, that God should be unjust if he rendered not
heaven to man's good works? And yet this proud Doctrine is delivered by the
Rhemists, Annotat. Heb. 6.4. Answer. In your hoat-spur-zeale you wound the
Blessed Apostle with the title of arrogant Fool. It is he who does suppose as
certain, and who taught the Rhemysts to say, that God should be unjust did he
not reward the good works of his Children: for to assure the Hebrews their
chatyes should not be unrewarded of God, he says Hebr. 6.10. God is not unjust
to forget your works, and love which you showed in his name in ministering unto
the Saints. As if he had said, God should be unjust, did he forget your works
and not reward them: But God cannot be unjust. Therefore be sure he will not
forget your works. Even as when the Scripture, to assure men of Gods word,
says Number. 23.19. God is not as man that he should lie, the same does tacitly
argue in this sort: If God should not keep his word, he should be a liar as
men are. God cannot be a liar as me^ are. Therefore you may be sure he will not
forget to keep his word. You should be more considerate and not thus rudely
run tilting with bul-rush-inuectimes against the holy Ghost himself, in your
spleen against the Pope. For this sentence, God should be unjust did he forget
to reward good works, is the Scriptures, though about the quality of the
Justice that is in God, whether the same be proper or improper, a question is
made by Deuines: neither did the Rhemists say, God should be properly unjust,
but only used the very words of S. Paul.

The Minister page 512. If the Jesuit should maintain that Good works meret
justification or perseverance, not by their Nature, but by Grace, this
distinction would not free his Tenet from error: so likewise it is erroneous to
maintain that Good works merit by grace. Answer. If Good works should merit
justification, they must do it by the force of the goodness inherent in their
nature, and not as elevated by the grace of adoption, seeing before
justification they be not Gods Children. But to say that men merit with God by
the sole natural goodness of their works, not elevated by the grace of
adoption, is erroneous. The works of Gods Children cannot merit the grace of
perseverance, because they be not elevated unto that end by the grace of divine
preordination, and Gods liberal promise. Besides the works of the just be
condignely rewarded with the Crown of Glory and so nothing of their value can
be spared to merit any thing Condignely, but only glory. If the works of Gods
Children were not otherwise Condignely rewarded, they might merit the grace of
perseverance, should God promise the same unto Good works done in a certain
number and quality; so your instance bewrayes your ignorance.

The Minister page 512. S. Paul says, Romans 8.18. I think the Passions of this
time be not Condign to the glory to come, that shall be revealed in us. The
Passions here expressed were Martyrdomes justified by grace, Philip. 1.29.
spiritual Sacrifices of a sweet smelling odor, 2. Tim. 46. and Condignity, or
worthiness equal in desert or value is denied unto them. Answer. The Apostle
says that the Passions of time be not Condign of their own Temporal and
fleeting nature unto infinite eternal glory. Therefore to the end they may be
co^digne, they must be elevated by the grace of divine adoption. For thus goes
the whole discourse, The spirit himself gives testimony to our spirit, that
we are the Children of God. If his Children then his heirs, the heirs of God,
fellow-heyres with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him that we may be
glorified with him. For I think the Passions of this time not to be condign
unto the future glory. By this it is clear S. Paul means that the Passions
of time be not proportionable in their nature which is temporal and fleeting,
unto the eternity of glory; and therefore they must be advanced and made dear
and precious to God by the grace of adoption, which is a grace proportionable
unto glory; for if we be the Children of God, we be the heirs of his glory.

And if the Ministers Argument were good, it would otherthow the merit of
inward inherent congruity which he does acknowledge. For Saint Paul might truly
have said, Passions of time, or which are of transitory and fleeting nature,
are not congruous in respect of the eternity of glory, yea the Passions of
Christ being temporal, and short were not by their own nature condign, or
Congruous unto eternal glory, nor could have been condign, had they not been
elevated by the dignity of Gods natural son, from whom they proceeded.

Minister page 517. The Jesuit has set fire on his own house: for if we owe
our works unto to God (as he says we do) by the titles of justice, Religion
and gratitude, what peeping hole, I pray you, is left for merit, to creep in
at? Answer. Our works by the titles of justice, Religion and gratitude are
due unto God, so far as he does please to exact them by his law, and no
further: but he is pleased not wholly and totally to exact them by the
aforesaid titles, but to leave them unto men, to use them for the gayning of
the crown of glory, as we are taught by his word. Hence man's merit is not in
rigor of justice, but grounded upon Gods merciful indulgence, in not exacting
upon works with uttermost rigor. This merciful indulgence is a wide gate, by
the which Merit makes entrance into Gods Children, showed you by the Jesuit;
yet so blind you are as you see it not, but go peeping about to find an hole
for Merit to creep in at.


the Catholic Saints of God use not to co^fide in their merits past, specially
being guilty of diverse daily negligences, but fly to Gods mercyes, as the
Church teaches us in the Lyturgy of the Mass, daily praying, In sanctorum nos
consortium non aestimator meriti, sed veniae quaesumus largitor, admit. The
Ministers Arguments, or rather Inuestiues against this doctrine of Merit, with
a short Answer thereunto.


Did Protestants know that we require all these divine favors to make any
work meritorious; did they also consider how singular and excellent these
favors are, they would not perchance wonder, that works graced with so many
excellencies should have some proportion with the heavenly Reward. And so
dealing with your Majesty, who is well able to ponder these things, I shall
without proof pass by this doctrine, as not particularly belonging to the
proposed difficulty.

Merit of works of Supererogation.. 2.
WHEREFORE to come to works of Supererogation, these works besides the seven
aforenamed graces, suppose another singular favor, and stand grounded thereon.
This favor is, that God though he might, yet does not rigorously require of his
Saints and servants, that in his service they do the uttermost of their forces.
He has prescribed unto men certain Laws and Commandments, which if they
keep he is satisfied, and what they do voluntary beyond these commanded
duties, he receaues as a gracious and spontaneous gift. This divine benignity
is noted by Saint Chrysostom [Homil. 21. in priorem ad Cor.] and excellently
declared in these words: Ete nim cum benignus sit Dominus, suis praeceptit
multum admiscuit mansuctudinis. Potuisset enim, si hoc voluisset, preceptum
magis intendere and augere, and dicere: Qui non perpetuo ieiunat puniatur, qui
non exercet virginitatem det poenas, qui se non omnibus exuit facultatibus luat
vltimum supplicium: sed non hoc f^cit, concedent nobis, vt non solum ex iussu,
sed etiam ex libero faciamus arbitrio.

Wherefore the precept, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, with all thy strength, does not command an entyre
employment of all our uttermost forces: Nor that we never love, nor desire, nor
think of any thing besides him, nor that all our thoughts and affections be
wholly, entirely, and perpetually on him. For this were a thing impossible, and
God does not require of us things impossible, as Joan 5.3. Mandata eius grauia
non sunt.
Scriptures and Fathers Basil. ho. in illud Moysis, attend tibi ipsi. Impium
est asserere mandata Spiritus Sancti impossibiliae esse obseruatu.
teach. This precept therefore commands a quadruple integrity of divine love.
The first integrity is in respect of our selves, that we love God wholly and
entyrely, not only with the outside, but with the inside, even to the bottom
of our soul, that is in a word, Sincerely.

The second integrity is in respect of God, that we love God according to all
his Commandments, not leaving any unkept; and so to love God entirely, or
with all the heart is the same, as to walk in all his Commandments.

The third integrity is in regard of the effect of love, which is to join men
in friendship with God, whom we must so love that there be no breach between
God and us, nor we separated from him; which we do so long as we keep his
commandments, without sinning mortally against them.

The fourth integrity is in respect of time, that we love him entierely, not
only for this present life, but also desiring and hoping to see and love him
for eternity. And in this sense Aug. de spiritu and lit. cap. vlt.
Saint Augustine, Saint Bernard. sermon. 5. in Cantica.
Bernard, and other Fathers are to be understood, that say in the precept,
Diliges Deum tuum ex toto cord tuo, is contained the perfection of the life to
come, and a perfection impossible to be atteyned to in this life, to wit, it is
contained in the precept, not as a perfection commanded to be practiced in this
life, but as a perfection to be desired and hoped for in the next; so that he
that loves God sincerely from the bottom of heart, to the keeping of all his
Commaundments, perfectly without breach of friendship between him and God,
having his desires and love referred with hope unto Eternity, without question
he loves God with all his heart, soul, and strength. What the Minister
cauilleth against this truth, is reduced to two heads. Minister page 522.
First to the definition of works of supererogation is required, that all which
the Divine law commandes be fullfilled. But if just men have sin, they
perform not all the Divine law does require. For every sin is a
transgression of the Divine law, 1. John. 3.4,

Answer. The law of God binds men to perform the works thereof, so far
as they are necessary unto Salvation, unto which the observance of the law is
ordained, If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments, Math. 19.17.
Hence venial sin is not properly against the law of God, but against the
decency and perfection of reason, the law of God supposed, and his goodness
toward man. The place you cite, as Saint John's, Every sin is a transgression
of the divine law, is by you falsified, as I have showed in the Censure, Sect.
4.. 9. though also that text speak of mortal sin, not of venial. The
testimony of S. Bernard sermon. 2. de Vig. Not. by you cited p. 522. affirming
that God commands his law to be kept exceedingly, that when we cannot do it,
finding our imperfection, we may fly to his mercy, is understood of venial
sinner, which, no man can totally avoid, which sins though they be not
directly against the Divine law, nor properly against any law, yet they are
against the decency of reason the Divine law supposed as has been said. Hence
it follows, that the committing of venial sins does not hinder, but we may
do works of supererogation; not works of supererogation in rigor of justice,
but through Gods merciful indulge^ce in not exacting of us so much as he might.
Suppose a slave being bound to work 8. hours a day, work only seven: If his
master forgive him this fault, without any new obligation, but that
henceforward he work 8. hours a day, this slave if he work afterward 10.
hours a day, does he not a work of supererogation? Yes certainly, though a
work of supererogatio^ grounded on his masters benignity. In this manner,
seeing God forgiueth his Children their daily faults upon their daily craving
perdon, without putting new obligations upon them, more then that they keep
still his law, if they do works more then his law exacts, they truly do
works of supererogation.

Minister page 526. No man though he give all to the poor etc. can exceed the
highest and strictest measure of Charity and obedience in this life. For the
Evangelical law commands us to be perfect, as our heavenly father is
perfect, Matthew. 5.48. and to love, as Christ loved us, Romans 5.7.8. and through
the obligation of gratitude we owe unto God, according to S. Bernard, Omne quod
sumus, omne quod possumus, Answer. The Evangelical law does not require that
we should be perfect as God is in equality, but only in similitude, that as he
loves his enemies and does them good turns, that we likewise love our Enemies
and do them the good turns we are bound to do by his law, which the Children
of God by Divine grace may do, and more also. Nor are we bound to have charity
equal unto our Saviors, but only like unto his, to wit, that as he loved us so
as he dyed for us, that we likewise dye for our brethren, when need requires,
which many Saints have done and daily do practice. By the band of gratitude we
owe unto God all that we are, and all that we can, so fare as it is required by
his law, and no further. We are bound by gratitude also in pr^paratione animi,
to be ready to do more then his law does exact, when he shall by special
precept lay that obligation upon us.

Hence it is manifest, that the band of gratitude does not hinder the
possibility of doing works of supererogation, as may be declared by this
example. Suppose the King pardon a gentleman condemned of treason and remit
unto him the forfeyture of his lands and goods, whereby he owes all he is, and
has to the King in Gratitude. Suppose also that the King exacting a Subsidy of
his subjects, require no more of this gentleman then he takes of another of his
quality; Verily this subject is bound to give no more then another; and if he
give an hundred pound more the^ any other, it is a gratuity, a work of
supererogation, which he might have omitted without any just offense or
ingratitude, yet a gratuity grounded on the Kings manifold gracious
liberalityes, toward him. Such is our case with God. He does not exact of us
by the title of gratitude so much as he might, by which his goodness we are
enabled to offer gratuityes unto him, which we might without offense or
ingratitude not have offered* By the light of this annotation the mist of the
Ministers Cauills is dissolved, wherewith he would obscure the consent of
Fathers about works of superogation set down in the next Paragraffe.




The Fathers taught works of Supererogation* and proved them by Sccipture.. 3.
BUT they that love God so perfectly as they love not only his Commandments,
but also his Counsels; not only shun such sins as separate from God, but
also such as hinder the perpetual actual love of God. These be they that do
more then they are commanded, that is, do works of Supererogation. And if
your Majesty call to mind upon how manifold graces this Merit is grounded, you
will not I hope, condemn the same of arrogance, but rather respect it as being
taught by holy Fathers, even in the express terms of Supererogation. In
proof whereof I allege these few testimonies.

Haymo, a learned Expositor of Scripture, living in the year 800. thus writes
Haymo in Euang. Domin. post Pentecostem.
. Supererogat stabularius, quando hoc agit Doctor ex voto, quod non accepit ex
praecepto. Quod fecit Paulus Apostolus quando habens licentiam vt Euangelium
annuntians de Euangelio viueret, hac vti potestate noluit, sed die praedicans,
noctibus laborabat. Venerable Bede in the year 700. upon those words of Saint
Luke Beda in cap. 10. Luc.
, Quodcumque superogaueris, ego cum rediero reddam tibi. Superogat stabularius
quod in duobus denarijs non accepit, cum dicit Apostolus, De Virginibus autem
praeceptum Domini non habeo; Consilium autem do. S. Gregory the great in the
year 590. alluding to this term of supererogating more then is received,
says Greg. 1.26. mor. cap. 20.
: Multi virginitatis virtute pollent, vt videlicet plus impendant obsequio,
quam acceperunt praecepto.

S. Fulgentius in the year 500. Fulg. Prolog. in l. contra Monimum.
Quid est, si quid supererogaueris, nisi si quid a me magis acceperis? Nam and
ipse qui supererogabat in eo quod non acceperat praeceptum, sed dabat ex
charitate Consilium, Misericordiam se profitetur vtique consecutum. S. Paulinus
in the year 400. Paulinus epist. 2. ad Seuerum.
Hic Samarites (Christus) redditurus est beatae virginitati de innumeris huius
boni fructibus, vberes gratias and immortales coronas, quia hoc consilium
Praecepto adijciens de suo supererogauit. Saint Augustine in the same Age Aug.
l. 2. q. Euangel. cap. 30.
: In illis (praeceptis Dominicis) imperat vobis, in his (Consilijs) si quid
amplius supererogaueritis, in redeundo reddet vobis. And again Idem ibid. cap.
19.
: Stabularius autem Apostolus est, duo denarij duo Praecepta charitatis, quam
per spiritum Sanctum acceperant Apostoli ad Euangelizandum caeteris. Quod
supererogat autem illud est quod ait, De virginibus autem praeceptum Domini non
habeo, eonsilium autem do. And in another Book Aug. lib. de Adulteriu. Coning.
lib. c. 14.
: Quae licita sunt nec vllo praecepto Domini prohibentur, sed sicut expedit
potius tractanda sunt, non praescripto legis, sed consilio charitatis. Haec
sunt quae amplius supererogantur saucio, qui curandus ad stabulum Samaritani
miseratione perductus est.

Optatus Mileuitanus, in the year 376. Optat. l. 6. cont. Parmenian.
Sed quia, qui saucium commendauerat, se promiserat redditurum quicquid in
curam amplius erogasset post impensos duos denarios, non praecepta, sed
consilium erogat Paulus. Nec impedimentum est voluntati, nec nolentes impellit
aut cogit. Qui dederit (inquit) virginem suam, been facit, and qui non dederit
melius facit: Hae sunt verba Consilij, nec sunt vlla praecepta coniuncta. Saint
Hierome Hier. aduersus Iouin. cap. 7. l. 1.
: Plus amat Christus Virgins, quia sponte tribuunt quod sibi non fuerat
imperatum; maiorisque gratiae est, offerre quod non debeas, quam reddere quod
exigaris. Saint Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 8. de Poenitentia.
: Nequaquam Dominum incuses, haud mandat impossibilia, multi ipsa superant
mandata. Saint Gregory Nazianzen Greg. Naz. orat. 3.
: In legibus nostris alia parendi necessitatem imponunt, nec sieve periculo
praetermitti possunt; alia non necessitate constringunt, sed in arbitrio and
voluntate posita sunt, ac proinde hanc rationem habent, vt qui ea custodierint
praemijs, and honor afficiantur; qui autem minus ea expleuerint, nihil
periculi pertimescant. Saint Cyprian Cypr. de habitu Virginem, prope finem.
: Non iubet virginitatem Dominus sed hortatur, nec iugum necessitatis imponit,
quando manet voluntatis arbitrium liberum. Origenes Orig. in cap. 15. ad Romans
: Eaqua supra debitum facimus, non facimus ex praecepto: verbi causa,
virginitas non ex debito soluitur, sed supra debitum offertur.

I will not bring more proofs of this doctrine out of Scripture which the
Fathers I cited prove by the words of Saint Paul 1. Cor. 7.
, in express terms affirming that there are besides Precepts, works of
Supererogation or Counsels: De virginibus praeceptum Domini non habeo, sed
consilium do. Nor will I allege more testimonies of Fathers, which might be
produced in great number most plain and pregnant. Only I cannot omit one place
of Saint Ambrose, who delivering this doctrine, does together answer a
Protestant vulgar objection against it: Ambros. l. de viduis, vltra medium.
Itaque qui praeceptum impleuerint possunt dicere, serui inutiles sumus, quod
debuimus facere fecimus. Hoc virgo non dicit, non dicit qui bona sua vendidit,
sed quasi reposita expectat praemia, sicut Sanctus Apostolus ait, Ecce nos
reliquimus omnia and secuti sumus te, quid ergo erit nobis? Sunt enim Luc. 17.
v. 10. Matthew. 19. v. 17. Ibid. v. 12.
spadones qui se castrauerunt propter regnum Caelorum, sed hoc non omnibus
imperatur, sed ab omnibus flagitatur. Virgo prouocatur consilijs, non vinculis
alligatur; sed nec vidua praeceptum accipit, sed consilium. What can be more
clearly spoken for works of Supererogation or Cou^sells?

Neither is there any arrogance as I said before, in this doctrine. For neither
the Fathers, nor we attribute more unto man then Protestants do; but only
acknowledge one kind of divine liberality toward man, which Protestants be
somewhat backward to believe: for supposing that God exacteth much less then
he might, and much less then man is able by his grace to perform, Protestants
will not deny but a man may offer unto God some voluntary services beyond
commanded duties; Catholics also grant, that had God used the uttermost
severity of charging us with debts, as he might have done, we could never by
any measure of grace that now is ordinarily affoarded unto men, have complied
with all our obligations, much less have performed unrequired offices. The
difference therefore between them and us is this: They think that God severely
exacteth of man, that ever, and in all occasions he work according to the
utter most of his power, yea commands him things impossible for him to
perform.

Contrariwise, we hold, that God, to the end his Law may be unto men a sweet
yoke, a light load, and his Commandments not difficile, does not exact of
man all that man is able to do with his grace, but much less, and so much
less as man is able through this remission to offer him liberalityes. What
pride is it for man, to acknowledge this sweet providence of his Creator, to
praise his merciful Indulgence, in not exacting so much as he might; specially
believing, that this divine Indulgence not to exact of man, and consequently
man's ability to present unto God, more perfect and excellent service then he
requires, is given him through the merits of CHRIST JESUS?

The doctrine of Satisfaction.. 4.
THE other part of this Co^trouersy proposed by your Majesty about works
referred unto the Treasure of the Church, concerns good Works, not as they
are meritorious of reward, but as they are satisfactory for sin. For the
works of Saints, as they are merits, be laid up, not in the Treasury of the
Church to be applied unto others: but in the memory of God, to receive their
deserved guerdon in due time What the Minister here Cauilleth about Communion
of Satisfactions, not of merits betwixt Saints, is refelled after ward. 5. in
the Annotation at lit. (x)
.

This doctrine of Satisfaction is like unto the former of Merit, much spoken
against, and by many disliked in the highest degree, who yet perchance do not
much understand what they so earnestly impugn, as may appear by this brief
declaration of our doctrine in this point.

First we do not think, that any sinner can make satisfaction by works unto
God, for the guilt of Mortal or damnable sin. The reason is, because works
of Satisfaction are such as merit pardon, and obtain it, by some kind of
Justice from God. The works of his Children, may merit in this sort, as being
the works of them that are instruments of the holy Ghost, dwelling and
operating within them, and living members of Christ his mystical body,
receiving influence of life and operation from him, as from their head. Sinners
are neither the Children of God, nor the Temples of the Holy Ghost, nor living
members of Christ, so their works cannot be so gracious, as they may deserve
any thing as due to them in any kind of Justice from God, much less can they
deserve so great a reward, as remission of mortal sin, and of the eternal
punishment due thereunto.

Secondly, we do not teach, that any Saint or Angel, can make satisfaction
unto God for the mortal sin of any man, no not all Saints and Angels
putting together all their good works and satisfactions. The reason is,
because an Injury is so much the greater, by how much the person that offers
it, is Base, and the person to whom it is offered is Noble, as the light of
reason and the estimation of mankind shows. But God whom man casts away
and abandoneth by sin, and consequently wrongs, is of infinite dignity, and
man offending him comparatively with him infinitely base: wherefore mortal
sin which is an abandoning of God for some transitory content, is injury done
unto God incomparably grievous. On the other side satisfaction is the less
esteemed, by how much the person satisfying is mean, and the person offended
great. Men and Angels what are they, being compared with God? Certainly
nothing; therefore certainly their works and satisfactions are inestimably
disproportionable to satisfy for any the least mortal sin, the guilt whereof
is so great a debt as it is vnsatisfiable, but only by the precious blood of
the Son of God. He being a person Coequall and Consubstantiall with his
Father, to satisfy Gods anger by humbling the infinite dignity of his person,
unto the most disgraceful death of the Cross, offered satisfaction full and
complete, yea superabundant; the person satisfying in regard of his Divinity
being infinitely more honorable, then the person offending was contemptible by
reason of his baseness.

Thirdly, the Roman Church teaches, that those that have been made the Children
of God by Baptism, if they sin mortally afterward, when they repent God
forgiues them the guilt of sin, and consequently the eternal punishment by
the Sacrament of Penance, bountifully and graciously through the mere merits
of Christ, without their satisfaction; only they must by Faith, by fear, by
hope, by Contrition, by purposes of amendment prepare and make themselves
capable of that gracious and grace-infusing pardon.

Fourthly, the Roman Church holds, that God by Penance forgiving the eternal
punishment, does in lieu thereof many times appoint a task of te^porall pain,
to be endured by the Penitent. This reserved penalty is greater or lesser
according to the multitude, and grieuousnes of the sins committed, and is
that for which penitents may and must satisfy. And why may not the penal
works, performed by the Children of God, beautifyed by so many aforenamed
excellent graces be sufficient to deserve of God the remission of this
temporal mulct, and cancel the debt of enduring transitory pain? I could
bring testimonies of the most ancient Fathers in great number, for the
necessity we have of suffering these voluntary afflictions for sins, and of
the efficacity thereof, to expiate sin with the very name of Satisfaction, The
Minister would feign elude this consent of Fathers by diverse Shifts, but two be
the chief, which I will here fully refute. Page 544. he says: The Romists in
their course of doctrine about Satisfaction, pervert all that which the Fathers
taught. First, that which the Fathers speak of the fault and guilt of sin,
they wrest to the temporal pain of mortal sin, remaining after the
remission of the everlasting guilt. Answer. You are according to the
Ministerial wo^t, proud, and bold in your accusations, but poor and miserable
in your proofs. You say the Fathers spoke not of the te^porall pain of mortal
sin, but of the very guilt thereof. And in another place page 547. yet more
boldly, WHAT SOEVER is spoken in holy Scripture, or by the ancient Fathers,
concerning redeming sins by satisfaction, belonges to the fault and eternal
pain of sin; and this satisfaction, must be performed by the delinquent
himself in this present life. This you say, but prove it not, yea the contrary
is clear truth, and proved by these 4. or 5. Arguments.

First, if after the remission of the everlasting guilt, there remain a
temporal pain to be mitigated, and taken away by penitential works, then
there is no reason to think but the Fathers spoke something thereof. But your
self p. 540. lin. vlt. say, That there is a remaynder of Temporal affliction
after the remission of the guilt of sin. And page 541. lin. 7. That this
temporal pain may be removed, or mitigated by works of mortification and
penance. Therefore you have no reason to think the Fathers never spoke
thereof.

Secondly, The Fathers spoke of that kind of satisfaction which David made unto
God for his adultery and murder of Vrias, yea they make this satisfaction of
David the prototype and perfect pattern of that satisfaction they require.
Hilarious in Psalm. 118. and alij. But David his satisfaction by patient enduring
penaltyes inflicted, was satisfaction for the temporal pain, and not for the
stain and eternal guilt of sin, which was remitted long before, presently
upon his inward contrition and repentance, Dominus a te transtulit peccatum
tuum, 2. Reg. 12.13. Therefore the satisfaction which Scriptures, and the
Fathers require, is for the temporal pain, not for the guilt of mortal sin.

Thirdly, the Fathers teach, that after inward grief, and contrition for
sin, (by which they knew the guilt of sin and of eternal pain was
remitted, according to the truth of Gods word Ezechiel 18.22.) long continued
satisfaction must be done, to pacify Gods wrath, Cyprian. Epist. 40. Dominus
longa and continua satisfactione placandus est. But the guilt of sin and
eternal pain being remitted, men need not, nor cannot satisfye but for the
temporal.

Fourthly, the Fathers teach, that men must seek to satisfye for their sins,
even after they be just, and Gods adopted Children ( Hierom. in Epitaph.
Paulae.) but in the Children of God the everlasting guilt is remitted, and
nothing can remain to be removed by satisfaction but the guilt of Temporal
pain. Finally, the Fathers teach, that after this life, often there remains
something of sin to be expiated by Purgatory pains, from which souls may be
released and relieved by the pious works of their living friends. So says S.
Augustine expressly l. 21. de Ciuit. c. 24. sermon. 32. de verbis Apostol. and
many others.

I omit other demonstrations of this truth. To what you so much object that
Fathers say, men must redeem their sins and satisfy for their offenses to
God, I Answer: By sin, they mean the pain due unto sin, which is termed
sin, because it is the effect of sin. Hence sin is said after the
remission thereof to remain in the soul, to wit, in his effect, nor can the
soul be said to be fully cleansed until this debt be satisfied.

Minister page 544. Secondly, that which the Fathers styled Satisfaction
improperly, and by way of deprecation, the Romists make satisfaction of
condignity, yea of rigor of Justice. Nazarius in 3 p. D. Thom. q. 1. art. 2.
controu. 7. page 113. And for venial sin, more effectual then Christ's
satisfaction. Suarez* Tom. 4. in 3. p. disp. 48. sect. 3. Answer. Your
slau^dring humor is intolerable. Nazarius says and proves that our
satisfaction neither is, nor can be in rigor of justice. He adds: If our
satisfaction be joined with Christ's, dicetur eam esse de rigore iustiti^
ratione satisfactionis Christi, it shall be said to be in rigor of justice in
respect (not of it self) but of the satisfaction of Christ. Hence you charge
him with this proposition, Men may make satisfaction to God in rigor of
justice. Verily you may as well accuse S. Paul of making himself omnipotent,
absolutely, and without any modification, because he says, I can do all
things (not in my self) but in him that strengthens me. Philip. 4.13. Suarez
says that the inward contrition inhering in the sinners heart, is more
effectual to expel venial sin by way of formal opposition therewith, then
Christ's satisfaction; tamen satisfactio Christi in ratione meriti perfectior
est; yet the satisfaction of Christ is more perfect and efficacious to expel
sin by way of merit. Here again you are showed a slanderous relatour of our
Doctrine, and a falsifyer of Authors.

Neither do we teach, that condign satisfaction may be made unto God in
respect of the offense against the Divine Majesty, nor can we co^dignely
satisfy his just anger, which has a kind of infinity, through the dignity of
the person offended, but only in respect of Temporal pain. In which respect
men may make unto God satisfaction just, condign, equal, compensant, the
Fathers say expressly. Tertullian libro de poenitentia: Christ proposes
pardon of sins to be REDEEMED by the COMPENSATION of penance. Origin homil.
15. in Leuit. By the fruits of penance, by laborious good works, the PRICE of
the redemption of sin is gathered together. S. Cyprian l 1. epist 3. By
lamentations and JUST satisfactions sins are REDEEMED. S. Hilar. can. 4. in
Matthew. How shall we PAY the last FARTHING OF PAIN, unless by the PRICE of
Charitable deeds to the needy, our sins be REDEEMED? S. Basil orat. super
verba, Atende tibi ipsi: Is thy sin great and grievous? Thou must needs
apply against it much and frequent confession, bitter weeping, long and
laborious watching, continual and neuer-interrupted fasting: let thy Penance
be EQVALL unto thy sin. S. Hierom. in cap. 1. Ioelis. Let the sinner
COMPENSATE by the austerity of penance, his former pleasures wherewith he
offended God. And, in Epit. Paulae. The body must be punished by sharp
entreaty, which has been long inured to pleasure: much time spent in laughing
must be COMPENSATED by continual weeping. Theodoret Epitom. diuinorum
Decretor. c. de Poenit. Even the wounds after Baptism are curable, but not
without many tears, and weepings, and mournings, and fastings, and prayngs,
and by pain CONTEMPERED unto the QVANTITY of the sin. S. Gregory homil. 20.
in Euang. We must not only do the fruits and works of penance, but works of
penance that be WORTHY or CONDIGN; DIGNOS poenitentiae fructus. Venerable Bede l. 1. in Lucam c. 2. Sacrifice unto God a sacrifice of JUSTICE, that is,
Be so angry against your former sins, that you massacre them, by doing
CONDIGN works of penance, punishing your selves for EVERY SIN, JUST AS MVCH,
as CONDIGN penance requires. This is a Sacrifice of JUSTICE.

Thus the Fathers teach, proving their Doctrine by Scripture, whereby your
vanity is manifest, who think to elude their Testimonies by the distinction,
That they spoke of satisfaction of deprecation and impetrant, not of condignity
and compensant. Against whom the Fathers, as if they had forseen your forgery,
oppose themselves directly, formally, and in terms.


there being scarce any ancient Father, that has not taught both the thing,
and the word.

Work, with reference unto the Treasure of the Church.. 5.
BUT I suppose these testimonies are unto your Majesty well known, and
therefore in this proposed difficulty, supposing the satisfaction for sin to
be possible, you move this doubt; Whether the penitents can so fully satisfy
for themselves, as their satisfactions may superabound and be referred into the
treasure of the Church? To satisfy this doubt, three propositions are to be
proved.

The first, that good works of Saints that are penal and afflictiue do not
only merit heaven, but also satisfy for sin. This is proved. Giving of Alms
for the love of Christ, is meritorious; witness our Savior himself, who to the
Just, in the reward of their Alms, will give the Kingdom prepared from the
beginning of the world. [ Matthew. 23.] And it is also satisfactory for sin,
witness Daniel, who gave this counsel unto the Babylonian King, Daniel 4.24.
Redeem thy sins with Almsdeeds, and thine iniquityes with mercyes, unto
the poor. And Saint Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 25. in Act. Apost.
who says, There is no sin, which giving of Alms cannot cancel. And Saint
Cyprian: Cyprian. Sermon. d. Eleemosyna.
Eleemosynis, atque operibus justice delictorum flamma sopitur.

Prayer is likewise meritorious with God; our Savior exhorts every man to
pray secretly in his Closet, promising that, Matthew. 6.6.7.
Thy Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward thee. It is also
satisfactory for sin. Saint Augustine Aug. Enchyr. c. 7^*
says: The daily prayer of the faithful does satisfy for their quotidian, and
light offenses, without which none can lead this life.

To fast, is meritorious, when it proceeds from a pure heart, to which our
Savior in the 6. of Saint Matthew, promised recompense: and that it is penal
and satisfactory for Corporal penaltyes, the fact of the Ninevites Ionae cap.
vlt.
shows abundantly; so that the same works of the Just as pious, do merit,
and shall have in heaven a plentiful reward; as penal do satisfy and obtain
full remission of the temporal penaltyes remaining to be suffered for sin.
In confirmation whereof, memorable is the saying of Saint Cyprian Cypr. sermon.
de lapsis, circa finem.
of fervent penance and punition of the body: Qui sic D^o satisfec^rit etc.
non solum Dei veniam mer^bitur, sed Coronam.

The second Proposition. Many Saints endured more penaltyes and afflictions in
this life, then were necessary for the recompensing of the temporal pains due
to their sins. The Blessed Virgin The Ministers railing against the Doctrine
which makes the Blessed Virgin free from actual sin, is discovered in the
Censure, Sect. 4.. 9. page 120.
never committed actual sin; witness S. Ambrose Ambros. sermon. vlt. in Psalm.
118.
tearming her, ab omni integram labe peccati; and S. Augustine saying Aug. de
Not. and Great. cap. 36.
, Plus gratiae ei collatum est, ad vincendum ex omni part peccatum: Yet she
endured many afflictions, her many Iourneyes, specially her banishment into
Egypt, her standing at the foot of the Cross when the sword of sorrow
pierced through her heart, besides her many voluntary Fastings, and Prayings,
and other penitential works which were daily practiced in the course of her
most holy life. Saint John the Baptist Luc. 1. v. 8.
, what a pure and immaculate course of life held he from his Infancy, in the
wilderness? Never committed any great sins, yea scarce so much as light sins,
as the Fathers Gregor. in cap. 2. Job. 11. Numquid credimus aliquid fuisse quod
in Ioannis vita mors tergeret? Venerab. Beda ho. de decollat. Joan. Quis dicere
audeat Ioannem in actu, vel dicto, habitu, vel victu peccasse? Quis in eius
praecordijs esse poterat peccato locus etc?
teach, gathering their opinion of this his sanctiiy from the Scripture: and
yet extremely penitential was he in his continual praying, fasting, lying on
the ground, enduring cold, wind and weather, his wearing continually a rough
hayre-cloath, whereof Saint Paulinus writes Paulin. ep. 11. ad Seuerum.
: Vestis erat curui setis compacta Cameli,
Contra Luxuriam molles duraret vt artus,
Arceretque graves compuncto corpore somnos.
What a mighty mass of superabounding That Saints can make superaboundant
satisfaction, is also proved by the sayings of the Minister in the Ce^sure,
Sect. 4.. 5.
Satisfactions were gathered from the life of this Saint alone?

The Prophets of the old Testament, what afflictions did they endure? Which
Saint Paul Ad Heb. 11.36.
gathers together in the eleauenth Chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews,
being nevertheless men of most holy life, innocent, and without any grievous
sins, 1. Cor. 4.2. Cor. 11*
That the world was unworthy of them. As also the Apostles, whose labors were
intolerable, specially such as Saint Paul records endured by himself, who yet
after Baptism (in which his sins were fully and certainly remitted) never
did grievously offend God. The labors Cypr. l. 4. epist. 2.
and torments of Martyrs were extreme, and yet any the least Martyrdom is
sufficient to satisfy for any great multitude of offenses, Aug. tract. 64. in
Joan.
quoad reatum culpae and poenae. Of whose merits the Church in the primitive
times did make most account; to whom afterward succeeded another kind of
Martyrdom, Ber. sermon. 41. in Cantica.
Terrore quidem mitius, sed diuturnitate molestius, of holy Confessors,
specially of many most holy Eremites.

These manifold afflictions endured by Saints, far above measure of the
temporal penalty, which after the eternal was graciously remitted did remain
due to their offenses, did not perish, nor were forgotten, but were laid up in
the memory of God.

The third Proposition. The treasure of the Church consists principally of
the superabunda^t satisfactions of Christ, who did endure much more then was
necessary for the Redemption of man; wherewith are joined the satisfactions of
Saints. We join the satisfactions of Saints with the satisfaction of Christ,
in the Churches treasure, not because we believe the blood of Christ to be
insufficient alone, to satisfy for sins, nisi velut arescentis and exhausti
defectus aliunde suppleatur and sufficiatur: (as mistakingly, not to say
calumniously, Calvin [lib. 4. Instit. cap. 9. n. 39.] reports of us.) For
Pope Clement the 6. (whom Protestants accuse as the first Author of this
Treasure) affirms even in his Co^stitution about this matter, that the blood
of Christ is of an infinite price, and every drop thereof sufficient to ctncell
the sins of the whole world. The reasons of this conjunction are these three.

First, That penal works of Saints as they are satisfactory, be not without
fruit, for being satisfactory, and not having the effect of satisfaction in
their own innocent and undefiled persons, they will be without this fruit and
effect, except they be applied unto others that are poor and needy, in whom
satisfaction is scant, and the debt of temporal pain abounds.

The second is, The glory of Christ, whose meritts were so powerful, as to
purchase to the church of God, such excellent and admirable Saints, so pure of
life, so fervent in penance, as their satisfactions might suffice to pay the
debt of temporal pain due unto others.

The third reason is, to make men love the Church and society of Saints, whereby
they come to be partakers of the abounda^cy of her treasures to pay their
grievous debts. This is that comfortable Article of the Apostles put down in
the Creed to be known of every one: The Communion of Saints. This is that
which made King David exult, saying Psalm. 118. verse. 63.
: I am partaker with all them that fear thee, and keep thy Co^maundments. And
in this respect the Apostle exhorts us: Coloss. 1. v. 12.
Gratias agamus Deo Patri qui dignos nos fecit in partem sortis Sanctorum in
lumine. This is that which the same Apostle writes to the Corinthians 1.8.14.
exhorting them to be liberal toward Titus and Luke: For the present let your
abundance (in temporal goods) supply their want, that also their abundance
(in pious works) may be a supplement unto your want. This hope, to supply in
this kind the spiritual need of Christians by the abundance of his
sufferings, made Saint Paul so much rejoice in them Coloss. 1. 24.
: I joy (says he) in my sufferings for you, and I make full the things that
want of the sufferings of Christ in my flesh, for his body which is the Church.
And again: 2. Cor. 12.15.
Cupio impendi and superimpendi pro vobis: Out of which words Origin. hom. 10.
in Number.
Origin gathers, that S. Paul, as a kind of victime or sacrifice did expiate
the sins of others; not satisfying for the Injury against God, nor for the
eternal punishment due, but for one outward and transitory effect of sin, to
wit, the debt of temporal pain. In this sense also Saint Augustine
interprets the former words of the Apostle, of suffering in his body the
things wanting of the sufferings of Christ: Aug. in ep. 61.
Patitur Christus in membris suis, id est, in nobis ipsis ad communem hanc
quasi Republicam. Nam quisque pro modulo nostro exoluimus quod debemus, and pro
posse virium nostrarum quasi canonem passionum inferimus paratoria plenaria.
Christ suffers in his members, that is, even in us, as for a Commonwealth:
for every one of us pays his own debt, according to his mean power, and
according to his forces puts into the plenary Storehouse a certain measure of
sufferings.

This was the practice of the Primitive Church, which at the petition of
constant Confessors in prison, did relieve the penaltyes that sinners were
enjoined to perform, to satisfy not only the discipline of the Church, but
also the wrath of God after the remission of sin still continuing unto the
infliction of temporal pain, as appears by the testimonies of Cypr. l. 3.
ep. 15.
Saint Cyprian. And that this relaxation of temporal pain was done by
applying the abou^dant satisfaction of holy Confessors and designed Martyrs
unto the Penitents, that received Indulgence at their intercessions, appears
by Tertullian; For he falling from the Church into the errors of Montanus,
whereof one was, That for Christians sinning after Baptism there was no
remission of sin, refutes the Catholic custom of remitting penaltyes unto
sinners for the merits of Martyrs, speaking thus Tertul. lib. de pudicit. cap.
22.
: Let it suffice the Martyrs, they have cancelled and satisfied for their own
sins. It is ingratitude, or pride for one prodigally to cast abroad upon
others, that which as a great benefit was bestowed upon him. And speaking unto
the Martyr he says: If thou be a sinner, how can the oil of thy Lamp suffice
both for thee, and me? By which heretical Impugnation appears, that the
Catholic doctrine then was, that men might satisfy one for another, and that
the abou^dant satisfactions of some that suffered exceedingly as Martyrs, were
applied for the redemption of some others more remiss and negligent, MINISTER
pa. 554. It is remarkable how the Roman Higlars with one breath, both magnify,
and debase the price of Christ's blood. For one while they say, That one drop
thereof is sufficient to sasisfy for all the sins of the world; and then
again they infer, That it is fit it should be eeked out with an addition of
Saintly satisfactio^s, to raise a stock to redeem souls out of Purgatory.
Else why stint they not this treasure upon the main Reuenew of Christ's
Passions only? Their detected meaning is: Christ's Blood alone is all-sufficient
to save souls; but the same is insufficient to impregnate his Holiness his
Coffers. The blood of Christ has abundant virtue in it to cleanse sins, but
it must emendicate virtue to fill purses, and to satisfy the Avarice of the
Horse-leeches of Rome.

Answer. You speak in the proper Tune of your Gospel, which was ever the
Note of Heresy, to wit, to bark and rail at the chair of Peter, the root
and matrice of the Catholic Church, Cyprian ep. 88. The Angel said unto
Jacob, in commendation of his constancy, thou have been strong against God, how
much more will thou prevail against men? and I may say of you in excusation of
your railing at us, What wonder though you spare not Christ's Vicar on earth,
who in your ignorant zeal about this matter, rail and blaspheme even God
himself? For thus you write in the precedent page 553. If the Blood of Christ
be infinite, it is foolish to join to the same the Blood of Martyrs and
passions of Creatures. Is any man so foolish as to add the light of a candle to
the clear light of the Sun? Thus you. Is not this Blasphemy against God? For
hence I thus argue. He that joins the blood of Martyrs and passions of
Creatures to the infinite price of Christ's blood, is a fool by your censure.
God, that men may attain unto heaven, does to the infinite merit of Christ's
blood, join the passions of Martyrs and of creatures, saying unto men, that
except they suffer with Christ, they shall not be glorified with him. Rom 8.17.
What follows of this your saying, but the most horrible blasphemy that may
be, that God is like a fool which joins the light of a Candle with the light
of the Sun? Hence your calumniation of the Roman Church is detected, the
folly wherewith you charge her, being the very same wherewith you charge God.
For as the joining of Saints works and sufferings to the merits of Christ, for
the full purchasing of heaven, is not eeking out of his merits by addition unto
them, but to perform the conditions which God requires, that the merits of
Christ may have their effects: So to join to the satisfactions of Christ, the
satisfactions and mortifications done by Saints, for the abolishing of the debt
of Temporal pain, is not to eeke out the price of his blood with addition, but
to comply with Gods will and pleasure, who will have us to be cleansed from the
reserved temporal guilt of pain, not only by Christ's satisfactions and
mortifications, but also by our own, as Scriptures and Fathers teach.

Besides Catholics teach, as you may see in Suarez, Tom. 4. in 3. p. disp. 51.
sect. 4. conclus. 3. That the superaboundant satisfactions of our Savior is a
sufficient and infinite stock and reuenew, out of which the Pope may grant
Indulgences ordinarily and without any stint, though there be not any saintly
satisfactions remaining in the treasury of the Church, [ Sola satisfactio
Christi esset sufficiens ad indulgentiarum efficaciam, etiam secundum legem
ordinariam] Whence two things are consequent. First, that the Minister belyeth
the Church in saying, that we join to Christ's blood the satisfactions of
Saints to impregnate his Holiness his coffers, as being persuaded that Christ's
blood alone is not sufficient for this end. For if selling and buyng of
Indulgences were lawful (as it is detested in our Church, and acccursed as a
most horrible and damnable crime, Council. Lateran. sub Inno. 3. and Vienn. sub
Clem. 5.) If I say we held it were lawful for the Pope to enrich his coffers by
the sale of pardons, according to our Tenet, the Pope might fill his purse and
coffers by selling Indulge^ces out of the Treasury of Christ's passions only,
they being infinite and vnexhaust. Secondly, The Ministers so often repeated
assertion, that the Doctrine of Indulgences is used unto filthy lucre, is a
mere Ministerial slander. For the Minister is no more to be believed in
saying, that by this doctrine the Pope fills his Coffers, then in his saying,
That he does for this end teach that Saintly satisfactions must be joined unto
Christ's, as judging Christ's insufficient to impregnate his Coffers. But this is
a manifest slander, seeing the Pope holds that the price of Christ's blood is
infinite, out of which infinite Indulgences might ordinarily be given, and also
sold to enrich his coffers if that practice were law full. Therefore, a most
false an impudent slander it is what the Minister here so often repeates, that
the Doctrine of the treasure of Saints superaboundant satisfactions, is devised
by Roman Prelates for filthy lucre.

Minister pa. 135. Against the Jesuits proposition, that Merits of Saints are
laid up in the memory of God, to be rewarded in due time with glory, but
redundant satisfactions be reserved in the treasury of the Church, thus
rayleth: By this you may see that Popery is a mystery, Apoc. 17.5. And the
Canonists say of the Pope, His will is a reason etc. otherwise there is the
same reason for communication of merits, as for satisfactions. For in Christ
Jesus both were communicated al^ke, and Christ is the samplar of saintly merit
and satisfaction, if there be any. Answer. Unto men altogether ignorant of
Theology, the known principles and truths thereof seem mysteryes, and strange
things, in which number you are. For otherwise the learned know a manifest
reason, why the satisfactions of Saints be communicable, and not their merits,
and the disparity betwixt them, and Christ Jesus in this behalf. Christ Jesus
being by nature the Son of God, is not only free from sin, but also his
soul in the moment of his Conception was advanced unto the highest degree of
glory and beatificall vision any soul can possibly attain unto. Hence his
works, not only as satisfactory for sin, have not effect in his person by
nature impeccable, but also as meritorious of glory they superabound in respect
of his soul, which independently of works is erected unto the highest degree
of glory. Hence also his works being not only as satisfactions. but also as
merits superfluous in respect of himself, be communicable unto other, not only
as satisfactory for their sins, but also as meritorious of glory for them. In
the Saints living upon earth it is not so: For they be not in glory, nor can
they in this life be so perfect, but they may merit still more and more glory;
and as they merit more and more, so their reward is greater and greater. Hence
their works as meritorious of heaven, can never be superfluous, nor without
the effect of a full and condign reward in their own persons; whereby it
comes also to pass, that nothing of their merits superabounds to be
communicated unto others. But of their works as satisfactory for Temporal
reserved pain, there is not the same reason. For some Saints may be preserved
by special grace from al actual sin, as the Blessed Virgin was, or from any
grievous sin, as was S. John Baptist: Others though they committed some
mortal sins, when they repent, the penalty reserved after the remission
thereof, being finit and temporal, they may by voluntary assumption, or divine
infliction endure more pain then is the reserved. Hence Saints may have
satisfaction which superabou^ds, that is, which has not the reward of
remission of temporal pain in their own persons, and consequently
satisfactions that be communicable unto others, though the merit of their
works be still proper to themselves and incommunicable. If the Minister will
continue his railing against this reason, he may, but I do not doubt, could he
deliver reasons for his Protestant Doctrine so drawn out of the bowels and
principles of Christian Theology as this is, he would not rail so much as he
does, but yield his Reader some learned discourses, in lieu of so many bitter
inuectiues.

Minister page 555. Though the superabundant satisfactions want the proper
fruit and reward of satisfaction, yet this (being recompensed by a large
increase and surplasage in an other kind) can be no dishonor to God. As prayer
though sometimes the same want the most proper fruit and effect thereof, which
is to obtain the thing requested, yet is the same otherwise sufficiently
rewarded. ANSWER. Your Example makes against your self, for pious and Godly
prayer being both meritorious of heaven, and impetratory of what is requested,
never wants either of these two fruits. For as it does still merit new
increase of glory, so does it still obtain the thing requested so far as it
is requested; for the thing is requested by Godly prayer so far as it is
profitable for the soul according to Gods holy will, but so far it is still
impetrated. And if the particular thing requested be not for the souls
greater good, another thing is obtained in lieu thereof that is better. Hence I
thus argue: You grant, if there be superabondant satisfactions of Saints, the
same must be rewarded by the proper fruit of satisfaction, as much as prayer
has still the reward of impetration. But prayer is still rewarded with the
fruit of impetration, either in the person of him that prays, or in some
other person for which it is offered. Ergo, the superaboundant satisfactions of
Saints, must have the reward of satisfaction; which seeing they cannot have in
their persons, they must have it in some other parties, to whom it is applied.

The Minister page 556. If one should affirm, It is more for Christ's glory to
purchase to himself a people which in this life is perfectly innocent, then to
purchase a people carrying always about them the remaynder of sin; he should
not honor Christ but prove himself a liar, 1. John 1.8. so likewise to
affirm, It is a greater honor to Christ's merits to purchase Saints that can
make condign and superabondant satisfaction for their sins, carries a show
of honoring Christ, but is in truth a Sacrilegious error. Answer. First the
power and strength of the Divine grace is better seen in infirmityes, and in
men compassed about with the remaynders and incombrances of sin, as S. Paul
says 2. Cor. 12.9. and S. Augustine, That the grace of Innocence was felicior,
but the grace of redemption is fortior. [de Corr. and great. c. 11.] Secondly,
^f Christ did purchase to himself some excellent Saints that did make condign
satisfactions, this is an honor to his merits: But the Scripture and Fathers
affirm that he has purchased to himself Saints, that can, and do offer unto
God condign fruits, and works of penance, satisfactions, compensations,
Sacrifices of justice, penance equal and commeasured unto the quantity of the
sin, in respect of the reserved debt of Temporal pain, as has been showed:
yea that Saints by their works obtain a crown of glory, so as God gives it
them proceeding as a just judge 2. Tim. 4.8. Ergo, this is an honor to Christ
in truth* and to say it is a Sacrilegious error, is blasphemy.

The Minister page 357. The Communion of Saints in respect of the living, is
compartnership in faith etc. Answer. The word of the Creed, Communion of
Saints, is absolute without restraynt, not to be limited by the brain and
fancy of a Minister. Hence it imports, that between Saints there is a
Communion of all graces and perfections which superabound in the one, and are
needed of the other. But good works according as they are satisfactio^s,
superabou^d in some Saints, and are needed of some other, as has been showed.
Therefore, between Saints there is Communion in respect of them.

The Minister page 558. David was a man full of grace according to the heart of
God etc. and so did not need the superabondant satisfactions of others*
Wherefore in respect of this Communion he did not rejoice, saying, Psalm. 118. I
am, O Lord, partaker of all that fear thee. Answer. Suppose David did not need
the satisfaction of other Saints, yet he might rejoice in that he was a member
of the house of Saints, who may participate of the superabounda^t satisfactions
of others, if they need them, and that he did not need them he knew not
certainly after he had committed the two enormous sins.

To the place of S. Paul (1. Coloss. 22.) I joy in my sufferings for you, and I
make full the things that want of the sufferings of Christ's in my flesh, for
his Body which is the Church. The Minister page 559. Christ's passions are of
two kinds, some personal and in his own flesh, some by simpathy and
compassion of others. The first are satisfactory, and S. Paul supplied not, or
perfected not them, for then Christ's sufferings were imperfect. The second are
Exemplare, Purgative, Probatiue, and for the edifying of the Church, these S.
Paul did accomplish and supply. Answer. To show the weakness of your Reply I
ask, whether Christ's sufferings on the Cross as examples were imperfect or
not? If you say they were imperfect, and perfectible by Creatures, you
blaspheme: and also you may as truly say, his satisfaction was imperfect and
suppliable by the addition of Saints. If you say, his sufferings, as examples,
were perfect and full, and yet were supplied by Saint Paul, why may not the
same sufferings, as satisfactions, be supplied by S. Paul, without being
imperfect? For Saint Paul is said to supply the sufferings of Christ as
satisfactory, not because they were not of infinite value, but because God will
have the satisfactions of his servants to be joined with Christ's, that Christ's
may have their full effect, even to the cancelling of the debt of temporal
pain.

Minister page 564. The indulgences Tertullian opposed were the same whereof S.
Cyprian speaks, Epist. 10.11.12. to wit, relaxation of Canonical censures
and pennances to notorious sinners, at the request of martyrs living in prison.
Answer. It is true, Tertullian being an Heretic, opposed such indulgences as
S. Cyprian does mention, as allowed in the Catholic Church. But that these
indulgences were only relaxations of Canonical pennances and censures, you
say, but show not; yea that the pennances released were required in foro
conscientiae, to satisfy Gods anger, appears by S. Cyprian his words in that
tenth Epistle by you mentioned, Deo patri misericordi satisfacere pro delictis
suis poenitentiam agentes possunt. And that penitents to make this full
satisfaction unto God, and so obtain pardon, were helped by the suffrages of
Martyrs, the same Saint Cyprian does affirm, Epist. 13. They who have received
bills from the Martyrs, to be released of their Penance, may by the
PREROGATIVE OF MARTYRS BE HELPED WITH GOD. And Epist. 14. They who bring the
Bills from the Martyrs, may by THEIR HELP BE AIDED IN THEIR SINS. This
Catholic practice, of pardoning unto Penitents the reserved temporal penalty
by the application of Martyrs suffrages and satisfactions, to have been impugned
by Tertullian, in his heresy, is manifest by his making the Penitent in an
heretical humor, to say to the Martyr who applied his satisfaction for his
pardon: If thou be a sinner, thou need satisfaction and pardon thy self;
How then can thine oil of satisfaction be sufficient both for thee and me?
Also the Martyrs, that sued for pardon to be given to the penitents, he
accuses of Prodigality therein, which is a sign that Martyrs bestowed
something that was their own upon penitents, that they by virtue thereof might
be pardoned; which cannot be any thing besides their own sufferings, according
as they were satisfactory for sin.

Minister page 565. The adversary is so far from being able to prove Popes
pardons in Tertullians days, That he cannot prove they had any being in the
days of Peter Lombard, or Hugo Victor. Answer. Still you show your self to
be a bold affirmer about things you know not. For what more evident falsehood
then this you vent, That Indulgences had not any being in the days of Peter
Lombard? The Waldensian Sect was in being in the days of Peter Lombard, (as
does witness Illyricus in catalog. Test. colum. 1498.) and they (as the same
Illyricus does record ibid. colum. 1501. and 1511.) contemned and derided the
indulgences of the Church, which they would not have done, but that they saw
the same had some being and use then in the Church. Pope Paschall the 2. some
years before Peter Lombard, granted the Indulgences of 40. days to all that
were present at the Lateran General Council kept in his time, as writes
Vrspergens. Chron. an. 1106. Urban the second, in the year 1096. before Peter
Lombard was borne, in the General Council of Cleremont in France, granted a
Plenary Indulgence unto all that should go to fight for the recovery of the Holy
Land: yea Leo the third, almost four hundred years before Peter Lombard, to
wit eight hundred years ago (as writes S. Lutgerus in vita Sancti Switberti
c. 9.) did at the request of Charles the Great dedicate the temple of our
Blessed Lady of Aquisgra^e donans eam multis indulgentijs, bestowing many
Indulgences upon it. Moreover: The Pope (says he) in France consecrated many
Churches every where granting many indulgences. And again: The Pope granted
special Indulgences unto the said Church for all the faithful, that should
keep the feast of Saint Switbert, and come on his day to hear divine service.
Behold how frequent and ordinary a thing it was eight hundred years ago, for
the Pope to give out Indulgences, which you say had not any being in the days
of Peter Lombard. Not only S. Thomas, and many Catholics write, that Saint
Gregory the Great before the year six hundred, granted Indulgences, but also
Protestants, as Friar Bale Act. Romans Pontif. printed at Basil Anno 1558.
Gregory (says he) did confirm the devotion of people in visiting images, by
granting them indulgences. And again: He was the first Pope that did grant
Indulgences unto the^ that should upon certain days visit Churches. And
though we cannot directly prove that such general Indulgences for all the
faithful, were used before Saint Gregory, yet it is not probable that holy
Pope would use it without the example of his predecessors; yea had this
practice been then novel the same would have been noted. But whenever the
use of such Indulgences began, certain it is, that Personal Indulgences
granted unto particular persons, upon particular examination of their cause,
were ever in use since the Apostles time, as does appear by the former
testimony of S. Cyprian and Tertullian.

Minister page 566. The holy Scripture teaches expressly, that all spiritual
redemption is immediately wrought by the blood of Christ, who purged sin by
himself, Hebr. 1.3. But our Adversaries restrain this, and the like place, to
the stayne and eternal guilt of sin, saying, that the guilt of temporal pain
is redeemed by Christ only mediatly, by the satisfaction of Saints. Which is
against the Apostle, Coloss. 2.12. affirming, that Christ blotted out the
handwriting of decrees (contained in the Law) that was against us, and that by
himself; but the temporary punishment is contained within the latitude of the
law. Leuit. 26.14. Answer. You do not understand the Doctrine of your
Adversaries, or else wittingly misrelate the same. For Catholics distinguish
the merit of Christ's redemption, and the conditions by means of which, the
same is applied unto particular persons. All spiritual gifts of this life and
of the future, all remissions of sin either mortal or venial, all
releasement of punishment either eternal or temporal, is wrought by way of
redemption immediately, and only by the blood and Passion of our Savior. But
the condition which God requires, that the same be applied unto particular
persons, is not only the suffering of Christ, nor is the same kind of condition
required in respect of every grace. Some be given upon condition of mere
mercy, some not otherwise then according to men's works. The gift of justifying
grace is applied unto men by the virtue of Sacramtts through Gods only mercy,
the sinner by faith, penance, and contrition disposing his soul for the
reception thereof. But the grace and gift of eternal life, purchased by
Christ his blood, is not applied unto men through Gods only mercy, but by merit
of Good works, done by the power of grace; by works I say, so good and
gracious, as God may according to them give eternal life, as a crown,
proceeding as a just Judge, as the Scripture teaches 2. Tim. 4.8. and in a
thousand other places.

In the same manner, the remission of the stayne of mortal sin and of the
eternal guilt, purchased by the death of Christ, is applied unto particular
persons by mere grace, by virtue of the Sacraments, and the sinners humble
preparation to receive the same. But the releasement of Te^porall punishment
reserved, is not given of mere mercy, but penitents being now Gods Children,
after the gracious pardon of the sin and eternal guilt, must, to obtain
full remission, do fructus dignos poenitentiae, Matthew. 3.8. Luc. 3.8. condign
works of penance, satisfactions, compensations just, worthy, condign, equal
unto the quantity of the reserved sin, or penalty, as has been proved by the
Fathers. Hence, as eternal Glory though it be an effect of Christ's merits
only, yet is it not given but unto such works as God may as a just Judge reward
therewith; so likewise, remission of Temporal pain though purchased immediately
by the merits of Christ only, yet is not applied unto the penitent Saints,
without satisfaction equal and condign, either done by the penitent himself,
or applied unto him out of the superabundant satisfactions of others, by the
virtue of Communion of Saints.

Minister page 567. Daniel a sanctified person and a Prophet, able to
communicate his satisfactions, praying for the remission of the eternal and
temporal guilt of sin, presents not his own satisfactions to God, nor yet the
super abundant merits and satisfactions of any Patriarchs, but rests wholly
upon the free mercy of God, and the future satisfafactions of the Messiah to
come, Daniel. 9.7. Answer. First, your argument, Daniel in this prayer did not
offer unto God the superabundant satisfactions of Saints, Ergo they may not be
offered, is idle. For though there be superabundant satisfactions of Saints,
yet it is not necessary that in every prayer we obsecrate God by them.
Secondly, you cannot prove that Daniel did not offer superabundant Saintly
satisfactions. If you say the Scripture does not mention any such oblation, and
therefore he made no such oblation, your argument is reproved by your own
assertion. Your self say that Daniel did obsecrate God, not only by his
mercies, but also by the future satisfaction of the Messiah to come, and yet
these future satisfactions be not mentioned by the Scripture as any part of his
prayer, but only Gods mercyes, not for our own righteousness, but for thy great
mercyes. Why then may not we say, Daniel alleged the superabundant
satisfactions of Saints, though the Scripture make not mention that he did?
Thirdly, no doubt Daniell was of the same Religion that the three Children his
companions were, who praying for the remission of their sins, and of their
whole people, offered unto God the merits of the Patriarchs, saying; For
Abraham thy beloved, for Isaac thy servant, for Israel thine holy One. (Daniel
3.35.)

The Minister page 567. lin. 23. being angry at the Jesuit that he does so
slight the Protestant arguments in this point, says: If the Jesuit be so
rigide as to admit no argument on our part which may receive any colorable
answer, I entreat him to deliver so much as one probable Argument (I will not
require a Demonstration) that the Roman Bishops have power over the souls of
Purgatory. Answer. When you shall find in the Jesuits writings that the Pope
has power over the souls of Purgatory, or can by way of authority dispose of
the^, I will promise you that he shall bring ten thousand demo^strations in
proof thereof. The mean while the world may see your vanity and desire to
delude them. You know that the Jesuit can bring evident proofs, for every
point of his Religion, and therefore you charge him to prove, what is no part
of his faith, and to bring probable arguments for that doctrine which he does
not hold as probable, to wit, that the Pope can by way of power and authority
deliver souls out of Purgatory.

The Pope by the power of his Keys, may grant pardon unto the living, out of
the treasury of Christ his satisfaction, and the satisfactions of the living
may be applied to relieve the dead, as the Fathers most clearly and uniformly
teach. But the Keys of Peter, can only bind and loose upon earth, and absolve
from sin and penalty the living. Ministers when they dispute with Catholics,
be like unto a man that sits on thorns, so pricked and urged with the
euidencyes of the present arguments, as they would feign be remoouing to some
other Controversy they care not to what. Thus you, in this place, are so galled
to see your vanity displayed by the Jesuit, as you wish your self even in
Purgatory to be rid of the Jesuits urging. ( page 563. lin. 23.) I dare say had
his Majesty proposed the question, Whether some souls be purged by Temporal
pain after this life, their state being releeuable by the suffrages of the
living; the Jesuit would have so scorched your Infidelity with the clear
testimonies of Scriptures and Fathers, as you would have run as fast from
Purgatory, as you now would feign be in it. Whether the Pope have authority in
Purgatory or no, you need not greatly care, being sure, believing as you do,
never to come thither, nor after death, within the precincts of Peter's
Dominion, who bears the keys of the Kingdom of heaven. No doubt you are to
fall into a lower place, except you repent of that heavy sin so clearly
discovered in this your Reply, to impugn known truths, and to falsify our
Authors of purpose, to make the doctrine of the Church seem odious. Of which
damnable and hardly remissible crime, I beseech sweet Jesus of his infinite
mercy to give you grace to be purged in this present life, that so there may be
some hope you may be saved, at the least by Purgatory in the next.


not for eternal, but only temporal Punishment. The Ministers railing
Arguments, against the former doctrine, censured.


I shall not need particularly to refell the vulgar objections against this
doctrine, all which proceed upon mistaking, and impugn what we never dreamed
off. They prove that Christ only dyed for the world, and redeemed mankind, and
not any Saint: who doubts thereof? That we are sanctified and washed from the
stayne of sin by the blood of the Lamb, not of any Saint. We confess it.
They bring the testimonies of Saint Leo and of Saint Augustine, that the Saints
received Crowns of God, gave not Crowns unto others, but only Christ: we
never did, nor will deny it. That only in Christ we dye to sin, and are
raised again soul and body unto eternal life; we never taught the Contrary:
For the satisfaction of Saints have not virtue to redeem the world, nor to
satisfy for the guilt of sin, nor to take men out of the power of darkness,
nor to justify souls by infusion of grace, nor to purchase for men Crowns of
glory, nor to raise men from life to death; But only they are auaylable unto
one transitory effect, which men might (were they fervent) obtain by their
own industry, joined with divine grace, to wit, the Remission of temporal
pain; which virtue also comes from the meritts of Christ, and his most
precious blood, in, and by the satisfactions of Saints applied to work the
aforesaid temporal releasement: from which temporal servitude, the Children
of God, may through his gracious assistance, by good works redeem themselves,
or by satisfactions of their fellow-Cittyzens and Saints be redeemed, though
this temporary Redemption compared with the redemption of Christ, deserves not
that title.

THE NINTH POINT
The opinion of deposing Kings, and giving away their Kingdoms by Papal
power, whether directly, or indirectly.

THIS Controversy was not handled by the Jesuit, for the Reasons delivered in
the Preface; nor is there any new cause given to speak in confirmation of our
doctrine, the Minister not having brought against the same any Argument. His
whole drift in this Point is to slander Jesuits, to cavil and sicophantize,
which being his natural Talent, now ready to conclude, he is more sharp
therein, as Motion according to Nature is still more vehement toward the end.
I will set down and briefly examine what he says, reducing all to five
Assaults, in which the Reader shall see his Boldness in uttering, and Weakness
in proving the most odious slanders, that may be vented by spleen and malice.

The Ministers fond Cavil, That Jesuits honor not the King, as Soueraygne.
FIRST, whereas the Jesuit says; Regal and Papal, be two powers instituted of
God, both soueraygne and supreme each in his kind, both Venerable and Honored
by me in the inmost affections of soul; after the triuiall trish-trash of a
thousand times confuted objections, against the Popes spiritual Supremacy,
thus you write page 570. in fine. Your Protestation, that you honor Regal and
Papal Dignity, must be understood Iesuitically, with mental limitation, to
wit, that you honor the Pope as an earthly God, yea so far, as that if he
lead you to Hell, yea are ready to follow him. distinct. 40. can. Si Papa. But
you honor the King as the Popes Vassal. Matthew. Paris. in Henr. 3. page 844.
Nonne Rex Anglorum noster est Vassallus?

This is your first Assault, so strong, as if bold slaundering, and idle
arguing may win the field, the day must be yours. You lay two crimes to the
Jesuits charge. First, that he is ready to obey and follow the Pope though the
Pope lead him to Hell. Can any Censure be more unchristian? The Jesuits
suffering persecution for his Religion, may convince any reasonable man that he
is not so desperate, as to run for any man's pleasure wittingly to Hell; nor
were he so mad, is he such a fool, as to go thither disgraced and persecuted
with the Pope. Were he so minded, he would rather go against his conscience to
please the King, whereby he might perchance get a Deanery, or some rich
Benefice, and so go to Hell with Wife, Children, Servants, worldly Contents,
merrily as you do.

But what strong reason have you to judge so strangely of the Jesuit? Marry,
The Canon Si Papa d. 40. says, If the Pope by being of bad life, and negligent
in his office, draw thousands to hell, yet let no man presume to correct him
(to wit iuridically, by deposing him) except also he do deuiate from the Faith.
This is the Canon; which supposed, your discourse has this force and form.
The Jesuit receaues the Canon Si Papa: But the Canon Si Papa says, the Pope
(not being an Heretic) may not be deposed for scandalous life, though he lead
by his example thousands to hell: Ergo, the Jesuit is ready to follow and obey
the Pope, though he lead him to Hell. It is hard to say, whether your judging
be more void of Charity, or your arguing of Reason. I perceive, if we fear
your censuring, we must not mantayne, that the King is not to be deposed for
scandalous life, though he lead thousands to Hell: For if we do, you will
thence conclude, that we are desperate, and ready to follow and obey the King,
though he lead us to hell: So wise a disputant and Censurer you are.

But let us hear your second crimination, and your proof thereof. The Jesuit
says, I honor Regal Power, as in his kind Supreme and Sovereign: that is,
(say you) as the Popes Vassal. A goodly Comment upon the Jesuits Text; what
warrant have you so to expound? Forsooth, Matthew Paris writes, that Pope
Innocent the third said of our King Henry the third, Is not the King of England
our Vassal? What is this to the Jesuit? Is he bound to believe every tale of
Matthew Paris his writing? Though had you any skill in Histories you might know,
that the Pope said so of that King, not because he thought that Kings be by
divine Institution his Vassals in temporal Affairs, but because that King had
done unto him voluntary Homage for his Kingdom. For this Henry the third, was
Son of our King John, who gave his Kingdom in vassalladge unto this Pope
Innocent, to protect the same from the incursion of the French, as he did.
Hence at his Coronation being the^ in his Nonage, says Matthew Paris, fecit
homagium Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, and Innocentio Papae, he did homage to the
holy Roman Church, and unto Pope Innocent. After ward coming to riper age, in
the 29. year of his Reign, he sent an Embassadge of four Noble men,
together with his Attorney William Powicke, to the Council of Lions, and
unto Pope Innocent the 4. to contradict the said donation of his Father,
alleging many reasons, (says Walsingam Ypodigm. Neust. Anno 1245.) that the
King could not make his Realm Vassal unto any, without the full consent
thereof. The Pope answered, Rem indigere morosa consideratione, and so the
matter rested. Now I pray you consider, how fond, and far fetched your Discourse
is. Pope Innocent (as Matthew Paris reports) four hundred years ago, said of
a King that had done voluntary homage unto him, He is our Vassal: Ergo the
Jesuit does not honor the King, as Sovereign in his kind: Or, Ergo, his
saying, I honor the King as Sovereign, is to be understood, as the Popes
Vassal?

The Minister his fond proofs of his Slander, that Jesuits hold singular
Opinions to the prejudice of Kings.
YOUR second Assault, is to prove that Jesuits hold peculiar opinions
prejudicial unto Regal authority, which no other Catholics but themselves
mantayne. This you prove by six Arguments, so seely and fond, as no man would
have mentioned them to this purpose, but only your self.

First, Jesuits (say you page 573.) are taxed, and censured by many of their
own Part for singularity of opinions. This is your Argument in so many words.
I pray you if any Doctrines* prejudicial unto Princes, be singular unto
Jesuits, that is, held by the consent of Jesuits, and by Jesuits only, why do
you not name these opinions what they are? Why do you dwell upon generalyties,
according to the custom of cosening Companions, Dolosus versatur in
Generalibus? Why, but because you know, that descending unto particulars, your
falsehood would presently be displaied? Hence you talk in the air, and in
effect thus you discourse. I know there be certain opinions mayntayned
singularly by Jesuits against Royal Soueraignety, what they are I do not
know. For they be written in books, as invisible as was our Church before
Luther, no where to be found, but in the Globe of the Moon, and are no ways
to be read, but by the light thereof.

The opinion for which some Catholics at whom you glance (as appears by your
margent) have taxed Jesuits of singularity is, that God has assured Prescience
of things contingent, not only of which shall in time actually happen, but
also of what, upon suppositions which never were, might have been. For example
God knows certainly whether these conditional propositions be true or false:
If King Henry the eight had never seen Anne Bullen, England had been
Catholic at this day: If Queen Mary of Scotland had fled into France when
she came into England, she had recovered her Kingdom against the Rebels: If
the miracles Christ did in Iewry had been done in Tyrus and Sidon, those Cities
would have done penance. This doctrine some Deuines mislike, and say the same
was first invented by Jesuits. Which if it be true, then have Protestants done
Jesuits wrong, that relate this very doctrine of Gods conditional Prescience,
as the doctrine of their Reformed Gospel. [ Field of the Church l. 3. c. 23.
page 122.] But, I pray you, what is this to your Scope? The doctrine, that God
knows the state of things conditionally contingent, what makes it against the
Sovereignty of Princes? Do you not see, you are ridiculous?

Secondly, If Jesuits be not singular in their doctrines, to the depression of
Kings, wherefore was Jesuit Suarez his Book, contra sectam Anglicanam,
condemned at Paris in France, and burnt by the hand of the Hangman? Answer. I
likewise demand of you, if Jesuit Suarez his book be prejudicial to Princely
authority, why is the same allowed in all other Catholic kingdoms; so as the
King by his solicitations could not get the same to be condemned? Do not other
kingdoms know the Catholic Extent of Royal Authority, zealously mantaining
the Sovereignty thereof? How can that doctrine be singular of Jesuits, unto which
Bishops, secular Doctors, and Religious of other Orders have set their names
by way of Approbation, as is to be seen in the beginning of that Treatise? And
if your Argument be good, Jesuit Suarez his book was in France burnt by the
hand of the Hangman: Ergo, the Order of the Jesuits holds doctrine to the
prejudice of Princes; surely this Argument is strong, and unanswerable:
Minister Paraeus his book was in London publicly burnt by the hand of the
Hangman, by Order of the King, wherein no Papist had his hand: Ergo, the
Protestant Ministry holds doctrines pernicious unto the State of Princes.

The third Argument: Wherefore were Jesuits banished out of the Dominions of
the Venetians, professing the Roman Faith, if they are guilty of no singularity
about the matter of Regal, and Civil Authority? Answer. Why are Jesuits
permitted, desired, and sought for by all other Catholic Kingdoms, and States
of the world, if they be guilty of singularity against Regal, and Civil
Authority? Should one dispute in this sort: Wherefore was Chrysostom [Socrat.
l. 6. c. 26. and alij.] banished out of the Catholic City of Constantinople
by the Catholic Emperor Arcadius, at the instance of the Catholic
Empress, in a Council of Catholic Bishops, but that he was guilty of
treason against Royal Authority? What would a learned Answerer say? He would
laugh at the Disputants folly, and tell him, that Kings and States may be put
into displeasure and Passion against the Ministers of Gods holy Word, and so
banish them their Dominions, not only for singularity against Civil Authority,
but for other reasons, as for their over zealous inueighing against vicious
life, and constant crossing of their disordinate humors. I could bring many
examples of just, and holy men banished by Catholics, yea by pious and godly
Kings, and States upon mistakings, suspicions, false informations. S.
Athanasius, that mirror of sanctity and learning, unto whom the Church of God
is more beholding then to the whole world which then lived besides, was he not
for suspicions about temporal Affairs, banished by Constantine the Great, the
first Christian Emperor, the pattern of Religious Princes? [ Ruffin. l. 1. c.
17.] God permits such trialls to fall on his Servants for the exercise of their
Patience, until time discover the truth, which being sufficiently cleared, if
men still remain obdurate, his Justice will not sleep.

The fourth Argument. Mariana the Jesuits work, de Institutione Principis,
wherein he maintayneth Regicide, is extant in many hands. Answer. The example
of Mariana proves not, that Jesuits hold singular opinions against others, but
only that Mariana was singular against the rest of his Order, which through the
oversight of Reuisors passed to the print. A thing that may sometimes happen;
which to prevent the General of the Jesuits gave that severe Order about
reuiewing of Books in that kind, which the Jesuit has set down in his
Answer. That Jesuit Mariana was singular against the rest, appears, in that
he was confuted by name of some of his own Order for this doctrine, even before
the censure of Paris. [ See the letter of Cotton.] And if you will allow,
against the common Proverb, One swallow makes not a Summer, that the error of
one be sufficient be condemn a whole Society, then the Minister Paraeus his
Work, wherein he mantaynes Deposition, and Regicide, must make all Ministers
guilty, specially seeing not one of them wrote against Paraeus his book, before
the same was publickely burnt in London.

Nor was Mariana his doctrine in the behalf of the Popes, as you often
ignorantly suppose, but of the Commo^wealths Power against Tyrants. A Doctrine
which Jesuits condemn, but Protestants commonly follow. I could name twenty of
their Authors, that peremptorily affirm what Mariana did only doubtingly
propose, yea much more. For do not Protestants teach [ See the book of
Dangerous positions lib. 1. c. 4. and l. 2. c. 1.] That Judges ought by the law
of God so summon Princes before them, for their crimes, and to proceed against
them, as against all other offenders: That it is lawful to kill wicked Kings
and Tyrants: That God to the people has given the sword, from which no person
King, Queen, Emperor is exempt: Being an Idolater he must die the death? An
hundred the like Theorems of your Gospel and Gospellers, could I allege to
stop your mouth, the opinion which Mariana did doubtfully insinuate being far
short of these horrible doctrines your Ministry does resolutely define.

The fifth Argument. In this kingdom, the seditious and murtherous attempts of
Campian, Persons, Garnet etc. remain to this hour in bleeding memory.
Answer. The memory of your cruelty toward Fa. Campian makes Christian hearts
bleed, that such barbarous Inhumanity should be used by men that bear the name
of Christians. You condemned him who was a man (to say nothing more) civil,
mild, courteous, and completely learned, Vir suauis and politissimus [Cambd.
Elizab. p. 209.] for meeting together with others to plot the Q death, upon a
day when they were a thousand miles asunder the one from the other, as it was
there proved at the Bar. The Queen ashamed thereof, after his condemnation,
would by no means permit his execution, but you by your importunity at last
forced her to yield to the murdering of this Innocent Jesuit, as the Scribes
and Pharisees won Pilate to deliver unto their bloody pleasure our Savior
Jesus, as your own Historiographer does testifye, Importunis precibus euicta
permisit. [Camden. Elizab. page 326.] Out of this your Caluinian immense desire
of innocent blood, you never ceased to vent bloody fables, and to father them
upon Father Persons, but never was, nor could any be proved against him, nor
against Father Garnet, but barely the hearing in Confession of the barbarous
attempt of others.

But suppose your Antecede^t were true about these three Jesuits, how foolish
is your Inference? Some Jesuits have gone about murtherous attempts: Ergo, The
Order of the Jesuits mantayne singular opinions against Regal authority? If
your argument be of good Consequence, then this is of necessary importance:
Many Ministers have been hanged in England for most bloody, and barbarous
murders, yea commonly at the Assisses every year some go to preach from the
Gallows. Ergo, the English Ministry holds singular opinions about the
lawfulnes of murder? Can you prove that one of the Society of Jesus, spread
over the world, was ever executed for any such crime by some Catholic Prince?
If you could, how would you insult?

So the vanity of your fifth Argument being apparent, let us co^template the
solidity of your last. Lastly (say you) Jesuits here among us at this day be
prime Oppugners and Disswaders of the Oath of Allegiance, and it wou^deth them
to the gall, that secular Priests propugne the lawfullnes thereof. Answer. That
Oath contaynes not only Temporal Allegiance, which Jesuits are most willing to
swear, but also the Abnegation of the Catholic Faith, to wit, of the
Authority given unto Peter in the Gospel, deuolued by course to his
successor. What you say, that Jesuits herein be singular, that secular Priests
propugne the lawfullnes of this Oath; their writings, their deeds, their deaths
testify the contrary. Which slander they would not let pass with silence, did
they not know your word to be of no credit: yea by their experience of your
Brother, they be well assured, that the venting of impudent falsehoods comes to
you by kind.

The Ministers fondnes in Cauilling at the Jesuits words, about the Temporal
Soueraignity of Popes.
IN your third Assault, you undertake to sift and winnow, (as the Devil does
Gods Elect) these words of the Jesuit, I disclayme from enlarging the Popes
power over the Temporalityes of Princes by any singular opinion of mine, or
more then the definitions of Counsels, and consent of Deuines does force me
to hold. Thus you plead against him page 174. Mark here, You that shall
read this; A sly Fox that would seem a sheep, and yet his tail bewrayes
him, (...). Though a Jesuit can couch well when need is, yet he sometimes
breaks out at unawares. Does his Majesty suspect, or enquire whether the
Jesuit hold an opinion different from his follows, and personal to himself?
These words by any opinion of Mine, implies the Individual only; and so, if
he have but a few, yea any two, Mariana and Bosius, this may hold in
Grammatical sense. Thus you, thinking you have showed your self a witty
Cauiller, and hoping for applause you call men's eyes upon you with Mark here.
Indeed you have played the Fox, but that foolish Fox, which (as I have heard
one relate that saw it) biting at an oyster that gaped, the oyster closing
caught him by the tongue, by which tied fast, he stood a spectacle of laughter:
For let us discuss the matter. You say the words of the Jesuit, By no
singular opinions of mine, imply the Indiuidual only. Be it so, what harm in
that? Marry, the Foxes-tayle bewrayes him, the Jesuit has broken out at
unawares. Into what has he broken out? Forsooth, he says, he will not enlarge
the Popes power by opinions personal to himself. Is this the Foxes-tayles
whereof you cry to your Readers Mark here? Verily, you deserve a flapp with a
Foxe-tayle for your discovery thereof. Oh, but the King did not suspect the
Jesuit of personal opinions in the behalf of the Pope. Are you acquaynted
with the Kings secret thoughts and suspicions? Suppose he did not suspect, what
treason was it to say, I will not by singular opinions enlarge Papal power?
Yea, but this notwithstanding, he may enlarge the Popes power if some few join
with him. You that cry, Mark here, do you not Mark that the Jesuit foresaw
this Cavil, and to prevent the same said, by no singular opinions of Mine, nor
more then the definition of Counsels, or consent of Deuines shall force me to
hold? Is the opinion of Mariana, and Bosius, or of some few Deuines against the
rest, the definition of Counsels, and the consent of Deuines? Now are you not
caught by the tongue? What more can you say to hyde your witless inuiting men
to note the wittines of your Cavil with Mark here? What may men Mark here?
If you were in the Jesuits case, you would not stick to say, Not a Foxes-tayle
in my speech, but an Asseshead in the Adversaries carping thereat.

But even Popish Synods (say you) are not far to seek which have exalted the
Popes Temporal Sovereignty, as far over Princes, as Heaven is above Earth?
How prove you this? You say in the margent, Bellarminus contra Barclaium
enumerat sex Synodos: Bellarmine numbreth six Synodes in his book against
Barclay. Well, let him number twenty; what then? Does Bellarmine say they make
for the Popes Temporal Sovereignty? No, but that they prove the spiritual
Sovereignty of Peter, deuolued by course to his present Successor; which not
any Roman, or Christian Synod, but Christ Jesus himself exalted as high as
Heaven, putting all things whatsoever upon earth, under the same: To thee I
will give the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, whatsoever thou shall bind upon
earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth,
shall be loosed in heaven. Matthew. 16.

Yet again, your feeble wit would feign second the strength of your malice
against the Jesuit. You say, Notwithstanding this Protestation he may defend
the Popes Temporal Dominion, and so close in opinion with Pope Hilbebrand, and
Boniface the eight, with Baronius, Bosius, Aluarus Pelagius, with Augustinus ab
Ancona, with Panormitan, yea and with the Devil himself. Answer. It is very
hard for any sort of men to stick closer to the Devil, then you of Luthers
generation; seeing, this your Sire says of himself, Noctu Diabolus mihi
accubare solet, propior etiam quam mea Catharina. The Devil lies with me in
the night, nearer unto me the^ even my Kate. [ Colloq. de lege and Euangel.
fol. 124. vel 158.] Your selves write of him, Lutherus a Diabolo doctus and
institutus Missam abrogauit: Luther taught, and instructed by the Devil, did
abrogate the Mass. [ Hospin. Histor. Sacram. part. Altera. fol. 131.] Which
History of his conversion from the Mass by Devilish Arguments, the same
Luther has written [ Luther. Tom. 7. Wittemb. An. 1558. de Missa priuata etc.
fol. 228.] even with his own Protestant holy hand, wherewith also, as himself
does testify, he did eat more then a bushel of salt with this his Familiar. [
Luther. Conc. in Domin. Reminiscere. Wittemberg. impress. An. 1523. fol. 19.]
So that it is small discretion in you to scoff at us about closing in opinion
with the Devil.

I add, that the Reader may see your jests to be still as sottish as they are
splenefull, if it be true, as it is most true, that Damones credunt and
contremiscunt [Iacob 2.19.] Devils believe the truth and tremble, it is no
fault to close in opinion with the Devil, but to close with the Devil in
lying, as you do even in this place. For Gregory the 7. and Boniface the 8.
teach not that Popes have Te^porall dominion or Soueraingty over the whole
world, but only the power of the keys, in which Authority is inuolued to
unloose all earthly bands, contrary unto the Salvation of Souls.

The Ministers miserable Apology for Protestants.
YOUR fourth Assault, is against the Jesuits saying, The Catholic doctrine is
not so prejudicial unto States as is the Protestant, held both by Lutherans and
Caluinists expressed in their writings, whereof we have in this age but over
evident and lamentable examples, to the World and your Majesty not unknown.
Thus you write page 577. Is the wit of a Jesuit grown so barren? Have you no
other evasion, but by recrimination, and that impertinent? For as concerning
your Flim-flam of Protestants, both Lutherans and Caluinists, I Answer; His
Majesty has observed by long experience, that it cannot enter into any true
Protestants heart, upon any occasion whatsoever to lift up their heads against
the Lords Anointed. Thus you. Where I might say with S. Augustine, O stultitia
hominis cogitare se dictorem, and neminem contradictorem! O the folly of a man,
to say what he will, never thinking he shall be gaynsayd, and hear what he
would not. For did you think men would ponder your sayings, and gaynsay them
finding them false, could you speak such palpable untruths as you do? A true
hearted Protestant cannot lift up his head against the Lords Anointed upon any
occasion whatsoever. Mark the CANNOT of the Protestant Impeccability. They
were wont to teach they could not keep so much as one of the Divine
Commandments; now they are so holy, as a thought cannot enter into their heart
to lift up their heads against the Divine Precept of Honoring the Lords
Anointed.

In Logic, as a pattern of a ridiculous Answerer, they bring this example,
as if one should say, De possibili nego, de facto concedo, I deny the thing to
be possible, yet I grant it to have been done. I see no remedy but you must be
forced to this Answer; For, that a true hearted Protestant upon any occasion
whatsoever, lift up his head against the Lords Anointed, you say is not
possible: yet I hope you be not so impudent against the knowledge of mankind,
but you will confess that they have often lifted up their head^ and hands
against their Sovereigns, the proper miracle of your Gospel, to done things
that cannot be done. I pray you, they that first planted the Gospel in
Scotland, and the Ministers of England in the days of Queen Elizabeth, were
they not true-harted Protestants? Was not the Kings mother the Lords Anointed?
by byrth-right a Sovereign Princess? Did you not lift up your heads against
her? I cry you mercy, you did not lift up you heads against her, but your axe
against her head, having first lifted up your hands, your arms, your swords
to deprive her of her Crown, to cast her from her Kingdom. Look upon all
Countries of Europe where Protestants live under Catholic Princes, if you
find one Nation, or Province of them, that within these last seven years has
not been in open Rebellion against their Catholic Sovereigns, I will grant
you the Question, that you Protestants are impeccable, that bad thoughts can
not enter into your hearts.

But the King has had long experience, that at least the Protestants of
England will not lift up their heads against the Lords Anointed upon any
occasion whatsoever. I pray you, what experience has his Majesty had, that in
the occasion he should deprive you of your Deaneryes, take from you the
Church-vsurped Livings, put you in prison, set up a Religion that would not
endure wiuing-preachers; what experience, I say, long or short, great or
little has his Majesty had, that in this, and the like occasions you will not
rebel, lift up your heads, hands, swords against him? yea if you be able, lay
the axe on his neck, as you did on his Mothers? When you seemed to have some
little cause of iealousy that his Majesty might grant some Conniuency unto
Catholics, was not there a Minister found, that in pulpit did publicly
preach, that in Case the King should turn Papist, Ministers may depose him?

But alas, A Jesuits wit, you say, is grown very barren, he has no other
evasion, but this Flim-flam about the Rebellious Spirit and doctrine of
Protestants. No other evasion? Yea he has otherwise confuted your false
calumniations, and clearly laid open your idle Arguments. And the doctrine
taught by Protestants, that the people has the sword, from which the King is
not exempt; If he be wicked, he must dye the death; That, Judges ought to call
Kings to the Bar, proceed against them for ordinary Crimes, as much as
against other malefactors; That, the people makes Kings, and may again
unking them at their pleasure, as easily as a man recalls his letters of Proxy;
These doctrins I say be they Flim-flams, nothing pertinent unto Kings? I
perceive you would have Kings sleep in security, and not fear your attempts,
that so (if they anger you) you may do with their Heads, as Iahel did with the
head of sleeping Sisera. Iudic. c. 4.

The Ministers Cavil against the Jesuits special Vow of Obedience to the Pope.
YOUR fifth and last Assault is an often repeated Calumniation, that Jesuits
cannot be Loyal unto Kings, because they are bound by special Vow unto Popes.
Hence to prove, that Jesuits hold singular opinions to enlarge the Popes Power,
you say (page 573.) That Jesuits more the^ other Romists are obliged by
special Vow to mantayne Papal dignity. And page 579. If his Holiness send
another wind, you which have Vowed strict Obedience unto the Pope, must turn
your sails, your Votes and Prayers must be bound to execute the Popes pleasure
(in killing the King.) And again page 577. What safety and security can
Princes enjoy by relying upon such servants, which stand Centinell upon an
hours warning, to follow their greater Master? If your Masters hand cast
Cross instead of Pile, what shall we expect from such Gamesters, Quibus Ludus
sunt Capita and Diademata Regum?

This is your Cavil, uttered with all possible gall, which yet is cleared by
the words in your margent out of the Bull of Confirmation of the Institute of
the Jesuits by Pope Paul the third. You cite them in latin as against Jesuits,
to delude fools. But you English them not, as knowing they tend to the credit
of Jesuits, and the discovery of your slander. These they be: We judge i^
expedient for the greater devotion to the Sea Apostolic, and more full
abnegation of our own self wills and pleasures, that the Professed of this
Society, besides the Common band of three Vows, be further tied by special
Vow, so that whatsoever the Roman Bishop for the time being shall command
PERTINENT UNTO THE SALVATION OF SOVLES, and PROPAGATION OF THE FAITH, they
shall be bound to execute the same presently, without tergiuersation and
excuse, whether THEY SHALL BE SENT UNTO TVRKES, or unto INFIDELS, even unto
those which are commonly called THE INDYES, or unto HERETICS, or SCHISMATIKS.

These be the words, containing the matter of the Jesuits special Vow. By
which it appears, that their Vow is not to enlarge Papal power, but to
propagate the Christian Name, to find out, not new opinions to put men under
the Pope, but new Nations, never heard of before, to exalt the^ to Heaven, by
teaching them the saving Truth. Nor are Jesuits bound by this Vow to obey the
Pope absolutely in all things, but in things that are according to their
Institute, which is to follow (as near as by divine grace they may) the life
of Jesus. If the Pope command them, they must obey in things that pertayne
unto the Salvation of souls, not in things which belong unto the destruction
of bodies. If the Pope bid, they be bound to go begging in Apostolical manner,
not fighting in military sort* to carry the Cross, not to brandish the sword;
to sound the Gospel of peace, not the Trumpet of War; to give in the defense
of truth their own Blood, not to shed the blood of others; to help men unto
eternal Crowns, not to take temporal Crowns from any.

Hence you may see, Jesuits stand indeed Centinell at an hours warning, to be
sent unto Jews, Turks, Infidells, Indians, Caniballs, to preach the Gospel,
and in preaching thereof to expose their lives to daily dangers of death,
destitute of all comfort that the world can affoard. In execution whereof they
have by their labors brought to the knowledge of blisfull life, and to the
hope of everlasting Crowns, many Princes and Kingdoms in the Indyes: whereas
your Gospel the mean while did nothing but tumultuate, raise seditions,
murder, and put Kings from their Thrones in Europe. In so much as Beza (
Epist. Theol. 63.) says; What Churches should we now have, had we not erected
them by force of arms, against the will of Kings? Whence it is clear, that
the Jesuits Vow to be ready at an hours warning to go unto any Country of
Infidels to preach the Gospel, is not against the safety and security of Kings.

If some Ministers in England, could so eloyne themselves from all affections
of this life, as to bind themselves by Vow unto their Lord of Canterbury, to be
ready at an hours warning, to go when he sends them without tergiuersatio^ or
excuse, to preach the Gospel, whether to Jews, Turks, Infidells, Indians, or
Caniballs, as he shall think most (...) how this Vow would enda^ger the Kings
security, I do not see. (...) would indeed trouble their Wives, and so it is a
Perfection not to (...) for amongst wiuing Gospellers: Yea they cannot endure
the sight thereof, more then Bats the Ca^dle, which they strive to put out with
their impure wings, as these men labor to disgrace such glorious Institutes
their Wiuing Gospel cannot aspire unto, with the filth of all slanderous
Reports.

The Title of Gamesters, quibus ludus sunt Capita and Diademata Regum, that
play and sport at the decrowning and beheading of Kings, which for a farewell
you would shake from your selves upon Jesuits, will not so easily go from you;
it is proprium quarto modo to you, the note and ensign of your Gospel, the
distinctiue Mark of your Profession, and will be so long as there shall be
mention thereof. For your gaming, feasting, and triumphing at the beheading of
the Lords Anointed is set upon Authentical Record in your own Chronicles [
John Stow. page 1240.] Will you read it? Anno Reg. 29. The 6. of December, The
Lord Mayor of London assisted with Diverse Earls, Barons, the Aldermen of
London in scarlet, the principal Officers of the City, the greatest number of
the Gentlemen of the best account, in and about the City, with the number of
80. of the most Grauest and Worshipfullest Citizens in Coats of Velvet, and
Chains of Gold, all on horseback IN MOST SOLEMN and stately manner, BY THE
SOVND OF FOUR TRVMPETS, about ten of the clock in the fore Noone, made open
and public Proclamation of the SENTENCE GIVEN for the BEHEADING OF THE QVEENE
OF SCOTS, to the GREAT and WONDERFVL REJOICING of the people OF ALL SORTS, as
manifestly appeared by RINGING of Bells, making of BONEFIRES, and SINGING of
Psalms IN EVERY street, and lane of the City.

Never since Christianity began was there Sect or Nation of men under the Name
of Christian, that did iuridically behead a Christian Anointed King, feasting,
singing, and dancing about Bonefyres for joy in that respect, but only your
Gospel. So as men hearing the Title of Gamesters, quibus ludus sunt Capita
and Diademata Regum, can they understand any other Profession but yours?

Thus I have more largely encountered with your slanders, that you might see
you gain nothing by your bitter excursions into odious matters. The mist of
your Cauills is easily dispersed, by the evidence of the Truth; your
Calumniations against Catholics, as balls cast against a wall of brass, (For
-- murus aheneus esto -- Nil conscire sibi.) -- return with a strong rebound
of confusion upon your own face.

THE CONCLUSION.
HAVING performed your Maiestyes will and pleasure in seeking to give
satisfaction about the Nine principal points that withhold your Roall Assent
from joining unto the Roman Church, my poor endeauours prostrate at your
Maiestyes feet to receive their doom, humbly beseech this favor, that your
Charity and Desire of the unity of the Church, may join together with your
Excellent Wisdom and Learning to pronounce the sentence.

Although I be confident, that examining Religion by the mere rigor of only
Scripture, the Catholic Doctrines would get the victory, more clear and
express testimonies standing on our side, then any that Protestants can bring
for themselves, This is further made clear by the Reioynder, so that it is but
the face of a Minister to say in this place That our relying on Scripture is
Vanitas vanitatu^.
as by the former discourse may appear: Although also, I be much more
confident in the tradition and perpetual practice of the Church interpreting
Scripture, which by so full consent delivers the Roman Doctrine, that
partiality it self duly pondering the weight of things, can hardly in heart,
and inwardly judge against them; yet my chiefest hope is in these Charitable
thoughts, and desires of peace and unity in the whole Christian world, which
the holy Ghost has inspired into your Breast.

For suppose, that Preconceipts instilled into tender minds against the faith
of Ancestors, might so far prevail, as to make them think (comparing
Catholics with Protestants) that Scriptures stand equally on both sides, yea
(sifting the matter by Scripture only) that Protestants may seem to have the
upper hand, yet Charity will move this question, Whether the testimonies and
arguments they bring from Scripture, are so undeniably clear, and so
unavoidably strong, that no answer or evasion may be found, but the Roman The
Minister says we give seeming and appering solutio^s, but this is done by
Sophistry. I ask who shall be Judge? Or how can this by tried by Scripture?
Church must be refused, notwithstanding so much discord and dissension, so
much inconstancy and incertainty about religion, which (as reason proves)
must, and (as experience shows) does thereupon ensue.

For, if you cast away the Roman Church and her authority, noe Church is left
in the world, that can with reason, or dares for shame challenge to be
infallible in her definitions; and if such a Church be wanting, what means is
left either to keep the learned certainly in peace, or to give unto the
ignorant assurance what is the Doctrine of Salvation the Apostles first
preached?

A Church fallible in her teaching, is by the learned to be trusted noe
further, then they do see her Doctrines consonant unto Scripture, and so they
may neglect her Judgment when they seem to have evidences of Scripture against
her. And if this liberty of contradiction be granted, what hope of Unity
remains, when a private man may wrangle eternally with the whole Church, and
never be convinced apparently of teaching against the Scriptures? Whereof we
have to many daily examples.

If we take out of the world a Church infallible, whence shall ignorant men
learn which is the Doctrine of salvation that the Apostles delivered? It is as
evident, as the Sun shyning at noone Day, and the evidence of the thing has
forced some Protestants to acknowledge, That the Controversies of Religion in
our time are grown in number so many, and in nature so intricate, that few have
time and leisure, Field of the Church Prefat. in l. 1.
fewer strength of understanding to examine them; so that nothing remains for
men desi^ous of satisfaction in things of such consequence, but diligently to
search out which amongst all the Societyes of men in the world, is the Church
of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth, that so they may embrace her
communion, follow her directions, rest in her Judgment.

If there be no Church in the world besides the the Roman, that can with any
color pretend Infallibity of Judgment: If the most part of men cannot by
their examining of Controversies be resolved in faith, and therefore must perish
eternally, except they find a Church that is an infallible mistress of truth,
in whose Judgment they may securely rest; Certainly those that have bowels of
Charity, will accept of any probable answer unto Protestants objections and
accusations, rather then discredit the authority of so necessary a Church,
which being discredited no Church remains in the world of credit, sufficient
to sustain the weight of Christian, that is, infallible Belief.

What a misery will it be if it fall out (as it is most likely it will fall
out) that at the Day of Judgment the most part of English Protestants be found
to have believed points of Doctrine necessary to salvation, not out of their
own certain skill in Scripture, as they should by the principles of their
religion, but The Minister here rayleth, but dares not directly answer the
Question, What shall become of ignorant me^ who believed the truth upon the
credit of their Church, and not upon their own infallible knowledge?
upon the credit of the Church that teaches them, which does acknowledge her
self no sufficient stay of assured belief? For without question men cannot be
saved who although they believed the truth, yet believed it upon a deceauable
ground, and consequently by human and fallable persuasion, and not (as need
is) by a divine, most certain belief, grounded upon an infallible
foundation, which cannot be had without an infallible Church. How dreadful
then must the danger be of living out of the lap of the Roman Church, that
is, of a Church of infallible Authority?

This Church having a most glorious succession of Bishops from the Apostles,
deserves above all other the protection of your Majesty, who by a long line of
religious Catholic Ancestors succeed in the right of two Illustrious
Kingdoms, and being so beneficial unto mankind, and so efficacious to
maintain Unity; Our Hopes did not dye with our late Sovereign, but still live
in his Royal Issue, and of the most Sacred Queen and Martyr his Mother.
we cannot give over hope of your Favor, whom singular preservation in the
womb of your glorious mother against the barbarous attempts of Heretical
division that would have brought you to an immature end, shows to be by Gods
infinite wisdom perordained for some singular good of mankind, specially by
your means to quench wars and dissentions, and to bestow the blessings of
peace and union on this land. Your Title to the Crown of England springes from
the peaceful conjunction of the two renowned Roses, which before were mortal
enemies, and fought so many cruel feilds, that if we consider the great
effusion of blood, wherein each of them were bathed, we shall hardly discern
the one from the other, by the diversity of color.

Your Majesty's Person is the root of a more happy union of two most glorious
Kingdoms, by your Sacred Person combined in assured peace, which in the
hystoryes of former times are by no other marks more famously known, then by
their mutual wars.

Nothing remains to be added, for the full consummation of this Islands
happiness, and your Majesty's immortal Glory, but the quenching of discord about
religion, by bringing them back again to the root and matrice of the
Catholic Church, Cyp. lib. 1. epist. 3. ad Cornel.
to the Chair of Peter the principal Sea; from which Sacerdotall and Sacred
Unity springs, and to which perfidious Error has no access. Whereby your
Majesty shall extend the blessings of peace from this Island to the rest of
Europe, from the the body unto the soul; and crown your temporal peace and
felicity with eternal. For both which, not only I, but all of my profession,
yea all Catholics, will offer unto Almighty God our daily prayers.

FINIS.

