The translatour to the Reader.
A Man that list diligently to consider and deeply to weygh the wonderful
change which universally every age brings, and woorketh in all worldly
things, shall perceive that it seems in manner not to be the world that
before it was, but rather (in comparyson) the first consummate and ended, a
new substitute and succeedyng in the place thereof: And whither a man like to
observe the same in matters of great weight, or else of less importau^ce, he
shall not want cause to wonder to see such mutation in all things. But were it
so, that this change were for the better, than might man justly receive
comfort by the consideration thereof. But alas it is so far from that, that
on the contrary part, we may behold in so many and so often mutations, decay
in every one, and each one worse then other, and so the last worst of all the
rest. Which thing right well appears, as well by divine as profane writers in
every age, amongste whom the poets (not without great consideration) esteemed
the first to be like gold, the next so decayed that it was from gold abased
to silver, the third to brass, the fourth of less price and halue, and was
become like iron, whereupon they all lament the decay of virtue, love, and fear
of God, decay of charity, decay of true faith, decay of mutual love, decay of
fidelity and good conscience, decay of obedience, decay of humility, and
finally and chiefly decay of devotion, prayer, and heavenly contemplation,
which ought to be the root out of the which all the rest should grow and
flooryshe, as proceedyng from a perfect love and reverent fear of God: For by
the decay thereof, God is not called upon for his grace and assistaunce, he is
not thanked and praised for his mercy and great benefits, the reward of his
mercy is not desired, the horrible punyshement of his justice is not feared,
whereby we live as though we had no need of God, and as though we hoped for no
better, nor mistrusted no worse than we find here, as though God were not the
rewarder of virtue and punysher of vice, and finally as though there were no
God at all, no resurrection, no heaven nor hell. So as in this time these old
verses are more than truly verified here. Eleu viunt homines tanquam mors
nulla sequatur.
Et velut infernus fabula vana foret.
Men live and yet believe not
That death will overtake them:
And pains of hell they fear not
For fables they account them.
For if God be, why acknowledge not we his power, majesty, and omnipotency,
and honor him thereafter? If God be merciful, why crave we not his mercy? If
God be just, why fear we not his vengeance, and beg his pardon? If God be
the spouse of the soul of man, why do we not love him? why be we not desirous
to be conversant with him, and continually to delight in him? who (...) far
in love with the soul of man, that if man do but faithfully crave his mercy,
pardon, grace, favor, and assistaunce, he does louyngly grant the same, yea
he does preoccupate and prepare our hearts to call on him, if we frowardly and
wylfully put not away and refuse to follow his holy inspiration, so as, of his
only mercy, he ^eaueth no mean to draw man unto him, if he list to apply
his own endeavor: Which if it follow not, than does man turn the unmeasurable
goodness of God, so rejected and refused, to the multiplying of his own
sin. And than does the wonderful unkindness and too too much
unthankfulness of man, vnspeakablye set forth the mercies of God, who
wylleth all men to be saved, who restrayneth his grace from no man except he
harden his own heart, either by presumption, despair, or wicked security in
sin, yea who knocks and beats at the door of our conscience, desires to
enter and dwell with us, only he requires to be let in, and his habitation
prepared for him: and yet does he that himself too. For if we do but admit him
in, he cleanses the house of our soul, yea he has already washed and made
clean the same with the blood of his dear son, so as we use the due means
to apply the same unto us. But the more God seeks us, the more we shun
him, the more he desires v^ the less we care for him, the more w^ need him,
the less we think of him* So as he is by our ouergreat unkindness and
wylfulnesse, much more now weryed, than when he complained by the Prophet
Esaye of the Israelites, saying: Laboraui sustinens: I am over weeryed with
bearyng and long sufferyng your sinful life and abominable doings. Esaias.
1.14.
And therefore this decay must needs be the greatest wheresoever it happen,
as by the want whereof, all the rest consequentlye do follow of necessity, and
loss of that which only is to be desired in this life, which is the
heavenly comfort of his divine inspiration, growyng to manne by the often
consideration of the benefits of Christ, incarnate, crucified, and risen
again: and not only that, but also the consummation of that joy and felicity
in heaven never to end. How sore this greateste virtue is decayed, and what
cause we have justly to lament the same, it may well appear by this little
treatisse ^ritten in Latin by an English man, ^ Bishop of great learning and
maruei^ous virtue of life, such one as seemed perfe^^ly to taste and savor
how sweet and pleasant the spirit of GOD is: Who in his work so profoundely
does penetrate the comfort, joy, and consolation coming by true prayer, that
any man readyng the same with diligence, may easily perceive what he loses
that frequenteth not prayer: And so far instructs all men, not only to
pray, but also so to pray that the^ lose not the fruit thereof, showing both
how prayer best pleases God, and how it most profits our selves. And in
that his time, more than forty years past, lamented, mooned, yea cried out
upon the decay of prayer and contemplation, and the want of the true use
thereof in all degrees, and the lousse life of men, and untowardness to pray,
which be so frail, so weak, so perverse of nature, so beset with daily
enemies, so prone to the worst, that they ought as much as might be, continually
to pray, continually to arm them self with strength and constancy of the
grace of God, to fight with their enemies, sin, the devil, the world, and
the flesh, weepeth upon the evil examples of Bishops, Priests, and
Clergy, who should move other by the perfection of their life, wayeth the
hardness of our hearts, that being well taught, list not to follow the same,
complayneth that the world prays not, no, nor knows what prayer is, nor
how to pray, shows how prayer is abolyshed, and the fruit thereof lost, yea
by them that do pray, for that either their prayer is not pure, and pleasyng
God, or else their life and works disagreeing and contrary. But what go I in
hand to seem to express the perticularities of that, which he so lively, so
perfectly, so plainly, and so religiously shows and declares, yea rather
the spirit of God, vsyng his pen to publishe his holy will, to instruct us.
Only this I have to say, that seeing the same in written hand, as it were,
neglected as a thing of small price, being in deed such a work as the like (I
believe) has not often ben written in that matter, I could not satisfy my
self to see such a pearl hydden, and such a jewel thrown and cast away to
oblivion, considering first the benefit that may, and I trust shall, grow to
the attentive reeders thereof, and secondly remembryng how much more need
there is of so holy an instruction and heavenly inuitation to prayer and
devotion at this time, than when the same was written. Since which time, has
passed almost one age of man's life, and in this while, decay still as before,
of pity and virtue, and want of the fear of God, and evil life wonderfullye
increased, as in the which the evil neighbor of mankind has stolen upon
him, and fyndyng him negligent, has sown cockle and much evil seed in the
field of our souls, and has in manner pulled up the roots of good works,
and the wholesome and plentiful fruits of repentance, faith, hope, charity,
alms, and true trust in God. For who in manner, shows in living to fear God?
Who is afraid to offend him? Who refrayneth to blaspheme his holy name? Who
has conscience to deceive, yea or to oppress his neighbor? Who is ashamed to
lie and forswear him self? Who has compassion to relieve the poor, which
this plague of God, and want of his grace, has increased out of number? Who
takes any pain to please God? Who seeks to subdue his flesh to the spirit,
sensuality to reason, reason to faith, and faith to the service of GOD? Yea
who lays not the brydell of liberty at length freelye and without stay to
follow sin, and to multiply the wrath of GOD? Who ^aunteth prayer? Yea who
shunneth and contemns it not? Who prefers the house of prayer, before a
dysyng house? Yea, find we not mo in the one than in the other? Subjects rebel
against their Prince and God his anointed, children disobey their parents,
contemn them, and laugh them to scorn, servants little esteem their
masters, laborers seek, and greedyly follow idleness, artificers untruth
and too extreme falsehood in their works. All sorts of men lust after their
ease, excess, and unruly liberty, no man seeks to mortify him self, to
overcome his own froward will. And the cause of all this, is this wonderful
decay of prayer, by the use whereof, we might at the last delyght in the
familiarity with God, and godly things, berauyshed with the love thereof, and
so consequentlye grow to the mislykyng and hate of sin, which is only
wrought by the love of virtue, which is only obtained by true and effectual
prayer, which dryueth away the hauntyng of those enormities aforesaid, which
provoke the wrath of God upon the world. And who can think that God will
long suffer this alienation of our selves from him? Yea this contempt of him,
this blasphemy against his holy will, and name? Who ought not hourly to look
for his visitation, and heavy hand of justice? Who may not ryghtly say to the
world now, like as Jonas the Prophet said unto the Ninevites: Ad huc
quadraginta dies and mundus subuertetur: There be yet forty days, and the
world shall be destroyed. Which saying me thinks is fully taught to any that
shall read this work, who shows the fault, the cause of the wrath of God, and
the mean to remedy the same, and with the Prophet calls to repentance,
lively faith, fervent charity, effectual prayer to appease his indignation,
hate of our selves, and love of God only, dispysyng the world, and longyng to
be with him. Read therefore this book, and read it with judgment, with
deliberation, with a deep consideration thereof, and with a desire and purpose
to be reformed, make thy heart meet, and prepare it to receive fruit of this
godly instruction, let thy heart judge of that thine eye sees, and thy soul
rejoice in that thy tongue pronounces. Read it in deed, and not
superficially ouerloke it: And than surely I can not think that he that so
does, can be defrauded of the fruit of his labor, or not obtain his desired
end thereof: Which I hartylye wyshe to happen to every reader hereof, whereby
God may be feared, loved, glorified, and esteemed by them, and they thereby
ravished, and inflamed with the right unspeakable love of him, sweetness of
his holy spirit, admiration of his omnipotency, trust of mercy, and joyful
expectation of his everlasting kingdom, which he has prepared for all those
that walk in his ways, observe his laws, be steadfast in faith, thirst after
ryghteousnes, think long to be with him, and by true, and faithful prayer,
seek to be directed in the pylgrimage of this wilderness, by the continual
guydyng of his holy spirit: To whom be praise for ever and ever. Amen.



A Treatise upon these words of our Savior Christ. Oportet Semper Orare.
Forasmuch as this saying of our Savior Christ, Oportet semper orare, Luke
xviii.
A man must always pray, written in the Gospel of Saint Luke, appertains
generally unto all Christian men: who sees not how profitable and necessary
it is for every man, diligently and effectually to apply him self to prayer?
And so expedient and beneficial a thing, in no wise to be neglected, for vain
and hurtful delectations and pleasures. Wherefore to the end that our prayer
may wax sweet and pleasant unto us, first of all it shall be very commodious
and profitable, to have redye at hand and in our remembrance, certain
reasons, with the which as most apt and convenient motions (as often as we
perceive our selves, to wax cold in devotion, and be as it were oppressed
with a slothful unaptness to serve God) we may stir up our minds, and whet
our hearts to prayer. Moreover it shall merueylously profit and exceadyngly
further us, not to be ignorant of the singular fruits and commodities, that
very many have obtained by prayer. For by the knowledge thereof, we shall the
more easyly inuit and prepare our selves to pray: And finally it shall be very
needful for us, thorowely to understand the very true manner which is
specially required in every man, to be observed in the time of his prayer.
Forasmuch as in every work of any difficulty that man takes in hand, the
right way of doing thereof being once known, does very much further the due
execution, and perfect finishing of the same. I have therefore intended by the
help of God, to entreat (...) ^ader of these three things: That is to say,
of the necessity of prayer, of the fruit of prayer, The three special
points, wherein consists the sum of this treatise.
and of the true use and manner of prayer. But forasmuch as the words of our
Savior beforesayde, do cast some scruple and doubt into many men's minds, it
shall not be out of purpose for the better understanding thereof, if we do
first expound and declare, how those words are most ryghtly to be
understood. And to begin withal, The interpretation of Christ's words,
Oportet semper orare.
this sayyng of our Savior is most assuredly true, Oportet semper orare, for
prayer is necessary unto us every day, every hour, and every minute. And yet
does not almighty god so severely demand an account thereof of us, that he
byndeth us to incessaunte prayer with our mouth, which thing never man has
unto this time, or could be able to observe. But forasmuch as there passes
no moment of time, in which we have not great need of the help and
assistaunce of almighty God: There are we of necessity constrained by
continual prayer, humblye with all diligence to require and crave his divine
help and succor. For who is he that perceyueth not (so as he give his mind
diligently to observe the same) that all we are even presentlye to be returned
to duste and ashes, whenever God should detayne and withholde his hand of
help from over us, and that there is no man of power without him, to endure
the space of one moment of time, as Job says. In eius manu est anima omnis
viuentis. Job. xii.
In his hand is the life of every living creature. Every one of us remains
in no better estate, then as if he did hang in a basket over a great deep
pit, borne up and sustained by a cord in the hand of an other man. A
similitude aptly applied.
And in that case doubtless, the man so placed, stands in great need of the
diligent help of him that holds the rope, and thereby stays him from
falling: for if he once let go the rope, the other that hangs, must needs
down headlong into the bottom of the pit. And likewise must it needs happen
unto every one of us, if God sustain us not incessauntlye with his mighty
hand and power. And he it is that so stays the rope, that we be not by the
greeuousnes of the fall, bruised and crussed in pieces, and so forthwith consumed
to nothing. I speak nothing now of many other dangerous perilles, and
headlong falling places, wherewith we be continuallye environed* What is he
than so gross wytted, and so blind in judgment, that understands not, that
there is no time, nor no one moment of time, in the which we have not very
great need, earnestly to call upon God, to require his aid, defense and
succor, and in the which we have not cause incessantly to pray? But forasmuch
as after this understanding and sense, there is no man that by actual prayer
(as we call it) does satisfy and fulfill the same words of our Savior, that
is to say, every moment to continue in prayer: Therefore we had need to search
out some other sense and meaning thereof. And in deed, this saying of our
Savior Christ, may rightly be otherwise understood? As thus. A certain
Monk, one of the old fathers, being demanded how he fulfilled that saying
or commandment of Christ, Oportet semper Orare, made this answer: When I
have (says he) finisshed and said my daily prayers, the time that remains,
I use to bestow in labouryng with my hands, as far forth as the ability
and strength of my body does permit, whereby it comes to pass, that daily I
gain somewhat, with the which I may relieve not only my self, but also some
other poor people. And they (says he) pray for me, as often as by the
unquietness and trouble of my body, I can not pray for my self: And by this
mean, he did believe that he satisfied the commandment. And he had the holy
scripture agreeable with his opinion, which says. Eccle. xxix
Absconde Eleemosinam in sinu pauperis, and ipsa pro te orabit. Hyde thy alms
in the bosom of the poor, and that shall pray for thee. See than, how the
holy scripture confirms that our alms does pray for us: and therefore, if a
man apply his mind to show mercy and pity to his neighbors, if he seek to
defend the Orphans and fatherless children, if he labor to comfort the
wydowes which be destitute of all consolation, if he be careful to deliver
those that be oppressed with violence, from injury and wrong: Finally, if he
show him self ready to help to his power, any that want succor or relief,
so that besides all this he neglect not the ordinary appointed times for
prayer, by the Church of God, he may well be judged to have fulfilled the
former words of our Savior. For that man does pray always, either by him
self, or else by his alms and charitable deeds, which supplieth all the want
that appears in his own prayer. In this wise than, may the words of Christ
aforesaid, be understood, wherein he teaches us always to continue in
prayer, which is as much to say, always to live and do well, which does
sometime happen to men, yea when they be slepyng. For as often as we do sleep
or wake, walk or sit still, eat or drink, be vexed or be in quiet, or what
else soever we do or suffer, if all these doings be with a true faith referred
to the honor and glory of God, no doubt they appertain to the increase of a
good and perfect life. For if it were not so, Saint Paul would not have
wylled the Corinthians, that whatsoever they did, they should intend and
direct the same, to the glory of God, saying unto them. Sieve editis, sieve
bibitis, sieve quid aliud facitis, i. Cor. x.
omnia in gloriam dei facite. Whether ye eat, or drink, or what thing else
soever ye do, do al to the honor of God. And surely, if God be moved with our
words and speaking, to be gracious unto us, he wylbe much more stirred to the
same, by our good works and well doing, forasmuch as works do now supplye
the place of words. And therefore the favor of GOD is turned toward us by
our good works, which we do to this end, and of purpose to please his divine
Majesty: For they do express the vehemency of prayer, and that much more
mightily then the prayers them self. Therefore, whosoever refers all that
he does or suffers, only to the glory of GOD, he surely prays
continuallye, and does at all times, satisfy this aforesaid precept of
Christ. For we may justly say, that he does continue always in prayer, which
always directs his works and do^nges, to the honor and glory of God. But
albeit this saying, Oportet semper Orare, may be understood in this sense:
Yet notwithstanding, because Christ has of purpose appointed a difference
between praying and workyng, and declares a great diversity, between alms,
prayer, and fasting: Therefore we shall now add unto these two, a third
understanding of the same. Saint Paul does admonish the people of
Thessalonica, that they should pray incessauntly, saying: Sine intermissione
orate. Cap. v.
And in many places of his Epistles, he declares that he did without ceassyng,
remember diverse in his prayers. Moreover in the Acts of the Apostles it is
written, Act. xii.
that whylst Peter was deteyned prisoner and in captivity, the Church of GOD
made continual prayer, and intercession for him. By the which words it is
manifest and apparaunt, that every true Christian man, does pray in every
action and work he does, yea although he sleep. The which thing can not be
true in any wise, except we do by prayer understand the continual desire of
the heart, which is always strong, and has his continual motion in man's
mind. For like as a man being bound in prison with wayghtie fetters of iron,
is compelled by the tedious werynesse of those miseries and afflictions which
he indureth, vehemently to desire, and earnestly seek for liberty. And if he
have once conceived any manner of hope of his deliverance, he than incessauntly
longs, wissheth, and desires to be loosed from those paynefull bands.
Uerylye, even so every Christian man (which is not ignorant, how greuouslye
and fearcely he is invaded and daily assaulted by the flesh, the world, and
the Devil, and how diverse and manyfold miseries and calamities he sustayneth
in ^his vale of wretchedness, to how many, and therewith how great perils and
daily dangers his life is subiec^ed and set forth) is enforced every moment
to desire the aid and help of GOD his grace, by the which, at the last he
being delivered from those calamities and great euylles, may as^ende into the
beautiful sight and beholding of GOD him self, and the most happy fruition
of everlasting fe^icitie. And this earnest desire is in the Scripture
oftentimes understood for a loud cry in the ears of Almighty GOD, as
where the Prophet says: Desiderium pauperum, Psalm. ix.
exaudiuit dominus. GOD has hard the vehement desire of the poor. For
doubtless, the earnest desire of those that be vexed and punished in mind and
soul, does spedylye break in, and makes a redye way to the presence of God
him self, and rayseth a wonderful outcry and noise into his ears: And
therefore forasmuch as such and the like desire, never cease in the hearts
of good men, but is continuallye occupied, and moved by grace, so that they do
always desire and long for the succoure and aid of God, his might, and power,
and that whether they sleep, wake, eat, drink, or whatsoever thing else they
do, these men may justly be judged always to pray, and that without any
intermission. For the declaration whereof, Saint Augustine says thus. Sine
intermissione orare, Saint Austust. in the. Cxxi. Epistle, ad proban. the.ix.
Chapter.
quid aliud est, quam beatam vitam, sine intermissione desiderate. Se^per hanc
a domino desideramus and oramus semper. To pray (says he) without ceassyng,
what else is it, that incessauntlye to desire of God, to lead a good and honest
life? Let us always crave and beg this grace of God, and then we do always
pray. This far Saint Augustine. And without this hearty desire, it is not
any noise or sound of words, be it never so long, that can stir up the
ears of almighty God. But if that be fervent (although there be no sound of
any one word hard) it does most easylye penetrate, and obtayneth vndelayedlye
a through and gracious audience* at the hand of God, as shall more largely and
playnelye be showed afterward. Therefore whosoever shall in this wise
understand the word of our Savior aforesaid, in my judgment, shall think
most ryghtly. And in another sense, a man can not easily conceive how he may,
or is in any wise able continually without ceassyng to pray: But by the
feruencie of this desire, which is never quenched in the hearts of good men,
prayer is always and incessauntly made before God, and we do continually
knock at the gates of the mercy of God, beggyng of him his grace and divine
assistaunce. It is therefore very true which Christ our Savior did say,
Oportet semper orare, We must always pray, and never give over. Luke xviii.
And yet not so that we be bound always to utter any certain prayer,
conceived and made in any form of words: but so that there pass no minute of
time, in the which we do not desire the succor of his grace, and the
felicity to come. other side, his own weakness, great nenecessitie, and
extreme misery, than can he not but be compelled continually to press,
labor, and travail, to come to the presence of the Lord God, his most
gracious creator and his only defendour: like as the king and Prophet^ David
does say. Que^^ui vultum tuum, vultum tuum, domine requiram. I have sought to
come unto thy sight, O Lord, to thy sight, O Lord, I will continually
travail to attain. And when he perceyueth and believes him self to be now
come and admitted to the sight of God, than unfolds he and lays forth his
own miseries, than renneth he to the remembrance of his former fervent
desires, then does he deuoutely and with a godly affection, bewail his own
state, and then does he crave with great compunction of heart, and with plenty
of bitter tears beg of his mercy, grace, and continual assistence, to help
him in his great need and necessity, not to leave and forsake him in trouble
and adversity, but to vouchsafe also to grant him his helpefull grace,
whereby he might in all things please his divine majesty. And whilst the
soul of this man is thus occupied, what other thing is he in hand withal,
than to be drawn up to his Lord God, by the cheyne and rope of prayer, than
to be united sweetly and made one with his maker and Savior, than to join
his will and understanding with that incomprehensible light of the majesty of
God? What other I say, than to make him self of one mind and affection, with
his incomparable clemency and goodness, and finally to extol and exalt
himself above all worldly creatures, to this end, that at the last his soul
may be made one with his Lord God, being (as it were) lynked together with
that true golden cheyne of prayer. Lo now what manner of bond prayer is. O
rope, more then golden, and cheyne, to be with all man's desire and affection
sought for and required. O bond of love, most sweet and delectable, who
would not wyllynglye offer himself to be tied and fethered with this most
pleasant cord* Who would not be hard bound and fastened in this so rich and
noble a cheyne* Or finally, who would not with all the powers of his soul and
body, wyshe and desire to repose him self in rest and quiet, between the arms
of so loving a Lord and myghtie king? Doubtless, this only thought and
meditation may suffice (if it be diligently weighed, followed, and considered)
to quicken, inflame, and set in fire the dullest man and most cold in virtue
and devotion, to frequent this benefit, and to seek the grace of God by
prayer, specially for that every man, be he never so extreme and wretched a
sinner, may and ought to hope assuredly, that albeit the majesty of God is of
a supereminent, and unspeakable dignity, yet is he so gracious, so merciful,
and so mylde unto man, that he refuses not to incline his most pure and holy
ears, unto our profane and unclean prayers, so as we want not a steadfast
mind to resyste sin, and impiety. For God is so redye, so inclinable, and
so well disposed to take mercy on us in that case, and does so intierlye love
our souls, that albeit he be the supreme mediator, ruler, and only Lord and
governor of the whole world, and we nothing but unclean fylthy duste, and
most vile ashes, yet does he not contemn our poor and mean state, nor
shunneth not us, or flees from us for our former euyls, of the which we have
and do truly repent us, be they never so great, but is forthwith attentyfe,
and gives ear to our pitiful lamentation, waylyng, and sorrowful syghyng, is
moved with our tears, has compassion of our miseries, condescendeth to our
pencions, yea and also (which much more is) does prevent our request with his
grace, insomuch that before we begin to pray, he moves and stireth us up unto
the same. O inestimable charity of our lord God, O clemency incomparable. Our
Lord God is so far in love with our souls, that he studieth how he may
most pleasauntly inuit and allure us, and laboreth by all means to drive us
to attend and give our selves over to the contemplation and beholding of his
beautiful light and bryghtnesse, to taste the savor of his wonderful
sweetness, to embrace the abundance of his plentiful liberality, and
finally, lovingly to kiss the unspeakable pleasures of his glorious face. Alas
how wretched be they that labor not to their power to be drawn in this
pullye and come at this call? And how much more miserable are those, which
being once drawn into that most pleasant way, walk not in the same, and
follow not it? But how far most wretched of all other, and unhappy be they,
which after all those callynges and drawyng of the grace of God, do wyllyngly
draw back, refuse the call, strive and rebel against the unspeakable
clemency of our so gracious and almyghtie Lord God? Thus much touching the
first reason.

The second Reason.
AND now let us show forth an other reason, which may eftsoon move and
stir our minds to prayer. It is apparaunt and well known that the
principal and chief goodness belongyng to man, is called and esteemed the true
perfection of eternal felicity, the which is appointed by God unto man, for
his last end. But no man can be able to reach and atteyne to this end,
without such ordinary means as God has appointed to lead us unto the same.
And amongste many other means, there be two which if a man once perfectlye
have obtained, he shall not lightly want the rest, which be also necessary for
the obteynyng of this beatitude: and those verylye be prayer and good works.
In those two means, we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that Cornelius the
Centurian was most commonly exercysed, by the which he so pleased God, that
albeit he was an ethnycke and infidel, yet was it said unto him by the Angel
of God: Acts. x.
Orationes tue, and eloemosine tue, ascenderunt in memoriam coram deo. Thy
prayers and alms deeds have ascended into the sight of god, and are remembered
of him. Therefore he that will exercise himself in these two, that is to say,
in prayer and good works, he shall surely never want the rest, which be the
other guydes to eternal felicity. For God his will is, that we should
humiliate and deiect our selves in the sight of his majesty, utterly
confessyng, and acknowledgyng, that of our own power and strength it is
impossible that we should do well* but that a good life (which is continued in
the practice of good works) is to be craved at his hand by continual prayer.
And that by these means, we may at the last ascend and come unto this last
appointed end for man, which is eternal felicity with God. And therefore,
forasmuch as without the benefit coming of the use of good works, no man
atteyneth to this appointed last end for man, and also that the grace of good
life can in no wise be obtained without prayer, I conclude, that if we mind
not to fall into eternal misery, we must continuallye frequent this prayer.
And now let no man object unto me in this case, the foolyshe, pyuyshe, and
beastly argument, and persuasion of the prescience of almighty God, which can
not be deceived, and yet some there be that says thus, God foreseeth and
assuredly knows all that ever shall happen after, before it be either thought
or done by man: And now undoubtedly he knows that either I shall be saved in
joy and felicity, or dampened to perpetual torments and misery. But if he
know I shall be saved, what need have I to pray for that I am alredye assured
of, and shall have it without any manner of prayer, even only by theffect of the
prescience of God, which can not be deceived. On the other side, if he by his
foreknowledge perceive me to be dampened, no prayers in the world are able to
profit me, forasmuch as his prescience can not be disappoynted or changed.
Ueryly, this crooked dilemma, or false subtyle argument, has seduced very many,
but how very a sophistical fallax it is, we shall show and declare afterward
much better, if we do first make proof, how the same argument is utterly
void, stands not, nor has any consequence, in all other things which
daily do happen and chance unto us. I notable example against reasonyng of
the presence of God.
As for example. He that is vexed with any grievous sickness, shall he admit
no physic to be applied and ministered unto him, saying God knows before
whether I shall recover health or dye? If he knowethe first, t^^n need I no
physic, for so without doubt I shall be healed without any manner of
medicine, only forasmuch as the knowledge of GOD can never be decea^^^* But
if he know that I shall perish and ^ye of this sickness, what good shall my
medicine do me, where as that can in no wise be made void and frustrate,
which he foreseeth? Thou may now se by this same very argument, all the art
of Physic and benefit thereof destroyed: Let us prove how well it will
stand in an other. The husband man will say, I will not sow, till, and
husband my ground, knows not GOD whether this field shall without my
labor bring forth plenty of fruit yea or nay? But if he know it shall so
do, than needs it not my travail, and paynefull husbandyng: if otherwise, I
shall but labor in vain. And by this argument, destroy also all manner of
husbandry, and tylthe of the earth. The like success and conclusion shall be
found in all other comparisons, if they be in the same manner sorted and
compared together. And therefore by these it is very apparaunt and manifest,
that the first supposed reason is of no validity, but utterly false and
deceytfull: For if it might be true, than were it by the same reason neither
needful nor wisdom for the sick to seek physic, nor the husband man to
labor to manure and till his ground. Wherefore, as the husband man may not
look for fruit of his fields except he till and sow, neither yet the sick
man atteyne his health except he be content to follow the advice of his
physician: Even so can no Christian man atchieue the fruition of perfect
felicity, unless he first have the grace of God to live well, and thereunto
can he not at any time come, without the help and mean of continual and
faithful prayer. And like as we do most commonly see for truth, that those
sick men must needs peryshe that refuse the medicines, council, and advice
of their physicians, and that those fields be without all doubt barreyne and
fruitless which want manuryng and good husbanding: Even so may we be well
assured, that without prayer and good works, it is not possible for us to
obtain everlasting felicity. And therefore, albeit that God has ordained
that eternal beatitude, as the supreme, and last end to all good men, yet was
it not his will that man should atteyne unto the fame, but by such just means
as he had appointed. And therefore, first and principallye, if a man do not
first begin with a good life, let him never look to end with that glory which
is to come, and therewith let no man think to obtain the grace to live well,
except he do by daily and continual prayer, crave and beg the same of God.
Begin therefore we must with prayer, from the which no doubt will follow good
life, by the which we shall at the last be brought to the glorious bliss of
heaven, even unto the present sight and fruition of the omnipotent majesty of
God him self, the want whereof is the most extreme loss and misery, which
does most manifestlye appear by the insatiable desire of our minds. For we
seek in every corner a felicity which may satisfy us, and fulfill our
desires, and we foolyshly think that it may be gotten either of worldely
pleasures, of riches, of honors, or at the least, of them all joined together,
whereby it follows, that we never make an end in desiring and sekyng for them,
yea and for the gettyng of the^ grows the disturbaunce of al good orders, and
the confusion of all things through the world: And yet when we have them,
there is nothing in them that can or is able to satisfy our minds, forasmuch
as they be with none other thing satisfied, saving only the supreme felicity
and glory of God. Have we not than great cause, by all means and ways
possible, to seek and travail for the beholding and fruition of this joy and
felicity, when by the want thereof we fall presently into perpetual calamity
and misery? But forasmuch as the only ready and assured high way to bring us
to that iourneyes end, is good life, and the only way to good life is prayer,
it follows necessarylye, that all those that are loath and unwilling to want^
and l^^e that most happy fruition, must wyllynglye fre^^^nt and apply them
selves to this aforesaid pure and continual prayer. And this may now suffyse
for the second reason.

The third Reason.
FOR a third reason, it shall marvelously move us, if we do call to our
remembrance that we be putt in mind and commanded by the mouth of Christ
him self, to be always redye and wyllyng to pray, in these his words Oportet
semper orare. For who was better able directly to instruct us in those things
that should further our salvation, than God the son of almyghtie God the
father, in whom the same God the father has reposed the treasures of his
wisdom and knowledge, and whom he sent down into this world, to this end,
to show the same whole world a right way to heaven? Or who could with
greater zeal and more earnest affection, study to teach us the same way,
than he that for the unspeakable love which he did bear unto us, wyllyngly
sustained the most bitter, shameful, and horrible death of the cross? And he
did not only admonyshe us of the necessity of continual prayer, but he did
also promise that we should obtain any thing that by true and earnest prayer
we should require, Luke. xi.
saying: Petite and accipietis, querite and inuenietis, pulsate and aperietur
vobis: Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you. This promise was made by the mouth of Jesus Christ the son
of God, who is truth it self and seduceth no man: Let us therefore with an
assured confidence approach unto the throne of his great clemency, where we may
both daily pray for the grace to live and do well, and also for a constant
immovable perseueraunce in good works, nothing doubtyng but he will much
more liberally imparte the same unto us, than we can be able either to require
or think of. Wherefore forasmuch as he has taught us the necessity of
prayer, and that we must always continue in the same, no man ought to doubt,
but that according to his lesson, the same is for us most necessary, and
expedient. And therefore it is so requisite for us Christian men that wander
amongste the miseries of this world, far from the face of our Lord God, to
obey, follow, and practice this healthful and profitable commandment of our
Savior Christ, that whosoever determines with him self, that he will not
pray, or makes an obiecte and let in his own mind against prayer, synneth
damnablye and to death: yea and he that is over negligent to frequent prayer,
having often opportunity, and specially seeing the peril of his salvation to
depend thereon, that negligence may be deadly, albeit negligence in his own
sense and understanding, is no mortal crime, but less or greater according to
the quality thereof. But if we would somewhat more diligently search forth
and discuss the perfect meaning of the aforesaid words of Christ, we should
playnelye see how great the necessity of prayer is. Doubtless, the health
of every Christian depends principally of God, of whom of necessity (as has been said) every man must require the same. And because this our health may be
every moment in danger, and that there is no man which is not bound to
provide and take care for his own health: It follows necessarylye, that every
moment we have present need to pray and call to God. For inasmuch as our
health can neither be obtained nor continued, at any other hand than by GOD him
self, it appears what need we have continuallye to exalte our eyes to
heaven* and always our hearts to God, and that not only for our selves, but
also for the health and well doing of our neighbors, which we are also bound
to doe^ For like as every man is bound to succor his neybour when he sees him
trauayled with poverty and misery, and such other wantes in his body: Even
so is he much more bound, when he sees any peril and loss like to fall to
his soul, and the imminent and manifest danger of the loss of the spiritual
health, and comfort thereof. But now specially there lies upon us a much
greater necessity of prayer then ever before, seeing the time so full of
dangers, the number of sinners so wonderfully increased upon the earth, and
so great an increase of sin and wickedness, in our age, as has not heretofore
ben seen. For now in this wretched time and age we live in, sins be
reioysed at, as though they were good deeds, and honest works are esteemed
for great sins and enormities, now is it well done and commendable to sin,
and contrary great sin and shame to do well. Woe be unto us, that be borne and
live in this wretched time, in the which (I speak it not without sorrow and
tears) whosoever (being endued with any zeal toward the honor of God)
shall cast his eyes on those men and women, which now live and remain,
shall easyly be moved to lamentation and mournyng, beholding every thing
turned and turmoyled vpsyde down. The most beautiful order of virtue and
honesty, utterly destroyed and confounded, and the lively light and example of
honest living, clearly extinquished, banyshed, and put out of memory and all
knowledge: And almost none other thing now left in the Church of Christ,
but either manifest iniquity, or counterfeit holiness. For now amongst the
ministers of the same Church, the great light of their example, in virtuous
and holy living, is almost utterly extinct, who were wont, and in deed ought
still, like lyghtes to the world, to shine in virtue and godlynes, and should
show them selves to all men, as spectacles worthy the beholding, and set to
the show upon an high hill, and like the bright candle set upon and above
the busshell, and not hydden and unworthy of sight. And now there comes no
light from them, but rather an horrible mistie cloud or dark ignorance, and
a pestilent infection therein, with the which innumerable being deadly
infected, are daily drawn to their destruction. O miserable estate of ours, O
time most worthy bewaylyng, into the which most unfortunately our dear and
holy mother the Church, the spouse of Christ, is fallen, which does now so
little esteem the most precious blood of her most loving spouse, Jesus
Christ: Yea, and like an inchaunted woman, nothing regards nor reputeth of
any moment, that most excellent price, wherewith she was so excedyng louynglye
and dearly redeemed. If this consideration did sometime fall into men's hearts,
it would and ought of right to compel us, being humbled in mind, and truly
penitent in heart and soul, to knock and beat with violent and continual
faithful prayers, the gates of the mercy of God, not for our selves alone, but
to recover both our own health, and our neighbors, whom we may now see
standing in a most miserable condition and state, brought to extreme
necessity, and being now in the present peril, and almost unavoidable
danger of the loss of their souls, and recouerye thereof is none at all, but
only by continual and effectual prayer, sorowefully and har^yly requyryng
the present pardon, succor, and comfort of almighty God.

The last Reason.
FInally the fourth and last reason may be in this wise deduced: There lives
no man of the substance of our commune frail flesh, that has not sinned and
is assured he shall sin again. The which being true, it shall be very
necessary unto us, for either of both these (...), to invoke and call upon
our almighty and most merciful Lord God, with continual prayers, not only
to forgive and pardon our former sins and offenses passed, but also that by
his omnipotent aid, and almighty assistance, we fall not again, either to
the same, or others, by the occasion whereof, we might incur and fall into
eternal and everlasting pain and punishment. And first there is no man that
knows him self to have sinned, which is assured and certain, that he has
as yet recovered the favor of God, except the same be by some means reveled
to him by GOD, of the which thing Solomon writes thus, in his book named
Ecclesiastes. Sunt iusti and sapientes, Eccle. ix.
and opera eorum in manu dei, et tamen nescit homo vtrum amore vel odio dingnus
sit, sed omnia in futurum reseruantur incerta. There be (says he) both wise
and just men, and the doings of them remain in the hand of God, and yet
knows no man whether he stand in the grace or indignation of God. But all
those judgments be reserved in the secret knowledge of him self unto the
end. And to this end be all men's deeds reserved to the last judgment of
God, because there can nothing be hidden, covered, or kept secret, neither
shall the least thought he unknown unto that severe judge, that ever crept
into the soul of man. But albeit no man can be assured by his own knowledge
in this state of life, that he stands and remains in the favor of God, yet
by certain conjectures, he may assuredly believe it, specially if he know him
self free from any deadly sin, of the which he has not already repented him
self, and either confessed him self, or else purposes assuredlye* to confess
the same to his ghostly father in time convenient: And therewith if he find
him self apt, redye, and wyllyng to the doing of those things, wherewith God
his honor may be advanced, if he delyght in hearing of the holy and sacred
word of God, read and preached, if he seek to be often present at the divine
service and praise geuyng to the name of God: And finally, if he intend as far
forth as he may, to abstain and flee from thence forth, from all contagious
corruption of sin: Ueryly this man may assuredly believe that he is* and
consists in the state of grace, and in the favor of God. But to know this
assuredly, no man shall be able, except he be illuminate with some other special
light of knowledge and revelation. And therefore for this cause it shall be
necessary for all men to conteyne and keep them selves within the limits and
bounds of some reverent fear, and to continue knockyng at the gates of the
mercy of God, by importune prayer, trauaylyng for his grace and favor. And
this fear is taught and persuaded unto us, by holy Scripture, where it is
written: De propiciatu peccatorum noli esse sine metu. Be not out of fear,
Eccle. v.
and altogether careless of thy sins forgeuen. And surely this fear shall
do so much good to man, that if the sorrow he has already taken for sin, be
not sufficient, now the goodness of God allowyng this reverent fear, accepting
the fervent prayer that grows from the same, it shall plentifully satisfy
and appease the wrath of God, for all our sins and offenses against him. But
if we did grant that there were some man that had assured knowledge of the
full and absolute forgeuenes of his sins, and that he knew him self, now
perfectly reconsiled to might confirm by the testimonies of many, as well holy
doctors, as credible Historiographers. But to our purpose, by that which is
alredye said, it is plain and apparaunt enough, that every man has need to
pray continually, as well to obtain pardon and forgeuenes of his sins past,
as to avoid the perilous dangers of such euylles, as be imminent toward
him. And now (as I suppose) it is sufficient to have remembered these four
reasons to prove the necessity of prayer. We will therefore according as we
tofore have promised in the second part, somethyng say of the great fruit
and wonderful commodity that grows to man by prayer.

Of the three chief and principal fruits of Prayer.
BUT albeit those reasons before mentioned seem very strong and well able to
move the minds of men to prayer, yet are there many slow, dull, and unapt to
perfo^rme this bond of duty. The chief cause why, is, because the^ do not
taste nor savor the pleasauntnes which many virtuous devout men, many times do
feel in prayer. And they will say, that wyllyngly they would pray, so as
they might once taste of the sweetenes which they here some other do find in
prayer. But these men remember not, that the sweetenes of prayer can not be had
where prayer is not, and therefore to be obtained by frequent use thereof before,
and than afterward they may assuredly look for the pleasant sweetenes which
grows thereby. And in deed it is ye long use and daily continuance of prayer,
which brings forth this delight aforesaid in ye mind of man, like as long
continued walkyng both breed unto the body, warmth and heat. For like as he
that goes a while up and down, and walks forward and backewarde, here and
there, after some motion of his body, at the last feels heat: even so after
that a man has long used and acquainted him self with prayer, there grows
in his soul a certain spiritual sweetenes and heavenly delectation,
wherewith he is beyond measure ravished and pleased. But albeit that every
manne that prays, attayneth not in his prayer to this pleasauntnes, The
fruits or commodities of prayer.
yet is he not utterly frustrate and void of other fruits and great
commodities, which he may gether by prayer. For there be three sorts of
fruits principallye growyng unto men in the time of their prayer: which three
kinds of fruits be so diverse, that a man may easyly obtain the first of
them, wantyng both the last. For a man may by prayer, procure favor and
reward at Gods hand, and yet not obtain the thing which in his prayer he
requires. As Saint Paul confesses him self, to have prayed thrice unto
god, ii. Cor. xii.
to take from him the concupiscence, or rebellion of his flesh, wherewith he
was gre^uously afflicted, and obtained not his request therein: And yet it is
certain and sure, that he lost not the reward and merit of his good and
godly prayer. Again, the two first may both be had, and the third yet not
obtained, as when we see many which make humble request to God for the
forgeuenes of their sins, obtain both pardon of God, which they require,
and besides that, are assured of the reward at Gods hand (for that God works
according to his promise) and for all this, are not always refreshed with the
spiritual joy and pleasure of their soul. of perfect charity, that is to
say, he that is already by charity in the grace and favor of almighty God,
when he prays. And therefore whosoever desires not to be defrauded of this
reward, has first to care and labor diligently that charity have first root
in his heart and soul, which being so, than is not only his prayer to be
judged meritorious, but also every other deed he does, proceeding from the same
root and foundation. And the more it has of charity, the greater must the
merit be. As thus: They are most worthy reward at the hand of God, that most
earnestly pray unto him for the well doing of their enemies, and evil wyllers,
forasmuch as that kind of prayer proceeds of so high a degree of Christian
charity. And therefore it shall be expedient for him that looks for any such
reward of his prayer, to study specially not to want perfect charity, that
is to say, to be when he prays in the favor of god, and state of grace, the
which thing as great as it is, yet may it be most easyly of every man
obtained, be he never so grievous a sinner, as Saint Chrysostom does at large
affirm, writing upon the Gospel of Saint John, saying thus: That man which
desires to be in that state, let him but repent and return from sins,
purpose assuredly with himself to lead a new life in following of Jesus
Christ, and he is even than of a sinner made ryghteous, and has this charity
so acceptable to God, and consequently (being thus justified) prays in the
favor of God and state of grace. Which saying of Saint Chrysostom may well
be confirmed by the Prophet Ezechiell, who from the mouth of God him self
promises, Ezech. xi.
that in what hour soever a sinner shall mourn in heart for his sin and
evil life, all the same will God cover with oblivion, and no more remember
them to punish the same. Omnium iniquitatem eius non recordabor. I will not
(says the Prophet in the person of God) remember again or take vengeance of
any of his sins. But we may be sure, and must believe, that sins are by none
other means blotted out and removed from the sight of God and his
remembrance, but by the gifts of his grace and perfect charity. By the
means of the which, it is wrought, that the sinner which is returned and
fled from his sin, that is to say, which is hartyly and truly penitent for
his former evil life, being now whollye brought to humble obedience unto the
will of Christ, is truly judged to be now placed in the state of grace and
charity. Wherefore, forasmuch as repentance and amendment of our former
euyls, and the (...) and change of our old life, depends partly of our own
will, which is free to every man, and partly of the help of the grace of God,
which is denied to no man, but him that has not that good will and desire
aforesaid, to ^^aue the same: it shall be very easy for every sinner, by those
means, even in a moment, to be made of a sinner, just and ryghteous, so as he
effectually will and intend the same, and therewith repose a steadfast hope in
the mercy and goodness of God. And therefore, whosoever, intendyng to pray,
eftsoon renueth and refreshes his faith in Christ Jesus, and detestyng the
fylthynesse of his former life, purposes with him self from thencefoorth to
abstain from sin, and to do all other things according to the will and
commandment of God and his Church, he may undoubtedly be accounted in the
state of charity and the grace of god, and shall not want the fruit of his
prayer, that is to say, such merit as shall accordynglye be recompensed and
rewarded in everlasting felicity.

Thus much hitherto have we said of the first fruit of prayer.

uses it, neither yet to ascribe unto it self, that by it self either this
key, or this nail was made and fashioned, but only by the Smyth, vsyng the
hammer as his tool and instrument. Even so is it not lawful for us to dispute
blasphemously against God, that of our selves, or of our own power we have
done these works, but only by the aid, help and workmanship of his grace, by
the which he rayseth and lyfteth us up to do any good deed, like as the Smyth
does his hammer to frame his work, and by us as his instruments he brings
to pass this his work in us. And therefore we are all bound to render
continual thanks to almyghtie God, with all the humility and meekness we
be able, that he vouchsaueth to use us as his instruments in the doing of
these good works, whereas if it so had pleased his goodness, he might and
were able to work the same by any other, and peradventure so much the more
fruitefully, as those other might be more apt, ready, and pliaunt to the
execution of the work of God than we be. But when a man has with this
consideration, in all humility dejected him self in the sight of the majesty
of God, it is further very necessary, that he do diligently examine and weygh
with him self, what it is that he intends to require of God in his
supplication and prayer, lest perhaps his request be hurtefull unto him
self, and such a peticion no man ought to look for at Gods hand. For
almighty God who is of his own nature most gracious and well wyllyng to man,
can not grant to his beseacher and suppliaunt his suite and request, where as
it is known unto his divine wisdom, that the same shall be hurtful and
peryllous unto him that requires the same. And we be assured that God knows
all those things as well that be or may be hurtful unto us, as those that be
or may be expedient and profitable, before we require the same. And therefore
we do not at all times obtain of GOD the things which we do require,
specially when he sees that our rerequestes tend to our own h^r^e and
destruction. There is also a third thing required to (...) this fruit
aforesaid, that is to say, that the thing which we require of God, apperteyne
unto our selves. For albeit that we be bound to pray for our neighbors, yet
are we not always hard when we pray in that sort, and specially ^s touching
the fruit which we now be in hand withal: for that man for who^ we re^uire
any thing at the hand of God, is perhaps either unworthy to receive that
grace and ^^vour from God, or else the thing it self is nothing necessary for
his own health and well doing. Nevertheless, if for those causes we do not
obtain the thing which we require, yet is not our prayer utterly unprofitable,
nor wholly void of merit, for he can not but deserve well that prays so:
Like as the Prophet says, Psalm. 34.
Oration (...) in sinu meo conuertetur. My prayer (says he) shall be turned
again into mine own bosom, which is as much as if he had said: Uerylye my
prayer which I make for others, if it profit not them, yet shall it not be
void of all fruit and commodity, for I know that at the least it shall turn
unto mine own merit, the profit thereof shall come to me, and my prayer shall
return with gain, into mine own heart and bosom. Therefore if the prayer of
any man be grounded upon the pyller of humility, and be exhibited unto God,
for his own comfort, relief and necessity, and require nothing hurtefull or
inconvenient for him self, let him proceed and go forward in the name of our
Lord God, whosoever he be thus affected, nothing mistrustyng, but the thing
which he in this wise humbly requires, he shall graciously obtain, nothing
mistrustyng I say, because Saint James does promise so, saying: Postulet in
fide, Jacob. ii.
nichil besitans and dabitur ei. Let him (says he) require in a faith not
waueryng nor doutfull, and his request shall be granted unto him. And likewise
our Savior Christ in the Gospel says thus. Mar. xi.
Quicquid orantis, petitis, credit quia accipietis, and fiet vobis. What thing
soever ye require by prayer, believe that ye shall obtain it, and your desire
shall be performed. And now this shall suffice for the declaration of the
second fruit of prayer, and how and by what means we may obtain the same.

Of the third fruit of Prayer.
THE third fruit of prayer we have before noted to be a certain spiritual
sweetness and pleasure, wherewith our mind is delyghted in the time of our
prayer, of the which fruit whosoever desires to be partaker, must of
necessity not only have charity, humility, and the other means before
spoken of, but he must also be marvelous attentyue unto the prayer he is in
hand withal, and not permit his mind and imagination to wander abroad to
any thing from the matter of his prayer. And albeit this diligent
attentyuenesse be necessary and expedient for any man that desires to enjoy
the other two fruits of his prayer, that is to say, merit and the obteynyng
the thing duly and lawfully required: yet may it suffice toward the gettyng
of either of those, if the mind of him that prays were earnestly bent in the
beginning and first entry into his prayer, so as he do not afterward by his
own will and purpose divert his mind, and suffer it to wander from his
prayer. For if in the very first beginning of prayer, a man's mind be both
wyllyng and studious to attend wholly thereunto, although afterward it be by
frayltie led aside, or by a certain obliuious negligence withdrawn from
that former entente and action, it shall not therefore lose the fruits and
commodities whereof before we have spoken, but by the effectual intent and
assured purposed determination, in the beginning of his prayer, he together and
fasten them unto GOD, least that in the continuance of prayer, by the means
of some light negligence, his mind be carried away to the imagination and
thinking of other strange and inconvenient things. And therefore for this
cause the old fathers of the Church of Christ, being endowed with great
virtue and holiness of life, as often as they were minded to pray, they went
forthwith in hand to gather their minds together, and by diverse means to
stir up devotion in them, sometime praying upon their knees, sometome being
alone, lying prostrate upon the ground, sometime extendyng forth their arms
in manner of the cross of Christ. And now and than exaltyng their hands up
toward the heavens, sittyng in the mean time solytary and musyng, talking
most comfortably with God him self, and devoutly syngyng some himpne or other
psalm. By these means and such other as seemed most commodious unto them,
they used marvelous effectually to raise up them selves to contemplation and
devotion, so far forth, that they very often times tasted of that
superexcellent, and in deed inexpressible sweetness. And suerly the only taste of
this kind of sweetenes exceeds, without comparyson or excepcyon, all the
pleasures of this world. For this one thing comprehends presently in it
self, all kind of pleasure and delyght, and is the fountain and spryng of al
manner of goodness, with the which, what thing else soever thou shalt compare,
is utterly nothing, nor can be of any manner effect or moment. And that thing
verily is god himself, who very often does with a marvelous grace and favor
show and present him self to them that with devout contemplacion, seek and
look for him. Of the which it follows, that whenever that most excellent
goodness is once tasted by the inward understanding of our soul, a
marvelous sweetness is forthwith dispersed and felt through the whole mind:
so far exceadynge all imagination of man, that no tongue first and
principally with all his power, often as he can, renew the memory and
remembrance of the incarnation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, together
with all the process and continual action of his life, and than let him
inculcate and imprint fast in his heart, the religious and thankful memory of
his bitter death and passion, addyng to this, tried, and examined by us, it
shall be very manifest and easyly to judge and perceive, what kind of prayer
ought to be esteemed most excellent and most fruitful. And therefore we will
with diligence search out something for the explanation of every of those three
things, that is to say: whereunto we ought to intend our minds in prayer,
how long or short our prayer ought to be, and how we ought to pronounce and
utter the same.

To what thing we ought chiefly to bend our mind in the time of our prayer.
First let us discuss this, whether the force of our minds be to be directed
to the words, the sense of the words, or to him we utter the words unto. And
to this first we say, that if a man were of such dexterity and redynes that he
could attend all those things together in his prayer, so as the heed taking
either to the words, or the meaning of the words, should nothing slack his
diligent and attentive mind to god him self, that manner of prayer, were
doubtless most excellent and beneficial. But because it can scarcely be
possible that a man in earnestly heedyng and intending one of these, shall not
negligently omit and forget the other, let us therefore perticulerly inquire of
every one, which is the better, more necessary, and more fruitful. And
amongst these, there is no man that diligently considers the thing, that can
or need to doubt, but that the attention which is directed unto GOD him self,
is the chief and most meritorious, so that all other things be agreeyng unto
the same, that is, if that same prayer directed unto God, be in no wise more
negligent than the other, which is intended either to the words or meaning.
And we mind that this understanding be accepted and taken, not only in such
prayers as a man appoynteth to him self, of his own will and choice, but
likewise in all other, whereunto we be bound by the ordinance of the Church.
And surely many there be of so weak and scrupulous minds, that being in fear
to escape or miss one word or silable in saying their appointed service and
prayers, bend all the power of their mind, to express the words, truly,
plainly, and disti^^tly. But those men (as I think) never or very rarely taste
of the sweetenes of devotion and prayer, for the which cause chiefly our
forefathers of the Church, did appoint those canonical prayers, as we use to
call them. For those old and holy men, specially had respect unto this: And
this was their most earnest purpose and paynefull study, by the saying of those
virtuous, godly, and devout prayers, to stir up the minds of the Priests,
who should be the means between God and the people, to the contemplation of
God him self, and so to the true love of him. And therefore if a man be so
attentive and diligent in uttering the words of prayer, that he neither
regard nor observe the scope and end which the holy fathers (when they
ordained those prayers) judged and determined chiefly to be considered, I may
in no wise allow or commend this manner of prayer, either as chief, or more
fruitful than the others. And yet would I not that others, which
contrarywyse so rashely run over the prayers appointed, that scarsely they
can understand them selves for haste, neither regardyng the superexcellencie
of him, to whom they pray, neither yet imagining of any further sense and
meaning of the words they speak, I would not (I say) that those should make
my speech before, any manner of color of defense for their errors and abuses.
For I speak it not with that mind to mislike or condemn them that regard
the words they speak, who I know do observe and fulfill the law and order:
but to this end, to persuade unto those a more excellent manner of prayer, and
therewith more fruitful. It may be also, that those which are chiefly sensible
taste and feeling of that supreme delectation and comfort, which he only
knows, whom God has granted to taste the same. But mark and remember this,
that the imagination which our mind frames to it self of GOD, must neither
be subject to color, light, figure, or briefly any wordly or corporal shape,
for all those things being creatures, are plainly besides God. And we seek
to join our selves with God and nothing else, beside him. And therefore if a
man will ryghtly think of God him self, let his mind ouertunne all worldly
creatures, and conceive him only alone which is highest, best, most
excellent, most mighty, and him that without exception, does unspeakably
excede all other things. If thou can this do, than think the same to be
present with thee, and yet without imagination either of color, light shape,
or form whatsoever, and than have thou ryghtly thought of God. In which
work and busynes, if thou be paynefull, and will diligently exercise thy
self, than shall thou surely at the last attain to the sensible taste and
feelyng of that unspeakable pleasure, and so shall thou at once obtain all the
three fruits of thy prayer. But yet if this manner and form of doing, seem at
the beginning hard and uneasy to any man, let him first exercise him self in
thinking and contemplation of Jesus Christ, who besides his humanity is also
very God. Let him lift up the strength of his mind toward him, as being very
God, remembryng his incarnation, his bitter pains and cruel death, and
therewith the glory which he now ineffably enjoys in heaven, sitting on the
right hand of the Majesty of his father. He that will diligently apply his
mind to this, or any other more apt or fruitful meditation of God, shall at
the last fall from the corporal imagination of Christ in his human nature,
and shall ascend and aspire to the spiritual contemplation of his godhead, as
has been beforesayde. And this truly is the very next way for any man, to
attain to the fruition of the perfect and partaker of the same joy and
delight, and is now made in such estate, that it feels a delectation
merueylous, and such as it never tasted before, which thing is affirmed by
the Prophet David, saying: Cor meum and caro mea, Psalm. 83.
exultauerunt in deum viuum. My heart and my flesh have reioysed together in
God, the au^thour and geu^r of life. As though he would have said, my soul by
the goodness of the spirit of God, has conceived in it self, so merueylous a
delyght in god, that by the great delectation thereof, even my flesh is also
replenished and watered over and over, wherein it has so reioysed, that it
could not refrain or stay it self from expressyng and showing forth the
pleasure which it had received. And surely this delectation is a very sparkell
or glimering resemblaunce of the everlasting life, which all good men shall
have after the general resurrection of their bodies. For than shall the glory
of the soul so far excede and abound, that it shall run over into the
bodies, and than shall both as well body as soul be fulfilled and satisfied
with the plentiful abundance of that unspeakable pleasure. And therefore as
touching this first question, it may appear by that which has been said,
that the chief and special thing to be regarded in prayer, is, to have our
minds so fixed on God, unto whom we make our prayers, as though we esteemed
him even now present with us, and so embrace the continual remembrance of
him, keeping him before the eyes of our hearts without any manner declynyng from
him. And albeit this shall seem in the first beginning of this exercise hard
and paynefull, yet shall it by use and process of time prove more pleasant
and delightful, specially to those souls which be any thing inspired with
the sweetness and good savor of Jesus Christ. And now let us draw to the
intreatyng of the second question.

hot nor cold, God despises, before whom, in the Apocalippes, he prefers
those that be utterly stark cold, saying: Vtinam calidus esses aut frigidus,
sed quia tepidus es, incipiam te euomere. I would thou had ben either
hot or cold, but for that thou art neither of both, I will begin (says
God) to reject thee and cast thee forth from the company and fellowship of good
men. Lo than how the mind of God abhorteth those persons that be newters, and
be neither hot nor cold. We must therefore endeavor our selves by all means
to be fervent in charity, for the kyndelyng of the which in us, no doubt
prayer is the most necessary thing. The which charity being once gotten, we
be encouraged cherefullye to take in hand all doings, which we trust shall
please God, and for the doing whereof, we shall by the goodness and promise of
God, be rewarded with everlasting joy and felicity. And therefore our special
endeavor in the time of our prayer, ought to be, that the fervent heat of
charity might be kyndeled in our hearts, and in such sort shall it be
convenient to moderate the length of our prayer, so as that end may both be
acquired and preserved in us. And therefore when we in our prayer do perceive
this feruentnes of mind once kyndled in us, by the weakness and wearynes of our
bodies to wax cold and faint, than is it time to cease from prayer, and
occupy our selves about some other virtuous exercise. For if we should so long
continue, that the feruentnes of devotion should be utterly extynguyshed in
us, we should not only not obtain the end which is sought for by our prayer,
but we should also give no small occasion to procure the contrary. For so sone
as by ouerlong continuyng in that dullness of prayer, the feruentnes thereof and
devotion is once cold in our minds, we do forthwith lose the inward
consolation of our minds, which that feruencie of devotion, not being
utterly extynguyshed, wrought and preserved in us, whereby it does many times
follow that we wander abroad, sekyng some sensible delectation and comfort of
external things, which most commonly induces a pernicious dissolution of the
mind, and by degrees draws it unto such other euyls as be not convenient,
which would never have chanced, if we had ceased our prayer before the
feruencie of devotion had ^tterlye ben extynguyshed. And therefore Saint
Augustine does much p^^se certain Monks in Egypt, which used very short, and
therewith very devour and godly prayers. The religious people in Egypt (says
Saint Augustine) be noted to use very often prayers, but those very short and
pithye, and (as it were) (...) thrown from their hearts into the bosom of
almyghtie God. And it appears, that this was the cause why they used so often
prayers, because they would oftentimes renew and kyndle again the fire of
devotion in their hearts: But the cause why they used short prayers was only
this, lest by length of prayer and tediousnes therein, fervent devotion before
conceived, might be dulled, cooled, and finally extynguishe^. And therefore a
man in prayer must specially labor and take heed, that when God has once
kyndled that fervent devotion in his heart, he by negligence suffer not the same
utterly go out and dye. But so long as the same may either be increased or
continued, we ought not to leave of prayer, except either the great
weerysomenes of our bodies, or some other like necessity enforce us. Wherefore
both the shortness and length of prayer, is to be ruled and measured, to and for
this end aforesaid. For like as the physician, regardyng the end of his
cure, which is the recovery and health of his pacient, does temper his
medicine, and ministers it to the sick, not in such abundance as he might
do, but as by discretion he ought to do, having regard both to the gettyng and
continuyng the health to his pacient: even so, a man in prayer must not labor
to pray as much and as long as he can speak, but to continue the length of his
prayer as much as shall be necessary and expedient either for to increase or
continue his earnest and fervent (...)

Whether the prayer of the heart only be more fruitful than that wherein the
mouth and heart also is occupied.
IT rests now to be discussed, whether that prayer be more beneficial to
man, which he makes with his heart only, or that which is both uttered from
his heart, and with his mouth. And here I make this protestation, that I do in
no wise purpose or intend any thing to say in the disprayse or otherwise, to
the derogation of open prayer by words, which is either admitted by custom
and the use thereof, or appointed by the ordinance of the Church, or enjoined
unto any man by penance, or by any means vowed, or in heart by promise taken
in hand, whereby any man stands bound to resite and say his prayers. But yet
I do think that a man which is free from any such bond, and enjoys full and
perfect liberty in Christ, and is studious of the most pure and healthful
manner of prayer, shall be oftentimes more hyndered by the continual use of
praying inwordes, than by the exercise of his heart alone, in making of his
prayer unto God. For as Saint Augustine in an Epistle unto Proba writes of the
fruit of prayer: Augustinus Epist. i. 12. Capi. 10.
This work is many times more perfectelye wrought by the syghyng of the heart
than by pronouncing of the mouth, more effectuallye done by the inward
workyng, than by outward speaking. But if the work of prayer be more
perfectly performed by the syghyng of the heart, than with the vtteraunce of
the mouth, than must it needs follow, that the prayer of the heart, from the
which those syghynges break forth, be more profitable than the praying with
the mouth, whereby words only be uttered. And that may of right be judged,
Ciprianus de oratione dominica, Sermon. 6.
for as S. Ciprian does witness, God gives ear, not to the voice of man's
mouth, but to the cry of his heart, nether is he to be moved with words, which
sees all thoughts. And therefore any simple poor man, which being with great
humility pr^strate to the ground, lying like a most vile abject, confessyng
him self a sinner, openyng his own miseries, and showing forth the most
secret griefs of his heart before the sight of god vtteryng no words at all,
but only powryng forth abundance of tears and syghes of his heart, that
man (no doubt) shall most spedyly obtain his request of God: which thing did
most manyfestly appear in Anna the mother of Samuel. i. Reg. i.
For this Anna (as it is written in the first book of the kings) did most
earnestlye require of GOD, being barreyne, to have a child, for the obteynyng
whereof, she did frequent the Temple, and there by daily prayer she continually
craved the goodness of God, that in her request he would be gracious unto
her: And yet did she not frame her prayer in words, but only in her heart. For
the Scripture testifies, that she spoke to God with her heart, and that no
word was hard that came from her, only her lips moved. To conclude, by
this her prayer (of heart I say, without speech outwardlye pronounced) she
obtained the thing she required of God, and had a son, which she so greatly
desired, and had begged of GOD, with many sighs and abundance of weeping
tears, and yet no words by her mouth uttered. Saint Jerome agrees with
this, expoundyng this place of Saint Mathewe.

Tu cum oraueris intra in cubiculum tuum, Math. vi.
and clauso ostio ora patrum tuum. When thou do pray, enter into thy
chaumber, and shuttyng fast thy door, pray unto thy heavenly father. It
seems unto me (says S. Jerome) that this is rather a precept, that we
keeping secretly in the thought of our hearts, and having our voice suppressed
with silence, should so make our prayers unto God, which we also read in the
book of the kings, that Anna did, where it is written that her lips only
moved, but no voice was hard. This much Saint Jerome writes. And surely this
manner of prayer, does vehementlye move the ears of the mercy of GOD, and does
mightyly bow them spedyly to hear us: Yea, and as Saint Paul witnesses, the
holy spirit of God, is the guide and the derectour of this manner of prayer,
saying: Romans viii.
Quid oremus sicut oportet nescimus: sed ipse spiritus postulat pronobis
gemitibus in enarrabilibus. What we should pray, as we ought to pray, we know
not: but the spirit himself makes request for us, with unspeakable
mourninges and sighinges. The meaning whereof is, that we do not sufficiently
know in what manner we ought to demand any thing of God, but the very spirit
of God inwardly raysyng up our hearts, makes us with unspeakable moan and
intercession to require of God, that thing which is most profitable for us.
And yet do I not deny, but that any devout man may right well begin his prayer
as he list, with words pronounced by his mouth, but so soon as he shall
perceive his heart to be any thing kindled and inspired with a sweet
delectation coming from the spirit of God, than shall it be most commodious
to him, leauyng his prayer in words, to follow and give heed to the leadyng
of the spirit of God, and with silence to yield himself wholly to his
direction and order. For as I have said a little before, the end which we ought
to appoint upon in prayer, is specially the feruentnes of charity, by the
which at the last our minds be kyndled, when with most diligent prayer, our
hearts be strongly raised, and our minds be highly lyfted up unto the
beholding of god. And therefore whenever we may perceive our selves to have
atteyned unto this end, than must we apply al our endeavor and diligence, that
as much as may be, the same be continued in us, which thing shall doubtless
much better proceed, by the guiding and operation of the holy spirit, than by
any words uttered by our never so great industry and diligence. And therefore
we must now with all our power follow the motion and driving of the spirit of
God, whyther soever it will lead us, and so need not to utter any mo words.
In like manner as if a man, A similitude aptly applied.
when after much travail, he has passed the Seas, and has obtained
harborowe and his desired Haven, leauyng his ship which brought him to the
haven, intends now to the end and purpose for the which he arrived, and
thinks now no more of his ship. Even so verily, he that by the use of
pronounced prayer, as by a mean, is carried into the inward consolation of the
mind, and comes to the spiritual feruencie in God, ought now to have his
principal care and study bent on this, that this heat in no wise wax cold,
and leauyng now the prayer of the mouth, he must follow the spirit of God,
the minister of this fervent devotion, whyther soever it does drive him. And
now let him not use any more his own words, but only those which be
suggested inwardly in the heart by that holy spirit of God, and let him ask
that of God with vehement and fervent devotion of mind, without any
pronuntiation or sound of words. But to the end thou may more plainly
and assuredly perceive, that this manner of prayer, which is done by the
spirit and mind, is much more excellent, than that which is uttered in
words, hear what our Savior Christ says in ye Gospel: Spiritus est deus,
John. iiii.
and qui adorant eum in spiritu and veritate oportet adorare. God is a spirit,
and they that adore him, must adore him in spirit and truth. Lo, as God is a
most spiritual thing, even so requires he a most spiritual sacrifice. And
therefore that prayer is more grateful unto him, which is offered by the
spirit and the mind, than the only gross vtteraunce of the voice, which can
not be framed without the bodyly breath. And let not this move the, that
Adorare, is named in that place, and not Orare, for the one of them shall never
well be without the other, but when God is prayed unto, than is he also adored,
and when he is adored, he is also prayed unto. And therefore God wylbe
entreated with spirit and mind of the most chosen and excellent minds,
which he most spiritual, and desires, such as in his Gospel he notes, to
honor and adore him in spirit and truth. Wherefore I nothing doubt, but many
godly and spiritual men (which have diligently exercised them selves in
prayer, and have accustomed daily to eleuate their hearts unto GOD, and have at
some times tasted and conceived the sweetenes of that fervent affection) have
much more profited by that prayer of their heart, than if they had said an
endless number of prayers and Psalms with their mouth, which thing some do,
ouerchargyng their minds, yea, and rather excluding them selves from the very
end of prayer, for that in that case, they can never be able to taste the
spiritual sweetenes of perfect prayer. And out of doubt, that desire and
travail to perform the saying of so great a number of Psalms, does many
times hinder and turn away the gracious visitation of God from the hearts of
them that labor in them, which otherwise he would willingly and redylye
exhibit unto them. A similitude declaryng the redye assistence of God in
Prayer.
For like as the son does every way disperse and sprede abroad the beams of
his light, even so is God redye on every side, to power forth upon us the
sweetenes of his grace and goodness, except by such lettes and hinderaunces,
all excess and entry to our minds be stopped, and the way hidden from us, as
it were with a thick and dark miste. For he that desires to be partaker of
that sweetenes, may in no wise give heed to any other thing whatsoever it be,
but attend only and wholly to God himself, yea, and that withal his heart.
But those other attend never a whit to God, but only regard how to utter
out those number of words, which they mind to say: Neither do they consider
the present Majesty of god, but only how they may most speedyly run over
their number of psalms, with the care whereof, they do so occupy and overcome
their minds, that no drop of heavenly sweetenes, can in any wise enter into
them. And yet do they think and persuade themselves, that by so doing they
shall specially please God, and can not be quiet or satisfied in conscience,
until they have by one way or other, ouerrunne and finished that huge number
of Psalms. Yea, and if they chance by forgetfulness to pretermit any part
vnsayde of that (I mean not which the Church appoynteth to be said) but
which they of their own will have taken in hand to say, they find their
conscience greeuouslye therewith offended, wherewith they be miserably
tormented, and their hearts torn and rent. Those men truly do not
sufficiently waygh the saying of S. Jerome, which is this, that the saying or
singing of five Psalms with a pure and sincere heart and spiritual joy and
gladness, is more worth than the whole Psalter, ouerrun with an unquiet and
troubled mind. And yet is it more marvel that they hear not, or at the
least mark not Christ himself in the Gospel, geuyng admonition and
instructing such as pray, not to bend their labor to speak much, saying in
this wise: Orantis, nolite multum loqui. When ye pray, Math. vi*
do ye not speak much, not to this end, that by those words it were to be
understood or thought that Christ misliked a long continued prayer, whereas
we read that he himself continued very long in prayer: But he would not in
any wise, that we should put a vain trust in a number of words, by one way
or other made up and multiplied, specially when they utterly wanted all
devout affection of the mind, and that we should not hope that he would
sooner be moved, with a multitude of words, than with a well affected mind.
For God is much more inclyned to hear our petitions by the only fervent
affection of the heart, than by never so great a number of words pronounced
without such affection. For the which cause Saint Augustine says thus. It
is one thing to speak much, and far an other to be much and well affected.
It is one thing (says he) to continue speech long, and much another to
continue devotion long. That man speaks much to God, that thinks his mercy
is to be won with a number of words only. But truly he uses not to be
moved with the multitude of speech, but with the quantity and abundance of
devotion and godly affection. And the bare sound of words pronounced by the
lips only, makes a very dull sound in his ears. But the fervent and
vehement affection of the mind, does quickly and speedyly penetrate them, and
that because God is much more delyghted with our godly affection, then with
our bare prayer, and specially when that affection being accompanied with
fervent sighs and aboundau^t tears, do pearse the heavens. Truly that manner
of prayer, if God were (in a manner) vnexorable, would overcome him to mercy,
and be he never so omnipotent, will bind him to grant our lawefull desires.
And surely the same prayer, is much rather framed and perfected in the spirit
and mind of man, and so sooner presented unto God, than by any words that
man's mouth is able to perform or express. For the spirit and soul of man,
being once quickened and kindeled with the fervent fire of devotion, much
sooner dispatcheth his intent and purpose, than any motion of the lips, or
framed prayer of the mouth were able to do, which thing (if none other) makes
apparaunt the thing whereof we have so long entreated, that is to say, the
prayer of the mind and soul only, to be more excellent and better, than the
prayer of the mouth: forasmuch as both the motion of the lips is very slow,
and the corporal weight of the tongue, uttering forth his words, not so apt
to follow the quickenes of the spirit, and also much hynderaunce follows by
openyng and shuttyng the mouth, so that they can not in any wise, serve the
swift motion of the soul and mind, and specially at such time, as the mind
is inflamed, and devotion feruentlye kynde^ed therein. For in that case, it is
carried with such a swyftnes, that the fleshelynes of the mouth, tongue, and
lyppes, can in no wise follow it: And if they should, yet do they bring no
benefit to the spirit, but only a wayght and heavy burden. And therefore I
would admonyshe all such as delight in prayer, and willingly study to serve
God therewith, and specially such as have leisure to attend the same, and to
bestow very much of their time therein, that they do not unprofitably ouerlode
themselves with to many words in prayer, but that they would from henceforth
daily bestow so much time in kyndlyng their minds, in casting their
thoughts and affections upon God, and in the receiving his merciful
visitation, into the bowels of their hearts, as they have spent less
fruitfully heretofore, in ouerrunnyng a multitude of words with small
consideration or weyghing of them, to the end that by this mean, they may at
the last obtain and come unto the taste and feeling of that unspeakable
sweetenes, which thing surely they shall attain unto, if they first do
worthyly prepare them selves in such sort, as we have showed before, and than
do humblye offer their minds in the sight of God, and finally apply their
careful study and intent, to perform and finishe their prayer, with all
attention and diligence of their hearts* And yet they shall do well to begin
with vocal prayer, and specially with such, whereby they have found them
selves before most easyly kyndled and inflamed to devotion, and the other
contemplation of their souls. But when after their beginning a while, they
shall perceive them selves inflamed and sweetly affected with the inspiration
and merciful visitation of the spirit of God, and pleasauntly drawn toward
his heavenly presence, than leaving to utter or pronounce their prayer, let
them follow the leadyng of the holy spirit of God in them, and than let them
labor in the silent prayer of their mind, with compunction of heart, sighing,
and tears, crauyng only those things of God, which his spirit shall put
them in mind of: And chiefly to beg of God the continual presence of his
grace, so that he forsake them not, but that it may please him to grant those
things unto them, which his wisdom knows and sees to be most expedient
and profitable for them. And surely if they do persist and continue in this
trade and form aforesaid, they shall not only be unto God, daily more and
more grateful and acceptable, but they shall also proceed daily more and
more, in the increase of fervent charity, and shall be made like unto the
heavenly and Angelical minds, which daily behold the presence of God. For
what cause is there (although they remain here in earth, and be covered with
the vessel of mortal and corruptible flesh) why they should not be called
most like unto the Angels, when their prayer is like unto the prayer of the
Angels? That is to say, they pray in soul and mind, and taste in their
souls the like sweetenes as the Angels do, yea, and do perceive and feel
within them selves the pledge and assurance of the felicity to come, which
the Angels now already do enjoy: So as they do now want nothing of the
absolute resemblaunce unto the Angels, but only the fruition of the joys and
glory to come, which so soon as they be rid out of the wandering pilgrimage
and mistie darkness of this world, they shall enjoy in heaven, with an assured
certain fruition and vnaduoydable possession which after shall never fail
them.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by John Cawood, one of the Printers
to the Queens Majesty.

Qum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


