A Discourse upon Chyrurgery: Written by that famous Doctor and Knight, Signior
Leonardo Phiorauanti, Bolognese.

With a declaration of many wonderful matters necessary to be known; with
most notable secrets found one by the said Author.

Translated out of Jtalian by John Hester, and now newly published and
augmented, for the benefit of this Country:

By Richard Booth, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by EDWARD ALLDE dwelling near unto Chirst-Church. 1626.

To the gentle Reader.
HEalth, has not undeservedly obtained in the wisest men's opinions, the
highest place amongst earthly blessings, without the which the most delightful
dainties are but unsavory, the richest ornaments burdensome, and the whole
time of our life seems tedious: For the preservation and restoration of which
invaluable benefit, the Lord in his wisdom and mercy has provided diversity
of means and variety of remedies: as also has endowed man with the knowledge
of those means, whereby his present strength might be maintained and his ruind
health repaired: in the laying open of which soueraign several medicines to the
public eye of the world, many learned famous men have expended many hours
and much study, in so much as it may seem to some as frivolous and fruitless
an enterprise, as to cast water into the Ocean; notwithstanding, traveling
with the same desire of many of my predecessors, and recollecting into my
mind that ancient and approved saying of Cicero, that We are not only borne
unto our selves, I did study and endeavor to find out something in which I
might make a lively expression of my entire love and sincere affection to this
my native Country and you my Countrie-men: and in my earnest inquiry and
diligent scrutiny, I could find nothing in my judgment more conducing to a
public benefit then publishing of this compendious and brief treatise of
Chyrurgerie, first compiled by a Knight of no small fame and a Doctor of
Physic, by name Signior Leonardo Phiorauanti; which was translated out of the
Italian by John Hester of London an expert Distillator, and by my care newly
augmented: I have taken the pains, do thou accept of the profit, and let thy
harnest succeed my seed-time, the which must of necessity be plentiful, if
thou with care perusest this book, and putrest the precepts contained in it
into practice. For howsoever I might be justly branded with the ignominy of a
self conceit and foolish Philautie, if I should commend my own care or
pains, yet thus much I date co^fide^tly auerre that in this little book thou
may with much ease and facility, discover many precious preservatives against
sickness, as many restoratiues for health as ever hertofore thou have
understood: here also be those secrets and mysteries in nature disclosed, which
for a time have laid raked up in the ashes of ignorance, and have bin
altogether obscured and hid from the eye of knowledge: neither are these rules
of Physic and Chyrurgery bare likelyhoods and suppositions, but such as have
bin approved and confirmed by long experience: the way that leads to health is
chalked out and made plain by the Author, thy care only remains to walk in
it: which blessed period if thou attainest unto, as thou have the good, so let
God have the glory, neither be altogether unmindful of the Authors painful
care.

Thine as his own, RICHARD BOOTH.

HOW THAT OUR PHYSIC AND CHYRVRGERIE IS better, then that, the which the
Ancients have commonly used.
I Here is no doubt, but that our new Physic and Chyrurgerie, is better then
that, the which the Ancients have used: because it helps the sick with more
case and speed, and much more safer: and to show the truth, the Ancients had
never knowledge of our Dia Aromatico, nor of Electuario Angelica, nor of our
Pillole Aquilone, nor did not make our Siropo solutiuo, nor yet our Magno
licore, with a number of other medicines found out by me, the which are written
in the end of this book, with the which I have done wonderful cures, as thou
may read in my Thesoro de la vita humana, and truly most necessary for all
professors of this Arts, because therein thou shall stude so many goodly
experiences, and it would cause the world to wonder thereat. But to turn to
our purpose: I say that the Ancients the which had not knowledge of the true
Physic, and Chyrurgerie, as by the experience thou may see, I say not this
to speak evil of those wise ancients Doctors, that were inuentors thereof,
but I say it to say the truth, and many shall be my testimony of this truth.
Because in many Countries, where our works that are Imprinted are come, they
begin to practice after our order. And this order of curing, I repute it not to
my science, but a work that God would re^^al^ unto the world, through my
means, and to show the truth, there has been none that has found the
medicines for wounds with so much ease and brevity as I have done.

Who has ever found the true Remedy for the Gout, for the Quartain, for
Fluxez, and all sorts of Fevers, as I have done? or what is he that ever
brought the whole Art of Physic and Chyrurgerie into eight sinall Volumes as
I have done? What is he that ever writ of the Pestilence, and of his qualities
and remedies and orders to be used in the same, as I have done? And if there be
any that does not credit me, let them make experience of all that I have said,
and I promise you and swear as I am a true Knight, they shall find more truth
then I will write at this time, being as I have said, a work given of God, for
a universal benefit of all the world: and forasmuch I exhort every one of the
Professors of Physic and Chyrurgerie, to follow this our truth, because they
are of so great experience, that it seems miraculous unto man, as I have same
many years ages, to my great honor, and satisfaction of the people of the
world. And thus doing and working, thou shall come to know that our Physic
and Chyrurgerie is more better and wholesome, then that which has been used
of the Ancients until this present time.

Certain remedies, for all Captains and Soldiers that travel either by
water or by land.
THere are three infirmities, that offend the Soldiers in the Camp above all
the rest, the which are these, Fevers Wounds, and Fluxes of the body, the which
thou may help in this manner following, with these medicines, that is with
our Quintessence of wine, our Balsamo, Magno licore, Quintessence solutiua, and
Specie Imperiale, and the order to use them is thus. When any of them has a
Fever or a flux, then presently when the desease begins, let him blood in
one of the two veins under the tongue, cutting it overthwart, and this thou
shall do in the evening, then the next morning take a dose of our Imperial
powder mixed with wine, and this you may do without any diet or straight order,
that being done, give him three mornings together, half an ounce of our
Quintessence solutiue with broth. But if it be a Flux, and that the Patient is
not cured, let him stand in a cold bath of salt water of the sea three or four
hours or more, and he shall be perfectly helped.

Then as concerning wounds, as well cuts as thrusts, and as well gallings with
arrows, as hargabush shot, and other sorts, thou shall cure them thus. The
first thing that you shall do to them, is to wash them very clean with urine,
and then dry them well, then put therein our Quintessence of wine, and
presently join the parts together, and sow or stitch them close, then put
there upon five or six drops of our Balsamo, and upon the wound lay a cloth
wet in our Magno licore, as hot as he may suffer it, and this you shall do
the first day: Then the next day follow this order: First put thereon our
Quintessence, and a little of our Balsamo, and then our Magno licore very hot,
and never change that medicine, and thus doing, the wound shall heal with
great speed, and in a quarter of the time, that the common Chyrurgions is able
to do it, by the grace of God.

A short Discourse of the most excellent Doctor and Knight, Master Leonardo
Phiorauanti, Bolognesse, upon Chirurgerie; With a declaration of many things
necessary to be known: never written before in this order. Whereunto is added
a number of notable Secrets found out by the said Author.
The Proheme.
IT is to be understood, that when the Alm^ghtie Creator had made the world,
he also created all manner of beasts, as well on earth as in the water, with
other fowls, after which says the holy Scripture, he created man after his
own Image and similitude, and to him gave power over all things created, and
with the same grace and reason. Through the which he was apt to rule and have
knowledge of all through the spirit of God, as to have knowledge of all things
whereunto he gave his mind and understanding, as it is at this present to be
seen among men in the world, that have knowledge of diverse and sundry things,
all necessary for those that will line in the world with honor: For some
understand the art of husbandry, which was the first art used in the world, for
so much as without it we cannot well live as it is plainly seen. There are
other that have knowledge in keeping beasts of all kinds apt or meet for man's
body, as Goats, Kyne, Hogs, Hens, Geese, Horse, Mules, and such like. There
are other have knowledge in Navigations, without the which also the world would
be vnperset, as it is seen by experience. There be other that have knowledge
in Gosmographie, whereby they kn^w (...) parts of the world whether men may
travail. There be other that have knowledge in the art of (...) they may help
to defend their Prince and Countries, in executing of Justice. There be other
that understand Astrology, by the which they know the course of the Planets
and their effects. Other understand the Mathematics, whereby they measure land
and other things: Other study Music, to accord voices together, and other
understand Physic, to help the deseased bodies of humane creatures, and also
animales of diverse and sundry infirmities. There be other that understand
Chyrurgerie, to help all manner of fozes that happen unto men: upon which
Chirurgerie, we will write a brief discourse and pleasant reason, and will
leave apart the science that is doubtful, because there is no science in the
world wherewith a man may do good if therewith be no practice or experience,
as a man may say: The which experience is master of all things, as it is
plainly seen, and therefore we will give you to understand which of those
parts be best or most necessary in this Chirurgerie, either to help those that
are hurt, or the science, or experience. And we will show the meers truth
without any dissimulation or fraud, as I have always done in my works which
are Printed, (...) at this present do intend to do, if almighty God give me
grace, and quicken my spirits or wits in writing that which shall be to his
honor, and pr^^te to the world.

What Chyrurgerie is.
CHYRVRGERIE is both a Science and practice, and to say the truth, he that will
know the composition of man's body, must of necessity have some science, and be
Anatomist, although the same Science be a thing to be learned by practice, for
I have seen many times those which were unlearned to be expert in the Anatomy
of man's body, and those were Painters and Drawers, the which was necessary for
them to know to frame their figures accordingly: and therefore I take not that
for Science but practice, for Science is only that wherewith the cause of
every infirmity is found out, and is of small effect to our purpose, because
Chyrurgerie helps not only the cause, but also the effect after it is
known, and therefore I may say that Chyrurgerie is no other then a pure and
mere practice, and that is only necessary for the Chyrurgian to know how to
stitch a wound well, to mundifie an ulcer, and to keep it from putrefaction,
and keep it from alteration, so that there run no evil humor unto the
place offended: and to know all kind of Unguents that are apt to heal all
kind of wounds and vicers, which thing must be known by practice. And
likewise to make all manner of Unguents necessary for Chyrurgerie, and for that
cause I conclude most truly, that our Chyrurgerie is only practice or
experience. And that which causes me to bele^ue it, is, that I have always
seen the most part of Chyrurgi^s, when they should have any case in
Chyrurgerie, they knew not what (...) the sore, but many times they prove this,
and that, and so continue until they have found one that is convenient for the
sore, (...) unto it (...) and therefore this is a certain (...) medicines to
help the fore, but with experience they search it. There (...) it be so, it is
a sign that I have said the truth, and so conclude, that Chyrurgerie is a
pratise to hel^^^ores (...) bodies, and also on beasts, when occasion (...).

What Wounds ar^.
VVOunds ^e those which in Latins is called Vul^^s, and of the vulgar, ^^^ere,
and they are of tide kinds, that is, simple and compound. The simple are those
that are only in the flesh, the compound are those where are cut sinews,
veins, muscles and bones, and these are of diverse and fundre kinds. And the
difference that, is among them is, by the variety of the place where they are
wounded, and by the difference of the weapon wherewith they were hurt, for some
go right, some ouerth wart, some long, some broad, some are thrusts or
stocate, that offend diverse parts of the body. The simple are of small
importance, because if ye keep them clean and close shut, nature will heals
them without any kind of medicine. But those where veins are cut, have need
of some ^^^or practice, with the which they may stop the blood, and in any wise
not to suffer the wound remain upon, but to sow^ it up very close, so that the
vein may heal. Also those where sinews are hurt are of great importance, and
would be healed with great speed, so that the sinews may ionye with more case.
But those where bones are hurt, at not greater importance, for if the bone be
separated from the other, of necessittiet it must be taken forth, before the
wound be healed. So that by this means every one may know what wounds are, and
their kinds.

Of Ulcers, and what they are.
Ulcers are of sundry kinds, and are engendered of many causes, as hereafter I
will show. But first I will write of those kind of Ulcers that are caused of
wounds. You shall understand that wounds in what part of the body soever they
be, being impostumated, or cancrenated, they change their names, and are no
more called wounds, although the original was a wound. For when it is
cancrenated, it is called Vlcera corasiu^, because it goes eating and creeping
on the flesh. But when the wound is impostumated and full of matter, it is
called, Vlcera putrida, that is putrified, and it is because it is filthy and
stinketh. But when it is neither cancrenated nor yet apostumated, but that
through some evil disposition the wound is closed, and that there comes in
it evil qualities without alteration, then it is called, Vlcera sordida,
because therein is evil quality, and it appears but a little, but it is
evil to heal. There be other sorts of Ulcers also, the which are caused of
diverse and sundry kinds of tumors, and the most evil and mischievous, are
those that are of tumors caused of the pox, for unto those there runs
abundance of evil humors that augment the Ulcer, and they be the worst sort,
for they cannot be healed by themselves, except the body be well purged and
euacuated of all humors that are offensive. There is another kind of Ulcer the
which comes of an Impostume, as well hot as cold, and those are more gentle
and easy to be helped, if ye know the medicines that are apt to help and
dissolve those kind of Ulcers. These are the three kinds of ulcers that
commonly happen unto men and women through diverse causes, as it is said before,
so that these are the principal causes of those malign Ulcers.

Of Impostumes and their kinds.
IMpostumes are a certain kind of tumor that is called in diverse manners,
because they come in diverse places of the body, as those fortes of Impostumes
that come in the greyne, which in Venice is called Pannoche, in Rome, Tencone,
in Naples Dragonfelly, in Spain Incordi, and the Anncient called them Buboni,
and some with other names. There are other that come in all parts of the body,
and when they come in all parts of the body, they cause great pain; and then
they ripen and break of themselves for the most part, and these in Naples are
called Antrax, and in Rome Chicolim, in Venice Vo^ nasito, in Lumbardie
Vnbungo, and in Spain Un nacido mui^iliac^. There is another kind of
Impostume, that is engendered of a confusion or broose, and is properly called
Apostumato pro Amaca^ra. In the head their gr^w certain kinds of sores that
are called Talp^, (...) Topma^e, the which are of small importance, for they
may be healed in short time, as it is seens in childrens heads that are often
troubled therewith, and also in their throats, and for the most part about the
(...).

Of Fistolaes, and their kinds.
ALl manner of sores that do not cicatrize perfectly and have communication
with the inward parts, are called Fistolaes, and we to^^te them in Italian
Sofio or Spiracalo, as ye may see by experience, and this is perilous when a
Fistolae closes, being in the body, and specially those Fistolaes that are in
the fundament, for Nature her self does inge^^der it for ease. But these
Fistolaes that come in diverse parts of the body ^^e troublesome, but not
perilous: also all such sores as ^^ry long before they be incarnated come to
Fistolaes, and many times it comes through long curing, by tenting with their
tents, the which are cause that nature makes a Callow and leaves the sore so
hollow, that it will never be filled with flesh, but so remain hollow, as it
is seen easily by experience. There be other sorts of Fistolaes in form of a
sore, and they be those sores that most commonly come in the legs, the which
do purge a long time, and are also very hard to heal, because if ye heal one
of them, presently there will rise another hard by it, and that is a kind of
Fistol^e. There is another kind of Fistolae that is caused of those sores that
are upon the bone, the which by his continuance do break and consume the
skin and the bone, and these many times remain fistolated, but who so takes
away the cause of the sore, nature it self will prevail mightily and heal
it, as may be seen daily by experience in these that be so troubled. The
Fistolaes that come in the eyes, are called Fistola lacrimosa, and they have
some communication with the inward parts, and are evil to be healed, Because
first the cause must be taken away inwardly, and then nature will heal it by
it self, as I have seen by experience, so that these are the kind of
Fistolaes most known unto all men: and the causes of these Fistol^es are two;
and for my part I am fully persuaded it is so. The first, is of wounds evil
healed, that remain fistolated. The second cause I find to be of sores caused
of the pox, and to show a truth, ye shall cure them of the pox, and their
Fistolaes will heal of themselves without any other help, as it is daily to
be seen. There may be many other causes the which as yet I know not, but these
two are a sufficient reason, and to be considered of the professors of this
Art, if they desire to come to any excellency: and therefore I will reason no
more of the matter, because the science and my experience will reach no farther.

Of all sorts of scabbes.
THere be diverse kinds of scabbes, but I will only entreat of those in which
I have had most experience, and will set them forth as plain as I can, that
every one thereby may have profit. The first kind of scabbe is that which is
caused of Replexion of the body, by eating much meat of great nourishment, and
then not to digest it, so in that cause nature to ease it self, sends forth
that humiditie, and when it toyneth to the skin it ingroseth and causes an
Impostums, and passing to the outward parts, it is already corrupted, and so
causes the Pu^^ules, as by experience may be seen: and this kind is a disc^^s
and ^at humor with great humiditie. There is another kind of scabbe that is
always dry with redness, and is small, with great heat and itching, and the
same in my judgment is caused by much heat of the Lyner and adustion of
blood; and may be healed eassly. There is another kind of great scabbe, that
has a great dry crust on them and they grow big, and the same is of the
french pox being new taken. There is another kind like serpigo that goes
creeping, and has a dry trust, and ha^h no matter under it; and the same is
also of the french pox inueterated. There are also diverse other kinds, the
which I will leave at this time, because they are of small importance, and may
be helped with those medicines which are fit for the kinds aforesaid.

Of Formicola and his effects.
THose kind of ulcers that are commonly called Maldi formica, are so called
because they are a kind of maling Ulcers and corro^^ue that goes creeping
upon the flesh, and makes many holes that are lifted up on the sides and are
red, and these for the most part are caused of the pox as may be seen by
experience, and those sores are evil to be healed, because thereunto runs
abundance of humors, the which cannot be resolved but with inward medicines,
that is, with exquisite purgations that purify the blood, and that cutteth
away the evil humors that run thereunto, and cause great alteration with
burning. This kind of sore comes many times in the head, and when it comes
in that part, it is called Tigna, or the white se^^^e, and to show that this
is the truth, ye may see that those medicines which heal Formicola, does also
heal the white scalle: for this is a kind of the pox, as by the effects ye
may plainly see, for if any should say the contrary, I would answers him
again, that this may well be, because the same infirmity may be taken in the
mothers womb, or as soon as the child is borne it may take it of the nurse
that gives it suck, if she be infected with that disense, so that I conclude
it may be so. But there are a number of that kind of disease, which I let pass
because I have seen no experience of them.

A discourse of wounds and other kinds of inward sores.
VVOunds that are within the body, as in the stomach or belly or in
Testinalles, in the bladder, taines, or guts: The Milt, L^uer, Lungs, Heart or
other muskles or Arteres, as there be a number, I confess to know nothing
therein, and I will show you the reason: you shall understand that when a wound
does offend the interior parts, the Physician, or Chyrurgion or great
Anatomist whatsoever he be, cannot know all those parts offended in the body,
for after the weapon is within the body, it may turn and with the point hurt
other parts a far off the wound, and offend diverse particular parts one
different from the other, and therefore I beseech you excellent Chyrurgions,
when such a case comes, how do you know or discern which parts are hurt?
but to say the truth, I believe in that case they know all alike, but what
should I say of the cure of such a wound, if the Chyrurgion know not where it
is, nor of what importance, but works by imagination, and that nature does
preuails, and that the wound does heal, it is by the good fortune of the
Physician: so that for wounds inwardly, I conclude no other at this time, but
will leave it to those that know more then (...) and hereafter I will discourse
of v^cers and impostumes inwardly what they are, and how to cure them with our
order: ye (...) understand that there are a number of kinds of v^cers and
impostumes that maying gender inwardly, but it ^^^^eth to me so (...) to
understand, that I can determine nothing that way true, and the cause is this;
that we have seen an inftinite of Physicians and Chyrurgious, that have
visited one impostumated or vlcerated, and the Physician could not know the
place, and particular of that impostume or ulcer, if that the patient dos not
tell him and show hi^, and cause him to feel with his hand, and this is most
true, and therefore if one cannot resolve him of outward things that he may see
and feel with his hand, how can he resolve him when one of these accidents is
within the body, where the patient knows not himself, which is grieved? Truly
I would gladly know what judgment they would give of that matter, for because
if there be any impostume or ulcer in any part of the body, the sick shall
feel great offense and pain, nevertheless he cannot tell where it is, nor
what part is hurts, so that I conclude, if that the patient know not, much
(...) the Physician knows: and of this I have made a large discourse in
Caprici medicinalle, for as I have said before, in this case I know nothing.
Nevertheless when it shall come to his place, I will write a discourse of the
order to cure the most part of V^cers and Impostumes, but touching wounds. I
will promise no more then I have said before. Also I will write excellent
remedies of great exuerience, with the which all wounds, so they be not
mortal, may be helped and healed, and also the reasons convenient in that
matter.

An order to use in healing all manner of diseases apperteining unto the
Chyrurgian.
VVOunds and all other sorts of sores, are of sundry and diverse kinds, as is
aforesaid, nevertheless the order to help them is not much different one from
the other, if we should say only the truth without abuse. For ye shall
understand that Nature is the master of all things created, and the Physician
and Chyrurgion are helpers of that Nature, as the Ancient professors of that
Art have affirmed. Than seeing this is so, what need we to make so much a^oe,
having Nature that works so gently, if it be not hindered by the minister,
and therefore if we will speak of wounds, I say that the minister has three
operations to do, and no more, and the rest leave to nature that works
gently. The three operations that the Matter has to dee, are these: To de^;ens
the wound so that there runs no humors to it, and that it putrify not, and
to keep it clean, and when the minister has done that, let Nature work that
which she will work well, and if any desire to see if it will be so in effect,
ye may see by a dog, for if he has a great wound upon his body, he heals
it without any medicine, only with dye^ and keeping if cloane with his tongue,
and this is most true, that those which do help wounds by enchantment, do
nothing but keep the wound clean, and cause the patient keep a diet, and so
nature works as well on man a on a dog, the refore let none marvel of this
authority of a dog, although I approve the like of a Christian. But for so
much as it would be good to help Nature, that it might work with more
speediness, as Husbandmen do and Gardeners, who because they would have
Nature to work the better and quicker in their ground, do cast thereon diverse
sorts of dunges, etc. The which is done only to help Nature to work the
quicker: and to conclude, I say that the Chyrurgion should do the same in
helping of wounds. But as for ulcers of diverse sorts, it were necessary to be
find ^^t the cause, because they come of diverse causes for when the cause is
found; it will be (...) to (...) cause ulcers cannot come but by great (...) of
nature in (...), as by great he^^ (...) cold^ or by ^eplerinns of the body;
Therefore in this case it is necessary to purge the body: first, to ease nature
which is offended, and to extinguish the se^perfl^^us heat or cold that is in
the (...)* That ^^ing done, the minister (...) helper of Nature has the things
to dos. The first, is to mortify or ^ill the fore, the second to mundifie, and
the third to incamete, and then Nature will (...) (...) in (...), Also
impostumes are caused of diverse accidents, in the which it is also necessary to
(...) out the cause, whereby to know what purgations are (...) to purge the
body of the super^ (...) minister has the things to (...) in that case* First
to bring it to maturation quickly, then when it is ripe and broke to mundifie
it well, and thirdly to (...) it, and these are the three (...) that are to be
done in an impostume (...) so following this order, the work shall prove well
and (...) the right way, an hereafter I will show in his place, the
operatio^ns to use in that effect with the order to help them, and also to make
thy vuguents, the wing their quality and virtue, and will prous by (...) those
things that are doubtful, so that every one shall be satisfied in that matter.

Of Medicines to be used in all kind of wounds outward with ease and brouitie.
Having (...) what out ward wounds are it is also necessary to (...) the order
how to ^ure them, with as much speed and ease as it is possible, and therefore
I will begin first with simple we (...) that are only in the flesh, with out
offense of the (...) although these need no help, but only to is y^e the
lips close together, and if need be to stitch them close, and then let nature
work, the which in short time will heal them, but if thou by Art wilt help
nature, thou shall anoint them with oil of Frankencense once a day. But wounds
where veins are cut, have need of present help, and artificial means and
sufficient remedies to help it with as much speed as may be, so that the
veins cut may join again together, without any great offense of the wound,
and that is done in this order. The first thing is to join the parts close
together and stitch it well, not as the common Chyrurgions dos, but as they do
use to stitch bags, and when it is stitched close, anoint it only upon the
wound with our Magno licore, and lay thereon a cloth wet in the same Oil very
warm, then take Hipericon, with the seed, Millefolli, Viticella, ana, and make
thereof a powder, the which thou shall strew upon the wound being dressed, and
round about it: for this medicine does assuttiliate the matter that runs
unto the wound, and takes it forth with great case and without pain of the
wound, for this is the most sovereign medecin in that case, that Nature with
Art may make, and has been proved a thousand times by experience in diverse
places. But those wounds where ^ones and sinews are hurt, have need of great
artifice and cunning because they be of importance. But when the sinews be
only offended, it were necessary to stitch them presently, as I have said of
these where veins are cut, but not to dress it with Magno licore, but in
steed thereof to take out Olcum benedictum, and oil of frankencense, of each
alike: for those oils do exceedingly comfort the sinews that are cut, and
when it happens that a sinew has a puncture or is cut half way, in that
case it were necessa^^e to cut it overthwart, because it shall bring no Spasmus
to the wound, but if so be than that the bone be hurt, and that there be any
part to come forth: it were necessary to (...) the wound open, until the bone
comes forth, and then to incarnal (...) it, and this thou shall do with our
artificial Balm, for the same serves for wounds and lay thereupon the Cerote
of Gualtifredo di medi, the which heals it with speed, and so with these
orders thou may help all the aforesaid sorts of wounds (...) the defensive
to use in these wounds is this. Rec. Aqua vitae made of pure wine and that will
burn all away, and put therein Hipericon, Millifollie, Viticella, Betonica,
and then wet a cloth to that infussion, and lay it for a defensive round about
the wound, and so thou shall have thine intent to the great satisfaction of the
patient. Wounds in the head, are helped as those are, where the sinews are
offended, there are also diners other sorts of wounds which are helped with the
aforesaid remedies.

To help Vicers of all sorts.
S^ing that Ulcers are of diverse and sundry kinds, it were necessary to knew
of what kind and quality they are, so that thou waist help them in form and
order convenient, and first. I will wait of the corrosine vicers (...) a wound
Cancrenated, mal di Formicola, and other sorth of ulcers that go creeping upon
the flesh. The cure of those kinds of (...) is to apply quickly our Causticke,
to mortify the evil, the which thou shall (...) thus, wet a little ^umbaste
in our Causlicke, and therewith wash all the sore, and then leave it so open
(...) hours without hinding it fast, and when 24 hours are past, wash the
(...) with strong Vinegar and water; of (...) a like quantity, with charge
that there remain none of the Causticke in the sore, then lay thereon butter
washed, with a Cole-wort leaf until the asker or dead flesh fall away, then
take our Cerote, Magistr^le, with a little Precipitate strewed thereon, and
then anoint it with Magno licore, and lay it upon the sore, for this Cer^te
helps all manner of corrosiue ulcers without any other help, and every
plaster will serve three or four days, taking them off, every 24. hours,
and make them clean, and then lay them on again, and as for the filthy vicer
that I have showed of in his Chapter, yet shall dress them only with our
Vnguento Magno. The which without any other help will heal them quickly: But
ye must every four days touch them with Aqua fortis, drawn from Precipitate,
the which water draws forth the offensive matter, and leaves it purified and
clean, and in all other sorts of Ulcers, our Balm artificial, our Magno
licore, Oil of Wax and Terpentine, the black Cerote of Gualtifredo di medi,
our Cerote Magistrale with Precipitate, are able to helps, be they never so
evil.

The order to be used in curing Impostumes of diverse sorts.
There be many sundry kinds of Impostumes that comes to man's body, that are
caused, of diners sundry accidents, and therefore must be cured by ^ivers
orders and with sundry medicines according to his kind, because some
Impostume is caused of a confusion or bruise of flesh, some are certain
griefs, that Nature would discharge her self of, and so sends forth that
matter, some are caused of cold, other of melancholic humors, and other are
caused of corruption of the Pox, and these are the kinds of Impostumes that
commonly come, and hereafter I will show the order to cure them, one after
another.

And first of those that are caused of a confusion because it is bruised flesh,
for every contusion must be putrified and brought to matter, therefore make a
Maturatiue and bring it to suppuration, and when you know there is matter,
presently lance them and dress them with this medicine as well within as
without, the which without any other help will heal any great contusion. But
you must make the Unguent fresh every day, and with new eggs, ye shall mix
the yolke of an Egg with our Magno licore, and therewith dresss them. And as
for these Impostumes that come b^y indisposition of nature, are certain;
S^oryne, a word so called in Italian, by the which nature would prevail, it
were necessary to let those have their cures according to nature, until they
break of themselves, and when they are broken, dress them within with this
Unguent. Rec. Dyle of Roses, ounc. 6. Litarge of gold in fine powder, ounc. 2.
Storax liquida ounc. 1. Lerpentine, ounc. 2. yellow Wax ounc. 3. mix them and
boil them on the fire until it be black, and if it be too hard, put thereto
more oil of Roses, and make it in form of an unguent, and there with dress
those kinds of Impostumes, and lay thereon the Cerote Diapalma, and therewith
will be wrought miracles. Also for these Impostumes caused of cold, ye shall
use hot medicines and atractine; the Cerote of Oxicrocij is excellent in those
kind of Impostumes, our Balm artificial, or the water, and such like things
as are temperate by nature. But those Impostumes that have their original of
the French pox, we evil and maling, because their cause is maling, and will,
and therefore their cure is with great purging, and to let the Impostume ripe
of himself: and when ye launceit, dress it within with our Vnguento magno,
mixed thus. Rec. vnguento magno, nunc. 2 magno licore oune. 1. precipitate
ounc. sem. mix them well together, and therewith dress the Impostume, the
which will heal quickly and well, and lay thereon our Cerote Magistrale, with
this charge, that in all the cutes aforesaid ye purge the body well, so that
the humors tun not cuts the place offended, and use defensives according to
the kinds of Impostume, as oil of Frankensance, of Terpentine; of War, of
Henny, Aqua vitae, all these are excellent de-ensiues by themselves, annoynting
them round about the Impostume.

The order to cure all manner of Pistolaes.
FIstolaes as I have said before, are of diverse kinds, and caused of diverse
accidents, and so likewise they have need of diverse medicines: and first I will
write of those fistolaes that come of wounds evil healed, and that have made a
callow, in that order that nature cannot cicatrise and so remain fistolated:
and the cure of these kind of fistolaes is to put therein a Rupture that does
cut and mortify the callow, and causes it to fall away, and then with
incarnating medicines, incarnate them and cicatrise them, and this is the true
cure of these fistolaes. But those kind of fistolaes that nature causes, to
ease her self of some accident, commonly dos come in the lower parts about
the fundament, and they be very perilous, and not to be healed as they before
were. But they must be with purging the body, stomach, and head, the which is
to be done thus. First purge them x. or xy. days with our Magistrall Sirope,
then give them our Aromatico, and drink thereon a little white wine, then
purge the head with a perfume of Mirra, and Cinaber, after these things be done
ye shall rectify the Liver with some decoction fit for that purpose, as of
Lignum sanctum, or Salsa perillia, or such like that work effect, for this
medicine does also help Fistola lacrimosa, that commonly come about the eyes,
or ears. There be other Fistolaes in form of a sore, which must be helped with
purging, and lay upon the sore our Cerote magistrale with Precipitate and
anoint it with Magno licore, for with this Cerote only may all fistolated
sores be healed, for it does mundifie and afterward cicatrise it: there be
also diverse such like matters that are cured easily, if ye apply thereunto
those medicines that are appropriate.

To help all manner of Scabbes.
THe kinds of scabbes be many, and caused of diverse causes, and their cures
are also diverse ways.

Those that are caused of replection of the body and of gross blood, the which
is caused by eating abundance of such meats as are of great nourishment, the
which if thou will cure them, it were necessary to purge them with our Siruppe
Solutiuo. x. or xy. days, then give him or her one dram of our Aromatico in
the morning fasting, and drink thereon a cup of sweet wine, then let him
sweat three or four times, and after minoint him withour Vnguento magno two or
three times, and it will heal him of those kind of scabbes.

Now to cure that kind of scabbe that is red and small, and causes great
itching, you shall make a decoction of herbs that cool the Liver and purify
the blood, as Borage, Buglosse, Endive, Mayden-haire, Linerwort, Hart's-tongue,
Agrimony, Citrach, Succory and such like herbs, then purge with Aloes, the
tuyce of Elder roots, Iera pigra solutina, and such like as does cool the
Liver and blood, and then annoint them with Vnguento di Litargitio, and
therewith you shall help all those kind of scabbes. There be also certain
great scabe over all the body, the which are very thick, and these are a kinds
of Pox, the which may be helped with giving them our Pillole contra il mal
Francese, the quantity is according to the discretion of the Physician, and
these Pills ye shall take three times every third day and unnoynt them with
our Vnguento magno, and he shall be helped. There is another kind of scabbe
that geath creeping with a dry crust like unto potigine, and those are the
mere Pox inueterated, and the order to cure them is thus, give them, our
Sirop against the melancholic humor, because it purges the blood and cools
the Liver, and dissolueth that viscous humor that ingendreth that crust; that
being done, give them our Aromatico, and anoint them with our Magno licore,
and he shall be perfectly helped in short space. There are other kinds of
scabbes that come through great cold, and those are healed only with
anointing them with oil of Frankensence three or four times.

To help the Mal di formica.
THose be certain ulcers which go creeping in the upper part of the fiesh and
have many orifices or mouths, and these are caused of the Pox being
inueterated, the which are cured in that order that the Pox is, and that is
thus. First, purge the body with our Electuario Angelica, the which purges
away gross and malign humors, and euacuateth the stomach of cholar and
fleagme, this being done, cause the patient to sweat, for that will asubtiliate
the humors, and cause them to come forth, that being done, take our Cerote
magistrale and strew thereon Precipitate, and then anoint it with our Magno
licore, and lay it upon the sere; and there let it lie 24. hours before ye
change it then make it clean and lay it on again, for that Plaster may serve
four days, making it clean every 24. hours, and when the Plaster will draw
no more matter, you shall use our Voguento magno, the which will help it in
short time. But if it do happen that this order do not curs them, then it
would be necessary for them to be anointed with the unction for the Pox, and
to anoint them so long till the mouth be sore, and when that sign does
appear, anoint them no more, for he will spit or vaper at the mouth, for
twelve or fifteen days, and as soon as he vapoureth, make a Bath and wash
him welt, and wash the mouth with wine, an without all doubt it shall help him
Go willing: now hereafter I will write of certain things which are used of
common Chyrurgians, with a brief discourse upon them.

Of the Towe which is laid upon wounds by common Chyrurgions.
THe pledgits of Towe which is laid upon wounds when they are first stitches,
is made in this order. Rec. The white of an Egg, Salt, and Rose Water, and
beat them together, and when the wound is stitched, then lay it thereon,
because the blood should stint, and the wound remains shut, so that it may be
helped with more ease. Now touching this, I will show the reason why they use it
in their first cure ye shall under stand that every like desires his like, to
succor him or keep company with him, and therefore the Ancient (our Ancient
professors of Art) willed the white of an Egg to be occupied in wounds,
because it is a substance of flesh like unto the other flesh, and to declare
the truth, I will prone it by natural reason, for ye shall understand that the
white of the Egg is that part which ingendreth the flesh, the skin, and the
fathers of the Hen, and the yolke ingendreth only the guts and other
entrails of the animal: then seeing the white is that which ingendreth the
flesh only, it is like unto flesh, as it is said before: then the salt is a
material which preserves all things from putrefaction, as is seen by
experience daily, and for that consideration it was put in this composition to
preserve the flesh: the Rose water by nature is cold and dry, and by his
coldenesss defends the inflammation, and by his dryness is repercussiue and
mitigateth, so that these are the reasons why the said Tow is laid upon wounds,
but I would to God that such things were used as by their excellent operations
would help and heal from the beginning to the latter ending, and to leave off
such trifling orders.

Of the disgestiue with the which they dress wounds after the aforesaid Tow.
AFter that the Tow is taken away from the wound they dress it with a
composition called digestive, because it digesteth the wound although this
medicine be some what scrupulsus and against science, and the reason is this,
ye shall understand that when a man is wounded, the place before was sound,
and therefore being wounded, our true duty is to help the same wound and not
to digest or rotte it, as commonly all Chyrurgions do, for by rotting it in
that order, it is perilous, and more dangerous to be cured, as is daily seen
by experience, and this no man can deny. But now I will follow our regiment in
showing what this digestive is, the which is made thus.

Rec. The youlke of two Eggs, Terpentine washed ounc. 1. Oil of Roses ounc.
sem. mix them in an Unguent, and this is the digestive wherewith they dress
it until the sore have made quitter or matter enough, and then they use to
dress it with medicines much differing from the same, but I marvel much at
the diversity of this matter, that this digestive being applied to a putrified
ulcer, works diverse effects, for it heals it divinely: and moreou^^, ye
shall understand that if it be applied unto when they be incarnated, it will
cicatrise them maruailously, for truly these are things worthis to be known,
and he that understands the reason I account him wise, for if this digestive
be laid on fresh wounds it putrifieth and rotteth them: again being laid on a
filthy sore it does mundifie and heal, and then if it be applied on a wound
incarnated, it scicatriseth it and heals, for this have I done diverse and
sundry times, the which is to be wondered of.

Of the mundification unguent wherewith they dress the wounds after they are
digested to mundifie them.
When wounds are come to digestion and that they purge, always they change
unguents and they apply unguents that have virtue to mundifie the wound and
make it cleans, so that it may be the better incarnate, and that unguent is
called properly a mundificatiue, the which is made of Barley flower and hunny,
or hunny of Roses, and oil of Roses, and this is the mundificatiue they use 8.
or 10. days together for if the wound were not well mundified, it would never
incarnate well, so that this unguent is most necessary in that operation in
respect of the ingredience.

Of their incarnatiue where with they dress the wound after it is mundified.
When that the wound is mundified, so that thereunto comes small quantity
of matter, than it is necessary to apply unguents that incarnate, so that they
may scicatrize with more ease, and this kind of incarnatiue is in the most use
among the common Chyrurgions, the which is made of Terpentine, Wax, and
Frankenscence, and a little oil of Roses mixed on the fire; and this is their
incarnatiue.

A rare secret, the which this Author did send unto a very friend of his, being
in the wars in Africa, the which helps all wounds, either by cut, thrust,
galling with arrows, or hargabush shot, or otherwise.
THe first thing that ye shall do is to wash the wound very clean with urine
and than dry it very well, then put therein our Quintessence of wine, and
presently join the parts close together, and stitch or sow them well, but in
any wise sow nothing but the skin, for otherwise it would cause great pain,
then put thereon five or six drops of our Balsamo, and upon the wound lay a
cloth wet in our Magno licore, as hot as you may suffer it, and this do the
first day, then the next follow this order, first put thereon our Quintessence
and a little Balsamo, and then our Magno licore very hot, and never change this
medicine until he be whole.

Of those unguents that Cicatrize wounds.
THe vnguente that cicatrize wounds after they are incarnated be of diverse
kinds, although they work one effect in cicatrizing or causing a skin. The
digestion that is written of before, being applied upon a wound incarnated, it
does cicatrize it with speed, the like does Diachilon and vnguentum de Tutia.
The Cerote called Gratia dei, although these be sundry compositions one
differing from another, yet in effect they serve all to this cicatrization as
ye may see by experience, and this they do because they be temperate and of
good qualities, and so they help nature to work more quicklier, and they are
called helpers of nature. But these kind of unguents that work by themselves,
as Vnguentum Apostolorum, the Causticke, Aegypciacum, the rottery and such like
unguents as work with violence, and suppress nature, and do that which
nature cannot do by it self without help, but all those unguents that are
not violent, neither in heat or cold, are apt to cicatrize wounds, and all
sores, that are mundified and incarnated.

A remedy to help a wound with great speed, of our invention.
WOunds of diverse and sundry sorts are very perilous of life, but to help
them quickly because the patient may take no harm, ye shall use this secret,
wash the wound with our water of Balm, and cleanse it well, and lay thereon
clothes wet in oil of Frankencense made by distillation, and therewith thou
shall heal any great wound in short time, as I have proved diverse and sundry
times, in sundry causes.

An excellent secret to heal wounds of Gunne shot or Arrows without any
danger.
IF thou will help the aforesaid wounds, it were necessary, first to join the
parts close too, and wash it with our Aqua celestis, and lay thereon our Oleum
Balsami, and therewith thou shall save the lives of many wounded persons.

A discourse upon old wounds that are not yet healed and their sovereign
remedy.
When that wounds are evil healed and that they impostumate, and that the
arm, or leg, or other parts where they were wounded is indurated and full of
pain, thou shall use this secret of our invention never known before of old
nor new writers, for it is of great virtue and many times proved: first ye
shall wash the wound well and make it clean round about, then wash the wound
with our Quintessence, and make it to fume, because our Quintessence does open
the pores, and asuttiliateth the matter, and causes the humor to come forth,
that being done, anoint it all over with our Magno licore, and thus doing,
before three days end, he shall feel great ease, and in short time he shall
be helped because this medicine takes away the hardness and heals the wound,
and comfort the place offended.

To dissolve a broose in short time, when it is new done.
THese are called confusions, unto the which nature sends quickly great
quantity of humiditie, and in that place it causes impostumation: But if our
Chyrurgians would be diligent and quick, al contusions might be helped with
great ease in short time, and therefore if thou will work miracles in that
cure, use this our means, and it will turn to thy great honor: and the
remedy is this.

Rec. Liquid Vernish, pound 3. yelow Wax, ounc. 4. common ashes, ounc. 6. Aqua
vitae rectified, pounds 2. Put all the aforesaid matters in a Retort of glass,
and distill it with a gentle fire until all the substance be come forth, the
which will be oil and water, the which ye shall separate, and keeps them, and
when occation serves, anoint the broose therewith, and lay thereon a cloth
wet in the same, for this is a miraculous medicine experimented and proved by
reason: for an experiment without reason is as a man without clothes, and
therefore if thou will know great and rare secrets never written before, look
in my Spechio del Scientia vniuersalli, and in my Thesoro del vita humana, and
therein thou shall find strange things, proved by reason and experience, the
which books God willing, I mean to set forth in the English tongue to the
profit of our Country.

To help a wound quickly that is in peril of any accident.
VVOunds in some parts of the body are very dangerous of life, and specially
where sinews be cut or pierced, or veins or muscles hurt, or bones broke, and
by an infinite of other particulars, which being open or evil healed, the
patient may be in danger of life, because the wind enters in, and they cause
pains and inflammation, and therefore to ayoide all these aforesaid matters, so
that the wound shall have no detriment, use this remedy. First join the parts
close together, and put therein our Quintessence, and lay thereon a cloth wet
in our Balm, and bind it fast that the air get not in, for it is very
hurtful, ye shall understand that these are two of the excellentest medicines
that may be found, because our Quintessence does assutilliate the blood, and
takes it forth, and takes away the pain, and the Balm does warm and
comfort the place offended, and will not suffer any matter to run thereunto
by any means, for this is most true, as I have proved diverse and sundry times,
and always have had good success.

To stop the flux of the blood in wounds with great speed.
When there is any great flux of blood in wounds by reason of some vein that
is cut, and that the Chyrurgions would stop it, it were necessary to stitch it
well, but not as the common Chyrurgions do with wide stitches, but stitch very
close and hard, and put therein our Quintessence, and upon the wound strew the
blood of a man dried in powder, and lay upon the blood and cloth wet in our
Balm artificial, very warm, and upon that bind the wound with ligaments
very straight, and every day twice, wash it with our Quintessence, and round
about anoint it with our Balm, and also cast thereon our secret powder for
wounds, and that do morning and evening, every day without opening of the
wound, and in that time the wound will remain well, and the veins will be in
a manner healed, so that they will not bleed, giving you charge, that the
wounded man keep no diet, because the virtue being weak, relaxeth the veins,
and that causes the flux of blood.

An other remedy to stay the flux of blood in a wound.
WHen there is a great flux of blood in a wound, the perfectest remedy, in to
stitch it very close, then take man's blood being dried and made in powder, and
cast it upon the wound, and bind it somewhat straight, and so let it remains
24. hours, and when ye unbind it, take heed that ye remove nothing, and cast
on more dryes blood upon the wound, anoint it round about with our Oleum
Philosophorum de Terpentina and Caera, and bind it up again other 24: hours,
and then bind it gently, and anoint the wound with oil of Frankensence, and
so in short time it will be whole, giving thee great charge that ye put in no
tent or such like, and then thou shall see miracles.

Of our Cerote magno, that helps against all sorts of sores and wounds.
THis Cerote is of great virtue, and heals all manner of fores and wounds, if
it be spread on a cloth and laid thereon, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. Galbanum ounc. 1. Ammoniacum ounc. 2. Oppoponax ounc. 2, Aristolochia
long a ounc. 1. new Wax ounc. 18. fine Mirrha, Olibanum, Verdigrese, ana. ounc.
1. Bedellium ounc. 2. Gum of Proine tr^^ ounc. 2. Lapis hematites, ounc. 2.
Terpentine, Frankensence, of each ounc. 4. oil of Wax ounc, 3. beat all those
that are to be beaten, and searce them finely, and keep every one by himself,
then dissolve the gummes in distilled Vinegar, according to Art, and then
vaper away the Vinegar again, and strain the gummes through a cloth, then
take the Wax with as much sweet oil and melt them on the fire, and when they
are melt, put thereunto ounc. 2. of Litarge of gold finely scarced, and stir
them continually until it be boiled, which you shall know by this token: put a
feather therein and if it be boiled enough, if will burn straight ways, or
else let it boil until it burn it, then take it from the fire and let it
cool a little, and then put gums and stir them well together, and set it on
the fire again, and it will rise with a great noise, and therefore let it boil
until it fall down again, then take it from the fire and put thereunto all
the aforesaid pouders, and stir it until it be cold, and therewith thou
shall work marvelous cures, if it be made well, according to Art.

Of our Magistral Unguent that helps diverse sorts of sores.
THis Unguent is appropriate for many kind of sores because it comfort the
sore and takes away the pain, and draws the matter from the lower parts or
bottom of the sore. The which matter is cause of the pain, it keeps it also
from accidents, giving you charge that it be made artifitially, for otherwise
it will not be of so much virtue, and this is the Unguent.

Rec. Litarge of gold, ounc. 4. oil of Roses, pounds 2. boil them in a copper
pan so long, as if ye put a feather therein, it will burn it, then it is
sodde: then put thereto of new Wax, ounces 6. Storax liquida, ounc. 2. common
honny, ounce 3. then let it boil a while until they be well incorporated,
then take it from the fire, and put therein Olibanum, Mirrha, Mercury,
Precipitate, Oil of Wax, oil of Turpentine, oil of Frankensence, 2. ounces
ana, mix them well till they be incorporated, then put thereto pure rectified
Aqua vitae, 4 ounces, and mix them well, and then it is ended; and this is of
my invention, wherewith I have done very strange cures.

To make Oil of Frankensence.
TAke a retort of glass, well luted, and fill it half full of Frankensence,
and for every pound of Frankensence put thereunto 3. ounces of common Ashes
finely serced, then distill it in sand, and the first that comes forth will be
water, which will be leere, then increase the fire, and there will come forth
an Oil of the color of a Rubie, the which keep close in a glass: the first
water is of marvelous virtue in diverse operations: but one miraculous
experiment I will not leave to write of, because it is a thing very necessary,
and is this: For such as have chilblanes or kybes, or chophes in the hands or
feet, that comes through cold, ye shall first perfume the parts that are
sore over the fume of hot water, so that they may sweat, then dry them and wash
them with the aforesaid water, and put on a pair of gloves, and in short time
they will be whole: it helps also the white scall and scabs, and such like
things. The Oil serves in many operations, and especially in all cold
disea^es: if they be inwardly, give thereof every morning one scruple to drink
and if they be outward, annoint. Also it helps all manner of wounds be they
never so great.

If you annoint them therewith, and keep them close from the Air: but in any
wise use no tenting to keep them open, but wet a cloth therein and lay it
thereon, and in short space they will be healed: Also it dissolueth a bruise in
short space if you annoint it often therewith. This Oil serves also for
Painters to make varnish.

Of Oil of Wax and his effects.
THis Oil of Wax is most excellent, for so much as it serves for the most
part against all diseases: which Oil, Raymond Lulli does aproue to be a more
heavenly and divine medicine then humane: It is most rare for wounds, but it is
not good for common Chyrurgians, because it helps a great wound in x. or xij.
days at the most: but as for small wounds, it heals them in 3. or 4. days,
anointing only the wound therewith, laying on clothes wet in the same. Also
this Oil works miracles against diverse diseases inwardly, if you give
thereof one dram with white wine: and as for those whose hair and beard do
fall away, it is a rare thing and of great profit, The order to make it is
thus.

Rec. A retort of glass well luted, and put therein what quantity of Wax you
will, so that it be not half full: and for every pound of Wax put thereunto
4. ounces of the powder of brickes, then set it in a furnace and give it a
gentle fire until all the substance be come forth, which Oil will be
congealed hard, the which is his perfection, for if you will distill it so many
times that it congeale no more, it will be too hot and sharp, and not to be
used within the body in any wise: but the first distillation you may use safely
inwardly, and make unctions for any kind of disease where need shall require,
and always it will be good, and do no hurt in any wise or in any disease, and
therefore this oil ought to be had in great regard of all men.

To help the Toothache that is caused of rotten Teeth, or that comes of a
dissension of the head.
THe Teeth being rotten or corrupted, always causes great pain, and many
times it comes of a dissension from the head and such like humors, as
Cattars, Erisipella, but let it come of what cause it will, I will show a
remedy of great importance, and it is very short: ye shall take our Aqua
realle, and hold it in your mouth a good while, and then spit it out again,
and this ye shall do for three days together every day once, then afterward
it were necessary to wash your mouth in like manner with our Aqua Balsami for
the space of a month, and so the toothache shall be taken away with ease, for
this is our secret, and may be used in all times of the year.

Against a stinking breath.
THe breath may stink through many causes, as by ulcers in the mouth, or
corrupt and rotten teeth, sometime it comes of the stomach, and that is ill
to be helped, and therefore if thou will help these, thou must use diverse
remedies: and first, to help those that have their mouths vlcerated, you shall
give them a quantity of our Pillole aquilone, and then let them wash their
mouths with our Aqua realle, and so the ulcers shall be helped, and the mouth
shall not stink: but when the stench comes of rotten teeth, use the
aforesaid remedy or medicine that is written for the toothache, the which
will make the teeth as white as snow, and will ache no more: but when the
stink comes from the stomach, it were necessary to purge the body with our
sirop Solutiuo, six or seven days, and then to take our Aromatico, that being
done, take rectified Aqua vitae and the water of honey, and oil of Turpentine,
of each alike, mix them well together, and every morning drinks thereof half
an ounce fasting, for the space of a month or there abouts.

To help those that have a great cough in the stomach.
THe Cough does come of diverse and sundry causes, but let it come of what cause
i^ will, it always offends the stomach and the head, for ever when the
stomach is offended, of nece^^i^i^ the head is offended, because it has
communication with the stomach, so that the stomach is cause of the pains in
the head; and therefore it is necessary to help the stomach first, unto that
thou shall do with our Pillole aquilone, the which is written in this book
following: and if so be you cannot take Pills, take our Aromatico, this being
done, if there be no fever, give him every morning 1. ounce of our electuary
Magistrale per la toss, and every night anoint his stomach with Magno licore,
and also his head and nosthrils, but if is happen that the aforesaid things
help it not, then take blood of the Liver vain, and purge the body with our
Sirop against the melancholic humor, and so by Gods grace they shall remain
healed.

To help such as cannot hold their water.
THis proceeds of two causes principally, the first is of superfluous heat of
the body, through the which heat, nature does assuttiliate too much that humid
part, and continually does send it down into the bladder: the second cause is,
that the pores are too much relaxed or opened, by the which operation the urine
does pass without retention: and these are the two causes why the vrin cannot
stay, and this comes commonly to young children, because they are very hot
of complexion, and the order to help them is this:

Give them our Pillole Aquilone three times, the quantity is from one dram, to
one and a half: that being done, ye shall make them a decoction of Hisop of
the mountain, and put therein sugar, and this they shall use x. or xij. days
at the least, for this mundifieth the place offended, and disposes it to
solution. Then after this is done, ye shall give him for x. days together
half a dram of Masticke with a little Plantine water, for this is hot and
restringeth the pores, and ingrosseth the urine, and so the Patient shall
remain whole of that infirmity, by the virtue of the aforesaid three
medicines, and it is a very easy cure and sovereign for that purpose. But
sometime there happens a flux of urine somewhat like this, and it is not of
the aforesaid causes, but of causes much different from them, for this is in
men and women of age, and this I find to be caused of the Pox that causes
the flux, and they void certain threads which some call Gonorea, and the
remedy thereof is only with great purging and sweating, and then to anoint
them five or six nights with our Vnguento magno, and keep them warm in bed
until ye have ended to anoint him, and then go to the stowe, and he shall
be helped of that infirmity.

To help those that cannot make water.
THe urine is stayed through diverse and sundry causes, and the principal are
three, of the which one is the stone that ingendreth in the bladder, for
always it hangs down in the neck of the bladder, and stops the Meati or
pores that the urine cannot pass, the which grieueth the patient meruaileufly.
The other is caused of gravel or gross and viscous humors that cannot pass
the pores, and so cause that retention of urine with great pain. The third is
caused of an obstruction or restriction of the pores or conduites, where the
urine does pass, and so keep the urine within with great pain, so that these
be the three chiefest causes of the retention of urine.

The cure of the first cause which is the stone, is to purge them well, and
then to use our most souerain remedy that is written in this book following,
the which is of great virtue to break the stone, as I have proved many times,
but when this medicine is not able to break it, then it is necessary to cut it
forth, and this is all concerning the first cause.

To help the second cause, it were necessary to use purgations that purge the
reins well, and then to give them our Aromatico, and then to anoint the
reins six days every day once with Vnguento magno, and with this medicine
thou shall help him perfectly.

To cure the third cause it were necessary to purge with aperatius things, and
then to anoint his reins and under the members and belly with our Balm
artificial, and give him to drink the powder of Hogge-lice or Centum pedes,
that are found under stones, and by the grace of God-he shall be perfectly
whole.

To help those that have great burning of their urine.
THe burning of the urine may come of diverse and sundry causes, but I find
four principal, of which one is the stone in the bladder being great or
small. The second cause is a certain heat the which corrupts the place
where it passes, and carries forth as it were certain long thrids the which
causes that burning. The third cause is a certain viscousnesse the which
holds to the bottom of the Vrinall, and it will not well break, and this is
called Gonorea. The fourth cause is certain fluxes of urine caused of some
kind of the Pox, as ye may see by those that use company with evil women and
take harm, for presently this burning comes, and therefore this shows me
plainly to be the Pox that causes that burning of urine.

But if thou will help the before said four causes, thou may do it with ease
having the true Art of a good Physician, and the remedy of the first cause
coming of the stone, is to take it forth of the bladder.

The second cause is to be helped with purging with our Siropo solutino, and
then after that, to use our oil of Vitriole compound, taking thereof every
morning 1. ounce, and so they shall remain helped.

The third cause is helped with taking every day ten days a quantie of our
Aromatico, and so with this only they shall be helped.

The fourth cause is helped with medicines appropriate for the Pox, and to
anoint them with Vnguento magno.

To help those that have great pain of the Gout.
THe Gout is a corrupt and malign infirmity, and properly ingendreth of
corruption, as it is plainly seen in these that are troubled therewith, and
to prroue it to be true, Nature does show it well, because you may see how
great the alteration is of that accident, and seeing that humor is caused of a
windi^ hum^u^ and alteration of the blood, as is seen by experience, I believe
the same disposition has his original and beginning of the stomach, for so
much as all those that are troubled of that disease, the first sign that
appears unto them, is a great pain in the stomach, 3* or 4. days or more
before the grief comes, and then the pain increases exceedingly, so that
by the said sign, I judge this accident cannot proceed of other place then
the stomach, and to affirm it better, ye shall understand that those which
are troubled therewith, can find no better remedy then to euacuate the
stomach from all corruption, and therefore if thou will help them of that
accident, the first thing that ye shall do is to give them a quantity of our
Aromatico in the morning fasting, and drink thereon a little white wine, that
being done, it would be necessary to make a somentation with ^attles, that be
well boiled in water, and then to anoint them with our Balsamo artificiato,
and so for that time the Gout will be gone, and will remain away for a long
time.

But if God permit me life, I will hereafter set forth the order to help the
Gout, that it shall never come again, with a certain order to be observed in
the same, found out by this Author, and has been proved an infinite number
oftimes in diverse places, and on diverse Noblemen as ye may well understand in
his Thesoro della vita humana.

A remedy against the Pestilene, which preserves those that use it.
THe Pestilence is a certain corrupt humor which is cause of the evil
disposition of the ^^re, that is corrupted and poysone^, and it is so
contagious that in 36. hours it corrupts the body, and causes them to dye,
and therefore if any will defend them from that infection, they may do it by
the help of God and the Physician with these medicines, the first thing is to
confess our selves unto almighty God, and to pray heartily unto him, and then
as concerning Physical medicines, three things are to be used, which may save
the lives of many. The first thing is to euacuate the stomach, the second to
sweat the third unction. And touching the first, ye shall use every 3. days
our Pillole aquilone, for they euacuate the contagiousnes, and will not let it
corrupt the body: the second, ye shall cause them to sweat by artificial
means, for that euacuateth a certain matter very apt to corrupt. The third, is
to annoint all the body with our Balm artificial for that preserves the
body, and defends it from the contagiousnes: so that by these three means,
men and women may be preserved from that violent death.

To help Pellaria, that is, a disease which causes the hair and Beard to fall
off.
THe Pellaria is a certain kind of fantastical infirmity, which we by
practice do know the cause, which is, by using company of women corrupted with
the pox, and by the same practice we see, that those whose hair do fall away,
do fall into great infirmities of the pox, although not all, yet the most
part: and therefore if thou will help that accident, it were necessary to purge
them with our Siropo Solutiuo, 8. or 10. days together, that being done, give
them our Aromatico, and then anoint the place where the hair is fallen away
every evening with our Balm artificial, so that with the use of these three
medicines, the patient shall remain perfectly whole of that matter, because he
firope purges the whole body universally, and the Aromatico purges the
stomach and the head, and the Balm comfort and defends the place where
the hair is fallen, so that it shall fall no more, this I have prouen an
infinite number of times. Ye shall understand, that there be (...) other kinds
of Pellaria the which will not be helped in the aforesaid order, for the one
comes of a great fear, and the other comes because they have had Mal di
massuca, and their heads be corrupted by that means: and for these two I know
us remedy, but to let nature have his course.

To help a Carnosite in the yard.
THe Carnosite that comes in the yerd hinders the urine that it cannot
pass, and grows in the mouth of the bladder, and is a kind of matter
engendered in that place, the which is much like unto an Emtode that comes in
the neck of the intestine about the fundament, and because it is a gross and
^lcerated matter, the vrin passes with difficulty and great burning, which is
very painful unto those that have it: but if thou will help that inconvenience,
if were necessary to purge the body well, and to keep a diet, and to drink the
decoction of Hipericon made with honey, and use to eat dry meats as much as is
possible, and then make certain little Wax Candles of Wax and Frankensence,
and then make this unguent.

Rec. Red Lead 1. ounce, white honey 1. ounce, butter 2. ounces, white Wine as
much as will suffice to incorporate them in a liquid form, on a soft fire,
then take ten quills (that has blood in them) out of the wing of a young Pigion
that is fat, and therewith stir the unguent when it boyleth, and when one
quill is dried, take another, and so change them until the Wine be consumed,
and then it is made* and when thou will occupy it, take one of the said Candles
of Wax, and upon the end, put of this unguent, and put it into the yard until
it touch the Carnosite, and this thou shall use day by day vutill the Candle
pass without any impediment, and then the patient shall be helped: this is most
true, for (...) have proved it an infinite number of times, to my great credit,
and content of the patient.

To help the white scall.
THis disease being so odious, is a corrupt humeur the which is not only in
the head as many do think, but it depends of the inwards parts and has
communication with the head, and this humor is like the Fume, for continually
it vaporeth up, and when it can assend no more because it is hindered in the
skin, then it settleth and ingrosseth and causes the head to break forth in
that grievous order as is seen. But I will show a secret to help it, so that
it shall never come again, and the order is thus. You shall give them our
Siropo solutiuo 8. or 10. days together, that being done give them our Pillole
Aquilone three times, the which pills must be taken every three days once,
that being done, take Sinaber finely beaten, 2. ounc. Olibanum, Mirrha, ana, 1.
dram, mix them together, and divide if in 5. parts and make thereof five
perfumes, in five mornings, and cover their heads with a cloth, so that it
touch not the head, then let the powder be cast on by little and little until
it be spent, upon a chasing dish of coals, and so let them stand covered one
hour without moving, and this do every one of the times, that being done,
anoint the head for the space of a month with oil of Wax and Terpentine, and
they shall be helped, for this is a remedy that cannot fail, for I have proved
it an infinite of times, in Palermo, in Mesina, in Naples, in Rome, and in
Venice, and always I have had good success to my great credit, and profit of
the diseased person.

To help those Caruolli that come upon the yard, and their causes.
THose Caruolli that come upon the yeard, are of diverse kinds, as by reason and
experience thou may see, but the most part are taken by using the company of
leind and corrupt women, infected with the Pox, and those are the worse kind,
for they are the first original of the Pox, and of those Caruolli come
Pannochie or hotches, and certain great scabbes, Dellaria, aches and tumors,
and an infinite of other evil effects, and these are the first kind. There are
another kind the which commonly come of their own accord by reason of heat,
and those are easy to be helped, and are not perilous or painful. There is
another kind, the which is as though it were scorched or burnt, the which
comes through debilitie of the yard, and having company with women, and these
are also of small importance.

The first kind are certain Ulcers that come upon the end, and some upon the
proper substance of the yard, and some upon the skin, and the order to cure
them is thus. Ye shall mortify them within and without with our Causticke,
and when they are mortified, ye shall dress them with our Magno licore, and
they shall be whole quickly.

But ye shall well note, that many times after they are healed before xv. days
do pass, there will come a certain alteration in the threate, so that they
can scarce swallow their meat, and this alteration many times endures vi^j. or
x. days, and then it resolves by it self, and that is a certain sign of
Pellaria.

And therefore if thou will anoyd that inconvenience that the hair fall not
of, asso^ne as ye feel any of the aforesaid griefs, their presently take a
quantity of our Electuario Angelica, and then take our Siropo magistrale 4. or
5. days, and anoint thy head x. or xij. days with our Magno licore, and so
by these means thy hair shall not fall. Because our Electuario Angelica does
euacuate the stomach and cleanses the head, and dries up the matter, the
which is already altered by that disease. Also our Siropo Magistrale, does
euacuate the body, and purify the blood, and staketh the fury of the disease.
Our Magno licore preserves the hair from drying and fall^^g.

There comes many times, after these Caruolli are healed, certain Impostu^es
in the ^^oyn^, of the which we will speak of in another book particularly.
The other kind of Caruolli that come upon the yard, are helped only by washing
them with some bath that is restrictiue and comfortatiue. The other kinds which
is like scorching or burning, are helped by keeping them clean, and anointing
them with a Liniment of Tutia camphorata.

And thus I make an end, giving to understand to those that practice, how that
they may avoid that disease called Pellaria or falling of the hair or beard,
for this is one of my secrets, whereof I mean to write a great number if God
permit.

A discourse of those sores that come of the Pox, and how to help them
quickly.
THe Pox as I have written of diverse times, being a putrified and corrupt
disease, the sores coming thereof, of force must be of his nature, that is
corrupt and stinking, therefore if thou will help them and take away their
pain quickly, thou shall use three operations, the first is to give them our
Pillole Aquilone, and then to wash the sore with oil of Sulphur, and then lay
thereon our Cero^e magistrale, with Precipitate, and anoint it with Magno
licore, and therewith thou shall help them quickly, because those Pills are
appropriate for that disease, and the oil of Sulphur draws forth the filth
from the center, and the Precipitate draws forth the gross matter, so that
of force it must heal.

The cure of one that had the Pox in his head.
BEing in Naples, among all other that I cured, there came unto a me Spaniard
called Il signor Diego di Menas, a man of the age of 36. years, of complexion
cholaricke aduste, the which had the Pox, and in his forehead he had a
certain tumor the which had perished a great part of the scull, and was open,
and he had been taken in hand of diverse men, and none could do him good, I
seeeing, that book him in hand, and gave him our Siropo solutiuo, 8. or 9.
days together, afterward I gave him our Aromatico, and then I gave him the
roots of Ci^a in derection, and then perfumed him with Olibanum, Masticke,
Mirtha, and Sinaber, and so by these means he was helped of that infirmity,
but the bone remains bare, and I laid thereon our Cerote magistrale, and so in
short time, the bone did separate of his own accord, and one day I took it of
altogether, and was so great that it covered the fourth part of the head, than
presently this signor Diego went abroad, showing what was taken from his head,
as diverse can testify.

The Cure of a wound in the head, and in the hand.
THere was a certain Gentleman called Gionan Iacopo Veneciane, which had a
great wound on the head and in one of his hands, which being taken in hand by
diverse Chirurgians, was brought to a very ill case, by reason of great
alteration in the wounds: the Physician that had him in hand, was one called
Realdo polumbo cremense, who dressed his head with Wine and Oil, and the hand
with Turpentine and Oil of Roses: then I being in company told him that it
were good to change those medicines, because in wounds of the head, those
medicines were not convenient, for the Oil being crud putrifieth, and the Wine
is repercussiue, and will not suffer the putrefaction to come forth, that the
oil ingendreth, and for that reason the said medicine would not be used.

And for the medicine for his hand, I say that the Turpentine is not
convenient, for where there is offense of skin, veins, sinews and bones,
Turpentine is not good because it is hot and putrifactiue, by means of the
oil, and causes inflammation, and therefore is not to be used.

But if thou will help the head and hand both, ye shall use a kind of medicine
that comfort the place offended and that does ass^t^itiate the matter and
incarnate, to the which, the said Realdo answered and said, my reason was good,
if I could find remedies that will do that effect, the which I sent for to my
house, and used them in this order: First I put our Quintessence into his wound
in the head being cold, and then a little of our Balsamo cold, which seemed
strange to Realdo, and then I laid thereon our Magno licore, and upon the cloth
I laid a little of our secret Powder, and the like I did to the hand, and so in
14. days the wounds were whole, to the great marvel of a m^^ber.

A great secret particlar for the Flux, and dissenteria.
THe Fluxes of the body, are no other but a distemperance of Nature, and are of
two kinds, the one is caused of an evil quality and distemperance of the
liver, and that is called Flusso epatico, The other is caused of great heat,
fever, and distemperature of Nature, and this is called Disenteria, that is, a
distemperment of the gutts, and both these sorts are hard to be helped of the
aucient Doctors, as it is well seen, by experience of those that practice, for
they will help them with repression and restrictnes, but that is not the way if
we shall believe Galen, who writes, Fluxus Fluxum curat, which is most true,
for I have cured a thousand of the Flux with giving them our Aromatico, and
three or four dosses of our Siropo Solutiuo, therefore Galen says true.

But the Dissenteria is cured with giving them our Electuario, Angelica, and
then every day after dinner stand in a Bath of Seawater cold, two hours at
the least, and so in this order thou shall help any crud kind of Disenteria in
short time, and with great ease: use this as a marvelous secret.

The Cure of one that was poysned with Arsnick.
THere was a man poysned with Arsnick, given him in a mess of Rice pottage in
an evening at supper, and as soon as it was in his stonacke he began to groan
and sweat, and vomit, in such order as it was strange to see, and it happened
that at the same time there was a learned man in the house, who seeing this man
in that case, suspected him to be poysned, and so sent for me, and when I came,
the poor man was almost dead, then presently I called the wife of the house
and told her that her husband would dye, and that she should have the Law for
poysning of him, but if that she would tell him what poison she had given him,
perhaps he might recover him again, with many other words, so to conclude,
she told me that she had given him two grains of Arsnick in Rice pottage; then
presently I called for a cup of Sack and caused him to drink, and then he
vomited and went to the stool, then I anointed him with our Oil of
Hipericone and Scorpiones, all the body over, and still caused him to drink
that he might euacuate that poison, but all his mouth and throat remained
swollen, and he did spit in great abundance, and I caused him to use that
unguent and every morning gave him Triacle with wine, and every three days I
gave him a quantity of Pillule Aggregatiue, and last of all, I caused him to
use Aqua vitae compound, and so in forty days he was perfectly whole and ridd
of a terrible disease which he had upon him before he was poysned.

The Cure of an Vlcerated Leg.
THere was a man of the age of 36. years, of complexion cholerike and
sanguine, who had his left Leg all vlcerated, in such manner that the
Physicians and Chyrurgions of the City would have cut it off, but in no wise I
would consent thereunto, but took it in hand, and gave first our Magistrall
Sirop in the morning, eight or nine days together, and in the mean time. I
washed the Leg in Wine, wherein was boiled Mallows, Consolida majore, Cardus
benedictus, and Honey, and then wet clothes therein, and laid them on twice a
day, then I caused him to use a decoction of Lignum vitae and the bark with
Iua artetica, Cardus benedictus, Pollipodi, Ripon^ico, Wine, and Sugar: and his
common drink was wine and water, boiled on the Fesses of the same, And this he
used 24 days, than I perfumd him with Cinaber three times and ere three months
were past he was perfectly whole, for his disease came of the pox, and those
sores are commonly called Mal di formica.

The Cure of the Gout on a Gentleman.
IN the aforsaid year, in the month of August, I was called to visit a noble
Gentleman called Don Christofalo della roca, a man of five and thirty years,
of complexio^ choleric and sanguine, who was sore troubled with the Gout, and
because it was in the beginning of August, our ancient Doctors have forbidden
to take any soluble medicine in that time, in respect of the Canicular days.
Nevertheless, I called Armellio, and Leonardo Testa, two excellent Physicians,
which gave their counsel to take no medicine, nevertheless I proved that the
Gout was extreme hot, and for that I ordained a cold Sirope to mittigate the
superfluous heat, which was made of Lyuerwort, Hearts tongue Dates, Raisins,
Figs, Sugar, and Succory water, and Aromatised it with Musk and Rose water, of
the which he took every day four ounces, and for the alteration of the Gout, I
washed it three or four times a day with our Aqua del Balsamo, because it
penetrateth and opens the pores and assuttiliateth and dries the humor
offensive, also I ordained him bread of Barley, because it cools the blood and
is of good disgestion, and caused him to refrain from all fatt brothes, and
his drink was temperate, And to this one of the Doctors did agree, but the
other would not, nevertheless the Gentleman was content with my advise: then I
began to give him the aforesaid decoction, with our soluble Quintessence, and
therewith he had every day two or three stools, and I washed the Gout three or
four times a day with our Aqua Balsami, and the first day he began to feel
ease, and the second he felt more, so that in seven days all his pain was
taken away: then I applied thereunto our secret of secrets, for that kind of
disease, which in three days delivered him: then I caused him to use certain
medicines to defend the Gout for coming again, and so he continued who^e to
his great satisfaction.

Of the causes of the Scyatica, and how ye may help it.
THe Scyatica is a disease so called, because it comes in that place of the
body called Sio, and is caused of an evil quality and gross humors, that are
stayed in that place, because they cannot pass down, and this is see (...) by
experience daily, for where that pain is, there is alteration, and the cure
thereof, is with Glister^, Vomits, Purgations and Unctions, because the Glister
does euacuate those places next unto it, and so eases the humor, the vomitte
cleanses the stomach, the purgations do euacuate the body downwards, the
unctions dissolve the wind, and so by these means thou may help the
Scyatica, as I have done many times to my great honor, and satisfaction of the
the patient.

A most excellent remedy to help the flux of the body, with a certain
discourse thereon.
IF thou will help the flux of the body, it were necessary to know first from
whence it proceeds, for he that knows not the cause, is le^^e is be
credited to cure the effect, and therefore I will show thee what the flux is,
and from whence it comes, and then I will show the order to cure it, also to
make the medicines.

The ^lu^ of the body is caused of a superfluous hea^e conceived in the
stomach, the which make a continual solution inwardly, as ye may (...) by
experience of those that (...) therewith for so long as the cause (...) not
taken away, all their (...) does turn into that (...), the which if it be,
(...) which I des^^y, that the (...) are (...) of the body, ^^uses of hot and
corrupt humors in the stomach, and therefore if thou will cure it, it were
necessary to extinguish the heat and to take away the corruption, the which
thou shall do with the redness of Mart Militare, written in this book
following, for that is the most sovereign remedy that can be found. But first
ye shall take twelve grains of our Petra Philosophalla, with half an ounce of
Mel Rosarum, and then take for four mornings together one scruple of the
redness of Mart, with half an ounce of sugar Rosat, and therewith thou shall
work miracles.

A discourse concerning corns in the feet or elsewhere, with their remedies.
THis callowes matter, is a certain hot humor, of the which Nature would
discharge herself, and when that humor is driven forth of Nature, it goes
unto the lower parts, into the end of the toes, for in that extreme part of the
toes, that skin that is called Epiderma, is hard, and will not suffer it to
pass, or exalare, and there many times it ingendreth a tumor in the skin with
great hardness, and many times that tumor does increase and cause such pain,
that it does not only hinder their going, but hinders them from sleep in the
night, and this kind of tumor t^ called commonly Callo or Corns in English,
and I thought it good to call them Creste, because they are always growing,
and is of great importance among the Chyrurgions, for an infinite number of
persons are troubled therewith, and therefore I will show thee our secret to
help them quickly, and with great ease, which secret was never known before of
any. First ye shall pare them with a sharp knife until the bottom, and there
ye shall find a certain thing like matter, but if ye find no matter, ye shall
pare it unto the blood does appear, then touch it once with oil of sulphur,
and then dress it with our Balsamo artificiato, once a day until it be whole.
Keep this as a secret.

Of an infirmity of importance that comes upon the extremity of the toe,
upon the nail,
THere are many men that are troubled with a certain infirmity under the
nail of their great ^o^, the which seems as though the nail gr^w in the
flesh, the which is not so, but the flesh grows over the nail, and although
this seems to be a thing of nothing, and that the Ancients have had small
consideration thereof, Nevertheless it is an infirmity of great importance,
and to be considered of, because many are troubled therewith, and specially men
of authority, and in specially those that are troubled with the Gout: I call
to remembrance, that in the time that I was in Naples, I cured a great number,
and specially those that were of great authority, to my great honor ^ profit.
The first thing that I did, I cut the nail on that part which was grieved, and
took it away, the which was done easily and with little pain, the which thing
being done, I touched it with our Causticke, and so let it remain three days
together, and then I dressed it every day with our Magno licore until it was
whole, the which was in short time.

A discourse upon the Hemerhodes, with the order to cure them with most
excellent medicines of our invention.
THe Hemerhodes are a certain kind of evil tumer, caused of the bleed of the
veins Emorodial^, and these come always in the extremity of the intestinals
about the fund^ment, and some of them cause great pain, and some of them do
burn excessiuely, or (...) scald. The which comes through the quality of
the good and evil humors. As ye may see by experience how that some have such
burning that they cannot rest in the night, the other have such pain that they
cannot fit, the other are so scalded that they cannot abide it, ye shall
understand this infirmity is more painful in one complexion than in
another, and the cure thereof is diffic^l^. Nevertheless it may be cured, and
the order is this.

First take our Aromatico, then take our Siropo solutiuo three or four days,
then take our perfume three or four times on the fundament, that being done,
anoint the place with our Balm artificial, for that dries and takes away
the pain altogether, and so the Patient shall remain perfect whole.

There is also a great secret in the tooth of a Horse-fish if it be worn on a
man's finger, to take away the Hemerhodes, the which tooth I have known proves
at the least 7. or 8. times, for I have a ring made thereof and have used it.

A great secret to help those that are burst or have the Rupture.
THis is a rare secret never known before of any man, and in specially for
those that have not been burst long time, and that the rupture has not yet
made a callow, and the order to cure ^^is thus:

First ye shall give them our Aromatico, every ten days once, and every
morning fasting give them one ounce of fine Tartar beaten in powder with water
or wine to drink, and likewise in the evening two hours before supper give him
as much, and his bread shall he biscuit made of Rye, also he must wear a trusse
made fit for that purpose, and use this remedy.

Rec. Rectified Aqua vitae without phlegm x^. ounces, Rosen of the Pine tree
that is dry, Olibanum, Masticke, Sarcocolla, ana, ounc. sem. Mix them
altogether, and with this water wash the Rupture every day, twice, and then
cast thereon presently the powder of a herb called Bislingua and Balsamina,
ana, and then wet a cloth in the said water, and lay it thereon, and bind the
trusse very hard, and keep thy house with as much ease as thou may and
strain not thy self in any wise, and thus within 100. days thou shall help
any great Rupture, keeping the aforesaid order.

A rare secret and divine, to help those that are troubled with the spleen.
THe Mylte is altered and comes hard, by reason of a superfluous humidity,
the which it receives, by the evil disposition of the Liver and Lungs, and
therefore if thou will help it, it were necessary to use medicines abstersive
and drying, and to give them our Aromatico once, and then to use this
electuary, the which is of meruellous virtue, in that operation.

Rec. Squamma ferri 1. ounc. Scolopendria, 1. ounce, Spignarde, Lapis lasuly,
ana, 2. scruples, Sinamon, half an ounce, beat them fine and make thereof an
electuary with purified honey, according to Act, and thereof take every morning
a spoonefull, and as much at night, two hours before supper, and anoint the
place where the Mylte lies, with our Balsamo artificiato, and so by the grace
of God and means of these medicines, thou shall be helped quickly.

Another great secret to help the spleen with great speed.
THe Mylt as is a foresad, is grie^ed through abundance of humiditie the which
it receives, and therefore thou must only seek to dry that humiditie, and
for that purpose, I will show thee 2. great secrets, wherewith thou shall work
miracles, and are of great reason and experience. The one is to be let blood
under the tongue in one of these 2. veins: that is, on that side where the
Mylte lies, that being done, ye shall take Mustarde and mix it with the urine
of a boy, and lay it between two clothes, and lay it on the fore place one
night, and then if it be not well, use it still until it be helped, for this I
have proved an infinite of times.

The cure of a certain Spaniard called, Carabasall di Cordonet the which was
troubled with the Pox.
THis Soldier being of the age of two land thirty years, was mightily
troubled with the Pox with extreme pains and sores, among the which he had
al^ his thigh so eaten away as though he had been gnawne with dogs, with
most extreme pain, and the way that I cured him was thus. I gave him 12.
grains of our Petra Philosophale, with sugar Rosat, the which caused him to
vomit and to euacuate downward, of the which he found great ease, that being
done, I prepared him our deco^tion of Lignum sanctum solutiue, the which is
written of hereafter, with a certain drink made with wine and Lignum vitae,
and this he used five and twenty days, and then I anointed him with our
Vnguento magno, and in the space of forty days he was perfectly helped to the
sight of all men.

The cure of the stitch in the side with retention of urine.
THere was a certain Gentleman called, Marco di Chiuffune, of the age of six
and thirty years, the which was troubled with a terrible stitch in the side,
and had proved many medicines and none did him pleasure, the which, after I
took him in hand, I gave him our Aromatico, and after that the pain slacked,
then I caused him to anoint all those parts with the oil of Nutmegs, and the
oil of Eggs mixed together, and so he remained quite whole, for in this order
I have cured an infinite of persons to my great honor.

A cure of a certain Spaniard wounded in the head in Naples.
THere was a certain Spaniard called Zamora, of the age of four and thirty
years, of complexion cholerike and sanguine, the which was wounded in the
left side of the head, with inscision of the bone also ye shall understand,
that in Naples the air is most evil for wounds in the head, by reason that it
is so subtle, and for that cause the Doctors did fear the cure,
nevertheless I dressed him with our Magno licore, and Balsamo artificiato,
keeping the wound as close as was possible, anointing it only upon the wound,
and so in 14. days he was perfectly whole, to the great wonder of a number of
Chirurgions of that City.

The cure of a certain Gentleman that had Mal diformica.
THere was a certain Gentleman Neapolitan, the which was called Il signior
Giouan Francisco Gaetauo, of the age of 38. years, the which was maruellously
tormented with a fore arm and a fore leg, called Mal di formica, and he^ was
of complexion cholerike and melancholic, and these sores went creeping upon
the flesh, healing in one place and breaking in another, and in his arm he had
nine sores, and in the leg fourteen, and this Gentleman had sought help
the space of 2. years and could find none, and had twice taken the diet, and
yet could find no help, the which Gentleman I took in hand, and the first
thing I gave him was this, 1. ounce of Gerapigra Ganenie, with twenty grains
of our Petra Philosophalle, the which provoked both vomit and sege diverse
times, that being done, I gave him our Siropo solutiuo, x^^. mornings together,
that being done I gave him a medicine, with our Petra Philosophalle and
Eleborus niger, the which caused him also to vomit and purge downwards, that
being done I caused him to make a strope of Lignum sanctum, and the hark^, Iua
Aretica, and Cardus Benedictus, in the which I put seven pound of wine, and
one of sugar, and then I caused him to make a drink with water, wine and
honey, to drink continually, and that I caused him to use five and twenty
days, and then I ^n^inted him with our Vnguento magnu, five times without
fire, the which unguent caused him to spit abundance of filthy matter, and at
the last it caused him to spit blood, then I caused him to make a bath the
which is written in our Regiment of the pe^tilen^e, called ^he joyful Iowell;
and I said on the sores our Cerote magistrale, and thus within 38. days he was
perfect whole.

Certain cures that this Author did when he traveled into Afryca.
IN the year 1550. he traveled into Africa, and there was chosen by Il
signior Don Pietro di Toledo vicere di Napoli, to be Physician unto the Camp
under Don Gracia his son, and so in the year 1551. in the month of May he
departed from Naples with all the Army of the Emperor, Carolo quinto, D.
Austria, and so having a prosperous wind, arrived in Barbary by a certain old
City called Monasterio, and there gave an assiege, and took it without any
remission or ransoming, and made slaves of all those that were left alive, and
it remained utterly destroyed, but not without great mortality of our
Christian Soldiers, and beside those that were killed, there was a great
number wounded the which were brought into the Galleys, and carried to the I Will
of Sicilia in a certain City called Trapano, the which say they, was builded
by a great Idolater called Tarpos, and there in the Hospital those wounded
persons were left, with certain Chyrurgions that were under my Jurisdiction,
and with certain medicines of my invention, and so in short time the most part
were helped, and then the Army returned unto Naples again, and refreshed them
with new men and victual. And then on the 15. of June, we set up sail and
sailed, and when we were in the midst of the Goulfe between Naples and
Palermo, there happened a great misfortune, the which was thus.

In the Galley of Signor Giordano Captain general of the Galleys of the Duke
of Florence, it happened that he being at the table with diverse Captains and
Gentlemen, and as they were at dinner, a certain Captain being grieved with
another, multiplied words, and took a loaf of bread and threw it at his face,
without any reverence or respect of the said General signor Giordano. That
being done, the said General arose front the Table and took him by the
bosom, and gave him 5. sto^ades in the breast, the which pierced into the
body, that he fell down for dead, that being done, the said General repented
himself of his rashness, and presently sent for me being in the Gally of Don
Gracia, to come and dress him which the General requested me to do with all
diligence, and when I came, the poor Captain lay as though he had been dying,
nevertheless I dressed him with great diligence, and the medicines which I
used were these. First I put into the wounds, of our Quintessence, and upon the
wounds I dressed it, with our Balm artificial, and gave him a vomit, the
which caused him to cast great quantity of blood, and then every morning I
gave him half an ounce of our Aqua Balsami, and thus within two days after we
arrived at Palermo, the Captain was perfect whole, to the great marvel of a
number. After that, we departed from Palermo, and went to the City of
Trapano, where the rest of the Galleyes were, and there continued 4. days, and
thou on Saint John's even we went to an Island called Fanignana, and there kept
the feast of Saint John, and then we departed with all the Army, and went on
the side of Africa, and on Saint Peter's day we landed in the Gardens of that
City, and there began to offer battle, and there remaining about 24. or 25.
dayed, the Army began to be infected with a certain kind of flux, whereof a
great number dyed every day. My General seeing that, called me, and asked if
it were possible to find some remedy for that flux, unto the which I answered
willingly, and said, I would devise by the help of God some remedy, because it
was my duty, as well as for the health of the Soldiers of the Emperor, the
which thing I did in short time through the whole Camp: as I will write
hereafter in the next Chapter.

The cure of the flux wherewith I helped the Army of the Emperor in Africa.
BEing as I have said before in the Camp, where they were meruailously
tormented with a flux, and many dyed thereof, and could find no help, although
they had medicines. Than I which had the experience in hand, began to laugh to
my self, and the remedy wherewith I helped them all was this: First I caused
them to eat well, and then in the morning, I gave them a vomit, and then every
day, after they had eaten, I caused them to go into the water of the Sea, and
there to remain 4. or 5. hours, and so doing within 4. or 5. days they were
helped, for I swear as I am Knight, that if I had not bin, the whole Army had
dyed of that flux, for of 14. or 15. thousand that were there, there was not
left 2. thousand but they were infected with that flux or distemperance of the
Liver, caused of superfluous heat, the which heat distempereth the stomach,
and causes that continual flux: ye shall understand that our vomit does
euacuate the stomach of the putrified humor, and the salt water cools the
heat, and restrains the flux, so that by that means they were helped.

A goodly remedy found out by me, for wounds in the head.
VVOunds in the head were very perrillous in that place, so that if a 100. were
hurt in the head, it was not possible to recover x. and that came through two
things the which were much contrary in that Region, for the day was so hot,
that it burned all things, and the night to the contrary so extreme cold, that
it was intolerable, and not to be credited, and so by this distemperance when
Craneum was uncovered that the air might touch it, presently they dyed without
any help, then I seeing that, began to consider of the matter, desiring to
find some means to help them, and so studying, it came in my memory, that the
air was cause of their death as it was in truth.

Than presently I commanded all those Chyrurgions that were under my
Jurisdiction, that they should not meddle with any wound in the head without my
presence, the which thing was done, and as many as were wounded, the first
thing that I did in steed of cutting or lancing or discovering, according to
the common order, I joined the parts and sowed them close and dressed them upon
the wound with our Quintessence, and with Balsamo and Magno licore, and so in
short time the most part were helped, and there dyed none so desperate as they
did before, and therefore to my Judgment, this was a good invention, and never
used of any before, and this order of curing is very natural, for Nature does
show it in herbs, plants and stones, how that they cannot stand dis-vnited:
then much more out flesh cannot stand dis-vnited, without great torment of the
Patient, for until it be joined together again, it is impossible to be helped,
then seeing that is true, it is most natural for the wound to be joined
together, and to use those medicines that where they be applied, will not
suffer the humor to come thereunto, nor putrify the place that is hurt, and
seeing it is so, as by experience is seen, we must believe this to be a
natural and most wholesome remedy, so that I affirm that the joining of the
parts of the wound in the head and other parts of the body, is most sovereign
and of great satisfaction to the (...), for they never feel pain, nor have no
fever nor other sort of accident, for of those I have cured a great number with
good success.

The cure of one that had his nose cut off, and set on again.
IN that time when I was in Africa, there happened a strange case, and that was
thus.

A Certain Gentleman a Spaniard that was called Il-signor Andreas Gutiero, of
the age of xxix. years, upon a time walked in the field, and fell at words
with a Soldier, and began to draw his weapon, the Soldier seeing that, stroke
him with the left hand and cut off his nose, and it fell down in the sand, than
I happened to stand by, and took it up, and pissed thereupon to wash away the
sand, and stitched it on again very close, and dressed it with out Balsamo
artificiato, and bound it up, and so let it remain viij. days, thinking it
would have come to matter: nevertheless when I did unbind it, I found it fast
conglutinated, and then I dressed it only once more, and he was perfectly
whole, so that all Naples did meruell thereat, as is well known, for the said
S. Andrea does live yet, and can testify the same.

The Cure of on Arm of S. Giordano Vrsino.
AT the same time, the said S. Giordano Vrsino, and S. Antamo Sauello Romano,
and S. Astor Baglione, with diverse other; took their horses, and rid about two
miles from the Camp, and there perceived certain Mores on horsbacke, who did
assalt these gentlemen, and one More with his Lance, did thrust through the
Arm, from the elboe through the shoulder, S. Giordano, who being sore wounded,
returned to the Camp in great pain, and presently I was sent for, and when I
saw it, I put therein out Quintessence, and upon the wound I laid our Balsamo
and Magno licore, and bound it strait, and so left it, and in five days it was
whole and sound, and then went to the assault most valiantly, as many can
testify, because he was General of Firenze.

A great chance that happened at the assault in Africa.
AT the same time, there was a Gentleman Florentine that was with the said S.
Giordano Vrsino, who was called Millematti, the which fought with his Sword and
Target, and defended many shot of Caliuers and such like, at the last one
pierced his Target and stroke him upon the breast and bruised him meruolously,
and yet broke no skin, and therwithall he fell to the ground for dead, and the
carier of dead men, or Becamort, as they call them, would have buried him in a
Mine, I then being present, caused him to be brought to the Tent of S. Aster
Baglione and there I put our Quintessence into his mouth, and that caused the
blood to liquifie and come forth at the mouth, and I laid upon his stomach a
plaster of Ashes and Oil, as hot as he could suffer it, and that I changed
morning and evening, and always I gave him of our Quintessence to drink, so
that in short time he was help, and yet lives in health: and this was one of
the most strangest things that ever I salve, that a pellet of a Caliuer could
not break the flesh, and that came by certain words that the said Millematti
did carry written upon his breast, as he persuaded me afterward, for he said, In
verbis, and in herbis, and in lapidibus, sunt virtutes, etc.

The Cure of wounds being poisoned, and of other sorts.
While the wars dured in Africa, many times the Christians were poisoned with
venomous Arrows and such like, for the Mores commonly when they fight against
Christians, they stick the heads of their Arrows in a Squill, and poison it
with the juice, and when those Arrow heads or other weapon goes into the flesh
of a man, it causes so great burning, that it brings Spasmus, and so in
short time they dye. And till this time there has been no other medicine
found, but to cut away all the flesh that the weapon touched or else to
couterise it two or three times with a red hot iron, to extinguish the venom,
but I (through the grace of God) have found the true and perfect way to help
them quickly and with great ease, and without detriment of the wounded, The
remedy is this: you shall put our Quintessence into the wound, and lay thereon
our Magno licore, the which are two medicines that kill the poison of the
squill, and therefore if any will prove this to be true: (...) see the
experience, take a piece of a Squilla, and scratch it with the nail, and then
put thy finger into thy care, or scratch any other place that ye may touch the
flesh, and presently thou shall feel a terrible burning, and to quench it
presently take of our Quintessence, and wash the place therewith, and presently
the pain will cease, and therefore use this as a secret, for therewith I have
cured a great number.

A remedy found out by me against the poison of a fish.
When that I caused so many sick of the flux to go into the sea whereby they
were helped, there was a certain kind of fish, that as soon as they touched
the flesh of a man, presently it inflamed and the poison so increased, that in
two or three days, it caused corosiue sores, the which caused many to dye, and
many were stong with that fish, the which never could find help: I then seeing
that desperate case, upon a time visited a young man being a Roman, the which
was hurt on the coddes and yard, with such a spasmus that it was wonderful to
behold, and having a glass full of my Quintessence in my hand, I opened the
sore and washed it therewith, and presently the pain ceased, then afterward I
dressed it with an unguent made of the fat of the fish, and so therewith he and
a great number more were helped in short time, and these are secrets of my
invention.

Of the taking of Africa and his destruction.
IN the year 1551. the 11. of September about the 9. hour the general
assault was given to the City of Africa, and in the space of 2. hours it was
taken, and destroyed by the Soldiers of Carolus Quintus, Emperor, whereat was
flaine a great number of both parts, and there was such a number hurt, that it
was to be wondered at, the which were healed with our Magno licore and Balsamo,
and when the City was taken and all ended, the Galleys remained there all
September, and the fourth (...) of October every man went to serve at their
ports appointed, and so we turned to Naples to pass the Winter, but yet we
remained but a while, for there was occasion to go to Siena, the which
revelled against the Emperor, and so went with Don Pierro de Toledo, the which
dyed after at Firenza, etc.

The Cure of a great wound in the head.
IN the year 1551. in the month of November, there came unto my house a
Spaniard called Giouan Ruiz di Zamora, who had a great wound ever the ear, on
the left side, that reached half over the head, with great fracture of the
bone, the which I presently stitche a with diligence, and put therein our
Quintessence, and upon the wound I dressed it with Magno licore, and Balsamo,
and made a gentle legature with a piece of stike, and sent him home to his
lodging, and will him to come again the next day about the same hour, and
those that were about me fell a laughing at my words, and said that he would
dye of that wound because I let him go forth in the air, to which I answered
that he might safely go forth, and so the next day he came again, and I took
off the ligament, but not the cloth, and thereon I put of our Quintessence and
Balm, and in three days after I touched it not, then I took off the ligament
again, and dressed it upon the cloth, and let it remain until the 8. day,
and then I opened it and took away the cloth, and found the wound so healed,
that you could scarf perceive any scarre, and many said it was impossible to
be healed, for it would come to impostumation, nevertheless it remained
perfectly whole, for 5. or 6. months that he remained in the City, in which
time I cured a great number in the same order that were wounded in the head, to
the great wonder of those that dwelt in Naples, for they count all wounds in
the head to be mortal, because the air is so pestilentiall, for as soon as
it touches the scull it corrupts the wound.

But using our order thou may safely help them, so that the wound be not
mortal, for by keeping it close shut it is preserved.

A very strange thing that happened in the aforesaid year.
THere was a certain young Mariner of the age of 26. years, the which was
called, Francisco di Giouanni Raguseo, of the I Will of Mezo, the which being in
fight fell down, and the other that fought with him cut him over the side and
back a handful long, in so much that a piece of the Milt was cut ouerth wart,
then he was carried to a Chyrurgion, and he stitched him up, then the next day
I was called, and there I found the wound not well stitched, the which I ripped
up again, and found the belly full of blood, and when I saw that, I caused
diverse to make water, and therewith I washed him, and with taking forth of the
blood, there came a piece of the Milts that was cut, the which I washed, and
gave it to a Mariner that stood by, and the Patron of the ship took it from
him and carried it away, then I stitched him up again, and left a little hole
or orifice beneath, where the matter might come forth, and dressed him with our
Quintessence, with Balsamo, and Magno licore, and in the space of 22. days he
was whole perfectly.

The cure of a Fistolae in the lower parts.
IN the year. 1552. in the month of March, I was brought unto a man of the age
of 40. years, of complexion choleric and melancholicke, the which had a
Fistolae in the lower parts, the which was of this nature, that it had
alterated the Coddes, the member, and all the parts there about, with xj. holes
infistolated, at the which xj. he made water with great burning and
intolerable pain, and which are accidents of a fever in manner continual,
the which Patient had been taken in hand of diverse and none could do him
pleasure. Than the first thing that I did, I gave him our Aromatico, that being
done, I gave him xij. days together our Quint essencia solutiuo, that being
^one, I gave him^^ quantity of our Electuario Angelica, and then he used one
of my secrets, the which I will not write in this place, that being done I
caused him to spit, with one of my confections written hereafter, and so by
these means he was perfectly whole.

Of many that I cured in Naples.
IN that time that I remained in the famous City of Naples until the year
1555. in the month of February, and then I thought it good to go to Rome,
whereat this time I cured a number of persons, and have helped so many by the
help of God, the which if I should record them it would be sufficient to fill a
great volume, for there came such a number to my door, that the people wondered
thereat; and with 4. medicines compounded by me, I helped in manner all of every
disease, and the medicines were these, one Pill made with our Petra
Philosophale, Elebore negro, Olio di sulpho, Olio di melle, mixed with
marchpane, and made in Pills. The second remedy was soluble Pills, made with
Aloe hepatico, Coloquintida Siena, and oil of Vitrioll, made in paste with
sugar, and common honey. The third remedy was an unction, made with Sage,
Rosemary, Wormwood, Rue, Muit, Nutmegs, Cloves, Ciuamon, Masticke,
Franke^^^nse, Terpentine and Wax with common oil. The 4. remedy was our
Quintessence, and these 4. remedius, I gave unto those people to help their
griefs: and I wi^^^ them that took these medicines to eat well and of good
meats, and so always they praises these medicines, the which was not without
great reason, because the Pills ^^r^t euacuate the stomach of all impediments,
and leaves nature ^ased: the second Pills euacuate the body of the corruption.
The Unction comfort the stomach, and helps digestion, and mitigateth the
pain. The Quintessence comfort the stomach, causes good disgestion,
purifieth the blood, and comfort the head, so that by these aforesaid
reasons, ye may understand that these four remedies may help against all
indispositions inwardly, and for cause of these remedies those people honor me
like a Prophet, and always have had me in great reverence, as long as I
remained among them.

A Cure of Vlcera putrida, which was in the Arm.
IN the year aforesaid, and in the month of August, there came to my hand a
Gentleman of the Ambassadors of Portingall, that was called Il Signor Iari,
being of the age of 32. years, of complexion melancholic, who had a
putrified ulcer about the left shoulder, which he had carried above 3. years,
and was as big as a hand, and very deep, which could not be healed of the
common Chyrurgians, nor yet be eased of his pain: than I reasoning with this
Gentleman, told him that the cause of that sore was corrupt and putrified
blood, and by that means the Liver received evil qualities, and that if he
would be helped; the cause must be removed, the which was hard to be done,
because the blood must be euacuated a little, and then the stomach must be
euacuated of moist matter that offends it, and hinders digestion of the
meat, and will not suffer good blood to engender, then it will be also
necessary to euacuate the body downwards, that the corruption sends not up
his vapors to the upper parts of the body, and hinder the cure of the Ulcer,
all this being done, it were necessary to euacuate the humor between the
skin and the flesh by sweat, so that all the parts of the body may remain
purified, and so by these means the Ulcer may easily mundifie, incarnate, and
cicatrize, and shall be a perfect cure, to the which thing the Gentleman was
willing, for he had as willingly dyed as lived, and so in the name of God I
took him in hand, and the first thing that I gave him was a vomit that purged
the stomach, and took away great part of his pain: then I purged him with
our Quintessence solutiuo, eight days together, that being done I made him a
fomentation, that caused him to sweat well, and to spit abundance, then I
caused him te be let blood under the tongue, and then I anointed all the ulcer
with our Causticke, the which mortified all the filthiness therein, and then I
dressed it with Magno licore, and our Cerote magistrale, and so with these
remedies in short space the said Gentleman was cured, to the great meruell of
the said Ambassador, and all those that saw it: by reason of that cure came
another of the same house unto me called Il signor diego Iaimes the which was
troubled with a difficulty of urine, the which troubled him mightily, the
which I gave three times our Petra Philosophalle, and the juice of Elder
barks, and he was helped: I cured another in the same house of a fever with
our oil of honey, and with Balsamo: The Ambassador likewise being troubled
with the Gaut, willed me to take him in hand the which I did, and cured him so
that in three years after which I continued in Rome he never felt pain, and
of these cures I helped an infinite number in Spain, as is well known to the
inhabitants thereof.

The cure of ethesia in the beginning.
IN the year 1555. in the month of March, there came to my hands a young man
of Millane the which was a Painter, of the age of five and twenty years, the
which was fallen into a spice of etisie, and did spit much blood with a
continual fever, the which I cured in this order.

First I let him blood under the tongue on the right side, and after that I
gave him a quantity of our Aromatico with Plantine water, because the bleeding
takes away the superfluous blood of the breast, the which nature sends forth
by itself, and the Aromatico with Plantine water is cold and dry, which are
most necessary for that disease, for they euacuate the stomach, re^ercute and
mittigatethe alteration, those things being done, I caused him to use our
Quintessence solutiuo to euacuate the body, in respect of the putrefaction
already conceived within the intestinalles, also I caused him to use the
Quintessence of the flower of flowers, and anointed his stomach with Magno
licore, and also he used our Electuarie of Althea, and so by these means he
was helped perfectly.

The cure of a certain man wounded in 13. places.
IT happened that a certain man called Alessandro Orefice, was wounded before my
lodging in 13. places, and there fell for dead, and then by a certain friend,
was brought into my lodging, and there I laid him upon a table and took off
his clothes, and sowed all those wounds which were to be sowed or stitched, and
dressed him with our Quintessence, and Balsamo, and Magno licore, and our
secret powder, and so by these means in 15. days he was perfect whole.

Of remedies that help many diseases.
THere are many and sundry diseases, and they be helped with diverse and sundry
medicines, therefore I will make a note only of those the which are most used.

And first I will write of those remedies that help the fever of all sorts,
the which are these, the strope of Burrage, Buglose, Endive, Cicory, Hoppes,
Fumitori, Rhabarh, Cassia, Scamony, Sine, Barley water, sirop of Sitroues, and
such like.

The remedies that help the Pox are these, Alees, Coloquintida, Turbit,
Hermodactalis, Scamony, Precipitate, Oriola, Oliuella, the unction of Mercury,
Lignum sanctum, Cina, Salsa perilla, the perfume of Sinaber, a stone of
herbs, our Cerote magistrale, and such like things: those remedies that help
the cough, are Enula campane, Garlike, Sulfure, Honey, Lapaciolle, the oil of
Sulfure, and such like: those remedies that help the scabbes are the juice of
Aureola, Sulfure, Litarge, Aqua realle, Roch Allome: those that are troubled
with pains in the body, may use Genciane, Nutmegs, Dictamus albus, Euphorbio,
those that are wounded shall use Terpentine, our Balsamo, Magno licore, Aqua
Balsamo, Elixer vitae, Cerote magistrale, oil of Hiperconie, of our invention,
and such like: Those that provoke urine, are the flowers of Mallows,
Alcakengi, Hogs lise, Cantarides, and such like, and therefore I will not
trouble you further, because I have written sufficiently in my other books in
sundry places, and hereafter I will write of diverse and sundry medicines of our
invention, never found out before of any man.

Here begins the order to make diverse and sundry Medicines of our
invention, never found out before by any man. And first to make our Petra
Philosophale, that helps against all manner of diseases, that happens unto
man or woman, or any other animal terrestrial.
THere has always been a great questioning among the Philosophers, whether
that one medicine might help against all diseases or no. The which I affirm,
and will approve with sufficient reason, that the Petra Philosophalle made of
our invention, may help against all the infirmities that comes unto man's
body, and two only reasons I will show thee with brevity: the first of them
is this, that all sorts of infirmities have their original and beginning of
the stomach, and to know the truth ye may se manifestly, that if the body be
never so little infirmid the stomach is also grieved: For ye may see how the
animals terrestrial, never help themselves of other infirmity than of the
stomach, and when they will help themselves, they eat herbs, the which
causes them to vomit, and this does signify that they have no other infirmity
than the aforesaid, so by the experience of the animals I approve that the
infirmity is caused of the stomach, and this is the first reason. The second
is, that all the medicines wherein our Petra Philosophalle is put, as soon as
they are come into the stomach, it draws unto it all the evil humors of
the stomach, and of the whole body, and mixeth with them, and so Nature sends
them forth by vomit or by sege, or both, and so the stomach shall be euacuated
of that matter, and the body remain free from impediments of infirmities, so
that by this reason I affirm that our Petra Philosophalle may help against
all sorts of infirmities, and to know the truth, I have proved it by
experience, in all manner of infirmities, and always have found it to do much
good unto all men, and hurt none unto my knowledge, and the order to make this
Petra Philosophalle, is thus:

Rec. Salniter, Roch allome, Vitrioll Roman, of each two pound.

First, dry the Vitriol in a earthen pan, and then beat it to powder, and
mix it with the other matters, and put thereunto four ounces of Sal gemme,
then put it in a goord with his head, and a receiver, well luted, and distill
it in a wind furnace, so that ye may make fire with wood, and at the first
make small fire, and so increase it according to Art, and always lay wet
clothes on the head and rece^^^er, and that thou shall do because the spirits
of the water shall not fly away. Ye shall understand that in the beginning of
your distillation, the receiver will wax red like blood, and then turn white,
and at the last when ye give it strong fire, it will turn red again, and
those are the pure spirits of the Aqua fortis, and then at the end, the
receiver will turn whit again, and then it is ended, then let it wax cold,
and then keep it in a glass close shut, to make our Petra Philosophalle.

Then take Mercury, lib. 1. Quickelyme 6. ounces, Soap 4. ounces, common ashes
3. ounces, Mix them together in a mortar of stone, and put them into a Retort,
and distill it with a strong fire, until all the Mercury become forth into the
receiver: then take it forth, and keep it in a glass, to make thy
composition, the which is made thus.

Rec. The water that thou made first, and put it into a goord of glass being
well luted, and then put in thy Mercury that thou did distill before. After
that, take Steel in thin plates 1. ounce, Iron also in thin plates 2.
ounces, Fine Gold in leaves, the weight of two French crowns, and put them
altogether in the glass, and presently set on the head, for it will begin to
boil and cause red fumes like blood, the which thou shall receive in a
receiver, and presently set thy glass in the Furnace and give it fire until
all the water be come forth with the fume. Then let it cool, and keep that
water close in a glass, then break the other glass that stood in the fire,
and in the bottom thou shall find our Petra Philosophalle, the which thou
shall grind finely, and searce it in most fine powder, and then wash it well
with Vinegar distilled, and dry it again, and at the last wash it with
Rose Water, and dry it very well, stirring it continually over the fire, then
keep it as a precious Jewel close in a Glass.

The order to use it, I will write here after, in sundry places: Ye shall
understand that the water the which ye distilled away from the stone, will
serve for the same purpose agau^i^: But ye must take but half the quantity of
the afore-saide matters, and when ye have distilled it again from the stone,
ye shall preserve it, for an infinite number of purposes as I will show thee
heere-after.

To make our Balm artificial, with the order to use it, and wherefore it
serves.
THis Balsamum has all the virtues of the natural Balm, although not in
qualytie, yet in virtue, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. Venice Turpentine 1. pound, Oil of Bays, that is perfect without
mixture 4. ounces, Galbanum 3. ounces, Gum Araby 4. ounces, Olibanum, Mirra
elect, Gum hedera, of each 3. ounces, Lignum Aloes, Galingall, Cloves,
Consolida minore, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Zedoaria, Ginger, Diptamnum album, of each
1. ounce, Musk of Leuant, Ambergres, of each one dram. Beat all those
aforesaid things together, and put them into a Retort of glass well luted and
put there-to. 6, pound of Rectified Aqua vitae without fleame, and so let it
stand viij. days, and then distill it by sand, and there will come forth a
white water mixed with oil, and so keep thy fire small, until there come
forth a blackish Oil, then change thy receiver, and set thereto an other, and
increase thy fire until all the spirits be come forth, then separate the
Oil from the black water, and keep them by themselves, and the like shall ye
do by the first water. The first water that is white, is called Aqua del
Balsamo. and the Oil separated from that is called, Oleum del Balsamo. The
second water that is black is called Balsamo artificiato, the which would be
kept as a precious Jewel.

The first water is most excellent to clear and preserve the sight of the
eyes, also the face being washed therewith, it makes it very fair, and
preserves it youthfully, it keeps back age it breaks the gravel in the
reins, and provoke urine, the which is stopped through carnositie, it
helps all manner of wounds, in what place of the body soever they be, if ye
wash them with the said water, and wet therein cloutes, and lay thereon, for
his operation is so strange, that it seems rather divine then humane. It
helps much against the Etisie and against all sorts of Cattarres, and Coughs.
If ye wash a Sciatica, therewith and lay thereon a cloth wet in the same, it
takes away the pain presently.

The other water called the mother of Balm, helps scales in short time if ye
wash them therewith, so does it help the white scall, Lepra, and all sorts of
ulcers that are not corrosiue; it serves also against a number of other
infirmities, the which I will let pass at this time.

The oil of Balm does serve for an infinite number of things, and especially
for wounds in the head, where the bone and pannicle is hurt, putting it
therein. It preserves the face if ye anoint it therewith. It is most
excellent against the Plurisie, giving thereof a dram at a time with the water
of Balm.

The Balm artificial is a miraculous liquor, if any have the stitch in the
side, and take two drams thereof, it presently will help him. It is also good
against the cough, and cattarre, and coldness in the head and stomach, and
for wounds in the head. It is a most sovereign remedy, if ye anoint all the
head therewith once a day, because it pearceth into the brain, and also into
the stomach beneath. It resolves all tumors in all parts of the body with
speed. It resolves a Quartaine in short time if ye anoint all the body
therewith, leaving no part.

And to be short, I know no disease neither (...) nor yet cold, but this
Balsamum does good unto, as well the hot diseases as the cold, because it
cools the hot, and heateth the cold, and this it does by his quality and
hidden virtue, so that I have found in this precious liquor such virtues, that
I am not able to declare them all, so that every one the which is furnished
with this precious Balm may be kept from infirmities, and shall not need to
seek the natural Balm, with so much expenses and danger of life, as has
been many times seen.

To make our Aromatico, the which helps against all manner of infirmities, of
what quality soever they be.
ARomatico Leonardo, is so called, because it is compounded and made by his
invention, and is a miraculous medicine, that serves against all manner of
diseases, of what quality soever they be, for it works this operation, that
is, as soon as it joins to the stomach, it draws to it all the evil
humors of the body and imbraceth them, and caryeth them forth of the body both
by vomit and sege, and so leaves nature unburdened, the which may prevail to
his pleasure, because it has no impediment, and by this reason I approve that
our Aromatico helps against all diseases as is said before, and the order to
make it is thus:

Rec. Fine white Sugar 4. ounc. pure Pearls, Musk, Safrane, Lignum aloes,
Cinnamon, ana, one scruppell, Petra Philosophale, 4. drames, mix them together,
and make thereof Losanges with Rose Water, according to Art, the which ye shall
keep in a box of wood close shut, and the order to use it is thus, that when
the Physician does go to visit any sick person, and that he will prepare
him some medicine to take inward, the best and most perfectest medicine that he
can ordeine is our Aromatico, because it euacuateth the stomach by vomit, and
the body downward, and his operation is such, that it does in manner help any
crud sort of infirmity, and the quantity is from one drame, to two drames,
and may be taken in broth, in wine, in water, or mix it with any Pills, or
potion, giving you charge, that when ye put it in any potion that ye leave none
in the bottom of the cup where ye drink it out, because the Petra
Philosophale is heavy, and will remain in the bottom, for if that remain it
will not work at all, giving you also charge that the said day that ye give
this medicine, that ye let the Patient drink as much crude water as he will,
and give them little meat to eat that day, and this is the order to use this
medicine.

To make our Electuario Angelico, and the order to use it, and in what diseases.
ELectuario Angelico Romano, is so called, because it was compounded of me in
the City of Rome, in the time of Pope Paulo quarto, and because this
composition works suddenly, I called it Angelico, and is most excellent
against many diseases, it is good against all sorts of feauers, giving it
Pe^ninoratiuo, and for the stitch in the side it is most rare, because it
takes away the viscocitie in the stomach, and opens the pores, and is good
against the Gout, for if they take it every third day once, in ten days they
shall be helped, it is also good against the cough, Cattar, and for the Mitt,
and for those that have the Po^e, or the running Gout, and such like
influences, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. Safran, Lignum alocs, Sinamon, red Coral, ana, 3. drames, Eleborus
higer, without preparation, 2. ounc. Electuario de succo rosarum, Mesue, that
is not too much boiled, 6. ounc. Sugar rosat, 8. ounc. Musk of Leuant 1. dram,
Petra Philosophale 3. ounc. our Quintessence of wine 2. ounc. purified honey as
much as will suffice to make it in form of a Lectuary, mix them on a small
fire in an ^arthen pan, and when it is made, keep it in a vessel of glass,
for any other vessel will not be good: This Electuary ye may mix with any
sollible medicine, but ye must take it fasting: the quantity is from 2. drams
to 4. drams. Ye shall understand that this in a manner reuiueth the dead by his
great virtue, as has but seen many thousand times, in Venice and in Rome,
most worthy of memory, and therefore if any Physician desire to get same in the
world, let him use our Electuario Angelica, the which works miracles on the
earth.

Of the vigitable stone of our invention, to transinute a body of one
complexion into another, and to make him sound for ever.
THe way to make the vigitable stone is rare, and his virtues are infinite and
without comparison, and the cures that are done therewith are so miraculous,
that the world will not believe them, although it be the mere truth, and the
order to make it is thus.

Rec. Tartar of white Wine that is thick and shining, Turpentine that is
clear and pure: the herb called Aloes, that has leaves as long as an arm,
and dented on both sides, and some call it Semper viue, take of each of these
one pound, and stamp them together, and put them into an vrinall with a head
and receiver, and distill them in a wind furnace until all the substance be
come forth, then take the fesses out of the glass, and grind them with the
said water, then distill them as thou did before, and always at the last give
it a strong fire that the fesses may remains well burnt, then take out the
fesses again and grind them with the water as thou did first, and distill it
again, and this thou shall do 15. or 20. times, until all that water be
consumed, and that the fesses remain white like salt, then lay them fesses on
a smooth stone in a moist place, and it will turn into water, the which keep
in a glass close shut, and that is the water of the vigitable stone, the which
water is of so much virtue, that one scruple thereof being put into 2. ounces of
Iulepe of Violets, and given to drink to any that is infirmed or evil
complexionated, in less then 24. days he shall be helped of any grievous
disease, and this must be taken in the morning fasting when the stomach is
empty, for then it works better his operation.

This is an excellent remedy against the worms, giving it in the aforesaid
manner, it mundifieth the Liver, and dries the humiditie of the Milt, it
dissolueth the Cough and Cattarres, it provoke urine where it is let, with
diverse other virtues, the which I will let pass until another time, for if I
should write them all, they would not be credited, and therefore we Physicians
should not rest to practice in all things that seems to us convenient, and I
promise thee truly that he which shall occupy this thing, shall work miracles
on the earth, and win great feign and honor. Ye shall understand that this
is the stone that the Philosophers have long sought to fix their medicine
mineral, so that making the proiection, they join the medicine with
mettalling bodies, and not to go away in fume, because this stone resists
all great ^i^es without consuming, and fixes Sulfure and Orpiment, so that
they shall abide the fire, and makes them white, if ye make proiection
therewith on Copper, or on Lattine, it will turn it into the whiteness of
pure silver, and that I have seen with mine eyes, so that ye may see of what
importance this vigitable stone is, the which works such goodly
transmutations, as well in mettalling bodies, as in humane bodies, and
therefore it is to be accounted of, because it may save the life of many that
use it in their medicines.

Our solible sirop with the order to use it.
SOlyble siropes made in decoction are very wholesome and of great faculty, and
specially in the cruditie of humors, and the reason is this: because it
disperseth the matter, and euacua^eth it with great ease; and without danger or
trouble of the Patient, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. Sage, Rosemary, Worme-wood, Cicory, Cardus sanctus, Nottels, Organy, of
each a handful. Figs* Raisons, Dates sweet Almonds, Salgem, ana 4. ounces,
Coloquintida, Aloes hepatica, Cinnamon, Mirabolani citrini, ana 2. ounces,
Common hon^y, two pound.

Stamp them all grosely, and put them to infuse in sigh^eene pounds of fair
water, then boil it till half be consumed, then strain it, and distill it by
a filter, and aromatise it with two caretes of Musk and a pint of Rose Water,
and then it is made, the which ye shall keep in a bottle of glass close
stopped, the quantity is from sour ounces to six ounces.

In winter you shall take it very warm. And in the Spring and Autumn, ye
shall take it but warm. In Summer ye shall take it cold, for this purges the
gross humors of the body, and hurts not the stomach, ye may use it in a
fever 4. or 5. days together, and it will help it. In cruditie of humors, as
the French Pox, Goutes, Cattares, Doglie Artetiche, and such like matters,
where there is no accident of Fever, ye may take it x. or.xv. days together,
and cannot hurt by any means, for it purges most excellent, it is given
against the Cough, against flux of the urine and pains in the head, and
carnositie in the yard, for the Hemerhodes, and in sum, it is good against al
diseases caused of corrupt humors, for it has such virtue that it draws from
all parts, and euacuateth the humors intestinall, for of this Sirop I have had
great experience, in such persons as were in manner banished and had lost their
taste, and presently using this, they came to good temperature, and I have used
it an infinite number of times, in persons that were vlcerated and full of
sores, evil handled of fortune, and of the infirmity, and finding no means to
cure them as they should be, I gave them this Sirop fourteen or fifteen days
and then they were cured, with a number of other things, the which would be too
long to writ, and therefore I would with every one to use this, not only in
the afore-sayd matters, but in all other diseases.

Our Siropo magistrale Leonardo, the which serves against an infinite number
of diseases, and is a rare medicine.
THis Sirop is solutiue and very pleasant to use, and cannot hurt in any wise,
the which is seldom seen in other medicines, and the order to make it is thus:

Rec. The leaves of Sine 2. ounc. Fumitorie, Mayden-haire, Hart's-tongue,
Liuer-wort, Epitemum, Ellemo, Pollipo of the Oak, the flowers of Burrage, of
Buglosse, Licorice, of each 3. ounc. Colloquintida, Elleborus niger, Aloes
hepatica, Mirabolani Indi, anna, 1. ounce, Proynes 14. Sebestien 12. Tamarise
1. ounc. Stamp them grosely, and infuse them in x. pounds of Fumitorie water,
then boil it until the consumption of the third part and then strain it, and
in that which is strained put these things: Sirop of Stecados 1. pound, Sa^fron
1. scruple, Mel rosarum 6. ounc. Rectified Aqua vitae 4. ounc. Mulke 1. dram,
the muflege of Marsh Mallows 4. ounc. Benjamin 1. ounc. Rose Water 3. ounc.
and then it is made, the which ye shall keep in a temperate place, and this
you must take warm; the quantity is from 2. ounces to 4. ounces, and it is a
most safe medicine to be used without keeping of any diet. It helps those
much that have Pellaria, scabbes, Hemerhodes and such like diseases, and may be
given unto a woman with child without any hanger, when she shall have occasion
to use any.

Our Sirop against the melancolicke humor, and specially where there is
ventositie in the stomach.
IT were necessary for those that will make this Sirop, to be expert in the
Art, for it would be made with great diligence, and the order to make it is
thus:

Rec. Water of Fumitorie, of Hops, of Wormwood, of Maiden-haire, of each five
pound. Then with this water thou shall make a deco^tion with these things that
follow.

Rec. Polipodium of the Oak 1. pound, Sine leaves, Epitimum, ana, 4. ounc.
Cordial flowers 2. handfuls, Mayden-haire 1. handful, Licorice, Raisons,
Cinnamon, of each 2. ounc. the 4. cold seeds 2. ounc. Make thereof a Decoction
according to Art, and strain it, then take 4. pound of that Decoction, and put
thereto the i^yce of Burrage, Buglosse, of Hops, of each 2. ounc. common Honey
6. ounc. Then with white Sugar make a Sirop in good form, and ar^matise it
with musk and Amber, putting thereto 1. ounc. of Plyris without Musk, and
then it is made. The quantity is from 3. ounc. to 4. ounc. in the morning
warm, and fast thereon, at the least 3. or 4. hours, for this purges
meruellously the melancholic humors, and all other gross humors, and
dissolueth wind, and comfort the heart, etc.

Our Potion of Lignum Sanctum, the which is miraculous to dissolve crud and
malign humors, with the order to use it, in the French Pox, and such like
diseases.
BEcause the Pox is a disease contagious, putrified and corrupt, and works
many evil effects, as I have written in my Caprici medicinale, therefore it
were necessary to prepare most excellent and rare remedies to dissolve the
same; which medicines are infinite.

But in this chapter I will write one that purges the crud and viscous humors
downwards, and does assuttiliate the gross humors, and dries all sorts of
subtle humors that offend Nature, and sends them forth by sweat, it dries
the melancholicke humor, and dissolueth choler, and is most wholesome for
those that are troubled with that disease, because it dries much and
dissolueth the disease, with many other effects, as by experience thou may
see, and the order to make it is thus:

Rec. The bark of Lignum sanctum, grosely beaten 1. pound, and lay it to
steep in xiiij. pound of fair water 24. hours, then boil it until 4.
pounds be consumed, then put there to, Pollypody of the Oak 2. ounces, Cicory
one handful, Aloes epatike 4. drames, and let them boil for an hour: Then
put thereunto the leaves of Syue, Epitemum, ana 1. ounce, Coloquintida 6.
drames, Sugar 8. ounces, then let it boil till half be boiled away, and that
there remain 7. pounds, then strain it, and put it in a glass with 12.
grains of Musk, and keep it very close stopped, and this is the strops the
which ye shall take twice a day, that is morning and evening, then make this
drink following the which shall be the common drink at all times, to your
meat.

Rec. One pound of Lignum sanctum, Raspead, and steep it in x. pounds of white
wine that is tipe, and let it boil an hour, then put thereto xv. pound of
fair water and let boil a little more, and then strain it, and keep it in a
glass bottle, for this is to be used all the day time, and the order to use
these is thus. First when any feels himself grieved with the pox or any
such like disease, he must keep his bed at the least xx. days and use to take
of the first sirope or pocyon every morning a good draft being as warm as he
may suffer it, then keeuer him well with clothes that he may sweat as much as
he can, then take off the clothes by little and little, and dry him with warm
clothes, and so let him repose for 2. hours, and then let him eat, and his
meat must be dry, as Biscote, rost-meate* Raysons of the Sun, Almonds, and
some times a raw Egg, and his drink at meals, and all the day besides shall
be the last made with wine and water, then at night give him of the first
Sirope as ye did in the morning, and cause him to sweat, and then dry him, and
this order thou shall use 20. days together not coming forth of thy chamber,
and by the grace of God thou shall be helped of any such grievous infirmity, as
I have seen the experience thereof an infinite of times, to my great honor,
for it may be occupied in all complexions with safety, as by the ingredience
thou may see.

A most meruellous water and rare, to cause a man to avoid the gravel in
urine, and to mundifie the raines.
THe gravel in the raines of the back is caused and engendered of great heat
and dryness in those parts, as thou may plainly see by those which are
troubled therewith, for their raines is so hot that they cannot abide any heavy
garment to lie thereon, and they always make their water with great pain and
burning: therefore if thou will help that infirmity, it were necessary to
refrigerate the raines and moisten it with good juice, and take away that
burning of the urine, and so in that order the Patient shall be helped, and this
thou may do in short time, and with great ease with this remedy.

Rec. The seed of small Lemonds, the seed of Oranges, ana, 1. pound, Saxifrage
6. pounds, Balm, Scolopendria. Pellitory of the wall, Sparagus, Crisoni,
Isope, Fenell roots, Parsely roots, ana, 6. ounc. stamp them altogether and
make them in form of a liquid unguent with the juice of Lemons, then distill
it in a common tin stillitory being ^nted, until the matter remain dry, then
keep that water in a glass close stopped, and when ye will occupy this water,
ye must first purge the body of the crud and viscous humors, and likewise
euacuate the stomach of choler and phlegm, that being done thou shall take
every morning and evening 6. ounces warm, and it would be necessary for those
that take it, to use a diet, and to refrain moist and cold meats, and use
only dry things, and so this water shall help those aforesaid griefs, as I
have proved diverse times.

To make the water of Lignum sanctum, most wholesome against the Pox, with a
new order.
COmmonly they they use to take the water of Lignum sanctum, against the Pox,
the which surely ie most wholesome, but it must be taken in good order and
form, and must be made with great discretion, and not as they use it now a
days, for they give it some 3. or 4. times, and never the better, although the
wood be sufficient enough to help them, and therefore I would wish every one
that will use this water to take it in such order as it ought to be, the which
I will show thee hereafter.

Rec. Lignum sanctum rasped small 1. pound, the bark being beaten 3. ounc.
infuse them in 12. pounds of fair water one night, and the next morning put
therein 1. pound of honey, the which is put in, because it is aparatiue and
warm, and helps to provoke sweat, and causes it to have a good fast, then
boil it till half be consumed, then put thereto Cardus sanctus 4. ounces,
strong wine 3. pound, then boil it until a third part be consumed,, and then
it is made, then strain it, and take forth the Candus sanctus, and put thereon
20. pound of faite water, and 1. pound of honey, and let it boil until 4.
pound be consumed, and strain it and keep it in a glass bottle, for this is
the common drink to drink all the day long, and the order to take it is thus:
first before ye will take this water it were necessary to take our Siropo
solutiuo, 7. or 8. days, after that take our Elect^ario Angelica sem. ounc.
that being done in the name of God take this potion of Lignum sanctum in this
order, take in the morning at the appearing of the day 8. ounc. very warm as ye
may fu^^^r, and presently lay clothes on him, and cause him to sweat 2. hours,
and then dry him with warm clothes, and so let him remain 2. hours, and
then give him to eat, and his meat shall be Biscuit, Raisons, Almonds, and some
time a little roast meat, and no other: then in the evening about the 22. hour,
ye shall give him the said sirope as ye did in the morning; neither more nor
less, and cause him to sweat, and about the 24. hour give him only Biscuit
and Raisons, and the other common drink that was made last, giving you warning
that ye make this drink fresh every third day, because it shall not hurt the
stomach, and every week once ye shall take a Pill of Mart millitare, and that
day thou shall eat birds flesh because of weakening, also ye shall take very
great heed to one thing, and that is this, if it happen that at the beginning
of this cure, there comes a fever or other accident unto the Patient, that
in any wise ye leave not the cure, but follow the order, for that is a certain
sign of health, for many times I have given this water and unto some in the 4.
or 5. day the ^eauer came, and tarryed many times x. or xij. days, and then
the fever went away with the corrupt disease, and all for company, and so in
short time they were cured, so that as I have said before, when that sign
appears, and is delivered, it is a certain sign of health: Also I will
advise thee of another thing, and that is this, if the Patient cannot sweat,
ye shall anoint him all over with the oil of Quinces, the which will cause
him to sweat a pace: for without sweat the cure will not be perfect, and this
order thou shall keep at the least forty days together within the chamber,
so that there come no air in, for it will hinder the cure.

Our distilation for the Etesia, the which is of meruellous virtue and without
comparison: with the order to use it.
Having written sufficiently of the quality of the Fever Etike and his cure,
in my Caprici medicinalle, here I will writ^ of nothing but the order to make
this precious Licore, with the order to use it, as well for that disease as for
other such like, and the order to make it is thus:

Rec. A young Hen that has not yet laid Eggs, and pull her quick, and then
take forth her guts only, and stamp her in a stone mortar, and put thereto as
much ^rum of white bread as the flesh does weigh, and stamp them together, and
put thereto a handful of fresh s^abious, and as many leaves of gold as
weighs a french Crown, then put thereto as much water of Mortella as all the
aforesaid matter does weigh, and so leave it one night, and then distill it in
an vrinall of glass, with 3. pound of strong wine, in Balneo Marie, until the
fesses remain dry, and then it is ended.

Then for every pound of this distillation, put thereunto 1. ounc. of water of
Honey made according to our order, and keep^ it in a glass vnstopt that the
strong savor may Go away, and the order to use it in the Fever Etike I have
written in this Chapter, this serves also for those inward causes the which
are most troublesome, and for the^e that have a burning fever, also for women
that have a ^eauer in their childbirth.

Our vigitable Sirop the which is miraculous and divine.
THis Sirop is one of my ^ secrets with the which I have done many (...) many
times, in (...) operations, on many (...), and have been so tharie of it, that
I meant (...) to set it forth in my lifetime, but yet I considering what great
benefit it might be unto the world, I thought good to set it forth that every
one might be served according to his pleasure: and the like I will do of many
other se^ers of great importance, the which shall be dispearce^ among my
books: and the order to make this Sitop is thus:

Rec. Lignum ^oes, R^opontico, Eupatorio, red Sanders of each 2. ounc. dea^e
them and make thereof a decoction in good form, and with 4. pound of this
decoction make a sirop, and put thereto these things following, whiles it is
hot, Sa^^rane 1. sruple, Ginger 1. drame, Musk 2. carrets, the solution of our
Petra vigitabile, 3. ounc. Cloves, (...), of each (...) sruple and a half,
than keep it in a glass close shut, and this is our vigitable sirop, the
which works miracles in diverse infirmities, for by his nature it purifieth
the blood, mundifieth the Liver, comfort the heart, preserves the stomach,
provoke urine, dissolueth gra^ell in the reins, it helps the cough, and
helps digestion, and quieteth all the humors in the sick person, with diverse
other virtues, the which I will leave till another time. This may (...) with
broth, with distilled waters, or with any decoction or medicine fasting, the
quantity is from 1. (...) 2. (...), and happy shall they be which shall use it.

An (...) helps the Cough with great (...) and ease.
THe Cough (...) of a (...) humor, and coldness in the (...), and therefore i^
ye will help it, it were necessary to have a remedy that does ripen the
cattarre, and mollify the stomach, and the order to make it is thus:

Rec. Enula campana 4. ounc. Marsh Mallows, 12. ounc. Quinces 16. ounc. but if
ye cannot get Quinces, ye may take Marmilade ready made, and boil it in fair
water with the said roots, until they be dry, then stamp them in a mortar,
and strain them through a strainer, then take for every pound of that matter
2. pound of white Honey, and boil them together, but boil them not too much,
then take it from the fire, and put thereunto for every pound of the aforesaid
matter, one scruple of Saffran, and 1. dram of Cinnamon, and 2. ounces of
Sulphur, and 1. scruple of Licorice, and then incorporate them well together,
and aromatise it with musk and Rose Water, and this ye shall use morning and
evening, for this is of so great virtue that it is to be wondered at, because
the Mallows do molifie, the Enula campana, does warm and causes digestion,
and comfort the stomach, the Quinces are cordial and warm, the Sulphur is
a great dryer, the which destroys the evil humors of the body, the Saffran
comfort the heart, the Cinnamon is stomacall, the Licorice is molificatiue,
and digesteth the matter, so that of force this Electuary must help any kind
of Cough, except it come of the Pox, for then it will do small pleasure, as I
have proved.

Electuario benedicto Leonardi, the which purges the body without any grief,
and is miraculous in his operation.
THis Electuario benedicto, is compound of our invention many years ago, and
is so called because of his meruellous operation, and the order to make it, is
thus:

Rec. Of a certain kind of fruit called of some Spina merula, of others
Spini ceruino, with his berry, they make a kind of say green, take of these
berries when they be ripe, and stamp them, and take thereof the juice, and
strain it by a filter, and for every pound of the aforesaid juice ye shall put
therein these things, Sinamond, Safrane, Cloves, (...), Ginger, ana, 1. dram,
Sena, Alo^^^^^. 3. dram, mix them well together, and set it in the (...) it be
dried like a pas^e, and then make it liquid again with these following.

Rec. Rosewater, our Quintessence, ana, 2. ounc. for a pound, Musk 2. carrets
for a pound, Mirrha 1. dram for a pound: incorporate all the aforesaid things
together, and set it in the Sun until it be through dry and may be made in
pounder, of the which ye shall take what quantity ye will, and mix it with as
much Honey purified, and that is (...) Electuario b^nedicto, the which purges
the body without pains, and preserves the stomach, purges the head, and
helps putrified fe^ers, with diverse other things the which I will not write
at this time. Ye may keep this mixture 6. months after it is mixed with Honey:
the dose is from half an ounce to a whole ounce. Ye may take them in Pills,
in broth, in a Lectuarie, or in Wine, or how ye will, and always they shall
(...) his effect well.

An Electuarle against the evil disposition of the Liue^ and Stomach.
THe (...) with diverse and (...) causes, but for the (...) part it is of heat:
For the heat shows some outward sign as is seen by experience, for their
Face and Nose (...), they have heat in their Legs, ch^ps in the palm of their
hand and seete. It ingendreth Fluxes in the body, burning of Urine, running of
the Raines, and such like effects. And the order to (...) them is thus.

Rec. Citraca, S^olopendria, Ep^^les, Eup^^erlo, ana 3. ounces, beat them in
(...) p^w^^r, Lignum aloes three drams, (...) 2. (...), Cinnamon 2. (...), white
(...) and a hal^, mix them and incorporate them together without fire, then
take thereof morning and evening 1. ounce at a time, but before ye begin to take
this electuary, ye shall take a quantity of our Electuario Angelica, and then
in short time they shall be help as thou may well see by the ingredience
that goes into this composition.

Our magistrall Electuary of Sulfure the which serves against diverse sorts of
infirmities.
AS the fire has virtue to heat and dry materyall things, so has the
Sulfure virtue to warm, and to dry the humiditie and couldnesse of our
bodies, for I have occupied it diverse and sundry times, and all ways have
seen diverse and sundry good effects, but for the better commodity, and more
ease to use it, I have compounded this Electuary, the which thou may use with
ease and benifite unto a number, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. Very fine Sulfure that is without earth, and make it in fine powder 1.
pound, Cinnamon half an ounce, Safran one scruple, Ginger 2. drams, Musk
dissolved in rose water 2. Carrets, white honey crude as much as will suffice
to make it in a lectuary without fire, then keep it in a dry place: and this
ye shall use in the morning sasting, and his quantity is from 4 drams to 7.
this dries up scabs, provoke urine, breaks the stone in the raynes, it
helps the cough, dries up the watering of the eyes, causes a good appetite,
with diverse other things the which I will leave to the experimentors.

Our Electuario of Consolida magore that serves for many diseases inwardly.
THis Consolida magore, is a herb so called, because of his effect that it
does in healing of wounds, and other places of the flesh separated, for if ye
eat thereof it will help the rupture, and all sorts of wounds penetrating,
and ulcers of the longs, it dries the milte and such like effects, but because
thou maist^^^^ it more commodious, I have compounded an Electuary the which is
excellent and rare and is made thus.

Rec. The root of Consolida magore, 1. pound, and boil it in water until it
be (...) thou stamp them in a mortar and pass them through a strains, then
put thereto as much white Honey as the matter weighs, and boil them on a
small fire until it he come to the form of a Lectuary, and when it is boiled
put thereof ^ these things.

Rec. The shelles of Pomgarnads in fine powder, 1. ounc. Lignum aloes 6. drams,
Mirr^a, Masticke, Sarcocolla, Sanguis dragonis in grain, ana, 2. drams,
Sinamon 1. dram, Musk of Leuant dissolved in Rose Water 1. carret, th^^^
incorporate them well whiles it be warm: Ye shall note, that the body must be
first well purged are ye take this Electuary, and ye must also keep a diet
that the medicine may work the better, for this helps all the aforesaid
diseases inwardly as is said before: ye may use it implaist^r wife upon wounds,
and broken bones, and use it inwardly, and so the Patient shall remain helped.
With this I have seen men of great age helped, that were burst (...), and
wounded from one part to the other, and also broken bones, and bruises, the
which if I should (...) them, it would not be credited.

Our impory all Electuary for the Mother.
THis (...) for the Mother, is by Nature temparate hot, and by his heat
provoke Menstrua and comfort the Matrixe, and all other weak parts, of
what causes so ever it be, and the order to make it is thu^.

Rec. Cinnamon elect 1. ounce, Nutmegs, Ma^e^, Cloves, ginger, ana 1. (...)
Cassie ligne vj. drams, Mar^ilad^ (...) Lignum al^^^ 4. drams, red Sand^^s 2.
drams, Aqua vitae well rectified 3. ounces, fine Musk 2 Car^ets, purified
honey 2. pound, then make thereof a Lectuary according to Art, the which is
most excellent against the indisposition of the mother: But first ere ye begin
to take this medicine, it were necessary to take a quantity of our Pillole
Aquilone, and then to take this Electuary in the morning fasting thereon, 4. or
5. hours, the quantity is from half an ounce to an ounce, also that time
that ye eat this Electuary, ye shall eat no evil meats, as hogs flesh,
fried meats, or baked meats, or such like as might hinder the operation of
the Electuary: This Electuary ye shall use at the least 40. days together, and
so thou shall see meruellous effects thereof, as I have done a thousand times
in Cicilia, in Naples, and in Rome, and also in Venice, and always it fell out
in one order, and yet the Regions are much different one from another, and the
inhabitants are contrary of complexion, nevertheless this medicine wrought
always one effect in operation, as well in one place as in another, and
therefore I approve it to be a most blessed medicine and of great experience.

Pills against poison the which are of meruellous virtues.
THese Pills are of such experience against poison, as is not to be believed,
and the order to make them is thus:

Rec. Imperatrice, Bistorta, Tormentilla, Valeriana, Dittamo, bianco, Carlina,
Aristologia rotunda, Genciana, Agarico electo, Salgem, of each a like
quantity, beat them in fine po^der, then take the juice of Garlike and
Oynions, as much as will make it into a paste, also put into the juice 1. drame
of Saffrane then let the said past being mixed dry in the shadow, and then beats
it into powder again, and mix it with the aforesaid juice in good form, and
keep it in a vessel of lead until thou have need, and when thou will
occupy it, take thereof 4. drams and make thereof Pills with Siropo Acetoso,
in good form, the which thou shall give unto him that is poisoned, and in
short time tho^ shall see miracles of that medicine: for all the aforesaid
simples in manner alone is sufficient to deliver one that were poisoned, but
being mixed together it works greater effe^t.

Vnguento magno Leonardo.
THis Vnguento magno is so called by reason of his great virtue and operation,
for it works so strange in some deseases, that it in manner reuineth the
Patient, and the manner to make it is thus:

Rec. Ot^egra onin. 6. ^unc. Oximel squilliticum half an ounc. mix them
together in an earthen dish until the Ot^egra ouiu, ^wors^ became like ashes,
then it is d^i^^trom, then put thereon 2. ounces of Vinegar, and wash it well
until it remain pure and clear, then take Olibanum half an ounc. Cerusae 1.
ounc. beat them fine, and mix it in a stone mortar with as much Magno lico^e
as will serve to incorporate them well, then put thereto the Omegra ou^u, and
mix them very well together, that being done, put thereto Axungi^ porcina 8.
ounces, and mix them all together, and then it is made, the which keep in a
vessel well g^ased, for it is ill (...) a long time without corruption, and is
apt to help those that are lame, full of pains, and sores and swellings,
pains of the eyes, the stone in the reins, and such like matters, it helps
all manner of French Pox, if ye anoint them therewith until their gumbes
before, and then leave. But ye shall (...) that the body must first be well
purged before ye anoint them: This (...) all corostus bleers, and helps them
in short times it helps all pains in the eyes, if ye put it therein, and
takes away all burning with speed, and to be (...) it helps those diseases
in most short time, to that it is to be wondered at.

Oil of Hipericon, the which is most miraculous for wounds and bruises.
THis oil of Hipericon compounded by us, is of great virtue in diverse and
sundry accidents, and specially in wounds, for it helps them without any
pain, although the veins, sinews, or bones were hurt or cut, and that in
very short time, it preserves the wound from corruption, and takes away the
pain, and incarnateth and cicatrizeth, as by experience thou may plainly
see. It dissolueth contusions, and is most meruellous against poison.

It helps against any crude sort of venomous Fever, if ye anoint all the
body therewith, leaving no part, and the order to make it is thus:

Rec. The flowers, leaves and seed of Saint John's wor^, as many as ye will, and
stamp them together, and put them in a glass, with as much strong white wine
as will cover it well, then set it in the Sun, 10. days together, then put
thereto as much pure sallet oil, as the herbs and the wine does weigh, then
let it stand in the Sun other 10. days, giving you warning that ye weigh
your oil before ye mix them, that being done, put thereunto for every pound
of oil 2. ounces of Turpentine, and 1. dram of Saffrane, of Nutmegs, Cloves,
Mirrha elect, of each half an ounce, Frankencense 1. ounc. Viticella 2.
ounces for every pound.

Stamp them altogether, and put them into a great glass, and set it to boil
in Balneo Mariae, with a head and receiver close shut, and to know when it is
boiled enough, is that there will ascend no more vapors into the head, and
that will be within 24. hours or thereabout, then take forth the glass being
yet hot, and st^aine it, and keep it in a glass close shut as a precious
Jewel, ye shall note that this oil must always be occupied very warm, and
in any wise tent no wound but wet clothes therein and lay it thereon, and thy
cure shall prosper well, for this I have proved a thousand innes in diverse
places.

To make our Oleum benedictum the which heals wounds divinely.
THis Oleum benedictum serves chiefly for wounds in all parts of the body, and
in specially for wounds in the head, if there were fracture of bone, and
^ffence of the Pannicle, and in other places where sinews were hurt, or
muscles or veins, or in any other noble place of the body: with this Oleum
benedictum, and with our vigitable Quintessence thou may help them ^asely
and in short time, without any danger or detriment of the wounded person, as is
said before, and the order to make it is thus:

Rec. The white of Eggs being hard sodden in water, 12. ounc. clear
Turpentine 14. ounc. pure Mirthe 3. ounc. mix them and put them into a Retort
of glass, and give it gentle fire at the first, and then increase it according
to Art, until all the substance be come forth of the Retort, the which will be
both water and (...), the which separate, and keep the oil by it self in a
gla^^e as a precious Jewel, for this works miracles in wounds of what sort
soever they be, moreoue^ it causes hairs to grow on the head or bea^d, the
which were (...) away, and that in short time, ^y only the place anointing
the place therewith, also if any have (...) and retention of urine, let him
take a ^^^ter, wherein he shall put a little of this oil and he shall be
helped, and this effect it does because it dries mightily, tha^ (...) made in
the secrets parts of the (...) inwardly, where (...) medicine can be applied.

A magistrall water, the which preserves the sight a long time, and mundifieth
the eyes of all spots.
IF thou will make a water that shall have (...) to preserve the sight long,
and to m^ndi^^e the (...) from all spots that are therein, if were necessary
that therein w^^e simples that are preservative, and mundificatiue, as I will
show that hereafter.

Rec. The best and strongest white wine that thou can find 12. pounds, new
bread well risen 4. pounds, Celendiue, Fenell, Cipolla squilla, ana, 4. ounc.
Cloves half an ounce, stamp them and then distill altogether in a Goord in
Balneo Mariae, until ye have received 5. pound, the which keep by it self,
for that is most excellent against pain in the eyes.

Also if any drink every morning for a month the quantity of 1, ounce, it
will help him of any grievous infirmity. Also I never applied this water to
any thing; but always it did great pleasure.

To make oil of Vitrioll compound, the which preserves nature in his strength.
THe order to make this composition is thus:

Rec. Four pound of fine Sugar, Riopontico 1. pound, Rhabarbaro 1. ounc. the
flowers of Mercury 1. pound: stamp them altogether, and make thereof a past,
that being done, take pure rectified Aqua vitae without phlegm 4. pound, and
put them altogether in a Retort of glass close stopped, then set it in warm
horse dunge six days, then take it forth, and distill it in Balneo Mariae,
until there will come forth no more substance, than take forth the fesses in
the Retort, and put it in a can^as, and press it forth very hard: then take
Buglosse water, Fumitory water, Scabious water of each 6. ounc. and with the
said waters wash well the fesses and press it forth again as hard as ye can,
then cast them away, and distill that water by a filter until it be clear,
then mix it with the first that was distilled by Balneo, then take the best
oil of Vitrioll that ye can get, and for every pound of the said water, put
thereunto half a scruple of the said oil of Vit^^oll, and keep it in a
glass close shut. This composition I have caused to be used in the Summer
time, and yet continually do use it, whereof I have seen great experience, it
provoke a good appetite unto those that have lost or spoiled it, it helps
the (...): it dissolueth the pains of the head and teeth, with many other
virtues the which I will not write at this time, it preserves old men in their
strength and (...), so that it has been a thing to be to (...) at, and the
order to take it is thus: Ye shall take half an ounce in the morning fasting
as it is, and fast thereon 4. hours at the least, and that day eat but little
meat but let it be of good norishment, and whosoever follows this order
long, shall live in perfect health of body, as I have seen diverse and sundry
times.

Oleum philosophorum de (...) and cera.
THis Oil of Turpentine and wax, is a most precious Balm, and his virtues
are infinite, because it is made of simples in (...) incorruptible, and is most
miraculous for those that are corrupted or stricken with the pestilence, because
it is most penitratiue, and of nature drying, and comfort all weak pa^^s in
man's body of what infirmity they be, and the (...) to make it is thus:

Rec. New yellow Wax 12. ounces, (...) Turpentine 18. ounces, Beniamine 2.
ounces, Five (...) Aqua vitae 30. ounces, common Ashes 6. ounces, (...) them
and put them into a Keto^^ of glass well luted, and then distill it in a wind
furnace, until all the substance be come forth, and in the reciuer thou shall
find 3. things, the first is the water, the second oil, the third steame, the
which thou shall separate one from another, and keep them close stopped in a
glass, the which is most excellent in time of the pestilence, as well for
(...), as for to help the sores, for if ye put it in a sore or b^tch that is
broke, presently it takes away the pain, and being mixed with other of our
medicines as I have showed in my regiment of the (...), it helps them with
great speed. If any anoint all his body with this Oil twice a month, it will
preserve him youthful and in health a long time, it preserves also dead flesh
or fish that is put therein from corruption, also if any be wounded in any
part of the body, let him anoint it with this Oil 4. or 5. times, and it
shall be whole: Also if any cannot make water, give him 2. drams of this Oil to
drink, and presently he shall make water, it is also good against the stitch
in the side and plurisie, and worms, and the cough and cattar, and against the
pestilent fever, and such like indisposition, if ye drink a little thereof: it
has a number of other virtues the which I will leave unto the experimentors.

Our magno licore which is of great virtue.
THis is of my invention, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. sweet sallet Oil xx. pound, white wine 2. pound, boil them together
until the wine be consumed, then put it in a vessel of stone, and put
thereunto these things following.

Rec. The flowers of Rosemary 3. pound, Lignu^ aloes, 6. ounces, Olibanum,
Bedellinum, ana x. ounces, then stop it very close, and bury it in the ground
4. foot deep, and this would be buried in the beginning of August, and there
remain until the month of March, then take it forth of the ground, and s^t
it in the Sun, and put thereto these matters following, Sage, Rosemary, Rue,
B^tony, Millyfolly, Comfery roots, Tamaro, Viticella, ana, one handful,
Gallingall Cloves, Nutmegs, Spignard, Saffa^ne ana ^ounce, Sarcocolla, Sanguis
Draconis in grain, Mastike ana 2. ounces, aloes epatike, Rasa di pino, ana 8.
ounces, yellow Wax, Auxungia, ana 18. ounces, Colophonie 1. pound, Hipercone
with the seed and all 2. pound, Musk 1. dram, Mix these all well together,
and boil them in Bal^^eo until the herbs become dry and have no more
substance, then it is boiled, then take it forth and strain it, and put
thereunto for every pound, 16. (...) and when the month of September comes
(...) thereunto 2. pound ^f the (...) of the he^be called B^lsami^^, the which
(...), and then it is ended, the which thou shall keep in a glass (...) for
the (...) the better it is, and is of such virtue (...) them every a morning
(...) ounce of (...) of (...) a warm, the space of 40 (...) And this i^ the
true (...) that helps the (...) disease so (...) in the (...) any were (...),
let him join the parts close together, and dress it with this Oil very hot
upon the upper parts, and in short time it (...) the white scal if ye anoint it
therewith: It helps (...) in the (...) the nos^^^lle^ (...) when ye go to
(...), if ye ^^^ynt the stomach (...) of the meat, it provoke urine where it
is let (...), it preserves the heard black, and is good against worms, and
all th^se experiments (...) proved of me of^^^ and sundry times in the (...)
and also in (...) other the which (...) time: Ye shall (...) that if (...) all
over that is grie^^ with the po^e with this Oil, it will increase his (...),
and so by that me^^^s ye may know whether he be (...).

Pillole Angelica, the which euacuate the body without any impediment; and are
most profitable.
IT is m^st necessary that all kind of ^^ls should ^awel prepared and (...);
because they shall make no alteration in the stomach of those that take them,
and therefore (...) will write a kind of Pill of (...) ^^^ention, and (...)
Pillole Aug^^^a L^onardo the which may (...) used in any kind of (...) may be
given to a woman with child without danger, for they dissolve the body without
trouble, they purge choler and fleame, and purge partibus along, and are good
against all pains, they dry vp^vlcers in all parts of the body, it dissolueth
the Catarrous humor, and in manner all fevers, and the order to make them is
thus: Rec. Coloquintida 4. ounc. and put it in 2. pound of pure rectified Aqua
vitae without fleame, and there let it remain 3. days, then strain it hard
into a clean vessel, and put therein Aloes epatike, Mirrha, Eleborus niger,
ana, 1. ounc. beat in fine powder, and mix them like a paste, then set it in
the Sun until it be almost dried: Then put thereto Safrane, Cinnamon, yellow
Sulfure, ana, 4. drams, and mix them well together, and let them dry
altogether, then make it into a paste with white crude Honey, and keep it in a
vessel of lead, for that is best, the quantity is from one dram to 2. drams,
for these are Pillole preparate, that may be taken without keeping diet, and
they do purge all humors hanging in the body, and preserves the body from
putrefaction, and I have seen the experience thereof diverse times.

Pillole Aquilone of our invention.
THese Pills are above all other in operation, as the Eagle is above all other
birds, and therefore I thought good to call them Pillole Aquilone, and the
order to make them is thus:

Rec. Conserve of Damask Roses made with Honey 3. ounces, Cinnamon elect, 2.
scruples, Petra Philosophale of our invention half an ounce, Sugar candy 2.
ounces: mix them and make thereof a paste with Siropo acetoso, and keeepe them
in a glass: the virtues of these Pills I will not write at this time, but only
I say they help against all sorts of infirmities, and hurts none in any
wise, the quantity is from 1. dram to 2. drams in the morning fasting, but ye
may not guild them in any wise, but drink after a cup of water or wine, to
carry them down, then ^leepe thereon, and that day eat little meat, and light
of digestion.

Our Quintessencia solutiua, the which is of meruellous operation in diverse
matters.
THis Quintessencia solutiua euacuateth the body with great ease and without
any betriment, and it purges all parts of the body, that are troubled with
gross and viscuous humors, it desolueth swelling and takes away the pains,
it preserves the ^ight, and kills worms, and causes a good appetite, with
many other good qualities, the which I will leave at this time, and the order
to make it is thus:

Rec. Lignum aloes, Cinnamon, Turbit, Aloes epatica ana, 1. ounc. Coloquintida
2. ounc. Cloves, Sa^ran, of each 3. scruples, Musk of Leuant 1. dram, Iulep of
Violets 1. pound: mix all the aforesaid matters together in a glass, and put
thereon 2. pound of our Quintessence, and so let it stand 12. days and then
strain it, and put it into a vessel of glass close shut, this may be taken
with broth, wine, or with what ^irop or potion ye will, the quantity is from
2. drams to 4. drams, in the morning fasting without keeping of any diet at
all, and it shall work well without trouble at all.

Our Sirope of Quintessence, the which is of meruellous virtue.
THis Sir^pe is of meruellous virtue as is seen daily by experience, and the
order to make it is thus:

Rec. Of that pure rectified Aqua vitae, whereof we make our Quintessence 12.
ounc. oil of Sulfur, oil of Vitrioll of each 1. dram, oil of Tartar perfect
2. ounc. Iulep of ^oses 4. pound, Musk 2. carrets, Safrane 1. scruple, Einamon
1. dram: mix them together, and keep them in a glass, for his virtues are
innumerable and in manner reuiueth those that are half dead: it helps the
^euer in short time, i^ ye use i^. This Sirop may be mixed with any kind of
potion that is given to the sick, and may be given alone in broth, wine or
water, or in what sort ye will, the quantity is from 2. drams to 4. drams, and
therewith I have done miracles, as thou may read in my Thesauro de la vita
humana.

Pillole Magistrale, the which is good against diverse infirmities.
THese Pills are of great virtue, and specially against all kind of pains
coming of corrupt humors, for they purge the putrified humors, and preserve
the body from corruption, and the order to make them is thus: ^ Rec. Olibanum,
Masticke, Mir^ha, Sarcoco^la, Aloes hepatica, Eleborus niger, Saffran, Turbit,
Colloquintida, q. v. stamp them finely, and for every ounce of the aforesaid
matters, put thereunto 2. carrets of Musk, and then incorporate it with honey
of Roses and Aqua vitae of each alike, and this paste thou may keep for six
months in a vessel of lead, the quantity is from 2. drams to 3. drams in the
morning fasting, and drink thereon a little wine. These Pills are most
excellent to take away the pains of the Gout, and to preserve a man from it,
they are also good for those that have the French Pox, because they euacuate
the gross and viscuous humors, and maintain the body in good temperature, and
using them in those diseases, it preserves the body in good temperature: They
are also good for women that are troubled with pains of the Mother and
re^ention of their terms, for these are aperatiue and provoke them, and
purges the matrice of all impediments contained therein, they serve against
the Megram and all pains of the head, and also against all kind of putrified
fevers, as I have seen the experience thereof sundry times.

A compound Aqua vitae the which serves against all cold diseases of the
stomach.
THis Aqua vitae aromatised with simples of Leuant, is of most excellent
virtue, and by the ingredience thou may perceive, and the order to make it i^
thus:

Rec. Nutmegs, Cloves* Galling^lls C^^damonum, Cubebes, Maces, Cinnamon, Ginger
Safran, Olibanum, (...) I ounce, beat them finely and put them in a Goord of
glass, and put thereon 6. pound of pure rectified Aqua vitae, and so let it
stand 6. days, then distill it by sand, and there will come forth a red water,
the which is most mecious against all infirmities caused of cold, it mundifieth
all sorts of sores, and helps all wounds without pain: It causes a good
memory, it helps the cough, and makes the heart merry, with diverse other
virtues, the which I leave to the experimenter.

A compound oil against poison* the which is of a meruellous virtue.
IF thou will help those that are poisoned, it were necessary to have remedies
of such virtue, that are apt to the solution of the poison, for the poison
works those three effects, as is said before in the Chapter of the effects of
poison, wherein it is written, how that it is necessary to keep the blood
liquid, so that it congeale not in the veins, and likewise to let or stay that
water which comes to the stomach, and so let that alteration or
inflammation, as we may ^^rme^^: and all these operations are necessary to be
done with most excellent remedies, in the which there enters part of poison,
for the Proverb says, that one poison kills an other, and that I will
approve in this Chapter, and the order to make this composition is thus:

Rec. The oldest oil that thou can find 1. pound, Aloes epatica Rhabarbaro,
Spico nardo, Mirrha, Tormentillae, Dictanum album, Gentiana, Bistorta, Cosolida
magore, Rubia ^i tintory, ana, half an ounce, Theriaca, Mithridato, ana, 3.
^^ams; quick Scorpions to the number of 60. first put the quick Scorpions
into the oil, and let it boil in Balneo Marie 4. hours then put the unto the
other matters and let them boil altogether other 4. hours, then strain it
and keep it in a vessel of glass close shut, for truly this is a divine
oil for that accident, in the which ye see enters Scorpions, the which are
venomous, and yet his poison is wholesome for those that are poisoned.

The like ye may seacute;e by those that are burnt with fire, for the best
medicine that they can find is to burn that place again: Also ye may see
that when great quantity of blood comes forth of a wound, the Chyrurgian
presently lets him blood in another place to turn the same. Seeing then
that these are true, it is also true that one poison does kill another poison:
and by this reason I approve, that if ye extinguish the poison, it were
necessary to be done with his kind, nevertheless it must be prepared so, that
the matter be not altered, and become hurtful unto the poisoned person, and
the order to use this oil against poison is thus:

When that a man is poisoned, presently anoint all his body with this oil,
and give him thereof to drink 2. drams with white wine venegar, morning and
evening, and God willing thou shall help any poison be it never so strong: If
ye be poisoned with Subblimate or a Diamond, this remedy will not be good
because they are not poisons, but are deadly minerals, the which by no means
can be digested or their evil effect mittigated. Therefore when one is
poisoned with Subblimate, his remedy is no otherwise but to make him bathes of
Vinegar, and let him drinkenulk^ enough, and eat butter, and drink Siero; For
this is the true remedy, as for an example when that a sore is mortified with a
rottory made of Subblimate or Arsenicke, presently it causes great alteration,
for the which there is no excellenter remedies than Vinegar, Butter and Milk:
then seeing that these remedies are so profitable to be used outwardly, there
is no doubt but that they will do the same effect inwardly: Also it would be
necessary to cause them to ^omit every day once at the least, to keeps the
stomach euacuated of that matter, so that it come not to the he the infected
person or infect the finewes, so that the party remain not lame for a long
time after, as is daily seen in diverse places.

A marvelous Soap that helps those which cannot spitt but with great pain.
THis composition is called Saponea nostra, because it is made of Soap, but not
of that Soap which is in the Apothicartes shops in Venice, but this is a
confection, the which being eat every morning a little quantity, it helps
those that spitt with pain, it opens the stomach, and breaks that evil
matter contained therein, and easseth it forth at the mouth with the spittle,
and so leaves the patient well disposed and mercy, and the order to make it is
thus:

Rec. White Venice Soap, and beat it in powder 1. ounce, pure Masticke 2.
drams, Sinamon, Licores, ana 1. dram, fine Sugar as much as will suffice to
make it in tables according to art, the which are most strange, nevertheless
marvel not thereat for I will show the reason, so that every one shall be
satisfied.

Ye shall understand that the first ingredience, being the Soap, is made with
the Lie of Soda and Calkes, the which things do dry and mundifie all sorts or
Vl^ere Sordide, and cools them: Also therein is Oil Oli^^, the which is one
of the most excellentest ^^^^urs in the world, for this of it self is able to
cut that matter from the stomach; and to mundifie i^, then in this compounde
there is Masticke, which is most excellent for the stomach, and draws down
from the head, then the licourice; and Cinnamon are aparatiue and comfort the
stomach, so that all these being mixed together, of force it must help
against these infirmities of the dreast, and the quantity thereof is from 2.
drams to half an ounce.

To make the Quintessence of Honey.
THis Quintessence has all the virtues of the Quintessence of wine, and is
made in this order, and is rather to be counted a divine remedy then human.

Rec. The purest Honey that ye can get which is not mixed with any thing 2.
^ound, and put it into a gowrd of glass, with his head and receiver close
luted, and give it first a gentle fire until there apear certain white fumes
in the head the which will turn into a red water by laying of clothes wet in
cold water, upon the head and receiver; than keep in thy five according unto
art, until all the substance be come forth, the which thou shall keep in a
glass close stopped, and in short time it will turn into the color of a
Rubie, than distill it vij. times in Balneo Marie, and it will loose his red
color, and be of a very pleasant smell, and remain in the color of gold: and
this Quintessence dissolueth gold and makes it potable, and also all manner
of Iuels that is put therein: also if you give two or three drams to any that
lie a dying, presently it will recover him again, as the Quintessenee of wine
does: If ye wash any wound or sore therewith it will heal it quickly: It is
good against the cough, cattar, and pains of the Mylt, and many other sorts
of diseases, the which I will not writ at this time, for few or none will
believe his great operation or virtue. If ye distill it 20. times with fine
Silver, it will restore the sight unto those that are almost blind. Moreover I
have given this 46. days unto one that had the Palsy, and he was helped
quickly.

It helps also the falling sickness, and preserves the body from
^utrifaction, so that by these means we may see that it is a celestial remedy
given unto us by the almighty God, and therefore I would wish some virtuous
men to take a little pains in making of this precious liquor, and they shall
see such wonders thereof that the world will marvel thereat, as I have proved
many times, to my great honor and profile of the patient. For many times I
have given i^ the ^icke that no man did see me, and presently they thought I
had wrought by enchantment, by reason of his great virtue, and therefore all
men that profess Physic and Surgery, ought to be provided of this licour
and such like, for their commodity and profit of the patient.

To make our Elixer vitae, or Aqua Caelestis.
THis Elixer vitae is a medicine of such virtue and strength that it helps in
manner against all diseases that comes to man's body, for those that are hot
it cools, and those that are cold it warmeth, and that it does by his proper
quality and virtue, for this I have proved a thousand times, and have used it
against sundry diseases, and always have had good success, and the order to
make it is thus:

Rec. Ginger, Zedoaria, Gallingal, Long Pepper, round Pepper, I^n^iper berries,
Citron peeles, Orange peeles, Sage, Basil, Rosemary, Mint, Margerome, Bay
berries, Penyriall, (...), Callamint, the flowers of Elders, (...) Roses and
white, Spica nardi, Cobebe, Lignum aloes, Cardamon^im, Cinnamon, Calamus
aromaticus, Germander, Sticados, Camepiteos, Meligette, Mace, Olibanum, Aloes
hepatica, the seed of Mugwort of each 2. drams Figs, Raysons, Dates, Almonds,
Graynes of the Pine, of each 6. ounces, Pute white Honey 1. pound, Musk of
Leuant, one dram. Fine sugar 4. pound.

Mix them altogether, and infuse them in five pound of pure Aqua vitae without
fleame, and so let it stand 8. days, then distill it in Balneo Mariae, until
the fesses remain day, then take that, and sercolate it in a Pelicane, in
horse ^onge 40. days, then take the glass^ with the fesses, and distill it in
sand, until all the substance be come forth, the which will be red like
blood, and stinketh of the fire, and is thick, the which must be sercolated
as the first, and this is the fire part, which is of meruaylous virtue,
insomuch that it reuiueth those that are at the point of death, and therefore I
will write of some of his virtues, which I have proved.

The first water distilled by Balneo, being taken every third day one dram,
preserves the body in prosperous state, and defends from many sorts of
diseases. It helps all sorts of wounds, if ye wash them therewith 3. or 4.
times, and is most excellent against all impediments in the eyes, if ye put
therein one drop, and preserves the sight a long time, so that ye shall not
need to wear spectacles. If a young woman does wash her face therewith
oftentimes, it preserves her a long time in that state. If ye use to drink
this Elixer if provoke Venerous acts, and disposes women to be delivered,
with diverse other virtues, the which I leave to the experimenter.

The last wat^^ the which is red, is excellent good against the pain of the
mother if it be drunk. It dissolueth also the Plurisie, if ye give thereof 2.
drams and anoint the parts grieved therewith. It helps the pains of the
Colicke and hardness of the Milt.

It is also good against pains in the teeth and stinking breath, and many such
like things. It he peth all manner of Fevers, and the reason is because it
dries by all the evil humors that offends Nature as well within as
without, so by this reason it is apt to help all sorts of diseases. If any were
sick and could not speak, let him take one dram of this, with one dram of the
first, and presently he shall speak, most miraculous to see, for this I have
proved a thousand times to my great honor and content of the Patient, and
therefore I would wish all those that profess Physic or Chyrurgerie to be
prepared of this liquor, and such like, for their own profit, and health of
their neighbors.

To make aqua Reale vel Imperiale; the which makes the teeth white presently,
inca^a^eth the gumbes, and causes a good breath.
THe teeth being black, rustie and full of filth, and the gumbes putrified or
corrupt, are the worst things that may be seen in man or woman, and are also
very unwholesome, and the remedy to make the teeth white and to help the
gumbes, is thus: Make this water, and use it in the order as I will show thee.

Rec. Sal gemma, Roch allome, Brimstone, of each 2. pound, Borax 10. ounc.
Pearls beat fine, Coral, ana, 2. ounces, pure distilled Vinegar 4. ounc. put
all the aforesaid matters in a G^rd with his head and receiver, and give it
fire according to Art, and at the last there will come forth a white water like
Milk, the which after it has stood a while; will wa^e cle^re. Ye shall
understand that this water is above all other waters in the world to help
^^cers in the mouth, and to incarnate the gumbes (...) brake the teeth white,
and causes a good breath in those which are troubl^ (...) the aforesaid
matter. For of this water I have (...) great quantity, and has been carried
into (...) Almanie, into Poland, into Constantinople, and in diverse other
Countries, as though it had been a divine thing, and not material.

For truly his experience does cause the world to wonder at it, the use hereof
I have written in this book, and hereafter I will write it again in some of
my books where occasion shall serve to use it in cures.

A kind of Pill most conueniene for the eyes and comfort the stomach.
THose Pills which comfort the stomachs; by forc^ must help the sight, for
when the stomach is filled with malign humors, it distempereth those parts
that are about it, and the fume^ that ascend up to the head, moisteneth Nerui
optici of the eyes, and by this cause the eyes are offended, therefore it were
necessary for those Pills that help the eyes also to comfort the stomach, the
which must be done by euacuating the matter hanging by vomit, and the order to
make these Pills, is thus:

Rec. Marchpane made with Sugar and Almonds, 1. dram Petra Philosophalle 1.
grain, Eleborus niger 6. grains, Diagridij 3. grains, mix them well in a
mortar in form of a pa^te, and make thereof 5. Pills, and those thou shall take
in the morning fasting, for they are of so much force and strength, that they
help not only the eyes and stomach, but in manner all difeases, because they
cleanse the stomach and euacuate the body, the which two things are most
necessary in all diseases.

A discourse upon a composition that preserves a man or woman in health a long
time.
IF thou will make a paste that shall have virtue to preserve whole bodies and
to help the sick, it were necessary to look out simples that have virtue to
do it, and when thou have found out those drugs that have virtue to preserve,
thou may put thy trust in them: the which I discoursing by the way of reason,
and conferring it by experience, have found out a number of drugs that are
friends unto our nature, and preserves it, of the which I will show thee some
that are of great importance, the which may be approved of reason and
experience, and are these.

Rec. Aloes hepatica, Olibanum, Mirrha, ana, 2. ounc. beat them in fine
powder, and make them into a paste like a salve with rectified Aqua vitae, then
dry it in the Sun, then beat it into powder again, and make it into a paste
with our Oleo del Balsamo, and then thou shall have a past of most meruellous
virtue, for if ye take thereof every morning 1. dram it will preserve you in
long in health, it is most excellent for those that be wounded or have any sore
upon them, because it keeps the sore from putrefaction, as by the ingredience
thou may perceive.

A meruellous Water to be used of all Chirurgions in curing of their Patients.
IT is necessary for the Chy^^^gion in the cure of wounds and sores, to help
the body as well inwardly as outwardly, to take away the evil qualities and
corruption of the humors, and to preserve it from putri^action, and then the
sore will heal with little help and in short time, and that thou mainst do
with this Water, the which is incorruptible and of great experience, and the
order to make it is thus:

Rec. Of that Aqua vitae whereof we make our Quintessence 10. pound, and put
therein these things following: Cinnamon, Lignum aloes, red Sanders, Cardus
benedictus, ana, 3. ounces, Cloves, long Pepper, Callamus aromaticus, Sa^^rane,
ana, 2. ounc. Almonds, grains of the Pine, Dates, ana, 4. ounc. Melegetre 1.
ounc. fine Sugar 4. pound, Musk 4. carrets: let all these stand in a long
neckd glass^ close stopped 8. or 9. bays, and then distill it in Balneo until
ye (...) 5. pounds the which keep close stopped in a gla^^s, as aprecious
I^wel: than distill the (...) in sand until the fe^^es be dry, and that will
be a red water, and it will stincke somewhat of the fire or smoke the whithal
(...) in a glasss, for in time it will loose his stin^king smell, and be most
precious. The first water is of such virtue, that it helps all putrified
vicers, if ye dress them therewith. The second is also perfect, that if any
man drink every morning 2. drams, it will so preserve him that it were
impossible he should have (...) this water I have made great experience in many
(...) of diseases, and specially in the Pl^^^^ and (...), etc.

To make our. Causticke.
ALthough I (...) in my Regim^^^ of the Pe^^^ence, (...), A joy full Jewel:
Nevertheless I thought good to write it in this place because every one has
not both these books: and the order to make it is thus:

Rec. Arsenicke christalline, Sal armoniacke, Sublimate, ana, boil them being
finely ground in as much strong Vinegar as t^ matter weighs, until two third
parts be consumed, and that there remain a third: then keep it in a glass
close shut unto thy use: as I will show thee in diverse places when occasion
shall serve.

To make oil of Antimony.
REc. Antimoni and calcine it until it smoke no more, and that it be of a
grayish color, and always as it cluttereth stamp it again, then take as much
common ashes as the Antimoni, finely searced and put them into a Retort we
^uted, and give it fire according to Art, till all the fumes or spirits be
come forth: giving you charge that your receiver be very great, least all
break. This oil is of me^uellous ve^tue against Ulcers: If ye give thereof 4.
grains with any sirop, it helps the fever presently: it helps Phistolaes,
and to be short, it is most wholesome in diverse things: but it were necessary
for the Chyrurgion to be expert in the use thereof, and to mix it according to
his work: And therefore he that cannot use it well, it were better to let it
alone, because it is a perilous thing unto the unskillful, and precious unto
those that know how to use it.

A precious Liquor above all other.
THis is the most precious Water that may be made in the world, and his virtues
are such, and so many, that they cause the world to marvel, at them. The
Mirra and Aloe with Vernish and with as much of our Quintessence, being mixed,
the which without fire, ashes and coals, cannot be separated, and when the
Air, the Water, and Earth, are separated, each of them shall be apt to
mitigate pains, dissolve humors, help wounds, dissolve so we (...) within
the body (...) such like (...) and caused the world to wonder of his
operations, and so shall every one do that desires to follow the right way,
and that will be a child of art. Thou shall understand that I would have
written this playner, but that I write it to those that have judgment both of
the quantities and virtues: because pearls are not for swine.

A secret of marvelous virtue.
Rec. A new brick forth of the kill, and break it in small pieces like a Nut,
them lay them in the fire until they be red hot: then take them forth and
quench them in sweet fallet Oil, then take them forth agains, and lay them in
the (...) until they be red hot: then quench them again, and this ye shall
do at the least five times, and at the las time taken them fo^th, and put them
into a glass (...), Frankensence and Mirrha, and distill it according to art:
then separate each lyquor by him self, and therewith thou shall work
wonderful cures, if thou know how to use it and whereunto.

Our secret of marvelous virtue in act and strength.
THis Unguent is of merueilous virtue, and was never made by any before, neither
ancients nor of our time, the which unguent helps putrified Ulcers in the
legs, so that it is to be wondered at: it works diverse operations, it
mortifieth the evil, mu^difieth, incarnateth and ci^atriseth, the which
things to the professors of the art seems hard: Nevertheless, it is true,
as I have proved an infinite of times: and because the worlds should have it, I
have written here the receite.

Rec. Of (...) M^g^o (...) of Mastike made at the Apothecaries, and (...) into
a vessel of copper, with as much Litarge as ye shall think good, and so let
it stand a good while on the fire, and put thereto of our Cerote magistrale,
(...) them w^ll together, and so of yellow, it shall become black: then take
it from the fire, and put therein Mercury precipitate, and stir them well
until it be cold, and here with thou shall work wonders. It would be
necessary for him that will make this receite, to consider well of the
ingrediences of the compositions, the which are written in this book.

To rectify and preserve the sight of those that are weak sighted.
IF thou will rectify and preserve the sight in those that are weak sighted,
of what cause soever it be: thou shall make this water, and use it according to
this rec^ite.

Rec. Fenell seed, the flowers of Rosemary, Rue, Celendine, Cardus benedictus,
Staues^ager, Cufrage, of each a handful, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, sweet Almonds, of
each 1. ounce: stamp all these grosely, and infuse them in xxx. pound, of pure
white wine, then let it stand 4. days, and then distill it in Balneo, until
ye have received 4. pound, the which keep close by it self, and when thou will occupy it, put thereof one drop into the eye, when ye go to bed, and in
the morning when ye rise. And thus using it, it will pre^erue the fight a long
time.

Of Lac Virginis, and the order to make it.
THis Lac Virginis, is a solution of Satorne and Sal gemma, the which is a
thing most necessary, for the Chyrurgion to use, and the order to make it is
thus.

Rec. Lytarge of gold as much as ye think good, and beat it in fine powder,
thou put thereon strong distilled Vinegar and so let it remain 2 or 3 days,
stirring it every day, then boil it until half be consumed, then let it
repose 2 or 3 hours, and the Vinegar will be clear and of the cooler of gold,
then pour it forth into a glass, and keep it, then take Sal gemma, and
rain water, ana, and dissolve it on warm ashes, and when it is dissolved,
keep it in a glass, and when thou will make Lac Virginis, take of each of
these solutions alike, and mix them together, and thou shall see a strange
thing. For as soon as they are mixed together, they will (...) to a white
Unguent like Ceruse or white lead, the which serves in diverse causes according
to the intention of the Chyrurgian. The solution at Litarge by himself with as
much Oil of Roses being mixed together, makes a delycate Unguent, and
re^riscatiue, the which ci^atrizeth vlcerrs with great speed.

To calcine Tutia, and to bring it into a salt.
THou shall dissolve thy Tutia in this water following. Rec. Salniter, R^^h
allome, Vitrioll, Sci^aber, ana 1. pound ^eat them together, and distill them
according to Art. Then take that water, and put therein thy Tutia, and let it
dissolve upon the warm ashes, and when it is dissolved, vapor away the water
until it remain dry, the which take forth and put it into an earthen ^an
vnglased and calcine it with a strong ^ire. Then dissolve it in distilled
vinegar and when it is dissolved, vapor away the vinegar, and the ^alt will
remain in the bottom, the which serves much for Tinture, and to make a
Liniment for the eyes, the which is most precious and care, for if ye mix a
little thereof with Hogs grease and Camphir, and then put it into the eye, it
helps them with such speed, that it is to be woundred at, and not without
cause. For his Nature is to give light and to heals things imperfect. The Tutia
mixed with Borar and with our Vernish that we guilde leather with, and given in
protection upon Venus mo^te, it causes it to be in color not much differing
from Sol, of the which thou may make strange things, for ^e that knew the
virtue and quality of (...), as w^ll in Alchimi, as u^ infirmities, were to
(...).

To precipitate Mar^^ and to bring it into a red powder, called Crocus (...),
the which serves for diverse purposes.
REc. Salniter refined Roch All^m, Vitriol Romain, ana* (...) according to Art,
with all (...) spirits, and in that water dissolve thin plates of Iron or
steel, and when it is dissolved, vapor away the water, until it remain dry
in a red powder, then take it forth, and calcine it in a Furnace of
reuerberation 24. hours. Then keep it to thy use, until thou know more
thereof, for it is wonderful in his operations, as I will show thee hereafter.

A secret of Turpentine of Cyprus.
THe Turpentine of Cyprus is a kind more finer then our Turpentine and without
comparison, and of more virtue then ours is, and this the Doctors say, does
dissolve pains and preserves the body, if it be taken inwardly: because they
say, that Turpentine is an vncorruptable Gum, the which is most true. But in
that Gum there is one part thick and gross that hinders his operation, and
he that can separate this gross part from the noble parts shall do great
wonders therewith: It is needful then with the fire and the means of our
Quintaessence to make the separation of the Elements, the which are 4. Water,
Oil, Liquor and Earth: the Water is profitable, the Oil is perfect, the
Liquor is noble, and the Earth that remains is spoiled and of no substance:
and with these things thou may do high and great cures, when they are
applied according as they ought to be, because many good and profitable things
through the want of perfect application in time and place, many times do hurt:
and to show the truth, I will show thee an example of wine, the which is a
precious liquor, the which being drunk in the morning is hurtful to many: to
eat meat betwixt meals is not good, and many such like things, that when they
be not done with order do hurt, and therefore it is necessary for those that
will understand that matter to be of a good intelligence, as well in making it,
as in using or applying it to the sick.

Here ends the Book of Leonardo Phiorauanti upon Chirurgerie.
HERE FOLLOWS THE making of certain precious waters, taken out of John Vigo,
Surgeon. And first of Magistrall waters.
Water called the mother of Balm is thus compounded.

Rec. Terebentine 2. pound, of Frankensence 2. ounc. of Lignum aloes 1. ounc.
of Masticke, of Cloves of Gallingale, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cubebs, ana, 1. ounc.
and a half, of Gum elemi, 6. ounc. as much good Aqua vitae as the quantity of
all the aforesaid is, stamp ^he things together and put them in a Stillatory
after one day, and still them with a soft fire, and the water that shall come
forth is called the mother of Balm, which being mingled with as much of Aqua
celestis hereafter writeen and stilled again, shall have meruellous virtues
against cold passions and also hot, and it is called the Lady of all medicines.

The water, which is called water of Balm or oil of Balm, is made as
follows: Rec. Of Terebentine 4. pound, of Frankensence, and Masticke, ana, 2.
ounc. of Aloes epaticke, of Landanum, of Castorium, of Date stones, of the
roots of Ditanie, and of Consolida the less, ana, 1. ounc. still them all in
a Limbecke of glass with a soft fire. The first water shall be clear as the
water of a spring, the second water shall be yellow, and swimmeth above the
other in the vessel: the third shall be reddish as good Safran, and when it
begins to be red and thick as honey, then begins the third water. The
first water is called water of Balms: the second oil of Balm: the third
artificial Balm, and some call it the ouercomer of Balm, for it is stronger
then Balm. The first burns like a candle: the second curdeth milk: if ye
put the third into a glass of clear water with the point of a knife one drop
at once, it will go down to the bottom without sundring of it self, and
when it has been there an hour, it will mount up to the top as true Balm
does. The first is good, the second is better, the third is best: and have
these virtues following. First if you wash your fare twice or thrice a day with
it, and chiefly the nostrils, it cures a rume descending from the brain, and
clarifieth the sight: and if ye rub the hinder part of the head therewith, it
comfort the remembrance, and sharpeneth the spirits of man. Item, if ye put
it into a vy^ll well stopped with odoriferous heathes, and leave it six days,
it will draw the virtue of the said hearbe^ unto it, and so ye may make
sublimed wine, putting into a glass full of wine two or three drops of this
water, and so the wine shall have the color, save ur and odor of the herbs
and spices wherewith it was mingled. Item, flesh and fish put in this water ^ot
not, and if it be rotten it biteth away the rottenness, and preserves the
whole part.

It induces appetite, comfort the stomach and consumes phlegm in the
bottom of the stomach. Taken with a little wine, it cures a stinking
breath. If ye put a Serpent or a Toade in a cloute wet therewith, they shall
dye incontinently: and it has like virtue against all venimes even as true
Balm has. And it is like in operation to fine Triacle, and consumes all
Apestumes, Ulcers, Fistulaes, swelling pustles, wounds, Hemoroydes, bruzings,
etc. And it is repercussi^e of cold humors, decicatiue and consumptiue. Item,
if ye wash the teeth with it twice or thrice, it shall heal, mundifie and
strengthen them. It heals also the Palsy and fortifieth the members, and it
is hot above all things that may be found, and of so great pearcing, that if
one drop be put into the hand, it will pearce through the same without hurt.
Item, in swelling of the feet or of the legs and pains in the joints, if ye
wash the said places therewith and plaster them with a linen clou^e: it will
cure all diseases coming of cold matter and rotten blood. Finally it is a
singular remedy for finewes drawn together, if you has them three or four
times therewithal.

The third water which has the color of blood, is of such virtue, that if a
Leprous man use thereof ^^^een^ days, half a spoonefull every morning, he
shall be healed. Item it preserves youth, if it be received in the morning
with a grain of wheat, with a spoonefull of flowers of Borage.

Aqua caelestis is of two kinds, as we will declare in this present Chapter. If
ye mingle with it as much of the water called mother of Balm and still it
again, ye have the treasure of all medicines. And if ye will ye may sunder the
four elements one from another. First we will speak of the virtues of these
two waters: The first water is of such virtue, that if it be put into a fresh
wound it heals it in 24. hours, so it be not mortal: and it heals malign
Ulcers, Cankers, Noli me tangere, old wounds, within the space of fifteen
days if ye wash them with the said water every third day; and if ye put a drop
of it upon a Carbuckle, it mortifieth the malignitie of the same shortly. Item
if ye put of the said water into the eye that has lost his sight, so that it
be not utterly lost, it shall be recovered within three days or eight at the
uttermost: And if a man drink a drop of it with a little good wine, it
breaks the stone in the space of two hours, whether it be in the reins or
in the bladder. It mollifieth hardened sinews if ye wash them therewith: and
many other virtues it has, which for brevity we ouer-passe.

The second water has color of blood, and is most precious: it preserves the
body from diseases, and comfort the weak members cheefely of old men. It
restores remembrance, sharpeneth the spirits, comfort the heart, purifieth
the blood, consoundeth the longs, heals all diseases of the milte, and
keeps the joints from Gouts, causes good digestion, purges cold and rotten
humors, heals all Agues, and briefly it conserueth and comfort all the
parts and members of man's body.

This water must be used from the month of November till the month of of
April, and ye must take but b^ls^ and spoonefull at once, nor oftener then once
a week. The manner to make it is thus: First ye must have a vessel of glass
a cubit high or there about, and fill it with A qua vitae made of good wine,
and see that it be well stop^ed, then cover it in horse dung, or in grapes
shelles, or Doves dung, so that it be not too moist nor too hot, least the
glass break, and ye must leave the neck of the glass without in the air:
The glass through the heats of the dung will ^oyle mightly, so that the water
will ascend to the neck of the same, and descend again to the bottom through
the coldness of the air, and so it will come to perfection within the space
of 30* days, then draw out the glass and put the thing following into the
water, stop the mouth that it breath not out, and so leave it eight days.

Last of all, put the glass in Balneo Marle with sand, a setting on a head
with a receiver well stoppsed, and make soft ^^^e, to gather the first water
while it see meth to drop down ^^eers, but when you see the water turn into a
red color, immediately change the receiver, for this is the second water, which
ye shall keep in a glass well stopped: the spices that enter into this water
be these:

Rec. Of good (...), of Cloves, of Nutmegs, of Ginger, Gallingale, Ze^dary,
long Pepper and roun^, of the rinds of Cit^on, of Spi^^^^de, Lignum aloes,
Cubeb^, Cardomonium, Calomus (...), German^^r, Saint John's wort, Mo^es, white
Frankensence, round Tormentill, (...), of the pith of white Wal^^^ of
Iuniperans Laurel berries, of the sea be of Magwort, of Smallage, of (...), of
Annise, of ^ow^^s of Bas^le, of Rosemary, of Sage ^aues, of Mariorum, Mint,
Penny^yall, S^ados, flowers of Elders, of red Roses and white, of Ru^, of
Scabious, of Lunary the less, of Agrimony, of Centaure, of Fumitory,
Pimpernell, Dandelion, of Cufrage, of Maiden-heire, of the herb called Caput
Monachi or Endive, of the seed of Sorell, or yellow Sanders, of Aloes
epaticke, ana, 2. ounc. of Ambrosine, of fine Reubarbe, ana, 2. ounc. of dry
Figs, of Raisons, of Dates without stones, of sweet Almonds, of grains of the
Pine, ana, one ounc. of Aqua vitae made of good wine, to the quantity of them
all, and four times as much Sugar as they be all, that is to say, for one
pound of ingredience four pound of Sugar, of white Honey two pound, then put
to the underwritten, of Gentiane, of the flowers of Rosemary, of Nigella that
grows in the corn, of Brionia, of the root of the herb called Panis
porcinus, of the seed of Wormwood 3. ounces.

This water is called Aqua cael^stis, but before ye still the water, ye must
quench in it a hot plate of gold, oftentimes, and put to it Orient pearls,
and so still the water, and take heed that the pearls remain not alone
without water, for if they be set on the fire without water they will loose
their color.

FINIS.
The Table of the Contents of this Book.
How that our Ph^sicke and Chirurgerie is better then tha^ which the Antiens
have commonly used. Page 1 Certain Remedies for all Captain, and Soldiers
that travel either by water or land. p. ^ A Discourse of Chyrurgerie: being
the Proheme. p. 5 What Chy^urgerie is. p. 7 What wounds are. p. 8 Of Ulcers,
and what they are. p. 9 Of Impostumes and their kinde^. p. 10 Of ^^stolaes and
their kind s. p. 10 Of all sorts of scabbes. p. 12 Of Fo micola and his
effects. p. 12 A discourse of wounds and other kinds of inward sores. p. 13 An
order to use in heeling all manner of diseases appertaining unto the
Chyrutgian. p. 15 Of medicines to be used in all kind of wounds outward, with
ease and breuity. p. 16 To help ulcers of all sorts. p. 18 The order to be
used in curing Impostumes of diverse sorts. p. 19 The order to cure all manner
of ^istolaes. p. 21 To help all manner of scabbes. p. 22 To help: Mal di
formica. p. 23 Of the Tow which islaid upon wounds by common Chirurgions. p. 24
Of the digestive with the which they dress wounds after the aforesaid Towe. p.
24 Of the mundificatiue unguent wherewith they dress the wounds after they are
digested to mundifie them p. 25 Of their incaruatiue wherewith they dress the
wound after it is mundified. p. 26 A rare see et the which this Author did send
unto a very friend of his being in the wars of Africa, the which helps all
wounds, either by cut, thrust, galling with arrow^s, or hargabush shot, or
otherwise. p. 26 Of those unguent that cicatrize wounds. p. 27 A remedy to
help a wound with great speed. of our invention. p. 27 An excellent secret to
heal wounds of Gunshot or Arrows, without any danger. p. 27 A discourse upon
old wounds that are not yet healed, and their sovereign remedy. p. 28 To
dissolve a bruise in short time, when it is new done. p. 28 To help a wound
quickly that is in pe^ill of any accident. p. 29 To stop the flux of blood in
wounds with great speed. p. 29 Another remedy to stay the flux of blood in a
wound. p. 30 Of our Cerote magno, that helps against all sorts of forces and
wounds. p. 30 Of our magistrall unguent that helps diverse sorts of sores. p.
31 To make oil of Frankensence. p. 32 Of oil of Wax and his effect. p. 33 To
help the tooth ache that is caused of rotten teeth, or that comes of a
dissension of the head. p. 33 Against a stinking breath. p. 34 To help those
that have a great cough in the stomach. p. 34 To help those that cannot hold
their water. p. 35 To help those that cannot make their water. p. 36 To help
those that have great burning in their urine. p. 37 To help those that have
great pain of the Gout. p. 37 A remedy against the pestilence, that preserves
those that use it. p. 38 The help of Pellaria, that is a disease which causes
the hair and beard to fall off. p. 39 To help a Carnositie in the yeard. p.
40 To help the white Scall. p. 41 To help those Caruolli that come upon the
yeard, and their causes. p. 41 A discourse of those sores that come of the
Pox, and how to help them quickly. p. 43 The cure of one that had the Pexe
on his head. p. 43 The cure of a wound in the head and the hand. p. 44 A great
secret particular for the Flux and Dissente^ia. p. 45 The cure of one that was
poisoned with Arsenicke p. 45 The cure of an vlcerate leg. p. 46 The cure of
the Gout on a Gentleman. p. 47 Of the causes of the Scyatica, and how ye may
help it. p. 48 A most excellent remedy to help the Flux of the body, with a
certain discourse thereon. p. 48 A discourse as concerning Corns in the feet
or elsewhere, with their remedies. p. 49 Of an infirmity of importance, that
comes upon the extremity of the Toe, upon the nail. p. 50 A discourse upon
the Hemerhodes, with the order to cure them with most excellent medecines of
our invention. p. 50 A great secret to help those that are burst or have the
rupture. p. 51 A rare secret and divine, to help those that are troubled with
the Spleen. p. 52 An other great secret to help the Spleen with great
speed. p. 52 The cure of a certain Spaniard called, Carabasall di Cordoner,
the which was troubled with the Pox. p. 52 The cure of the Stich in the side
with recention of urine. p. 53 A cure of a certain Spaniard wounded in the
head in Naples. p. 53 The cure of a certain Gentleman, that had Mal di
formica. p. 54 Certain cures that this Author did, when he traveled into
Africa. p. 55 The cure of the Flux, wherewith I helped the Army of the Emperor
in Africa. p. 57 A goodly remedy found out by me, for wounds in the head. p.
57 The cure of one that had his nose cut off, and set on again. p. 58 The cure
of an arm of S. Giordano Vrsino. p. 59 A great chance that happened at the
assault in Africa. p. 59 The cure of wounds being poisoned, and of other sores.
p. 60 A remedy found out by me, against the poison of a fish. p. 61 Of the
taking of Africa and his destruction. p. 61 The cure of a great wound on the
head. p. 62 A very strange thing that happened in the aforesaid year. p. 63 The
cure of a Fistolae in the lower parts. p. 63 Of many that I cured in Naples. p.
64 A cure of Vlcera putrida, the which was in the arm. p. 65 The cure of
Ethesia in the beginning. p. 66 The cure of a certain man, wounded in 13.
places. p. 67 Of remedies that help many diseases p. 67 Here begins the
order to make diverse and sundry medicines of our invention, never found out
before by any man: And first to make our Petra Philosophale, that helps
against all manner of diseases that hapeneth unto man or woman, or any other
animal terrestrial. p. 68 To make our Balm artificial, with the order to
use it, and wherefore it setueth. p. 70 To make our Aromatico, the which helps
against all manner of infirmities, of what quality soever they be. p. 72 Of
the vigitable stone of our invention, to transmute a body of one complexion
into another, and to make him sound for ever. p. 74 Our solible Sirop with the
order to use it. p. 76 Our Siropomagistrale Leonardo, the which serves against
an infinite number of diseases, and is a rare medicine. p. 77 Our Siropo
against the melancholicke humor, and specially where there is ventositie in
the stomach. p. 78 Our Potion of Lignum sanctum, the which is miraculous to
dissolve crud, and malign humors, with the order to use it in the French
Pox, and such like diseases. p. 79 A most meruellous water and rare, to cause
a man to avoid the Gravel in urine, and to mundifie the raines. p. 80 To make
the water of Lignum sanctum, most wholesome against the Pox, with a new order.
p. 81 Our distillation for the Etesia, the which is of meruellous virtue, and
without comparison, with the order to use it. p. 82 Our vigitable Sirop, the
which is miraculous and divine. p. 84 An Electuary that helps the cough, with
great speed and ease. p. 84 Electuario benedicto Leonardi, the which purges
the body without any grief, and is miraculous in his operation. p. 85 An
Electuary against the evil disposition of the Liver and Stomach. p. 86 Our
magistrall Electuary of Sulfure the which serves against diuerssorts of
infirmities. p. 87 Our Electuario of Consolida magore that serves for many
diseases inwardly. p. 87 Our imperial Electuary for the Mother. p. 88 Pills
against poyso, nthe which are of meruellous virtue. p. 89 Vnguento magno
Leonardo. p. 90 Oil of Hipericon, the which is most miraculous for wounds and
bruises. p. 91 To make our Oleum benedictum, the which heals wounds divinely.
p. 92 A magistrall water, the which preserves the sight a long time, and
mundifieth the eyes of all spots. p. 92 To make Oil of Vitrioll compound, the
which preserves nature in his strength. p. 93 Oleum Philosophorum de
Termentiua and Cera. p. 94 Our magno licore the which is of great virtue. p. 95
Pilsole Angelica, the which euacuate the the body without any impediment, and
are most profitable. p. 96 Pillole Aquilone of our invention. p. 97 Our
Quin^essentia solutiua, the which is of meruellous operation in diverse matters.
p. 98 Our Sirop of Quintessence, the which is of meruellous virtue. p. 98
Pillole magistrale, the which is good against diverse infirmities. p. 99 A
compound Aqua vitae, the which serves against all cold diseases of the
stomach. p. 99 A compound oil against poison, the which is of a meruellous
virtue. p. 100 A meruellous Soap that helps those which cannot spit but with
great pain p. 102 To make the Quintessence of Honey. p. 103 To make our Elixer
vitae, or Aqua c^^l^stis. p. 104 To make Aqua Realevel Imperiale, the which
makes the teeth white presently, incarnateth the gumbes, and causes a good
breath. p. 106 A kind of Pill most convenient for the eyes, and comfort the
stomach. p. 106 A discourse upon a composition that preserves a man or woman
in health a long time. p. 107 A meruellous water to be used of all Chyrurgians
in curing their Patients. p. 108 To make our Causticke. p. 108 To make oil of
Antimony. p. 109 A precious Liquor above all other. p. 109 A secret of
meruellous virtue. p. 110 Our secret of meruellous virtue in act and strength
p. 110 To rectify and preserve the sight of those that are weak sighted. p.
111 Of Lac Virginis, and the order to make it. p. 112 To calcine Tutia, and to
bring it into a salt. p. 112 To precipitate Mares, and to bring it into a red
powder, called Crocus martis, the which serves for diverse purposes, p. 112 A
secret of Turpentine of Cyprus. p. 113 Of Waters; And first of Magistrall
water, etc. p. 114
FINIS.

