THE SPANIARDS MONARCHY, AND LEAGVERS OLYGARCHIE. LAID OPEN IN AN
ADVERISEMENT, written by Signor VASCO FIGVEIRO a Gentleman of Portingale to the
rebellious French: wherein is discovered the tyranny of the one over the
kingdom of Portingale, and the treacherous rebellion of the other in the
kingdom of France, with a patheticall persuasion to the French to return to
the obedience of their natural and legitimate king.

Englished by H. O.

Praeiudicium saepe tollit omne iudicium. Imprinted at London by Richard Field
for John Harison. 1592.

TO THE GENTLEMEN READERS.
COURTEOUS Gentlemen, to your censures I commit this labor of mine, small and
simple, it is the first (I will not say) it may be the last. If you accept and
applaud it, I am thoroughly animated to enter into some matter of more
co^seque^ce, and such as I know shall be acceptable. What the vulgar either
imagine or speak, I care not: for with Horace.

Non ego ventosae plebis suffragia venor. It is no feather of fancy, for that
I account it base, to fetch such light merchandise so far as Valentia. If you
expect extraordinary elegancie, I answer, that a Translator is bound rather to
search fit words, to express his Authors meaning, then invent words running on
the letter, to content ouercurious fancies, which I contemn as dictionarie
method; and thus much can I assure you, that albeit it has no title fetched
from the Bull within bishops gate, as a fig for a Spaniard, yet does it
discover so succinctly and briefly, a Spanish imitatio^ of Machiauellized
axioms, that what other volumes at large, this in a leaf does plainly
demonstrate. If any object, that this treatise serves for french men, and not
appertinent to us. I answer, that their wit reaches no further then their own
home. For is not our Island the mark that Philips ambitious humor especiaily
aims at? has he not sent his invincible Armada, to make a conquest of our
vltima insula? Nay would he not repute him self an absolute Monarch, if he
might but get any interest within us? And have not we a viperous brood of
puritan Papists, and reconciled Leaguers, that dream upon a new invasion? with
good foresight by this treatise they may be warned, and true subjects armed.
Which success God grant.

Yours H. O.

A FAITHFVL ADVERTISEMENT OF SEGNIOR VASCO FIGVEIRO A GENTLEMAN OF Portingale
unto the rebellious French.
IF the Greek Achamenides showed himself so careful for the safety of the
Trojans his sworn enemies, that after having discoursed of the horrible
cruelties, that the Prince Ulysses and his people had received by the hand and
tooth of the cruel Antropophage Poliphemus, he admonished them to fly with
diligence from the Sicilian shore, the repair of that inhumane Cyclops. It
seems unto me, by a more forcible reason, as well for the ancient alliance
which our nation has had with the French, as also having been disciplined in a
better school, then that of this barbareus infidel: that I am obliged, by the
laws both divine and humane, to demonstrate unto you, so much as in me lies,
the good affection which I bear unto you. Then (Sirs) being induced by this
example, and many other good reasons, knowing by experience, the tyrannical
and barbarous government of Philip king of Spain, the unjust usurper of our
kingdom of Portingale. And seeing you Frenchmen (I speak to the ignorant, and
those which are gone astray) are come like the Trojans to the Sicilian shore,
to cast the anchor of your turbulent rebellions, and indiscreete affections,
still longing for novelty, in the dangerous and unassured port of the
inexorable ambition of this Philip. My desire is to advertise you as a good
neighbor and charitable friend, to weigh your anchors speedily from this port,
making sail to the shore from whence you have strayed: that is, to return to
the duty of true and natural Frenchmen, which the impetuous wind of a
temerarie sedition has caused you to abandon, and so to cast your selves
foolishly into the hands of a foreign Prince, which can not tend but to the
evident ruin of your liberty. For this is he (who like that infamous
Polyphemus, which acknowledged no other God but his belly) so he may feed his
own insatiable ambition, cares not with what garbage soever it be: and
therefore makes no conscience wickedly to violate, even the law of God it
self. Now as this miserable Achamenides made unto the Trojans, a long
narration, of the inhumanities of Polyphemus, before he exhorted them to fly,
that he might not seem to amase them, without just occasion: so am not I
ignorant, that I ought by the same example, to recount in what manner Philip
usurped our realm, and with what rigor he has since managed his tyrannical
government, lest I should be thought to build my discourse upon the wind, and
induce you to avoid shipwreck, without yielding example, or pertinent reason.
I could spend the time in recounting particularities, were it not that they are
so manifest to the world, that it were but lost labor to rehearse them.
Notwithstanding to satisfy those, which for cursed heart will yet stand in
doubt, I will speak a word or two, and so away.

It is known unto all men, that the king Henry, who before was Cardinal, the
predecessor of Don Anthonio our natural and legitimate king* in the assembly
of the estates of his realm, established five governors for ye administration
of ye said Realm after his death, until Don Anthonio made manifest the right
which he pretended to the crown: ordaining that the other competitors should
not in the mean time attempt any thing upon the said Realm, upon pain, of
repelling their pretensions. But while these things were in doing, Philip
having corrupted by rewards and promises, three of the said governors, and
many of the nobility, directly contrary to this ordinance of the said
Henry and the states, entered the said Realm by force of arms, and seized him
self of some especial places. Which the people and states perceiving, without
any delay, because periculu^ erat in meum, acknowledged incontinently Don
Anthonio for their sovereign, beseeching and vrgently pressing him, to take
upon him, the title and quality of king, which after many refusals, he
condiscended unto. In such sort, that he was established king, with all the
solemnities thereunto required, and since being assisted by part of his good
subjects, he came in battle against the said Philip, unto whom the fortune of
war gave the victory: in such sort, that our said Don Anthonio was forced
(having escaped infinite dangers of death, by the ambushes which were laid for
him by the tyranny of Philip) to retire him self into France, and afterward
into England. The said Philip being come to the top of this tyrannous
usurpation, has pardoned neither great nor little, neither any sex or
quality, that he knew had been, or might hereafter oppose them selves to his
tyranny. The Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, governors, captains, officers,
Ladies: both the secular and regular, the priests and religious, partly killed
in diverse manners, partly detained in perpetual prison, partly banished the
Realm, part chained in galleys, and part vagabonds wandering in the forests,
and hiding themselves in dens, for fear lest they should fall into the hands
of these merciless hangmen, do sufficiently testify his cruel and sanguinarie
ambition. I will content my self with naming of some few hereafter, referring
them which would know farther, to the copy of an Epistle written by our king
to Pope Gregory the thirteenth, albeit that was but in the beginning of our
miseries and slaughters, which are since so multiplied, that the number is
now infinite.

The Spaniard seeing him self enriched with the spoils of our king, contenting
not him self with this pray, imagined it should serve but as a ladder, to mount
up to the top of an absolute monarchy. And being drunk with the greatness of
this happy success, he began to plot higher attemps in his spirit, as ambition
never wants matter, proposing France for the mark of his other enterprises,
but knowing well that he might not attempt openly, and that herein force of
arms might turn rather to his damage then profit, he resolved to follow the advice of Lisander, namely, where the lions skin is not strong enough, to patch
it with a piece of the fores. But then he imagined, that nothing could more
securely, and more soon eleuate him to the top of this greatness, then a
forcible ladder of gold, underpropped with a more then Punicke subtilty, and
masked with a false semblance of integrity.

Likewise seeing that he had principally two great obstacles in France, namely
the late king, and Monsieur his brother: he deliberated to remove the lesser.
And to come to the point of this enterprise, knowing the natural avarice and
ambition of the Dukes of Guise and Maine, (who following the trace and
instruction of their father, and their uncle the Cardinal, pretended to enrich
their Bonnet, with the three flower deluces: and if not of all three, yet at
least of a part) he easily corrupted the^ with rewards and promises: in so
much that shortly they accorded upon the death of Monsieur, either by poison,
or otherwise, and that by a Gentleman of his own train named Salsede, who
being attainted, and convicted of the said enterprise, was drawn in pieces
with horses in the city of Paris, having first discovered and accused those
which had practiced with him. But your king, who ought according to the
enormitie, and importance of the cause, to have made exact search, and justice
upon the culpable, over whom at that time he had sufficient puissance, carried
not him self toward the truth, with that diligence that the importance of the
cause did merit. Et haec prima mali labes. For he knowing the humor of the
abouesaid, he ought infallibly to have held them suspect of great mischiefs in
his Realm.

For all this the Spaniard altered not his enterprises, but co^trarily
continuing, and more and more augmenting the pensio^s of his two partakers,
practiced every day new matters. Finally a few years after he obtained that
which he had long expected: for lo, Monsieur. being made away, not without
evident suspision of poison, and now ye Spanish king not being able any longer
to co^taine the heat of his ambition enclosed, or hidden, showed himself so
amorous of France, that without ceassing he cheared and courted it, soliciting
continually his partakers to venture: and briefly, leaving nothing undone, which
he thought might conduct him to the port of his desires, which being not able
to reach unto, it hammered his head, and gnawed his inwards with a tedious
torment.

Suppressing his passions, as impatient, that his partakers could not withdraw
or diswade her from her fidelity: he had recourse unto that remedy which
customablie foolish and desperate lovers use, namely some fine Dariolette or
Magician: and indeed he searched so much and so curiously, that at last he
recountred with a mischievous and crafty harlot, not ignorant in Magic, who
had been engendered, nourished, brought up and entertained in the proud and
magnificke Palaces of Rome: whom having furnished in abundance, with all that
was requisite for her affairs, recommending unto her all the artificialnes of
her craft, but especially to keep her self disguised under the mask of the
Catholic religion, he presently sends her into France. And this is that
mischievous and traitorous harlot, which is called the holy league: a name
truly fatal and pernicious to every well ordered Monarchy and common wealth.

This sorcerie and subtletie of the League is incontinently received with great
applause of the partakers, and pensionaries of Philip king of Spain, who leave
nothing undone that they may make her seem plausible unto France. The king
himself makes semblance of a fair countenance in entertaining it
courteously, yea making great difficulty to give credit to his most faithful
subjects, friends and servants, who pertinently declared that it was not begun
for other end, but to withdraw France from his obedience, and finally to ravish
her from between his arms. But the good prince is already so charmed by her
alluring speeches, that contrarily he swears only by her, and acts
whatsoever she commands, at least giving outwardly sufficient
demonstrations, like to that unfortunate Priamus, who was so bewitched with the
sorceries and subtleties of Helena, that instead of giving credit to the true
speeches of his own daughter Cassandra (who prophesied unto him the
misfortunes that should in the end fall upon him and his kingdom by means of
this fair Dame) he not only taunted her as a fool, but also detained her in
prison* Alas you Frenchmen, how many true Cassandras has your king had, which
foretold him the ruin both of him, and you. Notwithstanding it is manifestly
seen what small estimate, both he and you have made of their holy and
profitable aduertisements: nay you have bin so far from giving credit to this
infallible Oracle, yt otherwise you have mocked and searched for ye authors, as
me^ guilty of some capital crime. And herein you may be compared to the
Orithains, who after they had whooted and hissed at Euphraces the Orator, they
imprisoned him as a perturber of the people, for that he advertised the^ to
take heed least they submitted themselves under the tyranny of Philip king of
Macedon, as afterward they found it too true.

Now this damnable League, this impudent courtisan, proposing her self to
corrupt the fidelity of France, gained first of all secretly those whom she
knew gave most credence unto her, as many of the nobility, some of the
officers, as well of the kings as of the cities, and in a manner all the
Ecclesiastical persons: who (oh horrible shame) made no conscience to sell for
ready money, their eloquence and knowledge (which they ought to have employed
in preaching the gospel, and instructing the simple people in the fear of God
and obedience to their king) to corrupt the constancy and fidelity of France,
but Quid non mortalia pectora cogis auri Sacra fames? Where is the time that
the kings of France, and their Magistrates, yea all good Christians, had in
such indignation, those which dared to take either rewards or pensions of
foreign Princes? that if any were noted with this crime, he was sure without
either grace, or remission, ignominiously to loose his life: for this justice
has been one of the firmest pillars, which have so many ages sustained the
excellency of this Monarchy. But sithence that kings and their officers have
neglected this virtuous observation, it may easily be perceived, how the state
of their Monarchy has been more and more shaken. All other kings and princes
observe inuiolably this maxim, and he which infringeth it is punished
according to the rigor of the law: for under shadow of these liberalities,
strangers take knowledge of the estate of the realm, and so seduce the
subjects. And in this manner Cambyses espied and deceived the Ethiopians.

Now the preachers (by means of their mercenarie tongues) forget no art that
may serve their purpose to suborne France, but use all means possible to make
the king odious unto her, in altering by little and little, by their flattering
discourses the sincere amity, and faithful loyalty, which she has always
held entirely toward him: either exalting every petty imperfecti^^, above
his great perfection: either in blaming, accusing, or attributing unto another,
the glory only due unto him: and contrariwise in all things magnifying the
greatness, and virtues of this amorous Spaniard, whom they paint out
accomplished with all the perfections that may be imagined. Briefly, they omit
nothing, whereby they may substract France from her king: who seeing,
understanding, and knowing all the practices that were managed against him,
notwithstanding flattereth himself, or rather is so bewitched by this League,
that he will neither believe, nor chastise, ye opprobrious injuries, which were
publicly attached against him, yea even oftentimes to his face: so much, as it
seemed, did he fear to displease or offend her, which gave such audaciousnes
and courage, to these naughty packes, that no man was accounted of, unless he
ranged himself with the League, to vomit out a world of injuries against the
authority of the king: and he which could gorge out most, whether in preaching
or writing, was accounted the most honest man: yea even those who are his own
creatures and fed at his table, are not ashamed to set themselves against
him, and rent his renown by all manner of injuries and slanders. As namely one
called Roze, bishop of Senlis, the true portrature of ingratitude, who among
many other injuries uttered one worthily meriting a corporal punishment: yet
this good prince was content only for his chastisement to banish him the
court. Likewise an Aduocat of Paris named Breton, was so impudent as to publish
to the world a book against him repleate with mischievous calumniations:
notwithstanding it was eue^ against his will that justice was executed upon
him. But for these holy preachers did they approve this act of justice? nothing
less, but rather reproved it, as a tyrannical act: so that one of them named
Boucher, was so shameless as to preach, that the cord wherewith the Aduocat
Breton was strangled, was a thousand times more honorable, then the scarlet
robe of the president which condemned him. I cannot here forget a certain
Parisian, instructed and prompted by Madame de Mompensier, who faigning
himself mad, entered ye Louure, uttering a thousand detestable words against
the person of the king, yet for his knauerie, he was but simply whipped in one
of the o^^ces of that place. Behold how this prince brooketh these injuries
which were disgorged, and that impudently against him and his authority.
Behold how careful he is to extinguish the fire which kindles to borne him,
and the estate of his realm: so that well may it be said of him, Malum est
quidem habere imperatorem, sub quo nemini licet quicquam facere: sed multo
peius est quando omnia licent omnibus.

The League having now had a long time to practice upon France, over whom she
had already gotten this advantage, that it easily gave her credit in
whatsoever, advised with her self that it was now high time to let them, which
had set her a work, see some better fruits of her travel. So that leaving off
words and such like matters, she will now venture upon practice, wherein the
dice chanced so well, that her enterprise fortuned even to her wish. And this
was when she called the Duke of Guise, with his other partakers into the city
of Paris against the will of the king: who (as well for the more assurance of
his person, as to ferret out certain mischeiuous naughtipackes, lurking
privily in the said city, which put in fear the good servants of the king,
whom the League termed by the name of Polliticks) placed the guards of his body
in certain places of the city: but the League caused him soon to know, that
she had so thoroughly altered the will of the people, that they were far more
affectioned to the said Guysard, then to him himself: which he then perceived
when it was too late to remedy. Thus within less then three or four hours,
the Parisians were so animated against the kings guard, by the instigation of
the Duke of Guise, (as himself vaunted and braued in certain letters directed
to the nobility of France) that they killed and hurt diverse of them: yea ye
king himself was scarsely spared: for the Barricados were planted within the
gate of his Louure, in such sort that he thought his stay would be far more
perilous then his departure. This is that unfortunate day, which ye preachers
have extolled as the most fortunate day which happened of a thousand years in
France, and which they themselves in open sermon, baptized by the name of
Barricados: as in truth it has been very aduantagious for the master whom
they serve.

The king having received this indignity of his France, in ye capital city
of his realm, and in the sight of all the Princes in Christendom, who were
there resident in the person of their Ambassadors or Agents, did he show
himself to be moved or angry? not at all: but as if he had too much let
loose the bridle of his malignant affections, fearing a worse event, he is
content to put up the wrong, and to accuse himself. So seeking to reconcile
himself with her, he made it known, that he would assemble the estates of his
realm, by whose advise and counsel he would hereafter rule all his actions:
and that he might show some confirmation of his will, he casheard in one
morning about 33. of his Edicts.

At the first bruit of this declaration, the League seemed somewhat male
content, fearing that if France being admonished, and reproved by her king,
should have any remorse of conscience for her fault, she would return to her
former duty: yet considering that she had so practiced her nearest
counsailors, that they would speak nothing but by her mouth (like a good
scholar that Fortune had put in her hands, to mount the more easily, whether
she aspired) made show to wish nothing more then the convocation of the
estates: mean while letting not slip an hour vnimployed, either in
resolliciting her old partakers, or purchasing new: but especially watching
that none might be at this assembly, but those whom she knew to be of her
party, whom she instructed from point to point, what they had to do.

Whilst ye Provinces, were assembling to prepare, their Articles, she suffered
not the time to pass unprofitably, giving advise to her partarkers in those
things which were necessary for their Articles, to some to besiege Boulogne,
to others to beleager and batter Iamets, and to others to possess themselves
of the Marqueship of Saluce: yet not forgetting to advertise her Master what
she had happily negociated, as also the good estate of the affairs which she
then managed, requiring him with all speed to imbarke, that puissant army
which he had so long equipped to that end: whether to usurp England, or to
visit France in form of an Embassage, whereby to make proof of her good
affection, and to encourage her revolt against her king: but either the one or
the other might have been prejudicial to the French king, if the issue had
fitted their expectation: but God by his grace myraculously ouerturned it, for
this great Armada, which was termed invincible was broken, defeated, and
dissipated, beyond all human expectation, by the valiauncie and magnanimity
of the fleet, which the Queen of England had sent forth, to defend the
coasts of her realm.

Albeit the defeating of this Armada somewhat vexed the Spaniards, and not
without cause: for that it clipped the wings of their other enterprises:
notwithstanding the League was not any whit dismayed, but pursued more hotly
her affairs, as willing to repair this ruin, by double diligence. And
indeed she effected so far with the king, that he solemnly swear and
protested to unite himself with her, and hereafter to be solely ordered by her
counsel: so that the king was so blinded that he swear the destruction of
himself, and the extirpation of his, by an Edict ensuing, named for this cause
the Edict of reunion.

The time being come, where the estates ought to assemble, their Deputies
showed themselves at Bloys, where the assignation was given. Then was question
made in this assembly, that the king, and his France, or rather the League,
should give understanding of their affairs, to those which were called to
determine thereof. For this part of France, had already retired their
affection, from their natural king, to yield it to the king of Spains, yea
from their own children and heirs, to commit it to the said Spaniards in such
manner, did they effect that the kings established, a foundamentall law of his
kingdom, whereby no heretic, or favorer of heresy might ever come to the
Crown. In this sort excluding the king of Navarre, whom the League held for an
heretic, and the residue of the house of Bourbon, his cousins (except some
few) from their natural, and legitimat, right, to the Crown of France. Thus
the League not only depriving him, but also employing all their might, to root
them out, by force of arms. Briefly, the French League, might not abide the
sight of her own children, but hated them, with a most mortal hate. So that
having given away her soul from her own king, like an unjust stepmother, she
disherited her legitimat children, to inuest bastards, or strangers, in their
fathers heritage.

And which is more, she is not contented to have drawn away, this great corner
stone from the foundations of the kings estate, (for in steed of adding
another good foundation for this unjust law, she haled away one of the best, to
the end to overthrow it) as may be seen, in that she bound his hands in the
administration of his Realm, yea even to the taking away of those few which
remained of his most faithful, ancient, and domestical servants: placing in
their steed, those whom she thought most affectionat toward her. Thus was this
good Prince deprived of his legitimat successors fallen in a manner from his
dignity, diminished of his puissance, and abandoned of his most faithful, and
loyal servants.

What rests now therefore for unfaithful France, but to cast herself
between the arms of her good friend the Spaniard? the king so timorous, that
he dare not hinder her, and albeit he durst, all his means are removed, having
not one only heir, nor one, or at least few servants, that either would or
could aid him to retain her.

Furthermore, she has bin so shameless, as to enterprise upon the life of the
king, for that being utterly impatient, and transported with a foolish
affection, she sought all means to rid him away: so that treading under feet,
the fear of God, and shame of men, she resolved upon his death, what ever came
of it. She needed not greatly trouble her self, to seek one, to execute her
mischievous will, a thousand are ready to enterprise it, even to the peril of
their life. Albeit among so great a number, she discovered her self but only
to one, whom she especially loved, and put most affiance in, who was a hundredth
times more ready to obey, then she to command. Yea, such a one as most
inflamed her to practice upon the enterprise. Behold then this good Prince,
ordained by this French League, to a miserable death, and who must be the
bloody parricide, but the Duke of Guise? only the execution thereof remained
which had not bin long delayed, had it not bin for the providence and mercy of
our God, who as he has a care, especially over the person of kings ( Rex
venera^dus curae est Deo, says the Poet) manifested unto the king this bloody
conspiracy, giving him means by the aid of some of his faithful servants,
which yet remained, to prevent the traitorous, murderer and parricide, who had
vowed to take away his life, or at least his liberty. And thus was he taken in
the nett, which he had spread for others: yea the hand of the Lord, stretched
even upon the Cardinal his brother a man of the same stamp. But surely they
had the reward, which they had rightly deserved, wherewith Hermeas was paid by
the king Antiochus. As also accustomablie it happens, that. Nimium pote^tes,
and regibus suis, formidofi proceres, aut auditi miserum, and tragicum ta^dem
vitae exitum, ab ipsismet regibus, a quibus se formidari, and metui voluerunt,
consequuntur. If France, at the fall of this man, were meruailously moved, much
more, were the League, and Phillip. Having lost the best feather of their wing,
and the strongest pillar, which supported their attempts. Now France seeing,
that her flood, was discovered, knew neither what countenance to make nor what
way to take: whether to entreat pardon of the king, whom she had so detestably
offended, or following on, with her mischievous resolution, to persevere in the
amity, which she had sworn to Phillip. And I verily believe, that she had
retained the former opinion, as most safe: had not the League, in using, more
fine and artificial subtleties, then ever before, by the seducing of the
unfaithful preachers, induced, persuaded, yea, and constrained her, to follow
her last resolution, setting before her eyes, the enormitie of all the faults,
that she had committed against the authority of her king: who would be so
irreconciliable, and inflamed with a desire of revenge, that he would never be
induced to open the gate of his mercy. Thus desperately she resolves, that
seeing the dice was cast, she would run fortunes hazard: as also the arde^t
affection, that she had to change her natural Prince, to assay the government
of a stranger: which she earnestly wishes for, albeit to her common damage,
and extreme ruin. The Gauls (says Caesar in his Commentaries) love novelty,
and desire to change their Signorie: so that there needed no great labor, to
incite them to a general rebellion; and yet the seditious preachers adding
oil to fire, by their charming Sermons, and unjust declaration, make process
upon the body, by which process, the College of Sorbone, acquitted, the
people, from the oath of fidelity and obedience to their Prince: and without
any scruple of conscience to take arms against him, to extirpat both him, and
all those which shall sustain, or defend his quarrel. As if the College of
Sorbone were above the king, to license his people to violate the most firm,
and holy laws of the Realm: now in such case, if often happens (as Caesar
says) that some are pricked forward with avarice, others with desire of
revenge, or any other light folly, which ordinarily aecompanieth the common
people. Moreover the great ones labor to set the vulgar sort in a tumult,
wherein having committed some great mischief, they may be ashamed to repent, or
crave mercy, others there are, who are drawn by a hope, to become great men:
which (as says Salust) makes men, but of mean condition to venture their
life. Now before this French League will commit her fortune to the field, she
would remove all such stumbling blocks, as might hinder her actions, or
interrupt the course of her unbridled rage, in such sort that she captiuated or
banished the Cities, all those whom she never so little suspected to be servants
to the kings. And then began France, so to ruffle, that the League, and her
preachers had gathered a puissa^t army, whose leader must be the Duke du
Maine, who^ you cherish no less, the^ his late deceased brother: but O France,
to what end do thou march accompanied with such a terrible courage, as
though thou would affray, and subdue the whole world? is it to maintain the
authority of thy king? or to conquer, new lands planting the borders of thy
Monarchy, upon thy neighbors? or finally to recover those, which the
ancestors of thy Spaniards, yea, and he himself has unjustly robbed thee of?
no, no such matter. It is to abase, and beat down the greatness of my king,
for that he has taken away the life of my Minion, who (might I have had my
will) should have taken away his. To this end, do I muster so many men in
field, to sacrifice their blood, for the expiatio^ of the offense perpetrated
by the king upon the person of my favorite: As also my fields shall be
overflowed with the blood of the French, for an earnest penny of my Marriage
dower, with Philip king of Spain, for that so is his pleasure, and he
instantly requires it as a token of my affection. Ah miserable France, well
may it be cried out against thee.

Gallia, quis furor? heu: quae tanta licentia ferri.
Gentibus inuisis Gallum praebere cruorem?
You long for nothing so much as a bloody war, and you imagine thereby to
triumph incontine^tly over your king, to yield your self afterward to a
foreign Prince: but brainsicke as you are, you consider not the message, which
the great warrier Metellus sent unto king Bocchus. The entrance into war
(says he) is easy: but the end difficult, neither are the beginning, and
issue thereof in the power of one, and the same person: every one even the
veriest coward in the world, may easiely begin it, but the end thereof is only
at the pleasure of the conqueror.

The king perceiving France, to rush with such fury upon him, to avoid those
inconveniences, whereinto he might fall, judged that his best remedy, was to
abrogate and suppress that iniust law, whereby at the instant request of the
League, he had declared his legitimat, and indubitat heirs, incapable of
succession to the Crown, and to recall them, near unto his person: together
with all his old, and faithful servants both to sustain the assaults of his
rebellious subjects, as also to abate the pride of their ouerrash insolency:
who in the mean while, made a sudden assault upon him, in the suburbs of the
City of Tours, from whence they were so valiantly repulsed, that they were
constrained to make a shameful retraite.

The king had no sooner made declaration of the things above said, but he might
see him self assisted, with a great and courageous army composed of the
Princes of the blood, of the most faithful, and magnagnimous Nobility, and of
the better sort of his people, friends, and confederates, who never failed him
at need. So that all trembled for fear, where his army passed, the towns
which opened not their gates, were soon overthrown, nothing might resist his
puissance, and briefly all stouped under his authority.

Thus hoping to move France, to acknowledge her offenses, and to demand
pardon, which she might easily have obtained of his gracious clemency, he
caused his army to approach, even to the gates of Paris: then were both
France, and the League in extreme perplexity, without all hope of safety.
France was sore vexed and tossed in spirit, many doubts, and difficulties,
trouble her brain: the worm of her conscience, does gnaw, and prick
vncessantlie, and so lively, that she feels as it were an unsupportable
torment. Of the one side, she balanceth the enormitie of her mischiefs, which
plonge her into a mortal despair, and on the other side, the great mercy of
the king, which far surpassed the heaps of her misdeedes, lifting her to an
infallible hope of some great good: and I doubt not but that shortly she had
returned to acknowledge her faults, and cordially to cleave to her king, who
had handled her so graciously, if God would so much have favored her, as to
take away the veil from before her eyes, that she might discern, truth, from
falsehood, and evidently see the error whereinto the charming sorceries, and
crafty illusions of this pernicious League, had caused her to stray: and so
cast her headlong, into a bottomless pit, ouerflowing, with all calamities,
and miseries: but it pleased not the divine goodness of God, to endue her with
so favorable a grace, as one unworthy for her detestable vices to receive it:
as in truth full well has she deserved the pains that she has suffered, yet
(so obstinate is she in her wickedness) that she seeks no amendment.

The malicious League seeing France, in this doubtful anguish, gathered her
spirits together, to forge more crafty subtelties, then ever before, to cause
France, to run to arms, after the death of the Duke of Guise, and so
thoroughly intrudeth her, into her former errors, that waxen more fellonious
then ever before, she reconspireth the death of her king: and yet holds an
other course then before. And therefore bethinketh to enterprise it by treason,
and by such a one as might do it with least suspicion: so that having thoroughly
discoursed of her affairs, she concludes, that Religion, should serve her as
a covert, to commit this damnable parricide. Then was found out an execrable
traitor, a Iacobin Friar, who driven by a diabolical spirit, enterpriseth to
the hazard of his life traitorously to murder his natural Prince. O
detestable crime, and so horrible, that there is not a name so cruel or
obhominable, as may sufficiently express it. Damnable Monks, do you read in
the holy Scriptures that it is lawful for any man to murder, I say not only
his king, but even the basest man on the earth? the law of God expreslie
forbids to defile, the hands in human blood. God commands (in the book
of Deuteronomie) to take the homicide from the altar, and to slay him: but as
for kings, he has given them a particular privilege, as he says by the mouth
of the Psalmist. You shall not touch mine anointed, much more you shall not
kill him. David also forbore to lay violent hands upon king Saul his enemy:
albeit he had him at advantage. Did the Apostle teach you to commit this
execrable fact, when he said. Obedite praepositis vestris etiam discolis? dare
you the^ in this manner tread under feet the law of God, whereof in words you
vaunt your selves to be so zealouslie affectionate, shame befall upon you,
mischievous, and traitorous hipocrites, who preach unto the people, the law of
God yet your selves will not follow it.

Even the ethnicke Pagans shall condemn you in the latter day: for albeit they
were ignorant, yet they carried this respect unto the Princes of their land, as
to term them (in reverence) the living pourtraitures of the supreme divinity.
Harken what said one of the Poets. Rex est Imago animata Dei. But suppose he
were so wicked as you, and the treacherous Leaguers would feign him to be, yet
ought we to observe this good advertisement. Principes boni voto quidem
expetendi, qualescunque; tamen tolerandi. But certain it is, that he was
endued with all the perfections requisite to make a Prince worthy of the
greatest praise, and the only imperfection that he had (which was but to great
an imperfection in a Prince) was, that he showed himself somewhat to negligent
for the maintenance of his greatness, and conservation of his estate.

Now, then has the French League, mischieuously caused her king to be
murdered: who feeling the extremity of death, to approach near upon him,
declared in the presence of all his Princes, and Lords of his Realm, the king
of Navarre as natural, and legitimate successor to the Crown (as in truth he
is, and that most apparent) ending with these words the course of his life.

Incontinently all the Princes, all the Lords, and all the Officers of the
Crown following the declaration, and last will of the deceased king
acknowledged the king of Navarre, and that according to all equity to be king
of France, which all the whole army likewise acknowledged. Now France being
left a widow of her king, and consequently mistress of her self, according to
her own opinion and will (for it is a sure maxim, that the king never dies
in France) let us accord to her unreasonable appetite: what face sets she
upon it? does she mourn, or is she sorrowfully disco^forted? Does she show any
sign of sorrow in her widowhead, which ou^ ^o have bin drowned in tears? No,
but contrariwise, she rejoices so extremely, that she sets publicly forth,
a thousand, and a thousand signs of joy, as among many others her bonfires
being so great, that even her furthest neighbors, were lightened with the flame
thereof, who^ notwithstanding, she thinks scarcely advertised by this
exterior sign, of her unmeasurable joy, and therefore will certify them by
express letters: poor unfortunate France, which make virtue of thy vice,
and glory of thy infamy: poor enchanted France, which reioycest when thou
should swim in tears: but thou will not care to do otherwise, while thou
art bewitched by the enchanters of this diabolical League.

But now let us see, what will become of this widow: let us see to what Prince
France desires to betroathe her self: for I think she will yield but only
to one, otherwise she should do contrary to the nature of all other common
wealths, who finally have submitted themselves unto one only Monarke, as
approving the government of one to be better then of many: which the Satrapas
of Persia, also approved when as they constituted Darius for their souueraine
Monarche. The Roman common wealth also, after it had been a long time
furrowed, and tossed by the civil wars of particular persons. Maluit parere
vni, quam pluribus. Furthermore in private families one commands over the
rest: as the head over the inferior members: Yea even in nombers. The unity
(as says Plato is most esteemed). Philo Iudaeus in his book of the creation
of a Prince, teaches that the government by one only, was ordained by the
commandment of God. Let us hearken unto the judgment of Homer: Non bonum est
multorum principatus, vnus Princeps esto.

It appears then, that there is no sort of government more excellent or
commendable, then the Monarchy which France is not ignorant of, and therefore
will not be subject to many: but she will choose one to fit her own fancy, as
though she were ignorant, that in a Monarchy, an election is perilous, and
that nothing has made her so redoubted and puissant, as an immediate succession
of Princes barring the gate to election, which all Monarchies and well ordered
kingdoms have curiously observed. But if this poor abused France, remains
still opiniated in her election, yet the express commandment of God
forbids her to elect a foreign Prince, as it is written in the 17. of
Deuteronomie in these words. From among thy brethren shall thou make a king
over thee: thou shall not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy brother.

Many examples might be produced to this purpose, of common wealths and
kingdoms, which have been destroyed, only for trusting and subiecting the^
selves too much to strangers. For this cause Bartholomeus Coleon, reprehe^ded
the Venetians (who for his merits toward their common wealth, had erected his
statue in gold) as having to inconsideratly adventured their common wealth into
the hands of a stranger. The Corinthes had not fallen into a tyrannical
government, if they had not submitted themselves under Timophanes a foreign
leader. The Britains were chased their Realm by the English Saxons. The
Spaniards by the Moors: and the Greeks by the Turks: only by craving
succor of them in their wars: yet this French League passes a degree
further: she not only calls in the Spaniard to aid to destroy her own
children: but she will wholly submit her self unto him, and make him her
sovereign Lord: which because she might not as yet openly, and absolutely do,
for some considerations, she advises upon some fit expedient to cover her
mischievous intention: and to the end to cloak her theft, which she secretly
desires to commit with the said Spaniard, she elected for her king by form of
acquit Charles Cardinal of Bourbon, a man ouerworne with age, whom she had
purchased to no other end, but to alienate the Crown, being well assured that
he could not hinder, but rather profit much for the negociatio^ between the
Spaniard and her, as before times he had always done, for this Prince, she had
expreslie reserved for this affair.

But the late king having (as it seemed) foreseen this accident, to hinder him
from disturbing the state any more, had committed him to a place, where being
surely guarded, neither his rebels, nor the Spaniard, might aid him at their
devotion, which meruailously disquieted them. For France of her self could do
nothing to any effect without the authority of her bean king, as I may term
him: whom she only used as a covert for her traitorous monopolies, and
inventions against her legitimate and natural king: albeit he had not right,
or title to the Crown, the king being living, whom to be delivered of, they
would even remove heaven and earth, if it were in their power: but seeing all
this was to no purpose, because the said Cardinal was surely guarded by the
good, and faithful servants of the king, she recoursed unto force of arms,
and sets a great army in the field, which charged upon the king, being at
that time, with a small company, at Deipe, and there abouts: promising unto
themselves, either to slay him, to captiuate his person, or at the least to
cause him fly the Realm: but God so assisted him, by his own prowess, and
the valor of his own soldiers, with the succors sent unto him by the Queen
of England, that his enemies had but only the will to hurt him, and the grief,
because they were altogether unable to hurt him: for the king defeated, and
repulsed them valerously, and afterward searched them even at the gates of
Paris, from whence they durst not appear, to answer him in battle which he
presented unto them.

The Spaniard for his part continually entertaineth France with fair words,
and great hope of new forces, sufficient enough as well to set the fained king
at liberty, as to defeat him, which truly and by good title is called king.
And in deed five or six mouethes after the charge upon Deipe, was the County
Egmond, sent with a great troop. The Pope also sent his Legate, to comfort and
encourage her. In such manner that a puissant army presented it self to the
king, who suddenly set him self in battle array in the plain of Yury, where
God once again so miraculously favored him (although his enemies forces were
twice as great as his) that he gained ye victory, having slain the greatest
part of his enemies, among whom was the County Egmond, and put the rest to a
shameful flight, which sore troubled France: and yet behold another work of
God, who working for his anointed, about two months after took the
Cardinal to him self.

This unexpected death of the Cardinal rechargeth her, with diverse and
troublesome thoughts. She saw that the king had a puissant army, which so
increased every day, that he had conquered a good part of his kingdom, and
which more tormented her, she saw that he had blocked on all sides the City of
Paris, which then suffered an extreme defect, both of victuals, and other
commodities: which occasioned the people to open their eyes, which superfluity
of ease, and the charms of the League, until then, had shut up and veiled:
and surely they would willingly have yielded to the king, had not the damnable
League by her subtelties, and the force of her partakers, retained the^ in
their obstinacy, whether they would, or no. The^ began France to perceive the
fraud of the Spaniard, and the illusions of the League, acknowledging that
being foolishly persuaded, she had committed unpardonable faults against her
king, and that perseuering in her folly, she had rashly taken arms against
him, whom she ought to have cherished more then any Prince in the world, who
notwithstanding is so merciful, that she might have promised her self, that
he would forget all that was passed. So that she fully determined to send to
his Majesty to entreat of peace, but that she was so watched by the League,
and inta^gled in her laberinthes that she might do nothing, without her
knowledge or consent, who counsels her, to propose unto the king, among
other Articles these two following.

1. That he should change his Religion, into the Romish Catholic Religion, a
thing that she knew well that the king, would never accord unto, especially at
that time.

2. That he should pardon all those, which are coulpable of ye death of the
late king, a thing which he neither might, nor ought to do.

And as touching the changing of his Religion, albeit he holds it for the
most true, and holy, notwithstanding he has always protested, that he would
submit him self to the decrees of a holy, and free Council, general or
national, assembled to determine of the two Religions which are professed in
his kingdom: to the end to embrace that, which shall be judged most Christian,
and to reject the other. But that he is an heretic he denies, for that no
Council, has condemned the Religion, which he professes to be heresy. But
put case his Religion were heretical, yet it makes not either him, or any
other person incapable to possess those goods, which naturally and lawfully
belong unto him, and to force his conscience in regard of Religion, were a
thing uneasy to do. If his Religion be not good they need not fear, for
that he cannot long uphold or maintain it in his Realm, seeing Jesus Christ
has said, Every plant, which my heavenly father has not planted, shall be
plucked up by the root. They may see, a fair plea upon this question, in the
5. of the Acts, where a Doctor of the law, named Gamaliell, speaking of the
Religion, and doctrine of the Apostles, said unto the high Priest, and to the
Judges. If this counsel, or work be of men, it will come to naught: but if it
be of God, ye cannot destroy it, least ye be found eue^ fighters against God.
And do not you, manifestly resist the word of God, to sustain a Religion by
the point of the sword, and enforce men to follow it? It is evident God never
planted his, by the sword of Princes. To hope also that the French king, will
leave his Religion, to the end to enjoy peaceably his kingdom is a vain hope,
and I believe he will never do it, if the Monarchy of the whole world were
offered unto him, for that he esteems it, a great breach both to his
conscience and honor, if it be not (as I have said) first condemned by a
Council.

The League knowing then, that France could not treat a peace with the king,
upon the conditons before said, and that by her obstinacy she reaped such
great discommodities, that at the length would bring her to reason: she
solliciteth her more, and more to persist in her mischeiuous opinion, and the
more the people cry out with famine, so much the more do the preachers
entertain them in their rebellion, playing the Orators unto them, like as
aunciently Critognatus, a Captain of the Gauls, did unto the inhabitants of
Lauxois, being besieged by the Romans: who propsed unto them, that it were
far more honorable, to eat one an other, then to yield them selves to the
mercy of the Romans. But Critognatus was far different from these preachers
more inhumane, then the very Canibals, for that he did it for fear of coming
into bondage: and these to the end to yield France, and her poor people, under
the yoke of a miserable tyranny: he showed him self truly zealous of his
country, and the name of the Gauls, and these are thereunto mortal enemies:
for they have nothing but the French names, whereas in heart they are
Spaniards, above four and twenty carrects.

Now to the end to comfort the people in their adversity, they feed them with
a hope of succor, which shall remove that long, and insupportable siege. And
ind indeed the Spaniard, after he had set all his wits awork, caused the
Prince of Parma to march into France, against the king, who together with his
nobilty, and other men of war, presented him battle four or five times,
with a magnanimous courage, so that the Spaniard for all his brauadoes, was so
astonished at the sight of this valorous army, that he never dared to come to
blows, contenting himself, to lurk about Paris, to consume the rest of that
small portion of victuals, which remained in the country and towns
thereabout. The king seeing that the Spaniard had taken this resolution,
licensed some of his nobility to depart, and separated himself a few leagues
from Paris, making daily courageous assaults upon the enemy, who for all his
great brauadoes, and proud rodomantadies, took only two small Hamlets, not
without the loss of a great number of his soldiers, which were soon taken
again, and that before his face: and having done these two memorable exploits,
he thought it best to trusse up his baggage, and return to his lodging, for
fear of greater loss, to the utter abasing of his reputation: which he did
not so secreatly, but that the king made him fasten his spurs, and leave part
of his glorious feathers behind him. For he pursued him without cealing, now in
the forefront, now on his wings, and now at his tail, even unto the borders of
Flaunders. Thus in brief behold, all the succors and advancement, that France
received of her great friend Philip king of Spain, by the coming of the
Prince of Parma. Behold the people left in greater calamity, then ever before,
and their affairs still growing from evil to worse: the king surprising to
day one town and to morrow another.

Poor abused France, dismaske and pull away the veil, which the League has
put before your eyes, turn away your ear, from her crafty illusions: break
the bonds wherewith she has captiuated you, and purge your brain with some
good antidote, against her charms: and then, not till then, shall you
perceive, in what darkness, in what error, in what captivity you have been
detained, whilst this accursed League has governed you: then your self shall
be judge, how much you have lost of your beauty, of your authority, of your
greatness, of your fidelity, of your liberty, of your wisdom, and of your
forces: which before, and that from the beginning were redoubted, not only to
your neighbors, but even to the most renowned nations, so that if you would
look back upon your self, you should see, that your visage is so changed
that you could not know it, nay you would be afraid to behold it. Consider all
your members, and Organes, apart by themselves, and you shall find all your
members defeated, beaten down, feeble, and weak, and your organs all perverted
and gone astray in their offices. Your neighbors which were wont of late, to
fear, and redoubt you, do now hiss at you, pointing with their finger, and
mocking at your desperate rage, and miserable folly, which has made you more
cruel then Medea, against your own innocent children, whom you most cruelly
pursue, and without all humanity massacre, as if they were your most mortal
enemies, that had conspired your death. Take patience awhile, to hearken unto
one of your most affectionate neighbors, who will set down nothing which
shall be unreasonable, but rather wholly to your advantage and profit.

Imitate that virtuous Prince Antigonus, who freely hearkened unto a plain
country man (whom he met with by chance) reprehending the vices, wherewith he
was attached: and albeit he felt himself pricked to the quick, yet he took
all in so good part, that it returned greatly to his profit: correcting
afterward, that which the good man had noted to be vicious in him, and being
returned to his court, he said unto his minions, that he had learned that of a
peasant, which he never knew before, namely, the truth, which his flatterers
had always kept hidden, and disguised. In like manner (miserable France)
depart but a little from this fraudulous League, and her traitorous preachers,
to learn, not of one of your domestical flatterers, and deluders, but of a
simple stranger, desirous for your own good and safety, to cause you to know
the sincere verity, which this long time you have not heard of, for that you
would never give ear to any discourses, but those of your deceivers, depart
therefore but a while out of your court, and I will cause you sincerely to
understand, what you have hereafter to do.

Demosthenes persuading the Athenians to resist Philip of Macedon, exhorted
them not only to repulse the usurper, but consequently to chase out of their
city certain Orators, whom by rewards he had drawn unto his faction. In
like manner I advise you, that to avoid the tyranny of Philip of Spain, it is
needful to betake you to your weapons, and more then high time, to exile this
pernicious League, and her corrupted preachers if they will not amend,
contenting themselves to preach the gospel, as Jesus Christ has enjoined his
Apostles, whose imitatours and successors they feign themselves to be. Go
(says Christ) throughout the whole world, preaching the gospel unto every
creature: he commands them, not to meddle with the estates of Princes, to
seduce their people, causing them to revolt against the^, nor to cause their
doctrine, to be observed by arms, committing cruel and bloody butcheries,
upon all persons without any exception, as these our venerable masters have
done for these thirty years, and do yet solicit others to do: and herein
must I needs commend the policy of all other kingdoms, which forbid upon
grievous penalties, that divines should in their sermons dispute upon matters
of state. But how dare I take in hand to beat down so puissant a Prince,
redoubted to all Europe, who has so great commandment over me, bieng
subjected under his puissance: your natural and legitimate king, of whom it
may be well said, Rex quo iustior alter
Nec pietate fuit, nec bello, mayor, and armis.
He only it is that may vaunt, as sometime that great chieftaine Abarius
vaunted: Sweat, dust, and such like things are more delectable unto us then the
most delicate fare. And briefly this is he, who from his cradle has followed
the counsel, that Plinius secundus gives to a magnanimous Prince, which
desires to be skillful in military affairs. Princeps (says he) vt sit
Militaris debet prius multum, and dium bello periclitatus esse: sic enim
disciplina militaris scientissimus erit. This is he which is more then
sufficient to break all the attempts and enterprises of the Spaniard: yea even
to pursue him into his own country if need were, which he knowing full well,
has for this long time sowed discention between you, and has enterprised: to
make him odious unto you, fearing that if you should both march upon one foot,
he should be constrained to take heed to himself, without enterprising upon
his neighbors: so that he should fall from this high attempt to become Monarch
of the world. It is mere simplicity in you to redoubt the said Philip, seeing
his greatness is grown only by the negligence, floath, and malice of those,
over whom he has tyrannically usurped, as namely over us Portingales. In like
manner would he wax great by your civil dissentions, which are unto him as a
bridge to pass over unto your soueraintie. For making you believe that he will
(as a friend) succor you against him, whom falsely you entitle your enemy, he
will use the same subtletie that this other Philip of Macidone used, who under
color of assisting diverse people of Grecia against their neighbors (saying
that it was the duty of a friend, and confederate, to lend succors to others
in their urgent affairs) easily possessed himself of their common wealths.

And think you, I pray you, that Philip of Spain, will tell you by his hired
preachers (for you will not hearken to any other) that he will first reduce you
under his government, and afterward handle you rigorously? for my part, I
think him more wise, neither doubt I that you think otherwise: but rather to
the end to intrappe you, he promises you more good, then you dare hope or wish
for of your legitimate king. But if you have any discretion, be it never so
little, you will make no receipt of such excessive promises, for that they are
too much suspect, and too full of distrust, which in this case ought to find
some place in you. Men have invented diverse things convenient for the defense
and conservation of their cities, as walls, ditches, trenches, bulwarks,
bastiles, engines, artillery, and such like, which have not been done without
great charges by ingenious mechanickes and workmen. But sage discretion finds
naturally in it self, an inexpugnable rampire, especially in a free people,
against the assaults and invasion of a tyrannous usurper: and what rampire is
this? a distrustful foreseeing, wherewith if you be thoroughly fortified, no
encombrance shall annoy you, but you shall conserve your dear liberty, whereof
the Spaniard is a sworn enemy, and usurper.

Good God: how grievous would it be unto you, if after all this, you make the
Spaniard possessour of you and yours, and that by your own means: murdering
one king, rejecting another, who is your legitimate king, disaduowing your own
children, contemning your nobility, disdaining your most faithful people,
over whom you have made innumerable extorsions. And briefly after having
suffered all the mischiefs in the world, on your members affeebled with
travel. Insteede of finding in this Spaniard all recreation, pleasure,
sweetness, courtesy, rest, and tranquillity, he should cause you to enter from
a fever to a frenzy. For to deliver you from war, which you most desire,
what face soever you set upon it, for that it is grievous and wearisome unto
you, he cannot do it though he would, for that he has too strong parties, not
to speak of strangers, which thing if it may go by usurpation, have as good
right in your kingdom as he. You have good example of my saying at your door,
even Flaunders his patrimony, which is now a thousand times less in peace,
then it was in the beginning of their troubles. I assure my self that the
least wars that you have upon you, as well of his part, as by his occasion,
shall be more tedious unto you, then all those, which for this thirty years
you have supported, yea comprising the last (albeit in good earnest they felt
the extraordinary rigor of the Spaniard,) which notwithstanding in comparison
of these future, have been but as childs play: albeit it was long of those
which first began them, to the great grief of the most faithful, who were
forced to defend themselves against the arrogance of the Guysards, who would
tread them under their feet. And albeit herein they had committed some fault,
which cannot be said, for that they did it for their defense, yet are they
nevertheless in some sort excusable, for that they are household children. For
like as he which is borne in a rich and puissant family, if he happen to do any
thing unfitting, and contrary to his duty, is not to be blamed, or
reprehended so sharply as a stranger: but if some servant or stranger has
lost, or wasted, that whereunto he has not any right, how much more foully
should he fault? and how much more grievously were he to be reprehended? Now it
goes far otherwise with the Spaniard, for not only he is not French, but
also he has nothing in him worthy to be simbolized in the least degree, to the
good and laudable nature, I say not of the Princes, but of the meanest
gentlemen of France.

All this notwithstanding is nothing in regard of the dolourous heartbreaking,
which incessantly shall torment you, having in steed of the master, one of his
servant to rule and govern you, by the name of a Viceroy. Yea albeit he
should give you some French Lord (but make account he will take heed to that)
he will not handle you better the^ us Portugales, or the Neapolitans, and
Milannois, and all those which are under his subjection.

If the Grecians found it strange to have Philip of Macedone absent from their
Pithian games, whereat if he assisted not himself, he caused some of his
court, to be president: will the proud disdain of your Philip, be more
tolerable unto you, when he will not daigne, I say not to honor you certain
months every year with his presence, but not to visit you at all? and yet
surely the administration of such a kingdom, is of far more worth, and
importance, then the feast of I know not what games, and pastimes. And yet
moreover, you have been always accustomed to talk familiarly with your king,
and to remonstrate unto him, whether in private or public all your affairs:
you always saw your king president in the congregation of your estates. You I
say are they, especially above all other nations, who desire nothing more, then
to content your eyes, with the presence of your Prince.

But herein in my opinion he shall bear himself marvelous discreetely, for
that he ought not to entertain himself with you, but in a tedious manner, by
reason of the just distrust he may have of your fidelity. For seeing you have
falsified your faith to your legitimate Prince: seeing you have killed your
rightful king, seeing you have showed your self a stepmother to your own
children, to adopt strangers, good occasion may he have to hold your loyalty
always in suspect: which you may as easily violate toward him, as you have
done toward your natural and legitimate Prince. And be you sure, that he will
soon make you taste of the fruits of his distrust, by taking away all those
which may any ways be obstacles to his enterprises. Make account, that he is
not ignorant, that Tyrannidis inducendae, ac stabiliendae prima initia sunt
frequens accusatio, and in quouis crimine adiuncta delaesa maiestate Principis.
Itemque delatorum authoritas. Which he thoroughly practiced in Flanders, causing
the Counties Egmond and Horn to be beheaded: besides diverse other, as also
the Prince of Orange, whom he caused traitorously to be murdered. And as for
us Portingales, has he spared us? I will make you partakers of some examples
of his clemency toward our Nobility. The County de Vimiose Constable of
Portingale being slain in fighting for the liberty of his country. The
Spaniard confiscated all his goods, and sent his mother with her seven
daughters, prisoners into Castile. Diego de Meneses sometime Viceroy of the
East Indies, and governor of the town of Cascais, was publicly beheaded, and
one of the Captains of the said to town, named Henry Perera, was
ignominiously hanged, notwithstanding his nobility. Emanuel Serradas was
executed by the sword in the I Will of Tercera. And the County de Torres vedras
governor of the said I Will, was in like manner beheaded. The same end had Peter
Alpoen, after that Philip understood yt our king Don Anthonio was retired
toward France. Sfortia Vrsino a valorous Captain, was likewise empoysoned.
These few, which I have collected from a great number, may suffice, because I
would not be tedious unto you. And therefore by the example of the miseries of
our Realm, take heed in good time, least that happen upon yours (if the
Spaniard become master) which Tacitus writes, Sub tyrannis and unjust
imperium occupantibus, omnia sunt bellis ciuilibus, proditionibus, mutuis
coedibus, exilijs plena, etc. I take you to be so benign a mother, that you
would feel an extreme grief, to see your Nobility, the honor and stay of
your authority to be massacred or banished. And albeit it had provoked you by
a thousand outrages, as the League has undertaken falsely to persuade you: yet
would you impatiently support this horrible and cruel tyranny.

Now then you see into what unfortunate calamities, this pernicious League
would precipitate you into. You see, how she seeks nothing but to destroy
you, to enrich Philip with your damage. And you see that she enforces her
self to charge your neck with such a weighty tyranny, that you shall
continually remain courbed under the burden thereof, without being able to
redress your self. But I hope that by this time you have reculed far back
from her, yea even wholly chased her from your ears, and that returning to
your self, you will be governed by reason: by whose good counsel you shall
return unto your king, and be appeased with your Nobility, who heartely
desire to reuiew you, more excellent and magnificall then ever before: as full
easily you may be, being assisted and maintained by the most virtuous and
magnanimous king, that ever swayed your crown. Oh how comely would it be, to see
you reuested with this fair French robe, embrodered with the flour deluces. Oh
how neat it would be, over this Spanish motley robe, which for a time you have
worn, which has made you so ugly and deformed, that you are become the fable
of all your neighbors, who take you for some foolish sot, not knowing you
being so foolishly disguised: but take but once again your own habit, and
they will both honor and reverence you. These fair flower deluces will put
them in mind of your integrity, and immovable constancy toward your king,
which if you keep inuiolably, then shall you triumph over the arrogancy of
the Spaniard, if he should offer hereafter to disquiet or disturb your
felicity.

But now I come to you people of France, divided principally into two parties,
whereof the first part, which is the lesser, has continually remained entire
and faithful to their Prince, what fair language, what subtleties, what
menaces, what prisons, what tortures, what cruelties, and what loss of goods
soever, that the League and her partakers had plotted or invented, to lead
them to their devotion. The other part being far greater, has not only run
at the first fury of ye League, to revolt against their king, but also has
taken in hand to intraine and corrupt the sound party: and yet remains
plunged in their obstinacy. To these two parties agrees well the difference,
that Demosthenes put between those of Athens and Thebes. The Athenians as true
citizens, and men zealous of the common wealth, would favor Philip of Macedon
no further, then honesty and virtue would permit them: but the Thebans
contrariwise served him for an ardent covetousness of gain and particular
profit, which they hoped to draw thereby, not apprehending any farther, like
men of base understanding, the rigor of a tedious servitude. Now as for you
sage Athenians, you faithful Frenchmen, me thinks you need no
advertisement, to entertain you in your duty, seeing the League, by so many
and so many crosses, troubles, and persecutions, has not been able to divert
you: I esteem you so constant, that nothing shall be able hereafter to distract
you: you are men rather worthy of immortal praise, which shall never fail
you, then any admonition, and therefore I should be but too tedious to exhort
you to conserve that, which I know you do most affect, namely your liberty and
fidelity. And albeit Demosthenes played the orator often to his Athenians, yet
were if needless unto you, because you are more virtuous then the Athenians.
But it is to you, that it is more then needful, not to speak, but to cry out,
O you senseless Thebans, you rebellious Frenchmen, you traitorous brokers of
your goods, your friends, your parents, your wives, your children, your selves,
and your country, which ought to be more dear unto you, then mischieuously to
deliver over to a cruel tyranny. But you are run further then the Thebans
of Graecia, for they being gross heads, and without any foresight, covetous,
and such as only respected their profit, enriched them selves by the harms of
their fellow citizens: but you fail not for want of understanding or of
ignorance, but rather through rage, fellonie, and fore determined malice: like
certain Orators among the Orithains, or like the Olympians among ye Athenia^s:
so you being once infected by this pernicious League, have stirred up by your
flattering orations and lying pamphlets, the most simple to rebellion, and
therein detain them, as it were by force and violence. For these poor idiots
are so drunken by your mellified and seducing sermons, that they suffer them
selves to be led by the snoute like bears and elephants.

What say you now you unfaithful Frenchmen, abused by the Sorbonical seducers?
because you have once shaken off the yoke of obedience to your king, will you
never more receive it? Well may you be likened to a savage and outrageous
beast, seeing you have taken such unbridled liberty: or if you submit your
selves to obedience, you will choose a head to your own fancy. And in deed
better it is to obey in what sort soever it be, the^ euilly to command, and
continue so long time confusedly, in a chaos of Anarchie, which is most
perilous, Nihil anarchia periculosius, says Plato, and herein you follow the
advice of Tacitus, Praestat sub malo Principe esse, quam sub nullo. I perceive
then, you would acknowledge a superior, but not he whom God and nature has
given you, being induced to this resolution by the prattle of your Preachers.
And why? forsooth he is not of the Catholic religion, which it may be he will
take away from us, and constrain us by violence to embrace his religion, as
the Queen of England has done in her Realm: but as for the Spaniard, he is a
Catholic, whom we love better then our natural king, as well for that respect,
as for the promise he has made to gouerue us with all clemency, for that he
desires not to be our king, but only to maintain us in the Catholic
religion. Briefly, nothing leads us hereinto, but the conservation of this
religion, he being at this time the eldest son of the Romish Church.

I have before satisfied you concerning the first part of your objection, when
I declared, that your king will entertain you in liberty of conscience,
until a Council have determined of both religions, and assure your selves for
certain, that herein he will inuiolably observe his faith and promise.

Touching the second objection, that the example of the Queen of England
causes you to mistrust, yt your king notwithstanding his promise, will force
you to observe the religion reformed. I perceive that you have bin misinformed
of the state of England touching this point: for the Queen never made promise
unto her Catholic subjects to continue their religion: but contrariwise the
Estates of her Realm caused her at her coronation to swear to maintain the
religion reformed: yet for all this, it was never yet found, that she
constrained the conscience of one only Catholic, to renounce his religion to
live in the reformed: true it is, that according to her oath, she has forbidden
the Mass to be publicly said. As for the Catholics which have been executed,
they have bin condenmed with all the solemnities requisite to the proceeding of
rightful justice, as being attainted, and convinced by their own confessions
of high treason against her Majesty: either for rising in arms against their
Sovereign, or for being so detestable, as to dare make attempt upon her sacred
life. How much had it auailed your late king, if by this laudable example he
had chastised the perturbers of his state, who now finally have dug his
grave? Herein this sage and virtuous Princess, has carried her self so
discreetly and modestly, that she is cherished and reverenced by all the
Princes of the earth. And surely her actions are so virtuous and laudable, that
all men believe undoubtedly that the spirit of God guides her always, as it
were by ye hand. Yea I am persuaded, that ye greatest Prince in the world,
would esteem him self happy, if he might second or imitate her in the
administration of her estate. Yet notwithstanding that impudent liar and
slanderous deceiuer, who at the entrance of the League, published forth a
book, entitled the English Catholic to the French, was plunged into such
impudency, as falsely to allege acts so clean contrary to the proceedings of
this famous Queen, as I durst swear she never once imagined, only to the end
to cause you to fear, and redoubt the government of your legitimate king, a
prince as virtuous as any this day living under the sun.

And lest any man think, that any particular affection has incited me to take
her cause in hand, I protest, that nothing but the plain and sincere truth
(which has caused her innocence to be known, against these calomnious
falsehoods, and makes her praiseworthie in all her works) has incited me to
sustain the equity of her cause: and albeit that God and nature do otherwise
sufficiently bind me, yet should I be too ungrateful, if I should forget the
royal magnificence, and more then sisterlike amity, which her benign
clemency has demonstrated, and daily does demonstrate to our king secluded
from his kingdom: as also the gracious benefits which we his poor exiled
countrymen have received, and yet do receive of her unspeakable liberality.

The last part of your objection is, that nothing occasioneth the Spaniard to
be so desirous to command over you, but only to co^serue among you ye Catholic
religion: ah poor senseless souls: for gods sake do but give ear, to what I
shall briefly recou^t touching his actions in this point: and then shall you
plainly perceive, whether the zeal that he bears toward your religion
solliciteth him to be so charitable unto you. Has this great Catholic king
spent the treasures, or hazarded the life of his subjects, only for the
advancement of the Christian faith against unchristian Princes? nothing less.
To verify this to be true, Pope Gregore 13. proposing him self to the aid of
certain Christian Princes, to make an enterprise upon the Persian, for the
augmentation of the Church, requested this Spaniard to give them some succors:
which he not only flatly denied, but which is more, would not lend any of his
galleys, albeit the holy see offered to freight them at her own charges.
Moreover how dealt he with our late king Don Sebastian, whose death all
Christendom has sufficient cause to bewail: who (desiring to assist Mulei
Mahumet king of Fez and Marocco, agaiust Mulei Maluco his brother, who had
expulsed him his Realm, a work surely worthy of so Christian a Prince, and
aduantagious to the whole Church, for the good conditions he had compounded
with the stranger) required the Spaniard his uncle to succor him in this
expedition, who accorded that he should have fifty galleys equipped, and iiij.
thousand fighting men. Which Mulei Maluco perceiving, incontinently offered him
certain towns on the sea side to desist from his promise, which he speedely
accepted, not shaming to break his othsworne to his nephew, to contract
alliance with a barbarous infidel: so much did avarice reign over him, as to
cause him violate the laws of God and men: but he was paid with the same money
that he lent, for that sending his Ambassador named Vanegas, to take
possession of the town of Rarache and others promised unto him: the Barbarians
mocking at his treachery, constrained the Ambassador by force of the Canon, to
retire sooner then he was willing. But it may be you will say, he bare him
self politickly in these two actions, to conserve and maintain his estate: as
if humane policy were to be preferred before the law and honor of God. I,
but for all this he has showed him self a very zealous Catholic, and has
carried a particular respect toward those which make strict profession of this
religion. Well, let us see if that be true. After he had invaded our Realm,
and that among infinite other Ladies, he had banished into Castile the wife of
the Agent of our king Don Anthonio, his children and mother in law, he drew
three of his sisters, chaste, and holy religious, out of the monastery of S.
Clare at Lisbone, and confined them likewise into Castile. But he has dealt
marvelous clemently with them in saving their lives, albeit servile and
miserable. Yea but since the women are thus dealt with, the men must be handled
more rigorously, and surely herein he has thoroughly acquitted himself,
witness a good religious, named Friar John, of the order of the Iacobins, who
for embracing the liberty of his country, was hanged in the I Will of Madera:
another Friar, Hector Pintus of the order of S. Hierome, was committed to the
hands of certain soldiers in Castile, where he was afterward empoisoned.
Friar James de Noronba a Iacobin brother to the Count de Mire, was so cruelly
beaten, and hurt by the soldiers, that he ended his life. A Doctor named Friar
Augustine, of the order of S. Augustine, and Friar Emanuel Margues a gray
Friar, were chained together with rouers and thieves in a galley, which was
afterward taken by the Turks, under whose cruelty, I leave it to your
judgment to imagine what torments these poor religious have suffered. Friar
Gregory of the order of S. Augustine, was also captiuated in the galleys. Friar
Jews Soarez of the order of the Trinity, having bin tortured with a thousand
torments in prison, was afterward exiled. Friar Anthony Seneuse was
constrained to lurk secretly in the forests, to avoid the bloody rage of this
Philip king of Spain. And briefly a million of others, who have been, and are
daily, either drowned, strangled, empoysoned, prisoners or fugitive.

You might see a sufficient number of them fly for refuge into France, who
yield more then sufficient testimony of his cruel barbarism. But for what
occasion or to what end were all these cruelties committed? These good men were
faithful Portugals, contrary to your Preachers, and therefore he feared, lest
they should move the people to recover their liberty. I speak not of an
infinite number of the heads of our Nobility, wherewith the gates of our towns
are stuffed, and repaired from day to day. Yea but he has thoroughly gratified
all those which were favoring in the usurpation of our Realm: surely
according to their merits, and the bounty of the said Spaniard, a people who
commonly love treason but hate the traitors, when their own turns are served:
he has made them know when they have demanded recompense for their service,
that albeit they have sold and betrayed their country, yet he is nothing in
their debt, and that a man were ill advised to buy that which is his own.
Behold the fair reward of their treachery, and the payment of their sale.
Christian Var de Vegua governor of the Castle of S. John, can bear witness
hereof, who having delivered that place to the Spaniard, for a good annual
pension during his life, in steed of enjoying this promise, he was
incontinently banished for ten years into Africa to make war against ye
Moors. And if you desire to know further hereof, behold the request which these
traitors presented unto the said Spanish king, beseeching him to keep his
promise: and the answer which he gave them, you shall find it in the end of the
Justification of our king Don Anthonio, touching the war which he made upon
this Philip: so that if he has left any (having chased away the rest) in their
charges, and governments, which are not of any great importance, he holds
the^ so short, and sets such near espials upon the^, yt they are as it were
in a mere captivity.

Consider now if you run not the same race: as for the faithful Frenchmen,
whether secular or regular, albeit thoroughly Catholics, it is already
concluded (as it were of necessity) that they shall pass through the Spanish
butcherie. And as for you faithless traitors, make you no better account, for
that your natural French humanity (which difficultly can be utterly
extinguished) cannot long suffer the proud and intolerable Spanish arrogancy:
which the Spaniard full well knowing, at the least suspicion he may take of
your first and natural affection (as by good right he may always hold your
fidelity in suspect) will not spare you any more then the rest. The reformed
religion, as it serves him now for a pretext to impair himself of your
kingdom, although you called him not: so shall it also serve him as another
pretext, to cover his tyranny with a mantle of justice, whilst he tormenteth
and massacreth those, whom he shall perceive, may give him the least trouble or
impeachment, making them believe, that they are of the religion reformed. For
my part I believe that you are not so void of judgment, even the most gross
among you, that you do not foresee what I have rehearsed, whereupon I esteem
you so much the more sottish, mischievous, and disloyal toward your selves,
seeing you precipitate your selves, as it were with blinded eyes, from a fast
footing to so dangerous a peril, as is imminent over you.

Are these the effects of a king terming him self so great a Catholic? Is
this the reverence he bears to the holy Apostolic see? Is this to show
himself the sole protector and pillar of ye Christian church as he impudently
vaunteth in his titles? Is this to be the true Pastor of the people, as Homer
writes of ye prince Agamemnon? Is this to be like the good householder? Is this
to vanquish his will, to handle those so rigorously, whom he has conquered by
force of arms? Surely it is far worse then that pagan Cyrus, who courteously
entreated the Caldeans, whom he had vanquished. It were good he went to the
school of that excellent historiographer Xenophon, who teaches this good
lesson to all usurpers, Noui populi bello parti, sunt beneficio afficiendi: quo
lubentius nobis parere velint. Needless it were to set before your eyes, the
damages and miseries, which you have supported in these wars for the
Spaniards sake: you doubt not that the rich are become poor, that the needy
have spoiled other of their goods, to reuest and possess the^ selves thereof.
The poet Theognides yields the principal reason thereof, when speaking of
the like sedition unto yours, he says, Baiuli imperant, mali super bonos.

I need not to rehearse the taking of towns, by the army of your king of
towns (I say) wherinto the soldier was constrained to enter by assault,
whereas you the inhabitants have not only lost the most part of your goods, but
also your own honor and the honor of your ancestors, who had some interest
therein. And verily unworthy you are to receive any milder chastisement,
albeit all be against the intention, will, and express commandment of the
king, seeing you are so hardened in your rebellion, that you make all the
resistance yt possible may be, until ye soldier (having first escaped a
thousand and a thousand deaths, which you level upon his head) surmount you by
violence of arms. And yet which is more to be deplored, few towns become sage
by the misfortune of others: wherein may be noted the just vengeance of God,
which permits not long vndelayed the punishment due to your mischievous
offenses: yet do I not think, that you would continue so obstinate, were it not
for those treacherous preachers, and others, who have Hispaniolized hearts, like
Philistides, Menippus, and certain other orators, and partakers of Philip of
Macedon among the Orithains: for careless are they of all your miseries, so
they may satisfy the desires and commandments of the Spanish king their
Master, who desires nothing so much, as the final destruction of France:
which he little esteems, so he may possess it, and would see it wholly
ruinated, so he might loose nothing of his own: and the more it shall be
disfurnished of power, and disabled with men, the more easily may he
Hispaniolize over it: knowing then that he cannot subvert it, being united and
conjoined, he whetteth his wits to the end to divide it. Thus could not France
be subverted but by it self, like the common wealth of the Romans, of whom it
is said, Mole sua ruit. Salust has left written, that the ancient Romans were
accustomed to say, yt they felt themselves strongly enflamed with virtue, when
they beheld the monuments of their ancestors. In imitation of these noble
Romans, behold ye rebellious Frenchmen, the images of your ancestors, their
virtues, and laudable actions, pourtrayed and graven in the quiers of your
histories, and you shall see, that they have always combated to maintain the
liberty of France, saving in ye reign of Charles the sixth, by reason of the
dissension between the Dukes of Orleans and Burgundy: at what time they made a
great breach in their ancient constancy, dividing themselves, and permitting
the king of England to take deep rooting in the kingdom of France: which
notwithstanding Charles the 7. son of ye forenamed, wholly rooted out: and all
the French (like men awaked out of a profound sleep, which had a long time
securely detained them) remembered them selves to be true and natural
Frenchmen, which have never, at least very seldom suffered the^ selves to be
governed by foreign Princes. If you be curious to search more anciently, the
immouable constancy of the French or Gauls, it is all one, you shall see it
lively depainted for more then 1650. years ago, in Caesar's commentaries, who
without great travel and difficulty, could never subject them to the Roman
Empire: which makes me promise unto my self, that you seeing these things,
will blush for shame, so entirely to degenerate from their brave courage and
constancy, being rather in every thing contrary unto them. They conspired,
they revolted, they took arms, they warred without fearing any kind of death.
And why? To conserve their liberty, their freedom, and especially not to
receive the garrisons of the Roman Empire, redoubted, and commanding over the
whole world: of whom the greatest kings held them selves happy to be called the
friends and confederats. Briefly, nothing was more odious unto them then
foreign garrisons: as Ambrorix and the Captains of Tournay demonstrated to
Titurius and Cicero the Lieutenants of Caesar. But contrariwise, you league
your selves, you rebel, you run to arms, you enter into war, and expose your
life to a thousand dangers. Against whom? Even against your natural and
legitimate king, whole virtue is a thousand times more commended of strangers
then of his own subjects. To what end? To murder him, as you have done his
predecessor, or to chase him out of his realm, that you might seruilely
subject your selves. To whom? To Philip, a Spaniard, odious for his ambition
and tyranny to the whole world: and after to admit his garrisons, will you
nill you, into your towns, proud garrisons, arrogant garrisons insolent
garrisons, insupportable garrisons: and briefly, garrisons more then barbarous:
who will use you, your wives your children and goods after their own appetite,
you not daring to show the least semblance to take it in evil part. I speak
not idly, neither do I recount fables or lies: you shall not be handled more
courteously then your neighbors: the garrisons which shall bridle, and triumph
over you, shall not be compounded of less tyrannous and cruel soldiers, then
those whice press us so hardly, yt scantly we can take our breath: nay happy
shall you be if it be not worse. Your french soldiers, which have conuersed any
time in the army of the Prince of Parma will witness, if so be they will tell
truly, that I am not a lier. Yet if you desire to have more sufficient
testimony of my speech, inform your selves of the towns of Britain, where
the Spaniards have long enough soiorned: yea which is a country, which the said
Spaniard would make you believe were appertaining to him: albeit he has no more
right then to the other provinces of France, for yt king Francis the first, and
since that king Henry his son, united this duchy by the consent of ye
Estates of the country, to the Crown of France: in such sort, that it is of
the essence of that Crown which never falls unto the distaffe. If you submit
your towns to the tyranny of Philip, look hardly to see in the^, by these
impudent garrisons, that which we daily see in ours, the churches profaned by a
thousand filths, villainies, and horrible sacrileges: virgins violated, matrons
defloured: and briefly the places and streets regorging with the blood of poor
slaughtered innocents. Yea these infamous soldiers have borne so little
affection to the Catholic religion, as to fix publikly upon the gates of ye
Cathedral church of Lisbon, execrable propositions against the doctrine of ye
Gospel, and the decrees of holy Councils.

Yea, but if these garrisons be so rigorous as you say, we will chase them out
of our towns, and retire our selves from the servitude of the Spaniard. I pray
you was it easy or possible to your ancient Gauls, notwithstanding they
enterprised it, to deliver them selves from the subjection of the Romans, until
after many ages, and at such time as the said Romans had work cut out for
them in other provinces of their Empire? To the Grecians, from that Philip of
Macedon, and at this day from that of the Othomans? To the Britains, from that
of the English Saxons? And see you not, that we have not bin able to recover
our freedom, whatsoever our king might do, either by the succors given him by
your late king, or by those given him by ye Queen of England about some 26.
months past. No no, when you have once suffered your self to be trodden under
foot by such a proud and puissant usurper, it is more then difficult to raise
up your selves. It is not easy to remove the bridle when it is once put within
the mouth, no more the^ for Horaces horse, who permitted himself to be
bridled, for the desire he had to vanquish the heart in his course: but it fell
out otherwise then he expected, for he could never since affranchise him self
from the bridle, nor service of man.

For Gods sake, ye Frenchmen, after the example of your ancestors, be jealous
in keeping your precious liberty, be faithful to your prince, and banish away
from you this disordinate appetite of nouelty, in desiring to assay the
dominion of a stranger, what ever he be. For if it be dangerous (as Salust
says) to make experience of new servants, it is without comparison far more
dangerous to prove a new master, and principally so severe and rigorous, as is
the Spaniard. If in the time passed you have offended, study to repair this
fault, and you shall soon and with facility do it, if you rid from your heart
this indiscreet affection of change, this foolish persuasio^, that the king will
take away the Catholic religion: and this pestilent root of avarice, which
has wholly wasted and corrupted you, as it has done many other people. Do so
hereafter, that Philip may not say of France, as Iugurth sometimes reproched the
city of Rome, where for money he had wrought all things to his advantage, and
departing from it, oftentimes looking back, brake forth into these words: O
City ready to be sold, and sodeinly to perish, if it find out a merchant. But
your avarice has already done so much, that France is in far worse estate,
for that it has found a merchant that has already gone through with it.
Notwithstanding thanks be to God, he has not yet taken possession thereof, and
I think the earnest money he has given, will prove a desperate debt, for that
the sellers might not warrant the sale, having no right thereunto, nor repay
the money without great difficulty: and albeit they had some right, yet the
good counsel that Scipio gave to Iugurth, who labored by rewards, to purchase
particularly the amity of the people of Rome, ought to have made him more
wise. It is dangerous (said Scipio) to buy that of a few persons, which
appertains to many. Take good heed, that this mischievous avarice take no
further hold on you, lest you cause your posterity and foreign nations to say
of this Philip, as of ancient was said of Macedon: Non Philippum, sed aurum
Philippi subegisse Graeciam. And of our Philip: Non Philippu^ Hispanum, sed
eius aurum subegisse Galliam. I am not ignorant that many among you know not of
what force this money of Philips is, having never touched it as his partakers,
many Captains, officers, preachers, and others, have thoroughly done. For these
are they which have miserably sold you, and assure your selves, that you shall
have daily more and more mischiefs heaped upon you, till you stop the mouth of
these faithless preachers, or banish them as a mortal pestilence, if they
will not as I have aforesaid, teach only the pure word of God, reprehending
vices, for that is their vocation and no other. Which if you do, and withal
crave pardon of your king for your rash rebellion and offenses: I dare promise,
that he will use his accustomed clemency toward you: and receive you, not
only as a benign king his faithful subjects: but as a charitable father his
well-beloved children.

As for our lamentable and desolate Realm, the blood of our nobility, and of
our best citizens, the imprisonment, exile and banishment of others: our
losses, miseries, and briefly our hard captivity, which so hardly restrains
our throat, that scantly can we speak, and albeit we could, yet is it
forbidden us, least we loose that benefit to complain, exaggerating and
redoubling the pain of our insupportable martyrdomes, either by loss of life,
imprisonment, or at the least exile and banishment. Let all this (I beseech
you) be as a clear mirror, to the end looking therein, you may see, may
feel, touch and apprehend, that which you contemplate: and then, I doubt not
but it may be said of you, Post infoelicem, rebellionis successum, populus
facile inclinari solet, ad vetus obsequium repetendum. Suffer not your selves
any longer to be seduced by the subtleties presents, nor fair promises of this
Spaniard, who herein, as in all other things, is far more malicious then the
Ciclops Polyphemus, for he used no artificial subtletie to draw men to him,
and devour them: but Philip like an ingenious architect of all iniquities,
inuenteth millions of means to deceive, and tyrannize over you. Sed fugite, o
miseri, fugite, yea even so soon as possible may be, lest hereafter you be
constrained to do that which willingly you would not do. Be mindful to
recover, and preciously to reserve that gorgeous title, which you have always
carried, above all other people: namely, inviolable fidelity toward your
king: retain even with both hands that inestimable liberty, which your
ancestors have conquered by a million of dangers, and left intailed from hand
to hand to your posterity. Finally let this be engraven in your hearts, that
you are French men, that is to say, most affectionatly zealous of your
country, king and liberty, yea redoubted to all other nations, as being
issued out of the stock of ye ancient warlike Gauls: who oftentimes by force
of arms have terrified the Roman common wealth, being the terror of all
other nations. The Romans (says Salust) conquered all other nations, but as
for the Gauls, with them they combated for safety and not for honor.

It would highly content me, might I understand that ye have followed my
sincere and faithful advertisement: believe, that I have brotherly advertised,
and faithfully counseled you to your great utility and profit, and that all
the rigorous and more then barbarous cruelties of the Spaniard which you have
heard, are as true, as his tyra^nous iniquities are manifest to the whole
world. These things have I discovered unto you, as an eye witness, having
remained in Portingale after the departure of our king, no less miserable then
poor Achamenides, abandoned of his Prince Ulysses in the deserts of Sicilie.
For I have always even to this present lived poorly in dens, most often, in
forests, rocks, and caves, and sometime in some little corner of my friends
house, like a languishing prisoner, which has continually hanging before his
eyes, ye apprehension of a cruel death. Show not your selves less credulous
to my true speech, then were the Trojans to that of the Greek Achamenides,
Most happy the man which keeps a care,
By other men's harms to learn to beware.


Sirs, I have declared unto you how mischieuously you have bin seduced by the
Spanish faction, which pretends to vsurp your realm, and captiuate your
liberty: for this is the final end of the plots and Monopolies which he has
practiced, and of the dissentions, which he has ingeniously sowed among you.
Now therefore my desire is to advertise you in few words (but especially those,
which may carry an opinion, that I have compiled this discourse, not so much
for your good, as for the affection that I have to see your king, to the
particular contentatio^ of him and his, peaceably to possess his kingdom)
that nothing has incited me to this admonition, but the brotherly charity,
and the good will that I have to see your troubles assuaged: to the end that you
be not hereafter tormented by civil wars, and that the Spaniard possess not
any more your sottish affections: but rather after so many and so great
travels, which willingly you have heaped upon your selves, you may enjoy a long
and peaceable tra^quillitie, which all good men ought to wish for, and with
hands lifted up to demand of the divine goodness of God: and not maliciously to
nourish and enkindle war, which finally heapeth most miseries upon those
which do most seek after it. Behold the^ your case, taking all things that I
have said in the worst sort, touching the estate of your king, flattering your
selves, yt without great difficulty he shall never become Master of his
kingdom whilst you are his adversaries, and fauorise the party of the
Spaniard, or any other his enemies, and that for this occasion, I have taken in
hand to induce you, to reconcile your selves toward his Majesty, and require
pardon of your follies. But ye case is far otherwise, then either you think,
or your preachers give you to understand. He is not (thanks be to God) so
disfurnished of courage, of good and faithful subjects, nor of the assistance
of his affectionat friends, who are puissant and many, but that he can both
easily and speedily bring you to what reason he will, and wholly purge his
realm of this loathsome Spaniolized League, yea, and follow the Master thereof
by the trace, were he never so little pushed forward by ambition. For you know
well, how many towns he has forced and reduced to his obedience, and that even
at the first sight. Neither are you ignorant, that his only clemency has
retained his puissance from forcing, subuerting and saccaging the city of
Paris: herin showing himself rather a father then a king, not willing to do
that against his people, which he well might do, and their obstinat rebellion
had justly deserved. But me thinks it is now more the^ hie time, not any
longer to abuse his patient cleme^cie, lest at length it happen to your own
great harm, as says the proverb, Patientia nimium laesa conuertitur in
furorem. The example of many kings, yea of your own kings, who have chastised
their people according to their merits, ought long ago to have brought you to
this consideration, ame^ding your selves, rather to day then to morrow. And
indeed there is great appearance that he will now betake himself to rigor, seeing
his clemency ca^ not vanquish your obstinate courage, by ye great preparatio^s
of war which foreign Princes address to assist him: as the Q of England, who
has already sent good auantcurrors: all the Princes of Germany, many Princes
of Italy, the kings of Scotland, Denmark and Sueueland, and other septentrional
Princes. Yea, if he would require the succors of the great Turk, it is certain
he might be furnished. In such sort that I see, that if you do not shortly
remedy it, in submitting your selves to his Majesty, the most terrible storm
that ever lighted upon France, is even now ready to light upon you, to break
a sunder and subvert the very eybrow of your proud and detestable rebellion No
no, look not that the Spanish king with all his double pistolets, crafty
subtleties, and arrogant brauados shall be sufficient to turn away never so
little this impetuous and cruel tempest, hanging within two fingers of your
head. Recourse therefore speedily to your Prince, before he has exiled his
mercy and clemency. I verily hope that by this you are become wiser then you
were, and so shall your monarchy herafter become more excellent then ever
before, under the government of so virtuous and magnanimous a king.

FINIS.

