The most dangerous and memorable adventure of Richard Ferris, one of the five
ordinary Messengers of her Majesty's Chamber, who departed from Tower Wharfe
on Midsommer day last past, with Andrew Hill and William Thomas, who undertook
in a small Wherry Boat, to row by Sea to the City of Bristowe, and are now
safely returned. Wherein is particularly expressed their perils sustained in
the said voyage, and the great entertainment they had at several places upon
the coast of England, as they went, but especially at the said City of Bristow.

Published by the said Richard Ferris.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf for Edward White, and are to be sold at his shop
being at the little north door of Paul's at the sign of the Gunne. 1590.

To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Heneage knight, one of her Majesty's
Honorable privy counsel, Vize chamberlen to her Highness, and treasurer of
her Majesty's chamber* prosperous health, long life, with much increase of
honor.
RIght honorable the late dangerous attempt rashly by me undertaken to row in
a small Boat to the City of Bristow a long the perilous Rocks Breaches,
Rases, Shelues, Quicke-sandes and very unlikely places for passage with such
small Boats, along the Coast of England, is now by the assistance of almighty
God truly performed, as appears by our several certificates ready to be
seen, with our safe return, contrary to the expectation of sundry persons,
which being truly and particularly discoursed: I have presumed to dedicate
unto your honor: wherein may plainly be seen, how we adventured to pass the
force of dangerous Flawes and rough Seas, which we found in our voyage: And
proves the attempt the more strange in respect that I was never trained up
on the water: not doubting but the same may be a just occasion to prick
forward other of my native cuntrymen to practice an ordinary passage thorough
the like dangers in such small wherry Boats, especially when necessary occasion
shall serve, the better to daunt the enemies of this nation, who in such flawes
and frets at Sea, dare not hasard their Galleys to go forth, though they be
of far greater force to brook the Seas. Thus humbly desiring your honors
favorable acceptance hereof, I end, beseeching God to send health and long life
to her Majesty my dread Sovereign and most gracious Mistres, peace to this
land, and to your honor even your hearts desire.

Your honors most humble to command Richard Ferris*

Richard Ferris his travails to Bristowe.
AFter that I had rashly determined to pass the seas with a Wherry, and to
row my self in the same to the City of Bristow, though with the evil will
of sundry my good friends, but especially full sore against my aged fathers
consent now dwelling in the City of Westminster where I was borne, I thought
it convenient to seek out some one expert Pilot to direct me and my companion
by his skill, the better to pass the perilles and dangers whereof I was
foretold. Whereupon I took unto me one W. Thomas, a man of sufficient skill
and approved experience, by whom I was still content to be advised even from
my first going forth, until my last coming home.

The Boat wherein I determined to perform my promise, was new built, which I
procured to be painted with green, and the Oars and sail of the same
color, with the red Cross for England and her Majesty's arms with a vane
standing fast to the stern of the said Boat, which being in full readiness
upon Midsommer day last, my self with my companions Andrew Hill, and William
Thomas, with a great many of our friends and welwillers accompanied us to the
Tower wharfe of London, there we entered our Boat, and so with a great many of
our friends in other like boats rowed to the Court at Greenewitch, where
before the Court gate we gave a volley of shot: then we landed and went into
the Court, where we had great entertainment at every office, and many of our
friends were full sorry for our departing: And having obtained leave before of
the Right Honorable the Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Admiral, and M. vize
Chamberlain, for my departure, I took my leave and so departed, setting up
our sails, and taking us to our Oars, we departed toward this our doubtful
course: and first we took our way to Grauesende, and from thence to these
places hereafter mentioned, namely: To Margat. To Dover. To new Haven in
Sussex. To Portchmouth. To Sandwitch in Dorcetshire. To Abbots Berry. To Lyme.
To Seaton. To Tingmouth. To Dartmouth. To Saucombe. To Plymmoth. To Low in
Cornwall. To S. Mawes in faumouth. To the great bay at Pensans called Mounse
bay. To S. Iues at the further side of the lands end. To Gooddriuie. To
Padstowe. To Bottricks Castle, which is in the race of Hartlande alias
Hartey-point. To Cleuelley. To Ilford Come. To Mynnet high Cliffes. And
lastly, to the City of Bristowe.


At these places before recited we stayed and refreshed our selves, sometime we
were constrained to put into these places for want of victuals, sometime for to
have their certificats to testify of our being there: sometimes we were
weather bound, and sundry accidents worth the noting happened unto us in many
of these places, and our welcome in all places deserves due commendations, the
particulars whereof hereafter follows.

After we had passed Grauesend as is aforesaid, we came to the lands end, then
we bent our course to Margat, which place having passed, we woone the forelande
with some high billows.

From thence to the south forelande, and soon after we put in at Dover, where
we stayed about vi. hours, and where we were greatly entertained.

From thence we took to the Camber nestes, which is between Rye and Dover,
and so along the main Sea toward fair Lee. Then we rowed and sailed along
the Coast until we came to Beachie and passing by it we harbored at new Haven
in Sussex; where we had reasonable good weather fill we came between the I Will
of Wight and Portchmouth: there we had a great storm, and in such sort
ouerpressed with weather, that we were constrained to make toward a Castle
called Hurst Castle, from whence at the fall of wind and tide, we put forth
again to sea, and recovered to Sandwitch in Dorcetshire. From thence we passed
through a race called S. Albons which is a head land, where we were in a great
frett by reason of the race and so continued hazarding our lives by means of
that fret, to the great and dangerous race of Portland, where by the good
direction of our Pilot and master, we sought and strove by great labor to take
the advantage of the tide and weather, whereby we passed through it in one
hour.

Here did the billows rise very hie, so that we were in great danger, yet
God be thanked we escaped them without any damage. From thence we passed to
Lime bay, where we stayed but one night and from thence to Seaton, at which
place we were compelled to carry and lift up our boat on shore, by
extremity of foul weather, for we were there in great danger, by reason of
frets, sands, and foul weather, which greatly troubled us.

From thence we went to Tingmoth, and so to Dartmoth, there we remained two
days, and had good intertainement, and great courtesy offered us by the
inhabitants thereof. And upon the next day morning being Sunday, we put to
Sea again, there having a fair wind and tide we came to the Start, where
the wind rose and hemde us in round about, into a very dangerous race, (this
was on the fifteenth of July) where we were in such an extremity, that we had
like to have been drowned, yet it pleased God so far to work for us, that
we escaped the danger thereof, which done, we went to the westward of
Sawcombe, there we were constrained to hale up our Bote in a coue called
S^wer Mill, behind a rock near to Sir William Courtney, a very bountiful
knight, at whose house we lay all that night, and would have had us to have
staide longer. But from thence having fair weather we came to Plimmoth.

Here we met with her Majesty's ships, where master Captain Fenner and
master Captain Wilkinson, gave us great intertainement, especially for that
they saw we had leave given us from the right Honorable of her Majesty's
counsel, for our quiet and safe passage. And for that I was her Majesty's
messenger, they gave us the greater intertainement, and staide there one night,
from thence we went to Low, and there staide one night, from thence to Saint
Mawes, with very calm and good weather, until we came to the Lizard, being a
place well known to be most dangerous and full of rocks and rases, where God
be thanked we passed in the current of the tide, with great swiftness, but with
wonderful danger, where had it not been well looked unto of the master we
had all been cast away.

Then we did cut over the Mouse bay to Mouthole which is four miles beyond
the mount, where we were constrained for want of necessary victuals to come
back again to Pensance, where we lodged all night.

The next morning, we set out to go for the lands end, where setting from
Pensans with our half tide, to recover the first of the tide at the lands end,
we being in our Boat a great way from the shore, our master descryed a
Pyrate, having a vessel of four tun, who made toward us amain, meaning
doubtless to have robbed us, but doubting such a matter, we rowed so near the
shore as we might: and by that time as he was almost come at us, we were
near to a rock standing in the sea, where this Pyrate thought to have taken
us at an advantage: for being come close to the out side of the said rock,
called Raynalde stones, he was becalmed and could make no way, and so were we.
But God who never fails those that put their trust in him, sent us a comfort
unlooked for: for as we rowed to come about by this rock, suddenly we espied a
plain and very easy way for us to pass on the inner side of the said
rock, where we went through very pleasantly, and by reason thereof he could
not follow us: thus we escaped safely, but he was soon after taken and brought
in at Bristow. Here we found great breaches, races and rocks, the wind then
being Northerly and altogether against us, which was wonderful painful,
troublesome, and dangerous to us, nevertheless (God be thanked) we escaped in
safety, and recovered to Saint Iues, where we were well entertained. The next
day we put to sea again, but being within five miles of Saint Iues, we were
constrained to seek for a Coue, which we found called Saint Dryuey in Cornwale.

Here, for that we wanted victualles, our master was constrained to go climb
the great Cliffe at Goodryvey which is at the least forty fatham hye, and
wonderful steep, which none of us durst venture to do, and (God be blessed
for it) he had no harm at all, but surely to all likelyhoodes, had his foot
once slipped, there could have been no recovery to have saved him, but that he
would have been bruised in pieces.

At this place we stayed two days at master Aro^dalles house, where we were
greatly welcome, and from thence we went to Bottricks Castle, where dwells a
gentleman called master Hinder, there we were wether bound, and constrained to
stay full seventeen days, where we had great entertainment, he himself
offering us, if we would stay a whole year, we should be welcome, and the
rather for that I was one of her Majesty's servants. But upon the eighteenth
day, the foul wether seasing we did again put to the sea through the race of
Hartland, alias Hartipointe, which is as ill as the race of Portlande, which
we escaped and recovered to Cleuelley, where we were entertained by a very
courteous gentleman called master Carey. And from thence we came to Ilforde
Coume, which was on Satterday at night the first of August last past, whereupon
for that we were so near Bristow, I desired my company that we might put to
sea that night, which they were loath to do, yet at my importunate suit they
granted thereto. But being at sea, the wind arose very sore from of the land,
which put us all in great fear, whereby I my self was constrained to row
four hours alone on the Larboorde side, and my fellow Rower was compelled to
lade forth water so fast as it came into the Boat, which did beat upon me and
over me, very sore, the wind then being East and by South. Thus I was
constrained to labor for life, and yet had almost killed my self through the
heat I took in that time, rowing as is aforesaid, until we came to Mynette.

This done, we went from Mynytte, and so between the two homes came to Bristow
in one tide, and arrived at the back of Bristow, about six of the clock at
night.

But it was wonderful to see and hear what rejoicing there was on all sides
at our coming: The Mayor of Bristow, with his brethren the Aldermen, came to
the water side, and welcomed us most lovingly, and the people came in great
multitudes to see us, in so much as by the consent of the Magistrates, they
took our Boat from us, not suffering us once to meddle with it, in respect
that we were all extreme weary, and carried our said Boat to the high
Cross, in the City, from thence it was conuaied to the town house, there
locked safe all night. And on the next morning the people of the City gathered
them selves together, and had prepared Trumpets, Drums, Fyfes, and Ensigns
to go before the Boat, which was carried upon men's shoulders round about the
City, with the Wait^s of the said City, playing orderly in honor of our
rare and dangerous attempt atchiued. Afterward we were had to master
Majors, to the Aldermen and Sherifies houses, where we were feasted most
royally and spared for no cost all the time that we remained there. Thus having
a while refreshed our selves after our so tedious labors, we came to London on
Saturday being the eight of August.1590. where to speak truth without
dissembling, our entertainment at our coming was great and honorable,
especially at the Court, and in the Cities of London and Westminster, and
generally I found that the people greatly rejoiced to see us in all places?

To conclude, I have given order that the said Boat shall be brought by land
from Bristow to London, where the watermen and sundry other have promised to
grace the said Boat with great melody, and sundry volleyes of shot, which
very shortly is intended to be performed.

Here is to be remembered, that between Hartie-point and Cleuelly, the wind
being very strong, my companion and oar fellow Andrew Hill in taking down
our sail, fell over board into the sea, where by great good hap, and by
means that he held fast to a piece of our sail, we recovered him and got him
up again (although he were a very weighty man) which if we had not done I
could not have gotten any man to have supplied his room: but when we saw that
he was amended, we gave God thanks for his recovery.

Thus to God I with my fellow mates, give most hearty prayers and thanks for
our safe deliverance from so imminent dangers as we have been in since our
departure from the Court at Greenewitch, being still defended by the mighty
and handie work of Almighty God, to whom we in all obedience and duty daily
pray for the prosperous health of her Majesty, and her honorable Council,
whose lives and welfare is the strength and maintenance of this land, and whom
Almighty God, prosper and preserve now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Richard Ferres.

A new Sonnet made upon the arrival and brave entertainment of Richard
Ferris with his boat, who arrived at the City of Bristowe on the third day of
August. 1590.
COme old and young behold and vewe,
A thing most rare is to be seen,
A seely Wherry it is most true:
Is come to Town with sail of green.
With Oars color of the same,
To happy Ferris worthy fame.
From London City this wager sure,
Was for to bring his Wherry small,
On surging seas if life endure:
From Port to Port hap what hap shall.
To Bristowe City of worthy name,
Where Ferris now has spread his fame.
His Boat not bulgd, but at high cross,
Was seen the third of August sure,
Whereby the man has had no loss:
But did each willing heart procure,
For to be ready there in haste,
To see the Boat that there was plaste.
Oh mighty Jove thou guide of guides,
Which brought this Boat from surging seas,
Clean from the rage of furious tides,
No doubt Ferris God thou did please,
Both thou and thine which were with thee,
You served God he set you free.
Good Andrew Hill thy pains was great,
And William Thomas in this Wherry,
And honor Ferris sure does get,
He doubtless means to make you merry.
Your fame is such through travails toil,
You win the spur within our soil.
Shall I prefer this to your skill,
No no it was God that did you guide,
For this be sure without his will,
You could not pass each bitter tide.
But pray you did no doubt each hour,
Whereby God blessed you by his power.
Oh gallant minds and venturors bold,
That took in hand a thing most rare,
Twill make the Spaniardes hearts wax cold,
If that this news to them prepare,
That three men has this voyage done,
And thereby wagers great has won.
But now we may behold and vewe,
That English hearts are not afraid,
Their Sovereigns foes for to subdue,
No tempest can make us dismayde.
Let monsterous Papists spit their fill,
Their force is full against Gods will.
Has seely Wherry done the deed,
That Gallyes great dare not to try,
And has she had such happy speed,
That now in rest on shore she lie,
Doubtless the Lord her Pylot was,
It could not else been brought to pass.
Well Ferris now the game is thine,
No loss thou have thank him above,
From thy two Mates do not decline,
But still in heart do thou them love.
So shall thy store increase no doubt,
Through him that brought thy boat about.
I end with prayers to the Lord,
To save and keep our royal Queen,
Let all true hearts with one accord,
Say Lord preserve her grace from teene,
Bless Lord her friends, confound her foes,
For aye Lord save our Royal Rose.
FINIS.
James Sargent.


