A Dialogue against light, lewd, and lascivious dancing: wherein are refuted
all those reasons, which the common people use to bring in defense thereof.
Compiled and made by Christopher Fetherston.

Eccle. 9. 4. Use not the company of a woman, that is a singer and a dauncer,
least thou be intrapped in her snares. Imprinted at London, by Thomas Dawson.
1582.

To the right woorshipfull M. D. Lewyn, doctor of the civil Laws, one of the
Queens Majesty's high commisioners, and Chancellor to the reverent father
in God, John Bishop of Rochester: Christopher Fetherston, wishes long life,
happy days, and eternal felicity.
IF we enquire of the times of old (right worshipful) and seek out what has
been done in the days which are passed: If we go through that sacred volume,
wherein are contained, the statutes of the most highest, and the glad tidings
of our salvation, and diligently ^oate the histories therein contained: if we
read the ancient histories wherein are recorded the factes of our
forefathers, and those things which have happened heretofore: we shall
plainly see and perceive, yt they have always had some cloak in readiness to
cover eve their most abominable sin, to yt end it might appear unto me^, to
be no sin at all. When as our great Grau^dfather Ada^ had transgressed the Law*
which God had given him, and violated the commandment of his creator, by
eating the forbidden fruit: being asked why he did so, he could quickly cover
the matter with a fig leaf, and say that it was y^ woman which thou gave
me, which gave it me to eat, where he has no other to lay y^ blame upon, but
upon God himself. When Cain, y^ murderer, had slain his brother Abell, being
asked of God where his brother was, he could answer God very disdainfully,
and say, nu^quid ego su^custos fratris me^? am I y^ keeper of my brother* When
as y^ I sraelites would commit idolatry, they said they would have gods to go
before them into Canaan, for they knew not what was become of that Moses which
brought the^ forth of y^ land of Egypt, where they cloaked their sin with
zeal. When Ahab would have Naboaths vineyard, the possession of his fathers,
it was because he would make a garden of earbes thereof. When as that cursed
Iesabel (whose life was lewd, and death shamful) did go about to have Naboth
stoned to death, she did cast this covering upon her pre^^ce, and said, he had
spoken against god* and against the king. When as Saul had tra^sgressed the
commandment of God, in not killing the Amelekyts, and all that was theirs* he
excused his fact with his good intent, and said, he saved the best of the
sheep and of the oxen to offer in sacrifice unto the Lord. The Jews would put
Christ to death, because he had transgressed their law, by making himself a
king, Caesar being yet alive. And Stephan was stoned for sooth, because he
spoke blasphemy when he spoke the truth. Out of which examples we see that
thing evidently proved, where of I have spoken before. Now if we come nigher
home, and take a full view of those times which are now, we shall plainly see y^
the me^ of these days are not behind their ancestors in these things, for
they ca^bring a thin skin over their festered sore, that it may seem to be
hole, when it is nothing so. The usurer can say for him self, that it is lawful
for a man to make the most of his own. The covetous man draws this veil over
his sin, it is good saving a penny against a wet day, and he whose teath does
go before his hands* shall never be worth one halfpenny.

The fornicator has gone to scho^^^ with the Papists, and there has he
learned this lesson, Simplex fornicatio non est adulterium, that single
fornication is not adultery, and this is his last refuge, when he can say no
more for himself. The Drunkard can say that he is a good fellow, and such are
to be well thought on. The lascivious Dauncer has all those colors which in
this Dialogue are recited, and many more then these, to paynt his dancing
withal, that it may seem to be gold, whereas it is but copper, that it may
seem good, whereas it is evil, and that it may seem an honest recreation,
whereas it is inhonest, and of all those which will seem to be honest, utterly
to be abhorred. And now (right worshipful) as it has been the custom of all
those holy men (which lived in those days when those former sins were
committed) to pull away those copwebs where with they covered their sins, that
they might appear as they were in deed: so it behooves those which live in
these days, to pluck away the visurs from the faces of their vices which
reign in these days. Which thing I have gone about to do (with what diligence
I cold) in the last vice which I repeated which was lascivious dancing,
since it has pleased God here to fore, and even now of late, to stir up
those which have sufficiently refuted whatsoever could have been said in
defense of these other vices. And though I may seem to some to have enterpriced
this thing more rashly then wisely, and more impudently then prudently, fithens
there are a great many which might better have taken this same in hand: yet the
causes which moved me here unto were such, that I thought I had better take
this thing upon me (though I should do it but simply), then to let it alone,
least when all men do strain courtesy, it should be left undone. It is not
only the common sort of people which does render these reasons for dancing:
but it is even some of those which carry some credit, and are of great
countenance, which use to object as follows. So that it is to be feared,
least lascivious dancing in time be taken for a virtue, where as in deed it
is but a vice, as it is now a days used. And now (right worshipful) the
especial causes which moved me to dedicate this my simple Dialogue unto your
worship, are two in number. The first was this, because I meant hereby (not in
any case reaching you your duty) to certify you (in whose hand it is to
reform this and such like vices in these our dioces) how commonly this lewd
pastime is used upon the Sabboath day, and again, how the ministers of Gods
word are contemned, because they would debar the youth from dancing, so
that it is to be doubted, that unless speedy reformation be had, they shall
utterly be set at naught. To whom shall the servant, who has espied weeds in
the fields complain, if not to the master whose the field is? And whom
should I rather certify of this thing then you, who has authority to pluck up
such weeds by the roots. The last cause, but not the least, which enforced
me to offer unto you the first fruits of my labors, was, because you are he
at whose hands I have received as much as I have desired, but more then I have
deserved. So that I thought my self bound by duty not only to do this, but
also to pray unto God vncessantlye for your worship, whom I beseech long to
preserve you in life and health, and also to endew you with such graces, as
shall be necessary for your calling, to the which God, together with his
son Christ, and the holy Ghost, ^e all praise, glory, and honor, now and
for ever. Amen.

Yours in the Lord always Christopher Fetherston.

To the Christian reader. C. F. wishes grace, mercy, and peace, from God the
father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
AS Iron fornaces, do not at y^ first blowing send out the greatest, nor yet
the soundest sowes of Iro^, yet those which are then cast, are not cast away:
As out of the finest fountain of water, there does not at the first issue out
the greatest abundance of water, yet men do not refuse, but rather choose the
same, if it be but only (quia noua delectant) because they are delighted in
novelties: so (gentle reader) authors do not at the first publishe either in
quantity the biggest, or in quality the best books: and yet are not they
ashamed to put forth these their first labors, since nisi per principia ad
summu^ peruenire non possunt, they can not come un to perfection but by
certain beginnings. Which thing being so, does not a little encourage me, to
publishe this poor piece of work of mine (which is so simple, that it is
scant worthy to appear in print) and also I am the more bold to let it show
the face, because I hope that the good and godly will gratefully accept the
same, if it be but only because it is some testimony of my good will which I
bear toward them. The seely shepherd having no better stuff, presented
unto a famous prince a greasy bottle full of fair water: the poor farmer
having no greater store, gave unto a rich Citizen his land lord, a few
apples, and poor Conon, presented unto the king, a seely root in token of his
good will. All which did thankefully accept these simple gifts, nothing
respecting the gifts, but the good will of the giver. Whose examples, hoping
the godly will follow, in receiving this simple gift of mine, I pray instantly
unto the Lord God almighty, that it would please his divine majesty, to
finish that good work which he has begun in them, and that he will daily
increase in them that hunger and thirst, which they have after righteousness, so
shall they be sure to be satisfied in the life to come, with the fruition of
those joys which all those shall have which love Christ and his coming. Which
joys the Lord God grant unto us all, for his mercies sake. Amen.

A Dialogue against dancing, wherein are refuted all those reasons which the
common people of the country use to bring in the defense of dancing.
Compiled by Christopher Fetherston.

Iuuenis. Minister. Iuuenis. GOD give you good morrow good master Vicar.


Minister. And you the like good Iuuenis: and as I do desire him to give you a
good morrow, so I beseech him to grant that you may bestow this whole day
in such exercise, as may tend to the setting forth of his glory, the profit
of this common wealth, and the health of your own soul.


Iu. I thank you most heartily sir for your gentle wish, but I pray you sir
how fare all our friends in Vbique (the broadest parish as I suppose in
Ailgna)?


Min. They enjoy the health of the body, and I could wish, they were as well
endewed, with the health of y^ soul.


Iu. I am glad to hear, that they be in bodily health, for truly I stoo^de
somewhat in dout least all things had not gone well amongst you, because I see
you walk so soberly in these goodly green fields, which are not only
pleasant to the eye, but do also se^d out such a fragrant smell from those
sweet flowers wherewith they are adorned, that me think they should cause you
rather to laugh then weep, and make you rather sing then procure your sorrow.


Min. It is so in deed, yet the pleasure which I do bear take does not so
much augme^t my solace as other things do increase my sorrow, neither can chose
sightes which I now see with the eyes of my body, so much make memerrie, as
those things which I now behold with the eyes of my mind do cause me to
mourn.


Iu. I pray you sir (if I may be so bold as to ask you) what things be
these which do so turn your solace into sorrow?


Min. Upon condition you will resolve me the like question I do grant to tell you.


Iu. I will, if your question shall seem reasonable.


Min. The first then of all these is this. When as I do consider with my
self, with what great good gifts the Lord God almighty, has endued man,
and especially, how he has given unto him a Pilote most prudent, to govern
him upon the surging seas of this mortal life, which is even reason, how he
has given unto him all things which are necessary for this present life,
how he has made him lower then the Angels to crown him with majesty and
honor, how he has given his only son Christ Jesus to die for man, that man
might be delivered from eternal death and destruction; how he has suffered
him to be set at naught, to the end man might be bought, how he has
suffered him to be payned that man might be gained, how he has suffered him
to be scourged, that by his stripes man might be healed, how he has suffered
him to be accursed, that man might be delivered from the curse: so often does
it make me sobbe and sigh, to see how ungratefully man does behave him self
toward so kind a father. Again, when as I come nigher home, and look
round about me in this our Country of Ailgna, and do well weigh with my
self with what blessings the Lord has endewed us above all other nations,
and how we by our lewd and wicked lives do more dishonor him, almost, the^
any nation under the sun:

It makes me to burst out into bitter tears, and to bewail our great
unthankfulness. What nation under the heavens has tasted of those blessings
whereof we have had great abundance, or unto what country in all the world
has the Lord been so favorable, as unto this of ours:

The heavens are not made unto us as brass, nor the earth is not unto us as
Iron: but the clouds drop fatness and the earth yields her increase, and
yet behold more blessings then these.

Our oxen are strong to labor, and our sheep bring forth thousands, and
ten thousands, and yet behold more blessings then these. There is no
leading into captivity, neither any complaining in our streets, and yet
behold more blessings then these. We have a prudent Princes, a gracious
Queen, a godly Judith, a chaste Susanna, a virtuous Hester, a discreet Debora,
which these four and twenty years has judged Israel with equity and right,
and yet behold more blessings then these. We have sage Senators which take
counsel at the word of the Lord in all their interprises, and do nothing
without the warrantize thereof, and yet behold more blessings then these. The
Lord himself is our defense, and the God of Jacob is our protector, and yet
behold more blessings then these. We are but an handefull in respect of all
other nations, and yet all other nations stand in awe of us, because we are in
safety under the shadow of the wings of the Lord, and in y^ mercy of y^ most
highest we shall not miscarrie, and y^^ behold more blessings thenith ese: We
need not to go t^^^ jerusalem with Sa^a the queen of the South to hear the
wisdom of Solomon for we have at home with us great st^re of sage Salomons,
prudent Prop^^^tes, preaching Prelates, literace Leg^^^s, and yet ^sholde more
blessings then these. We can go to no Market in this part of Ailgna, but we
shall have gre^^^t or^ of ^^^de, both for our souls, and bodies, so
plentifully is the word preached am^ngst us and yet Ailgna how (...) thou
for all these benefits: Nay so great is thine unthankfulness, that it causes
those which are affraide least the day of thy visitation be at hand to shed
great abundaunce of tears. And this is the first thing O Iuuenis which
causes me to be sorry now, when thou say other men would sing.

The second thing which turns my melody into mourning is this: because I see
such negligence in a great many of Magistrates (I had almost said in all
Magistrates) that sin is left unpunished, and offenses are almost never
called in question.

Money which is gotten by usury is counted lawful gaynes, and men do almost
make an occupation thereof, so that I ^^^nke it will come to pass (if there be
no^ speedye reformation wrought) that y^ Scriuiners shall spend one penny, nay,
one pound more by year, for making indencures for those which shall be bound
prentices to the usurers. The adulterer braggeth amongst his companyons, that
although he have watched all night, yet in the morning came he to his purpose:
and so makes he no conscience of sin, but is rockt on sleep in the cradle
of security. The Papists lie hissing like a snake under the green herbs of
courteous countenaunces, and there is no man to put the^ to flight, so that the
godly may still look when they shall be stunge. The extorcioner wresteth and
wringeth, to the end he may augment his gains. The rich man stretches
himself upon his bed of euorie, he eats the fattest of the flock, and the
calfe out of the stall, he drynketh wine in bowls, and sings to the sound
of the instrument, and regards not the afflictions of Jacob, nor cares not
for the calamities of Israel. The poor cries, but he hears them not, the
fatherless complayneth, but he stops his ears, and the woeful wayling of
the widow does not once make him wagge. He joins house to house, and land
to land, so that the poor has not an hoale wherein to hyde his head. And are
these all the abominations which are to be found in Ailgna* no, no: there
be thousands more then these. Our Sabbothes are profaned, the word of God
is obstinately refused, the preachers thereof are shamefully abused, and yet
behold more abominations then these. The name of God is blasphemed,
Maiestrates are disobeyed, good laws are violated, and yet behold more
abominations then these. Ahab will have Naboths vineyard, because it is good
to make a Garden of herbs thereof. The rich man will have the poor man's
possession, because it lies in his way, and the covetous man will not suffer
the needy to dwell nigh him, because he can not abide the smell of his smoke,
and yet behold more abominations then these. Our fasting is turned into
feasting, our mourning into mumming, our praying into playing, our alms deeds
into all misdeedes. High and low, rich and poor, one with another are lulled
on sleep in the bed of security, and no man thinks on the day to come.
But it fares with us as it did with the men of Jerusalem, for as they did not
think upon the time of their visitation, until they were swallowed up of
their enemies: no more do we think upon the judgments of God pronounced
against impenite^t sinners, god grant we may not taste thereof as they sometime
did. Nay furthermore, as they did interpret every sign and token which God
did send amongst them to call them home, for the best, even so do we. When
they saw blasing Stars and other ^^erie impressions in the air, they did
ascribe it unto nature. When Ananias went up and down in Jerusalem, crying
continually vae Jerusalem, vae Jerusalem: Woe be to Jerusalem, woe be to
Jerusalem, they did at tribute it unto madnis. When as the brazen gate of the
temple which twenty men were not able to open, did (...) open of it own
accord, they say de: it was a ^^ken of good luck.

But yet at length their enemies came and did cast a ba^^cke about them; and
besieged them in on every side, they bent their force against them, and erecred
engynes at every coruer: so that at length they rased their walls, they sacked
their city, they turned their towers topsie ^^ruye, and made Jerusalem an
heap of stones. Whereby it came to pass that the inhabit a^ is thereof had in
stead of wealth, want and woe: in stead of plenty, pain and ponertie* in
stead of store, stark nothing: and they which bought Christ for thirty
penee, were themselves sold thirty for a penny.

A ruin most ruthful, a case most careful, an hap most hard, a subversion
most sudden, a desolation deserved, a destruction most due, and example most
excellent for all men to be ware by, that they do not commit the like sins,
least they taste of the same sour sauce. I marvel we can so often hear with
our ears what destruction fell upon Sodom and Gomorra for their sins, and
that we will never be warned by them to forsake sin. The earth under our feet
has shaken, because the Lord was wroth with us, and the he auens from above
have foretold our destruction, unless we repent. Our sins are many in
number; and great are our iniquities, and our offenses are gone over our heads,
and are become a burden to. heavy for us to bear. I am no Prophet, nor the
son of a prophet, I am no dreamer of dreams, neither yet an interpreter of
the same, I was not nourished up in Nayoth, nor yet did I eat bread in mount
Ephraim amongst the chrildren of the prophets: and yet when the figtree and all
other trees do shoot out their buds, it is a token that summer is nere, and
when the fields are white, it is a sign that harvest is at hand: so when
sin is ripe, a man may easily judge that it shall be cut down. Wherefore I say
once again O Ailgna repent. These, these are the things O Iunenis, which do
procure my meditation, whereat thou do so much marvel.


Iu. You have said well sir, me think this was even a good sermon, you might
have kept this till an none you had come to Church, and so might you have done
well to have preached it, amongst your parishioners in the pulpit. But now I
pray you what is your question you said you would ask me, despatche I pray
you, it is time I were gone, I sit upon nettles till I come at vbique.


Min. Soft sir I pray you, for soft ^ire makes sweetemalt.


Iu. And let me be gone sir, I desire you, for delay breeds danger.


Min. The hasty man never wanceth woe.


Iu. And yet it is good striking while the iron is whote.


Min. But haste makes waste.


Iu. And yet the tide ta^rieth for no man.


Min. Yet is it better to lose your tide, then to put both body and soul in
danger: But now to my question. I pray you sir, what business have you at
vbique.


Iu. For promise sake I will resolve your question. I mean: first to hear
divine service, then after dinner I will have a cast at dancing, that done, I
will have one bout at footbal, then perchance I shall be somewhat whote, and then
I mean to toss the pot, till perhaps I shall be thrice out, that is, I
shall have both my money out of my purse, my wit out of my head, and all the
drink out of the pot. Then perhaps if I do reserve any money unspent, I will
see what melody a pair of bones will make, if I can get any company, as I hope
I shall not miss but have some and that good store.


Min. Dancing, dicing, drunkenness, footeball play, marie sir, here will be a
Sabboath day spente with a witness. Here will be work for the Devil, his
damme, his eldest son, and one of his household servants.


Iu. Why so I pray you sir? not one whitte the more for this, for these be
good exercises, and the Devil is seldom wont to set me^ on work in that which
is good.


Min. Good quoth you, so are the en^icements unto sin good, so is robbery
and co^^^ousnes good, so is the abuse of gods benefices good, so is the
pretense to do mischief good, if these things be good.


Iu. Not so sir, for that does not follow: but because you seem to be one of
these busibodies which cannot abide dancing, I will see what you can say
against it, for my business does not sus^er me to stand to defend the other.


Min. I am very desireus to enter that cumbate, but. I pray you first set
down some grounds for the same, and I will try what I can do at the
overthrowing thereof.


Iu. I am content, in defense therefore of danncing I say, that it is a good
recreation, and I do think that this were sufficient for the defense of it,
if I should say nothing else.


Min. When as the Spider (having taken a sore displasure at the swallowe,
because she did eat the sli^s which are her meat) had hung up her thin
coppewebbe in the doors through which the swallowe was wont to fly, she
thought she had made her work enough for one while: yet the swallowe coming
after her accustomed manner, did fly quite through, which thing did not a little
anger the poor spider, because she was not as well able ^^ catch her as
every little fly. So fares it with you, you think you have se^^ee work
enough to do, when as you have hunge up this slender coppewebbe in my way,
which is your strong reason, which you bring to defend dancing withal,
yet perhaps you shall speed as well as did the Spider. I pray you therefore
answer me to this question. You say that dancing is a recreation, whether
therefore does it recreate the body or the mind?


Iu. It does recreate both, and for that cause men's servants having labored
hard all the week, do use to dance upon the Sundays.


Min. You say that dancing does recreate both body and mind, if therefore I
shall prove that it does recreate neither of both, you will think your self
to be in the backhouse ditch.

Can you de^^ne recreation unto me, or do you know what recreation means?


Iu. Not very well, I pray you therefore tell me what it is?


Min. In this you bewraye your grosenesse and ignorance, that you will say you
cannot tell what: You will say that dancing is a good recreation when as you
know not what recreation means. But it appears that this bolt which you
have already shot, came never out of your own quiver, Recreation is a
second making, or a making again of that thing which was once made, and by a
metaphore we call it a refreshing of that thing which is wearied with much
labor, (if it be applied unto the body): but if it be applied unto the mind,
we say it is a renewing of the mind being worn with much labor and study,
great cares, and unmeasurable sorrow. This definition being thus set down, I
come to that which you have said before, and I will first prove (if God shall
assist me) that dancing is no recreation of the body, secondely that it is
no recreation of the mind. If dancing were a recreation for the body, then
should it refreshe the same being weary, it should make nimble the joints,
strengthen the legs, make soft the feet, and finally, it should bring the
body being out of temper, into good temperature: but it does none of all
these things, therefore dancing is no recreation for the body. My mayor
proposition is certain and sure, for it is grounded upon the definition of
recreation, as for the minor it is no hard matter for me to prove it,
sithence common experience does tell us that it is true.

For dancing is so far from refreshing the body being weary, that it makes
the same more weary. For I have heard tell of those which have daunced one
half day for pleasure, and have laid in bed two whole days for pain. Call
you this a recreation? if this be your recreation much good eat you with it, I
will none. I do omit to speak how many have been lamed with dancing,
which in their youth have bin such dauncers that they were able to leap over
logges, but in their age have scante been able to step over strawes. I will
not say what incurable diseases have risen in many men's bodies, through the
extreme heat wherinto they have cast themselves in time of dancing. I need
not to tell what agues and shakings men have caught by dancing, so that they
have almost hin undone by it: and yet for sooth dancing is a good recreation
for the body. What leauines, sleepines, and siuggishnes does dancing procure:
How many men's servants being set to work, do after their dauncinge days
lie snorting in hedges, because they are so weary that they cannot work:
Whereby their masters do reap but small gaynes. If masters (especially
those which have dauncers to their servants) did well consider with them
selves what great discommodities do arise unto them by their servants
dancing, they would give the ministrels money to hold their peace faster,
then the dauncers would give them money to pipe, and yet they should be no
leesers by it at the years end.

But now will I prove in a word or two that dancing is no recreation for
the mind. All Philosophers do grant this in general, yt temperatura animise,
quitur temperaturam corporis: that the temperature of the mind, does follow
the temperature of the body. Which words do serve very much to the
overthrowing of your position. For if so be it the body be made sluggish, and
sleepie with dancing, and altogether unapt to do any thing, (as I have before
sufficiently proved) then must the mind needs be brought into like case. So
that you see, that whereas you said that dancing was a recreation both for
body and mind, I have proved it to be neither a recreation for the body, nor
yet for the mind.


Iu. You have made a fair speak of it, it were great pity but you were shut
up in a Cloister amongst Monks, you can lead such a sober life.


Min. If I could not lead a more sober life then they. I might well enough
dance, for truly the sins which amongst them are committed, do far pass
your dancing, and yet is it badde enough.

They are not sober and holy, because they seem so to be. They do wash the
outside of the cup and platter, but within they are full of deadly poison.

They are like painted sepulchers, which on the outside do seem fair and
beautiful: but in wardly they are full of dead men's bones, and all filthiness.


Iu. You are out of your text sir, I pray you return to it again. Will you
then admit no recreation at all for those which are labourors, and take great
pains all the whole week in their vocation:


Min. Yes that I will, and that such a recreation as shall be acceptable in the
sight of God, and laudable in the sight of the godly.


Iu. And I pray you sir what is that?


Min. When a man has kept the first part of the fourth commandment, which is
this, that he must labor all the whole six days, and do all that he has
to do, let him keep the seventh day which is the Sabboath day holy, unto the
Lord. That is, `let him rest from bodily labor, and let him attend unto Gods
hestes, let him behave him self as a true Christian ought, and as it becomes
him which will be a good keeper and sanctifier of the Sabbath day: so shall
he find recreation both for his body and also for his mind.


Iu. Nay not so, me think ye cannot prove, that by this either the body or
mind is recreated.


Min. Yes truly both of them, for first and foremost it is a great recreation
to a weary body to have rest, for as the old proverb goes: Fessum quies
plurimum inuat, rest is no small help to a weary man. And truly this rest he
shall have, if he keep the Sabboath according to gods holy will and pleasure.

Again (if you do well remember) I said even now, that that does recreate
ye body, which makes it more apt and able to do that which it ought: And
truly rest does this. For as we do vnbende our bows when as they have bin
long bent, to the end they may shoot more strongly when as we do bend them
again: so laboring me^ do grant some rest to their bodies, yt when me^ go to
work again, they may both be stonger to labor, and also endure longer. As
for the mind, who sees not that it takes great recreation by keeping the
Sabbath day aright.

And to the end I may better prove this to be true: let us briefly consider
what ought to be the exercise of a Christian upon that day, wherein he
rests from bodily labor. He must repair unto the Church, where all the
faithful are gathered together, to offer up their sacrifice, even that
spiritual sacrifice which is spoken of by the prophet David in the 50.
Psalm: Which is praise, prayer, and thanksgiving. This done, he must join
with them in prayer unto the Lord, lifting up clean hands toward the holy
heavens, where dwells God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Then
must he give ear unto that which is red and taught by the minister, he must
hear, mark, and learn, so much as he possibly ca^. If opportunity shall
serve, he must receive the Sacraments of the body and blood of our Savior
Christ, and that woorthilye, and thankefully.

He must meditate upon that which he has heard, when he returns home
again. He must visit the sick, he must clothe the naked, he must help
those which are in need and necessity, (if he be able,) he must procure
concord where discord has been: finally ^ee must bewail his sins, and be
heartily sorye for that which is past, and he must determine with him self
that he will never commit the same again.

Who so does these things, shall no doubt have his mind well recreated. For
when a man is wearied with sin, when he sees death and destruction before
his face, due unto him for his sins, (whereby it comes to pass y^ he is even
swalowed up of sorrow,) what greater joy can chance unto him then to hear
out of the word of God, (which is read every: Sabboath) these sweet
comfortes,

Come unto me all ye that traueile and be heavy laden, and I will refreshe
you.

Whosoever shall believe he shall be saved.

Who so ever shall believe shall not be confounded, and many hundredth more then
these.


Iu. Will you then permit those men which have labored sore all the whole
week, to have no pastime upon the sunday?


Min. Better pastime then that which I have spoken of can they not use,
neither can they possibly pass the time after a better sort, for by such
pastime shall they redeem the time, which they have lewdly let pass.


Iu. Yea but will you not permit them to use some sport or play upon sundays,
as dancing bowling and such like?


Min. You harp still upon that one string, which methinkes makes no good
harmony. I can in no case permit that which god has not permitted in his law,
for if I should add any thereto, great plagues should be added unto me. I am no
pope, I cannot grant men licenses to sin.


Iu. But how do you prove out of the commandments, that we may not dance
upon the sundays.


Min. We must keep holy the Sabboath day, therefore we must not dance upon
the Sabboath day.


Iu. This agrees as well as if I should say, there is a bridge at Rochester,
therefore there is a barge at Billingsgate.


Min. Not so neither, for mine argument hangs better together then so.


Iu. How do you prove it then?


Min. Marie sir thus, Dancing does dishallowe the Sabboath day, therefore if
we must keep holy the Sobboath day* w^e must not dance upon the Sabboath.


Iu. How prove you that dancing does dishallowe the Sabboath day?


Min. It is easy to prove. All vanity ^^th dishallow the Sabboath day, but
dancing is vanity, therefore dancing does dishallowe the Sabboath day.


Iu. You are still rapping me upon the lips with your logic, reason me
coldly after the custom of the country.


Min. In deed meethinke I do so, for my reasons ^e so cold that they have
almost made you ^rease, for all that heat which ye were in eue^ now, when you
begun to defend dancing, ^o that you do now gadde from your text.


Iu. Good God, I do much meruell why you do speak so much against
daunching: dancing has been used in your fathers time, and in your fathers
fathers time, and will be used when you are both dead and rotten.


Min. Yea marie sir, there you hi^te the nail upon the head, there g^eth the
hare away. This is even like the reason which you did of late reci^e. As if all
things were good which were committed in the time of our forefathers. Adam our
first father disobeyed God, is therefore disobedience good* David (who lived
many hundred years ago) did ^^e with Ber sabee, and caused Urias to be
slain, are therefore adultery and murder good* Judas be^rayed his master one
thousand five hundred and odd years a go, is therefore treason tolerable*
Absolon rebelled against his father long ago, is therefore rebellion
commendable* You spoke even now of cold reasoning, but me thinks this reason
is so cold that it has at all no force. But in this point you do not
degenerate from the Papists, who as they did suffer men to use all kind of
sensuality, so did they never find fault with this same vanity, I mean
dancing. As they reasoned from customs and antiquity, even so do you. But
we must not re^garde what has been done in times past, we must mark
diligently what God has commanded us to do, who was before all times. If the
Magistrate should govern as his fathers have done before him, he should
oftentimes do injury to the fatherless, and oppress the poor widow. If
the preacher should always preach as his auncest ours have done, he should
sometime deliver false doctrine. If we should live as our forefathers did,
we should most times wander out of the way of virtue. Which thing Chremes in
Terence* well considering, he burst out into these words: Quam m^lta iniusta
ac praua moribus fiunt, many unjust and wicked things do come to pass through
custom.


Iu. I pray you sir, are you wiser then your forefathers, do you loath that
which they did like*


Min. If wisdom did come unto men by nature, or if knowledge were an
inheritance like unto lands, which did discende unto the son in like
quantity as his father had the same: then could not we say that we are wiser
then our fathers: but for as much as wisdom, discretion, and knowledge are
gifts y^ come from above, eue^ from the father of lights, with whom there is no
change nor shadow of change (as Saint James does testify): we may boldly
say we are wiser then our fathers, if it have pleased God to bestow upon us
greater store of knowledge and wisdom then he gave unto them. For wisdom
is not proper unto gray hairs, so that all those which have gray hayres must
of necessity be wise, and they only can be wise, and that they can always
be wise: neither is knowledge knit up in white locks.


Iu. Well then sir, I perceive you will be wiser then your forefathers: but
what say you to our Justices will you be also wiser then are they* It appears
that they can like of dau^cing, else would they never grant any licenses to
minstrels.


Min. I will in no case compare my self unto the^ in wit, for comparisons are
odious: again, I know that they are called to such high degree, because of
that talent of wit and knowledge, which God has bestowed upon them above
their brethren, and I beseech God daily to increase the same, that they may be
answerable in all points to so high a calling. But now as touching these
lic^nces which they do grant to minstrels, I answer, that sure I am, that
whatsoever they have done heretofore, there will none of them (especially such
as do fear Bod, as I hope they do all) hereafter grant any license (if they
do grant any)* but they will put in this prouiso, that if the said minstrell
to whom this license is granted, shall pype or fidle upon the Sabboath day, or
any other day, to the end he may procure any lascivious dancing: or if he
shall pipe at any unlawful time of the night, to the end he may keep men's
servants out of their masters houses: that then the license, granted shall
be altogether void and of none effect.


Iu. In all this you do not answer directly to my question, I pray you why
have Justices hereto fore granted lice^ces to minstrels if they did not think
that dancing was lawful*


Min. Truly my friend they did not grant licenses to minstrels because they
thought that dancing was lawful: but they did grant them to the end they
might use such sober music as might delight the ears of the^ godly, and
also such as has been used amongst the holy fathers of old.


Iu. But now if you will take away dancing, what rejoicing shall men have, for
in dancing men do rejoice.


Min. I will in no case admit lascivious dancing, and yet will I grant, that
men must and ought to rejoice: but yet this rejoicing must not be in dancing,
nor in any such lewd pastime, but it must be such a manner of rejoicing as is
spoken of by the Prophet Jeremy in his ninth Chapter, where be induces the
Lord himself, speaking on this wise: Let not the strong man rejoice in his
strength, nor the wise man in his wisdom, nor the rich man in his riches,
but let every man rejoice in this, that he knows me to be the Lord, which
do equity, justice, and judgment.

This is that rejoicing which we must use, and if dancing were such a kind of
rejoicing, I would grant unto you liberty to dance, not only on the
Sabboath day, but also all the whole week. Again, Saint Paul writing unto
the Phillippians in his 4. Chapter of the same Epistle, writes thus. Rejoice
in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. Where he tells the godly
where in they ought to rejoice, not in a bawdy pype or tabor, but in the Lord.
If you will dance this dance, not only I but all the Godly will dance with
you.


Iu. Marie sir then God help us if we must be so strait tied. I perceive you
would have us to live like Saints: But I have heard an old proverb, that he
which is a Saint when he is young, shall be a Devil when he is old.


Min. A more diuelishe proverb could not y^ dwell himself have invented. But I
tell thee plainly Iuuenis, that unless men do endeavor them selves to live
like Saints, (that is, to lead an holy and vncorrupt life) when they be young,
they may chance to prove devils in deed. For both common experience, and also
that sage saying of the prudente Poet Horace tell us this, that: quo semel est
imbutarec^ns seruabit od^rem testa diu, What savor so ever the caske has when
he is new, he will retain the same a long space: so that we must study to
live virtuously in our youth, else we may chance to be vicious in our age,
and then beware that we become not very Diuelles as did Judas the traitor.


Iu. Tushe tushe, we will have our swindg while we be young, age will come soon
enough, and it will make us forsake all these sportes: and then will we be
sober and virtuous.


Min. Beside this that age has his proper vices, yet does neither age nor
nature bring virtues upon their back. For virtues are habits, which are gotten
by many actions of our own, so that you are greatly deceived in so saying.


Iu. Well well, dancing is used every where upon Sundays, and will be used
whether you will or no. Again, why are you so scrupulous and curious about
dancing, for I am sure the Church wardens of vbique (upon whose oath it lies
to for bid the same if it were unlawful) will suffer both the minstrels to
play, and us to dance upon Sundays, so we do not dance in time of service.


Min. If you remember your self, you promised to lay such groundworkes for
dancing, as should be sufficient to uphold the same: but you have here set
up such a couple of shoores to stay dancing, as I do think will make me sweat
before I shall shoue them away. Your first shoore or stay is the lewdenes of
the multitude, the second, the negligence of Church wardens and sworn men.
You have now paid it home. Well, have a lift at your first shoore, which is
this, dancing is used every where, therefore is it lawful for you to use the
same. It is written in Exodus 23. 2. That we must not follow a multitude to do
evil. Which place makes much against you, because you see that it is no
sufficient excuse for us when we do evil, to say the multitude does so: and
doubtless to dance as we do dance in these days is evil, therefore must we
not dance, because the multitude daunceth.

If your reason which you bring were sufficient to defend dancing, then
surely God should have dealt very unjustly with the men of the old world in
destroying the^ for their sins which were most horrible, because there was
not one of them which could not have alleged for him self, that they sinned
every where.

If your defense were strong enough, then surely the Sodomites and Gomorreans
had great wrong, for they might every one of them have said for him self
that their sin was universal, and did reign in every corner and street of
their city. If your position might stand for a principle, then surely Moses
did the Israelites great wrong to break the tables of the covenant, because
they committed Idolatry, for all of them might have said that they did eat
and drink through the whole host, and when their panches were well stuffed,
they rise up to play.

They might have said generally, that they consented to turn their glory,
into the similitude of a Calfe that eats hay. They might have said, that
with one mind and one mouth, they badde Aaron make them gods of silver, and
gods of gold, to go before them, for as for that Moses, which brought the^
out of Egypt, they knew not where he was become.

If your reason were sound, why did the Lord plague Jerusalem for Idolatry,
for their supers^ition, for their abominations: for without doubt they could
have said that it fared so every where.

But this was no sufficient excuse for them, but the old world was destroyed
with the diluge of water, the Sodomites were brent up with fire from heaven,
the Israelites were sore plagued, and Jerusalem came to a shamful end, this
notwithstanding that their sins were committed every where.

No more can we allege for our selves, that dancing and lasciuiousnes is
lawefull, because it is used every where, for it is contrary to the will and
word of God as were all their sins, wherefore that shoore begins to
shake. It is not sufficient for us to do that which other men do, unless
they do that which ought to be done. We must not do that which is done,
unless that be done which God has commanded to be done. Therefore away with
that foolish answer, which men do use most commonly to make when as they
are reprehended for their faults, they do so in all places.

When as God had by a mighty hand and stretched out arm, delivered his
people (even the sons of Jacob and Joseph) out of the land of Egypt, he
straytelie commanded them, that they should not do as they had seen the
Egyptians do, neither should they do according to the Exodus 18. 3
customs of the land of Canaan, whether they went to possess it: but they
should do according to his judgments. Thou shall not do that which seems
good in thine own eyes, but do that only which I command thee. Upon which
words, Chrysostom in his oration against the Jews, says thus: Of a truth,
that which is done according to the will of God, although it seem
displeasant: yet is it altogether pleasant and acceptable in the sight of God.
Contrariwise, whatsoever is done beside the word of God, and otherwise then
he would have it done, though it be as a thing acceptable to God: yet it is
of all other the worst and most wicked. Out of all which places we gather
this, that though dancing or any other exercise whatsoever, have bin used
never so long. or though it be used in never so many places: yet if it be
contrary to the word and will of God, and forbidden by the same, it is
detestable, and of all men to be eschewed.


Iu. Yea but how do you prove that dancing is forbidden by the word of God.


Min. We are commanded by the word of God to use sobriety, therefore we are
forbidden by the word of God to use laciuious dancing.


Iu. Yet again, here is a wise reason. The cowlestaffe stands in the corner,
therefore the Pope is at Rome: my dagger hangs at my back, therefore my
staff is in my hand.


Min. In deed (Iuuenis) your reasons have in them no reason, but I will prove
that my reasons are framed according to reason.


Iu. Do so then I pray you, but the Doctors doubt whether you can do it or no.


Min. My reason then is this. We are commanded by the word of God, to use
sobriety, therefore we are forbidden by the word of God, to use laciuious
dancing. I prove it thus. Whenever any virtue is commanded, all vices
which are contrary to that virtue are forbidden: as for examples sake, when
men are commanded to practice liberality, they are forbidden to use
covetousness, or to embrace prodig al^tie, and when we are commanded to love
truth, we are commanded to hate and detest theft, etc. Therefore when as we
are commanded to use sobriety, we are forbidden to use lascivious dancing.


Iu. Yea, but how do you prove this, you are as far from the matter as you
were.


Min. Lascivious dancing is a vice with is opposite to the virtue sobriety,
therefore, if when the virtue is commanded, the vice be forbidden, sobriety
being commanded, lascivious dancing is forbidden.


Iu. You are always wrangling with me with your Logic, if I should suffer
you to choppe logic at your pleasure, you would make me believe that the
Moon were made of green cheese, and that the crow were white: but I pray you
sir, remember your promise.


Min. My promise (as I remember) was this, y^ I would remove those 2. shoores
which you had set up to stay dancing* the former whereof I think is quite
plucked away, and I mean the other shall follow him, which is this, the
Churchwardens of Vbique do not forbid men to (...) save only in time of
divine service, therefore may you lawfully dance upon the Sabboath day, so it
be not in time of divine service. A more rotten shoore then this could not
have been set up, unto a more crasie staff then this could you not ^^and, and
a more bale reason to prove your matter to be good, could you not have
brought. Is it therefore lawful for you to do what you list, because the
Churchwardens do neglect their duty, not regard their oath, not consider
what burden lies upon their backs? Shall you be excused by their sin? will
you be lewd because they are lowsse? Shall this be a sufficient excuse for
you in the day of judgment, when as standing before the judgment seat of
God, the breach of the Sabboath day shall be laid to your charge, to say,
your Churchwardens suffered you so to ^o^* Nay nay, you shall bear your own
offenses, and they shall be plagued for their iniquities. If your reso^ were
forceable, then was the idolatry of the Israelites tolerable, because Aaron
who was their priest suffered them so to do. If your argument were strong in
(...), the^ did the Israelites well to crucify Christ, because the high
Priests and Elders consented thereto. For it is al one to say, Aaron gave his
consent to make the Israelites a Calfe, and therefore is Idolatry good: as to
say, the Churchwardens do suffer men to dance upon the Sabboath day,
therefore is dancing lawful upon the Sabboath day.


Iu. By this you seem to burden Churchwardens and sworn men with perjury,
because they do suffer us to dance upon the Sabbath day.


Min. In deed if they do willingly permit you to dance upon the Sabboath
day, without certifiyng of those which have authority to punish such
faults, they can scarsely excuse themselves of perjury.


Iu. In deed you do charge them very deeply now, but they say they are
charged no further but only to see that men do not dance in service time.


Min. Yea, but they are charged to see men keep the Sabboath day holy,
according to Gods holy will and pleasure, and they are commanded upon their
oath to present all those whom they do see to do the contrary, so that unless
they do present commen and laciuious dauncers, they can in no case excuse them
selves of perjury: for even those dauncers do break the Sabboath day, and
that grossly, as I have sufficiently proved already.


Iu. Yea but they say, if they should deal as strictly as they are commanded
by their articles, they should present them selves and you also.


Min. In truth this is their common answer, but whiles they say thus, they
are like to Saint George on horseback, who does always spur cut, but
he does not ride a mile in a moon. They are still presenting, but whiles
they may not present all, they will present none at all.

But let them take heed to themselves, for surely that God, who has said,
that he will not hold him giltles who takes his name in vain, will lay this
negligence to their charge, when as they shall stand trembling before his
judgment seat, where they can fee no Lawyer for money nor gold to plead
their case, where no shift will serve, where no brybe will be taken, where they
cannot smooth over matters with lies, for there, there, the secrets of all
hearts shall be opened. Let them not think that God is ignorant what their
doings are.

Let them not thrust them selves out of Gods favor, because they will win
man's favor. Let them not loose a great commodity, yea the greatest commodity,
because they will purchase a small commodity. Let them beware that they do
not taste of the punishment eternal, because they will save their neighbor
from that punishment which is temporal.

What shall this avail them to win the shel, and loose the egg? to win y^
saddle, and loose the horse? what avails it them to to win the whole world
and to loose their own soul: They shall be in favor with men, but they shall
have no friendeshippe with God, they shall here have pleasure, but after death
pain, here shall they have mirth and melody but when as they are gone hence,
moan and mourning, here shall they have solace and singing, but when they have
left this life, sorrow, sobbing, and sighing: here shall they have wealth, but
when death has done his message, they shall have want and woe, and all their
weal shall be away. Therefore say I once again, let them look to their oath,
let them not put them selves in hazard, because they will save other men
harmless. He that made the eye can see their doings, and he that planted the
ear can he are their counsels, and he that nurtereth the heathen, does
understand their imaginations. Let them take heed and that good heed to
themselves, non enim sapiunt si sibi non sapiunt: for they are not wise if they
do not provide for them selves.


Iu. You have said meetely well in this, but now to return to our former
talk, I marvel very much why you should disprayse dancing, sithence a great
many have gotten their wives, and that rich wives also only by dancing.


Min. The Papists in times past, and now also affirm, that ignorance was
the mother of devotion: and truly it was the best much cow that ever they did
grass, it was the most profitable opinion that ever they did hold. For by
this did they debar the simple people from reading the word, whereby it
came to pass that they could never espy out their iuglinge. But I do now see
and perceive, that ignorance was the mother of all mischief, that she was
the head welspring from whence did proceed all errors, and finally, that she
was that boole from whence did spring all those rotten branches of devilish,
detestable, and damnable herisies. For unless you had been ignorant of Gods
eternal truth, you would never have said thus.

If you knew who it is that brings marriages to pass, and knitteth men and
women together with an vndissoluble knot, which is holy wedlock, you would
never have said that many men do get their wives by dancing. It is god alone
and none but he, which coupleth both man and woman together. He it is that
has determined before the foundations of the world were laid, who those be
that shall so come together. He is able to bring to pass this his
determination without any such secondarie means as dancing.

Therefore most fond, foolish, and fantastical is the opinion of those men,
which do think that dancing was the only thing whereby they came by their
wives.

When as God did institute the first marriage in paradise, he did not send
for a pyper or ^idler, (for they were at that time vnhatched) to play, y^ Adam
might dance, and so please Euah. And is not God as well able to bring
marriages to pass without dancing, as he was the^? His arm is not shortened,
neither is his power weakened, but he is able to do as much now, as he was
able to do then.

In his hands are the hearts of all men, and he rules them as he seems
best to his godly will and pleasure.


Iu. I pray you sir, where shall young men and may dens meet together, if not
at the dancing place, and playing oak*


Min. I count him but a fool, which being destitute, will go to the dancing
place and playing oak, to choose his mate, and I take her to be but a noddie,
which lacking an husband, will thither run to look for him with whom she will
match. For first and foremost, he for his part shall chance sooner to light
upon a wild wanton, then on a mylde matrone, which will become rather a
gadding Dina, which will be running abroad to see the Country, then a sage
Sara, which will keep her self within the door of the tent, which will
become rather a careless grassehopper, then a careful amite: he shall rather
chance to choose one that will be a pasincoine then a chaste penelope: he shall
chance sooner to win an whorish Helena as did paris, the^ a virtuous Electra
as did pylades: finally, he shall chance rather to catch a faithless
Clytemnestra then a faithful philomela. Salust in his Catalinario writes, yt
Sempronia a certain laciuious and wanton woman was taught to sing and dau^ce
more elegantly the^ became an honest matron: in which place he calls these
two things the instruments of lechery. Out of which words we may well
gather this, that they are never of the chastest sort which do use laciuious
dau^cing, though I do not altogether deny, but that those which are now
modest matrons, may sometimes have been dauncers in their days.

And now as for the women, if she chance to choose her husband in the place
aforesaid, it may be that she shall sooner catch a spendall then a sparer,
she may sooner have one which shall be amongst all men rather reuyled then
reverenced: one which may be rather an aduiterous Agisthus then a faithful
Ulysses.

Gicero in his book of offices writes thus, that an honest and good man will
not dance in the market place though he might by that means come to great
possessions. And in his oration which he made after his return into the
senate, he could find no more reprochefull name to call Aulus Gabinius, his
mortal enemy by, th^n to call him Saltator Calami^ stratus, the fine dauncer.

It was objected to Lucius Aurona for a great fault, because he had dau^ced in
Asia: which thing was also cast in king deiotarus his teeth. Cicero answering
for Murena, says after this sort:

No man daunceth being sober, unless peradventure he be mad, neither in the
wilderness, neither at a moderate and honest banquet. The same Cicero vpbraydeth
unto Anthony among other his vices, dancing. Did the heathens think thus
evil of dancing, and shall not Christians think much worse of the same?

Did the heathens loath it, and shall Christians like it? did the heathens
count it as a vice, and shall Christians embrace it as a virtue?


Iu. I pray you sir then, whether shall we go to look for our wives? will
you have us love those on whom we did never look?


Min. Iuuenis, I will tell thee whither thou shall go when thou art disposed to
wedde.

Resort unto sermons, and there mark her well who^ thou shall see most usually
resort to weekly lectures, and to behave her self most Christianlike, or if
thou shall hear of any maid, which shall be have her self virtuously
toward all men, which shall be of sound religion, and which shall have the
fear of God before her eyes, her choose, all other refuse, her take, the rest
forsake. For be thou well assured, that such shall receive the blessing from
the Lord, she shall be blessed at home, and in the field, she shall be
blessed her self, and her seed after her.


Iu. I thank you sir for your good counsel: but I pray you how think you of
this, may not men dance at bridals, and upon feast days?


Min. I will answer you briefly (god willing) to both parts of this question,
and that answer which I shall make to the first, shall not be taken up at my
foot, but I will fet it out of y^ ancient father Chrysostom. who in his 56. homily
upon Genesis, when he entreats of the marriages of Jacob, says thus: You
have heard (says he) of marriages, but not of daunces, which dances he
furthermore calls devilish, in with homely he speaks much against dancing.
And amongs al other he says thus, the bridegroom and the bride are corrupted
by dancing, and all the whole family is defiled. And again, in his 48. hom.
he says, thou see marriages, but thou see no dancing, for at that time
they were not so lascivious as they be now a days. Furthermore he proceeds
to speak of the dancing of the daughter of Herodias, and he says: At this
day Christians do deliver to destruction not half their kingdom, not another
man's head, but even their own souls. And he adds, that whereas is wanton
dancing, there the Devil daunceth also with them. Here may you see what the
opinion of this holy father is concerning dancing at marriages. And as for the
second thing, whether we may not dance upon feast days, I say flatly we may
not. For if we should, we should be like to the Israelites, who sat down to
eat and drink, and again rose up to play: whereby we should provoke Gods
wrath And indignacion against us. and for as much as it is the common custom
in vbique, to dance and hoigh upon our Idol feast days, let us beware that
the like plagues do not befall us which befell them.


Iu. Will you have men to come together to make merry, and will you not suffer
them to be merry, to dance and sport themselves.


Min. Such myrthe will I in no case admit. Tobias called his friends to a
feast, but we do not read that they did dance after dinner: and let us
follow the example of that godly man. If we be merry, let us give ear unto
y^ exhortation of Saint James, who bids him that is afflicted, pray, and him
that is merry, bids he sing Psalms. Let us therefore make merry in singing
of Psalms, and Himnes, and spiritual Songs, praising and ^auding God always.

Pythagoras did gather by the foot of Hercules, how huge his whole body was:
and we may gather by that one dance which the daughter of Herodias did dance
upon her uncle and fathers birth day, what mischief comes to pass by
dancing at feasts.

Job in his 21. chap. 11. verse, says that the wicked run after the Tabour
and Flute, and he says, that the sons of the wicked do lead daunces*
Upon which words M. Calu^^ writes after this forte^ It is true (says ^ee)
that the Flute and Tabour, and such like things, are not to be condemned
simply of their o^^ie nature* but only in respect of men's ab^sing of them, for
most commonly they pervert take good use of them. For the tabour and pype does
no sooner sound to make men merry, but there is always lightly some vanity,
I say not superstitious, but beastly. For behold men are so carried way, as
they cannot sport themselves with moderate mirth, but the fling themselves into
the air, as if they would leap out of themselves. This then Job meant to note
a cursed mirth, and a mirth that God condemned. Whereby we ought to take
warning to restrain our selves from such loose and wanton pastimes: but ^et
us rather advisedly restrain our selves, and set God always before our eyes,
to the end he may so bless our mirth* and we so use his benefits, as we
may never cease to travel up to heaven ward.

Thus you see, that it behooves us to apply our mirthe to this end: namely,
that there may be a melody sounding in us whereby the name of God may be
blessed, and glorified in our Lord Jesus Christ.


Iu. Well sir, all that which I have hitherto said, has been but as a
^leebite, but I have that yet in store where* with I can easily pervert all y^
answers which you have hitherto made ^s you have hitherto dis^r^^ed dancing
by scriptures* so* will I prove out of the Scripture th^^ dancing is lawful,
for I have red that David daunced, and he was an holy man, therefore why may
not we also dance?


Min. In deed David did dance I do not deny, but yet after I shall have
said a few words, I will let you see that this can be no sufficient warrant
for your dauncings. As it is lawful to sing, and we do use singing to give
thanks to God, and to celebrate his praises: so also by a moderate dancing,
we may testify the joy and mirth of the mind. Such a kind of dancing was
that which the maid us did use, when they did celebrate with songs and
daunces the victory of David over Goliath. Such a kind of dancing was that
which Myriam the sister of Moses, and other women did dance, when as they sung
a song of victory after that Pharao and his hoaste was drownued in the sea.
And such was that* dance which David daunced before the ark of the Lord.
But yet none of all these do serve for your purpose, for their dau^ces were far
unlike to yours with you do now use. For their daunces were sage and sober, but
yours are light and laciuious: their daunces were mild and moderate, but
yours wild and wanton and they made no mixture of sexes in their daunces, but
the men daunced by them selves, and the women by themselves: but you in your
daunces must have women, or else the market is marred.

Which thing is intolerable, because that, that thing is an intiser and
prouoker unto wantounes and lust. Myriam the siser of Moses; daunced not with
young men, but a part by her self amongst women. Neither did David dance
among women: and the maidens which celebrated his victory; daunced by them
selves, and not among men. Wherefore you see, that this can be now a^^antise
for your dancing, that you read of those in holy Scripture which did dance,
because your daunces are in no point liken unto theirs, as I have said before.

For their daunces were a moderate motion of the body, which served to set
forth and express the joys of the mind, but you in your daunces do friske
and fling like wild coltes. And in you is verified almost that saying of
Faustus in Mantuane, which he uttered concerning the lasciuiousnes of the
people of his time.

Rusticagens, nullagenus art domabile, semper
Irrequietum animal, gaudet sudore peracto,
Mane sacrafesta (quando omnibus otia) luce
Ipsa otiac fa^^is impatiens epulatur, and implet
Ingluniem, audita properat tibicine advlmum.
Hic fury, hic saltufertur bouis instar adaras.
Q^^m^^str^s versar^ne^^^, and vome^e, terr^^^*
Calcibus ob^^^is, and inerti mole fatigat, Ac fe^^t and ^^t a Baccho fai^t
orgia luce, Vociferans, ridens, saliens, and poc^la siccan^*
The clow^^ she country people rude, which art can neither rule^or tame,
And eke the unruly creature which no skill can reform, or frame,
In sweat do does take a pleasure great.
On holy day (the service done)
When others rest and quiet are, to banqueting with speed they run:
Because that hunger they detest,
And idleness can not digest.
The dinner done when pipe does play unto the Elm in haste they go,
Here do they rage, they friske they fling, they scipe and leap often to and fro,
As the ox which at the aulcer stands
And fears still the priest his hands.
That ground (which wickedness is thought) with plough or ^ake to ouerturne,
With heavy heels and weight most rude they often time do ^eate and spurn.
And all the day to the drunkardes God whom Bacchus they do call by name
Great feasts they keep, with laughters loud,
with cries, and shouts, and hallows main:
And still they trow^e about the cup, Till all dri^^ be quite drunk up.
Again, your daunces and the daunces of those holy men: and women do differ
both in respect of the cause, and also in respect of y^ end. For they dau^ced
because they had received great blessings at the hands of the Lord, and
because they would set forth his praise: but you dance because you have
obtained your wicked purposes, and because you will entise others to naughtines.


Iu. Methinkes by you, you would have men to dance alone without women, there
would be a wise piece of work, how can we dance so?


Min. By this you bewraye your self what you do seek for in dancing, even to
lay baits for those with whom you do dance.


Iu. Perhaps you said truer there then you were aware off. But well I can not
tell, there were never so many whoores and thieves as there have been since
dauncinge was so much left.

For when as dauncinge was used, then men and women came abroad, and now they
creep into corners, either to filtch or else to play the naughtipackes.


Min. You have said fare, and fare ^al your heart. I remember M. Latimer in one
of his sermons makes mention of an old man, who being asked by the kings
Commissioners, what was the cause (as he thought) of Good win sands, he
answered, the building of Tenterden Steeple, for he said there were no sands
there before it was builded.

And truly I may well compare your talk to his answer. I pray you, is the
absenting of menselues from dancing, the cause of theft and who oredome, or is
that same natural corruption, which raineth most chiefly in the hearts of
those which are most set upon dancing, the cause thereof? And where as you
say there were never so many whoores and thieves as there ^e in these days,
when as there is so little dancing, I say you are greatly deceived in that,
for there were ^^uer so many of that stamp, as there were in those days, when
as they would dance even at the Church door, For where do lewd persons so
over meet together, ^^ where have they a more convenient place to meet
together, then at commen dancing places? And where may noughtie packes better
obtain their wicked purposes then when as they do dance till midnight?


Iu. Will you gaynestande me in all things? what say you to maygames, will
not they down with you? me thinks it is good that we should dau^ce, when as
we see all things so pleasant in May.


Min. If you do think that I will better like of your Maygames then I do of
other your common dauncinges, which you do commonly use, you are much
deceived, and you have caught the staff by the wrong end. For I am so far
from liking well thereof, that I can like better of your common daunces, and yet
the liking which I have thereof is but a little. For the abuses which are
committed in your maygaymes are infinite. The first whereof is this, that you
do use to attire men in woman's apparel, whom you do most commenly call
maymarrions, whereby you infringe that straight commandment which is given
in Deuteronomy. 22. 5. That men must not put on women's apparel for fear of
enormities. Nay, I my self have seen in a may gaime a troop, the greater
part whereof has been men, and yet have they been attyred so like unto women,
that their faces being hid (as they were in deed) a man could not discern
them from women. What an horrible abuse was this? what abominable sins might
have here upon ensued?

The second abuse, which of all other is the greatest, is this, that it has
been toulde that your morice dauncers have daunced naked in nets: what
greater entisement unto naughtines, could have been devised? The third abuse,
is, that you because you will loose no time) do use commonly to run into
woods in the night time, amongst maidens, to fet vows, in so much, as I have
heard of ten maidens which went to fet May, and nine of them came home with
child.


Iu. Belike they left the tenth for the person, because they would deprive him
of none of his right.


Min. What was their pretense herein I cannot tell, but sure I am, the fact was
most abominable. But are these all the abuses which do follow your may
games? nay, nay, there be many more then these.

What mere madness is this, that a man whom God has endued with wit and
reason, should put on a noddies coat, and feign him self to be a fool,
and to be desticute of both these most precious gifts? does he not think
that if the Lord should deal with him in Justice, that he does deserve to
be made a fool against his will, which plays the fool so willingly? What a
shame, nay what a sin is it for him, who will be angry with that man which
shall not call him a Christian: to play the part of a devil, who is an utter
enemy to Christ and al Christians?

But truly these two persons, I mean your fool and your devil, do make
manifest what you are when you use such wicked exercises.

By your fool (who is most commenly amongst the thickest) men do plainly
see, that all the company are but fools: and by your devil you do manifestly
declare, that you do follow the devil and not God, so long as you are so
idly occupied. And this is to be noted that your devil does always lead
the dance.

Many more are the vanities which are used in your maygames, but time: will
not permit me to repeat them up. Yet this I say, that they are altogether
so vain, that the godly may pray thus, and use these words of the Prophet
David, when soever they be desit ous not to see maygaimnes, Turn thou away
mine eyes (O Lord) least they behold vanity.


Iu. Good Lord is the wind in that door now? this is a marvelous sudden
change. I have known the day when as you have been as great a dauncer as the
best of them, and when you would have gone as far to see a may game as
another man, and are you become so sober now? the Priest has quite forgotten
that ever he was clarke.

Is dancing worse now then it was when you did use it?


Min. This is your last refuge, which you have to fly unto, you are almost
upon the suddes, you are now in a manner at a non plus. When as you are out of
matter, you begin to rail, and to object to me the lewdnes of my former
life. In deed it is acommon custom amongst men, to object unto those which
have forsaken vice, and be taken them selves to virtue, what thing soever has
been amiss in their life past, nothing regarding what they are now: but yet
hereby men do see how greatly they bewray their foolishnes. Should not he
have been accounted a dolte, which would have refused Paul the faithful
preacher, because he had sometime been Saul the severe persecutour? Should
not he have been worthily taken for a noddie, which should have rejected
Matthewe the zealous Evangelist, because he had sometime been an extorting
Publicane.

And should not he have been thought a very fool, who finding in those
comfortable psalms of David, sin reprehended, and vices reprouid, should
have also replied thus:

He needs not so much to find fault with these vices, the time has bin,
when he him self was both an adulterer, and a murderer?

Was Peter never good afterward, because he denied his master once?

Was Marie Magdalene never honest, because she had sometime played the whore? And
now whereas you ask me this question, whether dancing be worse now then it
was when I did use it, I answer, that it was as evil then as it is now, but
yet it did not please God so to open mine eyes then, as he has done now, that
I, might see mine own folly. Sin does so blind the eyes of men, that they
cannot see when they do evil. It is not my using or refusing of dancing
which makes it good or evil: but the seeing of the vanity thereof then, and
the ignorauce of the same then, made me think that it was then good, and
makes me now think that it is evil. Take me as I am, and not as I have
been. A tree which has sometime borne evil fruit, may bear good, if his
head have been cut off, and a new grafted in his place. A man that has bin
some time a vicious person, may become a good man, if this head of vice be
cut off, with the two edgged sword of Gods word (which pearceth between
the bones and marrowe) and the good graftes of virtue be grafted in his place.
The leapar is sound after he is cleused. And though Naaman the Assyrian his
flesh was through leaprosie as white as snow, yet having washed him self
seven times, it came again like to the flesh of a young child: so, though
the soul of man be never so filthy and foul through sin, yet if she wash
her self by earnest repentauuce, and a steadfast faith in the blood of Christ
Jesus, she shall be clean.

And now (O Iuuenis) that I may turn my talk unto thee, thine own
conscience tells thee how lewd a life thou have hitherto led, how
frowardely thou have behaved thy self in the commandments of God.

What great delight have thou taken in blaspheming the name of the most
highest: so that thou have thought it the best quality, and greatest
ornamente that a young man could have, to rappe out oaths one in the neck of
another, for then did thou think thy self half a gentleman, when as thou
could swear so lustilie.

Again, thou have thought the Sabboath day never better spent, then when thou
have rise up early in the morning to toss the pot, to bibbe, to swill and
dance til night. How disobedient a mind haste thou always borne toward not
only thy natural parents, but even all those which have authority over
thee? With what filthy concupiscence has thine heart been fraughted, and how
desirous have thou been, to have y^ which was none of thine own: These are no
small faults (O Iuuenis) but they are such offenses as do provoke the most
highest unto indignation. These are not parua peccadulia, but they be maxima
peccata, they be not minor sins, but they are even such transgressions as do
pull down the heavy wrath and vengeance of God upon our heads. Therefore
(good Iuuenis) let it be sufficient, that thou have behaved thy self wickedly
heretofore. Redeem the time which thou have lewdly let pass, amend that
thing which heretofore has been amiss. Flatter not thy self in thy self,
and say not with thy self, I am but young, and I shall live many years, and I
will repent when I am old, for why, thou art uncertain how long thou have to
live: Thou see as well the young as the old go to grave like flocks of
sheep. Again, repentance is not in thine own hands, but it is the good
gift of God. Hell, death, and damnation are prepared for the impenite^t after
this life, and in this life great plagues remain for the ungodly, as says the
Psalmist.

Encourage not thy self to sin, because thou see that the Lord does spare
thee: for as the Lord is merciful, so there proceeds wrath from him, and be
thou well assured, he will wound the heirie scalpe of such an one as goes on
still in his wickedness. Lay thy hand upon thy heart, and cast thy countes
afreshe. Awake out of sleep, and stand up, and the Lord shall give thee
light. Put off the old man, and put upon thee the new man. Cast off the
works of darkness, and put upon thee the armor of light. Take heed, for
there remains for impenitent sinners, a worm that gnaweth the conscience:
and there is prepared for the wicked, fire, which never goes out: where is
horror, terror, weeping, wayling, wringing of hands, gnashing of teethe,
continual death, yet those which are there do never die.

Tantalus his apples, Sisyphus his stone, and those ravening Harpyiae (where of
the Poets do speak) are nothing in respect of those torments, where of
the wicked shall taste, unless in this life they do repent. Wherefore I say
once again (Iuuenis) come away from amongst the wicked, and choose henceforth
to lead a new life: nunquam sera est ad bonos mores via, the way to good
manners is never to late.

Ne dicas quod tibi non praedictum ^it cave, say not but that thou have had a
fair warning.


Iu. Oh how am I now altered from my former estate, oh what a sudden change
do I feel in my self, even in a moment: I have heretofore said in my heart,
tush, there is no God. I have thought with my self, that if there were a God,
yet was he ignorant of those things which are done upon earth. I thought I
might have committed sin, and God could not have seen me, If I had committed
the same in the dark: but now I see yt he sees as clearly at midnight as at
noone day. Now I perceive that the darkness and light are all one to him: and
that there is nothing hidden from his presence. I thought I might have
committed sin, and he would not have punished me: but now I am afraid that
he will presently punish me, so horrible are my sins. Now do I perceive
that, that is true which you said even now, namely that the word of God is
like a two edged sword, which pearceth between the marrowe and the bones. Oh
what shall I do? now may I run up and down upon the face of the earth, as did
Cain, for often times have I in heart murdered my brother at football. Now may I
go hang my self, as did Judas, for his sin was but one, but mine are
infinite. What torments do I feel in my self? I see before my face nothing
but death and destruction due unto me for sin, I am sorry that ever I led my
life so lewdly.


Min. Iuuenis, as it is ye part of a good and skillful Surgeon to apply
such plasters unto the sores of his pacient, as may be sharp corasyues to
cut away the dead flesh, and then afterward to lay to the same some more
pleasant salues: as wise Physicians do minister unto the diseased at the first
bitter drinks, but afterward they give them more pleasant potions: so have I
hitherto (which I hope am come to cure thy soul) set thy sins in order
before thee, that thou may see the greatness of thy sin: hitherto have I
depainted out before thee, God in his justice, which both things have been
unto thee I know as bitter potions: but now will I declare unto thee his
mercy, which shall be a pleasant drink. Though there be in God the sharp
vinegar of his justice, yet does he so temper the same with the smooth oil of
his mercy (which lies always uppermost) that it makes a most pleasant and
sauorie sauce. Though he be a great, fearful, and almighty God, which
punishes the wicked: yet is he a merciful Savior which preserves the
penitent* Though he wound the heirie scalpe of such an one as goes on still
in his wickedness: yet at what time so ever a sinner does repent him of his
sins from the bottom of his heart, he will put all his wickedness out of his
remembrance. Though he be that God which turns man to destruction: yet is
he the same which says, come again ye children of men. Though he be that
God which plagueth the land for the wickedness of the people which dwells
therein: yet it is he that makes the sins of the penitent, which were as red
as scarlet to be as white as snow. If we turn unto him he will turn unto us:
and he will be favorable unto us for his great mercies sake.


Iu. O what great comfort do I take in these words: but tell me I pray you,
how I may appear before that great and fearful God, whom I have thus
displeased? how shall I crave pardon at his hands, or whereunto shall I trust.


Min. I will tell thee what thou must do. Catch in thine arms by faith,
Christ Jesus thy savior and redeemer. Cast all thy sins upon his back, for
he has made satisfaction for them all upon the cross. Creep under the
shaddowe of his wings: so may thou boldly appear before this great and
fearful God, and he will for his sake pardon all thy sins, and forgive thee
all thine offenses, though they were mo in number then the heirs of thy head,
then the sands of the sea, then the stars of heaven.


Iu. O but how shall I be delivered from this bu^ then of sin, which
presses me down so sore.


Min. Thou may play Marie Magdalens part, who was as great a sinner as
thou. Thou must fall down at Christ Jesus his feet, and wash them with thy
tears, because thou have so grievously offended him. Then must thou most
steadfastly believe, that he by his most precious death and bloodshedding has
purged thy soul from sin. Then may thou boldly apply unto thy self y^
sweet saying of Christ, go thy way, thy faith has saved thee. Repent and be
heartily sorry for thy sins, and let not the greatness of thy sin
discourage thee: for Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. Believe
and thou shall be saved, believe and thou shall not be confounded. Give thy
self wholly to the reading and hearing of the word of God: for it is the
staff and stay of our weak consciences, and by the reading and hearing
thereof, do we come by faith. Be thou fervent in prayer, which is an exercise
most meet for a Christian man.


Iu. Me thinks I do feel in my self already, some motion of the good
spirit, provoking me unto all these things whereof you have spoken: and I
beseech God daily to increase his spirit in me. Methinkes I begin already
to say within my self, unto my heavenly father, father, I have sinned against
heaven and in thy sight, and I am no more worthy to be called thy son. And
me thinks I see him already come to meet me, and to receive me home again
most joyfully. Now do I detest dau^cing and al such vanity, and I am minded
he^ceforth (if God shall assist me) to fly from sin as from a serpent. I will
henceforth resort as fast to Sermons, as I have gone unto dauncings, and unto
other vain pastimes. And now blessed be the name of my good God, which
brought me this way to meet with you.


Min. The Lord God continue thee in this mind good Iuuenis, so shall thou be
sure to come unto those joys, which neither eye has seen, neither ear has
heard, neither has it ever entered into the heart of man, to conceive how great
they be. Unto the which joys, the Lord bring us all for Jesus Christ his
sake, to whom with the father and the holy ghost, be all praise, glory, and
honor, now and for evermore. Amen.


FINIS.

