

Our Heart, is the Mind of God most-^ie.
Our Beeinge a^able, as the sweet Lilly.
Our Faithfulness / Love / and Truth upright,
Is Gods Light / Life / and Cleernes bright.
FIDELITAS. A Distinct Declaration of the Requiring of the Lord and of the
godly Testimonies of the holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ.

Set-fourth by Fidelitas, a Fellowe-elder with HN, in the Famelie of the Love.

Translated out of Base-almayne.



Behold, I set before your Eyes this-daye, the Blessinge and the Curssinge.
The Blessinge, (...) ye obey the Commandments of ye Lord your God, which I
command or give you this-daye. The Curssing, if ye obey not the
Commandments of the Lord your God, but ^rne you out of ye Way which I
this-day will ^ou unto or set-fourth before you.

Deu. 11. 30. Now goes the Judgment over the World: Now becomes the Prince of
this World cast-out.

John. 12.

Now is the Salvation / the Power / and the Kingdom, become our Gods: and the
Might his Christ's.

Apoca. 12. THE PREFACE.
Unto the Lovers of the Truth and of the upright Righteousness, and unto all
which shall read or hear this distinct Declaration of the Requiringe of the
Lord, Health and Salvation.

2. This-daye through our faithful Elder FIDELITAS reversed;a Fellowe-elder
with HN, in ye Famelie of the Love of Jesus Christ; there beco^eth reversed;out
of God-his Grace; distinctlie expressed and declared unto you all reversed;O
ye Lovers of the Truth; with thissame Declaration of the Requiringe of the
Lord, what the Will and Requiringe of the Lord is, and how ye all should
enter, rightly and according to the Truth, into the Pro. 4. b. Iere. 6. b.
Ways of the Lord and his Requiringe, for to live vprightlie in God-his true
Luke 1. g. Ephesians. 1. a.
Righteousness, and to inherit Math. 2^. d.
the eternal Life, according to the Promises of God ye Father and his Christ.

3. There is likewise expressed and declared unto you in the same, from whence
the wicked Thing proceeds, wher-through the whole World is 1. John. 5. ^.
so full of Falshod: and how that ye Man is let or hindered by the same, that
he does not rightly understand nor obey the Requiring of the gracious Word
of the Lord: and wherthrough also the same wicked Thing and his Let or
Hinderinge, may be removed and depressed or utterly brought-to-nothing: with
other-moe groundlie Instructions, to the Man's Preservation in the Godliness, and
evident or distinct Admonitions, for the auoydinge of his Destruction.

4. With which Declaration of the Requiringe of the Lord, the Lord likewise
calls and bids reversed;through the forenamed Elder FIDELITAS; all
People, to ye Esa. 16. ^. Heb. 5. a.
Gratious-stoole of his Love: and that they should all willingly apply them,
unto the 1. Pet. 1. c.
Obedience of the Requiring of his gracious Word and Service of Love.

5. To the Preservation of them all in his Godlynes, and to an Admonition for
the avoiding of their Destruction, in the Genesis 3. b. Esa. 59. b.
Estraunging or Separation from his godly Being and true God service under
the Obedience of his Love.

6. Therefore reversed;O ye Lovers of the Truth; when ye now this-daye, hear
this Voice and proffered Grace to the Entrance of your Salvation, Psalm. 95. b.
Heb. 3. b.
so harde^ not reversed;in any-case; your Hearts, as to be disobedient unto ye
Requiringe of this Declaration, To the end that ye remain not without the
Rest of the Children of God, which God now in the last time, declareth-fourth
out of ye Famelie of his Love, and wher-vnto He also calls and bids all
People.

Take it to heart.

A distinct Declaration of the Requiring of the Lord / which the Lord the
living God of Heaven has declared out of his holy Sion and heavenly
Jerusalem ^ and set-fourth through the Elder Fidelitas.
The First Chapter.
IN the Two-and-seuentith HN (In y^ time when as Certain reversed;being
turned-in unto themselves; tooke-on a Conceit or Meaning, that they could
vnpre^ared and unregenerated ^ and without the Tes^amentes of God ^ and
without the Ministra^ion of those-same through HN, be the People of God in
whom He is wel-pleased / and vncircum^sed on the Foreskinne of their Hearts,
enter into ^he Sanctuary of God: and that then could euen^, in the Turning-in
and Love unto themselves ^ (...) the Disobedience unto the Requiring of the
gra^ous Word of the Lord and his Service of ^oue ^ and in the Separation
from the Doctrine of ^N in the true Testamentes of God, live upright ^d free /
and also followe-after and fulfill the Lord^s Will / which they distincted not
from out of ^eir own Will) has the God of Heaven distinctlie declared unto
Me Fidelitas, a Fellowe-elder in the Famelie of Love reversed;with clear
Declaration, out Psalm. 50. a. Esa. 2. a. Mich. 4. a.
of his holy Sion and heavenly Jerusalem; the right Requiring of his Word
and Will: and also the right Way or Passe-ouer which leads to the upright
Life of the Righteous ^ to God-his true Sanctuary ^ and to the right Esa. 32.
c. Sap. 3. (...).
Rest and Freedom of the Children of God: and the Word of the Lord came unto
Me / and said:

2. GO-fourth and show thyself among the Children of Men which trouble or
busye them about my Truth ^ and about my Word and Righteousness / specially
among them, that are turned-in unto themselves and their own Love / and mean
or suppose euenso, that they in the Love of themselves ^ and in their taken-on
Knowledge of the godly Things, have my Truth and Righteousness: and say unto
them reversed;to their Preservation; all these Words which I speak unto thee
/ Ier^. 31. c.
and geeue thee in thy Heart and Mouth / or write the same in a Letter / and
endeavor the^ diligently, that the same be heald-fourth before their Eyes ^ and
heard in their Ears. First reversed;or before all; among those which read
and hear the god^lie Testimonies of my gracious Word reversed;set-fourth by
my chosen Minister HN; or which have rea^ and heard or allowed thosesame and
yet not ap^plyed them with all their Heart, to perform the Requiringe thereof:
and witness and declare vnt^ them all which geeue-eare thereunto, That which I
require through my gracious Word: Ezech. 3. b.
an^ warn them all of the Desiruction that shall fa^ upon the wicked World ^
upon all Unbelievers Disobedientones / and Resisters of the Requiringe of my
Word ^ and upon all Offallers or Declyners from the Requiringe of the same.

3. And in all thissame, infourme and instruct them likewise, what it is that
lets or hinders them, that they understand not rightly the Requiringe of
my gracious Word and Service of Love / nor-yet are obedient reversed;from the
Requiringe of the Math 3. (...) Luke 3. b. Heb. 6. a.
first Entrance to the true christian Life, till unto the Perfection thereof;
in any right manner to the same / nor bestow their diligence aright there unto:
and how that they for-that-cause, cannot persevere firmlie therein ^ nor com to
the true Heb. 3. b. 4. a.
Freedom of the Children of God. But call or bid them first, to the
Conuertion and Math. 18. a. John. 3. a.
Turningeabout to the right Childshipp of the new Birth / and that they let
their Understandings be renewed thereto, under the Obedience of my Love / and
say unto them:

4. TVrne you about to the Math. 18. (...). Mark. 10. b.
childish Singlemindednes, Math. 3. a. Act. 2. c. 3. c.
Fruits of Repentance. For That is the Requiringe of the Lord: And ther-to
reversed;to-weet, to the Entrance of thatsame, whereof there is spoken; let your
Understandings become renewed, under the Obedience of the Love / and yourselues
Act. 3 (...).
brought-to-right again: and euenso in your Conuertion, become first in the
right Fear Pro. 1. a. 9. b. Eccli. 1. b.
of God the true Forefrunt of ye Entrance to the Sanctuary of God circumcised
on the Foreskinne Deu^. 10. b. Iere. 4. a.
of your Hearts, to the Col. 2. b. 1. Pet. 2. a.
Laying-away of the Sin in the Fleash: and shewe-fourth goodwillinge
Obedience therein.

5. For thatsame and to shewe-fourth Obedience therein, is the Lord-his right
Covenant of Circumcision / Romans 2. c. Col. 2. b.
which the right Seed of Abraham bears in his Fleash / and that makes the
right Difference, betwixt the Lord-his People / and the uncircumcised Heathen:
And it is the right Covenant of the Lord / which the Lord reversed;er-euer
He makes the Iere. 31. c. Heb. 8. b. 10. a
new Covenant with his People; ordains Genesis 17. b.
first by his People / and which also in the Ministration and Obedience of his
Requyringe, has the Foregoing by them, to the Esa. 52. a. Ezech. 44. a. Joel.
3. b.
Entrance of the true Sanctuary of God and of his upright Godseruice / where
no Uncircumcised may enter-in.

6. And when ye now reversed;to a right Entrance of the true Sanctuary of
God; are entered into this Covenant of the Lord / and of the Circumcising of
his People / and that his Requiringe is accomplished by you, with the People of
the Lord, the Communialtie or Famelie of the Love / so enter than likewise
into the Romans 10. b.
Belief of Jesus Christ the true Holy of God-his Sanctuary wherein the
Accomplishing Heb. 9. b. c.
of the true Offeringe and Godseruice of the Circumcised of the Lord ^ the
right Baptism either Washinge of the Believers, Ezech. 36. c.
with the pure Water and precious Blood of Jesus Christ ^ and the true
Forgeeuenes of Sins / Heb. 9. b. c.
and the upright Purginge or Safe-makinge from the same, comethto-passe or is
wrought: and where-out the right Renewinge Romans 12. a. Ephe. 4. b.
of the Heart and Mind proceeds.

7. And in the same true Belief and Baptism of Jesus Christ, become implanted
into Christ, Romans 6. (...). Phil. 3. a.
with his like Death: and let yourselues euenso reversed;in the Death of Jesus
Christ; be prepared to an upright People of the Lord / Deuteronomy. 4. a. d 10. b.
Ephe. 1. a.
in whom He has a goodpleasure / and that are meet to enter into his Rest ^
and to the Rest and Freedom of the Children of God. And in the same true Belief
or Holy / and in the Requiringe of the same and his Ministration, shew-fourth
Deu. 6. 30. a.
goodwillinge Obedience / and Mat. 10. 24. b
bide steadfast therein, until that it all which the Lord requires of you and
in you, be fulfilled / and that Christ Romans 8. a. Gal. 2. c. 4. b.
after the Spirit ^ and the true Apo. 21. c.
Kingdom of Heavens and his upright Righteousness, be com unto you.

8. For euenso in the Fulfillinge or Perfourmaunce Christ with the Apo. 21. a.
Kingdom of Heavens and his spiritual and heavenly Goods, the Lord Ier. 31.
d. Heb. 8. a. 10. a
erecteth with his People, his new Covenant of Perfection / wherein it becomes
then all fulfilled and accomplished, that is written in the Luke 24. g.
Law of Moses. that God has required through his Propheates. and that is
euangelized of Christ and of his Kingdom.

9. And thatsame new Covenant, is the true new Covenant which the Lord has
promised, to mate or erect with his People: and which also in the Fulfilling of
his former Covenant, He makes or erecteth with his People / and remembers
not Ier. 31. d. Heb. 8. 10. a.
their Sins anymore. For euenso, in their Purginge or Safe-makinge through
Jesus Christ in the Belief ^ and in the Accomplishinge of the same Service in
the Holy, becomes Math. 27. d. 2. Cor. 3. b.
the Veil reversed;which is the Heb. 10. b.
Fleash of Christ; don-away from the Mostholie of the true Sanctuary of God /
and the Lord uncovers then by his People, his mostholie Sanctuary Apo. 21.
a.
full of all sumpteous Garnishinge of pure Beauty / and full of all spiritual
and heavenly Goods and Riches of God and Christ: and they become euenso
glorified, from the 2. Cor. 3. b.
uncovered Face of God and Christ, with the true Beeinge of the upright
Perfection. served with the spiritual Heb. 8. a.
and heavenly Goods. and repleanished with the holy John. 14. b. Act. 2. a.
Spirit of the Love of God and Christ.

10. And euenso in the Fulfillinge of the same, They are Romans 8. b.
the true Children of the new Testament in Jesus Christ, and the upright Elders
and Fathers in the Famelie of the Love of Jesus Christ, which geeue or set not
fourth their Testimonies, out of the Knowledge of many godly Things: but
which bring-fourth, out of the Accomplishinge of the fore-goinge Service ^ and
out of the spiritual and heavenly Treasure of the godly Being of their
Heart, Math. 13. f.
the New and the Old / that is, the True and the Figurative.

11. And all they that are in such-sort, out of the Accomplishinge of the
fore-goinge Service, entered into Ier. 31. d.
the true Sanctuary of God and Christ, Those know and perceive that the Lord
is euenso the true Lord, Deuteronomy. 4. a.
among his People: and they have then obtained the upright Ephe. 4. b.
Knowledge of the perfect Righteousness and Godliness ^ the upright Esa. 32.
(...). John. 8. c.
Freedom of the Children of God ^ and the true Appeasement of the Conscience,
in Jesus Christ.

12. But to remain in the Sin unrepentant ^ Jesus Christ, unregenerated
(wherein ye seduce and destroy one-another of you reversed;O ye Children of
Men; with the Knowledge) and that ye then euenso at the last reversed;when as
the Destruction has bewrapped you; shall see and perceive therein, that ye
have accounted yourselues wise, before the time appointed ^ taken-on the Sap.
2. (...).
Freedom in your Unregeneration ^ and Pro. 1. c.
refused the proffered Grace of the Lord / and the Obedience of the Requiring
of his gracious Word and Service of Love: and that ye likewise in all your
Fourth-goinge, have not reversed;according to the Requiringe of the upright
Righteousness which God esteems; don ne brought-fourth any upright Fruits of
Repentance / and must be feign to bear the Romans 2. (...).
Judgment of God, with the wicked World ^ and with the evil Things, wherein
she and her Adherentes do live: and that ye then know or perceive therein,
that the Lord the true God of Love is not any God of the Unrepentant and of
the Disobedient: but is their God, John. 9. (...). Act. 10. f.
which love the Righteousness and the Fulfillinge of the Requiringe of his
Word / and hate all Unrighteousness and Resistaunce of the Requiringe of his
Word / So shall then all thatsame reversed;in the same Judgment of God; be a
great Sap. 5. a.
Accusation unto you of your Sins, to your Condemnation.

13. Therefore, be now warned heer-withall / and fear not overmuch, to forgo
or leese your own Will and Corruption or Consumeablenes that hangs so fast
on / Math. 16. e.
that ye forsake not therthrough the euer-lastinge upright Righteousness ^ and
the Ministration to the same appertayninge: But fear rather, for the
Frindshippe of ye World / and for your own Self-seekinges cause, to become the
Iam. 4. a.
Enemies of God ^ and Disobedient to the Requiringe of his Word / and so then
to leese the Apo. 21. a.
eternal Perfection of the pure Beauty of the euer-lastinge Kingdom: and
perpetually to miss reversed;or be depriued-of; the eternal immutable Riches
of the spiritual and heavenly Goods: and to bide separated for-euer, 2. Tess.
1. a.
from the lovely Beholdinge of the uncovered Face of God and Christ, and from
the perfect Esa. 35. 51. b
Joy of the eternal Life. Yea, thereof be you all afraid.

14. But if now there be not any Fear with Sion. from the Ephe. 2. b.
Citizenship of the heavenly Jerusalem. from the Inheritance of the
Testamentes of God and Israel. and from the Freedom of the Children of God: and
ye shall euenso be forced, to remain captive in the Heathenship ^ and in the
Abomination of Desolatio^ of the Kingdom of Babel, and obtain therein a
terrible End.

15. Therefore hear the Word of the Lord, to Obedience of his Requiringe /
and let Pro. 2. 4. ^.
the same sincke into your Hearts / and turn not back in any-case: nether
suffer yourselues to be drawen-away from That which is set-fourth before you,
out of the gracious Word of the Lord and his Service of Love / nor-yet lead
therfrom, by any Man's Words that is against the same. For if you have bestowed
your diligence to hear the Witnessinges of the gracious Word of the Lord,
set-fourth through the holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ: and that ye
have yealded your Voice or consented therein, with our Fellowe-elder HN: and
that ye have reversed;moreover; enterprised or begone your Fourth-goinge therein
/ So look well then heerto, that ye seek not to finish the same Beginning,
in the Witnessinges of Men that are against the same / and in their Malice and
Offenciuenes, execute or judge a false Judgment over us and our Ministration.

16. But fix or bend always all your Sight FAITHFVLNES / and consider, how
that the Lord has chosen Me reversed;even from my very Psalm. 71. (...). Ier.
1. a.
Birth out of my Mothers Womb; to the Obedience of the Requiringe of his
Word / for that I with you / and ye also with me reversed;according to the
Requiringe of ye Testimonics of his gracious Word; should become united therein
/ and so we to grow of one vniformebeeinge with each-other, in the same / To
the end that ye might euenso reversed;according to the Requiringe of the same;
have a right Course or Passaige for to com-in, Deuteronomy. 10. a. Math. 22. d.
to the true Love of your God ^ to the upright Love of your Neighbor ^ 2. Pet.
1. b.
to the upright Love of brotherly Familiarity ^ and to the right common Love
toward all Men: and then likewise might Math. 10. c. 24. b.
persevere firmlie therein.

17. BUT reversed;alas; for that I FAITHFVLNES am so small / and that my
faithful Obedience, is reversed;euery-wheare; so little regarded among the
Children of Men / So cannot therefore many of you, consider well on Me nor on
my Obedience / for to become of one Heart and Mind therewith.

18. Therefore hear now the Word of the Lord, O ye Children of Men:
Turne-away the Sight of your Eyes, Psalm. 131. a. Pro. 6. b.
from the Highest / and turn the same to ye Lowest or Humblest: and notewell
theare in the Lowest, the faithful Obedience. first-of-all, in the little or
childish Singlemindednes / and how that Faithfulness, with the Goodwillingones ^
and the Goodwillingones with Faithfulness, do Ephe. 4. b.
growe-vpp obedientlie, from out of the childish Singlemindednes, to the manly
Olde-aige of the Man Jesus Christ.

19. For-that-cause / humble you euen-so / for to set yourselues
reversed;first-of-all; with us, in the lowest NOTA
or nethermost Luc. 14. b.
Place of all the Humble and Obedientones / so shall ye then also right-well
perceive, that the lowly Humbleones / and faithful Obedientones reversed;even
in the manly Olde-aige of Jesus Christ; do in such-sort rightly inherit with
God and his Saints, the Highest of the Glory of God and the Lamb. and the
true Freedom of the Children of God and of all the Holyones of Christ, and
thereto the everlasting Life.

20. But yet many of you have not ben able to Genesis 3. b.
Seed of the old Serpent, Ezech. 8. a.
that grievous and horrible Beast of the Bottomles-pit / which with his
Knowledge, contrary to the Requiring of the Lord ^ and with his Stool of
Disobedience, has set himself on the North, 2. Tess. 2. a.
in the Temple of ye Lord / wheare the gracious Word of the Lord and his
Requiringe, is now reversed;through our Fellowe-elder HN; administered unto
Many.

21. Which horrible Beast, has marred and corrupted all the Understanding of
Man, in the Knowledge / and has euenso always ben a Let to the Children of
Men, in their corrupt Understanding / and with his Knowledge reversed;contrary
to the Requiringe of the Word of ye Lord; hindered them for entring-in to the
right Entrance of the true Life / and for turning-againe aright unto the God
of their Salvation.

22. And thatsame horrible Beast Genesis 3. b. Ezech. 8. a.
the Seed of the old Serpent is now also in the last time, most-dammaigefull
and pernicious unto you all reversed;O ye Children of Men; in your Sight /
Hearing / and Understanding, for to com to the Obedience of the Requiringe of
the Word: and that also theefliest turns you out of the Way that leads
to the true Life / and brings you into a 2. Tess. 2. b.
secreat Error, which ye reversed;through the Let of that mostgreeuous and
detestable Beast; cannot well perceive / for that the same is ouer-all,
most-chieflie esteemed among the Children of Men / and has reversed;in all
their Ways; plucked or 2. Cor. 11. a.
drawn them into a contrary Mind / wherein they notwithstanding suppose that
they are in the right.

The Second Chap.
ANd albeit now that many Men persuade 4. Esd. 7. a.
the Way to the true Life: For they turneaway themselves from the gracious
Word of the Lord, which in his Service of Love, does seruiceablie set-fourth
and express unto them reversed;in their Esa. 59. a.
Separation or Disjunction from God and his upright Beeinge; the first
Entrance of the right Way to the Life / to thend that they should euenso
become turned-about therein, to the Math. 18. a.
childish Singlemindednes ^ and plucked to the true Obedience of the Requiringe
of the Word of ye Lord: and that they might then euenso reversed;rightly
and according to the Truth; com-againe to their God ^ and inherit the true
Life of God ^ and the upright Beeinge of the Love of Jesus Christ. But many
refuse thissame / and turning them unto themselves, they apply them to
geeue-eare unto that Ezech. 8. a.
horrible and mischeuous Beast, which inhabiteth with them / and has set
himself in them reversed;with his Stool of Disobedience; on the North, in the
Temple of the Lord ^ and euenso broughtin and placed his Word of Knowledge,
against the Word of Life of the true living God, by and among them / and
they let themselves become veryshamefullie seduced through the same.

2. Verelie / thissame Beast the seducinge Seed of the old Serpent is a
terrible Beast, before the Eyes of all the Holyones / inasmuch as that he is
risen-vpp out of the Apo. 17. b.
Bottomles-pitt [that is, out of the Separation from God-his Beeinge]: and is
the Esa. 5. b. 59. b
false Light of the Knowledge itself / which in all his Nature and Disposition,
is very false and deceitful / and bringeth-vnto either heriteth the disobedient
Man, with the Iere. 17. b.
most-wilie and mischeuous Heart.

3. And forasmuch as that the same Beast is so exceeding false ^ and so
hindersom or dammaigefull unto all Men, concerning the right Entrance to the
Life / and planteth so great Falshod in them / So ought all Men therefore, to
take good-heede of the same / and to stay or Deuteronomy. 4. a. Pro. 3. a. 6. b.
hold themselves so much the faster and faithfuller on the gracious Word of
the Lord and his Requiringe / and to passe-fourth therein obedientlie / until
that the same false and deceaueable Seed of the old Serpent / together with
his disobedient Knowledge, be damned and buried Apo. 17. b. 19. d.
in the Bottomles-pitt, wherout it came-fourth.

4. For / so-longe as it sits in the Man with Men / So does the same appear
or glinse so mightily reversed;with his false Light of the Knowledge; before
the Eyes of Men / that they Pro. 3. a. ^sa. 5. b. 59. a.
suppose the same to be the true Light of the Wisdom of God. also it blows
his Knowledge reversed;to the Tourning-in o^ Men unto Phil. 2. ^.
their Self-seekinge; so forciblie into their Ears, that they conceive it to
be the very Word of the Lord (For they apply them gladly according to the
Requyringe of the same Knowledge). It takes likewise their Understandings
captive so mightelie therein, that they suppose the same Captivity to be their
Freedom: And for-that-cause also reversed;so-longe as they hear and believe
the same; they cannot by anye-meanes see / hear / nor believe the true
Obedience and Faithfulness / nor the Forsakinge of their Selfseekinge
reversed;the which is required out of the Math. 16. c. Luke 9. c. 14. ^
Word of the Lord and his Service of Love; to an Entrance into the Doctrine
or Discipline of Jesus Christ ^ nether-yet go-fourth nor persevere constantly
therein.

5. Also they cannot rightly understand, how they ought reversed;according to
the Requiringe of the Word of the Lord and of his Service of Love; to let
themselves be prepared Luke 1. ^.
to an upright People of the Lord / vnlest they utterly Math. 16. c. Luke 9.
14. c.
forsake and leave the venomous Seed of the old Serpent and his Requiring of
Disobedience ^ and also their Selfnes
which they seek therein: and euenso turn them about to the Math. 18. a.
childish Singlemindednes / and not respect or way the Perrell of the Fleashes
Dammaige: but turn them wholly and altogether, to the Inwarde-beholdinge of
the Math. 10. c. 16. c. Luke 1^. ^.
Hinderaunce of the Soul and of the upright Righteousness / and to the
Inspection of the Preservation of the same, to a Remnaunt in the everlasting
Immortality / for to accomplish euenso the Lord-his Will. to enter-in to the
Obedience of the Requiringe of the Word of the Lord. and to fulfill Math. ^.
^.
all Righteousness obedientlie: and not let themselves lust after any other
thing.

6. Yea / so should they then reversed;out of the Obedience of the Requiringe
of the gracious Word and Service of Love; learn to perceive, the upright
Consubstantiation John. 6. e. 17. ^
or Vnifourme-vnitinge, which the Man ought to have with God and his upright
Beeinge / and also what-maner of Love he ought to bear toward an other: and
that the same forementioned grievous Beast, is Ezech. 8 a. Apo. 17. b.
the wicked and horrible Beast, whose Generation has reversed;thorough
thatsame Wickedone; killed or Act. 17. e.
murdered y^ NOTA
Witnesses of God and Christ ^ and the holy Zacharias the 2. Para. 24. c.
Math. 23. e.
Son of Barachias, betwixt the Temple and the Altar [that is: betwixt the
Entrance into the Sanctuary / and the Fulfillinge of the Offeringe either
Godseruice in thesame]. also caused the Dan. 8. b.
daily Offeringe either Godseruice to cease. and brought the whole House of
the Lord, which He had chosen unto himself for his Dwelling, in utter
desolatio^ 4. Reg. 25. ^. Psalm. 74. 79. a. Esa. 64. d.
with Abhominatio^s.

7. Also they should well perceive, that the Reuendgment of all giltlesse Blood
reversed;which from the Beginning til-vnto this present Day of the
Manifestation of the Judgment of God, is shead upon the Earth; shall com Math.
23. d. Apo. 6. ^. 16. ^
over thatsame wicked Generation, to his utter Rooting-out and Condemnation:
and also how and wher-through, that the mischeuous Beast and his Generation,
has even hitherto, ben a very mighty Let unto all Men, for to assemble them
to God-his Witnesses: and does yeat also presently now in the last time,
hinder very many, for to go-in reversed;under the Obedience of the Love; to the
Entrance of the upright Godliness.

8. Behold / how clear and apparent all Deuteronomy. 11. 30. b Eccli. 15. c.
Destruction and also the Preservation, becomes reversed;out of God-his Grace;
prefigured unto you. For-that-cause / learn now once to consider and mark,
that ye all err / and have wicked Eyes ^ and much Euel-surmisinge among you:
as also that your Eyes are ^en. 3. ^.
opened through that grievous and horrible Beast the false Light of y^
Knowledge / and he has given you to understand, that ye reversed;in your
Unregeneration; should take-on the Freedom, for to be disobedient to the
Requiringe of the gracious Word of the Lord. Pro. 1. ^. Esa. 5. ^.
to contemn and resist the Lord-his proffered Grace and the Minister of his
Word. and to turneaway yourselues therfrom.

9. For-that-cause, withdraw now your Eyes from the same wicked Sight / and
turn you about hither, to the Life of the Truth / and become counseled
in-time, to turn the Sight of your Eyes unto the Lust to accomplish the Will
of the Lord / and to be obedient unto ye Requiring of his Word / So shall
ye then perceive and know, that the Sentence-of-iudgment and the Doctrine
set-fourth by HN, is proceeded from out of the living God: and that the
Obedience to the Requiring of the same, trayneth and leads men into the true
Life, which God accepts / and is the Man's Salvation.

10. Ye shall then also right-well insee and understand, that the same
Obedience, is the John. ^. ^.
upright Freedom of the Children of God: and that the true Life, wher-vnto
the same Obedience bringeth-men, is the upright and John. 1. ^.
true Light of Men: and that all other Lights and Freedoms which are without
the same, cannot bide-standinge before God nor his Holyones.

11. Moreover / ye shall insee and perceive or understand, that the
Disobedience is not any Freedom. but is the Subjection or 2. Pet. 2. c.
Bondaige to the Sin ^ to the Self-will of Man ^ and to ye Might of the
Deuell / of the Hell / and of the Fleash (toweet, that those-same have the
Dominion over and in the Disobedience) and that the same Disobedience bears
always a Care or rests mindful, of all what concerns the Fleash / but is
verie-little careful of that which concerns the Soul and the upright
Beeinge of God: and that also therefore, all the Esa. 59. a.
Lights and 2. Pet. 2. a.
Freedoms of the unrepentant and unregenerated Men, are false and deceitful /
and bringe-in or stirre-vp Breach / Dissension / and Offenciuenes, among the
Children of Men / and euenso turne-away the Children of Men from the
Mercifulnes Mich. 6. a. Math. 1^. c. ^
and Forgeeuinge of Sins which they owe one toward an-other: as also from
the peaceable Concord of the upright brotherly Love / and from the upright
Being of God and his Christ.

12. Also that all unregenerated Men, which have regard and geeue-eare unto
these false Lights and Freedoms, become therwithall very shamefullie seduced /
and that those-same are also very hindersom unto them, for to com to y^ humble
and obedient Singlemindednes of Jesus Christ and his Love: For they all
leade-men away from the same / as also from the Way which reaches thereunto.

13. FOr-that-cause reversed;O ye Children of Men; hold you Eccli. 2. a. Heb.
12. a.
steadfastly on the Word of the Lord and his Requiring / and on the Love and
Mercifulnes, Romans 13. a.
which ye are deptours to keep and shew-fourth toward euery-one: and suffer
not yourselues to be withdrawn at any time, from the safe-makinge Testimonies
of God and his holy Spirit of Love / which have been reversed;out of entire
Love; to all your Preservation, healde-fourth by our Fellow-elder HN, before
you / and which are also yeat daily borne before you: For out of those-same,
ye may readelie conceive the true and upright Being of the regenerated Men ^
and their true Freedom with the Children of God: as also understand, whereto ye
are created ^ and called or bidden, through the Service of the Love: And ye
shall euenso well perceive, the pernicious Seducinge of the Sap. 2. a. 14. b.
Romans 1. c. 2. Pet. 2. b.
false Freedom of all unregenerated Men, whereof ye are presently warned.

14. Thus beware that ye eat not Act. 15. ^.
of That NOTA
which is strangled in the Blood. go not to the Aulters of the Heathen or
Uncircumcised / for to offer-vp your willing Guiftes thereon to the Lord. have
not any Lust for to eat 1. Cor. 10. c
of that which is offered to their Idol. mu^e not yourselues familier 1. Cor.
5. b.
with their Uncleanness. go not in also to their Howse-of-laughter / inasmuch as
the same reversed;assuredly; lies altogether desolate. nether rejoice you with
the Unrepentant: but turn you therfrom / Eccle. 7. a.
and go much-rather into the Howse-of-lamentation reversed;or Mourning-howse;
Esa. 66. a.
wheare the Littleones and Poor are / wheare y^ Goodwillinge and Obedientones
are / and wheare the Humble and Lowly ^ the Merciful and Meeke-minded ^ and
the Math. 5. a.
Hungry and Thirsty after the Righteousness, are: and wheare-as also there is
Sorrow borne and Repentance showed for the Sin: and ther-out let your Joy
/ Freedom / and Peace ^ and all your Familiarity or Common-heartednes / Love /
and Wisdom, have his proceeding / and be brought-fourth / So shall ye then
understand aright, that I have written and administered the Truth unto you: and
that this Counsel of the Wisdom, is not of Man ^ but of God.

15. Therefore take now in-tyme, the Counsel Pro. 2. 4. ^.
to heart / and assemble you all unto us / and to our Service of Love: and in
the same Service, let all your Understanding become renewed / to a right
Inspection of the upright Being, wherein the Man ^ught reversed;concordablie;
to stand comprehended: To the end that there might be found among us all that
love the Righteousness, one concordable Mind, Romans 12. 15. 1. Cor. 1. a.
to the Unity of Heart ^ one upright Dealinge ^ and one mutual brotherly
Walkinge, euenlike as it is meet and ^ right.

16. Heer-vnto let us become Phil. 2. ^.
like minded / and passe-fourth concordablie reversed;with goodwilling Hearts;
after the same: and not look how Certain reversed;in times-passed; have walked
and spoken / for to retain any Matier against anyone to the worst or to his
reproach: Math. 18. d. Ephe. 4. c. Col. 3. b.
but lay it all down and not think thereon anymore: and let us eue^so turn
our whole Sight, for to behold wher-vnto we were created and chosen / and
what a Love and Mercy we Romans 13. b.
are deptours to exte^d or show one toward another: and thereunto let us
love and be serviceable one toward another: and euenso enter into the true
Life / and then speak or talk thereof.

The Third Chap.
Hear now therefore the Word of Esa. 5. b. 59. a Math. 6. c.
Light of y^ deceitful Knowledge, has euery-wheare brought-in and placed his
Stool of Disobedience, among all unrepentant unregenerated Men: and that now
in this Day, y^ Manifestation or Declaringe of all Things that are in Heaven
and upon Earth reversed;both of the Perfect and also of the Imperfect; becomes
reversed;through the serviceable Testimonies of the holy Spirit of Love;
administered and declared, so clear and expreslie unto (...) / So let us now
then respect-well this 2. Cor. 6. a. Gal. 6. ^.
gracious Time / and diligently apply us with each-other
reversed;concordablie; in the same / that the wel-prepared Esa. 16. c.
Stool of Obedience of the true Light of Life (which presently in thissame
Day of the Love reversed;to an everlasting Stoole-of-grace; is com unto us
from Heaven, upon the Earth / and whereon also the Faithfulness does sit, Esa.
16. ^. 32. a.
with Judgment and Mercy) might now be erected euery-wheare reversed;by all
us which love the Righteousness in Jesus Christ; against the Stool of the
Disobedience of the false Light of the Knowledge (which it has broughtfourth
and lifted-vpp out of the Bottomles-pitt, to a Stool of Indignation
reversed;on the North; in the Temple of the Lord: and whereon the
Unfaithfulness, with his unmerciful Judgment has set himself): and that
euenso the same Stool of Obedience, might be planted reversed; Iam. 1. c.
with Meckmindednes; into all Lovers of the upright Righteousness.

2. For through the Erectinge of the same / and in that we all which love the
upright Righteousness, consent and geeue-ouer ourselves reversed;according to
the Requiring of the gracious Word and his Service of Love; thereunto, we
shall rightly and according to the Truth, be brought to the true freedom
John. 8. c.
of the Children of God ^ Math. 13. f.
taught to the Kingdom of Heavens ^ and John. 15. a. 17. c.
implanted to the upright Being of Jesus Christ.

3. Yea in such-wise reversed;in the Consentinge and Romans 16. c.
trodden under feet and utterly broughtto-nothing, by us and by all Believers
and Obedientones: and it shall euenso appear, that we reversed;in our Faith
and Obedience; are the upright Disciples Luke 14. c. John. 8. c.
or Scholars of the gracious Word of the Lord / and Math. 10. c. ^4. b.
persevere firm therein obedientlie.

4. It shall also right-well appear, that we the Perseueraunce in the
Discipline of the gratio^ Word, do know the Truth, in the Truet^ and that
we also are rightly made-free, not thorough the Knowledge. John. 8. c.
but of the Truth ^ an^ through the Inheritinge of her upright Beeinge.

5. Therefore, follow not now ye Deu. 12. a. Esa. 5. b.
Goodthinkin^ of your Hearts: but ensue the Requiringe of the Testimonies of
the Truth. For in this Day of the Truth, which we presently declare / it
shall all whatsoever is Truth / and of the Truth / and also all Act. 3. ^.
that which God has spoken through his Propheates, from the Beginning of the
World, become now restored ^ Agg. 2. a. b. Apoc. 2^. a.
and erected in his pure Beauty or Excellentie and Perfection, under the
Obedience of the Love: and many People shall be ashamed of their ignorant
Knowledge / and that they have so vncomlie leaned Eccli. 41. c.
with their Elbowe on the Bread ^ not esteemed the same according to the V^lue
thereof ^ and eaten so 1. Cor. 11. c.
unworthily of the same.

6. Have therefore now a good Consideration Judah the Root of David Apoc. 5. a.
the Book of ye Priuie-misterie of God reversed;which is full of Writing both
within and without; becomes opened unto you Apo. 14. ^.
and the ^ighteous Judgment of God and Christ, declared out of the same: and how
that fardermore, the grievous and horrible Beast of the Bottomles-deapth and
his Stool, shall reversed;through the same Judgment; be cast into his own
Apoc. 17. b. 19. ^. 20. b.
Bottomles-pitt ^ and remain therein damned for evermore.

^. When now therefore all this is accomplished ^ ^d the forementioned grievous
Beast the false ^ght of the Knowledge and his Stool of Diso^dience the 4. Esd.
4. c. d.
Place wheare the Evil is sown ^st-downe and overthrown ^ and with his
Adhe^ntes, damned in the Bottomles-pitt: and that ^e upright Beeinge of the
Love the true Light o^ ^ife and his Stool of Obedience ye Place where ^e Good
is sown is set-vpp again / and has got^n the Pre-eminence / Then shall
reversed;verelie; the ^cripture become fulfilled / Apo. 11. 11. b.
and the Kingdom and ^ominion, be the Lords / and the Might, his Christ's.

^. And all Men which repent them of their ^innes, Psalm. 98. a. Esa. 52. b.
shall obtain the Godliness / and inherit ^e true John. 8. c.
Freedom with the Children of God / like ^s the Lord has promised them / and
wher-vnto ^ee has also loved and chosen them, even from the ^eginning: and
shall fardermore understand / that ^e Judgment, which the God of Heaven has
de^ared through HN, upon the Earth ^ and set-fourth through the same his
Minister, is very-true: and that also the same Judgment, pronounces and
de^areth the right Form or State, of all what is in ^eauen and upon Earth and
beneath the Earth ^ of ^ll what is Gods and Man's ^ Spiritual and Hea^enlie ^
and (...) all what is Natural, right, and re^nable: and that no such John. 1.
a. 10. d. 15. c.
Wonderful-woorkes ^oulde be wrought nor brought-fourth by any Man, vnlest God
were with him.

^. They shall also understand, that the Reuea^inge in the last time, is
extending over all Men on the Earth, to their Preservation in the Godliness / to
thend that they all, which are captiued with Sins and estraunged from their
upright State / and from the good Being of God, should be warned (ereuer the
Judgment of God fall upon them) o^ the terrible Misery and Condemnation, Math.
24. c. Luke 21. c. Romans 2. a. Iudae. 1. b.
which shall fall upon the Ungodly / and upon all them that would not
shewe-fourth any Repentance / but despise the proffered Grace of the Lord:
and that they all should euenso reversed;to their Preservation in the Godliness;
turn them to the God of Life / and to his gracious Word and Service of Love
^ repent Act. 2. f. 3. c. 17. d.
them of their Sins ^ and so become prepared to an upright People of the Lord
/ and that the Scripture might euenso become fulfilled reversed;unto good; over
them.

10. O Ye Children of Men, despise not reversed;in anye-case; thissame Pro. 1.
c.
proffered Grace. nether let your Eyes be wicked in their Sight / Math. 6. c.
Luke 11. d.
lest your whole Body become dark: but let them be single / and so become
turned, for to look into the good Being / wher-vnto ye were created of God ^
and chosen through Jesus Christ, and wher-vnto ye are presently loved and
invited or courteousliebidden by the Famelie of Love: and euenso in the same
single Sight, let your Understandings become renewed under the Obedience of the
Love / To the end that ye be not deceived, with any perverse Sight Math. 18. a.
^0. b.
nor Wicked-conceauinge over yt Work and Word of the Lord (according to
the perverse Sight and Wicked-conceauing over yt Work and Word of the Lord
from the Beginning wherwithall the Man was begiled, Genesis ^ ^.
through the ^olde Serpent; nor-yet after the manner of the per^erse Sight and
Wicked-conceauinge, over the Work and Word of the Lord / wherwithall now
also in the last time, the false Light of the Knowledge the Seed of the old
Serpent deceaueth the unrepentant Men): but that ye may have all Math. 6. c.
Luke 11. d.
single-minded Sight / and all good Cogitations, over the same ^ and be
thankful to the Lord for his great Grace, that He so meets you all / and
reaches you the Hand reversed;now in the last time; John. 7. ^.
with the Outflowinge of his gracious Word / and with the Service of his Love
/ for to pluck you again unto Him: to purge you from all wicked Being: and
euenso to set you up again, in your upright Ephe. 1. a.
Form or State, whereunto He created the Man, in the Beginning / and set him
therein: and whereunto He has bidden all Men to com, through his Christ: as
also whereunto He presently reversed;through the holy Spirit and Service of
the Love of his Christ; loves us all / To the end that we should all euenso,
through the same Service of Love and Assistaunce or Hand-reachinge, become washed
and cleansed / and so enter John. 13. b.
with cleane-washed Feet ^ with Eyes of singleminded Sight ^ and with clear
or pure Bodies, Esa. 52. a. Ezech. 44. b.
into the true Sanctuary of the spiritual and heavenly Bewtiful-excellentie.

11. YEa, thereunto let all the Sight of your the serviceable Testimonies of
the gracious Word of the Lord; to your upright Godlynes / To the end that ye
might reversed;without fail; be safetie-kept, from the Seductinge of the
false Light of the Knowledge / which now 1. Tim. 4. a. 2. Tim. 3. a. 2. Pet. 2.
a.
in the last time, breateth-in forciblie, among many unrepentant unregenerated
Men / and that ye should not refuse That, whereunto ye are loved by God-his
Grace. nether-yet also turn you away, from your Godlynes ^ nor from us and our
Documentes, which are serviceable reversed;therein; unto you.

12. And if now it were so reversed;ye Deerlie-beloued; that some of you had been Pro. 6. 14. a.
negligent or sluggish, in that which the gracious Word of the Lord and his
Service of Love requires ^ and turned you away from the Doctrine of the Word
and Service of Love / and from Us the Lords and your Ministers yet remain not
therefore separated from us / nor from our Doctrine of your Godlynes: but turn
you again to the same / and assemble you euenso again reversed;with
goodwilling Hearts; to the Gratious-stoole Heb. 5. a.
of the Remission of all Sins, for the which Sorrow or Contrition is showed
/ and Repentance don: and have euenso out of Love, your communion reversed;or
mutual-societie; again with us / whereby ye might then also with us, have
your communion 1. John. 1. a.
with God the Father / with his Son the Lord Jesus Christ / and with all
Holyones / in all Love: and receive or employ all ye Seruiceablenes which we
show and bestow on you out of Love, unto your Reformation / and not in
any-case unto Math. 1^. ^.
Offenciuenes or Displeasure / that ye may euenso co^tinuallie, be found
humblieminded toward the good Being / and to the Love of your Neighbor.

13. For behold / to that effect / and to all your Sap. 1. ^. 5. ^
Error tending to their Destruction, before all your Eyes and Ears / To
the end that ye should rightly and according to the Truth, looke-into /
understand / and believe the forementioned godly Testimonies of our Writings
the wonderful Works of God which also declare-fourth reversed;with full
Instruction; the same Preservation of Men and their Destruction ^ and apply you
rightly, according to the Requiringe of the same ^ John. 20. c.
and so become saved.

14. But heerin (to-weet, in this Declaration) I have no respect of persons,
nether of great nor small: but call you all, to the Renewinge in your
Understanding ^ Esa. 40. ^. Math. 3. ^.
to the upright Repentance for the Sin ^ and to the Math. 18. ^.
childish Singlemindednes and Obedience, 1. Pet. 1. c.
which the gracious Word of the Lord requires, in his Service of Love / to
the end that ye all might euenso, become turnedabout to the same childish
Singlemindednes and Obedience ^ instructed to the John. ^ ^.
new Birth in Jesus Christ, and to the Passe-ouer of the same ^ taught to the
Math. 13 ^.
Kingdom of Heavens ^ and lead-in to the true Esa. 32. Sap. 3. 5. a.
Rest and Freedom of the Children of God / and Romans 6. c.
inherit the eternal Life: and that the Word which the Lord Jesus John. 19.
c.
spoke / in the End of his Passion [ Consummatum est] It is finished, might
also be then rightly and according to the Truth, spoken by you all.

15. For when as all that which the Lord requires through his Word and
through the Service of his Love, is fulfilled, with us all / and in us all / so
is then also verelie with us all [namelie / by those, with whom the same is
fulfilled] the ^. Cor. 15. ^. f Oze. 13. ^.
End of the Sin ^ and the Death of the same, com-to-pas or attayned-vnto: and
thatsame End of the Sin and her Death, 4. Esd. 7. e.
is the Beginning of the eternal Immortality: and is also the upright John.
8. ^.
Freedom in Jesus Christ, wher-vnto all Men Jews and Greeks / Circumcised and
Uncircumcised / Wise and Unwise. etc are called an^ bidden, by the Grace of God.

The IIII. Chap.
Therefore look now all well unto it, Math. 24. b.
always a good watch, toward all those that com unto you with subtle Words
and manly Prudence, for to seduce you from the godly Doctrine of the Service
of Love / Romans 16. c.
and separate yourselues from Such / for they make Breach / and bringe-in
Offense / and not any Concord to the Unity of heart, in the Love: but
endeavor you for to com and go-in, whereunto ye are now in the last time
reversed;out of the Grace of God; called through the Ministration of the
gracious Word of the Lord, under the Obedience of the Love.

2. Howbeit, ye are not called to the Hardeheartednes of y^ unmerciful Man
over his Frinde: nor-yet to com to the Exo. 19. ^. ^
Hill which is terrible / or which is heald-fourth as terrible before you, by
us / nether-yet to the Hill, which ye / being unprepared or unsanctified, may
touch: but ye are called to the holy Heb. 12. c.
Hill of Sion. to the peaceable City of the living God. and to the heavenly
Jerusalem: to the Multitude of many Thowsandes of Angels or Saints. to the
Communialtie of the Firstborne that are written in Heaven. and to God the true
Judge over All: to the Spirits of the perfect Righteousness. to Jesus, the true
Mediator of the new Testament. and to the Sprincklinge of Blood, which
speaks more or greater then the Blood of Abel.

3. Which pure and singular Bewtifulnesses of Mark. 16. b. Luke 24. f. Act. 1.
b.
Euangelie or Ioyful-message / and which is also com unto us, now in the last
time reversed;to a peaceable Kingdom and Gratious-stoole of the perfect Glory
of God and Triumphing of Jesus Christ, with all the Multitudes of many
Thowsandes of Saints; according to the Scriptures) we do also presently in
thissame Day, publish or spread-abrode, Math. 24. b. Apoc. 14. ^.
to an Eua^gelie or Ioyful-message of the same. Kingdom ^ NOTA
and to an eternal Glory of the Goodness of God and of his gracious Dominion
over all Repentantones, in the universal World / Math. 24. b.
to a Testimony toward all People, Ezec. 7. a. b. c
that the End comes / namely, the Fulfillinge of all that which is written of
the Judgment and Righteousness of God ^ of the Salvation and Preservation of the
Man ^ and of his Iniquity / Destruction / and Condemnation.

4. Therefore ye have now to Heb. 12. ^.
looke-well hereunto / that ye refuse not thatsame whereunto ye are called and
required for to com, by Him which speaks unto you / that the Destruction
bewrappe you not to your Perdition. For if They escaped not the Destruction,
which refused Him in tymes-past, when as He spoke unto them on the Earth /
muchlesse then shall ye escape the Destruction, if ye refuse That whereunto
ye are called, by Him which speaks unto you out of Heaven. whose Voice in
tymes-past, n^ooued or shook the Earth.

5. And now reversed;verelie; speaks He and says: A^. 2. ^. Heb. 12. c.
once-more will I move, not only the Earth. but also the Heaven / To the end
that It which is become moveable, may be changed / and be then immovable,
likeas it was made: and that God-his Kingdom of perfect Beauty and
Peaceablenes, might then euenso be and remain immovable always and for-euer
upon y^ Earth, as in Heaven. Which Kingdom we now inherit in the John. ^. a.
Tit. 3. b.
second Birth, that cometh-to-passe in Jesus Christ, and is the everlasting
Sap. 1. b.
Immortality: and which also bydeth fast-standinge before God, for evermore /
and inheriteth in itself, all that which is everlasting and immortal.

6. And the same second Birth in Jesus Christ, is Math. 19. d.
verelie the true Birth, which standeth-fast perpetually unremovable, in the
Judgment of God ^ and in the Communialtie of the Righteous: and wherein we also
serve and please the God of Heaven, rightly and according to the Truth.

7. FOr-that-cause, Romans 13. b.
awake now all out of your Dream / and turn the Sight of your Eyes, to the
true Light of Life: and discern or distinct the same, from out-of the false
Light of the Knowledge: and behold then euenso the perditionable End of
the same false Light / and how that the wicked World and all Vnrepentantones
reversed;which admit or take unto them the false Light; shall not be able to
escape the same perditionable End / but must needs bear a like Math. 25. d.
Romans 2. a. 2. Tess. 1. a.
Sentence of Condemnation with the same. Yea, look well into the same / and
consider advisedly thereon / that ye may be defended from the same
perditionable End ^ and preserved in the Godliness of the true Light of Life,
which is required out of the Ministration of the gracious Word and his
Service of Love.

8. For seeinge that the Dominion of the false Light, 4. Esdr. 14. b. Math. 24.
b.
reigns now so mightelie in the wicked World and in her Adherentes, with
al-maner of Falshod and Malitious-subtiltie: and that likewise many Adherentes
of the wicked World, have a Lust and stand-inclined thereunto / So is now also
the Destruction of the wicked World and her Adherentes, com harde-at-hande /
according to the Scriptures: For the Ezech. 7. ^. Math. 24. b. c
End of the wicked World comes upon all the four Corners of the Land. Yea,
euen-now reversed;in the Judgment 4. Esd. 13. d. Iudae. ^. b.
of God with all his Holyones; comes the End over her: For now Ezech. 7. a.
will the Lord send-fourth his Indignation ^ and Apoc. 6. c.
the Lamb his Wrath, over her / and judge her, according as she has
deserved: and let all that com upon her, which appertains to her
Abominations for to receive.

9. Thus become heer-withall admonished / and make not yourselues reversed;in
any-wise; familier nor ofone-beeinge with any-thinge that cleaves unto the
wicked World / that ye perrish not therewith: For the Ezech. 7. a.
Eye of the Lord shall not spare the wicked World ^ nor any of all those
which cleave unto her / nether-yet also look upon her, to her Excusation.
(...). Esdr. 13. c. Apoc. 18. b. c.
but will let com upon her and her Ministers, like as they have deserved.

10. For-that-cause / have now a right regard, Ezech. 3. ^.
and warn you of the Abominations of the wicked World and her Destruction /
to the end that ye should not perrish with her. For I foretell you assuredly,
that the Abominations of y^ wicked World (have therefore a circumspect
consideration heeron, O ye Children of Men) shall breake-in among you / and
ye shall likewise be vehemently assaulted therewith.

11. Nevertheless / if ye hold you firmlie to the Requiring of the gracious
Word and his Service of Love / ye shall then be delivered from the wicked
(...). 2. a. Ephe. 6. c. Heb. 12. a.
Assaultinges which com against you, out of the Abominations of the wicked
World ^ and out of the Falshod of our Resisters / and inherit the Crown Sap.
3. (...). 2. Tim. 4. (...).
of the eternal Life / and the true Annointinge Psalm. 45. b. 1. John. 2. c.
of the Ioyful-oyle of the holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ: and euenso
finde-by-experience, that our God of Love, is the true Lord / and that We his
obedient Communialtie of the Love are his acceptable People: and that also they
all, which bide estraunged from the same God. as also remain without us and
our Communialtie ^ and without the Requiringe of the gracious Word and his
Service of Love / or withdraw themselves therfrom, have no living God nor-yet
true Godseruice: Ephe. 2. b.
but are without God and without Godseruice, in this World. For our God 1.
John. 4. (...).
of Love, is the true living God / and Esa. 43. 44. 2.
besides Him, there is no God more. and his Godseruice of Love reversed;which
we minister under the Obedience of his Love; is the true safe-making
Godseruice / and besides the same, there is not any Godseruice more, nether in
Heaven nor-yet upon Earth.

12. Therefore is our God, a God and Life of his upright Beeinge / and a God and
Life of his People, which love his upright Beeinge / and have a Psalm. 4^. (...).
Lust to accomplish his Will, under the Obedience of his Love: and the same our
God, is also an Enemy and Death unto all false Beeinge of y^ perverse World /
and an Enemy and Death unto all Ungodly which hate his upright Beeinge / and
resist his Will ^ and the Obedience of the Requiringe of his Word. And
therefore our God of Love, is (...). 1^. (...).
a God that soueth the true Righteousness / and hates all ungodly Being: and
in such-like-sort we also with Him, even with all Inclination to do his Will.

13. Therefore goes now also Esa. 2. 8. Mic^. 4. (...).
the Word of the Jerusalem reversed;over the perverse World, to her
Destruction: but over all Believers and Obedientones of the gracious Word, to
their Preservation in the Godliness; and warns us all / together with all
those which clea^e with us unto the Requiringe of the gracious Word of the
Lord and his Service of Love, of the terrible Esa. 13. a Mal. 4. a.
Destruction that is for to com upon the wicked World and her Abominations ^
and upon all those that bide without us and our Service of Love / and resist
our God and his gracious Word of Life / and speaks euen-thus:

14. O Ye Children of Men / Math. 2. c.
attend or watch now all on the Destruction which is for to com. Ezech. 7. a.
For so / the one Infelicitie comes upon another: The one Woe goes before /
and the other Woe follows thereupon much-more rigorous: And albeit that the
one Night passeth-ouer by many / and that they then suppose, that it is become
Day with them, in their Unregeneration / and that the Infelicitie has not
com-nye or lighted-on them in the fore-goinge Night / yet are they not therefore
escaped the Infelicitie / nether shall the other Nights bide-backe or not com
upon them: but they shall all follow upon y^ foregoing Night / and every
sondrie Night shall make-manifest and bring with him, his own Infelicitie and
Destruction over them / until that the last most-horrible Night be com upon
them, in unmeasurable and vnqueanchable Destruction.

15. OH! what an unmeasurable Woe, cometh-ther Romans 2. a.
no Repentance / nor will assemble them, wher-vnto they are called and bidden
through the gracious Word and his Service of Love, to their Preservation in
the Godliness.

16. For-that-cause separate you now all 4. Esd. 2. d.
from the wicked World / and shew-fourth Repentance / and save or rid your
Soul and Body from the Destruction / and forsake Math. 16. (...). Luke 9. 14.
d.
all what is your own / and bring unto the Lord that 2. Para. 30.
which is His: For the End comes. Behold, Ezech. 7. b.
it comes swiftly on / and begins alredie to make his Entrance / and
breaketh-thorowe very stowtlie over the Inhabitants of the Land.

17. The Time of Destruction comes / and the great terrible Misery is
harde-at-hande. Ezech. 7. b.
Therefore, mourn not now over that which ye have sold / rejoice not also
over that which ye have bought / but let him that mourns, mourn for that
the Iniquity 4. Esd. 14. b. Math. 24. b.
reigns so mightesie / and let him that rejoices, rejoice in the
Intelligence of the true godly Beeinge / and in the Hope of the tocoming
Peace: For the Time of Destruction brings not els-what with it, but an
Inspection of great Affliction / Dolor / and Misery: Ezech. 7. b.
and there shall not be any Singinge heard therein, to the Ioyfulnes of Life. but
all Bewayling and Rufulnes / and Seekinge of Death: For such an Endinge, will
the Lord now shortly bring upon the wicked World / and powre-fourth his
Indignation, upon them that are so full of Falshod: and will euenso fully
accomplish his Wrath over them.

The V. Chap.
Behold / now comes the Day: Ezech. 7. c.
theare comes he / and breakethfourth / and shall not defer him. For the
Rod does blossom / the Proud waxes green / and Tirannie has made-vpp
itself, to a Punnishment over the Ungodly: in such-wise / that none of them
nor of ye Multitude of their Heaps, shall have any stay of Comfort either
Hope: For the Indignation of the Lord passeth-fourth over all the Multitude of
their Heaps: Ezech. 7. b.
Yea, the Sword raingeth-abrode in their Streates / and the Pestilence and
Hunger is in their Howses.

2. They shall reversed;even out of great Misery; castfourth their Esa. 2.
(...). 30. c. 31. c. Ezech. 7. b. 4. Esdr. 16. c.
Silver on the Streates / and esteem their Gold and Bragginge-iewels or
Riches, as Filthynes or Dirte. Soph. 1. c. Eccli. 5. b.
For all this shall not deliver them, in the Day of the Wrath of the Lord:
nether shall they also suffice their Sowles therewith / nor fill their Belly
therewith all: for all thatsame has not wrought in them any Reformation nor
Righteousness / but rather Offenciuenes and Malice, to the ingendringe of
Misdooinge: and they have euenso used their Jewels or Riches, unto Pride / and
made the same to an Abomination before the Lord.

3. OH! How full of Ezech. 7. c.
Bloud-giltines are the Lands / and how full of Malitiousgrudginge are the
Cities: and how full of Variaunce and Resistaunce of the Love, are their
Inhabitants. Therefore has the Lord also devised to bring upon them, the
most-wicked among the Heathen or Uncircumcised / that they might seduce them to
the very-worst / and counsel them to live free, in their sinful Birth ^ in
their Vnrepentaunce ^ and in their Unregeneration: and then will the Lord also
take his occasion therout, to make-an-ende of Ezech. 7. c.
the Pride of the Presumpteous ^ and of the Tirannie of the Violent-oppressours
/ and to disclose the Prophanatinge The Prophanatinge of their Assemblies, are
the Feastifuldayes of the V^ godly^.
or Vnhallowinge of their Assemblies: and will euenso reject both them and also
their Elders or Wise (which they have set-vpp / admitted / and chosen from
among themselves reversed;without the Love and her Service; to be Elders or
Wise ^ as also healde and esteemed them for Such) from the Presence of his Face.

4. Then shall many of them, Ezech. 7. c.
seek after the

5. But Ezech. 7. c.
there shall nether Wisdom / Ordinance of the Lord / nor Vision of Peace ^
nether-yet any Counsel to Concord nor to Preservation, be found by their
Elders. Their Kings or Governors shall then also be afflicted with great
Heauynes ^ and their Princes clothed with Mourning-weede. For their Might and
Dominion shall not be feared / and the Ezech. 7. b.
Hands of the People in the Land, shall find themselves vnmightie ^ and
their Hearts discomforted.

6. Yea / euen-then will the Lord himself Esa. ^2. b.
with his Arm / and with the Arms of his Holyones, be the true Judge upon the
Earth / and cleanse the universal Earth, Math. 3. b. Luke 3. b.
from all the Unrighteousness and Falshod that the Children of Men reversed;in
their Vnrepentaunce and Contemning of the Salvation; have practiced and erected
on the Earth: and they shall eue^so perceaue-in-experience, that our God of
Love, is the true Lord / and that He has never willed the Ezech. 18. d 1.
Tim. 2. a. 2. Pet. 3. a.
Destruction of Men: but always called them to Repentance / and to their
Preservation in the Godlynes / and warned them of the Destruction: euen-like as
his Love and Mercy does also yeat presently in the last Day, shew-fourth
the same.

7. O Ye Children of Men, consider and note Deuteronomy. 11. c. Eccli. 15. c.
Life and of the Death, visited out of entire Love ^ required to com to the
Psalm. 45. b. Esa. 16. c. Heb. 1. b. 5. a.
Gratious-stoole of the godly Majesty, which is com unto us on the Earth ^
and loved reversed;in Jesus Christ; for to have one uniform Heart and Mind
with us / To the end that ye might have your communion with us / whilst
reversed;surely; our communion is 1. Joan. 1. ^.
with God the Father. with the Lord Jesus Christ. and with the true Beeinge of
the Holie-gost.

Take it to heart.

8. WIth this distinct Declaration, there is reversed;even out of Love; required
o^ you all reversed;O ye Children of Men; which hear the same / or to whom it
becomes administered / that eueryone; unto Concord and Romans 15. ^. 1. Cor. 1.
^. 2. Cor. ^3. b.
Vnitie-of-minde to the Love; do open or make-manifest his Heart by us,
euenlike as we do hear by him / and geeue Testimony,
whether that he be of one Mind and Meaning heerin with us / or-els whether
that he reversed;as repugnant unto us; desires not to geeue his consent
heerin.

9. For, inasmuch as that the upright Goodwillingnes to God Math. 22. d. Ephesians.
1. 2. 4. b.
and his synceere Righteousness ^ and the true Common-heartednes of the Romans 12.
b. 1. Pet. 1. c. 3. b
brotherly Love and Conversation, is so nakedlie and expresslie set-fourth
heerwith before you / So can ye also somuch-the-easelier feel and perceive in
your Hearts, whether that ye be goodwillinge with us Littleones and
Lowlyones, to seeke-after the upright Righteousness ^ and after the true
Familiarity of brotherly Love: and whether that ye also desire reversed;in
this Math. 24. b. 1. Tim. 4. a. 2. Tim. 3. a. 2. Pet. 2. ^.
perrelous Time; our willinge Service, thereunto / and to your Preservation in
the Godliness: or that ye as repugnant unto us, are unwilling thereunto: as also
whether that ye reversed;with your Knowledge 1. Tim. 6. ^.
; desire to hold you back and as Strangers, from the same and from Us / and
not to have your soscietie with us / nor-yet do require any Service of Love
reversed;thereunto; at our hands.

10. Therefore let euerye-one now, freely geeue Ephe. 4. b.
true Life of Jesus Christ: and euenso desire to go-out-from and forsake with us
reversed;under the Obedience of the Love of Jesus Christ; all the Worlds
Falshod / and all that which ought not to be by the upright Believers of Jesus
Christ, and so to be the Servants of God, in his upright Romans 6. b.
Righteousness: or whether that ye both against Us / and also against the true
Faith to the upright Righteousness, do rest vnbeleeuinge / and desire not, for
God-his upright Righteousness cause reversed;or for to be the Servants of God
therein; to forsake the Love of the World ^ and all that which is worldly and
unright / together with your own Self-seekinge / nether-yet to consent or
stand-willinge to the same, whereunto ye are presently loved of us.

11. Whosoever now then is 1. Cor. 1. a. 2. Cor. 13. b.
concordablie-minded with us to the good Life and upright Beeinge (whereunto we
have reversed;according to the Requiring of the gracious Word of the Lord;
wholly geuen-ouer our-selues / and all our Heart / Mind ^ and Soul, to a
Esa. 10. c.
Remnant in the Perrishinge o^ the wicked World) and yealdeth his Voice therein
with us / let him also express then therewith, hi^ Inclinable-affect to the same
good Life and vprigh^
Beeinge / and that he consents therein / and hat^ an Heartie-lust and Desire
to the Furtheraunce o^ the Service pertayninge to the same.

12. Over Whom [namelie they that have ^ Lust with us to accomplish the Will of
the Lord and that receive our Warninge for the avoiding of the Destruction ^
and our Doctrine to their Preservation in the Godliness, in Thankes-geeuinge t^
the Lord / and apply them diligently thervnto] w^ will also continually
reversed;to their Preservation in t^ Godliness; shew-fourth our good Care: For
to^ardes such Goodwillingones / and humble Go^ fearingones, we (...) not spare
oursel^ uiceable unto them reversed;both Night and Day; in this perrelous Time
/ inasmuch as they with us, have adjoined themselves reversed;with whole Heart;
to the only living God and the Requiringe of his gracious Word / and also
love Him / and have a Psalm. 40. ^.
Lust to keep his Commandments / and to fulfill Math. 3. c.
all Righteousness.

13. But those which refuse to conuersate them Abac. 1. ^. Act. 13. c.
not Gods Wonderful-woorkes and his Testimonies, set-fourth or brought-to-light
by us. but contemn / deride / and resist those-same and our Service, laid on
us by God: and also backbite and defame us with much Falshod / over Those, we
will shewe-fourth Patience and all Goodness and 2. Cor. 4. a. Tit. 3. a.
Discrectnes.

14. Nevertheless, therein we Act. 20. c.
excuse and clear ourselves before them, as touching their Destruction: as
also of all that which shall com upon them and their Children, by the Evil /
whereof we have warned them / and they would in no-wise hear us. And keep
euenso our Hearts and Conscience pure and unspotted, from their Unbelief and
Unwillingness: Act. 13.
turninge us to the Believers and Goodwillingones ^ and to the humble
Godfearingones, which have a Lust to walk in the Ways of the Lord / and to
do his Will / for to be always serviceable unto Them, to the good Life / and
for to bring unto them, the Declaration of the heavenly Treasures ^ and of
the lovely Beeinge of the 2. Cor. 3. b.
uncovered Face of God and Christ ^ as also of the Mystery Math. 13. a. Col.
2. ^.
of the Kingdom of Heavens / all which gones reversed;in their Unbelief; do
utterly (...).

15. Let eueryone take this effectually to heart / and let noman refuse the
good Beeinge, whereunto God has created the Man ^ and called him thorough Jesus
Christ and his Holyones / and whereunto he is also presently loved, by the
Communialtie of the Love of Jesus Christ.

16. Also let noman be ashamed, to be adjoined unto the Goodness of God and the
Requiringe of his gracious Word / and to confess the same / nether let him
also refuse to assemble him unto us / and to geeue Testimony, that he
desires to endeavor himself according to the Requiringe heerof / and
consents or agrees therein with us: and so to let his inclined Goodwillingnes
appear, that he intends or means with Heart, the Service of Love ^ and
the Ministration to the same that is healde-fourth before him: like-as there is
also (...). 42. d. c. Reave. ^9. d. ^.
required either desired in the Euangelie of the Kingdom, set-fourth by God-his
chosen Minister HN.

17. Take it to heart: and let eueryone respect-well thissame proffered Grace /
and let noman harden his Heart ther-against.

CHARITAS EXTORSIT PER FIDELITAS.

