AN EXACT AND CVRIOVS SVRVEY Of all the East Indies, even to Canton, the chief
City of China: All duly performed by land, by Monsieur de Monfart, the like
whereof was never hitherto, brought to an end.

Wherein also are described the huge Dominions of the great Mogor, to whom
that honorable Knight, Sir Thomas Roe, was lately sent Ambassador from the KING.

Newly translated out of the Trauailers Manuscript.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Dawson, for William Arondell, in Paul's Churchyard,
at the Angel. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL OF PEMBROKE, one of the Lords of his
Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, and Knight of the most Noble order of
the Garter.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THis every way so mean a Book, and so vnmeasurably disproportioned to your
HONORS eminent rank and merit, I durst never have presumed to have cast, no
not so high as your feet, for the first public token of my wholly deouted
service, and humble duty; but that my self being totally, truly and most
deservedly yours, any thing that is in me, or shall ever come from me, little
or much, and of what nature soever, must needs acknowledge that dependence. And
when I remembered, the Earnest is ever the least part, yea often no part, of the
Payment, (neither do I here intend more) I had some hope your true Noblenes
would not altogether reject it. Vouchsafe, then my most noble Lord, to suffer
it to pass as a mere Earnest, or rather an Entayle to your Lord-ship, of
whatsoever I shall at any time hereafter, be able more happily to bring forth,
for your service and pleasure. Which (regardles as it is) if it may but escape
the imputation of an offense, it is the highest aim of him, that neither
desires, nor is worthy longer to live, then he shall give the world notice to
his utmost, how much he is,

Your Lord-ships most humble, and bounden in all duties*

A Preface of the Translator.
YET WAS I NOT SO much the Translator, as the Fashioner of this work. It was
my good hap in my last journey into France, to be acquainted with that brave
Spirit, the right Author and performer thereof; who, a right French Gentleman
withal, howsoever endowed with Courage and other Martial qualities, (yet as
though learning were a stain to a Noble blood, with us) the truth is, he
cannot very well write; strongly possessed, with that active humor of ours, so
much bent to Doing, as can little curb it self to Musing; and with that
preiudicat opinion, (the Ship-wracke of all our young Nobility) that it is
only for a Gentleman to ride, not to read, and rather handle a bad sword,
then a good book, but a Pen least of all. Which has ever been the unlucky
cause that our worthiest counsels, and most generous exployts in peace, or
war, would lie for ever buried under the dust of forgetfulness, with the
same bodies that performed them; If even they who have felt most smart by us,
had not set them down to our own knowledge, and of all nations, to diminish
their shame by the valor of their Enemies. So then this Gentleman having only
taken some notes of his iourneyes, still as he went, not able to make a right
treatise of them, for want of a fit writer in those barbarous Countries, being
as he thought, at his travels end, and happily landed in Christendom, he
found it in this case far more Barbarous. For there he was taken himself,
and in one of the most rich, and famous Sea-citties of the world, kept four
years in prison, watching him carefully, with an intent, so to keep him all
his lifetyme, least by a full discourse he should make other Nations acquainted
with these his observations, thereby to give them an entrance into that Earthly
Paradise, which they so enuiously bar from all notice, and intercourse of the
whole world, by the flaming Mouth of so many Cannons, and the Sunburned
Garrisons of their black Angels, the dearer to sell unto us those delightful
fruits of life, which we could fetch our selves at a better rate: In that
plight, our Traveler was feign to commend all his knowledge to his best
memory (a quality wherewith God has largely requited his not being a great
Rethoritia^) and principally to his notes, which yet in the midst of all his
troubles, and no small losses, he was more careful to keep then his treasure.
So as soon as by a very extraordinary and much unlooked for favor from
Heaven, he had made means, in favor of two great marriages intended, to get
out; and finally, being arrived at Paris, I was chosen for the framing and
setting together this dis-ioynted Treatise, enlarging his notes from his own
mouth (as sometimes one does after a Sermon) and was allowed my own Coppie for
my labor. The like whereof I may safely avouch is but in three hands besides,
through all the world; the one in the Closet of our most Noble and hopeful
young King, (whom God for ever bless:) the other, with a great Prince; the
third, with the Author himself. Now the truth is, that as soon as I had but
the first sight thereof, I immediately, according to my former resolution and
profession, wholly to apply my self, my studies, my life, and best endeavors
to the service and benefit (as far as I can) of this noble Kingdom, my
second and substitute Country, after that which nature first binds me unto,
purposed with my self to publish it here, as a witness of my true and
ancient love. A love indeed not humorous, nor new, but truly bred, euenwith
nature in my childhood, and before my knowledge, under the tender care of an
English mother, now of late in my riper and best years, upon good trial and
just reasons, (or such at least as I do flatter my self to be so) grown by
habitude to such a point of bewitching, as even I content my self to forbear
my right Country and Kindred, with all my hopes, perhaps not altogether
unlikely, (or but mere hopes vnbegun) of higher preferment in the multitude
of so many friends, great and small, and of both Religions (as I dare say, and
withal praise God for it,) I have yonder. Neither is that love of mine hid or
unknown to the world. There are books extant in more then one Language to
testify it, which I might very well have kept back, if it had been otherwise;
since even many of mine own Countrymen have taken some exceptions at it, as
though (God forbia) I would in some sort dissolve the bands of nature, far,
far, from my meaning and which scarce can be effected at my very dissolution.
Yet did not my love so much carry me away, as that I would witness it in
superfluous things. Therefore least I should run amiss, I was careful both
to recover and peruse all such Books, and Pamflets, as are to be found in
English, concerning Asia-Trauailes, which in all do not amount to five or
six. And finding the most part speaks of nothing else then of Graecia, Arabia,
Syria, with some stale tales of Jerusalem, so contrary one to another, and so
much beaten, and beaten again, as it is both shame and loss that such toys
should be uttered, (but that ever some pretty wit must get money by making
others loose their time) I thought this Author could not but prove profitable,
and welcome: Seeing that with no other end, but only to see and learn, he did
undertake his travel; without load, or engagement of merchandise, or of any
private end, or company, ranging still up and down, and curiously prying, and
peircing as far as he could into every Island, or Continent; yea, never by
water, where he might by land, has discovered in yonder world more Nations,
more People, more Kingdoms, more Towns, more Fashions, more Particularities,
then ever any man before, or since, to our knowledge. Now for the Style, this
man does not stand upon flowers, nor I my self; who do follow him as near as
I can. Neither does he fill the paper with idle talks of a Tempest, or a
Ship-wracke; a Robbery here, a Disgrace there; or shamefully recount how many
Kicks, how many Knocks, and Bastinadoes he had this way, or that way; a thing
more then most common among Turks and Infidels. He swears upon his credit he
had none. Neither does he stand upon any other vain particulars; but directly
goes to the maine; saying what he can, and what he knows goes to the
heart, and life of whom he intends to be revenged, not only for his long
imprisonment, but also for somewhat more then he dares write for this present.
Whereof nevertheless, he will give an inkling in his fit place, before he end;
sufficient enough to inform of the whole, such as are not altogether blind, or
deaf. But now it is high time to hear him speak.

THE TRAVAILES of Monsieur de Monfart to CHINA by land, the like whereof was
never yet performed.
IN the name of GOD, in the year of our LORD, 1608. I Henry Defeynes, commonly
called by the name of the Manor of Monfart, waiting then upon the most
Illustrious, and most Reverend Cardinal of Ioyeuse, upon some private
discontent taken against such a person, of whom I could not well, nor yet
truly would, revenge my self; knowing nothing does so much aggrauate, and
nourrish up grief, as Idleness, yea, idleness in the same place where the grief
has been taken, and in continual sight of the cause and subject thereof;
neither seeing at that time any worthy war in Christendom, to apply my
body and mind away from my wonted thoughts; did fully resolve to undertake
some far and hard travel, that by leaving behind old displeasures, and
purposely going to seek and find me new, I should strive to banish the one,
by means of the other; or at least try what change (the chiefest, I think,
comfort in misery) would work in me: For sure it is not to have fellows,
otherwise a man might soon be contented.

First then I went the common and nearer way from Paris directly to Venice, not
yet well resolved which way I should bend afterward; but determining there to
take my course. At Venice I must needs indeed take ship. Therefore having
resolved upon Babylon, Persia, and the East Indies, I sailed to Alexandretta,
otherwise called by the Turks, Scanderone, in Syria. This is a common way, a
known town, which serves for a haven to Aleppo, though three days journey
off. It is an ill-fauoured, unlucky, and unwholesome City, within eight miles
of Tharshis, the birth-Cittie of S. Paul. But many, going and returning daily
from thence, have both said and written so much of it, as I need little to
add. Only thus much, that it is the first place of firm land, where first and
foremost, and for the first discommoditie, there are no Innes to be found for
travelers: so that they must either carry their own victuals, and provision
themselves, or put it upon Cammels. Secondly, almost all travelers, but
truly at least, and chiefly, all Christians, come to loose the right of
themselves, and become as poor wretched slaves, subject to all injuries,
disgraces, robberies, mis-vsings in words and deeds, by thieves, drunkards, or
the next base fellow, from which their very Ianizaries and Gardes, cannot
always defend them, though they be paid dearly for it, and sometimes indeed
do their best for the same: and for some private offense, either punish the
malefactors themselves, or cause them sharply to be punished. But against
hundreds of thieves, as they flock ordinarily together, to assail passengers,
there is none, nor can be any Justice, or help at all. So that a Christian,
being now become the weaker, though twice stronger, must here begin, whether he
will or no, to observe his masters commandment, and turn the left cheek,
when he has been smitten on the right. For indeed the ready way to prevent
more blows, is even to take the hand that has stricken you, very heartily
kissing it, and with a cheereful countenance, stroke the knave by the beard,
which he will take very kindly.

From Scanderone therefore, I went to Aleppo; and your chief place in the way,
is Antiochia, where Christians were first so called. This Aleppo is one of the
fairest and greatest Mart-Citties in all the world. And from thence one cannot
travel with a simple guarde or Conuoy; but with whole Carauans, (otherwise
called Caffes) that is, whole numbers and multitudes of men, with their
Cammels, ioining and cleaving all in a troop, like an Army; to march together
in those hence forward most hard, desolate, and very dangerous ways.

There having found the usual Ambassador from the Basha of Babylon, Captain
of the Caffe, or Carauane, 20 l. sterling
which goes twice a year from thence thither, I gave him a 100. Rials of
eight, for my diet and safe conduct, The Desert.
through the Arabian desert. The Carauane co^sisted at that time of 10000 men
or rather more. They travel all by night, as well to avoid the vehement heat
of the day, as to be guided by the star; and therefore such guides as are
expert in that faculty, name themselves Pilots. They carry all their victuals
on Cammels, till they come to certain place beyond the Desert, whereof I Will
speak anon. This desert is all sandy, and destitute of paths, or highwayes;
neither may there be any, by reason of the continual motion, which the wind
causes in the sand. All that grows there, as well trees as shrubbs, are
Caper-plants, or Tamariskes, on which the Cammels do feed. There shall you
find no kind of fierce, or Savage beasts, but only Asses, Roes and Gazells,
(which is a kind of wild goats) with an innumerable number of Staggs; yea in
such quantity, and so bold, as often times they run through the Carauane, not
knowing whether men are to be feared or no.

We were most commonly constrained for mere necessity, to go and bayte out of
our way, to enjoy the use and commodity of some wells, which to this day are
preserved among the ruins of certain towns, that heretofore were builded, in
those places; And sometimes without finding any: They make their prouison of
water in great Borachoes, made of whole goate-skins; and sometimes are much
distressed through want of it.

There is no foul in all the desert but Pigions, which nestle in those ruins.
The king of this hither part of the desert, is a Mohammedan, tributarie to the
Turk, and so superstitious or timorous, that by reason of certain vows,
customs and ancient traditions, he never enters under any roof, the better
to behold his forces about him. He is so strong, that at an hours warning he
will bring 100000. horsemen to the field; with out any difficulty, their horses
being the goodliest in the world. Their Attire is after the Turkish fashion,
Turbant only excepted, in steed whereof they have a kind of Capp, rolled about
with a black Turbant. They are of a swart complexion, and all as well men as
women go almost naked. It is very true that such as intend to write back to
Aleppo, take with them at their departure some sitting Pigions from their
youngones, which afterward they let fly back again from what part soever
they will, handsomely laden with their letters: And the like do they in some
other cases for speedy warnings through all those parts.

After thirty days journey, more or less, we came to Nane, where the whole
Carauan takes water upon Euphrates; Nane, or Anna.
and there we reposed and refresht our selves some eight days together,
expecting boats for our transportation. It is a good Town, full of bad
people; but yet there begins to cease all penury, and discommodity for want of
victuals, finding in that Country all kind of meats, and refreshings fit for
man's life. So we embarked our selves there; and after twelve days came within
four leagues of Babylon: having seen nothing else on either side the river
but Palme-trees, and Date-trees, which bear most excellent fruit when they
be ripe, and return a most comfortable odor on the water. Between Nane and
Babylon, Mare Piceum, whereof Strabo, Pliny and Curtius, do also speak.
there is a great lake, which is vulgarly named the Pitchie sea. I went
expressly to see the head of it; which proceeds out of a rock in five
several clefts, about the bigness of a man's waste; which soon after meeting al
in one; run 18. leagues long, till it loses it self under the ground. This
black and thick lickour serves to build withal, instead of lime.

There the Basha, sent us all manner of necessary assistance, to bring our men
and Merchandice to Babylon, Babylon.
paying a certain custom, as one per centum, silver and precious stones,
excepted which are tole-free. This City, which now the Turks call Bagdat, is
at this present situate upon the River Tigris, and not upon Euphrates, as
aunciently it was; though it be still the self same stuff and rubbish, which
the Babilonians carried four leagues further, to rebuild their CITY, on the
bank of TIGRIS; wherein finding yet a further inconvenience, they transported
it on the other side; as to this day there are yet extant great tokens,
together with some habitations which have still kept in the first place. There
is also a great bridge of boats, though som-what incommodious by reason of the
largenes and height of the River. The town is twice as big as Paris, but
therein are many great Gardens, Orchards, and arrable grounds: and that which
seems most admirable, is to see so great an enclosure, compassed with so fair
walls. For indeed 4. wagons may go a front upon them, and are built all with
brick. The houses within the City are low enough, vaulted under, and
tarassed on the top. The Castle is exceeding strong, fair, great, and well
stored with munition. There the Basha makes his dwelling place. I saw him
walk abroad on a day, and it was reported he had very near 50000 foot to
wait upon him, and as many horse, the best arraied that can ever be, having
their harnesses all decked with gold, silver, and precious stones, to the very
stirrups: with a great noise of Trumpets, Drums, Cimbals, Clarions and
hautbois. I was so curious likewise as to go to the place, where it is said
the great tower of Babel was built, Tower of Babell.
being about half a days journey distant; where I saw nothing but a high
mountain of earth in the midst of a plain wherein digging you may find
certain bricks, whereof it is laid the tower was built.

From Babylon I went to Ezpan, Ezpan, or Ispahan in Persia.
now the chief and most gallant City of Persia (I durst almost say of all
the world) where the Sophy is most resident. The way is troublesome and
discomodious enough, being of fifteen long days travail, through wast
deserts, void of al towns and houses, or any other succor, partly by nature,
partly so wasted of purpose to impeach th'approches of the Turk. Only from
one days Journey to another, the Sophie has caused to be erected certain
kind of great harbors, or huge lodgings (like hamlets) called Carauan-sara, or
Surroyes, for the benefit of Carauanes; out of which lodgings, trauailers dare
not issue without a conuoy, which the governors of the said places give from
one to another; and the Captain of the conuoy must bring back a good
certificat from the Captain of the Carauan, how he has faithfully brought
them to the next lodging, and that they were well pleased with his conuoy.
Otherwise upon the least complaint the king should hear, he would cause the
Governors head to be cut off, Severe justice.
and his house set a fire, under whom the spoil were committed; restoring to
the full out of his own treasure, what goods soever of the Merchants, which
were past recovery. Yet is it true, thereof have been seen few examples by
reason of very few misdemeanures in that nature; but whenever any has
happned, that justice has been severely executed. Now these lodgings are
exceeding comely with fair shops belonging thereto; and are able to entertain
all Carauans, never so great, the like being so set throughout all Persia.

Hispaan is half as big again as Paris; very strong, very populous, and
wonderful frequented, as well because of traffic, as for the Kings presence
and all the Courts of Justice, Checker, and Religion. It is impossible to
relate the pleasures, recreations and delights which are there; either for
stately Buildings, great fair Gardens; store and goodness of fruits, continual
riding, and all other kinds of noble exercises, with an incredible Pomp,
triumph and magnificence, where once they undertake it. There is also great
peace and plenty through all Persia, both of common things, which others have
in some sort as well as they; as of sundry other singularities which none have
but they indeed, or at least with such abundance and excellency. Among other,
the finest, fairest, and best bezear-stones which they find cleaving to the
liver of certain goats. There also is found the great mine of Turquesses;
and the greatest quantity of silk that can be imagined, which the men
themselves do spinne. For their bodies, they are reasonable handsome, for
their minds, reasonable tractable and civil.

Being in the said City I saw 70000. gallant Harquebusiers go out to meet
the king, at his return from a victorious journey against the Turks, upon
whom he had conquered four Provinces; and because they were not come far
enough to his mind, Pleasant severity.
he did condemn them to pay three Zequins a piece, with threats that if they
offended again in the like he would cut off their heads: And did compel them
to remain in guard in a large spacious place before his Palace; where every
evening he caused them to play and exercise themselves as though they had been
in war: causing withal store of artillery to be shot in among them, and if
any one through fear seemed to neglect his duty, he caused his Turbant to be
taken off, and the man knocked down to death with staves, Then cruel.
himself giving the first stroke. At this his entry they made him a great
triumph, with a long magnificence. Among the rest they erected in the said
place before his Palace, four fortresses: A true asiatall Magnificence.
all full of fire-workes, with Lions, Dragons, Leopards, Crocodils and other
beasts; whose motion was artificially made to run upon lines, from one fort to
another, fighting as they had been alive. They made likewise four forests to
be burnt, consisting of all sorts of fruit full trees; whereon the fruits were
so naturally represented, that nothing could be more perfect.

The said place is all vaulted about with Porches, like to the Place Royal in
Paris; Like the royal Exchange in London but exceeding far greater
having fair shops of every side, as well within as without. There the king
commanded each one, according to his several trade, to deck their shops in the
richest manner they could; which they also did: and having shut up all the
passages for the sun, there was no other light but with lamps and torches,
placed in the best order that can ever be devised, which burning continually
did return a brightness cleerer then the day it self, and I might well have
said there was all the riches in the world, for so they had dilligently sought
after, and either bought, or borrowed it of purpose from all parts, to appear
every one more gallant and well-minded to their Prince, then his neighbor.
Surely all that ever I have seen since, through al my trauails, I think I saw
it first there. About four a clock in the evening, the King used to come
within that place and remained there til morning, playing, walking, and passing
the time: which triumphs, continued so for the space of two months together.
There I saw the greatest quantity of rich stuffes and tapistries that ever I
saw before or since; silver, and coined money of all countries; yea with a good
quantity out of France and Spain. Within that place there is a 1000 pieces of
ordinance as well great as small, which they say they had gotten from the
Turk; And among the rest I perceived four French pieces, of which having told
the king, he made me answer, that he had taken them from the great Vizier,
when he defeated him before Tawris, in his fathers time.

He is in a manner of the same religion the Turk is of, except some, I know
not what differences, which I understand not: being heretics, one to another.
When the King dies, he that succedeth puts out the eyes of all his Brethren,
and keeps them close prisoners in a great Castle, but yet with as much ease
as he can; a kind of courtesy which has been but since this kings time that
now is, for in times past they slew them as they do in Turkey.

From Ispaan I went to Casbin, Casbin.
12. days journey distant, a very Populous and rich City, and of great
Traffic, about the bigness of Orleans: which though it be great and strong
enough, yet the chiefest strength thereof lies in the great number of horsemen
that are continually about it. But there are no further commodities then at
Ispaan. From thence I travailed 15. days iourny through very fair and well
manured countries, Tauris.
till I came to Tauris. A City very populous too, and of great traffic,
somewhat perhaps bigger then Toulouze And was heretofore far greater, yea of
a huge bigness, as yet is to be seen by the ruins; but since having bin
sacked, and sacked again by the Turk, has lost almost all former beauty,
having heretofore, both for the fairenes and plentifulnes of the soil, and
statelines of the place, bin the seat of the Persian Kings.

Thence I prosecuted my trauail to Syras, being 16. days journey distant.
Syras.
It is still a brave place for trade, but chiefly for armor; the healthfullest
Seat and the fairest in all Persia: where the Verdican or lieutenant general
of the Sophie, resideth with all his Ianizaries, to the number of 50000.
horsemen; the best horses in the world next to those of the desert: for they
dare not have any other, but such as the king gives them, neither can they
sell them: and when they die he gives them others, as also to all the rest of
his horsemen.

The City is somewhat greater then Auignon, where there are the fairest
remnants of greatness, and of stately buildings, the finest Gardens* Brooks and
Fountains that can be seen. There are kinds of causeys in those parts made
for pleasure 12. leagues in length, bordered on each side with fair trees, in
form of a vaulted palisado, so thick, that the sun beams cannot pierce
through. Of each side of them there are fair springs of clear running water,
and between every 15. foot of ground, are great vessels full of clear
water, made in form of a fountain, which throws out water the bigness of a
man's body.

From Syras I went 8. days journey to the chief City of the great Realm of
Lar, Lar.
which gives his name to the whole kingdom, and from whence coms the best
Bezar-stones. There is the galantest, the strongest, and best stored Castle
under the Persian king, being impossible to be battered or mined; underneath is
the City wholly commanded by this Castle.

There the king causes such an order to be observed through his whole
kingdom, that before his Subjects sell any thing, those commodities, that are
his own shall first be put to sale, then they must sell theirs at the same
rate. He is very affable to strangers.

From Lar I went to Bandier, Bandier.
a small fort which the Portugals hold in Persia, to supply Ormus with water
and victual, which has but very little or none at all.

Thence I past to Ormus, an Island and kingdom which the Portugals do hold,
though the Moorish king has not abandoned his possession, but live in some
reasonable peace one with another. It is of a great force and consequence to
them, drawing from thence very great commodities, for it lies just in the
passage to Mecha, and of necessity every ship that passes that way, must
make a stay there to pay the customs. Among the rest I can affirm to have
seen one, that willingly taxed her self at 100000. Francs for her customs.
10000. l. sterling.
There is but Brimstone and salt in this Island, with out fresh water or any
other commodity, and they must carry from Persia, all what they stand in need
of: the Island is but 3. leagues compass, but there depends on it diverse other
countries: the goulph is but 4. leagues over, which is all the distance from
Persia to Ormus.

There I embarked my self for Macati, Macati in Arabia petrea.
which is a fortress in Arabia Petrea, on the same side of Ormus, and some 8.
days journey distant, belonging to the Portugals. This place is between
Ormus, and Sourat: there are exceeding good horses, swifter then those of
Persia: but lesser and yet more headstrong. There is also a great quantity of
Dates, which is their best merchandice, for man and horse do eat of them.
They are Mahometans, of a duskie hue, and as well men as women, wear long
gowns with long high hats, without brim, and nothing but the crown.

There I embarked again for Sindio, Sindio.
which is another Island and kingdom, about 80. or a 100, leagues compass, and
there I saw nothing but store of fair feathers, and plumes of two kinds of
Herons, whereof they make great traffic, because they are found no where else.
Likewise they have all sorts of skins, which are wrought very curiously with
needle-worke serving to sleep on in the cool. There is also great quantity
of Rice, which is all their merchandise, and is a great traffic throughout
all the Indies. They are Gentiles, and adore that creature, on which they first
place their devotion. They wash themselves every morning before the Sun
rising, and in the evening after Sun setting, they wash their hair also,
which they wear very long, and comb them very carefully, like women. They
burn their dead men: and their best beloved wives being trickt up in their
best and sumptuosest apparel, are conducted by their nearest kinsfolks, and
go nine turns about the fire, and at the ninth round throw themselves very
cherefully in the midst of it. They are a very loyal and chaste people, and
who would not be a lier for a world.

Thence I returned the same way I came, Returned to Bandier, to get again into
the Continent, and thence to Cambaya, a great Kingdom, the the beginning that
way of the huge Territories of the great Mogor.
to Bandier, and prosecuting my travail by land, I entered the confines of the
great Mogor, and made it two months, and a half till I came to Cambaya, the
Metropolitan City of that Kingdom, and whereof it bears the name. There are
found all kind of Marchandises, and Jewels, to wit, Diamonds, Saphirs, Pearls,
Rubies, Cats-eies, and great quantity of Crystal, Cotton linen, and silk
stuffes. This City is very near as big as Hispaan. The great Mogor
oftentimes makes there his reside^ce: he is a Gentile, and adoreth a Bull and a
Cow, which they Marry together, and keep them in a kind of Temple, of an
inestimable value: their Cratch is all covered with Diamonds, Emeralds, and
other more precious Jewels, the Arches and walls, are all full of them: and no
sooner they can recover any rare things, but they carry them thither to the
offering. Then the offspring which is produced from this noble Marriage,
succeeds also to be their God. They have an hospital for all sorts of sick
beasts, whereon they bestow great costs, and they observe the before mentioned
custom in burning their dead bodies. This is a wonderful mighty Prince, able
to bring, at any time 400000. gallant soldiers, and above to the field. In my
conscience, I think, he is very near as mighty, as rich, and Lord of as much
ground, better peopled (at least, I am sure) then the Turk himself; with as
many great Kingdoms, with their Viceroyes, as many brave Towns, as Bramport
by name, Agra, Lahor, and others, not inferior in any thing to any the Turk
has: They altogether make use of Elephants, as well to carry burdens, as to
launch forth ships: to guard their Fortresses, or any other Military actions,
making them to carry a pretty big Tower on their backs, with 24. or 25.
bow-men, and 4. harquebus a crocke, by which means they mightily molest the
Portugals, who have not yet found any invention to defend themselves from them,
except with fired lances, which they throw in their eyes; but whatsoever comes
within their reach, they break into pieces with their trunkes. For to take
them (as it was related to me in the Country) they make use of a female, when
she goes proud, in her heat, which they let go up and down in a great
wood, well enclosed, and environed with great stakes and trees, leaving but
only one passage open with a strong Portcullis, on the top whereof stands a
man as a Centinell, keeping himself unseen, letting down the Portcullis, as
soon as the Elephants be entered, then very solemnly, some certain men which
have thereof a particular skill, go to them, and capitulate with them, as with
prisoners of war, what exercise they will be put unto, either to serve in the
wars, or some other employments, whereupon, according as they like the
conditions, they make signs with their head to the Interpretor, then they
suffer them to come forth, and they fail not to follow him unto whom they have
yielded themselves. Then men must be sure to keep promise with them, or else
finding themselves abused, they would wilfully pine themselves to death. But
some there are, who either through shame or courage, will not yield themselves,
and had rather suffer themselves to be slain on the place. The Interpretor
must give them to understand whether they go, and how they shall be entreated;
but if they come and find the contrary, they starve themselves to death, and if
their Lord does sell them to a meaner man then himself, they will not go to
him. I have seen one my self, at Cochin, esteemed the valiantest of that
Country, finding himself unable, to bring to pass an enterprise imposed upon
him, which was to lanch a very great ship, made all the signs he could to
avoid it, whereupon the Trucheman told him, that they should be constrained to
go and find out another that should do it, which would prove a vile affront
unto him, having already purchased, so great a reputation, as he had, whereupon
he went to work, upon mere desperate vain glory, and drew the ship into
the sea, then bursted; which I have also heard to be usual, and have happened to
many others in some such cases. It is a creature that never lies down, the
female only excepted, in her copulation with the male, which is very much
alike to the man and woman, then with his trunk he gently raises her up
again.

Now for the people, they are of a swartie kind, like to those of Sindio, and
wear a white turbant very little, with Cotton garments. They bequeath their
goods, to their sisters Children, before their Brothers, being well assured,
that without doubt, they are sprung of their blood. It is very profitable
trading with this people, for if but a child went thither with his wares, he
should gain as much as the subtlest Merchant in the world. For as soon as you
are arrived into the City, the Kings officers come and dis-burthen you of what
you desire to expose to sale, which they lock up by account, within the
public Storehouse; you need but tell them the price, and make choice of one
of their Brokers, who goes to exhibit them to their Merchants, and so make
more of your wares by the one half, then you should have done your self; in
the end he comes and gives you a faithful account of all. Likewise for such
Merchandise as you desire to have among them, in giving them a note thereof,
they will by and by bring you all kind of Patterns, and they themselves will
fraught your ship, you needing not to trouble your self any further, and most
commonly will furnish you with better wares the^ they had before shown you:
yea, after having given you up their accounts, as well of the sale, as of the
goods bought, and restored you the overplus, if there be any, sometimes they
will present you with some good gift, for having done them the credit, in
making choice of them above all their fellows.

The fruits of this Country are excellent, and far differing from ours: among
the rest there is one not much unlike a Mellon, which grows on the ground
between two leaves, with a very yealow rind, being ripe, and this is called
Ananas, very hot of quality, but of taste, above all things so sweet, that
after having eaten of it, water will seem to you as bitter as gall. There is
another very licquorish fruit, called Amangues, growing on trees, and is as
big as a great quince, with a very great stone in it. Moreover there is
another that grows on trees, resembling a great Citrull, with a kind of
hornie rind, after the form of a pointed Diamond; They are green in color,
and called Iugues, containing a licquor like honey, which licquor is found
likewise in another fruit named Chatagu, very good to eat, but dangerous to
those that are not accustomed unto it, by reason of the heat of it.
Furthermore, there is another, named Iambes, which also grows on trees, and
is of the bigness of an apple, very good and wholesome, containing five stones
in it, the outside half red, and half yellow. They have yet another fruit, of
color green, cool, and wholesome, (which grows on a tree called Carambole)
square, and of a fingers length* they make great use of it in Physic. There
is with-all great quantity of Anis-seed, white Ginger, whereof they make great
Traffic, which also they preserve and confect.

Thence I continued my journey 12. days together, Sourat.
all along the coast, till I came within four leagues of Sourate, which is a
most fair Island, and a very populous Kingdom, (much frequented by Merchants)
subject to the great Mogor. There I embarked my self to pass that little
gulf. The City is about the bigness of Roan, the Castle impregnable, because
inaccessible: for of one side it is environed with the Sea, and the other side
is built on so strong and sleep a Rock, that it is as much as a man can do
with great difficulty to get up, and withal, the best guarded and furnished
with Ordinance, and all kind of Munition, as ever I saw, and indeed they have
good reason, for on that place depends the saftie of the whole Island.

Thence I held my course for Diu, Diu.
some fourteen days journey distant, which is a most important strong hold,
which the Portugals possess there, by them conquered from the great Mogor,
very near as big as Pontoise. They are Gentiles, and differ little or
nothing from the others, in humors, Religion, Traffic, soil, or fruits.

Thence I travailed to the Kingdom of Calicut, Calicut.
the King whereof is a Mohammedan; and made it 17. days journey complete, along
the coast, no extraordinary thing presenting it self to my view, beside the
fore mentioned Commodities: the men being of a wartie hue.

Departing from the before said Kingdom, Malebar.
I entered into that of Malebar, where they are exceeding black, but yet not
curled, flat nosde, or great lipt, as the Negroes be; nevertheless, with as
good faces, as any in all Europe. They are Mahometans, and valiant, although
they are somewhat of a savage inclination, and would never come to composition
with the Portugals, but delight themselves to be at variance with all their
neighbors. They lie in the field, and have very few houses of any importance.
Mean while that I was there, they took 160. Carauels from the Portugals. And
when they take any prisoner, who by chance has his garments cut, or iag'd,
they say he did tear them of purpose; knowing they should once be theirs,
and knock him in the head with staves. This Kingdom contains in length some
14 days Journey.

Departing thence, Cananor.
I entered the Kingdom of Cananor, where I travailed four days, without the
sight of any rarity of importance, more then is abouesayd. It is a little
Mohammedan Kingdom, they are swartie, and great Traffickers.

Thence I entered the Country of Mangalor, Mangalor.
which is also a little Mohammedan Kingdom; the inhabitants of a swartie
color, where I travailed 8. days along the coast, without any thing worth
writing, besides that which is in their neighbor Countries, only that they
have no formal Towns, or scarce any good houses.

Thence I entered the Island and Realm of Sumatra, Sumatra.
resembling altogether the former in all things, as well for Religion, and
commodities, as for the stature and hue of men. Only they have more then the
rest, the great pepper in abundance, whereof they do furnish the Portugals.
But they are wise enough, to keep the best from them, which they call Ganry,
of a gray color, bigger and smoother, then that which they send us, which is
but that which falls from the tree, before it be ripe, which makes them
become so withered and bare, keeping the better sort for their own use,
whereof they preserve a great part, delighting much to eat hot things,
although their Country be very hot. This pepper grows on a tree, about the
bigness of a man's arm* there grows also a great quantity of good Ginger.

Thence I entered the Kingdom of Bombas, Bombas.
in all things like the other, Pepper only excepted, being found in no part of
the East Indies, but in Sumatra, and I travailed 12. days journey along the
coast, without seeing one good Town.

Departing thence, I returned within the Countries of the great Magor, and
arrived at Chaoul, Chaoul.
a small Town, about the bigness of S. Clou. There are made the fairest
Cabinets in the world, being not to be matched by any, or Germany, or of China.
They are Gentiles, as in Cambaya, and great Traffickers.

Thence I wont to Damans, Damans.
which is a place fortified by the Portugals, about the bigness of Chaoul,
being 11. days journey, one from another, and are likewise Gentiles.

Thence to the Kingdom of the Canarrins* Canarra.
which is but a little one, and 5. days journey from Damans. They are tall of
stature, idle, for the most part, and therefore the greater thieves. They hold
some points of Christianity. They wear a cap, a long cloak, in form of a
gown. They lie in the field, under vile Cabbins of Turfe.

Thence I entered the Kingdom of Brameny, Brameny.
which contains but 2. days journey in length, and in a manner, of the same
qualities, and habit, with the Canarrins. Only they have a kind of linen
cloth, which they make Marchandice of.

Thence to the Kingdom of Coulam, Coulam.
(who are Gentiles, and of a swartie hue) which having trauersed from one end
to the other, in a 11. days journey, I beheld no place of importance. There is
nothing there, but all open.

Thence I took my way to Conchin, Conchin.
possessed by the Portugals: though the King keeps (nevertheless) still there
his title and Court. The City is about the bigness of Mante, and is as well
frequented with Merchants, as any other place in all the Indies, being the
thorow-fare to China. And there is a Citadell of exceeding great strength.

Thence I went to the Mountain of S. Thomas, S. Thomas.
where they are all Christians, and have always so borne themselves
(notwithstanding their king is a Gentile) their number being so great, that
very hardly may they be rooted out; besides that, the passages to it are most
difficult. They go for the most part almost naked, as commonly they do in all
those Countries. And there is a certain place where there is a Miraculous
cross, whether they go to procession, in the holy week. And then during
their service time, while they repeat the passion, this cross begins to
change color, and to sweat I know not what kind of black liquor like ink,
but the passion being ended, it returns to its former nature. They hold it to
be a grace which Saint Thomas obtained from God, for their perseverance in the
faith. The City is about the bigness of Poissy there are found certain stuffs
by them much esteemed, although they be made but of herbs, wherewith they
cloth themselves, and make a great trade thereof.

Thence I returned to Conchin, To Conchin again and thence to Bengalla.
and from Conchin to the kingdom of Bengala, wherein the Portugals also hold
the capital city, and best fortress, of which the whole kingdom takes their
name, which notwithstanding, is very small and of little strength. It is a
country full of all sorts of commodities. Among the rest, they have pretty
couerlets, of yellow linen-cloth, all pinkte and wrought with needle work*
whereof some are to be seen in these parts, This City lies all open, being
of the bigness of Saint Denis, and is some 5. weeks journey from Conchin.

Thence to the kingdom and Island of Seilan, Seilan.
which the portugals hold, being a place of importance. In that country are
whole forests of Cinnamon, all other countries being destitute of it. There be
also whole mountains of Crystal, and out of their rivers they draw Perles;
Rubies, Saphirs, and Cats-eyes, which are of great value, and whereof they make
a great trade in China. It is a good country and exceeding plentiful in corn,
rice, fruits, and all other things which are frequent throughout the Indies.
And is held to be 300 leagues compass, being all Gentiles. True it is, that
the beasts which they adore, vary from the others, for they will worship the
first creature they meet withal. They eat nothing that has blood, and of
their very bread they will make no more then will be eaten at a meal, for if it
be kept but 2. hours, they are forbiden by their religion to eat it. Moreover
there is a River of salt water which issues out of the sea, and runs near
the fort, where there is a certain fish, or rather a kind of sea dragon, a
monster, or I know not what, coms often howling even under the windows, and
will not depart before they have given him his pray, because (as they say) the
Governor has used him to it, causing all such as he bears grudge unto, or
he any way distrusteth, to be thrown to him, so that none but he and his men
can tell, what is become of them.

Thence I bent my course, (for the kingdom of Ior) as much as I could by land,
for this climate is all full of waters, Ior.
and Islands and is very temperate, being about a months trauaill between
Seilan and, Ior, which is a very pretty little town, about the bigness of
Auignon. They are Gentiles, and of a yellowish hew, they worship I know not
what shape with three heads, they observe the like abstinence as is above
mentioned, and have very near the self same commodities.

Thence I past to Malaca, Malaca.
an exceeding strong fortres, belonging to the Portugals, 10. days trauaill
beyond Ior. There you have an air most unwholesome, and those whose
constitution is able to bear it and live, at least their complexion is all
changed to a yeallow; There grows a certain fruit, prickled like a ches-nut,
and as big as ones fist, the best in the world to eat, these are somewhat
costly, all other fruits being at an easy rate. It must be broken with force,
and therein is contained a white liquor like unto cream, nevertheless it
yelds a very unsavory sent, like to a rotten oynion, and it is called Esturion.
There grows likewise, and no where else, Nutmegs and Cloves upon their trees,
or stalks; as also the Bezar-stone; which is found joined to the breast of
Monkies, but not so good as those of the Persian Goats. Likewise there be
Diamonds, but far inferior to those, whereof I am to speak anon: yet are
there Porcupine-stones of the couller of white soape, which are had in great
estimation, having seen one about the bigness of a Nutmeg, 90. l. sterling
sold for 300. crowns which indeed was a fair one, they make use of it,
almost against all diseases, leaving it an hour to steep in water, which
afterward they drink of, though it be as bitter as Gall.

This kingdom is of the Molucos, and the Hollanders possess there a strong
fortress, called Sonde, whence they bring us the birds of Paradise, for they
are found nowhere else, the country folks take them up dead, and sell them
for 8. rialls a piece; All a long this coast, is found great quantity of gray
Amber, and black, Musk and Ciuet, But the men of those countries are very
liquorish of the Amber, and eat the most part of it, as fast as they find it.
They are well furnished with all manner of commodities, wine only excepted: But
they have in steed of it, a certain drink called Caahiete as black as ink,
which they make with the bark of a tree, and drink it as hot as they can
endure it. Their houses are low, vaulted, and tarrased on the top, the better
to sleep in the cool air.

From Malaca I went to Macao, (near a months travail: Macao.
which is a City situate on the sea coaste, at the foot of a great
Mountain, where in times past the Portugalls had a great fort, and to this
day, there be yet many that dwell there. This is the entrance into China, but
the place is of no great importance; they are Gentiles, and there the
inhabitants begin to be fair complextioned.

Thence I Trauailled 2 months to the Cochinchines, finding nothing by the way
worthy of note; no not so much as necessaries, so that we were feign to
carry our victuals with us, the greatest part of the way. They are Subjects to
the King of China, but sometimes they rebel and make war against him; And
there is great number of Christians among them. Their Kings treasure consists
in a certain kind of wood called Calamba: for which the Portugalls pay 100.
crowns a pound, to make Pater-nosters with. It is of a mixte color, with
black and yeallow veins; the better sort of it is moiste, so that being cut
it expels a kind of fat oily liquor, It grows out of a certain tree,
which they fell and let it lie a while a putrefying: then they bruise it, and
within the same, they find this kind of wood, like many hard knots. They are a
very white people, because there it begins to be cold, low of stature, flat
nosde, and little eyed, with a very few hairs on their chins, and mustachoes:
none at all on their cheeks, the hair of the head they wear long like women,
tied up with a black silk haire-lace, and wear a flat cap upon them. They
wear cloth Breeches made very level, and a short robe above them, like a
master of the chamber of accounts. There are found a kind of Serpents that will
swallowe up a whole Stag; Two Friars assured me that trauailling in that
country, together with 16 other men, through a fenni-marsh, about the dawning
of the day, they met to their seeming, a great tree lying along the ground, the
boughs beging lopped off, upon which they all began to sit down and rest
themselves: but no sooner were they sat, but that which they took for a tree,
fiercely rowsd it self from under them, and left them all to pick strawes on
the ground, for indeed this was one of those Serpents.

Their custom is (as they say) to put themselves in ambush among the boughs of
a tree, and when they epsy their pray to draw near, be it man or beast, they
fall upon him with open mouth and devour it. There are also store of Lions,
Leopards, and Tigres: and there the fruits begin to resemble those of these
parts: but the fruit, which above al others abounds there, is the Mirabolan.

Thence I set forwards to Canton, the principal City of all China, Canton in
China.
(some 3. months trauaill distant) beyond which there is no passage, say any
body what he will to the contrary; for never any man proceeded further, except
(as they say) 6 Jesuits, who dwelled 20 years at Canton, as well to learn the
language perfectly, as to let their hair to grow long, after the country
manner, of whom there was never since heard any news, nor is their hope ever
to see their return. That people is very white, and apparelled as is above
said; they are likewise Gentiles, and worship the same Image with three heads.
Their women of of the better sort; and quality, which are able to live of
their own without working, never go out of their houses but as they are
carried in a chair. And to that effect, from their infancy, they put their
feet into certain wooden slippers, to make them stump-footed and impotent,
in so much as they are not able to go: the reason they allege for it, is
that women were made to no other end, then to keep at home.

The Christians are not permitted to lie within the City, but as soon as
night approaches they must retire themselves to their ships, being lawful for
them to traffic whersoeuer they please by day light. And for their traffic,
what rarities soever there be throughout all China, are to be had in this
city, which are diligently brought thither, to wit great store of cloth of
gold and silk, cabinets, wrought vessels, Venus shells, Massiue gold, and many
other things. They will exchange or barter gold for twice as much weight in
silver; for they have no coined money, for when they would buy any thing, they
carry with them a piece of gold, and will cut of as much as they intend to
bestow on what they take. They make carved Images of silver, which they erect
here and there through the streets, and no body dares touch them. The City
is governed by 4 rulers, and each one has his government, or circuit a part,
secluded from each other: those of one quarter dare not go and labor in
another, and those which cause them selves to be carried, from one part to
another, must change their bearers when they come to the gate of the next
circuit: those gates are opened every morning, and shut every night, unless
there be any complaint made of some misdemeanure, committed within the circuit:
for then they shut them suddenly, or if they be shut, they open them not, till
the offender be found. The King bestows these commands on those, who are best
learned. This is a most fair City, and well built, very near as big as
Paris, but there the houses are arched, and nothing near so high. Their
Venus-shells consist of certain kind of earth or clay which has remaind a 100
years in one place, and removed every eight days. There is so much sugar, in
that Country, that it is by them very little set by, yet is silk in far more
great abundance, but withal more course then ours, by reason of their store,
being so great as they are constrained to make it abroad in the fields, on the
very trees, in this wise; when the worms are hatched, (whereof the eggs are
far greater then ours) They observe what quantity of worms each tree will
be able to feed, then they lay so many on it, leaving them there without any
more ado, except it be to gather the quods, when they are ready to be spunne,
which is done as they gather Apricocks: for indeed a far off they appear to
be so, and is a very fine sight to behold: they use a strange kind of fishing
with Cormorants, and surely from thence must needs have derived at first the
like invention, which (as I hear) was of late brought into England, and thence
hither. They tie their necks a little above their stommacks, least they should
devour the fish they take: then coming to their master, he pulls it a
live, out of their throats: likewise for water foul, they make use of great
bottles with two holes, which they leave floating up and down the water a good
while, to acquaint the fowls therewith: then some fellows will wade up to the
neck in the water, thrusting their heads into those bottles, and having a bag
underneath, come as near the foul as they will, taking them with their hands,
without the rest being afraid of it.

From Canton I returned to Macao, Again to Macao.
and took, my way through the kingdom of Pegu, Pegu.
which is much transformed from what it was heretofore by reason of a certain
king, who forbad his people the exercise of husbandry and Tillage, or any other
thing necessary for the use of man; And having gathered together all the
victuals of the country, caused it strongly to be immured, where he kept his
residence, suffering the most part of his subjects to perish, through famine or
sickness, so that at this instant the whole country, remains waste and
desolate. Where in times past, there was wont to be found many rare
commodities: namely, most fair rubies, and is now all together frequented
with savage beasts; yea in so great quantity that they have almost driven out
the inhabitants. Yet for such as remain there to this day, they be Gentiles
and of a swhartie hue.

Thence I made it 18. days iourneyes, to the Realm of Camboge, Camboge.
which is very spacious, but void of any rarieties of note, only that the King
is able to bring 400000. men to the field, and makes war upon the King of
Sian.

Thence I came to Sian, Sian.
the King whereof is able to bring 600000. men to the field. These two Kings
have neither Horses, nor any fiery Instruments: but make use only of bows,
and a certain kind of pike, made of a knottie wood like Canes, called Baubuc,
which is exceeding strong, though pliant and supple for use.

Both these Kings are Gentiles, but yet differ enough in manners; for the King
of Sian worshippeth a white Elephant; And that of Camboge does as the most of
the aboue-mentioned. I saw nothing remarkable in both these kingdoms, (having
but coasted them) but only much Benzoin in Sian; which is an aramaticall
gum, distilling out of a certain tree, when they have first cut an incision
into it, whereof they make a great trade: as being the only place where it is
found. I spent three months in traversing these two Kingdoms.

Thence I embarked my self in one of the Portugal ships, which usually
traffic thither for Benzoin, and arrived at Conchin, a most fertile Kingdom,
as likewise all the others be in those Climes, Pegu only accidentally excepted.

From Conchin I travailed by land 2. months and a half, to Bisnagat, Bisnagat.
otherwise called Ballagat, by the Portugals: which is a most fair City, and
the Metropolitan of the kingdom, unto which it gives his name. It stands
within two leagues of the rock of Diamonds, belonging to the King, who makes
his ordinary abode in the said City, and retains 15000. men, continually
laboring in the said mine, with straight commandment, that all the great ones
be laid up in his Treasury, suffering none to be sold, but little ones, such
as we see in these parts. So that there is not any great ones sold, or
transported, unless it be by stealth, or some device; As I have seen one
with the great Mogor, as big as a Hens egg, and of that very form, which he
caused expressly to be peirced like a pearl, to wear it on his arm; which
stone had been so purloin'd from this King, and cost the other 500000. Parots,
which is little less then a million. It waigheth 198. Mangelins, and each
Mangelin waigheth five grains. I my self found means by money, privily to
have another great one, conveyed into my hands, whereof I will speak more by
and by.

This King is a Gentile, and of a hard, Swartie complexion. He worshippeth the
tooth of a Monkey, and some in his Kingdom, worship a certain kind of Serpent.

Thence I travailed 11. days, till I came to the Realm of Decan, Dialcan,
Dialcan.
or Idalcan; their King dwells within a days journey of Goa, which is a
strong City, the Portugals hold: and the viz-roy of the Portugall-Indies keeps
there his residence, against whom this King (who is a Mohammedan, and very
mighty) makes war now and then.

Thence I came to Goa Goa.
it self, an Island but five leagues in compass, nevertheless the greatest
Mart town in all the Indies: for there all the aboue-mentioned Kingdoms, and
the Portugals, mutually come to discharge and recharge themselves. It is a
very fair City, about the bigness of Poictiers. At the mouth of the Port, on
each side is erected a great Fortress, very strongly manned by the Portugals.
In this Island is the hard Wax made (which we call Spanish Wax) and is made in
manner following. They enclose a large plotte of ground, with a little trench
filled with water, then they stick up a great number of small staves, upon
the said plot, that being done; they bring thither a sort of pis-mires, far
bigger then ours, which being debarred by the water to issue out, are
constrained to retire themselves upon the said staves, where they are killed
with the heat of the Sun, and thereof it is that the Lacka is made. This is
a Climate where it raines, without intermission, the three months of Winter,
and so outragiously, that it is impossible to keep the sea upon that coast,
without Shipwreck. After the rain is fallen, comes there a land wind, which
dries up the air, and two hours after, is very safe sailing.

Thence I embarked my self, (with the permission, and Pasport of the Viz-roy)
for Lisbone, but we had such a terrible tempest, that we were eight whole
days, in the bottomes and Isles of Las Chagues, despairing ever to come out
again: in the end, God miraculously delivered us, and brought us to
Mozambique, Mozambique. Solfale.
which is a Fort belonging to the Portugals. Then to Solfale, where they are
Mahometans, and all black; And thence only comes the Ebony. Then we arrived
at Lisbone, Lisbone.
where I was imprisoned, and continued so four years long, without ever
telling me the cause why. Finally, after much ado, I was set at liberty,
through the great means my LORD the Duke of Mayenne made for me, when he came
into Spain about the marriages; And as it seems in favor and hope of them;
or else I fully believe I had never been released. For as I heard there, by the
means of some prisoners, the Viz-roy of Goa had given straight warning, that I
was an undertaking man, who had exactly viewed all those Countries, and could
do much hurt unto the King their Master, by the acquaintances, and
intelligences I had of them, if ever I could come among the French, English, or
Hollanders. There was I in my chamber of the prison, by an unlucky adventure
miserably robbed, of a little hollow pipe of white latten, long and slender,
which I had ever kept so close, that no body in the world knew of it, and
therein were 35. rough Diamonds, which was all that I ever had gotten, in my
long and painful travels, among which (the others being but common) there was
a mighty great one, waighing no less then 79 Carrats, and therefore of an
inestimable value, the first thief was presently, yea within a quarter of an
hour robbed of them by another, and so being passed, from hand to hand, when
after many days and troubles, I almost had given over at enquiry, all last the
second thief was found out, by means of the first, and being found seized
with my Diamonds, he was both taken by the Justice, and they with him, which
afterward were restored back unto me, I mean all the small ones, but not the
great, which came never since in sight, and did vanish away, through so many
honest hands. So that all the reason I could ever have for it, yea after much
importunity to the King himself and the officers, was to have (though not at
my request, nay) most against my will) that poor fellow hanged, who in my
conscience I think, was not the least nor the last thief, having bin (as I am
sure) robbed also by a third; howsoever, the stone is not of so small value, but
a great Prince may be gorgious and proud with it. God grant pardon to all
sinners.

Certain general observations, touching the Indies.
IT is to be understood, that all the kings and kingdoms between Cochin and
the great Mogor, were in times past his subjects, but in the end many have
withdrawn themselves from him, and are become sovereigns: Yet there are still
whole numbers that acknowledge him.

The Portugals possess no inland forte, through all the above named
countries, but altogether on the borders and seacoasts.

From Cambaya to Macao, they make use of Elephants all together in battles,
Garrisons, and for Carriage.

All these Gentiles, keep living Serpents in their ships, in stead (as it
were) of an Alminacke, or rather some Demy-god, for their good luck; so that
if they see them not frollicke and blithe, they dare not set sail: but if they
be jolly and merry, they will set out, whatsoever comes of it.

The aboue-named drink Caahiete, is drunk from Turkey to China, and is
exceeding wholesome and good.

Throughout all these Indies, in stead of glasse-windowes, they use mother of
pearl.

They have the fruit of a tree, like unto a Peach stone, called Areque, which
they continually keep in their mouth, and can no more forbear it, then those
who have used themselves to Tobacco; in like manner, they use an herb, which
they call Betre, somewhat like Iuie, which both men and women chaw night and
day in their mouths: and to abstain from that, would make their hearts faint:
Sometimes they eat it with lime; which makes it the ardentest thing in the
world. Once I would needs taste of it, but I thought verily to have burnt all
my Intrails: thus they forbear 5. or 6. days from meat.

They have also certain fig trees, which bear leaves, about 3. else long, in
so much, that they cover themselves with it, from the rain, and use them in
stead of Table-clothes, and the only half of one suffices 10. or 12. men.
They are exceeding fair and green, and a far off, seem a piece of
water-chamlet; their fruit is of 2. sorts, the one, of the bigness of a mean
Cucumber, the other, somewhat less; both yellow, being ripe, and wonderful
good, but the lesser is the best. Out of this fig tree grows a stem, as big
as a man's arm, within the which lie a great number of figs, clustring
together, like a bunch of Grapes, every stem, together with the figs, waighing
50. or 60. li. They gather the said stems, while the figs be green, for they
ripen as well in the house, as upon the tree, therefore they make great use of
them in long voyages. The custom they use in planting these trees, is to take
a long line, and to draw it stiffly through the figs, (as a Shoemaker waxes
his thread) to the end, that the small seed within the fruit, may stick to the
cord, then they stretch it in the ground, half a foot deep, whereof
proceeds an infinite number of figge-trees.

Moreover, you have there, as far as Macao, a kind of Palm trees, like those
which bear Dates, but this bears another fruit, which together with the shell
is as big as a man's head. It is exceeding wholesome, and yields both wine,
vinegar, oil to eat, and to burn, sugar, and a kind of liquor, which they
drink: the fruit it self tastes like a hasle-nut; of his rind, they make
cordage, and of the wood; It is the Cocos.
they build houses and ships. Many other things, could I add but thus much
will suffice, for a taste to such, as will be pleased, to hear me further
speak.

FINIS.

