THE ACCVSATION AND IMPEACHMENT OF JOHN LORD FINCH, BARON OF FORDWICH, LORD
KEEPER OF THE GREAT SEAL OF ENGLAND, BY THE House of Commons.

Printed Anno Dom. 1640. Jan. 14. 1641.

THE ACCVSATION AND IMPEACHMENT of John, LORD Finch, Baron of Fordwich, LORD
KEEPER of the Great Seal of England, by the House of COMMONS.
IMprimis, That the said John Lord Finch Baron of Fordwich, Lord Keeper, etc.
has traitorously, and wickedly, endeavored to subvert the fundamental Laws,
and established government of the Realm of England, and in stead thereof to
introduce an arbitrary tyrannical government against Law, which he has
declared by traitorous and wicked words, counsels, opinions, judgments,
practices, and actions.

II. That in pursuance of those his traitorous and wicked purposes, he did in
the third and fourth year of his Majesty's reign, or one of them, being then
speaker of the Commons house of Parliament, contrary to the commands of the
house then assembled, and sitting, denied and hindered the reading of some
things which the said house of Commons required to be read for the safety of
King, and Kingdom, and preservation of the religion of this Realm; and did
forbid all the members of the house to speak, and said that if any did offer
to speak, he would rise and go away, and said nothing should be then done
in the house, and did offer to rise and go away, and did thereby and
otherwise, in as much as in him lay, endeavor to subvert the ancient and
indoubted rights and course of Parliaments.

III. That he being of his Majesty's Council at the Justice seat held for the
County of Essex in the month of October, in the 10. year of his now Majesty's
reign, at Strafford Langton in the same County, being then of his Majesty's
Council, in that service did practice by unlawful means, to enlarge the
Forest of that County, many miles beyond the known bounds thereof, as they had
been enjoyed near 300. years, contrary to the Law, and to the Charter of the
liberties of the Forest, and other Charters, and diverse acts of Parliament, and
for effecting the same, did unlawfully cause and procure undue returns to be
made of Jurors, and great numbers of other persons who were unsworn to be
joined to them of the Jury, and threatened and awed the said Jurors to give a
verdict for the King, and by unlawful means did surprise the County that they
might not make defense, and did use several menacing wicked speeches, and
actions, to the Jury, and others, for obtaining his unjust purpose aforesaid,
and after a verdict obtained for the King in the month of April following (at
which time the said Justice seat was called by adjornment) the said John Lord
Finch then Lord chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and was
one of the Judges assistants for them, he continued by further unlawful and
unjust practices, to maintain and confirm the said verdict, and did then and
there being assistant to the Justice in air, advise the refusal of the
traverse offered by the County, and all their evidences, but only what they
should verbally deliver, which was refused accordingly.

IV. That he about the month of November, 1635. he being then Lord chief
Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, and having taken an oath for the due
administration of Justice to his Majesty's liege people, according to the Laws
and Statutes of the Realm, contrived in opinion in haec verba, (when the good
and safety, etc.) and did subscribe his name to that opinion, and by
persuasions, threats, and false suggestions, did solicit, and procure Sir
John Bramston Knight, then and now Lord chief Justice of England, Sir Humfrey
Davenport Knight. Lord chief Baron of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, Sir Richard
Hutton Knight, late one of the Justices of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas,
Sir John Denham Knight, late one of the Barons of his Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, Sir William Jones Knight, late one of the Justices of the said Court
of Kings Bench, Sir George Crook then and now one of the Judges of the said
Court of Kings Bench, Sir Thomas Trevor Knight, then and now one of the Barons
of the Exchequer, Sir George Vernor Knight, late one of the Justices of the
said Court of Common Pleas: Sir Robert Barkley Knight, then and now one of the
Justices of the said Court of Kings Bench, Sir Francis Crawly Knight, then and
now one of the Justices of the said Court of Common Pleas, Sir Richard Weston
Knight, then and now one of the Barons of the said Court of Exchequer, some or
one of them to subscribe with their names the said opinion presently, and
enjoined themseverally some or one of them secrecy upon their allegiance.

V. That he the (...) day of (...) then being Lord chief Justice of the said
Court of Common Pleas, subscribed an extrajudiciall opinion in answer to
questions in a letter from his Majesty, in haec verba, etc.

And that he contrived the said questions, and procured the said letter from
his Majesty; and whereas the said Justice Hutton and Justice Crook declared to
him their opinions to the contrary; yet he required and pressed them to
subscribe, upon his promise that he would let his Majesty know the truth of
their opinions; notwithstanding such subscriptions which nevertheless he did
not make known to his Majesty, but delivered the same to his Majesty as the
opinion of all the Judges.

VI. That he being Lord chief Justice of the said Court of Common Pleas,
delivered his opinion in the Chequer Chamber against Master Hampden in the case
of Shipmony; that he the said Master Hampden upon the matter and substance of
the case was chargeable with the money then in question: a copy of which
proceedings the Commons will deliver to your Lordships, and did solicit and
threaten the said Judges some or one of them to deliver their opinions in like
manner against Master Hampden: and after the said Baron Denham had delivered
his opinion for Master Hampden, the said Lord Finch repaired purposely to the
said Baron Denhams Chamber in Serjants Inn in Fleet Street, and after the said
Master Baron Denham had declared and expressed his opinion, urged him to
retract the said opinion, which he refusing, was threatened by the said Lord
Finch, because he refused.

VII. That he then being Lord chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas,
declared and published in the Exchequer Chamber, and western circuit where he
went Judge, that the Kings right to Shipmoney as aforesaid, was so inherent a
right to the Crown, as an Act of Parliament could not take it away; and with
diverse malicious speeches enveighed against and threatened all such as refused
to pay Shipmoney; all which opinions contained in the four, five, and sixth
Articles, are against the law of the Realm, the subjects right of property,
and contrary to former resolutions in Parliament, and to the petition of right:
which said resolutions and petition of right, were well known to him and
resolved and enacted in Parliament when he was Speaker of the commons house of
Parliament.

VIII. That he being Lord chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, did take
the general practice of that Court, to his private Chamber; and that he sent
warrants into all or many Shires of England to several men, as to Francis
Giles of the County of Devon, Robert Benson of the County of York Attorneyes
of that Court, and to diverse others, to release all persons arrested on any
utlawry about 40. shillings fees whereas none by law so arrested, can be bayled
or released without supersedeas under seal or reversall.

IX. That he being Lord chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, upon a
pretended suit begun in Michaelmas Term in the 11. year of his Majesty's
Reign, although there was no plaint or declaration against him, did
notoriously and contrary to all law and justice, by threats, menaces and
imprisonment, compel Thomas Laurence an executor, to pay 19. pound 12.
shillings, and likewise caused Richard Barnard, being only overseer of the
last will of that Testatour, to be arrested for the payment of the said money,
contrary to the advice of the rest of the Judges of that Court, and against the
known and ordinary course of justice, and his said Oath and knowledge, and
denied his Majesty's subjects the common and ordinary justice of this Realm, as
to Master Limericke, and others, and for his private benefit endamaged and
ruined the estates of very many of his Majesty's subjects, contrary to his oath
and knowledge.

X. That he being Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, and sworn one of
his Majesty's Privy Counsel, did by false and malicious slanders labor to
incense his Majesty against Parliaments, and did frame and advise the
publishing the declaration after the dissolution of the last Parliament.

All which Treasons and misdemeanors above mentioned, were done and committed
by the said John Lord Finch Baron of Fordwich, Lord Keeper of the great Seal
of England, and thereby he the said Lord Finch has traitorously and contrary
to his allegiance labored to lay imputations and scandals upon his Majesty's
government, and to alienate the hearts of his Majesty's liege people from his
Majesty, and to set a division between them, and to ruin and destroy his
Majesty's Realm of England, for which they do impeach him the said Lord
Finch, Baron of Fordwich, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, of high
Treason against our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and dignity, of the
misdemeanors above mentioned. And the said Commons by protestation, saving to
themselves the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other
accusation or impeachment against the said Lord Finch, and also of replying to
the answer: that the said John Lord Finch shall make unto the said Articles or
to any of them, and of offering proof of the premises, or any of their
impeachments or accusations that shall be exhibited by them as the case shall
according to the course of Parliaments require, do pray that the said John,
Lord Finch, Baron of Fordwich, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, may
be put to answer to all and every the premises, and such proceedings,
examinations, trials, and judgments, as may be upon every of them, had and
used as is agreeable to Law and Justice.

FINIS.

