FVIMVS TROES Aeneid. 2. THE TRVE TROIANES, Being A Story of the Britains
valor at the Romans first invasion: Publicly represented by the Gentlemen
Students of Magdalen College in Oxford.

Quis Martem tunica tectum adamantina
Digne scripserit?
LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Robert Allot, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Bear in Pauls-Churchyard, 1633.

Dramatis Personae.
Livius, lib. 5.
Mercury. Fur. Camillus. Brennus.
Caesar com. de bell. gall. lib. 4. and 5.
Julius Caesar. C. Volusenus. Q. Laberius, alias Labienus. Q. Atrius. Comius
Atrebas. Cassibellaunus Imperator Britannorum. Mandubratius, princeps
Trinobantum. 4. Petty Kings in Kent.
Cingetorix. Carvilius. Taximagulus. Segonax.

Galfrid. Monu: metensis. lib. 4.
Beli maur, his sons,
Lud, his sons.
Androgeus. Themantius.
Cassibelane. Nennius.
Belinus, a chief Nobleman. Hirildas, nephew to Cassibelane. Eulinus, nephew
to Androgeus. Cridous King of Albania. Britael King of Demetia. Guerthed, King
of Ordouicia.

Names fained.
Two Druids, or Priests.
Lantonus. Hulacus.
Two Ladies mentioned.
Landora. Cordella.
Rollano, a Belgicke. Chorus of five Bardes, or Poets laureate. Soldiers.
Shipmen. Servants.
Mercury, conducting the Ghosts of Brennus and Camillus, in complete armor,
and with swords drawn.
MEr. As in the vaults of this big-bellied earth,
Are dungeons, whips, and flames, for wicked Ghosts;
So fair Elysian fields; where spotless souls
Do bathe themselves in bliss. Among the rest,
Two pleasant Groves by two sorts are possessed:
One by true Lovers crowned with myrtle boughs,
Who hand in hand sing Paeans of their joy:
Brave Soldiers hold the second, clad in steel,
Whose glittering Arms brighten those gloomy shades,
In lieu of Starry lights. From hence I bring
A pair of Martial Impes, By Jove's decree,
As sticklers in their Nations enmity.
Furious Camillus, and thou Britain bold
Great Brennus, sheath your conquering blades: In vain
You threaten death: For Ghosts may not be slain.

Brenn. From the unbounded Ocean, and cold climes,
Where Charles his wayne circles the Northern Pole:
I first lead out great swarms of shaggy Gauls,
And big-bon'd Britains. The white-pated Alps,
Where snow and winter dwell, did bow their necks
To our victorious feet: Rome, proudest Rome,
We clothed in skarlet of patrician blood,
And 'bout your Capitol prauns'd our vaunting steedes,
Defended more by Geese, than by your gods.

Came. But I cut short your fury, and my sword
Redeemed the City, making your huge vast trunkes
To fat our Crows, and dung our Latian fields:
I turned your Torrent to another Coast:
And what you quickly woone, you sooner lost.

Mer. Leave these weak brawlings. Now swift time has spent
A Pylian age, and more, since you two breathed,
Mirrours of Britain, and of Roman valor.
Lo, now the black Imperial Bird does claspe
Under her wings the Continent, and Mars
Trampling down nations with his brazen wheels,
Fights for his Nephews, and has once more made
Britains and Romans meet. To view these deeds
I Hermes bring you to this upper sky;
Where you may wander, and with ghastly looks
Incite your Countrymen, when night and sleep
Conquer the eyes, when weary bodies rest,
And senses cease: Be Furies in their breast.
Never two Nations better matched. For Jove
Loves both alike: whence then these armed Bands?
Mavors for Rome, Neptune for Albion stands.

Brenn. Then let war open his jaws, as wide as hell,
And fright young babes, my Country-folke more stern
Can out-looke Gorgon: Let the Fates transposed
Hang beaten Flags up in the victours land:
Full dearly will each Pase of ground be sold,
Which rated is at dearest Blood, not Gold.
What, are their ruined Fanes, demolisht Walls
So soon forgot? Does Allia yet run clear?
Or can three hundred Summers slake their fear?

Came. Arise thou Julian Star, whose angry beams
Be Heralds to the North, of war, and death.
Let those black Calends be revenged; Those Ghosts,
(Whose mangled sheaths deprived of Funeral rites,
Made the Six hills promise a Cadmus croppe:)
Be expiated with a fiery deluge.
Jove rules the Spheres, Rome all the world beside:
And shall this little corner be denide?

Merc. Bandy no more these private Frowns; but have,
Fly to your parties, and inrage their minds:
Till at the period of these Broils, I call,
And back reduce you to grimme Pluto's hall.

Exeunt. Act. 1.
Scen. 1.
Duke Nennius, alone. Nenn. Me thinks I hear Bellona's dreadful voice
Redoubled from the concave shoares of Gaul:
Me thinks I hear their neighing Steedes, The groans
Of complementall Souls, taking their leave:
And all the dinne and clamorous route, which soundes
When falling Kingdoms crack in fatal flames.
Dye Belgickes, Dye like men. Free minds need have
Naught, but the ground they fight on, for their grave:
And we are next. Think ye the smoaky mist
Of Sunne-boyld Seas can stop the Eagles eye?
Or can our watery walls keep dangers out,
Which fly aloft? That thus we snorting lie,
Feeding impostum'd humors, to be launched
By some outlandish Surgion:
As they are now: whose flaming towns, like Beacons,
Give us fair warning, and even guild our Spyres,
Whilst merrily we warm us at their Fires.
Yet we are next: who charmed with peace and floath,
Dream golden dreams. Go, warlike Britain, go,
For Olive bough exchange thy Hazell bow:
Hang up thy rusty Helmet, that the Be
May have a hive, or Spider find a Loome:
In steed of soldiers fare, and lodging hard,
(The bare ground being their bed, and table) lie
Smothered in down, melting in luxury.
In steed of bellowing drum, and cheerful flute,
Be lulled in Ladies lap with amorous Lute.
But as for Nennius, know, I scorn this calm:
The ruddy Planet at my birth bore sway,
Sanguine adust my humor; and wild fire,
My ruling Element. Blood, and rage, and choler,
Make up the Temper of a Captains valor.

Exit. Act. 1. Scen. 2.
Julius Caesar. Comius. Volusenus. Laberius. Soldiers. with Ensign, A
two-neck'd Eagle displayed sable, Drum, Ancient, Trumpet. A Flourish. Caes.
Welcome thus far, Partners of weal and woe,
Welcome brave bloods: Now may our weapons sleep,
Since Ariovist in cocke-boate basely flies:
Vast Germany stands trembling at our bridge:
And Gaul lies bleeding in her mothers lap.
Once the Pellaean Duke did Eastward march,
To rowse the drowsy Sun, before he rose
Adorned with Indian rubyes: But the Main
Bad him retire. He was my Type. This day,
We stand on Natures western brinke; Beyond,
Nothing but Sea and Sky. Here is Nil vltra.
Democritus make good thy fancy, give me
More worlds to conquer, which may be both seen,
And won together. But me thinks I kenne
A whitish cloud kissing the waves, or else
Some chaulky rocks surmount the barking flood.
Comius, your knowledge can correct our eyes.

Com. It is the Britain shore, which ten leagues hence
Displaies her shining clifts unto your sight.

Caes. I Will hit the white. That Sea-marke for our Ships,
Invites destruction, and gives to our eye
A treacherous Becko. Dare but resist: your shore
Shall paint her pale face with red crimson goare.

Com. Thus much I know, Great Caesar, that they lent
Their secret aid unto the neighbor Gauls;
Fostering their fugitives with friendly care:
Which made your victory fly with slower wing.

Caes. That Is cause enough. They shall not henceforth range
Abroad for War, We Will bring Him to their doors:
His ugly Idol shall displace their gods,
Their dear Penates, and in desolate streets
Raise trophies high of barbarous bones, whose stench
May poison all the rest. I long to stride
This Hellespont, or bridge it with a Navy,
Disclosing to our Empire unknown Lands,
Until the Arcticke Star for Zenith stands.

Laber. Then raise the Camp, and strike a dreadful March,
And unawares pour vengeance on their heads:
Be like the winged Bolt of angry Jove.
Or chiding Torrent, whose late-risen stream
From mountains bended top runs raging down,
Deflouring all the virgin dales.

Caes. First let us advise; For soon to ruin come
Rash weapons, which lack counsel grave at home.

Laber. What need consulting, where the Cause is plain?

Caes. The likeliest Cause without regard proves vain.

Laber. Provide for Battle, but of Truce of word.

Caes. Where peace is first refused, should come the sword.

Laber. But it is unlike, their selfe-presuming might
Will curbed be with terms of Civil Right.

Caes. It Is true: yet so, we stop the peoples cry,
When we propose, and they do peace deny.
We Will therefore wise Ambassadors dispatch,
Parents of Love, the Harbingers of Leagues,
Men that may speak with mildness mixed with courage,
Having quick feet, broad eyes, short tongues, long ears;
To warn the British Court.
And further view the Ports, faddome the Seas,
Learn their complotments; where Invasion may
Be soonest intertaind. All this shall lie
On Volusene, a Legate, and a Spy.

Volus. My care and quickness shall deserve this kindness.
Mean time unite, and range your scattered troops.
Imbarke your Legions at the Iccian shore,
And teach Erynnis swim, which crawled before.

Exeunt. Act. 1. Scen. 3.
Cassibelane, Androgeus, Themantius, Belinus, Attendants. Cassib. Although the
peoples voice constraines me hold
This Regal staff, whose massy weight would bruise
Your age and pleasures: yet this, Nephews, know:
Your trouble less, your honor is the same,
As if you wore the Diadem of this I Will.
Mean while Androgeus hold unto your use
Our Lady-City Troynovant, and all
The Toll and Tribute of delicious Kent;
Of which each Quarter can maintain a King.
Have you, Themantius, Cornewalles Dukedom large,
Both rich and strong, in mettalles and in men.
I must to Verulams fenced town repair,
And as Protector for the whole take care.

Androg. My heart agrees. Henceforth ye Sovereign cares,
State-mysteries, false graces, jealous fears,
The Linings of a Crown, forsake my Brain:
These Territories neither are too wide,
To trouble my content; nor yet too narrow,
To feed a Princely train.

Them. All thanks I render: your will shall guide ours,
With treble-twisted love we will strive to make
One Soul inform three Bodies, keeping still
The same affections both in good and ill.
Now am I for a hunting match. You thickets
Shelter a Boar, which spoils the plough-mans hope:
Whose jaws with double sword, whose back is armd
With bristled Pykes; whose fume inflames the air,
And foam be-snowes the trampled Corn. This Beast
I long to see come smoking to a feast. Exit. Themant.

Enter Rollano. Belin. Here comes my Belgicke friend, Landoraes servant:
What news, Rollano, that thy feet so strive
To have precedence of each other? Speak,
I read disturbed passions on thy brow.

Roll. My trembling heart quauers upon my tongue,
That scarce I can with broken sounds vent forth
These sad, strange, sudden, dreary, dismal news.
A Merchants ship arrived tells, how the Roman
Having run Gaul quite through with bloody arms,
Prepares for you: His navy rigged in bay,
Only expects a gale: Farther, they say,
A pinnace landed, from him brings command,
Either to loose your freedom, or your land.

Cassib. And dares proud Caesar back our vn-tam'd surges?
Dreads he not our Sea Monsters? whose wild shapes
Their Theaters near yet in Picture saw.
Come Sirs, To arms, To arms: Let speedy poasts
Summon our petty Kings, and muster up
Our valourous nations from the North, and West.
Androgeus have you to the Scots and Pictes,
Two Names, which now Albaniaes kingdom share:
Entreat their aid, if not for love, yet fear:
For new foes should imprint swift-equall fear
Through all the arteries of our I Will.
Belinus, thy authority must rouse
The vulgar troops within my special charge,
Fire the Beacons, strike alarums loud,
Raise all the country against this common Foe:
We Will soon confront him in his full careere;
This news more moves my choler, then my fear. Exeunt.

Rollano, alone. Roll. I am by birth a Belgicke, whence I fled
To Germany, for fear of Roman Arms:
But when their bridge brideled the stately Rhine,
I soon returned, And thought to hide my head
In this soft Halcyons neast, this Britain I Will.
But now, behold, Mars is a nursing here,
And gins to speak aloud.
Is no nooke safe from Rome? do they still haunt me?
Some peaceful God transport me through the air,
Beyond cold Thule, or the Suns Bedchamber,
Where only Swine or Goats do live and reign.
Yet these may fight. Place me, where quiet Peace
Hushes all storms, where sleep and silence dwell,
Where never man nor beast did wrong the soil,
Or cropp the First-fruites, Or made so much noise
As with their breath. But foolish thoughts adieu:
Now catch I must, or stand, or fall with you. Exit.

Act. 1. Scen. 4.
Eulinus, Hirildas. Eul. The Court a wardrobe is of living shapes:
And Ladies are the tissue-spangled suites,
Which Nature wears on festival high days.
The Court a Spring, each Madame is a Rose.
The Court is Heaven, fair Ladies are the Stars.

Hiril. I, falling Stars.

Eul. False Echo, don't blaspheme that glorious sex,
Whose beauteous rays can strike rash gazers blind.

Her. Love should be blind.

Eul. Pray, leave this Cynicke humor, whilst I sigh
My Mistress praise: Her beauty's past compare:
O would she were more kind, or not so fair.
Her modest smiles both curb and kindle love:
The Court is dark without her; when She rises,
The morning is her handmaid, strewing roses
About loves Hemispheare: The lamps above
Eclipse themselves for shame, To see her eyes
Outshine their Chrysolites, and more bless the skies,
Than they the Earth --

Her. Give me her Name.

Eul. Her body is a Crystal cage, whose pure
Transparent mould not of gross elements
Compacted, but the extracted Quintessence
Of sweetest forms distilled: where Graces bright
Do live immured, but not exempt from sight. --

Her. I prithee speak her.

Eul. Her model is beyond all Poets brains,
And Painters pencells: All the lively Nymphs,
Sirens, and Dryads, are but kitchin-maydes,
If you compare. To frame the like Pandore,
The Gods repine, and Nature would grow poor. --

Her. By Love, who is it? has she no mortal Name?

Eul. For here you find great Iunoes stately front,
Palla's gray eye, Venus her dimpled chinne,
Auroraes rosy fingers, the small wast
Of Ceres daughter, and Medusaes hair,
Before it hist: --

Her. O Love, as deaf, as thou art blind! Good Eulinus
Call home thy soul, and tell thy Mistress name.

Eul. O strange! what ignorant still? when as so plainly
These Attributes describe her: why? She is
A Rhapsody of Goddesses. The Elyxar
Of all their several perfections. She is
(Now bless your ears) by mortals called Landora.

Her. What: Landora the Trinobanticke Lady?
How grow your hopes, what metal is her breast?

Eul. All steel and adamant. It Is beauties pride, To stain
Her lilly white with blood of Lovers slain.
Their groans make music, and their scalding sighs
Raise a perfume, and vulture-like she gnawes
Their bleeding hearts. No gifts, no learned flattery,
No stratagems can work Landoraes battery.
As a tall Rock maintains maiesticke state,
Though Boreas gallop on the tottering seas,
And tilting split his froath out spurging waves
Upon his surly breast: So she resists:
And all my proiects on her cruel heart,
Are but retorted to their Authors smart.

Her. Why then, let scorn succeed thy love, and bravely
Conquer thy self, If thou will conquer her:
Stomachs, with kindness cloyed, Disdain must stir.

Eul. Most impious thoughts! O let me rather perish,
And loving die, than living cease to love:
And when I faint, let her but hear me cry,
Aye me, there is none, which truly loves, but I.

Her. O ye cross darts of Cupid! this very Lady,
This Lady-waspe woes me, as thou do her,
With glaunces, jewels, bracelets of her hair,
Lascivious banquets, and most eloquent eyes:
All which my heart misse-consters as immodest,
It being pointed for another Pole.
But hence learn courage, Coosse; why stand you dumb?
Women are women, and may be ore-come.

Eul. Your words are eare-awigges to my vexed brain
Like henn-bane juice, or Aconite diffused
They strike me senseless.
My kinsman, and Hirildas to my end:
But I Will near call you Counselor, or Friend Adieu.

Her. Stay, stay. For now I mean with gentler breath.
To waft you to your happy landing place.
Seeing this Crocodile pursues me flying,
Flies you pursuing: we will catch her by a trick:
With promise feigned, I'le' point a Cupids stage,
But in the night, and secret, and disguizd:
Where thou, which art my self, shall act my part;
In Venus games, all Coosning goes for Art.

Eul. Blessed be these means, and happy the Success.
Now gin I rear my creast above the Moon,
And in those gilded books read Leactures of
The Faeminine Sex. There moves Cassiope,
Whose garments shine with thirteen precious stones,
Types of as many virtues: Then her Daughter,
Whose Beauty without Perseus would have tamed
The monstrous Fish, glides with a Starry Crown:
Then Just Asttea kembes her golden hair:
And my Landora can become the skies,
As well as They. Oh, how my joys do swell!
He mounted not more proud, whose burning Throne
Kindled the Cedar-toppes, and quafft whole fountains.
Fly then, ye winged hours, as swift as thought,
Or my desires: Let days bright Waggoner
Fall headlong, and lie buried in the deep,
And dor-mouse-like Alcides night out-sleep.
Good Tethys, quench his Beams, that He nere rise,
To scorch the Moors, to suck up hony-dewes,
Or to betray my person.
But prithee tell, What Mistress you adore?

Her. The kind Cordella, Loving, and Beloved:
Only some jar of late about a Favor
Made me inueigh against women. Come, away,
Our plottes desire the night, not babbling day.

Eul. We must give way: Here come our reverend Barde
To sing in Synod, as their Custom is,
With former chance comparing present deeds.

Exeunt. Act. 1. Scen. 5.
Chorus of five Bardes laureate, four voices, and an Harper: Attired. 1. Song.
1.
At the Spring
Birds do sing:
Now with high,
Then low cry:
Flat, acute;
And salute,
The Sun borne,
Every morn.
All. He Is no Bard that cannot sing:
The praises of the flowery Spring.
2.
Flora Queen
All in green,
does delight
To paint white,
3.
Woods renew
Hunters hue.
Shepherds gray
Crowned with bay,
And to spread
Cruel redd,
With a blew,
Color true.
All. He Is no bard, etc.
With his pipe
Care does wipe,
Till he dream
By the stream.
All. He Is no bard, etc.
4.
Faithful loves,
Turtle Doves,
Sit and bill,
On a bill.
Country Swaynes
On the plains,
Run and leap,
Turn and skip.
All. He Is no bard, etc.
5.
Pan does play
Care-away.
Fayries small
Two foot tall,
With caps red
On their head
Dance around
On the ground.
All. He Is no bard,
6.
Phyllis bright
Cloth in white,
With neck fair,
Yellow hair:
Rocks does move
With her love,
And make mild,
Tigers wild.
All. He Is no bard that cannot sing,
The praises of the flowery spring.
2. Song.
Thus spend we time in laughter,
While peace and spring do smile:
But I hear a sound of slaughter,
Draw nearer to our I Will.
Leave then your wonted prattle,
The Oaten reed forbear:
For I hear a sound of battle,
And Trumpets tear the air,
Let bag-pipes dye for want of wind,
Let Crowd and Harp be dumb;
Let little Taber come behind:
For I hear the dreadful drum.
Let no Birds sing, no Lambkins dance,
No fountains murmuring go:
Let Shepherds crook be made a lance:
For the martial horns do blow. Exeunt.
Act. 2.
Scen. 1.
Cassibelane, Cridous, Britael, Guerted, Nennius, Belinus, Eulinus. Volusene
following. Cassib. Heavens favor Cridous fair Albaniaes King:
And Britael decked with the Demetian Crown:
The same to famous Guerted, whose command
Embraces woody Ordovickes black Hills.
Legate, you may your message now declare.

Volus. By me great Caesar greetes the Britain state:
This letter speaks the rest.

Cassib. Then read the rest.

Volus. Caesar Proconsul of Gallia to Cassibelane King of Britain. Since
Romulus race by will of Jove,
Have stretched their Empire wide:
From Danowes banks by Tygris swift,
Unto mount Atlas side:
And Provinces and Nations strong.
With homage due obey.
We wish that you hid in the Sea,
Do likewise tribute pay.
Submitting all unto our wills,
For rashly aiding Gaul:
And noble Laddes for hostages
Make ready at our call.
These granted may our Friendship gain:
Denied shall work your woe:
Now take your choice, whether you'de find
Rome, as a Friend, or Foe.

Cassib. Bold mandates are unwelcome to free Princes.
Legate withdraw; you shall be soon dispatched. Exit. Volus.

Crid. He writes more like a Victour, than a Foe;
Whose greatness risen from subdued nations,
Is fastened only with feare's slippery knot.
Nor can they fight so feirce, for wealth or fame,
As we for native liberty. With answer rough
Bid him defiance. So thinks Cridous.

Guert. Guerted maintains the same, and on their flesh
I Will write my answer in red Characters.

Brit. Thou Ravenous woolfe, Imperious monster Rome,
Seuen-headed Hydra; know, we scorn thy threats:
We can oppose thy hills with mounts as high;
And scourge usurpers with like cruelty.
And thus thinks Britael.

Eul. Let Caesar come: Our land does rust with ease,
And wants an object, whose resisting power
May strike out valarous flashes from her veins.
So shadows give a Picture life. So flames
Grow brighter by a fanning blast. Nor think,
I am a Courtier, and no Warrior borne:
Nor Loue-Obiect: For well my Poet says,
Militat omnis Amans, Each Lover is a Soldier;
I can join Cupids bow, and Mars his Lance.
A pewter-coate fits me, as well as silk.
It grieves me see, Our Martial spirits trace
The idle streets, while weapons by their side
Dangle and lash their backs, as it were to vpbraid
Their needless use. Nor is it glory small,
They set upon us last, when their proud Arms
Fadome the Land and Seas, and reach both Poles.
On then, So great a Foe, so good a cause,
Shall make our name more famous. So thinks Eulinus.

Cassib. Then Friends and Princes on this Blade take oath:
First to your Country, to revenge her wrongs:
And next to me, as General, to be lead
With unity and courage. they kiss the sword.

All. The gods bless Britain, and Cassibelane.

Nenn. Now royal friends, the Heirs of mighty Brute:
You see, what storm hangs houering ore this land,
Ready to pour down cataclysmes of blood;
Let ancient glory then inflame your hearts:
Beyond the craggy hills of grim-fac'd death,
Bright honor keeps triumphant Court, and deeds
Of martial men live there in marble rolls.
Death is but Charon to the Fortunate Isles:
Porter to Fame.
What though the Roman armed with foreign spoil,
Behind him lead the conquered world, and hope
To sink our Island with his Armies weight:
Yet we have gods, and men, and horse, to fight:
And we can bravely die. But our just cause,
Your forward loves, and all our people edg'de
With Dardane spirit, and the powerful name
Of Country; Bid us hope for victory.
We have a world within our selves, whose breast
No Forainer has vn-revenged pressed
These thousand years. Though Rhine and Rhoane can serve,
And envy Thames his never captive stream:
Yet mauger all. If we our selves are true,
We may despise, what all the earth can do.

Cassib. Lets then dismiss the Legate with a frown:
And draw our forces toward the Sea, to join
With the four Kings of Kent, and so affront
His first arrival. But before all, let
Our Priests and Druids in their hallowed groves
Propitiate the gods, and scanne events
By their mysterious Arts. Exeunt.

Act. 2. Scen. 2.
Eulinus. Hirildas. Rollano. Her. Well, so: your tongue's your own, though
drunk or angry.

Roll. Vmh. seals his mouth.

Her. Speak not a word upon your life: Be dumb.

Roll. Vmh. gives him money.

Her. I Will winch up thy estate. Be Harpocrates.

Roll. Vmh.

Her. Thy fortunes shall be double-guilt. Be midnight.

Roll. Vmh.

Her. An excellent instrument to be the Bawd
To his dear Lady. -- But Rollano, hark:
What words, what looks did give my letter welcome?

Roll. Vmh.

Her. Nay, now thy silence is ante-dated. Speak.

Roll. Vmh.

Her. I give thee leave, I say. Speak, Be not foolish.

Roll. Then -- with your leave: She used upon receipt
No words, but silent joy purpell'd her face,
And seeing your Name, strait clapped it to her heart,
To print there a New Copy: As she would say,
The words went by her eyes too long a way.

Her. You told her my Conditions, and my Oath
Of silence, and that only you be used.

Roll. All, Sir.

Her. And that this night --

Roll. I, Sir.

Her. You guard the Door --

Roll. I, Sir.

Her. But I nere mean to come.

Roll. No, Sir? Oh wretch!
Shall I deceive, when She remains so true?

Her. No. Thou shall be true, and She remain deceived.
I Will lie, and yet I will not lie. My Friend
Eulinus in my shape, shall clime her Bed.
This is the point. You Will promise all your aid.

Roll. Your Servant to Command, and then Reward.

Eul. We Will draw thee Meteor-like by our warm favor
Unto the roof and feeling of the Court:
We Will raise thee (hold but fast) on Fortunes ladder. Exit Roll.
This Fellow is a Medley of most lewd
And vicious qualities: A braggart, yet a coward,
A knave, and yet a slave: True to all villainy,
But false to Goodness. Yet now I love him,
Because he stands just in the way of love.

Her. Coosse, I commend you to the Cyprian Queen;
Whilst I attend Diana in the Forest,
My kinsman Mandubrace, and I must try
Our Greyhounds speed after a light-foot hare. Exit Hirild.

Eul. O Love! whose nerves unite in aequall bonds
This massy frame. Thou Caement of the world:
By which the Orbs and Elements agree:
By which all Living creatures joy to be,
And dying live in their Posterity.
Thy holy raptures warm each noble breast,
Sweetly inspiring more Soul. Thy delight
Surpasses melody, Nectar, and all pleasures
Of Tempe, and of Tempe's eldest Sister
Elysium: A banquet of all the Senses!
By thy Commanding power, Gods into Beasts,
And Men to Gods are changed, as Poets say:
When Sympathy rules, All like what they obey.
But Love triumphs, when Man and Woman meet
In full affection: Double vows then fill
His sacred Shrine. Yet, This to me denied,
More whets my Passion: Mutual Love grows cold.
Venus, be thou Propitious to my wiles;
And laugh at Lovers periuries and guiles. Exit.

Act. 2. Scen. 3.
Lantonus. Hulacus. Two Druids, in long robes, hats like Pyramids, branches of
Mistletoe. Lant. That Souls immortal are, I easily grant:
Their future State distinguished, Joy, or Pain,
According to the merits of this Life.
But then I rather think, being free from Prison,
And bodily contagion, they subsist
In places fit for Immateriall Spirits:
Are not transfused from Men to beasts, from beasts
To men again: wheeled round about by change.

Hul. And were it not more cruel, to turn out
Poor naked Souls stripped of warm flesh, like Landlords,
Bidding them wander: Then (forsooth) imagine
Some unknown Cave or Coast, whether all the myriads
Of souls deceased are slipped, and thrust together.
Nay, Reason rather says: As at one moment,
Some dye, and some are borne; so may their Ghosts,
Without more cost, serve the succeeding age:
For sure they do'nt wear; to be cast aside.
But enter strait, less, or more noble bodies,
According to desert of former deeds.
The valiant into Lions, coward minds
Into weak Hares, The ambitious into Eagles
Soaring aloft; But the perverse and peevish;
Are next indenniz'd into wrinkled Apes:
Each vice and virtue wearing seemly shapes.

Lant. So you debase the gods most lively image,
The humane Soul, and rank it with mere Brutes,
Whose life of reason void, ends with their sense.

Enter Belinus. Bell. Hayle to Heavens privy Counselors. The King.
Desires your judgment of these troublesome times.

Lant. The gods foretold these mischiefs long ago,
In Eldells reign, The Earth and Sky were filled
With prodigies, strange Sights, and hellish shapes.
Sometime two Hosts with fiery lances met,
Armor and Horse being heard amid the Clouds:
With Streamers red now march these ayrie Warriors,
And then a sable hearse-cloath wrappes up all:
And bloody drops speckled the grass, as falling
From their deepe-wounded limbs:
Whilst staring Comets shook their flaming hair.
Thus all our Wars were acted first on high,
And we taught what to look for.

Hul. Nature tunes step-dame to her brood, and dammes
Deny their monstrous issue. Saturn joined
In dismal league with Mars portends some change.
Late in a grove by night, a voice was heard
To cry aloud, Take heed, more Troianes come.
What may be known or done, we will search, and help,
With all religious care.

Belin. The King and army do expect as much:
That powers divine perfumed with odours sweet,
And feasted with the fat of Bulls and Rams;
Be pleased to bless their plots.

Lant. All rites and orizons due, shall be performed.
Chifely Night's Empress fourefold Honor craves,
Mighty in Heaven, and Hell, in Woods, and Waves. Exit.

Act. 2. Scen. 4.
Caesar, Volusene, Laberius. Soldiers. Caes. What land, what people, and what
answer; Show.

Volus. We saw a Paradise, whose bosom teemes
With silver oar: whose Seas are pau'd with pearl:
The Meadows richly spread with Floraes tapistry:
The fields even wonder at their harvest loades.
In Crystal streams the scaly nations play,
Fringed all along with trembling poplar trees:
The Sun in Summer loath to leave their sight,
Forgets to sleep, and glauncing makes no Night.
Then for the men, Their statures tall and big,
With blue-stain'd skins, and long black dangling hair
Promise a barbarous fierceness. They scarce know,
And much less fear our Empires might; but thus
Returned defiance:
Cassibelane King of Britain to Julius Caesar Proconsul of Gallia. Seeing your
Empire's great. why should it not suffice?
To covet more and more, is Tyrants usual guize.
To loose what Jove you gave, you'de think it but unjust:
You have your answer then: Defend this I Will we must;
Which from the world cut of, and free from her first day,
Has Iron more for swords, than Gold for tributes pay.
If amity, and like fear, succor to Gaul impartes:
Pardon: For this small brook could not divide our hearts.
We hope the gods will help, and fortune back our Cause,
Who take Arms, but to keep our lives, our Wives, and Laws.
As you from Troy, so we; Our pettigree do claim:
Why should the branches fight, when as the roote's the same?
Despise us not, because the Sea and North us cloze*
Who can no further go, must turn upon their foes.
Thus rudely we conclude: Wage war, or change your will:
We hope to use a lance, far better than a quill.

Caes. I grieve to draw my sword against the stock
Of thrice-renowned Troy: But they are rude,
And must be frighted, ere we shall be friends.
Then lets aboard, and hoysting sails convey
Two legions over: For I long to view
This unknown land, and all their fabulous rites;
And gather margarites in my brazen cap.
Nature, nor Fates can valourous virtue Stop.

Laber. Now Caesar speaks like Caesar: stronger and stronger,
Rise like a whirlewind, tear the mountains pride;
Shake thy brass harness, whose loud clattering may
waken Gradivus, where he sleeps on top
Of Haemus, lulld with Boreas roaring Base:
And put to flight this Nation with the noise.
A Fly is not an Eagles combatant:
Nor may a Pygmee with a Giant strive. Exeunt.

Act. 2. Scen. 5.
Cassibelane. Belinus. Comius following. Attendants. Com. Health and good
fortune on Cassibelane tend.
My love to you and Britain, waft me hither,
To make atonement, ere the Roman Leader.
Bring fire and spoil and ruin on your heads.
No herb can ever grow, where once he treads.
Nothing withstands his force. Be not too hardy,
But buy a friend with kindness, least you buy
His anger dearly.

Cassib. Comius, speak no more: He knows our mind.

Com. O let not rage so blind your judgment, but
Prevent with ease the hazard of a war,
Of war, a word composed of thousand Isles.
O be not cruel to your selves. I Will undertake
Without discredit to appease his wrath,
If you will cas-sheere your soldiers, and receive
Him like a Guest, not like an Enemy.

Cassib. False-hearted Gaul, dare thou persuade even me,
For to betray my people to the sword?
Now know I, thou art sent for to solicit
Our Princes to rebel, to learn our strength.
Lay hands on him: A Spy.

All. A Spy, a spy, a traitor, and a spy. they chain him.

Com. Is this the Guerdon of my loving care?
You break the laws of Nature, Nations, Friends:
But look for due revenge at Caesar's hand.

Cassi. Expect in prison thy revenge. Away with him. exit. Com.
Belinus, have you mustered up our Forces?

Bell. Yes, if it please your Highness.

Cassib. And what are the particulars?

Bell. First Cridous leads from the Albanian realm,
Where Grampiu's ridge deuides the smiling dales,
Five thousand horse, and twenty thousand foot,
Three thousand Chariots manned. The Brigants come
Decked with blew-painted shields, twelve thousand strong.
Under the conduct of Demetiaes Prince,
March twice three thousand, armed with Pelts and Glaues:
Whom the Silures flank, eight thousand stout,
Greedy of fight, borne soldiers the first day,
Whose gray-goose-winged shafts near flew in vain.
Then Guerted mounted on a shag-haire steed,
Full fifteen thousand brings, both horse and foot,
Of desperate Ordovicians, whose use is
To rush half naked on their foes, enraged
With a rude noise of pipes.
Your Province bounded with that boiling stream,
Where Sabrine lovely Damsel lost her breath,
And with curld-pated Humber, Neptunes heir:
Affoordes eight thousand Carres, with hooks and sithes,
And fifty thousand expert men of war:
All brave Lhoegrians, armed with Pike and Spear:
Each nation being distinguished into troops,
With gawdie pennons flickering in the air.
Beside these, Kent is up in arms, to blunt
The edge of their first furious shocke.

Cassib. We Will now invite them to a martial Feast,
Caruing with Fauchions, and carowsing healths
In their lives moisture. Well returned Androgens: enter Andr.
Have you obtained, or is your suite denied?

Andr. Our message told unto the Scots, Their King
With willing sympathy, leauies a Band,
Ten thousand footmen, whose strange appetites
Murder, and then devour; and dare gnaw, and suck
Their enemies bones. Conducted thence, we saw
The Pictish Court, and friendly intertain'd,
Receive eight thousand, whose most ugly shapes,
Painted like Bears, and Wolves, and brinded Tigers,
May kill, and stonifie without all weapons.
More aid they promise, if more need. These forces.
Lead by Cadallan hither march with speed.

Cassib. It Is well, our Kings consent for common good.
When all are joined, we shall ore-spred the hills,
And soldiers thicker than the sand on shore,
Hide all the landing coasts. Ere next day break,
The rocks shall answer, what the drum does speak.

Exeunt. Act. 2. Scen. 6.
Hulacus. Lantonus. Ministers. Lant. That ceremonious fear, which bendes the
heart
Of mortal creatures, and displaies it self
In outward signs of true obedience;
As prayer, kneeling, sacrifice, and Hymns:
Requires again help from immortal Deities,
As promise, not as Debt: we laud their names,
They give us blessings, and forgive our blames.
Thus gods and men do barter. What in Piety
Ascends, as much descends again in pity:
A golden chain reaching from Heaven to Earth.

Hul. And now is the time, good Brother, of their aid,
When dangers, black face frowns upon our state.
Away, away, ye hearts and tongues profane:
Without devotion mysteries are vain.

They kneel, elevate hands thrice. Lant. Draw near ye heavenly powers,
Who dwell in Starry bowers.
And ye who in the deep,
On mosste pillowes sleep.
And ye who keep the center,
Where never light did enter.
And ye whose habitations,
Are still among the nations;
To see, and hear our doings,
Our birthes, our wars, our wooings.
Behold our present grief:
Belief does beg relief.
Both going around say. By the veruaine, and Lunary,
By Fernefeed planetary,
By the dreadful Mistletoe,
Which does on holy Oak grow.
Draw near, draw near, draw near.

Hul. Help us beset with danger,
And turn away your anger:
Help us begirt with trouble,
And now your mercy double:
Help us oppressed with sorrow,
And fight for us to morrow.
Let fire consume the foe-man,
Let air infect the Roman,
Let Seas intombe their fury,
Let gaping earth them bury:
Let fire and air and water,
And earth conspire their slaughter.

Both. By the veruaine, etc.
Help us, help us, help us.

Lant. We Will praise then your great power,
Each month, each day, each hour:
And blaze in lasting story,
Your honor and your glory.
High altars lost in vapor;
Young Heifars free from labor;
White Lambs for suck still crying,
Shall make your music dying.
The boys and girls around,
With honie-suckles crowned:
The Bardes with Harp and riming,
Green bays their brows entwyning,
Sweet tune, and sweeter dittie,
Shall chaunt your gracious pity.

Both. By the vervaine, etc.
We Will praise, we will praise, we will praise.

The image of the Moon, the Shrine opens. Hul. Fix, holy Brother, now your
prayers on One,
Britains chief Patroness; with humble cry,
Let us inuoke the Moons bright Majesty. they kneel.

Lant. Thou Queen of Heaven, Commandresse of the Deep,
Lady of Lakes, Regent of VVoods and Dear,
A Lamp dispelling irksome night: The source
Of generable moisture. At whose feet
With garments blue, and rushie garlands dressed
Wait twenty thousand Naiades. Thy Crescent
Brute Elephants adore, and man does feel
Thy force run through the Zodiac of his limbs.
O thou first guide of Brutus to this I Will,
Drive back these proud usurpers from this I Will.
Whether the name of Cynthiaes silver globe;
Or chaste Diana with a gilded quiver;
Or dread Proserpina, stern Dis his spouse;
Or soft Lucina, called in childbed throws:
Does thee delight. Rise with a glorious face,
Green drops of Nereus trickling down thy cheeks,
And with bright horns, united in full orb,
Toss high the Seas, with billows beat the banks,
Conjure up Neptune, and the Aeolian slaves,
Contract both Night and Winter in a storm:
That Romans loose their way, and sooner land
At sad Avernus, than at Albions strand.
So may thou shun the Dragons head and tail:
So may Endymion snort on Latmian bed:
So may the fair game fall before thy bow:
Shed light on us, but lightning on our foe.

Hul. Me thinks, a gracious luster spreads her brow:
And with a nodde she ratifies our suite.

Within. Come near, and take this Oracle. Lant. Behold, an Oracle flies out
from her Shrine:
Which both the King and State shall see, before
We dare unfold it. Exeunt.

Act. 2. Scen. 7.
Brennus Ghost. Nennius, in night robes. Brenn. Follow me.

Nenn. Follow? what means that word, who art, Thy will?

Brenn. Follow me Nennius.

Nenn. He names me: Sure it is some friend which speaks.
I Will follow thee, though it be through Stygian lakes.

Brenn. It Is Ancient Brennus calls, whose victories
Europe and Asia felt, and still record.
Dear Nennius, now is the time to steel thy courage.
Can thou behold thy Mother captive, then
Look back upon thy Ancestors enrolled
Among the Worthies, who spread wide her Fame?
First let thy Eye-balles power out poisoned beams,
And kill them with Disdain, who dare but lift
Their hand against her. No: no Confull must
Boast of her Thraldom, and out-braue our Walls.
I wonder that such impudent Owls should gaze
Against the splendor of our Britain clifts:
Play thou a second Brennus, Let thy Lance,
Like an Herculean clubbe, Two monsters tame,
Romes Avarice and Pride; So come Life or Death,
Let Honor have the Incense of thy Breath. Exit.

Nenn. Farewell heroic Soul: Thou shall not blush,
At Nennius deeds. The smallest drop of Fame
Is cheap, If death and dangers may it buy.
Yet give thy words new vigor to my spirits,
And spur the Pegasus of my mounting thoughts:
I Will follow thee, ore pyles of slaughtered foes,
And knock at Plutoes gate. I come. Come Life or Death,
Honor, To thee I consecrate my Breath. Exit.

Caesar. Camillus Ghost following. Came. Julius, stay here: Thy friend Camillus
speaks.

Caes. O thou Preserver of our present Race,
Our Cities Second founder! What dire fate
Troubles Thy Rest, that thou should trouble Mine?

Came. Only to bid thee fight.

Caes. Thou shall not need.

Came. And bid thee take a full Revenge on this,
This Nation, which did sack and burn down Rome,
Quenching the coals with blood, and kicked Our ashes,
Trampling upon the ruins of our state.
Then led the Gauls in triumph through Greece,
To fix their Tents beside Euxinus gulf.

Caes. Is this that Northern route, the Scourge of kingdoms?
Whose names till now unknown, We judged Gauls;
Their Tongue and Manners not unlike.

Came. Gauls were indeed the Bulk, but Brennus lead
Then Brother to the Britain King, those armies,
Backed with great troops of warlike Ilanders.
To thee belongs, To render Bad for Ill:
O be my Spirit doubled in thy breast,
With all the Courage of three Scipioes,
Marius, and Sylla: That this nation fierce
In feats of war, be forced to bear our Yoke. Exit.

Caes. So may thou sweetly rest, as I shall strive
To trace your steps: Nor let me live, If I
Thence disappointed ever seem to fly, Exit.

Act. 2. Scen. 8.
Chorus. 1. Song.
Ancient Bards have sung,
With lips dropping honey,
And a sugared tongue,
Of our worthy Knights.
How Brute did Giants tame,
And by Isis current,
A second Troy did frame;
A Center of Delights.
Locrinus eldest son
Did drown the furious Hunne,
But burnt himself with Elstrids love,
Leist, Rex Pacificus.
Elud, Judicious,
How heavenly Bodies roll above.
Wise Bladud founded has,
Both Soul and Bodies Bath:
Like Icarus he flew.
How first Mulmutius wears
A golden crown: whose heirs
More than half the World subdue.
2. Song.
Thou nurse of Champions, O thou Spring
Whence Chiualry did flow:
Thou Diamond of the worlds great Ring,
Thy glorious virtue show:
Thou many a Lord have bred,
In Catalogue of Fame read:
And still we have
As Captains Brave,
As ever Britains led.
Then dub a dub, dub. The Armies join, Tantara.
Cassibelane with armor gay,
And strongly couched lance:
His courser white turned into bay,
On carkesses shall praunce.
What a crimzon stream, the Blade
Of Nennius sword has made.
Black Alliaes day,
And Cannaes Fray,
Have for a Third long stayed.
Then dub a dub, dub. The Armies join, Tantara.
Act. 3.
Scen. 1.
Noise of Ships landing, and the battle within. Caesar. Volusene. Laberius.
Atrius. Ensign, Drums, Flagge. Caes. Our Landing cost us dearly, many lives
Between the ships and shore being sacrificed.
Our men with heavy armor clogged, and ignorant
Of all the flats, and shallowes, were compelled
To wade and fight, like Tritons half above,
Half under water. Now we surer tread,
Though much diminisht by so many lost.
Come on. Come on. They march, and go out.

Cassibelane. Cridous, Britael, Guerted. The four Kings of Kent. Nennius.
Androgeus. Themantius. Eulinus. Hirildas. Belinus. Rollano. Ensigns. Drum. A
March. Cassib. So, let them land. No matter which they choose
Fishes or Crows to be Executers:
They Will find the Land as dangerous as the Sea.
The Nature of our Soil will not bear a Roman,
As Irish earth does poison poisonous beasts.
On then: charge close, before they gather head.

Nenn. Brother, Advance. On this side, I Will lead up
The new-come Succors of the Scots and Picts.

They march, and go out. Caesar, etc. Caes. What, still fresh Supplies come
thronging from their dens?
The nest of Hornets is awake: I think
Here Is Natures Shop: Here men are made, not borne,
Nor stay nine tedious months, But in a trice
Sprout up like mushromes at Wars thunderclap.
We must make out a way. Exeunt.

Rollano, armed, cap a pea. Roll. Since I must fight, I am prepared to fight:
And much inflamed, with noise of Trump and Drum:
Me thinks I am turned Lion, and durst meet
Ten Caesar's. Where are all these Covetous rogues?
Who spoil the rich for gain, and kill the poor
For glory? Blood suckers, and public Robbers.

Laber* enters. Rollano retires afraid; but being gone out, goes forward. Roll.
Nay stay, and brag, Rollano did thee kill:
Stay, let me flesh my sword, and wear thy spoils.

Laber. reenters with an Ensign. Laber. Come. Will ye forsake your Ensign,
and fall off?
I call to witness all the gods, I here
Perform my duty. Thou can not escape.
Rollano would fly, fights, falls as wounded. Now dye, or yield thy self.

Roll. I yield, I yield, Oh save my life, I yield.
I am no Britain, but by chance come hither:
I Will never more lift weapon in their quarrel.

Laber. How may I trust your faith?

Roll. Command me any thing.

Lab. Lay down your neck.
Treads on it. Give up your sword. Beats him with it.
Base coward live: Such foes will near do hurt. exit. Laber.

Enter Eulinus, Androgeus, Belinus, with bloody swords. Eul. Rollano, what at
stand? pursue the chase.

Roll. I made their strongest Captain fly: This hand,
This martial hand, I say, did make him fly.

Eul. Some silly scoute.

Roll. He was a match for Cyclops, at each step
The ground daunc'd, and his nostrills blew the dust:
Armed as the God of Battle pictured is.

Eul. What were his looks?

Roll. His brows were like a stormy winter night,
When Juno scolding, and Mars malcontent
Disturb the air: At each look lightning flies,
Jove against the Giants needed but his eyes.

Eul. How eloquent is fear!

Roll. So came he stalking with a Beame-like spear,
I gave the onset, then received his charge,
And next blow cleft his morrian: So he flies.

Eul. O bravely done. Here comes a straggling soldier. ent. Lab.

Roll. It Is he, it is he. I care not for vain glory:
Its sweeter live, than dead to be a story, runs away.

Eul. O valiant coward, stay. There Is not a spark
Of Britain Spirit does enliue thy corpse. Exeunt.

Act. 3. Scen* 2.
Nennius, pursuing. Nenn. Fight Britains, fight. The day is ours. I Am cloyed
And glutted even with slaughter. There some fly,
And flying die, and dying mangled lie.
I twice broke through the ranks, yet cannot find
That ventrous Captain Caesar, on whose breast
I long to try my blade, and prick that bladder
Puffed with ambition, and victorious fight.

Caesar enters. Caes. We may confess, they come of Troiane kind,
An hundred valiant Hectors here we find.

Nenn. Fairly incountred, let our blades discuss
Who has the iustest cause: And on this combat
May victory her equal Balance hang.

Caes. Thou seem a worthy Prince, and Caesar's match.

They fight, wounds Nennius in the head, who staggers, fights, and recouers
Caesar's sword fallen, and puts him to flight. Nenn. Stay, stay. Thou art at
home: Here Is Campus Martius.
The Britains sought-for see thy frighted back:
Return, and take possssion of our I Will,
And by thy death be styled Britannicus.
Leave not thy blade vnsheath'd: A tyrants heart
To his own sword a scabberd should impart.
Ye Senators, and gaily-gownd Quirites,
Open the Capitolls iuory gates, and lead
Fat bulls with garlands green, and gilded horns:
Let supplications last for twice ten days:
Caesar returns a victour.
Prepare the laureate Coach, and snow-white steedes,
Embroydered Canopie, and skarlet gowns:
Let Altars smoke, and Tholes expect our spoils:
Caesar returns in Triumph. -- Basely flies,
And leaves his conquest in weak infancy.
For had he won this coast, yet many blows
Must pass, ere he could pass the Thames; And then
Ere he touch Humber, many nations must
Be tamed: And then before he Tweed can drink,
And climb the craggy rocks of Caledon:
A Life is spent: yea, many thousand lives.
Oh my wound rages, and tormented brain
Does labor of a Fury, not a Pallas.
This Blade was steept in poison: O, I am poisoned:
Well did thou fly, or I had made thee taste
Thine own provision. Now my wrath and pain,
With double force shall flow in purple streams.
The three infernal Ladies with wyar-whips,
And speckled snakes, shall lackey close my steps;
Whilst that I offer Hecatombes of men
The Latian Shepherds brood shall ban those stars,
Whose glimmering Sparks lead their audacious Pines,
To lie so far from home in foreign soil.
When Cedars fall, whole woods are crushed: nor dye,
Can Nennius private without company.
Enter Laberius. Thou runst upon thy death.

Lab. A Roman never daunted was with looks;
Else had not Sarmatane, and Lybian bug-beares
Bin captive led in chains.

Nenn. But our looks kill. Fight: Laber. falls.
Dye Slave, by Caesar's sword. Thou art his friend.
Dye, as the Ransom of his greater ghost:
And learn as well as I, how venom smarts.
Be thou my Post to the Tartarian Prince,
And tell him, Nennius comes: But first, I Will send
More of you headlong home, a nearer way,
Then by the cloudy Alps. Exit.

A retrait sounded. Act. 3. Scen. 3.
Cassibelane. Belinus. Lantonus. Cassi. Now hot Alarums dye in fainter notes:
Tempestuous night is gone: Victorious joy,
(As when pale Eos cleaues the Eastern fogs,
And blushing more and more opes half her eye,
With holy water sprinkling all the meades,
Whose clear Reflexe serves as her Morning glass:)
Does paint with gaudy plumes the checkerd sky.
The only Name of Victory sounds sweeter,
Than all mellifluous Rhetoric.

Lant. Thanks to Andates, whose power kingdoms feel:
Andates, greatest goddess: In whose train,
Fear, red-fac'd anger, and confusions wheel,
Murder, and Desolation run before:
But joyful shouts, mirth, Olive-budding Peace,
And Lawrell-crowned triumph, at her back,
Do pase with stately steps. Thy Temple is,
The Earth: where furious Monarchs play the Priests:
Armies of men imbrue thy Altar stones.
Thanks also to the Trident-shakers Mace,
Drawn by two ramping Sea-horses: at whose Beck,
The waters wrinkled frown, or smoothly smile.
But thou Heavens Diamond, fair Phoebus Sister,
Nor Delian Dames, nor the Ephesian Towers,
Shall blazon more thy Praise. Thy influence strong
Struck up the sandy ooes; that madding waves
Batterd their ships, and dashed their bended sails,
And with a tempest turned them round in skorne.

Cassib. But where is the Answer which her Idol gave:
Can you expound the sense?

Lant. Dread Sovereign, Thus runs the Oracle*
Loud does the King of Beasts roar,
High does the Queen of Birds soar:
But her wings clipped soon grow out:
Both repent they are so stout.
Till C. against C. strike a round,
In a perfect Circle bound.
The meaning wrapped up in cross doubtful terms,
Lies yet thus open: That disastrous fate
Must be the Prologue to a joyful cloze.
The rest we will search out, if our skill don't fail.

Belin. Renowned Cassibelane, might my counsel speak!

Cassib. I know thy loyal heart, and prudent head,
Upon whose hairs Time's child experience hangs
A milke-white badge of wisdom: And can wield
Thy tongue in Senate, and thy hands in field.
Speak free, Belinus.

Bell. We forfeit fame, and smother victory
By idle lingering: The Foe discomfited
Must needs be much amazed: His Ships dismembered
Do peece-meale floate upon the waves: The Horse,
Whose succor he expects, are beaten back
By friendly winds: His Camp contracted is,
A tithe of soldiers left, the rest all slain:
His chief munition spent, or lost: provision,
An Armies soul, but what we give, he wants.
What then shall hinder to destroy their name?
So none again shall venture, but our I Will
Rounded with Nereus girdle may enjoy
Eternal peace.

Cassib. I like thy warning: with united stroke
Of all our Nations, we will his Camp beleaguer,
Devouring ships and men. But one mischance,
My Brother's wound, his mortal wound I fear,
Turns all to wormwood. Why were ye dumb ye Idols!
No Sainted Statue did foretell this grief.
Come lets go visit him. You may, Lord General,
Set Comius free: We love not to insult,
But render good for ill. Exeunt.

Act. 3. Scen. 4.
Caesar, Volusene, etc. Caes. Heaven, Sea, and Wind, and all the Elements,
Conspire to work us harm. Our Ships in Gaul
Wind-bound, at length put forth, and come in view
Are tossed, and torn: Our Navy on the shore
With civil discord break each others plankes.
The ayrie Rulers are displeased, all day
Noyses and nimble flashes mixed with rain
Amaze our soldiers.
To make grief full, my Daughters death I hear.
When, powerful Fortune, will thy anger cease?
Never till now did Caesar fortune fear.
Mount Palatine, thou Throne of Jove, and ye
Whose lesser Turrets pinnacle Rome's head:
Are all your Deities fled? or was I bold,
To out-goe Nature, and our Empire stretch
Beyond her limits? Pardon then my fault.
Or do we basely faint? Or is our might
Answered with like, since Troy against Troy does fight?
Nor can I write now, I came over, and
I overcame: Such foes deny such have.

Volus. The Ilanders consult, and sure intend
Some sudden stratageme. And now the scales
Poyze equal day and night, when rougher Seas,
And stormy Pleyads may our passage stop.

Caes. Then Sirs, to ship: Compelled I leave this land:
But to return, if gods do not withstand, Exeunt.

Act. 3. Scen. 5.
Cassibelane, Belinus, Lantonus. Nennius in a chair. Nenn. We wunne the day:
and all our foes are fled?

Bell. Yes noble Nennius, scattered on the shore
Thick lay the Latins, and the glutted stream
Spewes up her dead, whom death has taught to swim,
Though ignorant alive: Their flowing blood
Made a new Red Sea. But those few we lost,
Sweetly reposed upon their mothers breast,
And wounded all before, kept in their face
A warlike frown.

Nenn. Where is false Caesar's sword, called Crocea Mors,
Which never hurt, but killed: Let it be placed
Within my tomb.

Bell. Here is the fatal Blade.

Nenn. Death like a Parthian flies, and flying kills:
In midst of Conquest came my deadly wound.
Accursed weapon, more accursed man,
Who Serpent-like in poison bathes his sting:
Tyber does breed as venomous beasts as Nile:
We skorne such cruel craft. But death draws near,
A giddy horror seazeth on my brain.
Dear Brother, and thou holy Priest of Heaven,
Witness my words; I leave my Country free,
And dye a victour. Thus, with lighter wing
My purified soul mounts to her First-best Cause.
I long even to behold those glorious Cloisters,
Where Brutus, great Dunwallo, and his sons,
Thrice noble Spirits walk.
Thou mighty Enginer of this wondrous Globe,
Protect this I Will, confound all foreign plots:
Grant Thames and Tyber never join their chanells;
But may a natural hate derived from us
Live still in our long-trailed progeny.
(My eyes do swim in death.)
Before this land shall wear the Roman yoke;
Let first the adamantine axell crack,
Which binds the Ball terrestrial to her poles,
And dash the empty air; Let Planets drop
Their scalding gelly, and all flame being spent,
Entombe the world in everlasting smoke.
Come faster, Death: I can behold thy grim,
And ugly Jaws with quiet mind: Now, now:
I hear sweet music; and my spirit flies. he dies.

Cassi. His breath is gone: who was his Countries prop,
And my right hand. Now only does he crave,
To see him laid with honor in the grave.

Act. 3. Scen. 6.
Eulinus, Hirildas. Eul. A mind content, Oh, it is a mind of pearl,
A Mint of golden thoughts, A Heaven on Earth!
When eager longer meet full-but their scope,
And hopes are actuated beyond hope.
So Jason joyed, the golden Fleet obtained:
So Hercules joyed, the golden fruit being gained:
So Venus joyed, the golden Ball to hold:
So Mydas joyed, when he turned all to gold.
So, and much more reioyc'd, the Phrygian swain,
When he conuaide the fairest (except mine)
Which air did ever kiss: His brazen keele
Proud of her burden, sliced the capering brine:
The Tritons blew their horns, and Sea-gods dance,
Before, behind, about his Ship they praunce:
The meare-Maides skip on high, but to compaire
Their dangling tresses with her silken hair.
These were but shadows of my bliss. A robe
Of pure beatitude wrapes me round about,
Without a specke, or blemish: nor can Invention
Wish more unto me, than I have, Landora.
I Am rich, free, learned, honored, all; in this.
Who dares conceive against the Female sex,
But one base thought? Lo here I stand, their Champion,
And will maintain, He is a beast, a devil,
Begot between a Bitch-woolfe, and an Incubus.
Women, all good, all perfect, and all gracious,
Men-making creatures, Angels clad in flesh;
Let me adore your Name.

Hiril. -- And let me speak.
Why: Landora loves not you, but me in you.

Eul. But I in you enjoy Landoraes love.

Her. But she inioyes not your love, cause unknown.

Eul. No matter; I in you, or you in me:
So that I still possess my Dearest dear.
A paultry fancy last night in her bed
Turmoyl'd my thoughts, which since I shaped in Rimes. Thus.

Her. Prithee let us hear: I know thou art turned Poet.
The Dream. Night having drawn the Curtain, down I lie
By one, for worse Saturnius left the sky.
Slumbring at last: For love can hardly sleep:
Strait-waies I dreamed: For love does Reuelles keep.
A Damsel fair, and fashioned for delight,
(Our day-borne objects do return at night)
With flowery chaplet, and red velvet gown,
Which from her breast was fastened along down
With rich enameled locks, all which one key,
Whose bright gold 'bout her silver neck did play,
Could open and divorce. A veil most fair,
(Such witness only Paphian doves do wear)
With false light did her beauteous Front improve;
From this Arch Cupid shot his darts of Love.
With gentle strain she took me by the hand,
(Touches in love do more than tongue's command)
Then leads me with an amorous smile along:
He Is easily led, whom beauty draws, more strong*
Than Cable-roapes. An Altar we descry,
Where Incense-franke, and Amber fumes did fly,
In little rolling curles: A reverend Priest,
With snowy beard wauing upon his breast,
There kneeling did his eyes in sorrow steep:
Whose passionate cry made me, though ignorant, weep.
Phlegons hot breath no sooner lickes up dew,
Than joy had dried those tears: For lo I view
A circular room, all built with marble clear,
The title, Natures Storehouse. Most strange here
It seemed: I know not how we came, nor whence,
Nor any passage saw to get from thence.
But Oh the rich delight, and glorious fire
Which dazeled me: No heart can more desire.
Her first my guide opened her spice-breathing door,
Ask what thou will, this is the Arc of store,
No vows are here repulsed, she said. But I
Surpised with extreme joy and ecstasy,
By chance a Scorpion's tail behind her spide:
Pity, such beauty such a monster hide.
Trembling, yet silent, doubtful what to crave:
Lo, with a stink and fearful screech this brave
And glorious Dame does vanish, and a dart,
Which still I quake at, struck me to the heart.
But waking I revived, and found in bed,
Such Sovereign Balm, would cure old Peleus dead.

Her. Ha, ha. Your tedious dream has made me drowsy.
But hark, we must attend the Funeral pomp.

Act. 3. Scen. 7.
The Funeral passes over the Stage. Nennius Scutcheon, armor Caesar's sword
borne. Torches, Mourners. Cassib. Set down that heavy load with heavier
hearts.
Could virtuous valor, honorable thoughts,
A noble skorne of Fortune, pride, and death;
Myriads of vows and prayers sent to heaven,
Could Countries Jove, or Britains Genius save
A mortal man from sleeping in his grave:
Then had thou lived great Nennius, and out-liu'd
The smooth-tongu'd Greek. But we may more envy,
And less bewail thy loss, since thou did fall
On honors lofty Field-bed, on which Stage
Never did Worthy act a statelier part.
Nor durst pale death approach with Cypress sad,
Till flourishing Bay thy conquering temples clad.
A Funeral Elegy sung to the Harp. Turnus may conceal his Name,
Nennius had Aeneas fame.
Hannibal let Africa smother,
Ne^nius was great Scipioes brother.
Greece forbear Achilles story,
Nennius had brave Hectors glory.
Thrush and Nightingale be dumb:
Sorrowful songs befit a Tomb.
Turn ye marble stones to water:
Isis Nymphs forswear al laughter:
Sigh and sob upon your bed:
Belyes noble Son is dead.

A Banquet served over the stage. Rollano with a leg of a Capon, and a tankard
of wine. Roll. I like such slaughtering well, of birds and beasts;
Which wear no swords, nor shake a fatal pike:
When hogsheads bleed, and Oxen mangled lie.
O what a world of victuals is prepared
For sacrifice and feasting. Forty thousand
Fat Bullockes: than the Parkes and Forests send
Full thirty thousand wild beasts, armed with horns,
And dangerous teeth: The maine battaillion
Consists of Sheep, an hundred thousand fat:
The wings are both supplied with birds, and fowls,
Sans number: And some fish for succors serve.
A goodly Army. Troynouant does smoke,
And smells all like a kitchen. The King, Princes,
And Nobles of the land a Triumph hold.
Music, and songs, good cheer, and wine; and wine,
And songs and Music, and good cheer* High, brave.
No more shall barley broth pollute my throat,
But Nectar, Nectar of the grapes sweet blood:
Come heavenly Potion, wine: whose gentle warmth
Softens the brain, vnlockes the silent tongue,
Wits Midwife, and our spirits vestall Priest
Keeping alive the natural heat. A health,
A health (to make short work) to all the world:
So will it sure go round. steals behind.

The Triumphs. Cassibelane. 4 Kings of Kent. 3 Kings, Cridous, Britael,
Guerted, Androg. Themant. Hirild. Eulin. Belin. take places. Cassib. Sorrow
must doffe her sable sable weeds, and joy
Furbish the Court with fresh and vernant colors:
Else should we seem ungrateful to the gods.
Triumphs must thrust out Obsequies: And Tilt
With Turny, and our ancient sport called Troy,
Such as Iulus 'bout his Grandsires tomb
Did represent. And at each Temples porch
Games, songs, and holy murdering of beasts. they sit down.
A dancing Mask of six enters. Then the Epinicion sung by two Bardes. The
Roman Eagle threatening woe,
The Sea did shadow with her wing:
But our Goose quilles did prick her so,
That from the clouds they down her bring.
Both. Sing then ye Hills and Dales so so clear:
That Io Paean all may hear.
They may us call Isles Fortunate;
They sought for life here, not for Fame.
All, yield to them, they to our State:
The world knows but our Double Name.
Both. Sing then ye Streams and Woods so so clear:
That Io Paean all may hear.

Androgeus, and Themantius, play at foyles. Then Hirildas and Eulinus play.
Eul. It Was fowly played.

Her. You lie, it was fairly hit.

Eul. I Will give a quittance.

Her. Do your worst, vain braggart.
They take swords. Fight. Hirildas slain. Oh, I am slain.

Cassi. Hold, hold: my Nephew's slain before my face.
Life shall be paid with Life.

Andr. He shall not dye.

Cassi. Shall not? Your King and Uncle says, He shall.

Eul. No kingly menace, or censorious frown,
Do I regard. Tanti, for all your power.
But the compunction of my guilt does send
A shuddering chillnesse through my veins inflamed:
Why do ye stare, ye grisly powers of night?
There, there, His soul goes: I must follow him.

Offers to kill himself: is hinderd. Andr. He was prouok'd and did it in
defense:
And being My kinsman shall be judged by laws
Of Troynovant: Such custom claims our Court.

Cass. No custom shall bar Justice: I command
That he appear before us.

And. Trials are vain, when Passion sits as Judge.

Cass. I Will soon rebate this Insolent disdain.
Exeunt Androg. Them. Eul. Let not this dismal chance deface our joy:
Most royal Friends.

Crid. War being silenced, and Enyoes rage
In hell fast fetterd: Sound we now retrayte,
That soldiers may regreete their household gods.
Their children cling about their armed thighs.

Brit. And place their Trophies 'bout their smoaky halles;
There hang a Gauntlet bright, here a stabt Buckler,
Pile up long piles, and in that corner plant
A weighty sword, brandisht by some Centurion.
Not he, who near on snaky perils trod,
But happy He, who has them stoutly past:
For danger's sauce gives joy a better taste.

Guert. Great Monarch, if thy Summons call us back,
We tender here our Service, Men, and Arms:
As duty bids, and binds.

Cassib. Should he return: Our Province dares him front.
So a most kind adieu unto all three.
Exeunt Crid. Brit. Guert. Cingeterix, Carvilius, Taximagubis, Segonax: I know
your faithful love, Kents fourfold Head,
Will check rash Rebels, and as firmly stand
As hearty Oaks, who bear off Aeolus blows,
And with a whistle but deride his force.
Exeunt four Kings of Kent. Burst gall, and dye my actions in flame-colour:
I saw Hirildas fall, and breath his soul
Even in my face. As though hell watched a time,
To crush our pomp, and glory into sighs.
The conduits of his vital spring being ripped,
Spurtle'd my robes, soliciting Revenge. Belinus,
Attach the Murderer, and if abettors
Deny obedience, then with sword and fire
Wast their Dominions. For a Traitors sake,
Whole towns shall tremble, and the ground shall quake. Exeunt.

Act. 3. Scen. 8.
Androgeus. Themantius. Mandubrace. Andr. Shall Justice, and just Libra near
forsake
The imbroydered Belt? No sign of them on earth?
Are Gods dim-sighted grown, or do they sleep
The morning, and carowse the after noone?
That mortal motions tumble thus by chance:
Cleave thou blew Marble Seeling, that heavens King
With clearer aim may strike a tyrants crown,
Nor spend his brimstone bullets against some hill,
Or innocent Pine.

Mandub. Your injuries run low; Mine break all bounds.
My Father butcherd at his lawless will:
I banished from my lands, deposed from rule,
Owing my Life to night and flight.

Them. I do confess, You may complain aloud,
And tear the Element with a dolorous note:
Call down Astraea from her crystal chair,
Or call up Nemesis from the dyrefull deep,
To expiate your wrongs.
Else would the Manes of your father slain,
In a white sheet come sliding to your Bed:
And be revenged on you. He gave you life;
How can you better spend it, than to wreake
His death and slaughter? But our case and Cause,
Brother, is not the same: Eulinus slew
His innocent friend; And we defend the fact;
With hostile noise drowning Lawe's reverent voice:
But Murder outcries Both. Give me then leave
To be a Neutrall: My young years unfit
For any desperate course, can but complain:
The King our Uncle does not use us well. Exit.

Andr. Usurpers use this method still: At first
He as Protector flily got the stern,
During our nonage: Then the Commons voice,
Bought with a fawning brow, and popular grace,
Confirms his Regiment: We appointed shares,
With empty titles to beguile our thoughts,
Like puppet-Lords, dressed up with crown and skarfe,
Glad that we live, and hunt, and reign ore brutes.
Our Uncle is the King. So when he saw,
His throne established, and his foes repulsed,
Grown big with prosperous fortune, proudly spurns
All fear of God or man.

Mand. His anger nursed by iealousies must feed
On Princes flesh, who loose both state and life,
If they but look awry. A tyrants growth
Reared up by Ruins, thence may learn his fall:
For whom all fear, He justly fears all.

Andr. In Antiphones thus tune we female plaints:
But plots and force beseem us. Thus. Great Caesar
Shall pull him down below us. Thou Mandubrace,
Sure pledges take of our revolt, and quickly
Implore his aid: blow up his drooping fire
With hopeful terms. But let him stronger come.

Mand. I fly unseen, as charmers in a mist.
Grateful Revenge, whose sharp-sweet relish fats
My apprehensiue Soul. Though all were pared of,
Which does accrue from Fortune, and a man left
As barely poor, as Nature thrust him out:
Nay worse, though spirits boil, rage, anger, care,
And grief like wild-horse tear the affrighted mind:
Though wrongs excoriate the heart: yet all is sweetened,
If vengeance have her course. I wreake not how;
Let Commonwealth expire, and owls proclaim
Sad desolation in our Halls; Let heaps
Of dust and rubbage Epitaph our towns;
Let fire and water fight, who first shall spoil
This universal frame. From North, or South,
Revenge, thou art welcome. No sin worse than pity:
A tyrants only physic is Phlebotomy. Exeunt.

Act. 3. Scen. 9. Chorus.
1. Song.
Rejoice O Britanie,
Britain O rejoice:
The stormy cloud past over,
And only made a noise.
A clattering sound was heard;
And still we felt no wound:
Rejoice; Rejoice:
Thou happy Britain ground.
O that sweet plenidh,
Eloquent Orone,
Were now to chaunt our victories,
With a melodious tone:
And rowsing Echo from the dales,
With harmony to sound:
Rejoice; Rejoice:
Thou happy Britain ground.
2. Song.
Gang ye lads and lasses,
Sa wimble and sa wight:
Fewle mickle teene betide ye,
If ye ligg in this plight.
Be bonny, buxome, jolly.
Trip haydegues beliue:
And gif night gars the welkin merk
Tom piper do you blive.
Hidder, eke and shidder,
With spiced sow ycramd;
Sa that uneath thilke borrells
May well ne yede, ne stand:
As leefe as life do weete it,
When timbarins gin sound;
Fore harvest gil prankt up in lathe,
To loute it low around.
Act. 4.
Scen. 1.
Caesar, Volusene, Attendants. Caes. A Story is it, or fable; That stern Mars,
Thy weight did Romulus sleepy mother press?
Since we thy Brood degenerous, stand at gaze,
Charmed in the circle of a foaming flood,
And traile our dastard pikes? Burst Ianus prison,
Roar as thou did at Troy, drown Stentors voice
By many eights, which Pindus may re-beate,
Which Caucasus may as a Catch repeat,
And Taurus lough the fame: That Pygmees small
May squeake, It thunders, and diue into buroughs.
Let the four winds with dreadful clamor sing
Thy anger through the affrighted world.
What Lemnian chain shackles our mounting Eagle?
The Moone's round Concaue is too strait a cage
For her advanced Pineons.

Enter Mandubrace wounded and bloody, with Androg. young son. Mane. If pity
can have room in angry breast,
Favor a Britain Prince, his Father slain,
His regiment bereft, his dearest blood
Drawn by the sword of false Cassibelane.
Having got Crown, he then struck at my head:
Nor can I safely suck my native air.
His Coosse Androgeus also, and whole regions
In open war withstand his violence.
Lo, Albions aged arms spread wide t'inchaine
Thee as her Patron, in a true-loue knot.
Wherefore dread Caesar, let thy mercy strike
Reuengefull fire; and be justly styled, kneeles.
Tamer of Tyrants. Then fame blows aloud,
When valor helps the weak, pulles down the proud.

Caes. Arise unhappy Prince, our deeds shall show,
We grant thy suite. To Volusene.
Fortune repents at last;
The Moon is changed, the Globe does to us turn
Her shining cheek, and woes us with a smile.
But what firm signs of Faith, what faithful aid,
What furtherance can you give at our arrival?

Mand. See here Androgeus heir, whose tender age
His Father venters, and makes bold with nature,
To pledge his Darling. He and thirty more
Of noble lineage shall assure our faith:
Besides I pawn my life.

Caes. Enough. I Will once more cross the Seas,
For your good, more than mine; That happier sky
May bless your Towns with peace, your fields with plenty;
Perpetual spring in gay perfumed attire,
Surname your I Will, the Garden of the West.

Mand. Thanks, gracious Caesar, for this kind acceptance,
My knee does kiss the ground, my lip your knee.
Pardon ye gods, if any haunt our land,
Ye Nymphs, and Lares, Fawnes, and Silvanes wild;
That thus I bring a stranger on our coasts,
Whose foreign shape and language, may affright
Our lazy clownes, and on my Countries back
Once tread victorious steps: Be pleased to view,
Wrongs now redrest, neglected first by you.

Caes. Now Volusene:
Our glorious state, like the noone-pointed Sun,
When he bestrides the Lions flaming fleece,
Does North-west roll his burning brand, whose fire
The Oceans blue lake cannot stop, but flies
With brighter blaze to thaw the frozen Isles.
But how proceeds our preparation?

Volus. Many strong Ships are built, five Legions armed
Ready to launch.

Caes. Blow gently Africus,
Play on our poopes: When Hyperions Son
Shall couch in West his fome-bedappled iades;
We Will rise to run our course. Exeunt.

Act. 4. Scen. 2. Eulinus.
Eul. Though Orpheus Harp, Arions Lute, the Chimes
Whose silver sound did Thebane towers raise:
Though sweet Urania with her ten-string Lyre,
Unto whose stroke the daily-rowling sphaeres
Dance their just measures; Should with tune and tone
Tickle my eare-bred air: Yet can their notes
Those fabulous stones more enter, than my Soul.
Lead, poppy, Slumber stupifie my heart:
But Bedlame grief acts gambolles in my brain.
The Centaures Wheel, Prometheus Hawke, The Vulture
Of Tityus, Sisyphus never mossie stone,
The tale of Danaids tubbe, and Tantalus gaping,
Are but flea-bitings to my Smart: I Have slain
A kinsman: more, A friend I dearly loved:
Nay more, no cause provoking, but in rash
And hellish choler.
I had thought my Love had cannon-proofe bin against
A world of injuries: when see, all is split
By a small wind. Cursed be thou my Sword,
The Instrument of Fury: Cursed hand,
Which made the thrust: But most accursed Part,
Whose ruddy flesh triangular boyld in flame,
Like an Aetnean, or Vesuvian Salamander.
That Breast, I so could hug, that faithful breast,
That snowy white, I with dark sanguine stayn'd;
And from the wounds red lips, his panting heart
Did seem to speak, Is this a friendly deed?
O no, Hirildas: Bears can harmless play,
Lions can dally, and sheath up their claws:
I only, worst of brutes, kill friends in jest.
Why do Androgeus kindly-cruell keep
Me from their Sentence? Say, Law bids me dye:
If Law should not, I Will make that Law my self.
Shall Ensigns be displayed, and Nations rage
About so vild a wretch? Shall foreign hoofes
Kick up our trembling dust, and must a Caesar
Redeem my folly with a kingdoms fall?
First may I stop black Cerberus triple jaws.
Dye, Dye, thou have outlived thy self. Thou only,
Phaenix of females, still do bind and bound
My runnagate spirit in these walls of mudde:
From thee, and For thee it is, I breath. Yet how
Borrow can I his Shape, or use mine own?
Odious before, now worse than hell-borne goblin
With brand and chains, to skare this Dove all quaking
Twixt wrath and fear. But Time may favor win:
When Hope does fail, then Knife or Rope begin. Exit.

Act. 4. Scen. 3.
Cassib. Belin. Rollano. Cass. Wisdom confirm my Sense: what seemed their
number?

Roll. Rising from shore Conjecture might descry
A thousand Ships with painted prowes, to pave
The briny fields of Neptune, their broad sails
Did Nereus canopy, Titans taper veil.
As nations twenty nine against Troy built up
A floating Delos of a thousand Ships,
To plough the liquid glass: No frame of Pallas,
No crafty Sinon; but Those wooden horse
Did Troy dis-Troy: So Troynovant shall feel
Her Mothers Fate: Achilles comes again:
And Pergamus again shall sink in dust:
They threaten. Exit.

Cass. Wonder! What can their Arsenalles spawne so fast?
Last year his Barks and Gallyes were debosht;
This spring they sprout again: Belike their Navy
Like the Lernean adder faster grows,
The more it is pruned. They come their last. Lord Deputy,
Lead on the present troops, and leauy new.
Twere best I think to let Him land, least view
Of his huge Navy should our Commons fright:
Retire our selves to some place of advantage,
Entice him from his ships: So cut the veins
Which nourish both: Enclosed he cannot escape.

Bell. I rather judge, We should oppose his footing,
Using the benefit of our natural mound.

Cass. Uncertain it is, where, when, he makes in-road:
To furnish all, unlikely: to neglect
Any, were dangerous, as Pelides heel.
Our shores are large, and level: Then to attend
His time and leisure, would exhaust the state,
Weary our soldiers.

Bell. All places may be strengthened more, or less:
As by last year, Discretion now may guess.
The Clifts themselves are Bullwarkes strong: The Shelves
And Flats refuse great ships, the coast so open,
That every stormy blast may rend their cables,
Put them from anchor: Suffering double war,
Their men, pitched battle; and ships, navall fight.
For charges, it is no season to dispute:
Spend something, or loose all: Shall he maintain
A fleet to inthrall us, we detract small costs,
When freedom, life, and kingdom lie at stake?

Cass. But the Assaylants are the flower of Italy
Backed with four hundred Gallick horse, all tried
And gallant troops, joined in one martial body,
To give a fuller stroke; When we Defendants
Scatterd along, can weak resistance make:
Plainness of ground affoording us no shelter.

Bell. For what serves Art and Engines, Mounts and Trenches,
But to correct the nature of a plain?
A few on firm land may keep out a million,
Weakened by sea, false footing, billows rage,
And ponderous rage. When as received within,
He prospers by our spoil; We feed a Viper:
And malcontents and rebels have a refuge.
Nor were it safe, to venture all at once:
When one fought field being lost, swift ruin runs
And rushing throws down all.

Cassib. We know our strength, and his: we will fight in field.
Some dozen miles from sea. An open Theater
Gives luster to our prowess: To keep him out
Supposes fear, not manhood. No, let him march,
Till he rowse death, and stride his future grave.

Bell. Your will commands, and mine obeies. Exeunt.

Act. 4. Scen. 4.
Caesar, etc. Ensign, Drum, Trumpet, Flag, Soldiers, Shipmen. The noise of
landing. Caes. The coast is clear. Our honor is the Goal.
In vain does Tagus yellow sand obey,
Rhenes horned front, and nimble Tygris running
For wager with the wind, which skimmes his top:
In vain from Ganges to Hesperian Gades,
The Bounds marked out by Jove's two base-borne Sons,
Our Ecchoed Name does sound: If we recoyle
From hence again not victours.
Ye Pilotes old, who were begot on mere-Maides,
Whose Element is the Sea, bred and brought up
In cradles rockt with storms, and wooden walls,
Fear not to grapple with their seas. Fear not
Their bulkes, Brave veteranes: That extended mass
Is not of iron, but can bleed, and dye:
They were not dipped in Styx: nor are they Giants,
Or wild Poetic Centaures we assail:
Let then this voyage quit our credit lost,
And let Rage lash on Courage. Here Is the Game:
Life may be lost, but sure we will hold fast Fame.

They march about, and go out. The whole battle with-in. Cassib. Belin. etc.
Soldiers. Gass. Our first attempt does prosper: They retiring
Scudde to the bosom of their Firre-tree vaultes,
And under hatches hide themselves from death.
The Cornish band made havocke of their ranks,
Like Scythian wolves midst of a bleating fold:
The gingling lances, rattling chariot-wheeles
Madded their horse. The Bow men merrily shot.

Bell. Yet would our tributary Kings had succored!
We are decai'd they much in number grown,
And surely will make head again.

Cassib. Fear not, thou know I can even with a whistle,
Hide Kent with glittering arms: More flaming sparkles
Paint not a freezing night: nor speckled Bees
Buzze not about sweet Hyblaes bloomy head.
But what need millions, when some thousands serve?
O did my Brother live! wee'de clime the Alps;
Like brave Mulmutius sons; make Romulus woolfe
Howl horror in their streets, and Rome look pale,
As when the Punicke Captain eyed her walls. march out.

Caesar. Volusene. etc. Caes. Are ye the Men, who never fought in vain?
Who wear Bellonaes favors, in your skarres:
I, ye are They. What then benummes our Spirits?
Our Empire from Quirinus narrow Center
Does circling spread, and finds no brinke nor bottom.
Titan no later sets, nor earlier wakes,
Than he beholds our Provinces, Why, then?
What Privilege has this place? Have we, or They
The Phrygian powers? Have they Palladium got?
No, no, Those gods our Capitol keep with joy:
These only have vn-daunted minds from Troy.
Enter Q. Atrius. What news, good Atrius?

Atr. No good news from Atrius.
When ominous Earth with shade and cloudy vapors
Had darkness doubled, storms began to sound,
The dabled South, ruffe-footed Aquilo,
Came rushing like two Rams, whose steeled horns
Dart fiery sparks: The clouds crushed breathe out flames:
Thunder and Lightning daunt all ears and eyes.
The winds and billows strive, who loudest roar.
The sky distilled in rain: his room to fill,
Ambitious waves would clime the starry hill.
Our ships are batterd all, some forty sunk.

Caes. What diuell-Cacus drags our Fortune back?
Does She move retrograde? and hoyst us up.
That we may fall at height? Why do Camillus
Each night torment my sleep, and cry, Revenge?
I strive against the stream.

Enter Androgeus, Mandubrace, soldiers. Androg. Thus join we Standards: And
resign the keys
Of Troynovant, with all our warlike forces.

Mand. By me the Trinobants submit, and Cenimagnians,
Segontiackes, Ancalites, Bybrockes, and Cassians,
Six worthy nations do desire thy guard.

Caes. All, all shall know our love.

Mand. The Tyrant lies on Isis flowrie banks,
Where a full Quier sing of white-surplist swannes.
The foordes vnleuell belly they have fenced,
With sharp stakes under water.

Caes. Nor stakes, lakes, foords, nor swords shall check our progress:
Those downie swannes shall hear more funeral notes.
Their Kings departed, Nennius dead, whose loss
Would tears extort even from Pumicean eyes;
Had Britain nursed but such another Champion,
They might have stuck their darts on our barred gates,
And Latium trembled with contrary fates.
In what now lies their hope?

Mand. Great numbers still remain: nay worse, they laugh
At death, and boldly trust (as Druids preach)
Their souls who die in fight shall live in joy.
Hence count they dangers, benefits: and die
With freedom in their mouth, and wilful rage.
But let soft mildnes wait on women, Let
Thy wrath ring through the woods in dustie noise,
To tell thy coming. No man's built so lofty,
But his foundation meets the humble dust:
Which vndermin'd, how high he pearc'd the clouds,
So deep he sinkes.
Hostile and civil foes shake top and root
As winds invade above, and Vines below.
And so will We.

Caes. No doubt: This blow shall like an earthquake move
The roots and pillars of this sea-clipt I Will.
A cloud of vultures shall attend our Camp,
And no more shall the fields bear Vert, but Gules:
The grain en-graind in purple die shall loose
His verdant hue. Bones, marrow, humane limbs
Shall putrefying reake, whose vapoured slime
Kindled on high may breed long-bearded Stars,
To tell more mischief, and out-beard Apollo.

Mand. Let Us wast no time, least more unto him flock,
As humors glide to guard the wounded member.

Caes. Atrius, let our ships be drawn on shore,
New-rigg'd and mended. I must needs confess him
A darling of the gods; under whose colors
Stars, winter, sky, and tempests serve in pay,
And know both march and skirmish by his Drum. Exeunt.

Act. 4. Scen. 5.
Rollano* Eulinus harkening. Roll. O my dear Lady, have thou slain thy self?
So fairly pure, so kindly chaste, so cries.
A Venus and Diana mixed in one.
She eat her meat with studdes of Pearl, she kissed
With Rubies, and she looked with Diamonds bright.
Fish seas, and foul the air, hunt all the earth,
For such another bit, and loose your labor.

Eul. O, why do thou complain.

Roll. Had she not killed her self, no cruel Atropos,
No fury could for pity cut her thread.
She was the Lodestone of all eyes, The whet-stone
Of all brains, the touchstone of all hearts: She was -- cries.

Eul. O my presaging thoughts in ugly form
Suggest some Tragedy. Speak: yet stay a while:
I know thou kill'st with speaking. Be then dumb:
Let sound near give those Notions airie roabes.
Yet speak, dispatch me: Feare's as bad as death.
Oh, could no tongue affirm it! Is she dead?

Roll. My Mistress is.

Eul. Wither ye pleasant gardens, where she trod:
White lillyes droope, and blasted daysies wink,
And weep in pearely dew. Blind Vesper mourn,
Hang thy cold tears on every grassie blade.
Groan loud ye woods, and tear your leafie hair:
Let wind and hoarie frost kill every flower:
For she is gone, who made continual May.
Let foggie mistes envellop Sun and Stars:
For she is gone, who made perpetual day.
Confounded Nature stand amazed, dissolve
Thy rolling engines, and unbrace the Seas:
Fling all into their first disordered lump.
For thy chief paragon, thy rich Masterpiece,
The Jewel, for which thou did venture all,
Is lost, is lost. And can I live to speak it?
How died she?

Roll. By a poisoned draught.

Eul. The very word (poison) infects my breath.
Durst thou presume to pass that corrall portch?
Were not her Lips sufficient Antidote?
Durst thou descend through those close winding stairs
With treacherous intent? How could thy venom
Seize on her, and not sweetened loose his virtue,
Or rather vicious quality? May toades,
Dragons, and mandrakes be thy gally-pottes:
This Body was a casket for the graces,
No caske for poison. With her dies all love:
Cupid may break his Bow, his arrows burn,
Then quench his Taper in a flood of tears.
Is she dead?

Roll. Or in a long trance.

Eul. She may revive:
I Will visit her: Art may prolong her days,
Whether she will or no. -- Exeunt.

Act. 4. Scen. 6. Chorus.
1.
Alecto rising from the lakes
Of nights sad Empery:
With knotty bunch of curled snakes,
Does lash fair Britany.
2.
More ghastly monster did not spring,
From the Hybernian flood:
With which Morindus combating,
Of foe became his food.
3.
Shall no more Shepherds in the shade
sit whistling without care?
Shall never spear be made a spade,
And sword a plowing share?
4.
Grant heaven at last, that Music loud
Of bloody Mars be still:
That Britain Virgins in a crowd,
With hymns the sky may fill.
2. Song.
Nor is Landoraes loss,
The least part of our mournful muse:
Jove Juno for to cross,
This Troiane Dame for Bride did choose.
Where She does shine,
Above Guendoline,
The Amazon of her days:
And Mercia wise
Law to devise. O sound Landor. praise.
There does she shine above,
Clear as great Deliaes horned bow,
Bright as the Queen of Love,
To shoot down gentle beams below.
Sabrina dare
Not to compare
With her most splendent rays:
A ring the sky,
A gem her eye: O sound Lando. praise.
Act. 5.
Scen. 1.
Caesar, Androgeus, Mandubrace, etc. soldiers. Caes. Thus gain we ground: yet
still our foes will fight,
Whether they win or loose. With bloody drops
Our path is printed: Thames his maiden-cheekes
Blush with vermilion: Nations crave our League
On every side: Yet still Cassibelane braves us,
Nor will submit.

Androg. Not far hence Verolame lies, his chiefest fort,
By nature guarded round with woods and fennes,
By Art enclosed with a ditch and rampire:
From hence we must dislodge the Boar.

Mand. There are but two ways to assail this Town:
Both which I know. Your parted army must
Break through both at once, and so distract
His doubtful rescues.

Enter Volusene with Hulacus prisoner. Hul. Draw slaves unwilling, I dare meet
my death:
And lead my Leader.

Vol. You Will repent anon,

Hal If I do ill: But not for suffering ill.

Vol. Your stoicall apathy will relent I know.
This Priest I caught within a shady grove,
Devoutly kneeling at a broad Oaks foot.
Now He awaites your Doom.

Caes. What god adore you?

Hul. Him, whom all should serve.

Caes. What Is the Moon?

Hul. Nights Sun:

Caes. What Is Night?

Hul. A foil to glorify the Day.

Caes. What most compendious way to happiness?

Hul. To dye in a good cause.

Caes. What is a man?

Hul. An Hermaphrodite of soul and body.

Caes. How differ they in nature?

Hul. The body has in weight, the soul in length.

Caes. One question more: What dangers shall I pass?

Hul. Many by land and sea: As steps to glory*
Throw Palatine on Aesquiline, on both
Heap Aventine, to raise one Pyramid: for a
Chair of Estate, where thy advanced Head
Among those Heroes pictured in the Stars,
Orion, Perseus, Hercules, may consult
With Jove himself. But shun the Senate house.
March round about the Caspian sea; search out
Among Cedars tall the Arabian Phaenix nest;
Run counter to old Nile, till thou discover
His sacred head wrapped up in cloudy mountains:
And rather than work fail, Turn Hellespont
Out of his channel; Dig that Isthmus down,
Which ties great Africa. Shun the Senate house.
Be Saturn, and so thou shall not be Tarquine.
A Brutus strong,
Repayes in Fine:
Thy brutish wrong
To Brutus line.

Caes. We Will talk at leisure more. Exeunt.

Act. 5. Scen. 2.
Cassib. Belin. etc. Cass. No rampires keep him back: He presses forward,
Though every stamp he treads, seems to conjure
The fates from their infernal center. None
But he, durst be so bold.

Bell. Yes, when Britains lead, and Mandubrace insulting
With naked sword calls on the lagging soldiers:
When fearce Androgeus with revolted nations,
Usher his army. No way half so quick
To ruinate kingdoms, as by homebred strife.
Thus while we single fight, we perish all.

Cass. I, I, those treacherous caitiffes, rebel slaves:
O may their countries heavy curse them sink
Below the nine-fold brazen gates of hell:
That princox proud: I, it was a escape in policy,
I should have slain the whelps with their good Sire.
Let Britains climactericall year now run,
The Series break of seventy Kings: Nay let
One vrne conclude our ashes and the worlds.
Befall what will: In midst of horrors noise,
And crackling flames, when all is lost, we will dye
With weapons in our hands, and victory skorne:
There Is none that dye so poor, as they are borne.
Faithful Belinus, let a Post command
The Kentish Kings to set upon his fleet:
Whilst we here bid the bace. Four thousand chariotteers,
(Such as did glide upon the Phrygian Plains,
And wheeling double service do perform,
Both horse-mans speed, and foot-mans stable strength)
Still do remain: With these and flocking voluntaries
We Will give him once more battle. Let the Captains
Enter, and hear my charge. Enter Captains. He stands on a throne.
Subjects and Fellow Soldiers; We must now try
For ancient freedom, or perpetual bondage.
There is no third choice. The enraged foe
With cruel pride, proud avarice, has spoiled
From East to West, hunting for blood and gain.
Your wives and daughters ravished, ransackt towns,
Great bellyes ripped with lances, sprawling babes,
The spouse about her husbands neck run through
By the same spear. Think on these Objects:
Then choose them for your Lords, who spoil and burn
Whole countries; and call Desolation, Peace.
Yield, yield; That he ennobled by our spoils,
May clime the Capitol with triumphant carte,
You led fast fetterd through the staring streets,
For city Dames to mock your habit strange,
And fill their arras hangings with our story.
No: Brennus ghost forbid, who this night stood,
Before my eyes, and grimly furious spoke:
Shall Britain stoop to Roman Rods and Hatchets,
And servile tribute? Will ye so defame
Your ancestors, and your successors wrong,
Heirs but of slavery* O, this day make good
The glory of so many ages past!
I see, you are incensed, and wish to use
Your weapons, not your ears.
All. To arms, to arms, to arms: We Will fight, and dye.

Exeunt. Act. 5. Scen. 3.
Eulinus, in a nightcap. unbraced. Violl. Poynado. Plays and sings to the
violl. So the Siluer-feathered swan,
Both by death and color wan,
Loves to sing before she dye,
Leaving life so willingly.
But how can I sing a note?
When dead hoarsenesse stops my throat:
Or how can I play a stroke?
When my heart strings all are broke.
Come guilty night, and with black velvet wings
Mantle me round; Let melancholic thoughts,
Hang all my brain with Blacks: This darkesome grove,
My gallery. So, all things suite my mind:
Such funeral colors please a gasping heart.
I dyed with thee Landora once: Now only
Some struggling spirits are behind, to be
Laid out with most thrift on thy memory.
Where shall I first begin my last complaint,
Which must be measured by my glass of life?
At thee Hirildas? Slain in furious mood,
By whose help only I inioy'd my love?
Or thee Landora? dying for his sake,
And in thy death including mine?
Or at my Countries wrack? whose surface torn
Does for my vengeance importune the Pole?
Or at my self? I, there is sorrows spring.
Shall I go wandering lurk in woods unknown,
A banished Hermit, and sigh out my griefs?
Teaching the pretty birds to sing my dear,
My dear Landora: There to feed on acornes,
Drink the clear fountain, and consume with weeping,
Were but an easy life, an easy death:
My violent passion must have sudden vent.
Refined Soul, whose odoriferous light,
The damned hags stare at, and whining elves,
Thinking it Heaven in hell: Behold my pangs,
Pity my dying groans, and be more soft.
O may our shadows mingle; then shall I
Envy no more those Citizens above,
The ambrosian iuncates of the Olympian hall
And all that gorgeous Roof. But cowards talk.
Come thou last refuge of a wearisome life; Draws his Poynado.
A pasport to the Elysian land, A key
To unlock my grieved in-mate. Lo I come.
O let this river from my eyes, this stream vnbuttons.
From my poor breast, beg favor of thy ghost:
O let this lukewarm blood thy Rigor steep, stabs.
And mollify thy adamantine heart.
Leander-like I swim to thee through blood:
Be thy bright eyes my Pharos, and conduct me
Through the dull night of gloomy Erebus.
Flow, flow, ye lively drops, and from my veins
Run winding to the Ocean of my bliss:
Tell her my love, and if She still shall doubt,
Swear that ye came directly from my heart.
I stay too long. stabs again. Sweet Lady give me welcome.
Though I shall pass twelve monsters as the Sun,
Or twelve Herculean labors on a row:
Yet one kind look makes all my journey sweet
Thou Fayry-Queene of the Tartarian Court,
To whom Proserpine may the Apple give,
Worthier than She, to warm old Plutoes bed:
See thy poor vassal weltering in his goare.
I faint, I faint.
I dye thy Martyr, as I lived thy Priest:
Great Goddess be propitious, Sweet Landora --
falls and dies. Act. 5. Scen. 4.
The four Kings of Kent march over the stage. A Drum struck up within. Q.
Atrius comes with Cingetorix prisoner. Rollano running. Volusene meets him.
Roll. What shall I doee? How shall I escape? falls for fear.

Vol. I scorn to take advantage, Rise and Fight.

Roll. I had rather be killed quickly, quickly.

Vol. Then die, as thou destrest. thrusts at him.

Roll. O let me wink first. bawles aloud.
I shall never endure it. Oh, oh. I am peppered and salted.

Exit. Volus. Roll. crawles away. Cassibelane, Belinus, etc. Cassib. O that
base Fortune should great spirits damp,
And fawn on muddie slaves: That envious fate
Should ripen villainy with a Syrian dew,
And blast sweet virtue with a Sirian flame.
A Catalogue of mischiefs do concur
Our Britain Hector, Nennius dead: Our Kings
Angry to be refused, sit still at home:
And then those traitors with their train augment
His huge and expert Army: Nothing stops him;
Rivers, nor Rampires, Woods, nor dangerous Bogges;
On this side Thames his dismal Ensigns shine:
Last, Kents unhappy rulers are at Sea
Ore-throwne, and our men almost spent. Then, General,
In desperate pride, and valors scornful rage,
Let us run headlong through their armed tents,
And make their Camp a Shambles: So to raise
Our lofty toombes upon their slaughtered heaps.

Bell. Nay, rather first lets parley for peace.

Cassib. Ye Country-gods and Nymphs, who Albion love,
Old Father Neptune, all ye powers divine,
Witness my loyal care: If humane strength,
Courage, and policy, could a Kingdom save;
We did our best. But discord, child of hell,
Numbers of traine-men, and each Captain picked
Out of a Province, make us bow or break.
In vain we strive, when Deities do frown:
When Destinies push, Atlas himself comes down.

Enter Comius. Bell. No mediator is so fit as Comius: And here is the man.

Com. Do not the dangers which enuiron you,
Call for a good conclusion? which I wish
As friend to both sides.

Cassib. No Comius: There is more behind, than Caesar
Has overrun: Our Chariotters still drive,
Our harness still is worn: Through woods and lakes
We Will tire his dainty soldiers: Then set fire
On Towns, and sacrifice our selves, our wives,
Our goods, and cattle, in one public flame:
That wind may blow our ashes in his face.

Com. So shall dead Elements curse your causeless fury.
Rather conclude some friendly peace.

Cassib. Thus far we hear you: If with honored terms,
And royal looks, he will accept our faith:
We will obey, but never serve.

Com. I Will undertake as much. Exeunt.

Act. 5. Scen. 5.
Androgeus, Themantius. Andr. Thus civil war by me, and factious broils,
Deface this goodly land: I am revenged:
The cause Eulinus dead, my Anger dies.
He is our Uncle, and in danger's mouth;
Both claim relenting pity. Whom peace made
A rampant Lion, war has made a Lamb.
Caesar shall not proceed, for private ends,
To captiuate our I Will: whose clamorous curse
Does knock, I know, at Heavens Starre-nailed gates:
For that Jove's bird, impt with our plumes, ore-flew
The Oceans wall; To seek her prey in Britain.

Them. I, we have made a Rod for our own backs:
Fetters of gold are fetters. No gap worse
To let destruction in by, than to call
A foreign aid: who having seen our weakness,
And tasted once the fatness of our land,
Is not so easily thrust out, as admitted.
Such medicine is worse than the malady,
Fretting the bowels of our kingdom.

Andr. I know their hatred just; and here resign
All my birthright to thee, my second self:
I must forsake my Countries sight, and seek
New fortunes with this Emperor; In hope
To be raised up, by his now rising wheel.

Them. O, do not so, dear Brother. So to part,
Were to divide one Individual Soul.
Nor think me so ambitious: I can live
A private life, and see a regal Crown,
With no more entry than I see the Sun,
Glitter above me. Let not Lud's two sons
Be parted by a Sea: I hold your presence,
At higher price than a whole kingdoms pomp.
Keep then your right: like those admired twins,
Let us rejoice, mourn, live, and die together.

Andr. You shall a Scepter gain.

Them. And loose a Brother.

Andr. Bear you the Sovereign power of this land.

Them. A body politic must on two legs stand:
I Will bear a part, so to diminish envy.

Andr. I must away, and shun the peoples eye.

Them. If to your self unkind, be kind to me:
For my sake stay at home: why will you fly?
Think you a stepdame soil gives sweeter sap?

Andr. I: For trees transplanted do more goodly grow.

Them. And I Will count men but stocks, when they do so.

Andr. I am resolved: All troubles brought a sleep:
To leave you with a parting kiss.

Them. And by that kiss
May I transfuse my soul, or quite expire?
Brothers have often for a kingdom fought:
We strive to loose it. This is holy strife.
But here I vow, if ere that sacred Lace
Shall gird my Temples: Rome must keep her bounds,
Or fish for Tribute in the dreadful deep.

Act. 5. Scen. 6.
Caesar. Mandubrace. Andr. Let gracious favor smooth wars rugged brow:
Cassibelane will compound: All rage must end:
We choose you Vmpire, for a friendly cloze.

Caes. It is my glory to end all with peace:
And for that cause, I Comius sent in have,
For to conduct him hither.

Them. This trump gives warning of the Kings approach.

Cassibelane. Comius. Lantonus. Cassib. Fate, and no fault of mine, makes me
appear,
To yield as far as honor gives me leave.

Caes. Hail valorous prince, disdain not this ingrafting
Into Romes Empire, whose command incloses
The whole Leuant, and whose large shadow hides
The triple-bounded Earth, and bellowing Seas.

Cassib. We shall observe your will; so you impose
A league, no yoke. They shake hands.

Caes. Thus we determine: That Crown still shall stand;
Reign as the total Monarch of this I Will:
Till death vn-kings you. 'Twere, Androgeus, best
You in our train kept honorable place:
And let Themantius wear the royal wreath.
You must forgive the Towns which did revolt,
Nor seek revenge on Trinobants, but let
Young Mandubrace possess his Fathers Princedome.

Cassib. Be all wrongs drencht in Lethe.

Andr. Pardon my rash attempts. Cassib. embraces Androg. and Mand.

Mand. Count me your loyal friend.

Caes. In sign of league, you shall us pledges give,
And yearly pay three thousand pound of silver,
Unto our Treasury. So let these decrees
Be straight proclaimed through Troynovant, whose Tower
Shall be more fairly built at my charge, as
A lasting Monument of our arrival.

Cassib. All shall be done: Renowned Prince, whose worth,
Vnparalelld both as a Friend and Foe,
We do admire.
Accept this Surcoate, starrified with pearls,
And Diamonds, such as our own shoares breed.

Caes. And you receive this massy Cup of gold,
Loves earnest, and Memorial of this day:
By this, suppose our Senate calls you friend.

They sit together. Lant. Now time, best Oracle of Oracles,
Father of truth, the true sense does suggest
Of Dians answer;
The Lion and the Eagle do design
The Britain and the Roman states, whose arms
Were painted with those Animals: Both fierce
Weary at last conclude: The Semicircles,
First letters of the Leaders names, we see
Are joined in true loves endless figure.
Both come of Troiane race, both nobly bold,
Both matchless Captains, on one Throne behold.

Caes. Now the Tarpeyan rock ore-lookes the world;
Her Empire bounded only by the Ocean;
And boundless Fame beats on the starry Pole.
So Danow crawling from a mountains side,
Wider and deeper grows, and like a Serpent,
Or Pyramid reuerst; improues his bigness,
As well as length: Till viewing countries large,
And fed with sixty rivers, his wide mouth
On the Euxine Sea-nymph gapes, and fear does stir,
Whether he will disgorge, or swallow her.

Cassib. Since the great guide of all, Olympus King,
Will have the Romans his Vice-Royes on earth:
Since the red fatal eyes of crow-blacke night,
Fling their malignant influence on our state:
Since Britain must submit: It was her fame,
None but a Julius Caesar could her tame.

While Trumpets sound: Androgeus and Themantius embracing take leave. All
depart. Act. 5. Scen. 7. Chorus.
1. Song.
Come fellow Bards and sing with cheer;
Since dreadful Alarums we shall no more hear.
Come lovely peace, our Saint divine,
Olive and Laurel do love for to twine.
The Graces, and Muses, and Nymphs in a round:
Let voice beat the air, and feet beat the ground.
So Hells black image chased away,
Eos does dandle the goldy-lock'd day:
So Bruma banished all forlorn,
Cupid and Flora the spring do adorn.
And so the grim fury of Mars laid in grave,
A merrier ending does friendly peace crave.
2. Song. A Morisko.
The Sky is glad that Stars above,
Do give a brighter splendour:
The Stars unfold their flaming gold,
To make the ground more tender:
The ground does send a fragrant smell,
That air may be the sweeter:
The air does charm the swelling Seas,
With pretty chirping meeter:
The Sea with rivers water does
The plants and flowers dainty:
The plants do yield their fruitful seed,
That beasts may live in plenty:
The Beasts do give both food and cloth,
That man high Jove may honor:
And so the world runs merrily round,
When peace does smile upon her.
Oh then, then Oh: Oh then, then Oh:
This Iubilee last for ever:
That Foreign spite, or Civil fight,
Our quiet trouble never.
Exeunt. Mercury reducing the Ghostes of Camillus, and Brennus. Came. How
bravely Caesar past the angry Maine?

Brenn. How bravely was he back repulst again?

Came. How did he wheel his sword in Nennius face?

Brenn. How did he loose his sword, and fly apace?

Came. How did again his Army fill your coast?

Brenn. I, when our Princes did conduct his host.

Came. How did they pierce through Isis dangerous flood?

Brenn. But made her swell, and bank-rupt with their blood.

Came. Mirror of Captains, Julius style has won.

Brenn. But we may justly brag of two for one.

Came. Confess, our valorous race has now repaid
The Allian Massacre, and our cities Flame:
See how they yield, and yearly Tribute pay.

Brenn. No, proud Dictator: Both do weary stand
On equal terms: Both wish a peaceful League.
But if they shall oppress; know, Generous spirits
Will break this Compact, like a Spiders web.

Merc. Jove's will is finished: And (though Juno frown,
That no more Troiane blood shall die the stage)
The worlds fourth Empire Britain does embrace.
The Thunder-bearer with a Ianus look
At once viewes ruddie morn, and cloudie West:
Her wings displaied ore this Terrestrial egg,
Will shortly hatch an Universal peace:
For Jove intends a favor to the world.
It now remains, That you two martial wights
Cease from your brauing one another worth:
You must be friends at last. The cloze is sweet,
When after tumults, hearts and hands do meet.

Exeunt. Nec Lusisse pudet, sed non incidere Ludum.
FINIS.

