LAW, OR, A DISCOVRSE THEREOF, IN four Books.

Written in French by Sir HENRY FINCH Knight, his Majesty's Serieant at LAW.
And done into English by the same Author.

CICERO. Leges nobis charae esse debent, Non propter literas, sed propter earum
rerum quibus descriptum est vtilitatem, and eorum qui scripserunt sapientiam.

LONDON, Printed for the Society of Stationers. 1627.

To the READER.
THis Book, being formerly published in the proper and genuine Language, had,
as it well deserved, good acceptance; the Author and the Work mutually adding
to each others Esteem. And herein the Matter was no less profitable, than the
Manner useful and ingenious: so that this only of all the Books of Law (as
concerning the Method) is without President. Herein you may find a triple
relation distinguished by the various Print. In the first, you have the Maxims
and positive grounds of the Law, with whatsoever is added or explaned by
Statutes concerning the same; Which taken apart will afford a continued
sensible discourse. In the second is contained the proofs and examples of
those Maxims. And because that precious Flower of the Crown, the Kings
Prerogative, may not be valued in the hands of a common person, such cases as
concern the King are severed from the rest.

To impart good is to improoue it, which was one cause of the translation of
this Book: yet is it not thereby made so facile as to descend to vulgar
capacities; witness the very phrase, the terms of Art, excluding all hope of
accrue to Lay-conceited opinions. Neither speaks it at adventure, but as the
Author taught, and no otherwise; whose fame will affirm, and none will deny,
but that he best knew how to fit and adorn his own work.

Now remains only to ex^enuat the faults, either those material in the
copy, or literal ^n the Print, the first a judicious Reader is able to
supply, a little ^abour will correct the rest: He that is courteous will remit
both. To plot and to perfect at once ^s to be more than man. Such was the
pain to compose that ^he child wasted its own pa^ent, therein nevertheless
being unhappy preventing the ^lessing of Perfection, and be^omming an
Abrotiue; But be ^ou the Guardian, so much It inuites, the Author merits more.
His proposed end was to enrich others by this expression of his Love, cover
therefore the faults occasioned by an Error of Love, and redeem Him that for
your sake is imbarque^ in the common Censure of al^ Men.

J. L.

THE FIRST BOOK of Law.
CHAP. 1.
Of the Law of Nature.

LAw is an Art of well ordering a Civil society. In Greek it is called (...)
a distribuendo, because it gives and distributes right to every one. In Latin
it has its name Lex, not a ligando, as some would have it, although Law indeed
be vinculum ciuitatis, nor a legendo, which is, to read; though I find that to
please Bracton most; but as he that best could tell deriues it, a legendo,
Bract. lib. 1. ca. 3. Cicol. 1. de Legib.
which is to choose, because of the choice and ^xquisite wisdom that is in
it. Nam vt il^ (says Tully speaking of the Grecians) ^quitatis, sic nos
delectus vim in Lege ponimus, and proprium vtrumque legis est. The Hebrews ^all
it (...) (thorah) from the root (...) (jarah) which is to teach: because it is
the doctrine of truth, as Plato says in his ninth book (...) Leges ad hominum
doctrinam ponuntur. So that Law carries with it, and has (as it were)
enclosed in the name and nature of it, those three laws (...) and golden
chain of all good learning, Lex veriattis, Lex Iusticiae, Lex sapientiae. And
therefore is not only (...), scientia, but Plato li 4 de Reipub (...).
(...), Scientificissima. Whereupon Plato tells us, Nomen menti consentaneum,
(that is, to God, whom the Philosophers call (...), or men's, which is Truth,
Wisdom, and Justice it self) possidet diuina nobis and admirabilis lex. So
that the name it self does show the Author from whence it came: and as he
says, Qui tanti talem genuere parents.

Laws are Native or Possitiue. Tully in his Oration pro Milone, takes us out
this Lesson: Est enim haec non scripta sed nata lex, quam non didiscimus,
accepimus, legimus, verum e natura ipsa arripuimus hausimus, expressimus; ad
qua^ no^ docti sed nati, non instituti sed imbuti sumus. In his first book de
Legibus, he does again repeat it. Constituendi vero iuris ab illa summa Lege
capiamus exor dium, quae seculis omnibus ante nata est quam scripta Lex vlla:
Where this Native Law he calls su^mam legem, as that from which all other
laws do stream:

Native, are those Laws which are in us of themselves, and therefore
unchangeable and perpetual.

These are two fold, like those two great ^hts which God has set in the
firma^ent of our heart, Nature and Reason, ^or being proper to a man, as he is
a man and reasonable creature, they may be divided as reason it self is
divided. They that ^^ue travailed most in the grounds of Nature, distinguish
that excellent faculty of Reason (which of all earthly creatures man only
has) into two other faculties, (...) or the mind, and (...) or the reasoning
part: (...) they call that faculty of the soul that offreth unto us things
clear and lighltsome of themselves, without any further reasoning or
discourse. By (...) they mean that faculty of the soul, that by discourse of
reason does deduce and draw one thing from another. From hence the masters and
professors of the art of reason, make indgement (which is the flower of all
reason, and in effect nothing else but ratio coniuncta, reason set together) to
be Noeticum or Dianoeticum We by their example may distinguish those which we
call Native Laws, and are the foundation of all other laws into Primitive,
which is that they call Noeticum, we, the law of Nature, or secundarie rules of
reason, which is their Dianoeticum, with us the Law of reason. And these very
names of (...) and (...) or (...), which is all one reason and the discourse of
reason, both Plato and Tully speaking of the laws do give them.

The law of Nature is that sovereign reason fixed in man's nature, which
ministers L^x natura est ratio summa incita in hominis naturaquae iube^ ea
quae facienda sunt, probibetque contraria.
common principles of good and evil. In effect nothing else but those (...) or
Communes noticiae, which the Philosophers speak of; That men must live
peaceably together: That we are not to do unto another that which we would not
have done unto us: That Justice is to be done to all men, and such like. Of
this Tully speaks 2. de legibus. Principem illam legem and Cic. lib. 2. de
Leg.
vltimam mentem esse dicebant. Where he likewise calls it the high and
supreme law of all. And in another place, Natura iuri^ ab hominis repetenda
natura, because the light hereof as the light of the Sun shines most clearly,
and in the eyes of all men.

CHAP. 2.
Of the Law of Reason.

THE law of Reason is that which deduceth principles by the discourse of sound
reason. Whereof T^ says, Ratio cum est in mente bomini^ confirmata and
confecta, lex est: An^ Cic. lib. 1. de Leg.
again, Lex est radius diuini luminis, and r^cta ratio su^mi Iouis. Plato, by
way of Poetical Plat. l. 1. de Legib.
fiction does imagine that there were a^ the first, two contrary humors that
raigne^ in man, and (as it were) two fools of hi^ council that did rule him,
Pleasure an^ ^^ine. Each had two other affections to ^^tend them, Hope of good
things to come, and Fear of future evils, whereby men's minds were haled and
pulled hither and thither, and diversely distracted. Then to govern both, God
set in man (...), the reasoning or discoursing part, to teach what is good or
bad in either; which he calls (...), the golden and sacred rule of reason.
We may term it, that vncorrupt reason which Adam had at the first in full
perfection: But through Adams fall (that brought sin into the world, and the
fruit of sin, Blindness and corruption) that excellent image of Reason is
now so wonderfully defaced even in the best and wisest, that the light of this,
as the light of the Moon, shines more obscurely: But yet shines, so that
from it all the other Laws receive their Light.

And hereupon are grounded more or less clearly, diverse rules of reason, that
every where go for undoubted Oracles, which (confirmed by judgment,
learning, and much experience, and rightly and well applied) are so many stars
and shining lights, to direct our course in the arguing of any case: yea such
is their singular and incomparable use, that, as Lords paramount, they rule and
ouerrule the grounds themselves. And rather than any of these (rightly
understood) should fail, the very maxims and principles of the positive law
will yield, as to a higher and more perfect Law.

CHAP. 3.
Of rules taken from other learnings.

THE rules of reason are of two sorts; some taken from foreign learnings,
both divine and humane: the rest proper to Law it self.

Of the first sort are the principles, and sound conclusions from foreign
learnings; Out of the best and very bowels of Divinity, Grammar, Logic; also
from Philosophy natural, Political, Oeconomicks, Morrall, though in our
report^ and yeere-bookes they come not under the same terms, yet the things
which ther^ you find are the same; for the sparks o^ all Sciences in the
world are raked up in the ashes of the Law: and well does one say, Non ex
Praetoris edictis, neque a 12 tab^lis, Cic. l. 1. de legibus.
sed penitus ex intima philosophia hauriend^ iuris disciplina est. He that
will take the whole body of the Law before him, an^ go really and iudicially
to work, mus^ not lay the foundation of his building i^ Estates, Tenures, the
gift of Writs, an^ such like, but at those current and soun^ principles which
our books are full of.

First from Divinity, the doctrine^ ^^ligion, the head and masterpiece of all
the rest, whereof S. Augustine says truly, Aug. lib. 9. de Civitat. dei.
O^nium legum est inanis censura, nisi diuinae legis imaginem gerat. From hence
we have these two rules.

To such laws of the Church as have 34 H. 6. 40. P^^sot. A^^els leys que eux
de St. eglise ont en ancient escripture, covient pur nous a don^^ credence:
car ce^ est common ley, sur que touts manner leys sont fondues, 4 Eliz. 265.
warrant in holy Scripture, our Law gives credence.

1 The Sabbath day is no day for law Cases, upon a fine levied with
Proclamations according to the Statute, 4 H. 7. Cap. 24. if any of the
Proclamations be made on the Lords day, all the Proclamations are erroneous,
for the Justices may not sit upon that day, but it is a day exempt from such
business by the Common Law for the solemnity of it, to the intent that all
people may apply themselves that day to prayer and serving of God.

No Plea shall be holden Quindena paschae, because it is always the Sabbath,
but it shall be Crastino quindenae paschae. F. N. B. 17. f.


If a Writ of Scire facias out of the Commonplace 1 Eliz. Die. 16^
bear Test upon a Sunday, it is error, because that is not Dies iuridicus in
Banco.

No sale upon a Sunday shall be said a 12 E. 4. 8.
sale in market ouert to alter the property.

Of Grammar, the rules are infinite in the Etymology of words, and in the
construction of them, what their nature is single, what joined with other:
among the rest which need not be remembered, this one we have common in our
Books.

2. Words, in construction must be referred to the next antecedent, where the
matter it self does not hinder it.

An Endictment of murder, found in this sort, That Eliz. fuit in pace etc.
quosqu^ 32. H 8. Die. 46. b.
A. vir praefat. Eliz. de D. in Com. S. Yeoman, did kill her, is good; for the
addition Yeoman, must of necessity refer to the husband, because a woman
cannot be a Yeoman; but an endictment quousque Alicia S. d^ D. in Com. S. vxor
I. S Spinster, etc. is no^ good against Alice S. for there Spinster being an
indifferent addition, both for man and woman, must refer to I. S. which i^
the next antecedent, and so the woman has no addition. So of an enditement
against 9. E. 4. 48.
I. S. seruiens I. D. de D in Com. Midd^ Butcher: This is not good, for,
Servant i^ no addition, and Butcher refers to the Master, which is the next
antecedent.

From Logic; In the Maxim of causes and effect^

3. The cause ceasing, the effect does lik^ wise cease.

The King grants an Office to one ^ 5. E. 4. 8. b.
(...), and ten pound fee during life prooffi(...)illo, now if the King put him
from his office the fee shall cease.

The Executor, nor husband (after the 7. Eliz. 293. b.
death of his wife gardein in soccage) shall retain the Wardship, for the
Garden has it not to his own use, but to the benefit of the Heir: and the
Executor, or husband have not the affection which the Testator or his wife had,
which was the cause that the Law gave them the Wardship.

If a stroke be given the first day of May, and the King pardon him the second
13. Eliz. 401.
day of May, all felonies and misdemeanors, the party smitten dies the third
day of May, so as this is no felony till after the pardon, yet the felony is
pardoned, for the misdemeanor is pardoned, and therefore all things pursuing
are also pardoned.

The King has a Ward, pur cause de guard, and after makes livery to the first
13. E. 4. 10. b.
Ward, now the second Ward shall not sue livery.

If two Coparceners make a Lease reserving a rent, they shall have this rent in
common, as they have the reuersion: But if afterward they grant the reuersion,
excepting the rent, then they shall be Ioyntenants of the rent.

It is no principal challeng to a Iuror that he has married the parties
mother, if she 14. H. 7. 2.
be dead without issue, for the cause of favor is removed.

4. Things are construed according ^ that which was the cause thereof.

A man makes me swear to bring hi^ 44. E. 3. 14. b.
money to such a place, or else he will kill me, I bring it him accordingly:
This is folony in him. So if he make me swear ^ 14. Ass. pl. 20.
surrender my estate unto him, and I do f^ afterward, this is a disseisin to
me.

One imprisoned till he be content ^ 21. E. 4. 68. b.
make an obligation at an other place, an^ afterward he does so, being at
large, ye^ he shall avoid it by dures of imprisonmen^

Outlary in trespass is no forfeiture o^ 3. E. 3. 84.
land, as outlary of felony is, for thoug^ the not appearing be the cause of
outlar^ in both, yet the force of the outlary sha^ be esteemed according to the
hainousnes^ of the offense, which is the principal cau^ and foundation of the
process.

A man and feme sole have a villein, an^ afterward entermarry, and the villein
pu^chaseth land, they shall not have the lan^ by entierties, but by moities
jointly, or i^ common, as they had the villein.

5. According to that which was the b^ginning of it.

If a Servant (departed out of his M^sters 33. Ass. pl. 7.
service) kill his Master upon a mali^ that he bear him whilst he was his
se^uant, it is petty treason.

^. erects a Shop upon the Kings Freehold, 10. Eliz. Die. 266. b.
the King grants the land to B. in fee; A. before entry or seisor of the shop
by the Kings Patentee, continues his possession and dies seized. This is no
descent to ^^ll the Patentees entry: for by his first erecting of the Shop, he
could gain nothing against the King.

6. And therefore a derived power cannot be greater than that from which it is
derived.

The Attorney of one that is disseised Litlet.
cannot make claim off from the land, if the dissessee himself durst have
gone to the land.

The Bailiffe of a disseisor shall not say, 28. Ass. pl. 4.
That the Plantiffe never had any thing in the land, for the Master himself
shall not have that plea, because he is not Tenant of the Freehold.

The Servant shall be estopped to say, 2. E. 4. 16.
The Freehold is his Masters, by recovery against his Master, thou'gh the
servant himself be a stranger to it, for he shall not be in better condition
than he in whose right he claymeth.

7. Things are dissolved as they be contracted.

An Obligation, or other matter in writing 19. E. 4. 1. b.
cannot be discharged by an agreement by word.

In an annuity growing by prescription 5. H. 7. 33.
rien arere is a good plea, for this prescription is a matter in fait: but in
an annuity by deed it is no good plea, without showing an acquittance.

When a man auoides the Kings title, by 4. H. 7. 7. b.
as high a matter of record as the King claims, he may have it by way of
plea, without being driven to his petition, though the King be entitled by
double matter of record; as one is attainted of treason by Parliament, and an
office finds his lands, whereby the King seiseth them, The party may allege
restitution by Parliament, and a repeal of the former act.

8. Things grounded upon an ill and void void beginning cannot have a good
perfection.

An Infant, or a feme covert make their 10. El. 344.
will, and publish it, and after dying of full age, or sole, yet the will is
nothing worth.

One disseised of two acres in D. releaseth all his right in all his lands in
D. and delivers it to a stranger, to be delivered over to the disseisor as
his deed, such a day: before which day, the disseisor disseiseth him of an
other acre in D. and then the release is delivered over to him, yet nothing of
the right of this third acre passes by the release.

9. He that claims paramount, a thing shall never take benefit nor hurt by
it.

Two Ioyntenants, one makes a lease 2. and 3. El. Die. 187.
for years of his moity, reserving a rent, and dies. The suruiuing Ioyntenant
shall have the reuersion of his moity, but not the rent, for he comes in by
the first feoffor, and not under his companion. So of the wife, where the
husband being lessee for years in her right, makes a lease of part of the
term, reserving a rent.

An Executor recouereth and dies intestate, administration of the goods of the
first testator is committed to I. S. I. S. shall not sueexecution upon this
recovery.

Dower cannot be assigned, reserving a rent, or with a remainder, over, for
she is in from the husband, and not from him that assigns dower.

10. According to the end.

Vouchee comes into the Court to 31. E. 3. Ioynder in aid. 10.
be viewed, and being viewed, is awarded of full age; yet he shall not be
driven to answer, till he come in to the same intent by other Process.

The vouchee, upon a Grand cape ad valentiam, 19. E. 4. 3.
shall not lose the land, though he cannot save his default, for the process
is only to this end to have him to appear.

A man that is warned by Writ to answer 50. ass. pl. 2.
to a matter shall not be driven to answer any other matter than is contained
in that Writ, though the King be party. As if by office it be found, that
lands in chief descended to I. S. a fool natural, and that A. occupies
them, whereby a Scire facias goes out against A. to answer why the lands
should not be seized into the Kings hands for the Ideocie of I. S. A comes
in and pleads, That I. S. when he was of perfect memory, made a release to one
B. who infeoffed A. This is good enough without showing any license of
alienation to discharge himself for the purchasing of those lands.

In the maxim of Subjects and adjuncts.

11. Where the foundation fails, all goes to the ground.

A Church appropriated to a spiritual corporation, 3. E. 374. b.
becomes disappropriate, if the corporation be dissolved.

A disseisor of lands in ancient demesne 49. E. 3. 8.
the Lord confirms unto him to hold at the Common Law, the disseisee
reentreth; now the land shall be ancient demesne again: for the estate
(whereupon the confirmation should inure) is defeated.

When an estate (to which a warranty is Lit.
knit) is undone, the warranty also is undone. As if Tenant in tail
discontinue, and the discontinuee is disseised (or make a feoffement upon
condition) in whose possession a collateral ancestor of the issue in tail
releaseth and dies, the issue is barred. But if the discontinuee enter upon
the disseisor (or upon the feoffee for the condition broken) the issue is
restored to his formedon.

12. Things incident cannot be severed.

Estouers, or wood granted to be burnt 12. El. 381.
in such a house, shall go to him that has the house, by whatsoever title:
for one is inseperably incident to the other.

Lord and Tenant by fealty and homage, the Lord releaseth his fealty; this is
void: 7. E. 4. 11.
for fealty is incident to homage.

An office of skill and diligence, or annuitie, pro concilio impendendo, cannot
be forfeited 12. El. 379.
by attainder of Treason.

A Court baron is incident to a manor, and Court of Pipowders to a Fair:
therefore 19. H. 8. Br. incidents 34.
one cannot grant the manor or fair, reserving those courts. Where one
holds of a man to keep his Castle the Lord cannot 31. E. 3. ass. 441.
grant his Castle guard, reserving the Castle.

13. Things by reason of another, are of the same plite.

The custom of Gauelkind is not changed, though a fine or recovery be had of
the same at the Common Law: for this is a custom by reason of the land, and
therefore runs always with the land.

But otherwise it is of lands in ancient 6. E. 6. Die. 72. b.
demesne, partible among the males: for there the custom runs not with the
land simply, but by reason of the ancient demesne: and therefore because the
nature of the land is changed by the fine or recovery from ancient demesne to
land at the Common Law, the custom of parting it among the males is also gone.

An erroneous recovery had of lands in F. N. B. 21. b.
Boroughenglish, the puisne son shall have a Writ of Error, because the land
it self goes to him. So shall all the sons of lands in Gauelkind.

Two Coparceners make partition, and 42. E. 3. 3.
one covenants with the other to acquit the land: now if the Couenantee alien
his part, the Alienee shall have a writ of Covenant.

Personal things.

14. Cannot be done by another.

Suite of Court cannot be done by another. 7. H. 4. 19.


A man cannot excuse himself of a contempt 22 E. 4. 34.
(as of not serving the Kings Process) by Attornie, but in proper person.

15 Cannot be granted over, as matters of pleasure, ease, trust, and authority.

A license to hunt in my park, to go to 12. H. 7. 25.
Church over my ground, to come into my house, to eat and drink with me,
cannot be granted over. So of a way granted for 7. H. 4. 36.
life over my ground.

The Patentee for life of an office of trust, 11. E. 4. 1.
^s to be a Chamberlain of the Exchequer: Squire of the body cannot assign
it, unless it be specially limited in his Patent that he may. For then he
might grant it to one in whom the King has no trust, or that would be
negligent etc.

The keepership of a Park, Stewardship, 12. El. 179.
Bailywicke of Husbandry, etc. for life, cannot be granted over, because they
are offices that require skill and diligence.

A. licenceth B. to do an act: B. cannot Br. licenses 25.
^^^nt this license to another.

A Warrant of Attorney made to one to 19. H 8. 10.
deliver seisin, he cannot grant this his authority over.

16. Die with the person.

When a Corporal hurt or damage is 12. H. 8. 12.
done to a man, as to beat him etc. if he or the party beaten die, the
Action is gone.

Lessor Covenants to pay quitrents during 1. and 2. P. and M. 114.
the term, and dies, his executors shall not pay them: for it is a personal
Covenant, which dies with the person.

Among the disagreeable arguments.

First from those that differ only in a certain respect and reason, not in
deed and in nature.

Things do inure diversely, according to the diversity of

17. Time.

Lands given in Frank marriage, reserving 26. Ass. pl. 66.
a rent, the reservation is void till the fourth degree past, and afterward
good.

Person viz.

18. The same person.

One that has a rent charge going out of 14. H. 8. 6.
the wives lands, releaseth it to the husband and his heirs: the husband yet
shall not have it* but it shall inure to him by way of extinguishment only, as
seized in right of his wife.

19. Several persons.

A man makes a lease of a Manor, except 1. and 2. P. and M. 104.
an acre, this acre is no part of the manor, as to the lessor, but as to him
that hat^ right to demand the manor by an eig^ title, it remains parcel,
and therefore h^ shall make no foreprise in his Writ.

If tenant in tail and his issue disseise the discontinuee of tenant in tail;
and tena^ 11. E 42.
in tail die, whereby the lands disend ^ the issue: Now he shall be remitted,
an^ shall be in as tenant in tail against eue^ stranger, and derraigne the
first warrantie; but not as against the discontinuee, because he was Particeps
Criminis.

Then from Relatiues.

20. No man can do an act to himself.

A man cannot present himself to a benefice, make himself an officer, nor sue
13. H. 8. 22.
himself: and therefore when a man having right to land, has the freehold
cast Lit. 147. b.
upon him by a latter title, he shall be said in of his ancient title, because
there is no body against whom he may sue, but himself, and he cannot sue
himself.

No more can a man summon himself. 8. H. 6. 29.


And therefore if the sheriff suffer a common recovery, it is error, because
he cannot 3. El. Die. 188.
summon himself.

A man cannot be both Judge and party in a suite. 4. M. B. com. 25.


And therefore if a Justice of the Common place be made a Justice of the Kings
Bench: though it be but hac vice, it determines his patent for the Common
place. For if he should be Judge of both Benches together, he should control
his own judgments: for if the Common place err, it shall be reformed in the
Kings Bench.

Of Comparisons.

From the equals.

21. Things are to be construed Secundum equalitatem rationis.

Upon a recognisance acknowledged by (c) 27. Eliz. Coo 3. 136. S^^ Willi
Herberts case.
the Ancestor, or a Judgment in an Action of Debt given against him: if he die
seized of two acres, whereof one holden in Borough English, or having issue two
Daughters which make partition, or if he die without issue, whereb part of his
land discendeth to the heir of his fathers part, and part to the heir on the
part of the mother: in all these cases if one only be charged, he shall have
contribution against the other: for they are in aequali iure.

If two, four, or more men being severally D 26. als pl. 37.
seized of land, join in a recognisance, all their lands must equally be
extended.

And this is a Logical virtue, a kind of Bract. l. 1. cap. 3.
equity as Bracton calls it, where he says, Equitas est rerum conuenientia
quae paribus in causis paria iura desiderat, and omnia been coaequi parat: Et
dicitur aequitas quasi aequalitas. Whose nature is to amplify, enlarge, and
add to the letter of the Law.

Especially this shines and shows forth it self in the exposition of
Statutes, by extending things there provided to mischiefs in the like degrees,
whereof the examples every where are pregnant, and in guiding the grounds and
maxims of things, that newly start up, by the rule of the Common Law.

Uses at the Common Law were 23. H 8. Fitz.
nothing, yet in time gaining greater regard to be imputed among inheritances,
are demeaned as other inheritances at the Common Law. So as a possessio fratris
shall be of them, and of lands in Borough English, the use shall descend to the
puisne. And now also these uses being turned into estates, shall be demeaned
in all respects as estates in possession.

So when C^^. 4. 2^*
Custom creates inheritance in Copihold lands, and makes the lands
discendable, then shall the Law direct the discents according to the maxims
and rules of the Common Law, to have a possessio fratris, and such like: but
not in collateral things, as Tenancie by courtesy Dower, descent to toll an
entry, etc.

From the greater and the less.

22. The greater does contain the less.

By a pardon of murder, man slaughter is pardoned.

An attaint supposing a verdict to have passed before two Justices, whereas it
passed before four, is good enough.

A recovery pleaded of three acres, where it was of six, is good enough.

A Condition that I shall not infeoffe I. S. is broken, if I. infeoffe him and
I. D.

A Copiholder of a manor, where the custom gives liberty to demise in fee,
may demise it for any less estate, without other prescription

Where the custom is, that a man shall not devise his lands for any higher
estate 18 E. 38.
than for term of life, yet if a devise be in fee, and the deuisee claim but
for life, the devise is good.

By the statute 32. Henric. 8. that gives 3 and 4 P. and M. Die. 150. b.
power to devise two parts of ones lands, a devise of the whole had bin good
for two parts, though the Statute 34. and 35. H. 8. of explanations had not
been made.

23. A matter of higher nature determines a matter of lower nature.

A man has liberties by prescription, and 21 H. 7. 5.
after takes a grant of those liberties by Letters Patents from the King, this
determines the prescription, for a matter in writing determines a matter in
fait.

If an offense, which is murder at the 33. H. 8. Die. 50.
Common Law be made high Treason, no appeal shall lie of it, because the
offense of murder is drowned, and it is punishable as high treason only,
whereof no appeal lies.

24. The more worthy thing draws to it things of less worthiness.

An adulterer takes away another ma^^ 11. H. 4. 31.
wife, and puts her in new clothes, the husband may take the wife with her
clothes.

A box insealed with charters, it shall 10. El. 323. b.
go to the heir with the Charters, and not to the Executors.

A base Mine where there is Ore, shall be the Kings for the worthiness of the
Ore.

The body of a man is more worthy than 3. El. 238.
land, therefore land shall follow the nature of the person:

As a villein shall make free land to be villein land, but villein land shall
not make a freeman to be a villeine.

So the Kings land which he has in his natural capacity, shall be demeaned
according to the privilege and prerogatives of his body royal.

And therefore

25. Things accestarie are of the nature of the principal.

A servant procures another to kill his 40 Ass. pl. 25.
master: This is no petty Treason, in the servant, because it is but felony in
the other which is the principal. 7. H. 6. 19. b.


A Parson grants an annuitie with a Nomine poene, the successor shall be
charged with the Nomine poene due in his predecessors life, and not his
executors.

The profits of the office of a Filizer, etc. 26, H. 8. Die. 7. b.
cannot be put in execution upon a recognisance, Statute, etc. because the
office it self, being an office of trust, cannot.

Tith is not payable of Oaks usually topped 26 El Moline.
and lopped (though it be every seven or eight years) for the branches are of
the nature of the principal (that is to say) the Oak it self) for which no
Tithe is to be paid.

26. A man's own words are void, when the law speaks as much.

Lands given to two, and vni eorum diutius viuenti, they make partition, and
one dies; 30. ass. pl. 8.
yet the lessor shall have again the moitie of him that dies, for vni eorum
diutius viuenti are but idle words, because (without them) the Iointenant, by
course of Law is to have all, if he do survive.

From the rule of method.

In things of ffor malitie

27. The generals must go before, and the specials follow after.

In a Writ the The rule of the Register.
general shall be put in demand, and in plaint before the special: as land
before pree, pasture, wood, iuncarie, marish, etc. wood before Alders, will
owes, etc.

28. The more worthy is to be set before the less worthy.

The entier thing shall be demanded before Ibid.
the moitie part or parts.

The thing of greater dignity before that Ibid.
which is of less: as a mease before land, a ^astle before a message or
manor.

In a repleuin if it be of two Cattels, one ibid.
quick and the other dead, the living thing shall be first demanded.

Where one has the presentment to a Church two turns, and another the third
turn: he that has the third turn, bringing a Quare impedit, shall not begin
with his own turn first, but with the other two turns.

Next are the precepts of Natural Phylosophie.

29. Law respects the bonds of Nature.

Affection for the provision for the heirs males that one shall engender,
brotherly love, etc. are good considerations to raise a use: but long
acquaintance and familiarity are not.

The son may maintain his father, and one brother another.

Brothers or cosins shall not wage battle in a writ of right.

A Statute that makes it felony to receive or give meat and drink to one
that commits such and such an offense knowing it, stretches not to a woman
that receives or gives meat and drink to her husband in such a case.

30 The Law judges and esteems of al ^^cording to their nature: both persons
and their ages, things, actions, and the time of the doing them.

In persons,

It looks to the excellency of some, and gives them singular privileges
and preheminences above the rest. As to the King, the Queen his wife, Noblemen,
and Peers of the Realm. Also unto them of the Church.

It tendreth the weakness and debilities of others; As of

Men out of the Realm, or in prison, Feme Covert (and therefore favors them
for their dowers) infants, men unlettered. Idiots out of their eight mind, or
without all understanding, as those that are borne dumb deaf, and blind, or
having other imperfections.

If a disseisor die seized, the disseisee being all the while within age,
Covert baron in prison or out of the Realm, it shall be no descent to toll the
entry of the disseisie.

Upon a lease made to a husband and wife, she shall not be charged after the
Huslands death, for wast done by him in his life time.

A woman shall be endowed of the best possession of her husband: as if the
husband held of I. S. by iij. d. who held out of another by xx. d. and I. S.
release to the husband (so as now the husband holds by xx d) the wife being
endowed of this land, shall hold only by the third part of iij. d. and not of
xx. d.

An Infant, Idiot, and a man of non sane memory, may enter, or have an action
to avoid their feoffements.

If a dumb person bring an action, he shall plead by procheine amy.

31. Strangers not parties nor priuies.

Lessee for years grants a rent charge, and 1, El. 198.
surrenders, yet the rent shall be paid during the years.

So if he in the reuersion grant a Rent charge during the term, and then the
lessee surrendreth unto him, he shall pay the rent during the term: for a
stranger (that is, the grauntee of the rent) for his benefit shall say, that
the term continues, and that it is determined.

And therefore

Things done in another right.

A person outlawed or excommunicated may have an action as executor of another
man.

And a villeine in such case against his Lord: for they recover not their own
but to another use.

32. It disfauoureth other some.

Aliens neither borne within the Real^ nor free denisens, that they shall not
pa^ticipate of the privileges of nature borne subjects.

Especially aliens that are enemies.

Alien enemies shall not have so much: a personal Action, which other Alie^ may.

An obligation made to an alien ene^ shall go unto the King.

Any body may seize the goods of an a^en enemy, to his own use.

Touching their ages.

33 It holds

xxj their full age to make good any ^ they do.

xiiij their age of discretion.

And therefore

That a competent age to bind a man ^ matter of marriage.

xij to bind the woman.

ix to deserve her dower.

In things

34. It respects every one according to worthiness. As

Life and liberty most; the person above his possessions; freehold and
inheritance more than it does chattels; real chattels more than personal.

None shall have judgment to recover in an action of wast, where the wast
comes but to 12. d or such a petty sum, for De minimis non curat lex.

A lease for life, the remainder for years, the remainder over in fee, an
action of wast lies for him in the remainder, against lessee for life: for the
mean estate for years is not regarded. Otherwise it were if the immediate
estate of the remainder were an estate for life.

A villeine infranchised for an hour, is for ever. So infranchised upon
condition, the condition is void, and the infranchisement absolutely good.

If a man for fear and simplicity will confess himself guilty of a
felony, yet the Judge must not record that confession, but suffer him to plead
not guilty: and that is in fauorem vita.

35. A matter in the right more than a matter in possession.

In auowrie or annuitie, aid shall not b^ of a person, if the plaintiff be
seized by t^ 3 E. 3. 88.
hands of the same person, because it is ^ the persons own wrong to deny it.

Otherwise in a Cessauit, for that is in t^ right for the land.

In an action of Trespass against tena^ for life, who pleads villenage in the
plai^tife, 14. H. 7. 5. K^ble.
and the piaintife is found frank at no villeine, yet he in the reuersion is
not stopped by this verdict: for the thing it sel^ whereupon the reuersion
depends is ^ in demand, and the plaintiff shall recou^ only damages:
neither can he in the ^uersion have a writ of error or attaint v^on it.

Otherwise it is in a Natiuo habendo: ^ there the right of villenage comes ^
question, and he in the reuersion may ha^ an error or attaint.

Yet it favors

36. Possession where the right is equall^

A man purchases at one time seven lands holden of several Lords by Knig^
service, and dies: the Lord that first ^ hap the Wardship of his heir, she
have it.

Husband and wife purchase socage la^ 3. El. 296.
unto them and the heirs of their body, a^ having issue within fourteen years
of a^ ^^w if the Grandmother of the part of the mother of the issue do first
seize the body, she shall have the Wardship, and not the Grandfather of the
part of the father of the issue.

37. Matters of profit, or interest largely: of pleasure, ease, trust,
authority, or limitation strict.

A license to hunt in my Park, or walk 13. H. 7. 13.
in my Orchard, extends but to himself, not to his servants, or other in his
company, for it is but a thing of pleasure, otherwise it is of a license to
hunt, kill, and carry away the Dear, for that is a matter of profit.

Way granted to Church over my land, 1^ H. 7. 25. b.
extends not to any other but himself, for it is but an easement.

A reuersion granted to two jointly, and 11 H. 7. 12 b.
the Tenant atturnes to one, it is a void atturnement.

If the Sheriff behead one that should 35. H 6. 58. b.
be hanged, it is felony.

The King licenceth one to alien the 4 E. 6. 68. b.
third part of his land, and he alieneth all, it is a void alienation for all.

A lease is made to A. and B. for their lives, A. dies, B. shall have all
during his life, for it is an interest.

But if a Lease be made to I. S. during the life of A. and B. there (if one of
them dye) the estate is utterly determined, for that is a limitation.

38. Therefore these may be counterma^^ded, so cannot those.

A license to come to my house to speak^ with me: 1. E. 5. 2.
Goods bailed over, to deliue^ 9. E. 4. 4. b.
to I. S. or 28. H. 8. Die. 22.
to bestow in alms. Park. d.
A lette^ of Attorney to deliver seisin: all these may be countermanded
before they b^ done.

But if I present I. S. to a Church, I cannot ^4. E. 4. ^.
after vary and present a new, for a kin^ of interest passes out of me.

So if I deliver an Obligation as a scrowl^ into a Strangers hand, to be
delivered t^ Park. 19. ^.
the obligee, upon condition performed, f^ the Obligee is as it were party or
privy ^ the delivery.

39. Matters of substance more than ma^ter of circumstance.

Pleas in bar, and replications (thoug^ 21. H. 7. 24. ^.
the Plantiffe be afterward non suit) make an estopple, for they are express
allegations and material. As in debt upon an obligation if the Defendant plead
in bar an acquittance made at D. or if the defendan^ plead an acquittance,
and the plantiffe reply, that it was made by dures of imprisonment at D. now in
another action, neithe^ the defendant shall plead that the acquittance, nor the
plantiffe that the dures was, at an other place: But a matter in the wri^
(...)count, makes no estopple, for they are (...)t supposels:

As in a formidone and claim by descent (...)m I. S. or a mortdancester, as
son and (...)e to I. S.; yet in another formidone he (...)y claim from I.
D. and shall not be estopped.

No more shall recitalls make any estoppell, for they are not material. As
where 33. H. 6. 10. b.
A. reciting that he is seized in fee of the manor of D. grants a rent out
of it to B. this shall not estoppe A to say that he had nothing in the manor.

39. Things executed and done, more than ^^^ngs executorie, and to do.

^ feme disseisers takes a husband, the disse^sy releaseth to the husband,
afterward 32. H. 8 Br. Darretnement 18.
a divorce is had for precontract: yet the release remains good, because it
was executed.

A feoffment made to the use of ones will, 20. H. 7. 11.
if his will be declared before or at the time of his feoffement; it cannot be
altered, because it is executed.

Otherwise it is of his will declared after.

Po^^^bilitie of things.

And therefore

40. Nothing to be void, that by possibility may be good.

Lands given to a married man and another 15. H. 7. 10.
man's wife, and the heirs of their two bodies; is a good estate in tail (and
that presently executed as some think) for the possibility that they may
entermarie.

A mesualtie is given in tail, reserving a rent, this is good: for the
tenancie may escheate 1. H. 4. 1.
to the donee, and then the donor shall distraine for all his arrerages.

A man han has issue a daughter, and leaves his wife priuiment inseint: the
wife 41. E. 3. 11. b.
may detain the charters of her husbands lands from the daughter, for the
possibility that it may be a son that she goes withal.

42. A mutual recompense.

An assumption or promise does then only bind, when it is made upon good
consideration of another thing.

Cesti qui use may grant his use without consideration, as he may his horse or
other chattell: but he cannot raise a use without good consideration. And this
consideration must be some cause or occasion meritorious, amounting to a mutual
recompense in deed or in law.

A writ of annuitie shall be maintained by a parson against a Vicar, upon an
Ordinance of the ordinary, if there be Quid pro quo.

In Actions.

43. It yields favor, when for the doing of it there is

Necessiitie.

Funeral expenses shall first of all be Br. executor 172.
discharged by executors.

A man may milk a Cow that he has by return irreplegiable. And that is for
the necessity.

A man in his own defense for the necessity 4. E. 6, 19.
of the saving of his life: and a champion in a writ of right for the
necessity of trial, may kill another.

Whether refer

44. Conformity, which is a kind of necessity.

Rent must be demanded, though no man be upon the land to pay it. Br. for. Mar.
12.


Where an infant in ward marries himself, yet to have the forfeiture of the
marriage, the Lord must tender him one. 40. E. 3. 30. b.


He that pleads in the auoidance of a fine, That the parties to the fine had
nothing; must show who had.

But it is not trauersable, but only showed for Conformity.

45. Of Color.

If the heir indow the ancestors wife, 41. E. 3. 28.
though she were not dowable, yet she shall hold in dower.

Where a Court has no color to hold plea (as a Court Baron of land not holden
22. Ass. pl. 64.
of the manor) all is void.

But where there is color (as if a Court Baron hold plea of land within the
Manor) though it be by plaint, where it should be by Writ original; yet the
judgment rendered, is only voydable by writ of Error.

A woman grants a reuersion, and marries with the grantee, if the tenant pay
him the rent generally, it is no Atturnement: for he has color to pay it him,
as seized in the right of his wife.

46. It priseth Acts in law higher than those that are done by the party.

Upon the grant of a rent, the Tenant cannot attorne nor put the grantee in
possession by an Ox or such like, because it is 49. E. 3. 15.
another thing: but upon the recovery of rent, the Sheriff may.

Parceners may compel partition, so cannot Ioyne-tenants, nor tenants in
Littlet.
common.

For equality of partition among Coparceners, a rent granted shall be a fee
simple, 2. and 3. P. and M. 134. ^. 29. Ass. pl. 23.
without words (heirs) and issuing out of the lands, without so expressing it
in the grant.

Also things that otherwise cannot, may a. 2. H. 7. 5.
pass without deed, as a rent, reuersion, (b) 21. E. 3. 7.
seigniorie, way auowson, composition, to (c) 11. H. 4. 3.
present by turn. (d) 28. H. s Dyer 29. Fitz. N. B. 34. ^.


Parceners may have a Quare impedit one against another (that is, the eldest
daughter may have it against the rest, if she be disturbed of her presentment.)

So cannot Ioin-tenants, nor Tenants in common.

47. It reputeth that men will always deal for their own best advantage.

And therefore

46. Believes against the party, whatsoever is to his own prejudice.

For the time of doing things:

It countenanceth more

48. Things done in time of peace, than in time of war.

A disseisin and descent in time of war, shall not toll the entry of the
disseisee. Lit. 97.


Usurpation in time of war gains no 7. E. 3 darrein presentment 2.
possession; but the other may have an assise of darreine presentment (that
notwithstanding) if his ancestor presented last before. Fitz. N. B. 31. ^


49. Things done in the day, more than in the night.

Rent payable at a day, the party has all the day till night to pay it: but
if it be a 1. Mar. 172. b.
great sum, as 500. or 1000. l. he must be ready as long before the Sun
set, as the money may be told: for the other is not bound to tell it in the
night.

A man must not distreine in the night time for rent behind.

Where things are fit to be straightened to a time, it esteems (according to the
nature of the things)

50. Sometimes a whole day sufficient.

Where goods are lost in war, and recovered from the enemy by another of the
kings subjects, the owner shall have them again, if he make fresh suite before
the Sun set, else not.

51. Sometimes a whole year.

The Lord loses his villeine for ever, if a villeine fly into ancient
demesne, and there continue a year and a day, without claim of the Lord.

Recovery in a Writ of right, and fine^ executed, bind all persons though they
have right, that lay not to their claim within ^ year.

The King cannot grant a protection to endure longer than a year.

52. The third offense it esteems more heinous.

The third Writ not returned by the sheriff, is a contempt, whereupon an
attachment lies.

Political precepts follow.

The Law favors

53. Things for the Common: weal.

A man may justify the doing of a wrong 29. H. 8. Die. 36. b.
in things that sound for the Commonweal.

As in time of war, to make Bulwarks in another man's soil without license.
To raze ones house on fire, in safeguard of the neighbors houses.

A Sheriff may break open the doors of ones house to take a felon. But not to
serve a Capias in an action of Debt or Trespass: for that is a particular
case, and not for the Commonweal.

Fishermen may justify their coming 8. E. 4. 18. b.
upon the land adjoining to the sea, to dry their nets: for fishing is for the
Commonwealth, and sustenance of all the Realm.

A millstone that is lifted up to be picked and beaten, cannot be distrained,
for it 14. H. 8. 25.
remains parcel of the mill, which is a thing for the Commonwealth.

Things brought into an Inn or Fair, or 22. E. 4. 49.
Market; or cloth lying in a Tailors shop, or a horse that is a shooing, shall
not be distreined.

Public quiet.

And therefore

54. Common error goes for a Law.

An acquittance made by a Mayor in his ^. R. 3. 7.
own name only (where the town is incorporate by the name of Mayor, Sheriff,
and Burgesses) shall be allowed for good, if there be an hundred precedents
and more of like acquittances. And that is for common quietness.

Whether a common recovery be a bar Manxels case f. 2.
unto an estate tail or no, is not to be disputed, because a great part of the
inheritance of the Realm does depend upon it.

Of this kind are those Deconomickes.

The husband and the wife are one person.

And therefore

The wife is of the same condition with her husband.

Franck if he be free, Denisen if he be an Fitz. N. B 78. ^. Abridgement of
assizes per Br. denise^ 2.
English man, though she were a neif before or an alien borne.

55. They cannot sue one another, or make any grant one unto the other, or such
like.

If the 21. H. 7. 29. b.
woman marry with her obligor, the debt is extinct, and she shall never have
action against the Co-obligor (if another were bound with him) because the suit
against her husband, by enter-mariage was suspended. And therefore being a
personal action, and suspended against one, it is discharged against both.

So, if a feme sole bail goods to one, and marry with the bail.

Likewise the husband cannot infeoffe Park. 40.
his wife, but upon a feoffement made unto her by a stranger, he may deliver
seisin unto her by Letter of Attornie; for thereby himself gives nothing.

56. Upon a joint purchase during the couerture, either of them takes the
whole.

If the husband alien land etc. so given, 39. H. 6. 45. 21. R. 2. judge. 63.
she shall recover the whole, in a Cui in vita after his death, and the
warrantie of one of them or his ancestors, is a bar of the whole against them
both.

And if a feoffement be made to the husband Littlet. 65.
and wife, and a third person; the third person takes one moiety, and the
husband and wife the other moiety.

The husband is the woman's head:

And therefore

58. All she has is her husbands.

The personal things she has are merely his; but real things, whether land,
rents, etc. or chattels real, and things in action he has only in her right:
yet so, as of real chattels and things in action, he may dispose at his
pleasure, and shall have the real chattels if he ouer-liue. Of things in
action, her self may dispose by will.

If Tenant in tail enfeoffe a woman and Littlet. 148.
die, and his issue within age take her to wife, he shall be remitted, and the
woman now has nothing: for he cannot sue any formedon in this case, unless
he will sue against himself, because by the enter-mariage himself is seized
in her right.

If one that has a lease for years, grant ^4. Eliz. Ploy. 418.
his term to a feme Covert, and another, or if a feme sole and another be
Ioynt-tenants for years, and she take a husband, yet the estate of the feme
and ioynture does continue, so as the suruiuor of the wife; or of the other
shall have the whole: and if a stranger oust them, her husband and she must
join in an eiectione firm, and the feme shall have judgment as well as the
husband: And 1. Eliz. Ploy. 191.
in pleading he may say, That they are possessed in her right. Neither can the
husband, where the wife has a term for years, either devise it to another
14. Eliz. Ploy. 419.
by his will (for she has an estate in it before and at the time of his death,
which preuenteth the deuisee) or grant a rent 14. Eliz. Ploy. Ibid.
charge out of it, for she suruiuing is remitted to the term, and therefore
shall avoid the charge, but by an express act he might in his life time have
given it away. But if a woman having chattels personal take a husband, the law
deuesteth the property out of her, and vesteth it in her husband only.

And if goods be given to a feme Covert, and another, the ioynter is straight
way severed, and the husband and the other are Tenants in common; and the
excutors ^1. H. 7. 29.
of the husband shall have all the goods that were his wives.

But in an action of debt upon arrerages 16. E. 4 8.
of an account (where one was receiver to the feme whilst she was sole) they
both must join, and that although the auditors were assigned during the
couerture for the very cause of action, that is, the receipt (whereunto the
assignement of auditors is but a thing pursuant) was in her right; yet the
husbands release of an obligation 7. H. 6. 1.
made to the feme, or where goods were taken from her whilst she was sole,
shall be good against the wife if he die. But if he die without making such a
release, the wife shall have an action upon the obligation, and not the
executors of the husband: Likewise the wife suruiuing, or her executors 39. H.
6. 27.
if she die, shall have those things in action, and not the husband; or she
may make her husband her executor, and then he shall recover them to her use.
But a ^. Eliz. Ploy. 191
lease for years, which the wife, shall be the husbands, if she die before
him: for that is a thing in possession and not in action.

59. Her will is become his will, and subject unto it.

Upon a feoffement to a feme Covert, she takes nothing unless her husband
will agree; and where one is bound to enfeoffe the husband and wife, the
husbands refusal is the refusal of them both; but where the husband and wife
are joint purchasors, the husband may make a feoffement and livery upon the
land, which shall work a discontinuance, though the wife be in presence upon
the land and will not agree. If they bargain and sell the wives land by
Indenture, and the vendee grant unto them for the same a yearly rent, her
acceptance of this rent, after her husbands death, does not bar her of the
land, although the acceptance be an agreement to the bargain, but the bargain
being but a contract, is the bargain of the husband only, and not of the
wife: if she make a release, obligation, or such like, it is merely void. If
both her husband and she bail goods to one, they shall not join in an action
of detinue, for it is only his bailement, and void as unto her. In an account
upon a receipt, by the hand of the plantiffes wife, the defendant may wage his
law; hereupon it is that the wife can never answer in any action without her
husband. And if in an action of trespass against them, the wife come in by
Cepi corpus, and the husband does not appear, she must be let at large without
any mainprise till her husband do appear: but he appearing, may answer
without her, therefore a protection cast by the husband serves for the wife
also, because she cannot answer without him.

Last come the Moral rules.

60. The Law favors right.

When two are in a house, or other tenements, Littlet. 158.
and one lay claim by one title, the other by an other title, the Law
adiudgeth him in possession that has the right to have the tenements.

And therefore

61. Suffers things against the principles of Law, rather than a man to be
without his remedy.

A man that is outlawed may bring an 4. H. 7. 40.
action to reuerse it, and outlawry there is no plea.

The Tenant shall have a repleuin against F. N. B. 69. h.
the Lord that did wrongfully distreine, though the Beasts be come back to
himself, because he can have no action of trespass against him.

A man (after that judgment is passed against 11. H. 7. 10.
him) shall plead against the King a Charter of pardon, or any such thing done
mean betwixt the verdict and the judgment, because against the King he can
have no Audita querela. Otherwise it is, against a common person.

Hates wrong.

So that

62. No man shall take a benefit of his own wrong.

A man is bound to appear before the 31. H. 6. bar. 60.
Justices at a certain day, at which day he is in prison at the parties suit,
so as he cannot come, the bond is saved. Otherwise it is if he were in prison
for felony, or any other misdemeanor, for that is his own fault.

An Infants appeal shall not stay till his 27. H. 8. 11. and Br. covert. 2.
full age, for the defendant shall not have advantage of his own wrong.

One in execution scapes, and the Gailor 13. H. 7. 1.
gets him again, the party if he will, may have him to remain in execution
for him still, for the escape is his own wrong.

And therefore,

63. Of it self preiudiceth no man.

If a feoffement be made to two jointly, one of them cannot deraigne the
warranty 48. E. 3. 17.
without the other. Yet if a Villeine and another purchase jointly, and the
Lord of the Villeine enter into a moitie, he may deraigne the warrantie alone,
for his moitie: for there the seuerance grows by act in law.

He that misdemeaneth authority, that 12. E. 48.
law gives him (as if one come into a Tavern, and will not go out in
seasonable time; or distreine for rent, and kill the distress) Shall be a
wrong doer ab initio.

Otherwise it is, if he misdemeane an authority that another gives him. As
if I lend my horse to one to ride to York, and he ride further, yet the riding
to York shall not be unlawful. Nor a general action of trespass lies not
against him upon an accord upon the case.

Especially for things that cannot be imputed to his own folly.

The Lord Chancellors servant impleaded at the common law, claims privilege
35. H. 6. 3.
of the Chancerie: and before it be discussed whether he shall have it or no,
the Lord Chancellor dies; yet his privilege is allowable still, for the act
of the Court to advise of it, shall not prejudice him.

Of rent a man shall have an eiectment 33. H. 8. Br.
of ward before seisin: for the law counts him in seisin, in as much as he
cannot have it before the day. Otherwise it is of land.

And therefore

64. Drives not a man to show that which by intendement he knows not.

A man may plead that he was chosen 2. Mar. 128.
Knight for the Shire by the greatest number, without showing the number: for
the election may be by voices, or hands, or in other sort; hard to discern the
certain number, and yet easy to see who had the greater number. 10. E. 4. 15.


One bound in an obligation to serve I. S. for vij. years in omnibus mandatis
eius licitis, shall plead that he did serve him lawfully, without showing what
service or in what commandment: for no servant can remember all. 4 E. 6. 46.


A man may aver a thing to be don by couine, without showing how the couin was:
for couine is a secret thing contrived between two or three, to the prejudice
of another.

Truth.

And therefore

65. It disfauoureth

Fraud and couine.

If a woman that has good title of Dower, cause I. S. to disseise the tenant
of the 18. H. 8. 5.
l^^d, and recouereth her dower against I. S. yet this is no good estate of
dower in her, for she is privy to an unlawful act, which should be the means
of her estate.

66. Uncertain, whereby truth is inueigled.

A man grants all his trees and wood upon 1. Mar. Die. 91.
Bacre, that may reasonably be spared; this is a void grant, unless it be
referred to ^ ^hird persons judgment, what may be ^^^red.

If two several Writs of one self same Manxels case fol. 10. b.
thing against one self same man, be returned at one self same time: both
shall abate.

67. Variance.

If the Writ vary from the Obligation, 11. E. 4. 2.
^^other specialty in name, surname, or such like, in an action of debt or
annuitie brought upon it; or the Court vary from the Writ. As in an action of
debt of xx. l. 8. E. 4. 2. b.
^^d declare but a debt of x. l. both shall ^^^te.

An 4. ass. pl. 2.
essoyne or 32. H. 6. 3.
protection varying from the original Writ in the quantity of the Tenancie,
or the name of the party, (c) 7. H. 6. 22.
shall be quashed: and the Chancellors servant bringing a Writ of privilege
varying from the original Writ (as if the original be a Writ of Trespass, and
the privilege in placito debiti, or the original an Action of Debt of 44. l.
and the Writ of privilege in placito debiti of 42. l.) it shall be disallowed.

Departure also when one fortifyeth not the matter of his plea that went
before, but comes in with a new matter, is a kind of variance, and makes
the plea naught. As if the reioinder be a matter puisne underneath the matter
of his bar, and not above, and going before it: As in an action of Trespass,
the defendant pleads a descent unto him of the land, the plaintiff says,
that after the descent the defendant infeoffed him: Now if the defendant
reioyne, that the feoffement was upon condition, and he entered for the
condition broken; this is a departure: for the matter of the bar (that is,
the descent) is before the matter of the reioynder, that is to say, the entry
for the condition broken, whereby the feofme^ is avoided. So if in an assise
the defenda^ pleads the feoffment of I. S. and the plaintiff make title to
himself by descent, an^ that he was disseised by I. S. who infeoffe^ the
defendant: or that he infeoffed I. S. upon condition, who brake the condition,
and afterward infeoffed the defendant etc. Now if the defendant say, that
after the disseisin (or condition broken) and after the feoffement of I. S. to
the defendant, the plaintiff did release to the defendant, or confirm the
state of the defendant, this is a departure, for that is a matter that grows
after the feoffement pleaded in bar. But if he plead such a release or
confirmation from the plaintiff to I. S. that is no departure; for it is a
matter before the feoffement, or in an action of Trespass for goods, if the
defendant in title himself by the gift of I. S. and the plaintiff says that
himself was possessed till I. S. took them from him and gave them to the
defendant Now the defendant may say, that after the taking, the plaintiff gave
them to I. S. who gave them to the defendant: For although the defendant might
have pleaded these things at the beginning, yet, in as much as it is pursuing,
and fortifieth his bar, and no puisne matter underneath the title of his
bar, but eigne, and above the matter of ^is bar, therefore it is no
departure. So a plea in a bar which is intendible at the Common Law cannot be
maintained by a ^atter of custom or by Statute law. As in (...) assise the
Tenant pleads in bar a devise unto himself of the land, being deui^^ble by
the custom: the plaintiff says, that the Deuisor was within age at the ^^me
of the deuisee. Now if the Tenant say, That by the Custom there, an infant of
fifteen years of age may make a devise; this is a departure. For the custom
pleaded in bar shall be intended of those that may make a devise by the
Common law. So if in an action of Trespass the defendant plead in bar a
lease for fifty years from a house of Religion, and the plaintiff avoid it,
by reason it was made within a year before the dissolution, and so void by the
Statute 31 H. 8. Now if the defendant will allege, That by the same Statute
it is provided, that all such Lease^ shall be good for xxj. years, and so
maintain the Lease to be good for so many years, this is a departure. Or if
one plead a Fine, and that being avoided because the parties to the fine had
nothing, will maintain the Fine to be good by the Statute 1. R. 3. because he
that levied the Fine, was Cesti qui use.

68. Contrariety.

An Obligation is made Soluendum nu^quam. 21. E. 4 36.
This Soluendum is void, and the thing presently due.

A. is bound to B. Soluendum eidem A^ 4. E. 4. 29.
This is a good Obligation, and the Solundum void: for the plaintiff may
declare upon a Soluendum to himself.

In a Trespass de domo fracta and inuris ei^dem ^1. H. 7. 21. b.
domus fractis. The defendant cannon plead not guilty to the breaking of the
house, and justify the breaking of the wal^ for the house and walls are all
one, and he cannot of the same thing both justify and plead not guilty: for
by the justification, he ^cknowledgeth himself guilty. So one is contrary to
another.

A feoffment in fee is made of two acres, unto two men habendum one acre to one
2. and 3. P. and M. 153.
man, and the other acre to the other man. This is a void habendum: for the
premises give him an interest through both acres, and the habendum excludes
him from having any thing to do in one.

A lease of a manor excepting the services, the exception is void: for it is
parcel of the thing let.

And therefore

69. It will not drive a man to justify that he goes about to defeat.

He that brings an assise of the mastership 10. H. 7. 9.
of a Chapel against I. S. shall not need to name I. S. the master of the
Chapel, because the plaintiff is to disprove his interest.

Diligence

And therefore

70. It hates

Folly, and Negligence.

After a recovery in a writ of right, if a ^^^anger that has right, lay not
to his 5. E. 3. 222. Her^^.
claim within a year and a day, he is barred for ever. For vigilantibus and
non dormientib* iura subueniunt.

A descent cast during the couerture (where the wife is disseised) barreth her
not of her Litt. 95.
entry after the husbands death. But if a feme sole be disseised, and then
takes a husband, there a descent during the couerture takes away her entry:
for it was her folly to take such a husband that entered not in time.

Speeding of men's Causes.

And therefore

71. It hates

Delays.

He that pleads a Record in delay, (a^ to prove the plaintiff excommunicate)
must 3. H. 6. 15. b.
have it ready to show. Otherwise it is, if he plead it in bar.

In dilatorie pleas both defendants must join. 12. H. 7. 3.


A plea in bar that is dilatorie, must be good to every common intent. 8. H.
7. 9.


72. Unnecessary circumstances.

One that is in Court ready to ioyn wit^ the defendant, may do it without
Process* 2. H. 6. 1. b.
As the vouchee the plaintifes lessor beein^ prayed in aid of, when the def. in
a repleui^ auoweth upon him, or the mesne when the Lord paramount auoweth upon
him. Bu^ ioynder in aid cannot be by Attorney without Process.

One that is a debtor to the King of Re^ord 1. H. 6. 4. b.
in the Exchequer, if he be seen in the Court, may be brought in to answer
without Process.

73. Circuit of Action.

When a father infeoffeth his son and Manxels case. fol. 7. b.
heir with warrantie, and dies. Now the son in a praecipe brought against
him, may vouch the feoffor of his father: for the Law will not suffer to vouch
himself, and when he comes in as vouchee, then to deraign the first
Warrantie for the Circuit of voucher.

Upon the grant of a Ward with warrantie, the defendant in a Writ of Right of
Ward, may rebutt the plaintiff by that warrantie, and shall not be driven to
bring an Action of Covenant for avoiding circuit of action.

So in an action of wast upon a Lease for years by deed. And in the same deed
the lessor grants to the lessee, that he shall not be impeached of wast; the
lessee may plead this in an action of wast.

The Law construeth things

With equity and moderation.

And therefore

74. Restrains a general act, if there be any mischief or inconvenience in
it.

Tenant for life lets to another for life, Litt. 110*
without expressing whose lives, it shall be taken for the lessors own life;
for else it were a forfeiture of his estate.

A house that has Copyholds and other lands usually occupied with it, is let
for years, with the lands appertaining; yet the Copyholds pass not without
special naming: for then it were a forfeiture of them.

A Corodie granted to one and his servant to sit at his Mess, he cannot
bring a servant that has some filthy or noisome disease.

Estouers granted one of a Manor, the grantee shall not cut down fruit trees.

A Common granted to one for all his beasts, yet he shall not have Common for
Goats, nor Geese, nor other beasts, not Commonable.

A feoffment of all his lands in the town of D with Common in omnibus terris
suis, this Common shall be intended in D. only, and not elsewhere.

75 Moderateth the strictness of the Law it self.

By Abridging, diminishing, and taking away the severity of it, and mollifying
the hardness thereof. A moral virtue as Plowden calls, and may appear by
Aristotle, who treating of it defines it, A certain correction of the Law,
wherein it is any way Wanting, because of the generality of it.

It is no trespass for a man to beat his Apprentice, which is reasonable
correction.

No more is it to carry away a man's wife against his will, to a lawful end.
As to sue a divorce against her husband, or to have the peace of him before a
Justice of peace.

A great part of the depth and learning of the Law (if you go to the primative
reason of it) stands upon this and that other kind of equity that went
before. Of both which Plowden in that case discourses at large, and well
sets forth the nature of them, so far as concerns the interpretations of
Statutes. But they have a further and more shining use in the exposition of
Common Law it self, as in the cases before put.

To the best.

And therefore

76. Every act to be lawful when it stands indifferent to be lawful or not.

If the Lessor come upon the ground, it shall be intended that he came to see
if wast were done,

If the disseisee come, it shall be taken that he meant to be remitted

In an action of Trespass, two issues are 11 H. 7. 5.
joined triable in two counties, one in London, an other in Middlesexe only
(without saying which of the issues it should try;) this shall be taken to
try the issue in Mid. only: for so the venire facias is lawful, and not in
both counties; which is against law. And therefore it is a discontinuance of
the issue in London, and not a miscontinuance.

CHAP. 4.
Of Law Constructions that are natural.

THVS far of Rules drawn from other sciences. There follow those that are
proper to our selves: which we call Law-constructions. And are natural or
fained.

Of the first sort we have two notable grounds.

Law construeth things, Reasonably.

And therefore

77. With a reasonable intent.

A feoffement by deed of a Manor, with auowson appendant, and no liuerie made,
the auowson passes not: yet they may pass without livery, but the meaning
was, the manor and it should pass together.

A bargain and sale of land, and a reuersion by deed not enrolled, the
reuersion passes not no more than the land, though the deed without inrolment
may pass the reuersion: but it was meant they should pass together.

One reciting by his deed, that where by ^1. H 7. 5.
prescription he has used to find a Chaplein, because some controversy has
grown of it, grants by the same deed to do it: this determines not the
prescription, for the intent of the deed (reciting the prescription) was to
confirm it, and not to make a new grant.

78. According to the effect.

A deed delivered by an infant, cannot be 1 H. 6 4.
delivered again at his full age: for it took some effect before, and was but
voydable.

But a deed delivered by a feme Covert, or a release delivered to one that
has nothing in the land, may be delivered again (viz.) when she comes to
be sole, or the party to have somewhat in the Land: for the first delivery was
merely void, and took no effect at all.

So that

79. He that cannot have the effect of a thing, shall not have the thing it
self.

The King shall not be received upon default 4 E^^z 241.
of Tenant for life, because the demand cannot have the effect of the receipt.
viz. to count against him: which none can do against the King, but sue to him
by petition.

Two Abbots cannot be Ioyntenants: Litt.
for they cannot have the effect of it, which is suruiuorship.

80. To the most validity.

Tenant in tail makes a lease for life, this shall be intended the Lessees
life. Litt. 140. b.


An annuitie granted pro consilio impendendo, or a feoffement ad erudiendum
filium, or ad soluendum x. s. is a condition, without words conditional,
because else the party has no remedy.

And therefore

81. When many join in an act, it makes it his act that may do it.

A use limited to begin when ones eldest 2. and 3. El. Die. 191.
son is married by I. S. the son (being in ward to the King) is married by
the king and I. S. yet no use rises, for it is the sole marriage of the King.

A patron of a Church suffers an usurpation by six months, and then grants
an annuitie to I. S. till he do promote him to a benefice After, he and the
usurper ioin in a presentment of I. S. yet the annuity is not determined.

The disseisee and the heir of the disseisor, Litt^let.
in by descent make a feoffment by one deed, and Liuerie; this is the
feoffement of the heir only, and confirmation of the disseisee.

82. When two titles concur, the best is preferrred.

One is disseised, and the disseisor lets the Littl.
land to the disseisee for term of years, or at will: now if he enter, the
Law shall say, he is in of his ancient and best title.

83. Things to be done by him that has most skill to do them.

An Obligation upon condition, that a 9. E. 4. ^.
Bell shall be brought by the Obligee, to the Obligors house (being a Brasier)
and there weighed and put in fire: and then the Obligor to make a Tennor of it,
tunable with other bells.

The Obligor must weigh it, and put it in fire (not being expressed who shall
do it) for it belongs to his office, and therefore he has most skill to do it.

So upon condition that the Obligee shall bring to the Obligors shop (being a
tailor) three yards of cloth which shall be shapen, and the Obligor to make the
Obligee a gown of it: the Obligor must shape it.

A merchant agrees with the Kings collectors, 4. E. 6. 15.
that his marcha^dise shall be weighed at the Kings beam, and the King shall
have his subsidy as it rises: the Collector must weighe it.

Issues joined must be tried by them that have most skill. (videlicet.) An
issue upon 4. El. 230* b.
the law, by the Justices learned in the law.

Attendance upon the King (Scotland) in L^^tl^^ 21.
war xl. days (as tenant by escuage must) by certificate of the kings
Marshall.

Disseisin of an office in the Commonplace, 11. E. 4 3. 6.
or rasing of a Record there, by the Filizers and Attournies, attendant in that
Court.

84. Void things good to some purpose.

Lessee for twenty years takes a Lease 1. and 2. P. and M. 107.
for x. years (to begin presently) upon condition if such a thing be not done,
to be void, though the second lease be void upon the condition broken, yet
the surrender remains good.

A feoffement upon condition to be void, 10. H. 7. 22.
as if it had never been, yet the feoffee shall have an action of trespass
(after the feoffors entry for the condition broken) for a trespass done by the
Feoffor before.

85. One thing to enure as another.

The King grants to a Town easdem libertates 21. H. 7. 13.
quas London habet, it shall be intended the like. The Lessor enfeoffeth his
Lessee for life, by dedi and concessi, this shall enure as a confirmation.

One grants the third presentment to an 15. H. 7. 7.
aduouson, and dies: his heir shall present twice, and his wife shall have
the third for her dower, and so the grantee shall have but the fourth.

The King pardons one the making of a Bridge; this is only good for the
fine: 37. H. 6. 4.
but yet he must make the Bridge, because the Kings subjects have interest in
it.

86. In one thing, all things pursuant to be included.

One makes a lease, excepting a close, 14. H. 8. 1.
wood, etc. now the Law gives him a way to come to it.

Where the King is to have mines, the 10. E. 317.
Law gives him power to dig in the Land.

Upon a grant of Trees, the Grantee may 2. R. 2. bar. 337.
come upon the Land to cut them down, and with his Carriage to carry them
through the land. And the vendee of all ones fishes in his pond, may justify
the coming upon the banks to fish, but not the digging of a trench to let out
the water to take the fish, for he may take them by nets, and other devises.
But if there were no other means to take them, he might dig a trench.

87. Strongest against him that does them.

Two Tenants in common grant a rent 2. and 3. P. and M. 140. b. and 161. b.
of twenty shillings, the grantee shall have forty shillings. But if they
reserve twenty shillings upon a lease, they shall have only one twenty
shillings.

One bound to pay I. S. twenty pound, 2. M. 104.
cetra festum natalis domini, it is no plea to say he has paid it, but he must
show when, else it shall be taken he paid it after the feast.

And therefore

88. A man shall not qualify his own act.

The obligee releaseth his debt till Michaelmasse, 21 H. 7. 23. b.
the debt is gone for ever.

A reuersion of three acres of land is 18. E. 3. Var. 53.
granted, the tenant atturnes for one, it is a good atturnment for all.

A parson makes a lease for xl. years, the 17. El. Die. 339.
patron and Ordinary confirm it for xx. This is a good confirmation for the
whole xl. years.

The construction which otherwise law would make, is altered by the parties.

89. Special agreement.

Lessee for years is excused for wast, if the houses be blown down by
sudden 40. E. 3 5.
storm or tempest. But in that case if he covenant to keep reparations, an
action of Covenant lies against him.

Two Ioyntenants exchange an acre of land with another, they should hold the
Park 55. f. and ^6* g.
land taken in exchange jointly. But if they exchange to have that acre in
common between them, they shall be Tenants in common.

^^. Special words.

A lease reserving a rent, the heir of the 27. H. 8. 19.
^^ssor, after his death, shall have the rent: otherwise, if the lease be
reserving to the lessor.

A feoffement in fee to one and his heirs 30. H. 8. Die. 42. b.
with warrantie to the feoffee. This warrantie goes not to the heir.

91. Surplusage of words.

The Ordinary may refuse him generally, 9. E. 4. 28. b. Lit.
that demands his clergy without showing cause. But if he show cause which our
law allows not (as because he has not his ^^^sure or ornamentum Clericale
etc.) he shall pay a fine, and yet be driven to take the Felon.

In a valor maritagij, and count of a tender 9. El. Die. 255. ^.
of marriage to the def. The tender is trauersable, if it were not before.

An information upon a statute made 6. E. 6. 84.
such a day, and the day mistaken, is naught, though he needed not to have
recited the day.

In an action of Debt by I. S. Parson of ^^. no such town as D. is a good
plea: yet ^e needed not to have named himself parson of D.

A writ of forging diuersa facta and muni^enta and count but of one, the Writ
shall ^^ate: yet he needed not to have said in his Writ, but only factum.

CHAP. 5.
Of Fictions in Law.

A fained construction, which we ca^^ a fiction in law, is when in a
similitudinarie sort, the law construeth a thing otherwise than it is i^ truth.
And is of the person, thing* Action, and the circumstances there of ti^^ and
place.

Of the Person.

92. Things don by another, are as if they were done by ones self.

A promise to ones wife in consideration of a thing to be performed by the
husband: 27. H. 8 24.
if the husband upon his coming home, agree and perform the consideration;
he may plead this promise to be made to himself.

If my servant sell my goods, and I agree, I shall have an Action of Debt,
supposing he bought of me.

A lease for years is made, and a letter o^ Attornie to deliver possession to
the lessee: 25. El. Earl of Leic. c.
if the Attorney deliver possession to the Attornie of the Lessee: it is a good
possession and pursuing to his authority.

Of the thing we have these two rules.

93. A thing that comes in lieu of another, to be as if it were the same.

One shall recover in value against the heir (upon the ancestors warrantie)
lands 18. H. 3. r^c. va. 26.
which the heir took in exchange for lands descended.

A manor is given by fine, a Scire facias 48. E. 3. 11.
lies of a Tenancie that afterward escheated.

If a manor descend to an heir within 6. H. 4 1.
age, and after a tenancie escheateth, he shall have his age of it in a Precipe
of the manor; it shall be assets by descent, and he may vouch of this
Tenancie by reason of a warrantie made of the manor; for the tenancie comes
in lieu of the services.

94. A thing to be all one with that whereunto it does amount.

The maxim of a bastard eigne, is that 14. H. 4. 9.
the mulier puisne must make an entry upon him, or else he gains the right:
yet a continual claim made by the mulier puisne destroys his right: for it
amounts to an ^ntrie.

A Lease for a thousand days, is a Lease 14. H. 8. 13.
for years.

A lease for years and a release amounts Brook.
to a feoffement.

If a man license one to occupy his land 5. H. 7. 1.
for a year. This is a lease for a year.

And therefore

95. A thing that should not be done, to be as if it were not done.

One grants a rent charge, without saying 18 El. Die, 362.
pro se and heredibus, and dies. The grantee brings a writ of Annuitie against
the heir, and has judgment to recover: yet he may distrein afterward: for
the heir was never chargeable. So that upon the matter, it makes no election.

A man makes a lease for years of a house, 20. El. Die. 362.
with certain implements, reserving a rent, the Executors after the Testators
death, receive the Rent, yet it is no assets in their hands: for the whole rent
belongs to the heir.

96. So of a thing done in a time that it should not.

A man seized in fee, lets for ten years, and 1. E 6. Br^^c. 18.
after sells the land, and takes it back to him and his wife, and then the
husband and wife let it for twenty years, reserving a rent: the husband dies,
the wife accepts this rent during the first ten years. By this the second
lease is not affirmed, for the acceptance of a rent before the lease begins,
and so before any rent be due, is no acceptance at all.

A matter pleaded or disclosed out of time and course, is as if it were not
pleaded at 21. El. 563.
all. As if one bring an action of debt upon an obligation, and count that the
defendant was of full age at the time, the defendant shall not trauers this;
but only say he was within age, and the trauerse must come of the plaintifes
part.

To the circumstance of time, these two rules pertain.

Prioritie of time is imagined in things.

97. Done together.

One deuiseth a term for years to his son, 21. El. 540.
and that the wife shall have it during the sons minority. This is first a
devise to his wife, and after to the son when he comes of full age.

One grants his reuersion of lands, and by the same deed grants a rent out of
these lands to another, and delivers the deed to both at one self same
time. Yet it shall inure first as a grant of the rent to the onc, and then as a
grant of the reuersion to the other.

98. Happening in an instant.

A mesualtie discends to the Tenant of the land, though the mesualtie be at the
same 11. H. 7. 12.
instant extinct, yet the tenant shall pay relief if he be of full age, or be
in ward if he be within age (viz.) where it is holden by knights service.

Land is given to A. for the life of B. the 7. H 4 6.
remainder to the right heirs of B. A. dies, the remainder takes effect
before any occupant.

A man exchangeth land for a rent charge out of the same land. This is good
enough 9. E. 4 21.
though they be in an instant (whereby the rent should be drowned in the land)
for the law accounts the exchange of the land to be first perfected.

99. Things relating to a time long before, be as if they were done immediately
from that time.

When the wife is endowed by the heir Lit 92.
of her husbands lands, she shall be said to be in immediately from the
husband. And therefore if the husband were a disseisor, and the heir in by
descent, yet the disseisee may enter upon the wife.

Goods taken out of the possession of an 36. H. 6. 7.
executor who refuses, and administration is committed to I. S. I. S. may have
an action of Trespass, supposing they were taken out of his possession: for he
shall be said an Administrator from the very time of the death of the
intestate.

These rules of common reason do many times cross and encounter one another,
which is the greatest difficulty that we find in the arguing of our cases. But
to help this, the general ground is according to the former rule ((...)) that

100. Those prevail that carry the more excellent and perfect reason with
them.

Tenant for life makes a lease for life without naming whose life, this shall
be intended Lit. 110. b.
for his own life (Rule 74.) for else it were a wrong But if tenant in tail
make Lit. 140. b.
such a lease for life, this is a discontinuance, and for life of the grantee
(Rule 86.) for it for it is strongest against the grantor, and most beneficial
for the grantee.

Things executed where the husband is 32. H. 8. Br. der. 18.
seized in the right of his wife, shall not be avoided by divorce: as wast
committed, receipt of rent, wards, or presentiments that have fallen gifts made
of the wives goods, etc. Rule 39. But otherwise it is in matters of
inheritance, as if the husband discontue and charge the wives lands, release or
manumise villeines etc. Rule 30.

A feoffement is made with warrantie, 28. E. 3. 20 b. Br. gar. 27.
the feoffee dies having issue two daughters, who make partition of the land.
This warrantie shall be divided notwithstanding the partition which is their
own act, and therefore not so much favored Rule 46. For the land comes to
them originally by act in law, that is by descent, Rule 5.

If the Chancellor die before his servants 35. H. 6. 3.
privilege discussed in bank, yet it shall be allowed, notwithstanding the
cause of his privilege now be gone. (contrary to Rule 3.) But the reason is,
for that once he had cause: and the act of a third person (that is to say the
Court) shall not prejudice him where no folly was in himself. Rule 63.

The husband possessed of a term in the 9. El. Die. 264. b.
right of his wife, makes a lease of parcel, rendering a Rent, the wife shall
have the residue of the term, but not the rent, Rule 9. notwithstanding it
come in lieu of the land, Rule 93. and be as it were an accessarie unto it,
Rule 25.

Things may be done in the night time, notwithstanding, rule 49. where there is
a kind of necessity of doing them, then, Rule 44. as arbitrament made and
delivered in writing, the last day after the Sun set, is good enough: for
judgments and arbitrements require long advice.

So may goods be distreyned in the night 11. H. 7. 5.
time for damage feasant.

If one of the Chapter infeoffe Deane and Pank. 41.
Chapter, by that he himself shall take by his own liuerie, Rule 18.
notwithstanding Rule 20.

A man may do an act to himself, notwithstanding 13. H. ^. 15.
Rule 20. where the law cannot do otherwise, Rule 18. as a fem tenant in
socage may indow her self, an executor pay himself, etc. Counts and
declarations must be certain, Rule 66. yet things which contain a necessary
implication are good enough, Rule 94. As in an eiectione firm, and 14. El Die.
347.
count of a lease made by tenant for life, it suffices to say, that the lessor
is yet seized, without alleging his life expressly. In an information upon the
Statute of usury, and count that the defendant took per viam, and medium
corrupt mutationis, where it should be accomodationis, yet it is good enough.

Corporal service as suite of Court etc. 7. H. 4. 9.
cannot be done by another, Rule 14. notwithstanding Rule 92.

Matters of trust or authority, etc. cannot be granted over: because being
strictly taken, they are esteemed to belong to the person, and therefore guided
by Rule 15. Yet an office of skill and diligence to one and his heirs, may be
granted over. So upon 12. El. 379. b.
a letter of Attorney to deliver seisin to A. he may deliver it to the Attornie
of A. for that upon the matter is a possession delivered to himself, Rule 21.

Tenant in tail makes a feoffement with 25. El. Earl of Leic. case.
warrantie, and leaves to descend a reuersion in fee simple expectant upon an
estate tail, which I. S. has; this is no assets, for it may be tolled by a
common recovery (and therefore the law esteems it as if it were so) But it
seems otherwise of a reuersion depending upon an estate tail of land which
the issue himself has, for it were the folly of the issue in tail to cut it
off, Rule 70.

CHAP. 6.
Of Laws Possitiue.

A And so much of Laws Native.

The Law of nature and of reason, or the Law of reason primarie and secundarie,
with the rules framed and collected thereupon Which three are as the Sun and
the Moon and the seven Stars, to give light to all the possitue laws of the
world.

Possitiue are laws framed by their light, and from thence come the grounds and
maxims of all Common Law: for that which we call common law, is not a word new
and strange, or barbarous, and proper to our selves, and the law that that we
profess, as some unlearnedly would have it, but the right term for all other
laws. So Euripides mencioneth (...) the Common Laws of Greece: and Plato does
define it, speaking of (...) the reasoning faculty, (...) says he (...) which
being taken up by the common consent of a Country, is called Law. And anon he
names it (...) the golden and sacred rule of reason, which we call Common Law.
The place is very notable: it opens the original and first beginning of the
Common law, it shows the antiquity of the name, in effect all one with that
which since and by a later name is called Ius Civil (quod quisque populus ipse
sibi ius constituit, as Justinian speaks) it teaches Common Law to be
nothing else but common reason: but what reason? not that which every one does
frame unto himself: but refined reason. Quae cum adoleuit atque perfecta est
nominatur rite sapientia as Tully says, and as Plato there has it, when it
comes to be (...) opinio or decretum. How? (...) generally received by the
consent of all.

Therefore Laws positive, which are directly contrary to the former, loose
their force, and are no laws at all.

As those which are contrary to the Law of nature. Such was that of the
Egyptians, to turn women to merchandise, and commonwealth affairs, and men
to keep within doors. And of the Thracians, which accounted idleness an honest
thing, and stealing very commendable. So if it were made a law, that men might
commit adultery, forge false deeds, etc. And this is manifest unto all men.
But because the law of reason is known only to such as are able to judge
aright, and that but imperfectly (as before was showed) therefore here the case
is harder, what laws may be said agreeable and what repugnant thereunto. Only
in general (which is sufficient for this place and purpose) it is truly said,
and all men must agree, that laws in deed repugnant to the law of reason, are
as well void, as those that cross the law of nature.

Positive laws are sundry and diverse, according to the several and oiuers
constitutions of particular places and Countries.

Such among the Jews were their Politicals, delivered by Moses, which so far
as they be possitiue, bind us not unto them. Such were the ancient law of the
Grecians, the xij tables, and civil laws of the Romans, and Such are the
Common Laws of England. And almost so many people so many Laws. And as those
laws are diverse one from another, so one and the self same laws may be altered
and changed in themselves. So long as no alteration is permitted against the
two maine Laws, of Nature, and Reason.

The second book of LAW.
CHAP. 1.
Of the Common Law of England, whereof the parts of the Realm, and of the
persons in it. Of Custom, and Prerogative.

THE Common law of England is a Law used time out of mind, or by prescription
throughout the Realm. Lit. 38. That prescription is a usage time out of mind.
For to plead that there is a custom among merchants throughout the Realm, to
assign licenses over, is not good, in as much as that which is curra^t
throughout the Realm, is Common Law, not Custom. And under the name of the
Realm of England, it is plain that 8. R. 2. cont. claim. 13.
Scotland and Wales 2. Mar. 29.
much less 20. H 68. A fine with proclamations according to 4 H. 7. shall not
bar one in Ireland.
Ireland, are not included. Neither is the maine sea, that is to say, beneath
the low water mark, parcel of the Realm: for there the Admiralls jurisdiction
(which has nothing to do of things within the Realm) does only meddle and
not the Common Law. But between (d) 22. ass pl. 93. The statute 1. R. 2. cap.
5. proves the Common Law to be so.
the high water mark and the low water mark, where by ordinary and natural
course the sea ebbes and flows: the common Law and the Admiraltie have diuisum
(e) Sir Henry Constables Coo. 107.
imperium, one upon the water when it is full Sea, the other upon the land when
it is an ebb.

Statutes 27. H. 8. cap. 26. Incorporateth Wales into England.

The whole Realm is divided into several (a) 12 H. 7. 18. Fineux.
Counties or shires, And those again into certain villes or Towns: in many
(b) Litt. consuetudo ex rationabili causa vsitata private Communem legem.
of which as also in diverse manors whereof it comes to speak afterward.

There be special vsuages time out of mind, altering the common law which we
(c) Lit. 46. and 58.
call Customs. (d) 8. H 3. prescip. 60.


As in Kent, the custom of Gauelkind for all the heirs males to inherit alike,
and the wife not to lose her dower, nor the heir his Land, though the husband
or ancestor 5. E. 4. 30.
be hanged for felony.

In London, if the debtor be fugitive, that the creditor before the day of
payment may arrest him to find better suertie. In many Boroughes the youngest
son to inherit Lit. 37.
all. The wife to have for her dower al her husbands lands: the lands there to
be deuisible by will.

A County is a part of the Realm, entirely governed by one Sheriff under the
King, but all subject to the general government of the Realm. And therefore
every County is as it were, an entire body of it self, so that upon a
feoffement of lands in many towns in one County, liuerie of seisin made in
one parcel, in any one of the Towns in the name of all, suffices for all the
lands in all the other Towns within the same County. But upon a feoffement of
lands in diverse Counties, there must be livery of seisin in every County.

Also an exchange of lands in one and Lit. 13.
the same County is good by parroll: but in diverse it must be by deed
indented.

A man is driven to take notice of many things done in the same County, where
he is, but not in another. As if an action of debt be brought against an
Executor, he 2. H. 4. 11.
may pay the assets which he has in his hands to any other to whom the
Testator stood indebted, till notice of the action brought against him, if the
suit be in an other County, but not if it be in the same County, for there
he must take notice of the action at his peril.

An Enquest also shall not take notice of things done in another County; but
because all are under one general government, therefore things done in
several shires shall be tried by a ioynder of Counties, the Jury that tries
the principal may take notice of a thing accessory, though it be in another
Shire. As in an action of trespass, if the defendant plead 21. H. 6 51.
an arbitrament in a foreign County, and issue be taken upon it, and found
for the plantiffe: the Jury there must access damages 9. E. 4. 40.
for the trespass done in the other County.

Likewise in an action of debt against an Executor, who pleads, ne vnque
administ. and gives in evidence, a deed of gift made unto him by the Testator
in his life time in another County, the Jury must find it upon pain of
attaint. So of a release pleaded to be made in another County in a writ of
right.

There be in all thirty nine Shires, Kent, Sussex, Surrey, etc.

A Town is a precinct, anciently containing ten families, whereupon in some
Countries they are called Tythings, within 18. H. 6. 13.
one of which Tythings every man must be dwelling, and find fuerties for his
good behavior, else he that takes him into his house is to be amerced in the
Leet.

Diverse of these Towns have Hamlets in them, some special places there be in
every County, out of any Town or Hamlet.

The persons within the Realm are to be considered either as one entire body,
or as particular persons.

As one entier Body, it consists of the King, and common persons his
subjects.

The King is the head of the Commonwealth, immediate under 1. H. 7. 10.
God.

And therefore carrying Gods stamp and mark among men, and being, as one may
say, a God upon earth, as God is a King in Heaven: has a shadow of the
excellencies that are in God, in a similitudinarie sort given him: Gods
excellencies and honor stands partly in things incommunicable unto other,
partly in such as after a sort he makes his creatures partakers of both:
which the King is said to have some in truth, other by fiction, all by
similitude from the divine perfection.

The first thing in God, and most proper to his sacred Majesty, is, the
infinitenes of his nature; who, as the philosopher elegantly says, only is
that Circle, Cuius Centrum est vbique peripheria nusquam. So say our books,
that the king in a manner is every where, and present in all his Courts.

In a writ of Error upon a false Judgment given for the King, no Scire facias
shall go F. N. B. 21. b.
forth ad audiendum errores, for the King is alwa^es present in court, and that
is the cause that the form of entry in all suites for the King is Henricus
Hobart miles, Attornatus domini Regis generalis qui pro domino Rege sequit'
ven' hic in Cur. etc. and does not say Dominus Rex per Henricum Hobart
Attornatum 25. H. 8. Br. nonsuite 68. 3. El. 231.
suum, etc. And therefore it is also, that the King cannot be non suite, that
all acts of Parliament which concern the king or general, and the Court must
take notice without pleading of them, for he is in all, and all have their part
in him.

A second thing proper unto God, is the divine perfection. In the King no
imperfect thing can be thought, no 35. H. 6. 26.
negligence, or laches, no folly, no infamy, no stain, or corruption of
blood. So as 3. Eliz. 213.
nonage auoideth not his grant, though it be of Lands which he has in his
natural capacity.

By 1. H. 7. 4.
his taking of the Imperial crown upon him, all attainder of his person are
purged ipso facto.

The excellencies which God bestows upon his creatures (for I will touch no
more but those that the books of our Law do speak of, and such as are
leading rules to the cases that you shall find there argued and debated) are
first, Majesty, Soueraignitie, Power, Perpetuity, and then that noble
complement of Justice, and truth.

The law says Bracton gives unto the King Dominationem and potestatem. Bract.
lib. 1. cap. 8.


He has absolute power over all: for by a clause of non obstante he may
dispe^ce with 2. H. 7. grants 33.
a Statute Law, and that (if he recite the statute) though the statute say,
such dispensations shall be merely void.

The King cannot take, he cannot part from any thing but by matter of Record.
Bract. ibid.
And that is for the Majesty of his person. (a) Stam* prae 73.
His supreme soueraignetie makes him immediate (b) 7 E 4* 17.
under God. Omnis quidem sub eo and (c) 50 Ass. pl. 1. 18. Eliz 498.
ipse sub nullo nisi tantum sub Deo, says Bract. It makes all lands to be
holden of him, every surrender unto him to be good; no action to lie against
him; for who shall command the king.

Nay, acts of Parliament do not bind him, 4. E. 4. 21. 1 El. 223. and 240 3.
Eliz. 239.
unless they concern the Commonwealth, or he be specially named. Neither can
the King be a Iointenant with any, though it be of land, or other things that
he has in his body natural: for none can be equal with him. And therefore
if two purchase land to them and their heirs, and one be made King, they are
now no more Iointenants, but tenants in Common. Lastly for perpetuity, the
King never dies, but in 4. El. 234.
law it is said the demise of the King, and a gist unto the King, without
saying more, trencheth to his successors.

To come to the other two, the power of 4. Mar. 177. Potentia iniuriae est
impotencia naturae.
God is alwais joined with Justice and truth: for to do wrong, to deal
untruly, is not omnipotency, but a thing of weakness and impotencie So it is
with the King, he cannot be a 4. E. 4 25.
disseisor, he can be no wrongdoer: for he is all Justice, he shall never be F.
N. B. 143 b.
estopped. Judgment final in a Writ (c) 20. E 3. Dr. 15 F. N. B. 31. D.
of right, does not conclude him, for he is all truth, Veritas and Iusticia
says Bracton, Circa solium eius. They are the two supporters that do uphold
his Crown.

Therefore also he has a prerogative in all things that are not injurious to
the subject. As he may create Corporations, Deane and Chapter, Mayor and
Cominaltie, etc. make Denisens: and it remains good, though he be declared an
usurper after (but no continuance in England can make a Denisen, though it be
from his childhood, and he sworn to the King in Leets) he may reserve rent
unto a stranger, grant a condition or thing in action, give in fee simple, upon
condition not to alien, except out of his grant, things incident as Courts and
perquisits of Courts upon the grant of a manor, sue in what court he will: as
to have a Quare impedit or Writ of Escheate, retornable in the Kings Bench, or
a Quare incumbrauit there, though the record of the Recovery be in the common
place. He may allege in his Court or plea, double matter, or as many matters
as he will (and the party must answer to them all, and then the King shall
take issue upon any one at his pleasure. He may waiue his issue, and demurre in
Law, and contrariwise, so it be the same term, but not in another term, for
so he might do it infinitely. He may challenge a juror without showing cause,
or the array, because the Sheriff that made it, was cosine to the party. But
no challenge shall be of a Iuror against him He is not bound to make a demand
(or tender) where a lease is made, reserving a rent with a clause of re-entrie:
has the property of all goods that are in nullius bonis, shall have the
Tithes of Forests and places out of any parish, take advantage of other men's
places, as to have a Writ to the Bishop, if title appear for him, though he be
a stranger to the Action, all the daughters and heirs (where the ancestor held
in chief) must do homage to him: where (if they hold of a common person) the
eldest only must do it where he is to have a benefit, a man may plead more
pleas than once, pur darreine continuance, as outlawrie in an action of debt,
etc. And many prerogatives more he has, which in their several places shall
come more properly to be considered.

But in them all it must be remembered, 12. H. 7 19.
That the Kings prerogative stretches not to the doing of any wrong: for it
grows wholly from the reason of of the Common Law, and is as it were a finger
of that hand, although so much differing in fashion (as the head and the body
can never be of one proportion) that if you set them in paralels together, you
shall find it to be law almost in every case of the King, that is law in no
case of a subject. And yet for all th^^, they are not two but one law. Only
the Common Law is as the primum mobile which draws all the Plannets in their
contrary course.

In regard of the King, the Queen his wife is participant of diverse
prerogatives above other women.

As in an Act of Parliament making all 3. El. 231.
gifts and grants unto her, or by her (whether between the king and her, or
between her and any other person) to be of the same effect, as if it were
between other subjects, without any benefit thereby to come unto the king, need
not be pleaded, but the court and all the Realm must take knowledge of it,
because she is a public person, in whom all the subjects of the Realm have
interest, being the Kings wife, as they have in the King himself. Likewise
she may have in her self the possession of personal things during her life,
so as she may 49. ass. pl. 8.
have an Action in her own name alone, take lands and other possessions from
the king by Charter: 3. H. 7. 14.
make leases, feofments etc. which shall be good during her life, but
afterward the king shall have them* And diverse other prerogatives she has,
which follow in their place.

His Subjects are the members of the Commonwealth, and are Barons and Commons.

Barons we call the Peers of the Realm. For every Duke and Earl is Peer
of the Realm, because he has a Baronie belonging unto him. Otherwise Duke
and Earl are but names 14 H. 4. 7.
of dignity and of honor only, and 21. E. 4 84. 8. H. 6. 10.
parcel of ones name. So as in every Action which he brings, or is brought
against him, he must be named Earl or Duke, as he is, else the writ shall
abate. But the name of Baron is the 32 H 6. 29.
name of ones place and calling, which shall not be expressed in any writ. And
where addition is necessary, as by the Statute of 1. H. 5. yet he shall never
be impleaded by the name of baron, for it is not any dignity, but must be
named knight if he be one, or Esquier if he be no Knight. And touching
Bishops, who enjoy the name of Stamp. prer. 154. 7. H. 8 Cr. 184. Hunnes case
by all the Justices of England.
Lords of the Parliament, they have the same in respect of ancient baronies
annexed to their dignity.

All the rest are Commons.

The particular persons are natural persons, or bodies politic.

The natural person is every man.

A body politic is a body in fiction of 14. H. 8. 3. Fineux.
Law, that indureth in perpetual succession And such is the King alone, and by
himself considered: and a Parson. The law calls him the Rector of a Church,
for the King has two capacities, a body natural 4. El. 234.
(wherein he may inherit from any of his ancestors, or purchase to him and his
heirs, and retain the same, notwithstanding he be removed from his estate
Royal) and a body politic, wherein he may purchase to him and his heirs
Kings of England, or to him and his successors. So a Parson is a 4 E 3 17. Br.
Deane, etc. 2. 14. H. ^. 30.
Corporation by the Common Law, and has two capacities, one to take to him and
his heirs, and the other to him and his successors. And therein he is seized ^^
iura Ecclesiae.

And if I. S. be Parson of D. and land be given to I. S. Parson, and his
successors, and ibid.
to I. S. Clerk, and his heirs; he is a tenant in Common with himself.

The parson in regard of his continual attendance upon that sacred function,
is (a) F. N. B. 175.
freed from all personal charges that may hinder him in his calling. For such
a one shall not be chosen Bailife, Bedle, Reeue, or other such Officer; nor be
compelled to come to the Marl cap. 10.
Sherifes turn, to the F N. B. 160. c.
Leets of the King or other Lords, for land annexed to their Churches. And all
this by (d) Marl cap 10. does so recite it.
the course of the Common Law.

So is every other clark within orders.

To the Parson belongs of Common F. N B. 175. Br. Dism ^6.
right (as our books say) the tenth of all manner of yearly increase, which
we call Dismes, or Tithes. And therefore by a lease 15. H. 7. 8.
of Rectoria, the Lessee shall have the dismes and offerings of the same
Church; for they are incident unto it.

And if a Parson demise his glebe to a Lay man, he shall pay Tithes, because
they are 32. H. 8. Br. ^^s. 17.
of common right.

Every Parson before he can be incumbent, must be presented to the Ordinary,
who is to admit him. And therefore is allowed time to inquire of the clerks
ability. 14 H. 7 21.
As if he be presented to the bishop when he is ready to ride, who wills him
to come to him within three days to be examined: if he come not then, nor
within six months after, the Bishop may collate by laps: for there be many
things to dishable him from having the benefice. As if he be criminous,
insufficient, a villeine, have not his letters of Order, etc. And if a mere
Layman 12. and 13. El. Dier 292.
be presented, admitted, and instituted, and no sentence of deprivation or
nullitie given, the Ordinary cannot collate by laps: for till that time, the
church is full to all intents, when the Ordinary admits him to be able,
that is called an admission, when he admits him to the charge, as to say to
the Clerk Instituo te habere Curam animaru^, that is, institution.

And then the Archdeacon is to put him in possession, by delivering the ring of
the church door unto him, and ringing of bells, which is called an induction,
and that being done, the party becomes an incumbent. 20. El. 528.
Before which induction there is no possession or freehold in him, of glebe,
or house, or dismes. So as a rent granted by a Prebendarie, after admission and
institution, and before induction, with confirmation of the Ordinary before
induction, and of Deane and Chapter, the day of induction is void.

The Incumbent has not the mere right in him of Land in the right of his
Church. But the fee simple is in abayance, Lit. 143. 6. E. 6. Die. 69.
that is to say, only in the remembrance, intendment, and consideration of
law; Therefore he cannot discontinue, and every Act which he does with such
land, may be avoided, when he cease to be incumbent, except such as are done
by consent of patron Lit. 143. 12. H. 8. 7.
and ordinary, which bind for ever.

If the Church be void six months, 3. E. 4. 3.
without presenting, which is called a laps, the Ordinary himself may collate,
that is, a Clark appoint of his own: and if tt be void Doct. and Stud. per Br
plen. 15.
six months after his time, then the Metropolitan, and six months after
his time, the King may present. All this is to be understood, If the Patron
present not before them. But so long as the Church is void, though it be two
years after, the patron Doct. and S^ ibid.
may present, and the Ordinary or Metropolitan are bound to admit him. Quere
whether it be so where the King is entitled to present by laps.

When one Church is not able to find 40. E. 3. 28. Fi^^. 50. E 3. 27. B^lnap.
the Cure, the ordinary by consent of the Patrons may unite it, or make a
consolidation of it to some other. And it seems that in this case, the
consent of the King is not requisite, because here is no prejudice wrought to
any, for if one man be patron of both Churches, he shall have the sole
presentment: if there be several Patrons, then they shall present by turn,
and the King shall have the laps, as before he should. Otherwise it is upon an
appropriatian, for that is an amortisement, and therefore all must join in the
making of it.

Statutes.
37. H. 8. Cap. 19. By assent of ordinary, incumbent, and Patron, under their
seals, an union may be made of two Churches, being not above six pound yearly
value in the Kings books, nor distant one from another above a mile; saving to
the King his tenths, and first fruits.

In corporate Towns it must be by assent of the Corporation.

If such a poor Parish shall within a year assure by writing to the incumbent
and his successors, eight pound yearly, the union shall be void.

Over and besides those Corporations that were at the Common law, there be
diverse others which have grown of later time, by a special foundation and
election, whereof some are aggregate of many persons, 14. H. 8. 3. Fineux
that is to say, of a head and body: other consist in one singular person.

These Corporations are all of them 14 H. 8. ibid.
Temporal or Spiritual.

The Temporal, made by the King, as Mayor and Comminaltie; and many more which
he makes or may make every day. Also 9. Eliz. Die. 255. Littlet. 36. 40. Ass
pl. 27. and 41.
Colleges, as master and fellows, etc. diverse Towns are so incorporate before
time of memory, with power to hold plea, by Writ of ex graui quaerela, or such
like, and are called Boroughs, from whence Littlet. 36.
come the Burgesses to the Parliament: and this makes the difference between
the Borough and a Town. So that 40. Ass pl. 41.
vpland Towns which are not ruled and governed as a Borough is, are but
Towns, though they be enclosed in walls, as Ludlow, and such like. And every
Littlet. 38
Borough is a Town, but not e conuerso. 40. Ass pl. 27.
The names of all the towns in England, and which are so incorporate, and
which not, are of record in the Exchequer.

The spiritual ones were for the most part made by the Pope, but had their
power to purchase from the King. And these 4 H. 4. Cap. 2. 4 H. 4. Cap. 12. Coo.
likewise are of two sorts, for either they are Regular or Secular.

Regular, which have entered into Religion, (and thereupon called religious)
professing to vow three things, Obedience, voluntary Poverty, and perpetual
Chastity. Wherefore these are dead persons Littlet. 66.
in the account of Law. Only their head has power to purchase or do such
other things to the use of the house. And of this sort are Abbot and Covent,
Prior and Covent, etc.

Secular, are such as have entered into Religion; as the Bishop and his Chapter,
Moster of an Hospital, and his Brethren, or confreres, guardian of a chapel,
and the chapl^ns, etc. Also Archdeacons, and such like. Touching the Bishop and
his chapter (which make but one body) their possessions 40. E. 3. 23. Coo. 75.
are divided: so as the Bishop has part by himself, and the Chapter the
residue. Which chapter consists of a Deane, as the chief, 17. E. 3. 40. Part.
and prebendaries, or such like, who are most properly termed the chapter: and
of these also, their possessions for the most part are divided: the Dean having
some part sole in the 21. E 4.
right of his deanrie: and the particular Prebendaries some other part in the
right of their Prebends: the residue the Deane and 17. ass pl 29. 18. E 3. 36.
F. N. B. 195.
Chapter have together. And every of them is to such purpose incorporat by
himself.

And these spiritual corporations are 26. Ass.
sometimes presentatiue, sometimes dative, (perpetual or remoueable) sometimes
elective, and have a common seal, according as their corporatio^ is. To them
also personages may be appropriate, by the patron, Ordinary, and king, and
vicars, endowed to serve the cure. Whereupon a praecipe quoth reddat lies against
the vicar only, without naming of the person, for he alone is Tenant of the
freehold, and may have a iuris vtrum, (or other action) against the person. All
which is to be understood of an ancient indowment, but not for lands whereof
he is endowed by the Ordinary.

Statutes.
Magna Charta cap. 36. A gift of lands to a Religious house, to take it back
to hold of them, is merely void, and the Land forfeit to the Lord.

Stat. de Religiosis, cap. 1. Land given in mortmaine, under color of a term,
forfeit to the Lord, the immediate Lord has one year to enter, the next Lord
half a year, and so from Lord to Lord, till it come to the King.

Westminster 2. cap. 41. The King (founder of a Religious house) may seize lands
which he gave them, if they alien.

See all the statutes of the dissolution of Monasteries, Chaunteries, etc.

CHAP. 2.
Of Possessions.

OF the Common Law there be two parts.

One that concerns Possessions.

The other the punishment of offenses.

A possession is whatsoever may be inioyed.

Prerogative.
The King shall have to his own use, and 31. E. 3. San. def. 37.
therefore may let to farm rendering a rent, all the possessions of a fool 18.
E 3. Sciro fac. 10.
natural, not of any other Idiot Stam pre. 34.
during his ideocie, but 1. H. 7. 24.
not that which he has title unto by entry or action. And therefore upon an
office (finding that the Idiots ancestors died seized of an estate tail) it is
sufficient to trauerse the dying seized, for that only intituleth the King.

Statutes.
Prerogative cap. 9. The King shall have the custody of their lands during
their life. Prerogative cap. 10. And of Lunatickes, during their Lunacie, to
their own use.

When one has the possession of any thing 28. H. 8. Die. 12. Fitz.
to another use, this use at the Common Law, was accounted nothing, but as a
matter in conscience and Chancerie only. Whereupon these Statutes following
were made.

1. R. 3. cap. 1 Cesti qui use may grant the land, or suffer a Recovery of it.

4 H. 7. cap. 17. The heir of Cesti qui use, (of land holden by Knights
service) shall be in ward, and pay relief.

19. H. 7. cap. 15. Execution upon judgment, statute, or recognisance, shall be
good against Cesti qui use.

The heir of Cesti qui use of land in Socage, shall pay relief, heriot, etc.

27. H 8. ca 10. Where any be seized to the use or trust of another, Cesti qui
use, or trust, shall have the possession in such quality, manner, and
condition, as he had the use or trust. So when any be seized to the use or
intent that another shall have a yearly rent out of the same lands, Cesti qui
use of the re^t shall be deemed in the possession thereof, of like estate as he
had that use.

27. H. 8. cap. 16. Bargains and sales to raise an use of inheritance or
freehold, must be by deed indented and enrolled within six months, in a
Court of Record at Westminster, or in the County where the land lies.

Sundry men possessing the same thing by purchase, are Iointenants, or Tenants
in Common.

Iointenants which possess by the same title. As if two, three, or more, be
infeoffed Lit. ca* of Iointer.
of certain lands, to hold to them and their heirs, or during their own or
another life, or disseise another to their own use, or a lease be made, or a
horse, or other Chattell personal given unto them.

And here the suruiuour shall have the Lit. ibid.
whole in the same sort as he had his part, excepting only present interests
of the thing it self granted by him that dies.

As a Lease for years, though the Lessee never had possession, or though it be
to begin at a day to come, and the Iointenant which made it, die before the
day; binds the Suruiuor: for the Lessee has a present interest.

Otherwise it is of a grant to have a lease, if the grantee pay x. l. before
midsomer next, 5. El. Ploy. 203. Brown.
and the Iointenanr which made the grant, die before the day: for there is no
interest at all, but a communication only, till the money be paid. Otherwise
it is also of a rent charge granted out of the land whereof they Lit. ibid.
are Iointenants: for that is no interest in the land it self.

Tenants in Common are they which possess by several titles. Lit. chap. of
tenants in Common.


As if two Iointenants be, and one alieneth his part to another, the Alience,
and the other Iointenant, are Tenants in Common: for the Alienee comes in by
one of the Iointenants feoffement. So if three Iointenants be, and one alien
that which to him appertains in fee; the Alience is of this third part tenant
in common, with the other two Iointenants: but they remain still Iointenants
of the other two parts. So if land be given to two men or two women, and the
heirs of their two bodies engendered: the Donees have a Joint estate during
their lives: but their issues are Tenants in Common of the inheritance. For
euey one claims as heir of the body of his father. And it is impossible
that two men or two women should have one heir of their bodies between them
begotten.

So if land be given to a Mayor and Comminaltie, and their successors, and to
I. S. for I. S takes in his own right, and the other in the right of the
corporation. And therefore 7. H. 7. 9.
upon a feoffement to a corporation, and another person, there must be several
liueries, in respect of their several capacities, which makes them tenants in
common.

So if lands be given to two, Habendum the one moitie to the one, and the other
moitie Lit. ibid.
to the other. In like sort if a lease for years be made to two, or two buy a
horse or ox, and one grants that which to him appertains of the term, horse
or ox to another.

To possessions this is general, that they may be granted.

Statutes.
3. H. 7. cap. 4. All deeds of gift of goods and chattels made of trust to ones
own use, shall be void.

13. Eliz. cap 5. made perpetual.

27. Eliz. cap. 1. Every gift, grant bargain, and conueiance, of lands and
chattels, or of lease, rent, common, or other profits out of them, and every
bond, suit, judgment, and execution since the beginning of her Majesty's
reign, or herafter to be had or made, for the defrauding of any persons iuct
action, suit, debt, account, damage, penalty, forfeiture, heriot, mortuarie,
or relief, shall be void against that person, his heirs, executors, etc.

The parties or priuies knowing such a fraudulent gift which shall justify it
to be done bona fide, or shall alien such things so to them conveyed; forfeit
one years value of the lands or profits out of it, and the whole value of the
goods and chattells, and the sum of such couenous bonds, and shall have half a
years prisonment: this act exte^deth not to common recoueries, nor vouchees in
a formdon, nor to any gift, etc. bona fide, and upon good consideration to any
person, not knowing of any fraud.

27. Eliz. cap 4. Every conueyance, grant, charge, lease, estate, encumbrance,
and limitation of use of Lands, tenements, or hereditaments, made since the
beginning of her Majesty's reign, or hereafter to be made, for the defrauding
of purchasors of the land it self, or any part or profit out of it, shall be
void against the person so purchasing for money, or other good consideration,
and against all claiming under him; with penalty, as in the former statute.

This extends not to the avoiding of any grant etc. upon good consideration
and bona fide If any such conueiance etc. be made with a clause of reuocation
or alteration at his pleasure, by writing; and after he shall bargain, demise,
sell, grant, convey, or charge the same lands etc. for money or other good
consideration (the conueyance not revoked or altered) then the conueyance etc.
shall be void against the bargainees, etc. and all claiming under them (lawful
morgages only excepted.)

Prerogative.
Every grant made by the King, upon surmise or suit of the party, shall be
taken most beneficially for the King, and against 37. H. 6. 21.
the party Soas a pardon to the Sheriff ex speciali gratia and mero motu of
all misprisions, offenses, contempts, and deceits, shall discharge him of an
amerciament, for returning of one Quarto exactus, where indeed he was
outlawed. But if himself sue for such a pardon, he must have express words,
otherwise it will not help him.

His grant shall not be taken to two intents; that is, Shall not inure to any
other intent than that which is precisely expressed within the grant.

As if he grant an office for life to an Alien, 9. E. 4. Den. 1.
it is nothing worth: for it cannot inure also to make him a Denisen.

If he grant land to A. in fee, which A. is 19. El. Ploy. 502.
his villeine; this shall not manumise him: for the villenage is a foreign
matter not expressed in the grant.

But the King may create a Duke, and in that patent grant him Land by the same
Br. patents 44.
name, or make a Mayor or Comminalty, and by the same patent, give them Land,
or grant them license to purchase: for these are two several things expressed
in the Grant.

No grant of his is good, when it appears within the body of the grant, that
the King is deceived.

As if he give lands to one and his heirs 18. H. 8. B. pa. 104
males. For this is a fee simple, and it is plain, the king meant to grant but
an estate tail.

Statutes.
1. H. 4. cap. 6. The Kings grants shall be void, if express mention be not
made of the value, in the Petition of those that sue for it.

A grant by an infant under the age of F. N B 202. 26. H. 8. 2.
21. years, F. N. B. 202. c. 7. H. 4. 5. 12.
one out of his right mind; whom we call non sane memory, or non compos mentis,
or compelled thereunto either by 9. H. 7. 24.
dures of imprisonment, or fear of some (c) 39. H. 6. 50.
bodily hurt threatened to himself, not to his father, mother, brother, etc. as
loss of life and member: or though it be but of imprisonment: for imprisonment
is a corporal pain, and one may be imprisoned that he may die of it. Otherwise
it is of a menace to break or burned down ones house; for that is but the
loss of ones goods, is auoidable, that is to say may be avoided at any time be
entry action, etc. if they deliver it with their hand: as in a feoffement, and
themselves make liuerie, or a gift of goods, and themselves deliver them.

But if they deliver it not with their hand, as in a grant of a rent, aduowson,
etc. or a feoffement by letter of Attornie, etc. it is merely void, and
nothing at all passes: So as they may have a trespass or assise, and remain
Tenant to the Lord, and therefore shall be in ward, notwithstanding any such
feoffement.

So of a grant made by one that has no Park. 5.
understanding. As if he be borne dumb, deaf, and blind. But one dumb may
make a good grant, or borne dumb and deaf. For diverse may have understanding
by their sight only, though dumb and blind.

Grants of an infant, in respect of having things necessary, cannot be
avoided.

As a bargain for his necessary meat, 18. E. 4. 2.
drink, and apparel: for he cannot live without them.

Other grants of his where himself has likewise benefit. We call it Quid pro
quo, are only voydable, as if he let land for years, 18. E. 4. ibid.
reserving a rent.

To this place belongs exchange, which Lit. 13.
is a mutual grant of equal interests, each in exchange of other.

As of land in fee simple, for other of the same estate. But to exchange an
estate pur Park. 55:
auter vie, for an estate for life is not good. For though both have a free
hold, yet an estate during another life, is not so high a freehold, as an
estate during his own life. And in every exchange there be two gra^ts, Lit.
13.
for each grants to other his land in exchange. And the very word it self
of exchange 9. E. 4. 21.
is necessary: For if I give to a man an acre of land by deed indented, and
he by the same deed give unto me another acre for the same acre, nothing
passes without liuerie, if the word Exchange be not in.

Prescription is as available as any Lit. 40.
grant. As that one and his ancestors, time 19. H. 6. 34.
out of mind, have been seized of a certain yearly rent out of land, and
distreyned for Lit. ibid.
it being behind. Or if a velleine and his ancestors, as of villeines in
gross; or that one, and those whose estate he has in the Manor of D. have
had a park there time out of 3. E. 3. Br. incid. 39
mind. For of such things as cannot be granted without deed or fine, the
prescription Lit. ibid.
must be in him and the ancestors, whose heir he is: and not in himself, and
those whose estate he has: because he cannot have their estate without writing,
which must be showed to the Court. As of a villeine in gross, a 12. H. 7. 18.
hundred rent etc. Otherwise it is of things appendant or regardant to a manor

A possession is either upon a limitation, or condition, or else absolute.

Upon a limitation which cease upon the 11. H 7. 17.
doing or not doing of something. As a lease for years, upon condition if the
lessee go not to Rome by such a day, his estate shall cease. And therefore in
this case the grantee of the reuersion may enter, if he go not: for thereby his
estate is determined and void. Lit. 90.
So if lands be given to husband and wife during the couerture: or a Parson
make a leas to one so long as he is parso^; this in both cases is an estate for
life upon limitation.

Upon condition, which is only defeasible upon the doing or not doing of
something. As a lease for years or life, upon condition Let. 74. and 8^:
if the lessee go not to Rome by such a day, the Lessor and his heirs may
reenter. And therefore here the grantee of the reuersion cannot reenter for the
condition broken. So if a man by deed indented, infeoffe another in see simple,
or make a gift in tail, or a lease for life or years, reserving to him and
his heirs a yearly rent, payable at a certain time, upon condition, if the
rent be behind etc. it shall be lawful for him and his heirs into the same
lands or tenements to reenter etc. In these cases if the rent be not paid at or
before the time limited in the condition; the feoffor or his heirs may enter
in such lands or tenements, and them have and hold in his first estate, and
thereof quit and clean to ouste the feoffee, donee, or Lessee, etc. And this
is termed a condition in deed. So of such estates as have by the law, a
condition annexed unto them; although it be not specified in the writing. As a
man grants to another by his Deed, the office of a Parkership of his park,
to have and occupy the same office for term of his life; the estate which he
has in the office, is upon condition in Law: that is to say, that he do well
and lawfully keep the park, and do that which to the office appertains,
otherwise the grantour and his heirs may lawfully oust him, and grant it to
another. And such a condition which is understood by the law to be annexed to
any thing, is as strong as if the condition were put in writing.

In the same manner it is of the grant of a stewardship, Bedleship, Bailiwicke,
or other offices.

Absolute, which is neither upon limitation nor condition.

Again, possessions are in being, which properly we term in possession or in
Action.

In possession, which one does enjoy.

In action, which one ought to enjoy, either in respect of a right or title.

Right is when a wrong was done before: 15. El. Ploy. 555. Manwood.
as by wrongful entry upon his lands, or taking away his goods, etc.

Title, when no wrong was done.

As in a feoffement upon condition, and the feoffee breakech the condition.

Of things in action: as cause and matter Preamble of 32. H. 8. 8 cap so
recites the Common Law.
of suit, entry to continue ones right, or upon title: as for a condition
broken, and such like, no stranger shall take advantage And strangers are
accounted (besides the parties themselves, which are not either privy in Park.
164.
blood, as the heir to the feoffor: or in succession, as the successor of
Mayor and comminalty, etc. or executor, administrator, etc. which represent the
testator.

Statutes.
32. H. 8. cap. 34. All grantees of reuersions may enter upon Farmors, for any
forfeture (or condition) and have like advantages against them (by action only)
for any other covenants, condition, or agreement contained in the Indenture of
their lease) as the Lessors, their heirs, or successors might And the like for
the Lessees against the grantees of the reuersions (recovery in value only
except.

Therefore things in action cannot be granted but to him that has possession:
and that by release or confirmation: for a release 1. H. 6. 4.
or confirmation of land to him that has nothing in the land, is void.

Release is a passing of the grantors interest. The form whereof is, De me and
hared. Lit. 105.
quietum clamaui, etc.

Confirmation is a ratifying of the grantees possession. The form whereof is.
Confirmaui C. de D. statum and possessionem etc. Lit. 119.


Furthermore, the grant of every thing in action, and of such things in
possession as cannot pass by liuerie of the hand, must of necessity be by
deed. For the right of the thing Real or personal, cannot be given 6. H 7. 9.
nor released by parol. No more can a reuersion, rent, common in gross, or
villeine in Park. 13.
gross, be granted by paroll.. But a horse, ox, or such personal thing,
corn, and trees growing upon the ground may: and also the wardship of body or
land.

So a lease for life, with a remainder over, is good without deed: for the
remainder passes by liuerie and seisin.

A Deed is a writing sealed and delivered. For if either a parchment with Park
25.
out Writing be delivered as ones Deed, yet it is not his Deed, though an
Obligation be afterward written in it: or Park. 27.
if it be a writing but not sealed at the time of the delivery of it as his
Deed, it is a scroule and not his deed. Or if I make and 9. H. 6. 37.
seal a deed, and the party take it without my delivery; I may plead it is
not my deed. And belongs always to him whose possession is made by it. As if
I release to two disseisors, and deliver the Deed to one, the 34 H. 6 1.
other suruiuing shall have it. Or if the 6 H. 7. 3.
Disseisee release to the Disseisor, and he make a feoffement of the land, the
feoffee shall have the release. But if a feoffement to two without deed, and
the writings of the land are delivered to the one, the other shall not have
them: or if having two joint feoffees, I release to both, and deliver the Deed
to one, the other though he survive, shall not have it.

But a writing read in another form to 1. H. 7.
one not lettered, that is, that cannot read, is not his deed at all, though
he seal and deliver it.

A deed is a deed poll or indenture. Lit.


Poll, that which is the only Deed of the grantor.

Indenture, that which is the mutual Lit. 88. 14. El.
Deed of both: yet the deed of the grantor is the principal, and the other is
but a counterpane. And therefore if the Lessor seal, and not the lessee, it is
as good against him as if both had sealed. And if there happen any variance
between the deeds, it shall be taken as the deed of the grantor is, and the
other shall be intended only the misprision of the writer.

And barreth them from saying contrary to any thing in the Indenture. As upon a
15. El. Pl. 434.
lease by indenture or fine, both parties are estopped to say that the lessor
had nothing in the la^d: so as if the lessor come afterward to have the Land by
purchase or descent, the Lessee may enter upon him by way of conclusion, and
likewise the Lessee shall by estoppell, be driven to pay the rent.

Sometime bare acts, without indenture Lit. 149.
or other matter. Work an estoppel in like sort. As if the husband discontinue
the wives land, and take back to him and his wife for their lives: the wife is
remitted, but the husband (by this bare taking back, is estopped to say so.

CHAP. 3.
Of Hereditaments, where: of Estates.

A Possession is an Hereditament or Chattell.

Hereditament is a possession which one may have an Estate in. One borne of
Parents out of the Kings allegiance; such an one we call an alien. But 36. H.
8. Br. denisen. 9. 1 R. 3. 2 Hussy.
an an aliens Son, borne in England is no alien: Nor by the Common Law, one
borne beyond Sea, of English Parents, in the Kings subjection. And the Statute
25. E. 3. only makes it more clear; is disabled to enjoy any hereditaments,
he shall have no 38 H. 8. Br. denisen 10. and 16.
real nor mixed action, nor is inheritable: but either his younger brother being
a denizen, shall have it, or the So Doct. and Stud thinks Br. denisen 7.
Lord by Escheat.

Prerogative.
Therefore such a one purchasing 14 H 4. 20. c. Mar. Br. denison 25.
any, though it be but for years, it is the Kings.

An Estate is particular, or an inheritance,

And is Uncertain, or Certain.

Uncertain, which is determinable at another pleasure, as an estate at
sufferance, and at will.

At sufferance, when after lawful occupation, he continues possession without
authority. 7. E. 4. 6.


As lessee for years, holding in after his term expired, and before any entry
made upon him. But if he continue after entry upon him, then is he a wrong
doer.

At will, when an estate is made during Lit 24. 14. H. 8. 12.
pleasure.

Statutes.
6. H. 8 cap 15. If the King give land, or an office, durante been placito, and
after grant the same unto another: the second grant shall be void, if mention
be not made therein of the first.

Certain, which is not so determinable, And is called a term, whereupon may
depend a remainder or reuersio^: for a remainder cannot be but upon a
particular estate precedent. As upon a lease for years or life; 7 E. 6 Ploy 83.
upon an 11. H. 4. 42.
estate to one and his heirs during the life of I S for in effect it is but an
estate for life. But not upon an estate to one and 4. E. 6. Ploy ^9.
his heirs, so long as I. S. has heirs of his body; For that is a fee
simple determinable. Nor 3. E. Pl. 235. and 247.
at the Common law, upon an estate to one and the heirs of his body: for it
was a fee simple co^ditionally; ibid.
neither could any reuersion be of it.

Remainder, is a residue of the estate, at the same time appointed over: and
therefore 38 H. 6. 30.
cannot be said to be ex assignatione, but ex dimissione of the Lessor, because
it passes at the same time.

Reuersion is a residue of the estate, not at the same time appointed over. As
if a Lit.
man let land for life, without saying more; the reuersion of the fee simple is
in the lessor. And if he afterward grant this to another, the grantee has a
reuersion.

Terms are forfeited by plucking the inheritance out of him that has it. As
if tenant Lit. 137. a fundamenti legu^. per Br. Forf. 96.
for life (or years) of land make a feofment in fee: for thereby the fee simple
passes, by reason of the liuerie.

Otherwise it is, if tenant for life of a reuersion or rent, grant it by his
deed in fee: or if tenant 1. H. 7. 22.
for life take a fine of a stranger, sur conusance de droit, or sur release;
for such a fine increases not his estate. But a 42. H. 3. 20.
fine by tenant for life to a stranger, sur conusance de droit come ceo quil ad
de son done, is a forfeiture. So if tenant for life 9. H. 7. 20.
pray in aid of a stranger, or (in 9. H. 5. 14.
a writ of right brought against him) join the mise upon the more right. And
these are by reason of the estoppell.

Terms may be surrendered: that is to say, yielded up and drowned For a
surrender cannot be of a fee simple. to him that the 12. H. 4. 21.
next and higher estate. As two Iointenants, 22. H. 6. 5.
and to the heirs of one, he that has the freehold cannot surrender to the
other: for both have a joint possession, and the same estate. But Tenants in
Common may: As the alienee of him that has the free hold in Park. 113.
the former case, may surrender to the other Park ibid.
Tenant for life, where there is a remainder for life with remainder over in
fee, cannot surrender to him in the remainder in fee; for he has not the next
immediate estate. Lessee for life cannot surrender to Park. ibid.
him in the remainder for years: But to him in the remainder for life he may,
for that remainder (as unto him in the remainder) i^ an higher Freehold than
the others estate, which is unto him but pur auter vie.

Statutes.
Glocestr^ cap. 7. Tenant in Dower, alienating longer than during his own
life, he in the reuersion shall recover against the Alienee in her life time.

A term is for years, or life. The present estate for life is termed a
Freehold (in deed) if he be actually seized of it (in Law) before his entry,
when it is cast upon him by course of Law; as upon the heir by death of his
ancestor; upon him in the remainder by death of the particular Tenant.

A term for life is either for his own or pur auter vie, that is, for
another life, where the tenant pur auter vie dying before Lit. 167.
the other, whom we term Cesti qui vie, he that can first hap it, shall enjoy
out the term, and is named an occupant, but if land be let to one and his
heirs during another life, the heir shall put out the occupant.

Inheritance follows. Every Inheritance at the Common Law is called a Fee
simple: The release whereof, or of an estate for life, is not good to one that
is but tenant 9. H. 6. 44.
for years, without priuitie. As if Tenant for life or in fee, release to the
Lessee for years of his disseisor. But the release of a term for years to
the Lessee for years of him that does eiect him, is good enough: for there
needs no priuitie.

And to these two estates of inheritance, and life, warrantie does belong:
which is an assurance warranting such an estate: for the word Warrantizabimus,
only makes a Lit. 166. 26. H. 8. 3.
warrantie, and not defendemus. And if a lease for years be made with
warrantie, this sounds not in nature of warrantie, but of a covenant, because
it is a chattell. A^^ if the Lessee be ousted, yet he may have an action of
Covenant. But in a warranty of a fee or Freehold, the party shall have no
advantage unless he be tenant of the land.

Every exchange has a warranty knit 3. E. 3. form. 44.
by law. And therefore the Exchangor or his heir may vouch to warrantie by an
exchange without deed, and his Assignee rebutte.

Inheritance is an estate descendable: for Lit. 1.
inheritance never lineally ascends, as from the son (that purchases in fee
simple, and dies without issue) to the father: but always discends, as to the
uncle, brother, etc. to his heirs that has actual possession.

As if the eldest brother once enter, his Lit. 2.
sister of whole blood shall inherit, and not his brother of the half blood.
But if he never enter, the brother of the half blood shall inherit as heir to
his father.

An heir is the next of worthiest of whole Lit. 2.
blood: for the half blood is inheritable, being also of blood to the first
purchasor.

So the blood of the fathers side is worthier than the mothers: the elder
brother Lit. 2. and 3.
worthier than the rest. Therefore these shall inherit first.

So, lands purchased may go to the heirs 49. E. 3. 12.
of the part both of the father and mother of the purchasor, unless it be once
attached in the heir of the part of the father; for the^ the heir of the part
of the mother shall never have it, because they are not of blood to him that
was last seized.

But Lands descended go only to the heir of that part from whence it
discends: as if from the father who did purchase it; then it may go to the
heirs of the part of the mother of the same father, but not to the heirs of
the part of the sons mother. For though they be of blood to the son that
was last seized: yet they are not of blood to the father which was the first
purchasor.

He that is begotten out of marriage, is called 1. H. 6. 3.
a bastard: for if a woman great with child take a husband, the issue borne
(though it 1. H. 6. ibid. 7. H. 4. 9.
be within six weeks after) is no Bastard. Or if the wife clope from her
husband, and continue in adultrie, yet the issue borne during that time (if
both be within the four Seas) is intended lawfully begotten. And if one die,
his wife priuement inseint 21. E. 3. 29.
(that is, so with child as it is not discerned) and she take another husband,
the issue borne within a month (or such a time as it is impossible he should
beget it) shall be accounted the son of her first husband, and such a bastard
is of blood to none: in Law, Lit. 41.
nullius filius.

And therefore cannot inherit: nor bring 35. H. 6. 9.
a Writ of Detinue as heir; nor be a villeine Lit. 41.
but by his own confession in Court of Record: and the land shall 2. E. 2.
bast. 20.
escheate where there is no issue but such a bastard, nor other heiere.

But Lit. 94.
marriage following after, gains him the right of inheritance, if after the
fathers death he enter before his younger brother, 17. E. 3. 59. bast 32.
or sister if both be females, borne 3. El per Die. in sir Th Gerrar. c.
of the same father and mother within espousals: who is called mulier puisne,
and the other Bastard eigne, and continue 2. E. 3. 16.
the possession all his life without interruption. And that 36. ass pl. 2. Br.
dis^ent 29.
although the mulier puisne be an infant: because this binds the right. For
Lit. 94.
such a bastard is a Mulier by the Law of Holy-Church: and therefore has a
color to enter as heir to his father.

If the next be women in equal distance, Lit. 53.
as daughters, sisters, Aunts, etc. they shall inherit alike, and are but as
one heir, called parceners or coparceners.

Where the general entry of one, is of Lit. 160.
the rest, if they list. So is not a special entry to her own use.

As if Tenant in Tail have issue two daughters, and the eldest enters into
the whole, and thereof makes a feoffement with warrantie; this is a
collateral Warrantie, and a bar to the puisne daughter for her moitie. Which
proves, That this special entry is not the entry of both: for then it were
a Warrantie commencing the disseisin, and no bar. But all this is to be
understood where the other coparceners list to have an entry for them, and not
otherwise. And therefore in a Partitione facienda 4. H 7. 9.
of rent, it is a good plea for the defendant if she is sole seized, without
that, that she holds pro indiuiso. And the plaintiff is driven to a nuper
obijt. And if one enter, 43. E. 3. 19.
both cannot be vouched as heirs, for that is to their disadua^tage. But both
may have an assise.

The inheritance it self that discendeth, shall be charged by the deed of the
same 10. E. 4. 10.
Ancestor,

Whether Obligation, covenant, annuity, warrantie, or whatsoever else: but not
by any bare matter 10. E. 4 10.
en fait, as of ones Ancestor time out of mind have been wont to pay an
annuitie, etc.

Binding himself and his heirs.

But if either a man bind his heirs to pay (c) 31. E. 1. gr. 85.
xx. l. a year, or such like, but not himself; or himself 15 El. Pl. 457. Br.
Annuitie 13. 2. H 4. 4. 13.
without naming his heirs: there the heir shall not be charged, though he have
assets by descent. And therefore 15. El. Pl. 441. 17. El. Die. 344.
the heir being charged only by reason of assets, when he has assets, the
same is counted his own debt, and the action of debt lies against him in the
debet and detinet, not in 40. E. 3. 15.
the detinet only. And for one acre only by descent, the heir shall be
chargeable to an Obligation of 1000. l. but no other land shall be put in
execution, but it. So, though it be but a reuersion that discendeth: In which
case the Judgment shall be Quod recuperet debitum, and damna de praedicta
reuertione leuanda cum acciderit. And a special Writ shall go out to extend
the whole.

Statutes.
Merton. cap. 5. A Nomine poenae shall not incur upon an heir within age.

The dying seized of the inheritance and Lit. ca. of descents.
freehold together. Not of a freehold only, as of an estate for his own or
another life, nor of a remainder or reuersion where the Freehold is out of
him.

Whereby the land discendes unto his heir. For if it escheate, as by the death
of Li^. ibid.
the Alience of the Disseisor, without heir, the disseisee may enter; takes
away the entry of every one, We call it a descent that tolleth entry, whether
it be of one that has right, as in the dying seized of a disseisor, Lit ibid.
abator, 4. E. 6. Pl. 47.
or intrudor; or of one that has but title that may have an action: as an
Infant Lit. 96.
whose feoffee after his full age, dies seized: he 21. H. 6. 17.
in the reuersion, where tenant for life does Alien, and the Alienee dies
seized; the Deuisee 9 H. 6. 25. 21. H 6. 17. 33. Ass pl. 11.
of land in London, if the heir enter and die seized. For the Infant may have
a Dum fuit infra aetatem, he in the reuersion a consimili casu, and the Deuisee
in that case an ex graui querela. But if the Disseisor of the feoffee upon 47.
E. 3 11. 1. E 6* Br. Devise 36.
condition, or an Alienee in Mortmaine die seized: or if a man devise, that I.
S. shall sell his lands at London, etc. and the heir be disseised or make a
feoffement, and the Disseisor or feoffee die seized: yet the feoffor upon
condition in the first case, the lord of whom the land is holden in the second
case, and I. S. in the last case may enter, notwithstanding any descent: for
they have no remedy.

But claim upon the Land within a year before the death, it is called
continual Lit. chap. of contin. claim.
claim, or if they dare not upon the land for fear of some bodily hurt, then
as near the Land as they dare, saves their entry.

Statutes.
32. H 8. cap. 23. The dying seized of a disseisor by strength, and without
title, tolleth not the entry of him and his heirs, which at the time of the
descent had good title of entry, unless the disseisor had peaceable
possession by five years next after the disseisin.

A fee simple, is a fee simple, conditional or absolute.

Conditional is a fee simple to one and the heirs of his body: for that is a
fee simple 40. El. Pl. 250.
at the Common law: but the having of issue made it a more perfect fee simple
than before.

Which before issue cannot be alienated, 30. E. 1. Form. 85.
after issue had, becomes an absolute Fee simple.

And may be alienated or forfeited by attainder (a) 7 E. 3. 36. 8. per a El. 11
Pl. 240. 30. E. 1 ibid.
of felony. But so, as if the Issue fail before the alienation, the donor, or
giver, shall have it.

And this by the statute of Westminster. 2. C. 1. being restrained from all
alienation (to the prejudice of the Issues) and that so as by the very words
of the Statute, a reuersion depends upon it; is now become, and made by the
construction of that Statute, a new kind of estate, divided from a fee simple,
and called an estate Tail. Which name for plainness sake we use hereafter,
calling the other only a fee simple. And the name of Inheritance we apply
indifferently to them both. In which sense all common use does take those words.

Statutes.
Westminster 2. cap. 1. The Will of the giver (according to the form in the Deed
of Gift manifestly expressed) shall be from henceforth observed. So that they
to who^ the land was given under such condition, shall have no power to alien
the land so given, but that it shall remain to their issue after their death,
or shall reuert to the giver or his heirs (if issue fail) neither shall the
second husband of any such woman from henceforth have any thing of the land so
given, upon condition after the death of his wife (by the Law of England) nor
the issue of the husband and wife shall succeed in the Inheritance: but
immediately after the death of the husband and wife (to who^ the land was given)
it shall return to their issue, or to the giver or his Heirs, as aforesaid.

34. and 35. H. 8. cap. 20. No common recovery of lands in tail, of the gift
or other provision of the King or his Progenitors, (though it be with voucher
against tenant in tail, the remainder or reuersion being in the king at the
time of the recovery) shall bind the heir in tail, or bar him of his
entry. Tenant in tail shall take no advantage for any recompense in value
against the vouchee or his heirs.

Hither belong hereditaments given in frank marriage; that is to say, freely
in marriage with ones Kinswoman.

For the very word Frank marriage implies Lit. 4. and 60.
an inheritance to the Donees, and the heirs of their two bodies begotten.

But land cannot be given in Frank marriage H. 8. Br. ^^an. 10.
with a man that is Cosen to the Donor, but always with a woman.

Absolute, is a fee simple to one and his heirs whatsoever: which discending
to femals (if one of them have lands of the same Ancestor by frankemariage) she
shall have no more unless she be content to put those lands in Hotchpot; that
is, that the value thereof be allowed to the other.

As if x. acres were given to her in Frank Lit. 59.
marriage, and xx. acres more (all of equal value) descend from the same donor,
she putting all together that that value may be known, shall retain her own
x. and have v. acres more.

But if the lands descend from the father of Lit. 61.
the Donor, or other Ancestor, and not the Donor himself; she shall have her
part in that which discendeth, without putting in Hotchpot: for she is not
advanced by him, but by the other.

No more shall any Hotchpot be, but in Lit. 61.
lands given in frank marriage. For if a woman have lands by any other gift,
she shall have her part of that which discendeth, as if no such gift had been.
And the reason of all this is, for that (if she will not put the Lit. 59.
land in Hotchpot) the Law intends that she holds her self sufficiently
advanced. And note, that upon the Hotchpot, the lands given in frank marriage
must always remain to the Donee.

To this place are to be referred Lands given to a Corporation, which go in
perpetual succession.

And therefore Lands given to a Mayor a 27. H. 8. 15.
Comminaltie, without saying, And to their successors, is a Fee simple, and
though the Grant be for their lives. For those are void words.

And a color in an Action of Trespass, 21. E. 4. 66
cannot be given in a Corporation by a lease for term of their lives: for
being a Body politic (which never dies) they cannot have such an estate.

Here two special estates for life; dower, and Tenancie by the courtesy of
England, do arise after ones death that has an inheritance joined with the
Freehold.

For they 9. El. C. B.
may be of a reuersion depending upon an estate for years, and consequently of
the rent, if any be reserved. But 40. E. 3. 15.
not where one has an estate for life, the remainder to another in tail, the
remainder to his own right heir: whether it be a fee simple, or such an
estate tail as may go to the issue had between the Donees; that wife, or
that husband (if the Donee be a woman.) As if lands be given to a man Lit.
chap. of dower.
and the heirs that he shall beget of the body of his wife; the same wife
shall be endowed, but not a second wife. And of lands given to a woman and the
heirs of her body begotten by the husband, her husband may be tenant by
courtesy, but not a second. So of 4. El. Pl. 239.
landss given before the Statute of West. 2. to a man, and a woman, and the
heirs of their two bodies; the second wife shall not be endowed, nor the
second husband be Tenant by courtesy, for their issue cannot inherit. But in
both cases the wife Lit. chap. of dower.
of every issue (inheriting by force of that gift) shall be endowed, and the
husband of every such issue may be tenant by courtesy. So of Lands given to a
man and the heirs of his body, or to a woman and the heirs of her body,
whatsoever wife the husband takes may be endowed, and whatsoever husband the
wife takes may be Tenant by courtesy.

Dower is an estate whereby the woman Let. 7.
has the thirds in seueraltie, who must be nine years of age at the time of
her husbands death. Detaining of deeds 9 F. 4. 47.
concerning inheritance descended to the heir, is a bar of her Dower, so
long as she deteineth them: but 2 H 7 6.
so it is not of lands purchased by the heir.

If the husband at the Church door, Let. chap of dower.
(which is called an endowment, ad ostium Ecclesia, or, being So he must be.
Littlet. 8.
heir apparent by the fathers or mothers consent, which is called an
endowment, ex assensu patris or F. N B. 150.
matris, etc. for the 8 E. 2 dower. 154.
Son must make the endowment, and they assent, do Park. 86.
presently upon affiance, not 44. E. 3 43.
before espousals, endow her of any certainty, as of the whole moity, or less
part, etc. this shall bar her of the thirds if she agree to it. But so shall
not an endowment, ad ostium F. N. B. 150.
camera, nor, ex assensu fratris, or consanguinei: F. N. B. 150.
Therefore it is at her election after her husbands 21 H. 6. 25.
death to hold her to this endowment, or to take her Dower at the Common
Littlet. 8.
law. And in such endowments the wife may enter after her husbands death,
without any bodies assignment, (because the certainty of the land which she
shall have appears) which in dower at the Common law she cannot.

Statutes.
Magn. Chart. cap. 7. The wife, after the death of her husband, shall abide in
his chief message forty days, within which time, her dower shall be
assigned her If the chief message be a Castle, then she shall have a
competent house provided her till her dower be assigned.

Westminster. 2. cap. 34. A woman that leaves her husband, and abides with an
Adulterer, shall not have dower, unless the husband (voluntarily, and without
coertion of the Church) reconcile himself, and suffer her to inhabit with him.

11. H. 7. cap. 20 If a woman that has an estate in dower for life, or in
tail jointly with her husband, or only to her self, or to her use in any
lands, etc. of the inheritance or purchase of her husband, or given to the
husband and wife by the husbands ancestors, or any seized to the use of the
husband or his ancestors, do sole (or with an after taken husband) discontinue
or suffer a recovery by couin, it shall be void. And he to whom the land ought
to belong after the death of the said woman may enter (as the woman had been
dead) without any discontinuance or recovery: Provided, that she may enter
after the husbands death. But if the woman were sole, the recovery or
discontinuance barreth her for ever

This act extends not to any recovery or discontinuance with the heir next
inheritable to the woman, or by his consent of Record enrolled.

27. H. 8. cap. 20. Where an estate is made in possession or use to husband and
wife, and his heirs, or the heirs of their two bodies, or to them for their
lives, or for the wives life for her Iointure, she shall not have any dower:
upon a lawful euiction of that Iointure, she shall be endowed according to the
rate of land of her husbands, whereof she was dowable.

Such a jointure being made after marriage, the wife (after her husbands death)
may refuse it, and betake her to her dower, unless the Iointure be made by Act
of parliament.

Tenancie by the courtesy of England is ^^ estate, whereby of an actual
possession, the husband that had issue by her borne Lit. 7.
alive (whether the issue be male or female, heard, or seen, and whether it
afterward die or live, or if 28. H. 8. Dyer 25. Fitz.
the issue be borne alive, it is sufficient, though it be not heard to cry
(in as much as he may be borne dumb) shall have the whole.

But no tenancie by courtesy shall be of a Park. 90. and 89.
possession in Law. As where lands descend to the wife, and she dies before
the entry by her, or her husband, or any for them. Nor of a thing in suspense:
As where tenant in fee of the Land, marries a woman that is seized of the
seigniorie in fee; the husband can never be tenant by the courtesy of the
Seigniorie: for by the intermarriage it is suspended. And it is called tenancie
by the Litt. 7.
courtesy of England, because no other Realm uses it.

CHAP. 4.
Of Land.

HEreditaments, or tenements, or bare hereditaments.

A tenement is a possession holden, the fee simple whereof, when he that has it
dies without heir, comes to the Lord. Litt. 2.


Which is called an escheate. As if Land descend from the father, and he die
without an heir of the part of the father. Or a Bastard 39. ass pl. 7.
purchase land, and die without Issue.

Of this sort are lands and Adnowsons.

Land is a tenement or manuell occupation.

For if the tenant of twenty acres of land 21. H. 7. 39.
before Quia emptores terrarum, make a feofment of one of the acres, to hold of
him by vj. d. and dies without heir; the Lord shall have a Writ of Escheate,
supposing that he held of him xjx. acres, and vj. pence rent, yet indeed he
held not the rent but the land: And in his count he shall declare all the
special matter. So in a Writ of Ward of the heir of the mesne; the Writ shall
suppose the rent to be holden, and declare specially. Or he may have a
general Writ of the F. N. B. 139 c.
land, or a special Writ, because the Mesne held the land vnde redditus ille
prouenit. All which proves, that indeed not the seigniorie, but the land is
holden. Therefore of land rent etc. the pleading is, he was seized of his
demesne as of fee. But an aduowson lies not in manuell occupation: therefore
Lit. 3.
the pleading there, is, He was seized in fee, without saying in demesne.

Under the name of land are comprehended not only gardens, meadows, pastures,
woods, rivers, etc. but also messuages, tofts, mills, Castles, and such like.

For in a Praecipe quod reddat of a message, the warrant of Attornie, is quod
talis Po^lo suo (i.) posuit loco suo I. S. in placits terrae.

Churches and Churchyards belong to 11. H. 4. 12.
the Incumbent.

For things annexed to the Church or Glebe: as trees or grass growing there,
are the Parsons; and he shall have an Action for them, and for entry into the
Churchyard or Glebe. And if he be eiected out of 38. H. 6. 2^.
his Church, and another take the profits, he may have an assise of the
Rectorie, Church yard, and Glebe: for it is his Freehold.

Prescription here is of no force. For it makes no right in land, but in rent
or profit Doct. Stud. 16.
out of land.

Prerogative.
All land is holden of the King immedidiately, or by means: himself having
not 50. Ass. pl. 1. 18 El. Ploy. 498.
any higher upon earth, of whom to hold.

Escheates of all cities appertain unto 8 E. 3. Escheat 12. 8. El. Ploy. 314.
the King All mines of gold and silver or wherein the gold and silver is of the
greater value, are the Kings.

Among coparceners the eldest upon partition 14. H. 3. stat. Hib. does so
recite it.
shall have the chief house.

Seisin delivered of land, we call it liuerie of seisin; and the making of the
estate we call a feoffement, always passes a Free Lit. 137.
hold, though he be but Tenant for years, at will, or sufferance, that makes
it. And 4. E 6. Ploy 25. Lit. 12.
otherwise a free hold of land cannot pass save by release Lit. 109.
and confirmation, Lit. 121.
where they were by way of enlarging an estate. As a lease for years, and
afterward release or confirm to the Lessee, to have and to hold to him for
life, or to him and the heirs of his body, or to him and to his heirs, etc.
for a feossement with liuerie made by one to his Tenant 22. H 6 43.
at will, or 22. E. 4. 38.
for years, is void, except it be by Deed, and then it shall inure by way of
confirmation.

Exchanges, Lit. 13.
indowments, Br. Dower 7.
and surrenders. 44. Ass pl. 3.


Liuerie within the view, so we call An estate made within view of the land,
be it by delivery of a Deed of feoffment within 38. E. 3. 11.
the view, or otherwise, is a good Liuerie of seisin, if the other enter in the
feoffors life time: else the land discendeth to the heir of 2. H. 8. Br.
feoff. ^0
the feoffor, and the feoffment shall never effect.

CHAP. 5.
Of Aduowsons.

ADuowson is the interest of presenting 15. H 7. 8.
to a Church.

And this also lies in tenure. For a common person may give it to hold of him.
And the Writ of Right of Aduowson is, Quod clamat tenere de te.

CHAP. 6.
Of Seigniories.

HItherto of Tenements.

Bare Hereditaments are those which are not holden, and concern the land or
persons.

Those that concern the land, are extinguished or gone for ever when he that
has them has also the possession of the Land that they concern, in as high
and continuing an estate as he has the hereditaments:

Otherwise they are but suspended or gone for the time.

As if the Lord purchase the Tenancie in 34. Ass pl. 15.
fee, and though it be to him and another, and that other survive For his
estate is as high in the tenancie as it was in the seigniorie.

But if one that has a rent charge in fee, grant it for life to the Tenant in
fee of the land, ot in fee to the Tenant for life, of the land, that is by a
suspensio^ of the rent. And therefore Abridgment of Assizes
in the first case it may be with a remainder over, and Park.
in the second the Tenant may grant it in his life, and his heir shall have it
after his death. For the estate was not so high in the one as in the other.

So if a man that has a rent charge in fee going out of land, entermarrie with
a woman Tenant in fee of the land: or if the Tenant infeoffe his Lord upon
Condition. For there in the first case the husband may 5. E. 3. 16.
grant this rent, notwithstanding the entermarriage: and in the second case, if
the tenant Park. 19:
enter for the condition broken, the seigniorie is revived. For the estates are
alike perdurable.

These are leuiable by distress, or such as cannot be distreyned for.

Distress is a taking of chattels As 2. H. 4. 15.
a Cart full of Corn, a fold 20. E. 4. 3.
of Sheep, etc. a 14. H. 8. 25.
Mill stone, etc. if it be not part of the Mill, though it be fixed to a
piece of timber with nails, windows, and doors, when they are removed off
from the hooks. But a Millstone, though it be lifted up to be picked and
beaten: yet so long as it lies upon the other stone, remains parcel of the
mill, and cannot be distrained. No more can windows and doors hanging upon the
hooks, though they be remoueable, found upon the same land, but in 9. H. 6.
9. 13. E. 4. 6.
other land not holden of him, he cannot distrein for his seigniorie except it
be by the Tenants grant, for satisfaction of arrerages for dismes let reserving
a rent, cannot be distreyned for the re^t, not when they are severed from the
ninth part, in as much as 11. H. 4 40.
there is no distress but upon Land in Demesne, neither could a distres be
taken upon 3. Mar. Pl. 154.
^ Pistarie, but that it contains land and demesnes.

Prerogative.
The King may distreine in another 9. H. 6. 9. 13. E. 4 6.
land of the same man's for his seigniorie or rent charge, but so shall not his
Grauntee. 9. H. 6 9. is, That a common person cannot distreyne for his
seigniorie, but in the land holden of him, except it be by his Tenants grant.
But the King may in any place. 13. E. 4. 6. is, That the King for his services
or for a rent charge, may distreine in all his Tenants lands. But so shall not
the Kings Grantee.

Statutes.
Marlb. cap. 15. Distresses shall not be taken in the High way or Common
street; but by the King or his Officers having special authority.

Artic Cler. ca. 9. Nor in the ancient fees of Churches.

The distress being put in pound ouert, or open pound; that is, some place
where the owner may lawfully come at them, as if they be things that have life,
to give them meat etc he that distraineth shall not be 9. E. 4 2.
charged, what hurt soever they receive. for quick Chattel must be put in pound
ouert, that the owner may give them sustenance: dead, need not. But if they be
marred in his default that distreyneth, he shall answer for them.

Statutes.
Marlb. cap. 4. None shall lead distress out of the County where they were
taken. The neighbor that does it to his neighbor, shall be fined. The Lord that
does it to his Tenant, shall be amerced.

1. and 2. Phil. and Mar^ cap 12. No distress of Cattle shall be driven out
of that hundred, rape, wapentake, or lat^, where it was taken: except to a
pound ouert within the Shire, not above three miles from the place where it was
taken. No distress taken at one time shall be impounded at several places,
whereby the owners shall be constrained to sue several repleuies, the pain of
both these v. l. and treble damages. No person shall take above iiij. d. for the
poundage for any whole distress impounded: and where less has been used,
there to take less, upon pain of v. l. and loss of the money he he has
taken above iiij. d. any prescription notwithstanding.

Bare heredieaments that may be distrained for, are a Seigniorie, and
Rentcharge.

Seigniories are services whereby lands are holden.

Services are common to all certain Estates, or proper to Inheritances.

Common, as fealty, and rent service, whereof fealty is incident to every
such estate. For Lessee for life or years, shall do Li^^tlet. 29.
fealty of common right.

But Tenant at will shall not, because he has no sure estate. And therefore
the seigniorie Lit. 23.
or tenancie being altered (whether by descent or grant) it must be done anew.

All other both common and proper) grow by reservation.

Fealty is an oath to be faithful to his Lit. 19.
Lord for the tenements.

Rent service is a rent to be paid to the Lord at certain set times.

And to this place we may refer al services that lie in fesance. As to be
ones butler, Park 12.
to cover his house, to scour his ditches, etc. But a reservation of things in
prender or vser, as to have Common for four beeues, or four cart loads of
wood, makes no Tenure.

Of which kind, two among the rest are specially to be considered; that is to
say, frank almoigne and divine service.

Frank almoigne is, when a man of the Church holds freely in alms: For if
an Abbot, tenant in Frank almoigne, alien to Littlet: 31.
a secular man, he shall do fealty to the Lord, because a secular man cannot
hold in frank 7. E. 4. 10.
almoigne. And the Tenant in this case holds of the Donour, and is within his
fee. For the Kings grantee of straies infra seoda sua shall have them in lands
holden of him in frank almoine. And the tenant shall have against him a Writ
of mesne, or Ne unjust vexes. And if the Abbot tenant in frank Almoine, and
all the monks die, the lord shall have the escheat; for the which he is bound
to say prayers, and these prayers are the services But because the prayers are
not limited in certain, he neither shall do fealty, nor is subject to
distress or Cessauit, if they be not done.

The Lord must warrant such a tenant against himself and his heirs, and save
7. E. 2. ga^ 79. Lit. 32. for aquit.
him harmless of all manner of services against the Lords above, which we
call acquitaile.

Divine service is a spiritual kind of service Litt. 30.
limited in certain. As to distribute in alms to an hundred poor men, an
hundred pence, etc.

These are the services whereby every certain estace may be holden.

There follow those proper to Inheritances.

The grantee whereof shall hold of the grantor by such services as he holds
over, if other services be not reserved. As if Park. 134.
there be Lord, and tenant by Knights service, and the tenant before the
Statute of Quia emptores terrarum infeoffe a stranger of the Tenancie, without
any thing reserving: Now the feoffee and his heirs shall hold of the feoffor
and his heirs by Knights service.

Or the grantor may appoint him to hold of the next Lord. As if before the
Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, there were Lord mesne and Tenant, and the
tenant infeoffe a stranger to hold of the mesne; this is good, and the feoffee
shall hold of the mesne by the same service that his feoffor held, and the
feoffor cannot reserve new services, for to them the mesne is a stranger. But
if the feoffement were to hold of the Lord paramont, that were void. So if the
feoffment were to hold of any other stranger.

Statutes.
18 E. 1. Quia emptores terrarum. In all feoffements to one and his heirs, the
feoffee shall hold his land of the chief Lord of the fees by the same services
that the feoffor held before. If the feofment be made of parcel he shall hold
of the chief Lord pro particula, according to the quantity of the land, and
the feoffor set free for the part.

A mesne, that is, he that holds over if it be by no greater services than
the tenant holds of him, we call it oueltie of services, whether they be the
same as each of other by xx. s. or less as he by xx s. and the tenant of him
by xxx. s. must acquit the tenant of all manner of services against the lords
paramout.

But Donees in franke-marriage cannot hold but by fealty. And therefore a gift
in franke-marriage, rendering a rent, the 4 H. 6. 22.
reservation is void, for it is contrary to the nature of a franke-marriage,
which is, to render nothing till the fourth degree be past. Some think the
reservation good, and the franke-marriage thereby destroyed. Old tenures, Fol. 7.
But all agree, that the franck-marriage and the reservation cannot stand
together. And that of the donor till the fourth degree be 17. E. ^.
past. And therefore a gift in frank-marriage, the remainder in tail to a
stranger, is a good frank-marriage, for the reuersion of the fee is in the
donor, which makes a tenure between them: otherwise it is, if the remainder
were in fee. who must also Littlet. 4.
acquit them of all manner of services. And therefore the Donees in
frank-marriage 12. H. 4. ^.
may have a Writ of Mesne.

Prerogative.
One that holds of the King, as of his 30. H. 8. Die. 44.
person, which is a tenure in chief. But if a Prince of Wales, before Statute
of Quia emptores terrarum, make a feoffement to hold of his person, and after
is made King, this is no tenure in chief, for a tenure in chief is the higest
and most honorable service in law, because it is to the chief head of the
body of the Realm, and therefore must be immediate unto the King, and take his
original creation from the King himself, not from a subject. So to hold of
the King, as of his honor of Gloucester is no tenure in chief; for it is not
of the Kings person, alienating the Freehold without (a) 14. E. 3. Q* impedit.
54.
license, forfeiteth the Land.

Statutes.
Mag Chart. cap. 31. By a common Escheat. of a Baronie, etc. to the king, the
Tenant shall not hold in chief.

1. E. 6. cap 4. No more when a Seigniorie comes to the King by treason or
dissolution.

1 E 3 cap. 12. The King from henceforth shall not hold as forfeit such lands
if they be alienated, but shall have a fine for them in the Chancerie.

Services proper to estates of inheritances, are homage and suite of Court. For
Tenant for life shall not Let. 19.
do nor take homage, but only tenant in fee simple or in tail, in his own
or another right. As the husband for lands that he so holds in the right of
his Wife, if he have an issue by her, shall do homage in her life time; but
not after her death, if he holds himself in as Tenant by courtesy. Neither can
a man at this day make a manor 23. H 8. Br. comprise 31.
notwithstanding that he give Land to many severally in tail, to hold of him
by services and suite of Court, for he may make a tenure but not a Court, for a
Court cannot be but by continuance time out of mind.

Homage is an oath of fidelity, acknowledging Lit. 18.
himself to be the Lords man: wherein the tenant must be ungirt, uncovered,
kneel upon both knees, and hold both his hands together between the lords
hands sitting before him. This is to be Lit 9.
done only to the Lord himself. But the Lords Steward or Bailife may take
fealty Lit ibid.
for him, and but once during the Tenants (a) Lit. 33. b. 24. H. 8. Br. Br.
foaltie 8.
life. So as having done it once, he neither shall do it again to the heir
of the Lord, or grantee of the services, nor to the same Lord, if other lands
do afterward descend to the Tenant that are holden by homage of him. And
though it be in the Kings case.

Prerogative.
The Kings Chamberlain shall take homage F. N. B. 256. ^.
for him.

Statutes.
33. H. 8. cap. 22. A fee set down for respiting 14 H 3 Stat. Hib. so recites
it.
of homage in the Exchequer or other Courts.

When an inheritance descends to coparceners, the eldest only shall do
homage,

Prerogative.
But if they hold of the King, all of them must do it.

When one and his Ancestors, whose heir he is, have held by homage of a Lord
and his Ancestors, whose heir the Lord is, time out of mind, and the Lord
has received homage, for the Alienee of Tenant Lit. 33.
by homage ancestrell, holds not by homage ancestrell, nor shall have
warrantie from the Lord, because the continuance of the tenancie in the Tenant
is discontinued. No more shall the Tenant himself by homage ancestrel, if he
alien in fee, and afterward take it back again. And if the Lord by homage
auncestrell 18 H. 6. 2.
grant his seignorie, the Tenant need not atturne, unless the grauntee will
warrant the land to the Tenant and his heirs, for otherwise his warranty were
lost, because by atturnment the homage auncestrell is destroyed. that binds
him to warrant 45 E 3. 23.
and acquit the Tenant. And the tenant 11 H 4. 52.
may have a Writ of mesne. But if the Lord Lit. 33.
have not received homage, he is not bound. Therefore such a one may compel
the Lord to receive his homage by a Writ de homagio capiendo. 45 E. 3. 13.


Suit of court is a service by coming to the Lords Court. For suit of Court
Old tenures. F^l. vlt.
one shall be distreyned and not amerced, which proves it to be suit
service. But for a suit real (which is to come to the Leet) he shall be
amerced and not distreined: yet a tenure to come to a leet or hundred, 12. H.
7. 17:
and to do there some special service, as to be a Crier, etc. is a good
service, but not suit service. And every suit service is d. 21. E. 4. 25*
intended to a Court Baron.

Land in the Lords hands (whereof several men hold by suit of Court) is termed
a Manor: the land considered apart from the service, is termed demesnes.

Statutes.
Marl. ca 9. None shall be distreined to do suite of Court unless he be
specially bound to it by his Charter of feoffement; except such as they or
their ancestors were wont to do it, forty years before the making of this
Statute, whether they were infeoffed by deed or without.

The eldest Coparcener shall only do suite of Court, and the other parceners
contribute. And where there be many feoffees, the Lord shall have but one
suite, and the feoffees contribute.

The particular kinds of services (whereby lands of inheritance are
distinguished) be Socage and Knights service: both draw unto them certain
commodities to the Lord, partly in the tenants life, and partly after his
death.

That in his life is a reasonable aid or portion toward the making of the
Lords eldest Son a Knight; and toward the marrying of his eldest daughter.
It is called aid pur fair fits Chiualier, 40. E. 3. 22.
and pur file marier. And if the Lord confirm to his tenant to hold by fealty
and certain rent, releasing all other services and demands; yet he shall have
reasonable aid, for it is incident to the services, and not released by those
words.

Statutes.
Westminster 1. cap. 31. Reasonable aid shall be twenty shillings for a whole
Knights fee, and as much for xx. l. land in Socage: and so after the rate of
more, more, and of less, less. The time of leuying it to make his son
Knight, must be when he is fifteen years old; to marry his daughter when she
is seven. If the father after the aid levied die before he marry his daughter;
the fathers Executors shall be charged to the daughter of so much as the
father received, or his heir, if his goods be not sufficient.

25. E. 3. cap. 11. Reasonable aid to make the kings eldest son a knight, or to
mary his eldest daughter, shall be levied of all Land holden of the King,
without mean, according to the rate in the former statute.

The other after his death are Wardship, and relief.

Wardship is the custedie of the body and Land of the heir within age, which
shall Fitz. guard 67.
be till xiiij. of a woman.

Relief is a portion to be paid by the heir to the Lord.

Socage is a tenure to be don out of war: Lit. chap. of Socage.
As if one hold by fealty only, or by fealty and certain rent, or by homage
and fealty, or by homage, fealty, and rent for all manner of services, or by
escuage certain, that is to say, by paying a certain sum of money, as half
a Mark, etc. and no more or less (howsoever the Parliament assesse it)
toward finding of a man for the war when the King makes a voyage royal
toward the Scots, etc. or by paying a certain Rent for Castle-ward, etc.

Where the next of Kin, to whom the inheritance cannot descend, As if land
descended of the part of the father, then the mother, or next cosine of the
mothers side: if of the part of the mother, then the father, or next friend of
the fathers side shall have the heirs wardship till xiiij. to the Heirs own
use. And therefore must render an account to the heir at his full age, of the
issues and profits of his lands, and of the value of his marriage, if he marry
him within fourteen years of age. And if he die before the heirs age of
fourteen, yet his executor shall not have the Wardship; no more shall the
husband after the death of his wife, Guardian in Socage. But if the wife be
Guardian in Socage, and the husband (or they both by indenture) let the land;
yet the wife after her husbands death may enter: for in as much as she has it
only in the right, and to the use and benefit of the Infant, the ordering and
directing of this land shall not be taken from her by any act of her husband.

Statutes.
Marleb cap. 17. Guardian in Socage may not do wast, exile, nor destruction, nor
give nor sell the marriage but to the commodity of the heir.

Here for relief the Lord shall have presently Littlet. ibid.
so much as one years rent amounts unto. As if the tenant hold of the Lord by
Fealty, and x. s. rent payable at certain terms of the year (as half
yearly or quarterly) then the Tenant shall pay unto the Lord x. s. for relief
over and above the x. s. that he shall pay for the rent, and that by and by,
without tarrying till the day of payment of his rent, and of what age soever
that the heir be.

Prerogative.
Tenure by Socage in chief gives the King primer seisin, or the value of that
la^d 33. H. 8. Br. Liuerie and onster lomaine 60. Stamf. prer. c. 35. H. 6. 52.
F. N. B. 250.
by a year, if the heir be of the age of xiiij at his ancestors death:
therefore there the heir shall be driven to sue his liuerie, but not if he be
under xiiij, at the death of his ancestor. And if being under xiiij he sue his
liuerie, it shall be vna cum exhibibus; but not if he sue it at xiiij. If one
hold of the Kings person to do something concerning war, but not to be
performed by the person of a man, as to give him yearly a bow, sword, dagger,
etc. it is called petty Sergeantie, and is but a tenure in Socage.

Knights Service is a service touching Lit. chap. of knight-seruice.
war to be don by the body of a man. As if one hold by Escuage uncertain, that
is to say, by being himself or some other for him with the King 40 days well
and conveniently arrayed for the war (if he hold by a whole knights fee; or
20 days if he hold by the moity of a knights fee, and so by proportion)
whenever the King makes a voyage royal into Scotland, etc. else to pay so
much money as shall be assessed by parliament. F. N. B. 83. c.
Or if a man hold of any Lord to keep his Castle in time of war (which is
called Castle-gard) or to blow a Horn in time of invasion by enemies, which is
called Cornage.

To all knights service homage is incident, 7. E. 4. 28.
but not unto Socage. Here the Lordship is the Littlet. 22.
Lords Lit. 72.
to his own use, Therefore his executors shall have the ward during the heirs
nonage Br. guard 111*
and that til xxj of an heir male. And therefore if the lord marie a male that
is his ward, before 21. yet he shall be in ward for the land til that age.

Statutes.
Mag chart. ca. 3. The lord shall take Homage of the heir before he have
wardship.

Marl c. 6. If one infeoffe his heirs within age to cause the lord to lose his
Wardship, and die, yet the lord shall have the wardship.

So when a fraudulent feoffement is made by a Tenant, upon condition to reuers,
after certain years, to him or his heirs, if the feoffees pay not a certain
sum, to the value, or more than the value of the Land. In this case the Lord
shall have a Writ, de custodia reddenda; and if (being able to auerre this
matter) he recover, yet the feoffees shall have the Land again, when the
heirs come to age. The Lord not being able to auerre this, shall render the
feoffees their costs and damages.

32. H. 8. Cap. 1. Two Iointenants or more, and the heirs of one holding of
the King, and he that fee dies, the King shall presently have the wardship and
marriage of the body of his heir, if he be within age. Saving to every woman
her dower of two parts of those lands, divided from the third part, as above
said, and not otherwise, and saving to the King during the Wards minority, the
reuersion of such Iointenants, and Tenants in dower.

Magna Chart. Cap. 3. The heir being made Knight within age, yet the land
shall remain in the Lords custody to the end of the term.

The wife shall be barted of her dower, both dower 2 H. 7. 6.
at the Common law, and dower 4 H. 3. dower. 174.
ex assensu patris, or, 11 H. 3. dower 187.
ad ostium ecclesiae, so long as she deteineth the heir from him. But in
pleading she must show 2 H. 7. 6.
the heirs name, and whether it be male or female.

Wardship of the body gives the Wards 2 H. 7. 9.
marriage to the Lord, as a thing of mere right, pertaining to him. And that
whether he will be married by the Lord or not.

Statutes.
Merton. Cap. 7. The Lord marrying the heir within fourteen years of age,
in such sort as he be disparaged, shall loose the custody and whole commodity
of the wardship, if the Wards friends complain of it.

The heir full of age shall satisfy his lord for the value of his marriage,
as much as any man would give, before he receive his land.

Merton. Cap. 6. An heir, after fourteen years of age, marrying himself
without the Lords license (who tendreth to him a couenable marriage) the lord
shall hold the land, after the heirs full age of one and twenty years, so
long till he may receive the double value of the marriage.

Westminster. 1. Cap. 22. The Lord may hold the land of heirs females, two years
after their age of 14. within which two years, if he marry them not, they shall
go quite, without giving any thing for the Wardship or marriage. And if they
will not accept a couenable marriage tendered by the lord, he shall hold the land
til xxj and over, till he have taken the value of the marriage.

4. and 5. Phil. and Mar. cap. 18. A woman above xij, and under xvj, agreeing
to a person that contracteth matrimony with her contrary to the form of the
stat. (which see fo. (...)) the next of her kin to whom the Inheritance
should come after her death, shall from the time of such assent, have all the
lands, etc. which he had at the time in possession, reuersion, or remainder
during her life.

If one hold sundry Lands of diverse Lords, the wardship of body goes to the
Lord of that land which the Tenant held first. Who is called a Lord by
prioritie, and F. N. B. 142.
the other by posteriority. And it is the feofment of the land which makes the
prioritie: for the pleading is, That he holds this land of him per antiquius
feoffamentu^, then he holds the other la^d of the other. Therefore if the
Tenant of Lands holden by prioritie, makes a feoffement in fee, and take an
estate back again in fee, this land shall be holden by posterioritie. But if
the lord by prioritie grant his seigniorie in fee, yet the tenure shall be of
the grantee by prioritie. So though the grantor take an estate of the Seigniory
back again in fee.

Prerogative.
The King shall have the wardship of body, 12. E. 3. prer. 23.
though the tenure of him be by posterioritie. But his Grantee of the Seigniory
shall not.

The eldest child 33. H. 6 55.
whether son or daughter, being heir apparent to the father, shall not be in
ward for his body during his fathers life. But if one having a son, take F.
N B. 143. l.
a wife seized of Knights service, and has another son by her, and after the
wife dies: this second son shall be in ward during his fathers life, unless
the husband be entitled to be tenant by courtesy.

Prerogative.
Tenure by Knights service in chief, gives to the King the wardship of all
other Stamf prer. 1. The stat. of prer* c. 1. 16. in this point but a
declaration of the Common Law.
lands also. And further, 33. H 8. Br. livery ouster lemaine 66.
primer seisin, or the value of them all by Stam prer. 14.
half a year (if the heir were in ward) by a whole year (if he were not) Br.
Relief. 12.
which primer seisine must be paid, and relief also.

Relief for land holden by Knights service, amounts to an C. s^ for a whole
Knights fee, to a C. marks for a Baronie; and to an C. pounds for an Earldom.

Mag. Chart. cap. 12. calls this old Relief, and according to the old
custom of the fees, which proves that statute to be but an affirmance of the
Common Law.

If the heir be within age at the Tenants Old Not. Bren per Br. releif. 13.
death, no relief shall be paid to the lords that are to have the Wardship.
And if one hold of several common persons by Knights service, the Lords by
posterioritie shall have no relief, because they are to have the Wardship of
the Land holden of them, though the Lord by prioritie only 24 E. 3. 24.
have the wardship of the body. But if in that case there be any Land holden
by Knights-seruice in chief, the heir at his full age shall pay relief to the
other lords. For there the King has the Wardship of all his lands.

Prerogative.
Grand Sergeantie, that is to say, Tenure ^. 33. H 8. Die. 44.
of the Kings person, for every grand Serieantie is a tenure in chief, being
of none but of the King, to do unto him a more special service whatsoever by
the person of a man, as to bear his banner or Lance, Lit. 34.
to lead his horse, to carry the sword before him at his coronation, to be his
sewer, butler, or caruer, to be one of the chamberlains of the receipts of the
Exchequer, or to find a man to war for him whersoeuer within the four Seas,
for if he can find none to do the service for him, he must do it himself, is
a b. 11. H. 4. 72. Lit 36.
special knights service in chief, where the (d) Lit. 35. 11. H. 4. 72.
king in stead of relief, shall have the value of the Land by a year.

CHAP. 7.
Of Rentcharge. Lit. 48.


REnt charge is a rent with liberty to distraine. As when a man seized of land
grants by a Deed Polle, or by Indenture, a yearly rent going out of the
same Land to another in fee or in fee tail, or for term of life etc. with
clause of distress* or makes a feoffement in fee by Indenture, reserving to
himself a certain yearly rent, with clause of distress.

CHAP. 8.
Of Rent Secke.

BAre hereditaments concerning land (for which no distress can be taken) are a
Rent secke and common.

A Rent Secke is a Rent without Lit. 48.
liberty to distreyne. As where a Rent is so granted or reserved as before,
without clause of distress.

When a Rent is granted for equality of partion among Coparceners, As upon two
houses, one worth xx. s. a year, the other worth x. s. allotted one to the one
coparcener, the other to the other; and that coparcener that has the house
worth xx. s. a year, to pay v. s. yearly to the other, this rent may be
distrained for though no such liberty be granted.

The grant of a seigniorie, rent charge, and rent seck, as also of the
remainder or reuersion of any of these, or of the land it self, is nothing
worth without Attornement, that is to say, the agreement of the tenant that
presently must be charged. As Lord, mesne, and tenant; the Lord grants his
seigniory, Lit. cha. attureme^t.
the Mesne must atturne, and not the tenant parauaile: for the Mesne is Tenant
to the Lord, Lord, and Tenant, the Tenant lets the Land for life, or gives
in Tail, saving the reuersion to himself: now if the Lord grant his
seigniorie, he in the reuersion must return to the grantee, and not the tenant
for life or in tail: for he in the reuersion is tenant to the Lord, and not
the other. But if the Tenant had let his land to one for life, the remainder in
fee, there upon a grant of the seigniorie, the Tenant for life must atturne;
for he is tenant to the Lord. So is not he in the remainder, whilst Tenant for
term of life lives. If lands be let for years, or given in tail, saving the
reuersion: Upon a Grant of the reuersion, the Tenant of the land must atturne.
And an Attornement may either be by words; as to say, I agree or am content
with the Grant; or I attorne to you, and become your Tenant by force of the
grant: or else by delivering to the grantee, a penie, half penie, or farthing
in name of Attornment, or by any other matter implying an agreement, as a
surrender to the grantee of the reuersion, praying in aid of him, etc. And if
such attornment be not to the grantee in the life of the grantor, the Grant is
merely void.

In the grant of a reuersion depending Lit. 128.
upon a Freehold, the Attornement of the Freeholder is sufficient, though he
be not the tenant that presently must be charged. As if lands be let to a man
for years, the remainder to another for life, and he in the reuersion grant his
reuersion to another; the Attornement of him in the remainder is sufficient.

CHAP. 9.
Of Common.

COmmon is a profit to be taken in another land. As 9. H. 6. 35.
feeding his beasts, etc. And if a man give to I. S. in frank marriage with his
daughter, Common for all his beasts, or other men's (if he should have none of
his own) to do his business yearly, and to feed with the beasts of the
gra^tor where they should go: there if the grauntor come afterward to have no
beasts, yet the Grantee shall have his common. But if the grant be
wheresoever the beasts of the grauntor go, etc. there the grantee shall not
have common, but when the others beasts are in common. Also upon a grant of
common throughout a manor, yet he shall not common in gardein, or land sowed,
etc. nor take his common with beasts that are ^ E 2. dower 123.
not commonable, as hogs, etc.

So of a common of estouers, that is to say, taking of reasonable house-boote,
and hay-boote, etc. And such manner of profits Ibid. 2. E. 2.
(though they be appendant to the freehold) cannot be parted. For if such an
heritage descend to parceners, one shall have the whole profits, and the other
Sisters an allowance. And the wife for her dower shall have but an allowance
only.

Statutes.
Merton Cap. 4. The Lord of wast woods and pastures, may approve against his
Tenant, if he leave sufficient common and pasture to his Tenant, with egresse
and regresse according to his land.

Westminster. 2. Cap. 46. Such a Lord may approve in like sort against his
neighbors which have common appurtenante, and for his Winde-mill; necessary
increase of Court, or Court-lodge.

Hither belongs chemin, or way over ones land from one certain place to
another, whether from close to close, or from his house, or the kings high
street, or church. and other Hereditaments of like nature.

CHAP. 10.
Of Villeines.

BAre hereditaments that concern the person, or merely of the persons
themselves, or by reason of the person.

Of the first sort are villeines. A Villeine is such a servant as himself, and
whatsoever he possesses, Land, 22. Ass. pl. 37.
rent, etc. but not things in action, as an obligation, debt, covenant, or
warranty made unto him, is the Lords 3 H. 4. 15.
if he claim it. But the wife which the villein marries after his purchase
of land, and before the Lord 19. E. 3. Dow. 171.
enter, shall be endowed. And if he make a feoffment before the Lord enter, the
feoffee shall retain it, and his Executors shall have the goods not claimed by
the lords in his life time.

Statutes.
19. H. 7. cap. 15. Upon a feoffement made to the use of a villeine, the Lord
may enter into the land it self.

Prerogative.
The Lord cannot seize his villein in the Kings presence. 27. Ass pl 49.


The children of a Villeine are also Villeines. And if one confess himself a
Villeine 18 E 4 30. b. 18 E 4 ibid. 19 H. 6. 32.
in Court of Record, the issue he had before are frank: but those born (b)
after are villeines.

Villenage begins by confessing a man's self to be one in a Court of Record.
41. E, 3 villen 6.
And therefore in a Praecipe quod reddat, if the Tenant say that he is Villeine
to I. S. and holds the land in Villenage; the demanda^t says he is frank,
etc. and he is found frank by the Jury: yet he remains a Villein to I. S.

A Villeine is set free, we call it manumission or infranchisement, when the
lord inableth him to possess any thing against 11. H. 7. 13. Lit^tlet 45.
himself. As by granting him an annuity, making an obligation or lease for
years unto him, or a feofment of any lands by deed, or without: and whether it
be in fee simple, fee tail, or for life. But to make a lease at will unto him,
is no infranchisement: for he has no certainty of his estate, seeing the Lord
may put him out when he will.

Statutes.
9 Ric. 2. cap, 2. In a suite by the Villeine against his lord, the lords shall
not be barred of their villeins, because of their answer in Law.

CHAP. 11.
Of Annuitie.

THose by reason of the person, are Annutties, and Corrodies, or Office.

Annuitie is a yearly rent to be Lit. 48.
had of the person of the Grantour. As upon an annuitie granted, or a rent out
of his coffers, or a rent out of land, without saying more. But if the Deed be,
That if A. be not yearly paid x. s. at Easter; he may distreine for it in the
Manor of D. This is a Rentcharge (for the Manor of D. is charged with a
distress) but no annuitie: nor the person of the Grantor charged because he
grants not any rent, but grants only that he may distreyne. So if by
express words he insert in the Deed of the grant of a Rentcharge, Prouiso
quod non extendat ad oner andam personam meam per breue de annuitate, etc.

CHAP. 12.
Of Corrodie.

COrrodie is a partition for ones sustenance. Be it bread, ale, herring, a a.
25. Ass. pl. 7. b. 31. H. 6. 16. Ass. 16.
yearly robe, or sum of money for the robe. So of a chamber and stable for
my horses, when the same is coupled with other things, as with a certain
messes of flesh, bread, ale, etc. But a chamber and stable themselves are not
any Corrodie. And in the first case they shall pass without liuerie and
seisin, but not in the other.

CHAP. 13.
Of Office.

OFfice is a duty of attendance upon a charge. And therefore the grant of an
office to an ignorant man that has utterly no skill at all, is merely void.
As if the king by his letters Patents make a Clark of the 5. E. 4 Rot. 66. per
Br. office 48.
Crown in the Kings Bench, which was never exercised in the Office, nor in any
other Office there, and so utterly insufficient to serve the King and his
people; the grant is void, and the Justices may refuse him. So is the
presentment of an unlearned man to a Church, merely void. Likewise the Non
feasance and the not attendance upon an 39: H. 6 31.
office, has a Condition in Law annexed to it. As if the Marshall suffer but
one voluntarily to escape (...) he prisoners, it is a forfeiture. But in
negligent escapes what shall make a forfeiture of the office, and what not,
both for the number of negligent escapes, and for the greatness and smalnes of
them (as if some that escape were committed unto him for surety of peace, and
were suspicious men) lies wholly in the discretion of the Court: and the King
may himself ^ H. 7. 29.
have an office: as a forestship granted to one in tail, the remainder to the
King, and his heirs is good: for although he cannot in respect of the Majesty
of his person, exercise the office himself; yet he may grant it over to one
that may exercise it.

Statutes.
5. E. 6. cap. 16. The office or deputation of any office, or any part thereof
which concerns the administration or execution of Justice, or the receite,
controllment, or payment of the Kings money, etc. or suertie of the Kings lands
or customs, or any administration of necessary attendance in the Kings
Custom House, or the keeping of the Kings places of strength, or the Clarkship
of any Court of Record, shall not be bargained and sold, or any reward or
agreement of reward taken for it, upon pain, that the seller, etc. shall
forfeit all his interest in the office or deputation, etc. And the buyer be a
disabled person, to occupy or enjoy the same: And all bonds, etc. to be
void, as against him by whom rhey are made. Provided, That all Acts executed
by any person offending before he be removed from his office, etc. shall
remain good.

This Statute extends not to any office of inheritance, nor to any
Parkership, nor to any offices to be given by the chief Justices of the Kings
bench, or Common place, or by any Justices of Assise.

CHAP. 14.
Of Franchises.

BEside the Hereditaments already handled 15 E. 4. 7. 4 El Pl. 219. 6. F. 3
per 30 H. 8. Die. 44.
there be certain other derived from the Kings Prerogative, which are termed
Franchises. For all Franchises are derived from the Crown: and therefore are
extinguished if they come to the Crown again, by escheat, forfeiture, etc. For
the greater drownes the less.

A franchise is a royal privilege in the hands of a common person: so we call
every subject: and is forfeited by misusing of it. As keeping Fair or market
upon Monday 22 Ass pl. 34.
when Wednesday is granted him: or keeping Fair upon two days when he has
but one granted: for that is a misuser. (But keeping market upon a Monday and
Wednesday, when only Wednesday is granted, is a forfeiture but of that which he
usurps more than is granted) Claiming a fair, etc. 2 H. 7. 11.
for two days by Patent, when only one is granted, is a forfeiture of both.
But if he claim one by Patent, and another by Prescription, and this latter
found against him; yet he forfeiteth but that day only. Misvsing 22. Ass. ibid.
of any point, where there be many in one Franchise, is a forfeiture of them
all. But not where the Franchises are several. But non vser of a market, etc.
is no forfeiture 2. H. 7. ibid.
of it, as it is of the office of the Clarke of a Market, and such like, which
of necessity must be used.

Statutes.
27. H 8. cap. 24. No subject shall have authority to pardon any felony, or
any Accessaries to felony, or any outlawrie for such offenses. Nor to make any
Justices of Air, Assise, Peace, Gaole-deliuerie. All original Writs,
inditements of Treason, Felony, and Trespass, and Process upon the same,
shall be only in the Kings name. And the Test in his name that has the
Franchise.

Every Writ and Enditement whereby a thing is supposed to be done against the
Peace, shall be supposed to be done against the Kings peace only, and not
against the peace of any subject.

The King shall have all fines, issues, amerciaments, and forfeitures lost by
any Officers of Franchises for non execution, or insufficient retornes of
process, or for any misdemeanor concerning their office, with many prouisoes
in the same statute.

The kinds of Franchises are diverse, and almost infinite.

Of such sort are the liberty of having a Court of ones own; of drawing
causes out 9. H. 7. 11.
of the Kings Court into his own. In the first case we call it tenere placita,
when he is to hold it before his bailif in such a place, and therein a man may
prescribe. (In the other case we call it Conisance of plea: and that lies not
in prescription but in dema^d, and is always of Record) of returning Writs,
etc. Also Warrens which a man 35. H. 2. (...).
may have in another land, as well by the Kings grant, as by Prescription. And
if the King grant to one Warren in his land, and afterward the grantee alien
the land, reserving the franchise. Markets, 2. H 7. 11. 22. Ass pl. 34.
Fayres, toll 9. H. 6. 45.
of every buyer for things he buyeth there, not 28. Ass pl. 53.
being for his own expenses, For 9. H. 6 45.
neither shall the seller pay toll, but the buyer: neither shall a man pay toll
for the things he brings to the Fair, but for the things he sells. But by
custom he may for every thing brought to the Fair, and for his standing also.
and whatsoever liberties and commodities else that (created first by the kings
special grant, or of their own nature belonging to him) are given to common
persons to have any manner of estate in.

CHAP. 15.
Of Chattells: where, of Testaments.

SVch the^ is the nature of an hereditament in his sundry sorts and kinds.
Chattells are possessions wherein there cannot be several estates.

All ones own Chattels real, as 20. E 4. 9.
a Lease for years, etc. and personal, as corn Park. 99.
growing upon land, but not trees, for they are parcel of the Freehold, etc.
whether in possession, or that any is indebted to him in, but not those he is
only to recover damages for, as in goods taken from him, or to be accounted
for. (c) Neither c. 7. El. Pl. 290.
could the Executor at the Common Law have an action of account or trespass De
bonis asportatis in vita testatoris, may be given away or devised by his
Testament. otherwise called his last Will: and the things devised are Legacies.

Testament is an appointment of some person, whom we call an executor, to
administer them for him after his death. For without naming Executors, or if
they all 37. H 8. B. test. 20.
refuse it, it is no Will at all: yet the legacies shall be paid in both cases,
and the Testament annexed to the Letters of Administration. But is a good will
of land though no Executor be named: for land is not Testamentarie And
Administration is it which makes an Executorship: That if one 3. N. 67.
make three Executors, and will that none shall administer but only one; this
one is sole Executor. Also this Administration is for the Testator and his use,
so as the Executors themselves cannot make their Will 19. El. Pl. 325
of these goods, nor 17. H. 8. 22. 21. H. 7. 29.
partition between them, etc. nor the husband which marieth a wife that is an
Executor, shall have those goods by intermarriage with her: neither shall the
Executors forfeit them by outlawrie. 10. E. 4. 1.
Therefore Executors represent the person of the Testator. So as a villeine
Executor may have an Action of Debt against Littlet. 41.
his Lord, for debt due to the Testator. And (a) 21 H. 6 30.
outlarie Excommengement, etc. is no dishablement (b) 42 E. 3. 13.
to bring an action as Executor. (c) 48. E. 3. 14.
And all of them are but one person: whereupon (d) 2. E. 3. Quid iuris clamat
upon it is, That the release or Attornment of one is good for both: that in an
Action (e) Till the Statute 9 E. 3. cap. 3.
brought against them, as debt, covenant, and such like; one cannot answer
without the other by course of the Common Law: and that they cannot have every
one by himself, a several plea in abatement of the Writ, etc. 36. H. 6. 17.


Yet their power, both for the time when, and the things which they shall
administer, may well enough be divided. As a man 32. H. 8. B. exe. 155
may make A. and B. his executors, and that A. shall not entermeddle during the
life of B. or make one his Executor touching his goods in D. and another his
Executor touching his goods in S.

Statutes.
32. H. 8. cap 1. He that has Lands, Tenements, or hereditaments in Soccage,
and none holden by Knight-seruice, or Soccage in chief, may devise all by his
Will in writing, or give all by an Act executed in his life. So may he that
has land holden by Soccage in chief, and other holden of a common person by
Soccage, and none holden by Knight service: saving to the king, primer seisin,
releife, suing of the same out of the Kings hands; fines for alienation, etc.
and al other duties for the Soccage in chief, as before has been accustomed.

He that has land, etc. holden by Knight service (whether he have other lands
holde^ of the King, or of any other person, by Knight service, or otherwise, or
not) may do the like for two parts in three to be divided in certainty, for
the advancement of his wife, children, and payment of his debts. Saving to the
King the Wardship, or primer seisin, of the third part, without any charge,
dower, etc. and fines for alienation.

He that has lands, etc. holden by knight service (whether of the King alone
by a Knight Service not in chief, or of a Common person, or some holden of the
King, some of a common person) and other lands in Soccage, may devise by Will,
or give by any Act executed in his life, two parts of that holden by knight
service, and all the Soccage: Saving to the Lord of the land holden by Knight
Service, the Wardship of a full third part thereof, without any charge, dower,
etc.

Provided, That every one shall sue his liuerie, relief, and heriot, as if
this Act had never been made.

34 H 8. cap. 5. The former Statute shall be extended to inhable devises or
other acts only of lands in fee simple.

And if the party that makes the Will or other Act, be seized in
Coparcenarie, or in Common, it shall be good for so much as in himself of right
is.

The wardship, relief, primer seisin, etc. shall be of lands that descend
immediately after the death of him that makes the will or other act, as well in
fee-taile as in Feesimple: and the devise of two parts residue shall be good,
though it be of all his fee simple lands. Such a will shall be good for two
parts (in case only where two may be devised) though it made for the whole, or
more than two parts.

Such Wills made by any woman covert, or person within xxj years of age, Idiot,
or non sane memory, shall not be good.

And so some other things there, for the explanation of the former statute.

Westminster 2. cap. 23. Executors from henceforth shall have a Writ of account, and
like action and process in the same Writ, as their Testator should if he had
lived.

4 E. 3. cap. 7. Executors shall have an Action for a trespass done to their
Testator: as of his goods and Chattels carried away in his life, and recover
their damages in like manner as he whose executor he is should have done if he
had lived,

The Executors must prove 21. E. 4. 24.
or make probate of the Will (to be a true one) in the Spiritual Court, and be
21. El. Pl. 54^
sworn to see it performed.

If many Executors be made, and one refuse; yet he may administer at his
pleasure, 21. E. 4. 23.
and the other must name him in every Action for any duty due unto the
Testator, and his release shall be a bar of the whole duty. And if he
survive the other Executor, he shall have the action, and not the Executor of
him that died.

Otherwise it is if they al refuse, for there 36. H 69.
the Testator dies intestate.

But an Executor once administering, As 9. E. 4. 47.
if he sell land in use, appoints by the will to be sold, and the money to be
disposed, etc. can never refuse after.

Executors must answer all certain duties of the Testators, But not for 11. H.
4 46.
a trespass done by him, burning of a Writing bailed unto him by Deed
indented; receipt F N. B. 117. ^. 2. H. 6. 12.
of rents, or occupation of other men's lands, as Bailife, having sufficient of
his Chattels which we call assets entermaines, to do it. And therefore shall
be charged of their own goods, if they waste the Testators.

But so, as duties that grow by specialtie 11. H. 7. 1^
are to be answered before other duties, and legacies to be last of al
delivered: without 21. E. 4. 21.
which delivery, the deuisee can neither enter 20. E. 4 9.
into a Term, nor take 2 E. 4. 30. 37. H. 6. 30.
a chattell personal devised to him. But upon a lease devised for xx: years
to one for the fi^h x. years, the remainder or remnant of the term to
another: or devised to one for 20. El. Pl. 519.
so many years as he shall live, the remainder to another: a delivery to the
first Deuisee serves for him in the remainder also. 21. El. Pl. 539.
So, though it be but the occupation of a term, which is so devised: for the
occupatio^ and profits of the land is all one with land it self. But if the
occupation of a Book, 37 H. 6. 30. and per 20. El. Pl 521.
glass, or other Chattell personal be devised to one for life; and after his
death, to another in like sort: there a delivery to the first is no delivery
to the other; for their occupations are several, and in such Chattels
personal, the occupation is distinct from the property.

In these devises the Testators intent (standing with the rules of Law) shall
be taken. As where a man deuiseth Lands 1^. H. 7. 13.
(deuisible by Custom) to his son and heir after his wives death; the wife
has an estate during her life, by implication, in the intent of the devise. A
devise to one 27. H. 8. 27.
and his heirs males, is an estate tail. But 29. H. 8 Die. 33.
a devise to I. S. in fee, upon condition, if he pay not to I. D. a certain
sum of money, then I. D. to have it in fee; is a void Condition and
remainder, for it is contrary to Law. But a devise of the Fee-simple to Alice
S. and after her death to B. is only 19. El. Die. 357.
an estate for life, the remainder for life to B the remainder to Alice in fee.
So as the husband of Alice (if she die in the life of B) cannot be Tenant by
Courtesy.

The Executor of an Executor, is Executor 10. E. 2. Ex^c. 110.
to the first Testator, and may have an Action of Debt for the arrerages of an
Annuitie due unto him.

Statutes.
25. E. 3. Cap. 5. Statut. 4. Executors of Executors shall have Actions of
Debt, Account, and of goods carried away of the first Testators: and execution
of Statute merchants, and Recognisances made unto him.

If no Will be made, the Ordinary shall administer all the chattels that were in
his 7. El. Pl. 277.
possessions. For he which had the charge of his Soul in his life, is presumed
the fittest person to have the care of disposing his goods in pios vsus after
his death. And therefore the Ordinary may seize the goods and must keep them
without wasting, and may give, alien, or sell them at his will, and dispose the
money coming thereof ad pios vsus. And if he do not so he breaks the
confidence which the law reposeth in him. But yet this gift or alienanation
remains good by law. Howbeit being a spiritual governor he shall not be
subject to temporal suits, nor have any Actio^ of debt or otherwise for any
thing due to or by the intestate.

Statutes.
Westminster 2. cap. 19. The Ordinary shall answer for debts wherein the Intestate
was bound, as Executors should.

31. E. 3. cap. 11. The Ordinaries shall depute next friends of the intestate
to administer his goods, who shall sue and be sued, and be accountable to the
Ordinary, s as Executors should.

21. H 8. cap. 5. Administration shall be committed to the widow of the
Intestate or to the next of his blood, or to both, at the discretion of the
Ordinary. Where diverse persons next of the blood (which in deed are in
equality of degree with the intestate) claim administration, or where one only
claims it as next of the blood (where in truth diverse are in equality of
kindred, as aforesaid) the Ordinary shall be at his choice to accept one or
more, making request. Where but one or more, and not all (being in equality of
kindred) make request; the Ordinary shall be at liberty to admit the widow,
and him or those only making request, or any one of them, at his pleasure. The
Ordinary shall commit administration according to the rule aforesaid, upon
pain of ten pound.

The Statute Magna Chart. Cap. 18. is, That the Kings debts shall be levied of
the dead man's goods, and the surplusage delivered to the Executors Saluis
pueris, and vxori rationabilibus partibus, which proves that this rationabile
part was at the Common law.

But Magn. Charta cap. 28. 16. etc. v^ in F. N. B 122. l. ^ Br. ration part. 6.
whether any Will be made or no, his wife, and such children as are not
advanced by him in his life (as if a daughter be couenably married by him, this
is a (b) 3. E. 3. d^t. 156
sufficient advancement) shall have a part to their own use; that is to say,
one third of all (after his debts paid) to his wife, and the other to his
children. And a Writ de rationabili part bonorum is given to recover it.

CHAP. 16.
Of Chattels real.

CHattels, are Real, or Personal. Real; as terms for years, and wardships,
whereof we have spoken before.

CHAP. 17.
Of Chattels Personal.

Personal as Plate, Jewels, Silver, Gold, Implements of household, Cattle, and
all goods and moouables whatsoever, Corn sown upon the ground etc. For that
is deuisible by will, shall be forfeited in outlary of Park. 99. 5. H. 7. 10.
Debt or Trespass.

The ownership of a chattell personal, is termed a property, which of wild
beasts 3. H 6. 55. 12. H. 8. 3. 18. H. 8 2 For soul of Warrein.
both Fowls of the Air, Fishes in the Sea, Beasts upon the Earth, and
generally all Foul of Warrein, Feasants, Patridges, Dear, Conies, Hares, and
such like cannot be in any, and therefore it is no felony 12 H 8. 3. 18 H. 8.
2. 3 H. 6 55.
to steal them: and a writ of Trespass shall be Quare warrenam suam intrauit
and mill lepores cepit, without saying suos, Nor after they are made tame,
longer than they remain in ones possession. As my tame 12. H. 8. 3.
Hound that follows me, and is with my servant; my Hawk that is flying at a
foul; my Dear that is chased out of my Park or Forest, and the Forester
makes fresh suit: 12. H. 8. 11.
these all remain in my possession, and the property is in me: but if they
straie, it is 12. H. 8. 3. and 11.
lawful for any man to take them. Otherwise 18. H. 8. 2
it is of Hens, Capons, Geese, Duckes, Peacocks, etc.

Prerogative.
Treasure hid in Stamf. 10.
the earth, not upon the Earth, nor in the Sea, and 27 Ass. pl. 19.
coin though not hidden, being found 10. El Pl. 322
is the Kings: we call it Treasure-troue.

Cattle also that stray into another (d) 14 H 6. 5.
land are the kings after a year and a day, (e) 31 E. 3 estrar. 4
if being proclaimed at the Market in two (f) Br. Estray. 10.
several towns next adjoining the owner (g) 33. H. 8. Br. Estray. 4.
do not claim them. For if a Lord keep a stray three quarters of a year, and
yet within the year it strayeth again, and another Lord gets it, the first
Lord cannot take it again: for till a year and a day past, and Proclamation
made, he has no property. And therefore the possession of the second Lord is
good against him.

Goods wrecked are also his. Stamf. prer. 37. and D(...) B wreck^ 3 that this
was at the Common law.


Statutes.
West. 1. c. 4 Where a man, dog, or cat escape alive out of ships, it shall be no
wreck. But the things shall be prised by the Sheriff or Coroner, and delivered
to those of the Town where they be found, to answer for them. So as if any
within the year and day prove that the goods be his, they shall be restored to
him.

The King being Tenant in Common of an entier Chattell personal, shall have
10. El. Pl. 322.
the whole. As if an obligation be made to two, or two possessed of a horse,
and one is attainted, the King shall have the whole duty of the Obligation, and
the horse.

Goods that belong to an Alien enemy, 7. E 4. 13. 38. H 8. Br. deuisen 10. 8.
16. 20.
any body may seize to his own use. But an Alien borne in amity may have
property in goods, and buy and sell, and their bargains good: and may also
bring personal Actions.

The taking of goods by an Alien enemy 7. E. 4. 13:
in battle, deuesteth the property from the owner* if he come not before Sun
set to claim them.

Churchwardens are inhabled to have 12. H. 7. 27.
goods to the behoof of the Parish. For they are charged to find diverse things
belonging to the Church, as ornaments, and such like: And therefore in reason
they should be inhabled to purchase goods. And thereto extends their
Corporation. And all the Church goods, as 8. E. 4. 6.
books and ornaments, 11. H. 4. 12.
bells hung up in the Church, are theirs, and 11. H. 4. 12.
they may have an appeal of robbery of them, or a 8. E. 4. 6.
trespass, and count, to the damage of the parishioners. But they cannot give
or release them, for 13. H. 7. 10.
that is to the disadvantage of the Church. (f) 8. E. 4. 6.
And if they do, the Parish may choose new Churchwardens, who shall have an
Action of account against them. 12. H. 7. 27.
But churchwardens are not inhabled to take a feoffement, a lease for life, or
perhaps for years, or such other things as have continuance.

CHAP. 18.
Of Baylement and Contracts.

TO Chattels personels, Bailement, and Contracts do belong; Baylement is a
delivery of goods in possession, and is either to keep or employ. To keep
when only the custody is committed to him, and is a simple Baylement or
pledge.

A simple Baylement, when he receives them to keep for another: whether it
be 5. H. 7. 18.
for the Baylor to redeliuer him again: in which case the Bailor may retake
them without request: or for a stranger to bail 1. E. 5. 2.
them over to him. In which case, before such bayling over, the Bailor may
countermand the Bailement, and command the Bailee to deliver them him again,
and shall have an account upon refusal. For in neither of these cases the
property is out of the Baylor.

A pledge is when he receives them in 5. H. 7. 1.
assurance for another thing had of him at the time. As to take a chain of
gold for money then delivered, etc. but not for satisfying of a debt he owes.
But the property of the pledge remains in the owner; For he shall bear it
if it be casually lost or broken: and the other that has the pledge shall not
be attached by it, in as much as he is not owner.

The baylement of goods to employ, is, when the Bailee has the things
themselves to use to another profit. As to sell meliori modo quo poterit, etc.
Where, if he sell that for xij. l. which is worth 1000. l. and refuse a better
prise, the party has no remedy.

Contract is a mutual agreement for the very property of personal things
where the duty growing upon it cannot be apportioned. As if I sell my own
horse and the horse of I. S. to one for x. l. and I. S. takes his horse from
the vendee, yet the vendee must pay me the whole x. l. Of this kind of
contracts are buying and selling, borrowing and lending, and such like, and in
all these cases an Action of Debt lies.

The sale of another man's goods in open market (we call it market ouert)
without Couine or notice whose they are, alters the property if toll be
paid for it.

Hither belong certain (as it were) contracts in Low, though not arising from
the special agreement of the parties. As he that finds another goods is
chargeable by reason of the possession to him that right has: he that
receives money to ones use, or to deliver over to him, is chargeable as a
receiver. He that enters into land of his own head, and receives the profits
of it, or parents that occupies land purchased by an infant, are chargeable as
Bailifes. And if a Liberate be delivered to the Clarke of the Hamper, who has
assets in his hands, an Action of Debt lies against him. So does it upon
every judgment.

CHAP. 19.
Of Accord and Arbitrament.

THese are the things which belong to Chattels personal in general: for the
interest of personal things, uncertain, accord (otherwise called a concord)
and arbitrament lie.

As of a trespass done, for the damages are uncertain; but of debt or
damage recovered in certain, it is otherwise, unless it be joined with
trespass or other things uncertain: for then all put together, lie in
arbitrament or concord. So of Wast, detinue of charters of land, which are
things in the realtie, annuitie, etc. they lie not in arbitrament or concord.

Accord, is an agreement between the parties themselves: not by meditation of
friends; for then it is an Arbitrament upon a satisfaction executed: As for one
15. H. 6. accord. 1.
at his own cost to agree, I. S. and another, whom I. S. has trespassed; this
may be a satisfaction to I. S. Otherwise it is, if he do but endeavor to
agree to them. And this satisfaction must be executed: for a tender 17 E. 4. 8.
of money without payment, or an 6. H. 7. 11.
agreement to pay money at a day to come, is no satisfaction before the day
come, and the money be paid: nor shall be pleaded in bar of an Action of
Trespass: for upon an Accord, the party has no means to compel him to pay
it, as he has upon Arbitrament. But being paid at the day, it is a good plea
if the other afterward bring an Action.

Arbitrament is an award of satisfaction (c) 16. E. 4. 9.
by others whom they choose to judge between them, As to arbitrate because A.
19. H. 6. 36.
(one of the parties) has done a greater trespass to B. (the other party)
than B. has to him; therefore that A. should give B. money in satisfaction,
and B. be quit against him, is a good award. But that one shall be non suite
in an Action, is not good; for after non suite he may begin again, whereas
the Arbitrament (which must be in some sort a satisfaction for the damages)
ought in that respect to be a determination of things awarded. where the award
of a personal Chattell alters the property thereof. So as he may have a
detinue 2. El. Die. 183.
for it, or debt if it be of money, or such like, to he paid for 16. E. 4. 9.
a debt due, or 19. H. 6. 38.
amends of a Trespass. And therein an Arbitrament differs from an Accord.
But an award of an acre of land, etc. is not good unless the acre be delivered.

Et iam prima mei pars ex exacta laboris.
The third book of Law.
CHAP. 1.
Of a wrong without force.

FOr of possessions (the first and hardest part of Law) we have hitherto
spoken sufficiently. The other rests, which ministers Justice in the
punishment of offenses.

An offense is the doing of any wrong. And is a wrong without force, or to the
which force is coupled.

In those of the first kind, the offender is to be amerced, or to pay a petty
sum of money to the King. And 38. E. 3. 31. 9. H. c. 2.
if he be a lord of the Parliament (whom we call a Pier of the Realm) then a
C. s^. As if 38. E. 3. ibid.
ones writ abate, or if in 9. H. 6. ibid.
an Action of Trespass against two, for hunting and taking two Dear, one
Defendant be found not guilty, the other guilty of taking only one Dear;
here the plaintiff (if he be a Peer of the Realm) shall be amerced CC. s one
C. s against him that was found not guilty as all; the other hundred shillings
against him that was acquitted of one of the Dear.

The Kings wife shall never be amerced. 18. E. 3. 2. br. 355.
And therefore a writ brought by her is good enough, though this clause, Si
fecerit te securum, be left out, for she shall not be amerced for her non suite.

CHAP. 2.
Of Trespasses upon the Case.

Offenses without force, are trespasses upon the Case, or Real wrongs.

Trespass upon the case is such an offense, whereby any thing is indammaged:
And is a misuser or deceit.

Misuser, when by mere wrong it is indammaged. Of which kind there be many,
and those of diverse sorts. As if a man maliciously utter any false slander to
the indangering of one, in Law. As to say, He has reported that money is
fallen; for he 9. El. Vttings case.
shall be punished for such a report, if it be false. The touching of him with
some heinous crime, as that he has gone about to Sir Th. Cokains case.
get poiso^ to kill the child that such a woman goes with (yet it is no
felony;) lien So it has been adjudged
in wait to rob him; procured 26. El. Cracknel. 5. c.
another, or agreed 33. El. Cebot against Haines adjudged.
with another to murder him (though he were not murdered in Deed;) 27 El Hacks
c.
sought his life for his land, etc. or the impairing his trade of life; As to
call a merchant 27. El. Bartons case.
bankerupt (for it is his living, but so it is not of a gentleman;) an Attornie
26. El.
Ambodexter, or to say that he deals 27. El. Burc. c.
corruptly. But in all such cases, words of choler and heat, as to call one
cosoner, All th^se cases have so been adjudged or commonly received for Law.
13 H 7 per 11. El Die. 285. 30. H 8. Br. Act. sur case 104.
and crafty knave, common extorcioner, and drunkard, witch, rogue,
pillorie-knaue, villeine (unless he say villeine to such a man, or regardant
to such a manor;) words uttered in a suite in law, as to bring a writ of forger
of false deeds against a noblema^, or any other (though it be false) will bear
no Action; for these are not maliciously. So if he be able to justify the
words, for then (g) 7. El. Die. 236.
it is not falsely. As that he called him perjured, by reason of a perjury
committed in the Star Chamber, murderer, thief, or such like, upon a
Conviction; 31 El Nowels case
but not upon an Enditement or Common voice and fame, though the defendant
himself suspect him. if one having another man's goods, It has been oftentimes
adjudged, that in such cases the conversion is trauersible.
convert them to his own use: if a 7. H 6. 5. and 17. El. in Mans^rs c. no
action of debt lies upon it (at the Common Law) but an actio^ of trespass
upon the case.
Sheriff suffer one in execution for debt to go at large: if a Smith 48. E. 3.
6.
cloy my horse: but not if he take him to cure (without warranting of him) and
doing all he can, yet the horse impair. If being committed to the F. N. B. 93.
H.
Jail, the Gaolet of malice put upon me so many yrons, or otherwise use me so
hardly that I become lame thereby, etc.

Statutes.
Westminster 1. cap. 33. He that publishes any false news and tales, whereby
discord, or occasion of discord and slander may grow between the King and his
people, or the Nobles, shall be kept in prison until he has brought him forth
into the Court, that did speak the same.

2. R. 2. cap. 11. The like for him that tells false lies of Nobles and great
Officers of the Realm, whereby discord may arise between the said Lords and
Commons.

12. Ric. 2. cap. 11. In the case of these former Statutes, if the party cannot
bring forth him that spoke the same, he shall be punished by the advice of the
Counsel.

But two above the rest do here require more special consideration; that is to
say, Disturbance, and Nuisance.

Disturbance is the hindering of that which in right belongs unto one to do.
As for a man to use his Common; to reduce a watercourse that is misturned, to
present unto a Church, etc.

Nuisance is annoyance done to ones hereditament. F N. B. 184. a F. N. B. 184. d.
As leuying a Fair or market to the Nuisance of another Fair or Market,
building a house so near mine, that the rayn which falls from that house
falls upon mine, etc.

All manner of nusances are to be removed, and common nusances, As a wall, 33.
H 6. 26.
etc. built upon the Highway, trees 42. Ass pl. 5.
growing upon the river bank, whereby a watercourse is stopped, any man may
pull down.

Deceit, when the damage grows by F. N B. in his writ of Deceit.
an undue slight. As if a man purchase a writ in my name out of the chancerie,
I not knowing of it, whereby I am to pay a fine; or if one (whom I make my
Attornie in a plea of land against finee) make default, whereby the land is
lost: Or if in a Praecipe against diverse Tenants, a man purchases a protection
for one of them, supposing him to be beyo^d-sea in the Kings service, where
indeed he is and always has been in England, by means whereof the demandant
is delayed: or if in a Praecipe quod reddat, the Sheriff return the tenant
summoned, where in deed he was not, whereby he loses the land: or if in play
one win another money with false dice, or if he that felleth any thing do
upon the sale, warrant it to be thus and thus, whereby the other is deceived.
So that the warrantie must be parcel of the contract: for if it be 5. 7. 41.
after, (at another place) or 11. E. 4. 6.
a servant make the warrantie upon the sale of his masters goods (which in law
is the masters sale, and warrantie of the servant) it is a void Warrantie, and
no Action of deceit lies upon it. Also the warantie can reach but to things in
being at the time, not to things to come: as that a horse (c) will carry you
xxx miles a day: nor to things which man be discerned by my five se^ces to be
otherwise; as cloths of murry color to be blew, unless the buyer in this case
be blind. But where they are warra^ted to be of such a length, and are not,
there an action of deceit lies: for that cannot be discerned by sight, but by
a colaterall proof, the measuring of them.

CHAP. 3.
Of certain offenses punishable by amercement by the K. Prerogative.

CEertaine offenses against the law, are in nature of trespasses upon the case,
and by the kings prerogative punishable like to them. As suing an action
without just cause, or giving just cause of an Action: for So are all the
precedents.
in every actio^ where the matter passes against the plaintiff (be it by
verdit, demurrer, or otherwise) the plaintiff is to be amerced, and the def. in
det, detenue, covenant, repleuin, Quid iuris clamat, etc. 11. H. 4 45.
but not in trespass, for there he shall be fined and imprisoned. Nonsuit 22.
Ass pl. 32.
in an actio^, 7 H* 6. 36. 40. E. 3 20.
fault in the original writ he brings: or (by the Sherif) in the return of a
writ: making 10 E 4 Br. amerciament 46.
default when he should appear. (as the Jurors at the Habeas corpora) and
whatsoever other offenses (not being with force and arms) which offer no
direct injury to a common person.

CHAP. 4.
Of Discontinuance.

HItherto of Trespasses upon the Case.

A real wrong is that which medleth with the Freehold otherwise than it ought:
and is a Discontinuance, or Ouster.

Discontinuance, when he that has an estate Tail, or Fee-simple in another
right, As the husband in right of his wife. A Deau sole seized in the right of
his deanrie: Deane and Chapter, Gardeine, and Chapleines; as also Mayor, and
comminaltie of lands in the right of their Corporation. makes a larger estate
of the land than he may. As by a Fine or feoffement for life of the lessee, in
tail or in fee, which is called a discontinuance. But the Grant of a rent,
release, or confirmation to a lessee for years in fee, make no discontinuance,
for they pass without liuerie, and therefore pass no greater estate than the
Grauntor had.

Statutes.
32. H. 8. cap. 28. All Leases by deed indented for life or years, by any
person of full age, having an estate in fee or in feetaile, in his own right,
or in the right of his Church, or wife, or jointly with his wife, shall be
perfectly good.

This extends not to Leases of land in the hands of any farmour, by virtue of
any old Lease, unless the same be expired surrendered or ended within a year
after the making of a new; nor to the grant of any reuersion, nor to any lease
of land which has not most commonly been let, or occupied in farm by the
space of xx. years next before, nor to any lease made without impeachment of
Wast, or made for above xx. years, or three lives from the day of making. And
that there be reserved yearly payable to the lessours, their heirs and
successors, according to their estates, the rent accustomably yielded within
twenty years next before: which heirs and successors shall have the like
advantage against the Lessees, their executors and assigns, as the Lessor
himself might. Provided the wife be made party to every lease by the husband
of any land of her inheritance The Lease to be made by Indenture in both their
names, and she to seal the same, and the rent to be reserved to the husband
and wife, and her heirs, according to her estate of inheritance.

13. Eliz Cap 10. All grants, Feoffements, Leases, and other conueyances and
estates, by any Master or Fellows of a College, Deane and Chapter, Master or
Gardein of an Hospital, Parson, Vicar, etc. other than for xxj years, or three
lives, from the time of such lease or grant, reserving the accustomable yearly
rent, yearly payable, shall be void.

14. Eliz Cap. 11. The Statute 13. Eliz. Cap. 10. before, shall not extend to
grant assurance, or lease of any house in City, Borough, Town corporate, or
Market town, or within the Suburbs, (the same not being their dwelling house,
or having above ten acres of ground belonging to it.) Provided the lease shall
not be made in reuersion, and the accustomed yearly rent shall be reserved,
the Lessees charged with reparations, and it shall not be above forty years.
No alienation shall be of such houses, unless that presently upon such
alienation there be an absolute purchase in fee simple of other Lands of as
great value.

18. Eliz. Cap. 11. All leases made by such persons (as 13. Eliz. Cap. 10.
before) where another lease for years is in being, not to be expired,
surrendered, or ended within three years next after the making of such new
lease shall be void. All bonds and covenants for renewing or making of any
lease, contrary hereunto, or to 13. Eiz. Cap. 10. before, shall be void.

1. Eliz. not printed, the like (as 13. Eliz. Cap. 10. before) for Archbishops
and Bishops, unless it be of estates made to the King, his heirs and
successors.

32. H. 8: cap. 28. No fine, feoffement, or other Act by the husband only, of
any land being the inheritance or freehold of the wife, shall be a
discontinuance or prejudicial to the wife, or such as have interest after her
death: leases within the compass of this Statute only except.

Warrantie of an estate of inheritance, or for life, descending upon him that
ought to have such estate, makes a discontinuance. As if tenant in Tail of an
Aduowson in gross, suffer an usurpation by six months, the release of a
colateral ancestor with warrantie is a discontinuance, for he has fee by the
usurpation.

So it seems of a collateral ancestors release, with warrantie to the Grantee
in fee of a rent or aduowson in gross by Tenant in Tail. But if Tenant in
Tail of a rent or aduowson in gross grant it in fee, with warrantie; this is
no discontinuance, but at the pleasure of the issue.

Discontinuance takes away the entry of those that come to have title after
his death. If he (whose entry is barred by a descent or discontinuance) have
the freehold cast upon him by a new title, he shall be in of his ancient title:
which is termed a remitter. As if the heir of the disseisor Lit 152.
(in by disce^t) make a lease for life to I. S. the remainder for life or in
fee to the disseisee, if Tenant in Tail discontinue, and then 11. E. 4. 1.
disseise the discontinue, and die seized, whereby the lands discends to his
issue; if the husband make a feoffement in fee of land in 21. E. 3. 26.
the right of his wife, and take back an estate in fee to him and his wife. In
these cases the disseisee after the death of I. S. the issue in Tail, and the
wife suruiuing, her husband is remitted: but if the husband survive, her heir
is not; for there is another tenant of the Freehold, against whom he may bring
his Action. And in the case of Tenant in tail before, though the heir of the
Discontinue were within age at the time of the descent to the Issue in tail,
yet his entry is gone for eve, r by reason the Issue is remitted.

CHAP. 5.
Of Intrusion, Abatement, Disseisin, and usurpation.

OVster is, when the Freeholder is ousted, or put out. And therefore it gains
a Freehold unto the party.

This ouster is of a freeholder in Deed, or in Law. Of the first sort are
Intrusion, or Abatement.

Intrusion, which is after the death of Old Not. Br. 135.
Tenant for life, be it a man's own life, or another man's, Tenant in Dower, or
by courtesy, etc.

Abatement, which is after the death of 5 H. 7. 6.
one that has the Inheritance, whether the land descend unto his heir, or he
die without heir.

Of the second sort are, Disseisin and usurpation

Disseisin is the ousting of him that has Lit. 62.
a Freehold in Deed: which of a rent or other profit is by the disturbing of
him in the means of coming to it. As in every Lit. 52:
Rent, whether Rent-seruice, Rentcharge, or Rent-secke. Encloser and
Forestaller.

Encloser is, when the Tenant encloseth the Land, so as he cannot come to
distrein, or to demand it. But if it be a Park or such 99. E. 3. 15.
like, that has of ancient time been enclosed, so as it is not done of
purpose to keep him from his rent, that is no disseisin.

Forestaller is, when the Tenant besetteth the way with force and Arms upon
his coming. Of which nature also is the menacing of him, that for doubt of
some bodily hurt, death, or loss of member he dare not come.

In a Rent-seruice and rentcharge, Rescuous, and Repleuin.

Rescuous, when either the party having distreyued; the distress is rescued,
or being upon the land to distreyne, cannot be suffered.

Repleuin is, when an Action of Repleuin is brought upon a distress taken.

In a Rentcharge and a Rent-seck, denier.

Denier is, when the Rent (being demanded upon the Land) is not paid.

Usurpation is, when the Church becomes full by the presentment of a wrong
Patron: which is done by the institution of the party presented.

Prerogative.
But against the King, Induction only does it. Therefore at the Common law, in
a Quare impedit, Plenartie day of the Writ purchased, is a good plea, though it
be by institution only. And the Plenartie by six months (which barreth the
right Patron of his Quare impedit, by the Statute Westminst. 2. Cap. 5.) is
accounted from that time between common persons. So is it for the King when he
presents. And in these cases the Ordinary may certify a plenartie without
making mention of any induction, but of admission and institution only. But
against the King plenartie is accounted from the time of induction, and not
before. And if a Patron that holds of the King, present, and die after
admission and institution of his Clark, and before induction; the King shall
present a new. Otherwise it is in the case of a common person. But Plenartie is
no plea in a Quare impedit, against a person impersonee (that is, a Spiritual
Body politic, which being Patron, has the Church appropriated in
succession, (viz.) to hold to their proper use, without presentation,
institution, or induction of any incumbent) for his plea must be, That the
Church is full of his presentment, which a person impersonee cannot say.

Statutes.
Westminster. 2. Cap. 5. Usurpation upon Gardens tenants in Dower, or upon femes
covert, or houses of religion in time of vacation, shall not put the heirs
fems, or houses of religion out of possession. But faint recoueries shall not be
avoided in such cases by way of plea.

Plenartie is no plea in a Quare impedit, or darreine presentment, if the Writ
be purchased within vj months.

When one parcener presents in another turn, yet this gains no possession:
for the other may present when her turn comes again.

CHAP. 6.
Of Trespasses in goods.

SVch is the nature of an offense without force.

An offense with force is a Trespass (or offense) against the Crown. For in all
Inditements and Inquisitions, Stat. 37. H. 8. ca. 8. recites the Common law to
be so.
of treason, murder, felony, trespass, etc. vi and armis must be in, else it
is not good.

Trespass is a criminal offense punishable by a fine unto the King. So is
every contempt punishable: and for this reason no action of Trespass lies
for the Lessee for years, against the Lessor, (though he distreyne without
cause) for that the Statute of Marlebridge, cap. 4, is, That he shall not be
punished by fine and ransom; which if he be attainted in this action, he must
needs be, and for this the party must be imprisoned till he do compound.
Therefore after tender of his fine, the king cannot justly detain him in
prison.

Trespasses touch possessions or the person. Possessions, when the wrong is don
in them, namely in goods or land.

Trespass in goods, is the wrongful taking of them with pretense of title. And
therefore altreth the property of those goods. So as one cannot declare in an
Action of trespass, that the defendant took his horse at S. and carried him to
D. and there killed him against the peace, etc. For by wrongful taking, the
property being diuested out of the plaintiff, and vested in the defendant,
consequently it follows, that he cannot kill his own horse against the
peace.

CHAP. 7.
Of Trespass in Land.

Trespass in land is, when the trespass is done upon an actual possession
thereof. For of a trespass don 11. H. 7. 22.
after the death of the Ancestor, and before the heirs entry: after 1. Mar.
Pl. 142
breach of the Condition, and before entry for it: where a lease for years is
made, reserving a rent, upon condition to be void if the rent be not paid: or
after Michaelmas, and before the Lessees entry, where a lease for years is
made to begin at that day: no Action lies for the heir in the first case; for
the Lessor in the second, nor for the Lessee in the third. Because they were
Park 4.
not seized of the Land at the time of the trespass done; yet the Lessor in
the second case might have made a new lease before his entry; for the first
lease was merely void, and the Lessee in the last case, might before
Michaelmas grant away his term.

Where beasts or any other Chattells, shocks of Corn, or whatsoever else,
whether 21. H. 7. 39.
Conisance may be of them to bring a Repleuin, or not: that so the Trespass
may be distreyned by him that has damage by it. As one that has Common 15.
H. 7. 13.
out of land, though he have nothing in the land it self, so as he can have no
Action of Trespass against the owner of the beasts, for their entry into the
land, nor the grass wasted, etc. yet he may distrein them damage feasant,
because of the damage he sustaineth. But so cannot Cesti qui use: for he has
nothing at all to do in the land, save that there is a confidence between the
feoffees and him: but the feoffees may punish him by the Common law, if he
occupy the land, for he is but a mere stranger. And if a stranger of his own
head drive out beasts that are damage feasant, the owner of the beasts shall
punish him, for he is indammaged by this driving out, and the other has no
loss.

Hither belongs Eiectment, when a F. N. B. 220. f. 1. H. 6. 1.
termer for years of land is ousted: Whether by the Lessee or a stranger, but
not a Termer for years of beasts or other Chattels.

Prerogative.
Here (viz.) of land, which is a thing permanent for things tronsitorie and
remoueable: 1. H. 7. 19.
the King may be put out of his possession, and have his Action according, as
rauishment of guard, Quare impedit, etc. But of things permanent he cannot have
an Action, as a Praecipe quod reddat, eiectment of ward, etc. because of such
things he cannot be put out of possession: the King having possession by matter
of Record, or Stamf. prer. 74.
other good title, none can put him out. But 8 H. 4 16. per Sta^f. prer. 57.
if having no title by matter of Record, or otherwise, he enter upon me and put
me out, there if I enter again, my entry is lawful, and no intrusion. So if
the king seize upon an office, finding that his tenant died seized but of an
estate for life, the reuersion to another; he in the reuersion may enter, and
make a feoffement: for the King seiseth by color of a Record, which Record
gives him no title indeed.

CHAP. 8.
Of Menaces.

TRespasses to the person are with pretense of violence, or violence indeed.

Pretense of violence, as Menaces and Assaults.

Menaces are threatening words of beating one, or such like, through fear (a)
18. E. 4. 28.
whereof ones business is foreslowed. For (b) 7. E. 4. 24.
a menace only (without other loss) makes not the Trespass, but both of
them together.

CHAP. 9.
Of Assault.

ASsault is an unlawful setting upon ones person. As offering to (c) 40. E. 3
40.
beat one, though he do not beat one in deed, striking 22. ass. pl 60.
at one with an Hatchet, or such like, though he do not touch him. Whether
belongs lying in wait, besetting his ma^sion Book of Entries fol. 552.
house, and not suffering his servants to go in and out, etc.

CHAP. 10.
Of false Imprisonment.

VIolence indeed, is false imprisonment, or bodily hurt.

False imprisonment is an unlawful restraint of liberty. As 22. ass. pl. 85.
arresting one against his will, though it be in the High-streete, and he never
put in prison in any house; detaining of a woman 43. E. 3. 20.
against her will, whom he has ravished. So if a 22. E. 4. 45.
master imprison one without cause, and deliver the key of the door to a
servant that has notice of his wrongful imprisonment of him, if the servant
deliver him not, he shall be punished in an Action of false imprisonment. But
if the imprisonment be upon a false and feined suite, as in suing 43. E. 3. 33.
execution upon a statute merchant, when the money is paid, yet no Action of
false imprisonment lies, for he is imprisoned by course of Law.

CHAP. 11.
Of Battery.

BOdily hurts are either outward violences only, or Rape.

Outward violences only, are Battery and maime.

Battery is the wrongful beating of one. But if a man will take away my
goods, I may lay my hands upon him, and 9. E. 4. 28.
disturb him, and (if he will not leave) I may beat him, rather than he shall
carry them away, for that is no wrongful beating.

CHAP. 18.
Of Maime.

MAime is the wrongful spoiling of a member defensive in fight. As cutting off
ones finger, knocking 8. H. 4. 31. Corone 458.
out ones foretooth, Brit. and Bract. per Stamf. 38. b.
putting (a) 28. E 3. 94.
out his eye, etc. Otherwise it is of knocking out his grinding teeth, cutting
off ones ear, nose, etc. for these are but deformities.

CHAP. 13.
Of Rape.

THese are outward violences only: Rape is the carnal abusing of a 9. E. 4. 26.
woman against her will. But if the woman conceive upon any (e) Brit. per
Stamf. 24.
carnal abusing of her, that is no rape, for she cannot conceive unless she
consent.

Statutes.
6. R. 2. ca. 6. If the woman after rape, consent, as well she as the rauisher
be dishabled to have any heritage, dower, or Ioint-feofment after the death of
their husbands and Ancestors, and the next of blood shall have title to enter
incontinently.

CHAP. 14.
Of Contempts.

Certain offenses against the King are in the nature of trespasses, and are
termed contempts: as 38. H. 39.
making rescous upon his Writ served, 24. E. 3. 3.
going armed in his palace, etc. where sometime the punishment is increased
according to the quality of the offense, not only in the fine, but further,
in the loss of member, and such like. As a juror 36. H. 6. 27.
appearing, and being challenged, if he do not appear upon demand, when he
is found indifferent, shall be fined by the value of his land by a year. He
that smites a man 41. E. 3. Coron. 280.
in Westminster Hall, or a Iuror in the presence of the Justices, shall have
his right hand cut off, his land and (e) 19. E. 3. Judgment 174.
chattels forfeited, and in the latter case be committed to perpetual prison.

CHAP. 15.
Of Offenses against the Crown.

THus much then of Trespass; it remains to speak of offenses against the
Crown, which are criminal offenses, punishable by death.

Where further also all the offenders both hereditaments, As lands, rents, etc.
whether for life Stamf. 186 b. and 190
only, or of 22. ass. pl 4 in high Treason.
an estate of inheritance, and chattels, not only in possession, 29. Ass pl.
63.
but such as he has but a right to, As lands 6. H. 7. 9.
whereof he is disseised, debts, 29 ass ibid.
goods 50 ass pl. 5.
to be accounted for, or wrongfully 29. Ass pl ibid.
taken; But 29. Ass. ibid.
not such as he is to recover but damages for, as in battery, etc. are
forfeite to the King. And that as well in Felony, as Treason, save only in
felony land of inheritance is forfeite to the Lord, as appears chap. 16.
afterward.

Hereditaments 30. H. 65.
from the time of the offense, (whether the attainder be by Outlawrie, verdit,
or howsoever else) Chattels, though real, 5. Mar.
as a lease for years, etc. from 8. E. 4. 4.
the time of the attainder only. So 8. E. 4. ibid.
as a sale or gift before, is good, for he must live of them. And therefore
after enditement, and before attainder, the goods shall 7. H. 4. 47. Br forf.
de terr. 10.
not be removed out of his house, but shall be in the keeping of his neighbors.
And in these and all other forfeitures, as upon an 5. H. 4. forf. 32.
enditement of fugam fecit, or 3 E. 3 corone 347.
if one be taken with the manner, upon a robbery, or 22. ass pl. 8. ^.
tarry the exigent, etc. the Town is chargeable with the goods, and therefore
22. ass. ibid.
may seize them wheresoever they be.

Statutes.
31. E. 3. cap. 3. No man nor town shall be charged in the Exchequer, by the
extract of the Justices, of the Chattels of fugitives, or felons, if they can
show that another is chargeable.

1. Ric. 3. cap. 3. No Sheriff, Vnder-shetife, or escheator, Bailife of
Franchises, nor any other person, take or seize the goods of any person
arrested, or imprisoned, before that such persons, so arrested and imprisoned
be convict, or attainted of such felony, according to the Law of England: or
else the same goods otherwise lawfully forfeit, upon pain to forfeite the
double value of the goods so taken, to him or them that shall be thereby
indammaged, by Action of debt in this behalf to be pursued.

The blood also is here corrupted. So as 37. H. 8. Br. d^n. 42 22. H. 6. 38.
a remainder to his right heir, can never take effect. The eldest son
attainted of felony in his fathers life time, and him suruiuing, or his issue
32. H. 8. Die. 48
(if he die before) cannot inherit: and besides, shall be an impediment, that
the younger brother cannot, (b) 22 H 6 ibid.
but it shall go to the Lord by escheat. Otherwise 32 H 8 Die. ib.
it is if the eldest son die without issue in his fathers life time.

Lastly, the wife loses Lit. 169
her dower, And notwithstanding 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar. Die. 140.
the husband alien the same before the offense committed.

Statutes.
1. E. 6. cap. 12. No dower shall be forfeit, by the husbands attainder, of
any murder, or felony whatsoever.

Prerogative.
Those that fly for fear of the offense 3. E. 3 corone 209. 3. E. 3. corone
289. 5. H. 4. forf 32.
(we call it a Fugam fecit) forfeit their thattels Accessaries after the fact,
that is to say witting mainteiners (and 12. E. 3. corone 377. 14. E. 2. per 19.
El. Die. 355.
if it be of one outlawed in the same County, though they have no other notice
of it) as by 8. E. 3 cor. 427.
receiving one that flies for it into his house, and shutting the door, so as
the Country thinking him to be there, he escape whilst no man follows him;
ayding (b) 26 ass pl. 47.
him with money, but not with good words, as wholesome advise speaking or
writing for his delivery, And therefore also that suffer Stamf. 35. h.
one arrested whether by themselves or any other to escape which (k) 9. H 4. 1.
we call a voluntary escape, are guilty of (l) Stamf. 22. i.
the same offense.

Prerogative.
Concealing the offense, without discovering it unto the king, or his Council,
or to some Magistrate, is called misprision, and that forfeiteth (a) chattels,
and hereditaments during their life.

CHAP. 16.
Of Felony.

Offenses against the Crown be of two sorts, Felony, and Hightreason. Felony
is an offense of the Crown not bent immediately against the State, where the
forfeiture of the offenders 27. E. 3. Escheate 17.
inheritance is given to the Lord (whether it be in petie 22. ass. pl. 49.
Treason, or other Felony, and Stamf. 198. a.
at any time after he is attainted; And therefore the Lord may have a writ of
Escheat before execution. But Stamf. 190. ^.
of lands (whereof one is seized in the right of his wife) the King shall have
the issues during the husbands life.

Prerogative.
The King, both Stamf. 190. a.
here, and wheresoever Stamf. 190. ^.
the offender was dispunishable of wast (as if he were seized of land in the
right of his wife) is utterly to wast the inheritance, by rooting up the houses
and trees, plowing up the meadows, digging up the land, etc. And this is in
detestation of the offense.

Statutes.
Magn. Charta, cap. 22. The King shall have the land by a year and a day, and
then render it to the Lord of the fee.

Prerogative, cap. 15. gives the king the profits by a year and a day, and
moreover the wasting of it.

CHAP. 17.
Of Stealth.

Felony is a bare Felony, or petty treason.

Bare Felony is a Felony of the lowest nature, and is punishable by Stamf.
182.
hanging.

This is simple, or mixed.

Simple, as stealth, and manslaughter.

Stealth is the wrongful taking of goods without pretense of title. And
therefore alters not the property, as a trespass 4. H. 7. 5.
does, so as upon an appeal the party shall re-haue them.

Statutes.
21. H. 8. cap. 7. (made perpetual, 5. Eliz. cap. 18.) The servant that has
any goods or chattels delivered him to keep by his master, and (with an intent
to steal) does either go away therewith, or being in service, imbezle, or
convert the same to his own use, shall be judged a thief, if the value of the
goods amount to xl. s.

This extends not to Apprentices, or any person within eight years of age.

Inne-keepers must answer for goods 22. H. 6. 21.
of their guests stolen: though they let them have a chamber with a key unto
it, to keep their goods in. But if the guest suffer with his good will a
stranger (whom he knows not) to lodge with him in the chamber, and the
stranger rob him, the Inkeeper shall not be charged. Otherwise it is, if he be
lodged there by the Inne-keeper.

Prerogative.
Goods confisked; that is to say, which (a) 3. E. 3 corone 371.
the thief, attainted for stealing another thing, for if it be for stealing
the same goods they are said to be forfeit, and not (b) 3. 3. 3. coron. 355
confisked, disclaimeth to have any property, in and waifes; that is to say,
which a (c) 12. E. 45.
thief (but not one that commits a trespass) waiueth; are the Kings, if he
(whether any officer of his, or the Lord of the (d) 21. E. 4. 16.
Franchise, seize them before the party from whom they were stolen. But if
the party from whom they were stolen seize them first, (though it be not in
xx years after they be stolen) or doing his diligence to apprehend the
thief, which is called fresh 21. E. 4. ibid. 7. H. 4 43.
suite; whither the thief be taken at his suite or not, convict him
afterward upon an Appeal; he shall have his goods again.

Statutes.
21. H. 8. cap. 11. The party shall have restitution of his goods without fresh
suite, if he or any for him give in evidence, by reason whereof the other is
attainted.

The stealing of goods which exceed not the value of xii. b (called petty
Larcenie) 27. H. 8. 22.
is a felony (for a man may justify the calling of one thief for such an
offense) that does only forfeit his Chattels.

CHAP. 18.
Of Manslaughter.

Manslaughter is the killing of any person Stamf. 21. c.
borne into the world, though he be not baptized. But Stamf ibid. ^ ass. pl. 2.
to kill an infant in venture sa mere, is no felony.

Statutes,
21. E. 1. Stat. de male fac in parcis: It is no Felony for Forresters to kill
misdoers, if they will not submit themselves.

But if one live a year after an act committed, which was the cause of his
death, as beating, 3. E. 3. Corone 303.
poison Stamf. 21. d.
given him, etc. it is no felony in him that did the Act: but this death shall
be accounted a natural death.

The killing of one by 2. H. 4. 18.
chance (which we call by misfortune, or misaduenture) in the doing a lawful
act. But not if A. B. be (f) Stamf. 16. c.
fighting and C. coming between to part them, be slain by either of them
both without any ill intent, for that is felony at the least if not murder, in
him that kills C. because the thing which they were doing was unlawful, or
in his own defense, which we call Se defendendo, flying (g) 4. H. 7. 2.
as far as he may to save his life, for otherwise (h) 43 ass pl. 31.
it is felony, though the other pursue him, does only forfeit his chattels,
and he must have a charter of pardon.

Statutes.
Gloucest. cap. 9. He that kills a man by misaduenture, or se defendendo,
must put himself upon the country, and if he be found to have done it so,
the King if he please may pardon him.

Marlb. cap. 25. To kill a man by misaduenture shall be no murder.

But the killing of one that attempteth to rob him (whether 26. ass pl. 32.
upon the Highway, or 26. ass pl. 23.
when men come to his house, and compass it about to burn it (though they do
not burn it) whereupon he issues out and kills one of them, is neither
felony, nor causes any forfeiture at all.

Prerogative.
Any unreasonable thing killing a man: (a) 8. E. 2. Corone 389.
As the wheel of a mill, when one falls from the bridge into the water, and
is carried by the violence of it under the outward (b) 3 E. 3 coron. 140.
wheel; the task of Corn that a man falls from, and so receives his
death: it, and every thing moving with, it is forfeit to the King. As if a man
being upon a Cart (c) 8. E. 2. cor. 397
carrying Faggots, and binding them together, fall down by the moving of one
of the horses in the cart, and die of it: both that and all the other horses in
the cart, and the cart it self, are forfeit. And these are called Deodands.

CHAP. 19.
Of Chance-Medlie.

Manslaughter is Chance-medlie, or murder.

Chance-medly is manslaughter without former malice. As if 1. Mar. Pl. 100.
certain set upon one to kill him, and I. S. having no malice against him, and
being in the company, and seeing them combating, take part suddenly, and
together with the rest smite him that he die, this is Chance-medlie in I. S.

CHAP. 20.
Of Murder.

MVrder is Manslaughter upon 18. El. Pl. 474.
former malice: which we call prepensed malice. As if one to kill his Wife,
give her (lying sick) poison in a roasted apple: and she eating a little of it,
give the rest to a little child of theirs, which the husband least he should be
suspected, suffers the child to eat, who dies of the same poison; this is
murder though the wife recover: for the poison ministered upon malice prepenced,
to one (which by a contingencie procures the death of another, whom he meant
not to kill, nor bare any malice to) shall be as great an offense, as if it
had taken the effect which he meant, proceeding from a naughty and malicious
intent.

Felony de se, That is, he that murdereth 3. El. Pl. 258.
himself, does only forfeite his Chattels, But not his lands; neither does it
work corruption of blood, nor loses the wives dower, because it is no
attainder indeed: But his Chattels he dotb forfeit, real and personal goods,
debts, etc. And this forfeit shall have relation to the time of the act in his
life, which was the cause of his death. So as husband and wife being possessed
jointly of a term for years of land, and the husband drowning himself, the
term is forfeite to the King; and the wife suruiuing shall not have it: for the
Kings title is from the casting of himself into the water, which was before
the wife had any title by suruiuor. And this forfeiture is as strong to give
away the term as an express grant, which the husband might have done and
barred his wife.

CHAP. 21.
Of Robbery.

Mixed, is that kind of bare Felony which rises from the former.

Whereof there be two sorts, Robbery, and Burglarie.

Robbery, is stealth from ones person by assault in the highway. But if
either nothing 9. E. 4 2^.
be taken, though he command him to deliver his purse or money, or money
taken, but 5. El. Die. 224.
without putting the person in fear by assault and violence (as where one is
indicted Quod vi and armis, apud B. in via regia ibidem xl. s. de pecunijs
numeratis, etc. felonice cepit de persona I. S.) it is no Robbery. And
therefore in this latter case he may have his Clergy at this day.

CHAP. 22.
Of Burglarie.

BVrglary is the night-breaking of an house, with an 1. E. 6 Br. Corone 179.
intent to steal or kill; though none be killed, nor any thing stolen. And so
it is of a 1. E. 6. ibid.
stable, parcel of a house, but 13. H. 4. 7.
not of breaking ones Close to kill him, nor ones house, if it be but to beat
him, nor though it be to kill him, if it be in the day time. (d) Stamf. 30. b.


CHAP. 23.
Of petty Treason, properly so called.

ANd of bare Felonies so much shall suffice. Petty Treason is a Felony, 1. E.
3. 24.
For where one is arraigned for falsifying the Kings seal, (which is a petty
Treason) a Charter of pardon of all Felonies is a good plea. (f) 1. R 2 4. F.
N. B. 269. b.
of higher nature than bare Felony is; the punishment whereof is burning.

This is against mortal creatures, or against God.

Against mortal creatures, as Petty-treason (a) 22. ass pl. 49. 21. E. 3. 17.
Corone 477.
(properly so called) and Sodomitrie. Petty treason (properly so called) is
the killing of any to whom private obedience (b) 12. ass pl. 30. 19. H. 6. 14.
his masters wife.
is due: as ones master, mistress, husband, etc. for which in stead of
burning, (c) 1. R. 3. 4.
(which the woman here shall be) a man (d) 12 ass pl. 30. 1. R. 3. 4*
shall be hanged and drawn. (e) 21. E. 3. ibid. 19. H. 6. ibid.


CHAP. 24.
Of Sodomitrie.

SOdomitrie is a carnal copulation against nature, to wit, of man or woman F.
N. B 269. b. they shall be burnt, and that by the common Law.
in the same Sex, or of either of them with beasts.

CHAP. 25.
Of Heresy.

AGainst God, is that which immediately (f) Lect. Frowick. No Sanctuary lies
in case of Heresy, for it is treason against God.
is bent against his Majesty, as Heresy, and Sorcerie. Heresy is a
presumptuous oppugning of an Article of Faith: whereof what it is, (g) F. N B.
269. b. Sorcerers, Sorceresses, and Heretics shall be burnt, and that by the
Common Law F. N. B. 269 b.
the Common Law takes no notice. But in case of Heresy, the party before he
can be burnt, must be convict in a Provincial Sinode; and after abiuration,
make a relapse into the same or some other Heresy.

CHAP. 26.
Of Sorcerie.

SOrcerie is a consulting with Devils, F. N. B. 269. b. 45. E. 3. 17.
and contains under it, Coniuring, Nigromancie, and such like.

CHAP. 27.
Of Petty Treason, growing by Prerogative.

HEre diverse offenses are accounted (a) 26. ass pl 63.
felony, in respect of the (b) 3. H. 7. 10.
Kings Prerogative, As to counterfeit (c) 1. E. 3. 24.
the Kings coin, great seal, or Privy Seal; to acknowledge any foreign
person to have any power within the Realm. As 30. ass pl. 19.
by pleading an Excommunication under the Popes Bull. and are punishable as
Petty Treason.

CHAP. 28.
Of High Treason.

HIgh Treason follows, which is an offense of the Crown, directly (e) 25. E.
3. cap. 2. makes a declaration of all these to be high Treason.
against the State. As in compassing the death of the King: For entending his
death (without (f) 13. H. 8. 12.
more) is Treason; otherwise it is in felony, except an act be done, or the
Queen his wife, or of his son and heir, by leuying war within the Realm,
or adhering to his enemies: or them comforting, ayding, etc. and is punishable
by drawing, 1. H. 7. 24. Stamf. 182. c.
hanging and quartering, in a man, drawing and hanging in a woman.

Statutes.
25. E. 3. de prodicionibus cap. 2. It is made high treason to kill the
Chancellor, Treasurer, or Justice of either Bench.

Justices of Eire, or of Assizes, or any other Justices assigned to hear and
determine in their place, doing their office.

To counterfeit the kings money.

To bring false coin into this Realm, counterfeit according to the money of
England (knowing the same money to be false) to merchandise, or make payment
with it.

To counterfeit the Kings great seal, or privy seal.

1. Mar. cap. 6. Seal manuell, privy Signet, or privy seal.

Strange coin current in this Rlalme.

1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. cap. 11. To bring wittingly false foreign coin
hither, to the intent to utter it within the Realm.

1. Eliz. c. 11. To clip, wash, round, or file, any money of this Realm, or
current here: and causes forfeiture of land for life only. But no dower shall
be forfeited, nor blood corrupted.

18 Eliz. cap. 1. To Impair, Diminish, Falsify, Scale, or Lighten any money
by any Art, ways or means whatsoever.

1. Eliz. cap. 1. Advisedly, maliciously, and directly, to affirm, set forth,
and defend the third time by express deed or act, or to put in ure, or to
execute any thing, for the defense or setting forth of the spiritual authority
or jurisdiction of any foreign person, heretofore claimed or used in any of
the Queens dominions.

So for any person compellable to take the Oath.

To refuse (after lawful tender) the Oath to acknowledge the Queen supreme
governor in all causes within her dominions.

13. Eliz. cap. 1. To put in ure any bull, or instrument of absolution, or
reconciliation from Rome, or to take upon one (by color of any such to absolve
or reconcile any person, or to publish any such Bull or instrument. To receive
such absolution, or to procure, abet, or counsel any offender to uphold him.
To practice to absolve, persuade, or withdraw any person within the Queens
dominions, from their natural obedience, or (for that intent) from the
Religion now established here, to the Romish religion, or to move them to
promise obedience to the Sea of Rome, or other Estate, or willingly to be
absolved, withdrawn, or to promise such obedience.

1. Eliz. cap. 6. Maliciously, directly and advisedly, to say or hold opinion
(the second time) that the Queens Majesty, or her heirs of her body, be not
right Kings and Queens of this Realm, or that any other person ought to be.

Their abbettors, procurers, counselors, aydors, etc. To affirm by any
writing, printing, deed, or Act: The first time, their abbettors, etc.

33 H. 8. cap. 20. Attainder of high treason by the course of the common law,
or statutes of this Realm, shall be of as great force as an attainder by
Parliament. And the King shall have the real possession of every thing
forfeited without inquisition, or office: saving to strangers, etc.

29. Eliz. cap. 2. No attainder of high treason (for which the party is once
executed) shall be impeached for any error, by the heirs, or any claiming
under them.

26. H. 8. cap. 13. and 5. and 6. E. 6. cap. 11. Any offense (made treason
heretofore) done out of the limits of the Realm, shall be inquired here by
Commission, and like process used, as if it had bin don within the realm.

One resiant out of the limits of the realm, may be outlawed for high treason.

An estate tail shall be forfeit for Hightreason.

The fourth book of LAW.
CHAP. 1.
Of Courts.

THus we have gone through both the parts of Law; there remains yet one
general and common affection scattered, throughout the whole Law, (as the
blood is through the body,) which we call an Action.

Action is the handling of a cause in controversy before certain Judges: who
(in respect ot the place where they are set to do Justice) are commonly called
a Court.

Statutes.
36. Ed. 3. cap. 15. All pleas which be pleaded in any of the Kings Courts,
before any of his Justices, or in his other places, or before any of his other
ministers, or in the Courts and places of any other Lords within the Realm
shall be pleaded, showed and defended, answered, debated and judged in the
English tongue, and that they be entered and enrolled in Latin.

Of all apparent faults proceeding from the Action, As in false Latin 4. H. 6.
16.
or default of form in the writ, insufficiency in (b) 5. E. 4. 7.
an office or Indictment, misawarding of Process (as if of an exigent where no
exigent lies:) impossibility in the plea, as in (c) 7. H. 6. 5.
account, supposing him to be his Receiuor for vij years, and the defendant
pleads, fully accounted such a day, which is the first of those vij years; The
Court must take notice. To abate the Writ, award a Supersedias upon those
offices, Inditements, or Process, to stay Judgment if the defendants plea be
found against him, etc. though the party except not to it. And 4 H. 6. 16.
therefore although he that casts an Essoyne cannot plead in abatement in
the Writ, by way of plea; yet if it be a matter apparent to the Court, (as
Henricus, etc. Dux Hiberniae, where it should be Dominus) he and every other
stranger, as amicus curia, may. And the Court is bound to abate it ex officio,
though the Tenant or defendant make default.

Every Court has power to award forth Precepts. And if the Precept be 14. H.
6. 20. in a Sommons ad Warrantizandum. F. N. B. 73. in a Repleuin.
not served, another of the like nature shall go forth till it be served.
Therefore the second Process is called a Sommons (or attachment, as the first
Process was) sicut alias; the third a Pluries, the fourth, and all the rest,
Plus pluries.

To every Court do belong both Clerks and Officers.

A Clarke is he that serves for things to be done in Court, as entering the
pleas, and such like.

Any error that appears to the Court to be the Clerks (misprision)
mistaking, may be amended at any time. As a good original Writ or precept ill
entered in the 7. H. 6. 4^.
Roll. A Writ against A. and B. and the 44. E. 3. 18.
whole Process continued against B. andC. not A. and B. a Scire facias out of
a fine and 20. E. 47.
parcel of the land omitted.

Statutes.
14. E. 3. cap. 6. No Process shall be adnulled or discontinued by the Clerks
mistaking in writing one syllable or one letter too little, or too much, but
shall speedily be amended, without any advantage to the other.

9. H. 5. cap 4. made perpetual.

4. H. 6. cap. 3. The Justices before such pleas or Records be made, or shall
be depending by adiournement, errors, or otherwise, may make such amendment as
well after judgment as before.

4 H. 6. cap. 3. The former Statutes shall not extend to Records and Process,
whereby any person shall be outlawed.

8. H 6. cap. 12. No judgment or Record shall be reuersed or adnulled for
error, assigned in rasing or interlining, adding, substracting, or diminishing
of words, letters, titles, or parcel of letters in any Record, Process, or
warrant of Attorney, original Writ, or judicial Pannell, or return, though
to the Judges of the Courts wherein the said Records and Process be certifyed
(by Writ of Error, or otherwise) the same appear suspected. But the Kings
Judges of the Courts where the said Records and Process be certifyed by Writ
of Error, or otherwise, shall examine the same by themselves and their Clerks,
and amend therein (in affirmance of the first Judgment) all that seems to
them to be the Clerks misprision: Except Appeals, Inditements of Treason,
and of Felonies, and the Outlawries of the same. And the substance of the
proper names, syr-names, and additions, left out in original Writs of Exigend,
and other Writs containing Proclamation. And if any Record, Process, Writ,
Warrant of Attorney, Return, or Pannell, to be certified defective, otherwise
than according to the writing which thereof remains in the Treasury, Courts,
or places from whence they be certified; the parties in affirmance of the
Judgments of such Records or Process, shall have advantage to allege
variance betwixt the same Writing and the Certificate: which being found and
certifyed, the same variance shall be by the said Judges amended, according to
the first writing.

27. Eliz. cap. 7. After demurrers joined and entered, the same Court may amend
all imperfections, defects, and wants of form, other than those only which
the party demurring shall particularly express with his demurrer.

Officers are those which are to serve the Courts Precepts, and where the
Precept so requires, to certify the Court thereof: which we call a return.

So upon a Writ to inquire of damages, it is a good return that the Inquest
gave 44. E. 3. 3.
no damages. For he returns what they did.

But upon a Capias returned Cepi corpus, he 44. E. 3 2.
shall be amerced if he have it not there at the day. For the Writ is, Capias
ita quod corpus eius habere possis, etc. tali die, etc.

Statutes.
Westminster 2. Cap. 39. Damages given against the Sheriff if he return not at
all, or return a tardie, upon Writs delivered or offered to be delivered him
by Billet. So upon returning Mandaui Balliuo libertatis falsely: upon
resistance of any Great man to execute the Kings Precept, the Sheriff shall
take the Fosse Comitatus, and see it served.

Stat. Ebora^ 12. E. 2. Ca. 5. Bailifes of Franchises must deliver their
returns of the Writs to the Sheriff by Indenture, and if he change the
Return, the Lord of the liberty, and the party, shall recover double
damages.

The Sherif, etc. must set his proper name to all returns.

27. Eliz. C. 12. Every Vnder-Sherife, Bailife of Franchise, Deputy, or
Clarke of the Sheriff, etc. must take an oath for the supremacy, and for the
true, speedy, and indifferent returning of Writs, and impanelling of Jurors,
without taking above the fees allowed.

29. Eliz. Cap. 4. Sherifes may take for the serving of any extent or execution
only xij.. of and for every xx. s. where the sum exceeds not C. l. and vj.
of and for every xx s. being above an C. l. that they shall levy, or extend
and deliver in execution, or take the body in execution for.

Courts are Courts of Record, or Court Barons. For against a recovery pleaded
9. E. 4. 42.
in ancient demesne, or other Court Baron; one shall not say, null tiel Record,
for it is no Record, but null tiel recovery, and it shall be tried by the
Country. Otherwise it is in the Kings Courts.

Of Record, which are the Kings Courts, as he is King. Otherwise, if the 9. E.
4. ibid.
King have a Court as Lord of a Manor, that is but a Court Baron. And these
have that credit, that no auerment can be taken against any thing there entered
or done. And therefore work an Estoppell to the 15. El. Pl. 434.
parties in like sort, as Indentures did before. (a) 21. H. 9. 24.
As upon a Lease made by fine, both (b) 5. E. 4. 1.
parttes are estopped to say the Lessor had nothing in the land.

So of Pleas in Bar, Replications, Returns of the Sheriff, etc.

Statutes.
1. E. 3. Cap. 4. Statut. 1. Auerment given in a Writ of false Judgment
against the Record certifyed.

Things also that cannot be granted but by Deed, pass here, and that more
strongly, by matter of Record.

The King takes Hereditaments, 18. Eliz ploy. 483. 21. H 7. 19. 39. H. 6. 26.
Stamf. praef. 56.
though it be but for years. Otherwise it is of an Obligation or Chattell
personal, by matter of Record only: for to personal and transitory things,
as Catalla felonum and fugitiuorum, wrecke of Sea, treasure troue, and the
profits of land of persons outlawed in a personal Action, etc. the King is
entitled without office or other matter of Record: but to take a Freehold by
a Condition 3. Eliz. ploy. 229.
broken, or purchase of his Villeine, or such like, he cannot without office
or matter of Record. Otherwise it is, where the Law casts a Freehold upon him,
as in a gift in Tail, the remainder to the King. 3. Eliz. ploy. 229. 5. E. 4.
7.


And therefore also the King takes a Freehold without liuerie or seisin by
deed enrolled: but cannot be infeoffed by Deed, without inrollement of Record,
for that no Liuerie can be made unto him.

Villenage begins only by confessing Lit. 39.
a man's self to be one in a Court of Record And therefore in a Praecipe quod
reddat, 41. E. 3. Villen. 6.
if the Tenant say, That he is a Villeine to I. S. and holds the Land in
Villenage, the demandant says that is frank, etc. and he is found frank by
the Jury: yet he remains a Villeine to I. S.

Duties of the Testator growing by record, 21. E. 4. 21.
must be answered by Executors before other duties.

Courts of Record are the Parliament, 1. H. 7. 20 the higher house. Br. Recogn.
8. the lower house.
or Courts that have ordinary jurisdiction. For the Parliament when it is
sitting, may take a Recognisance, and do such other things as to a Court of
Record appertains.

The Parliament is a Court of the King, Nobility, and Commons assembled, Having
an absolute power in all causes. As to make Laws, to adiudge matters in Law,
to try causes of life and death; to reuerse 23. El. Dyer 375. 1. H. 7. 19.
errors in the Kings Bench, especially where any common mischief is, that by
the ordinary course of Law there is no means to remedy: this is the proper
Court for it. 37, Ass pl. 17.
And all their Decrees are as Judgments. And if the Parliament it self do
err (as it 21 E. 3. 46. Br. Parliament 16.
may) it can no where be reuersed but in Parliament.

Statutes.
4. E. 3. Cap. 14. and 36. E. 3. Cap. 10. A Parliament shall be holden once
every year.

1. H. 4. Cap. 14. No Appeal shall be pursued in Parliament.

Prerogative.
Statutes of restraint bind not unless they concern the Commonwealth, or
he be specially named: As the Statute of Westminster 2. which alters fee-simple
Conditional, into an estate Tail, that Tenant in Tail shall have no power to
alien, does bind him: for it is for the Commonwealth. So as Lands being given
to the King in Tail, the Remainder over, if the K. have issue who alieneth,
and dies without issue; he in the remainder may enter. But if by Statute one
be attainted, and his lands forfeit, with a prouiso that of such lands as he
was seized to the use of any other cesty qui use may enter; that binds not
the King that cesty qui use should enter upon him, for it is not for the
Commonwealth. But the Statute of 1. H. 5. cap. 5. that in Enditements, addition
must be given to the party indicted, binds the king in that case because
Enditements are especially named.

He may license things forbidden by the Statutes. As to coin money which is
made felony by the Statute, and was before lawful, for that is but malum
prohibitum. But malum in se, as to levy a nuisance in the Highway, he cannot
license to do: but when it is done he may pardon it. But where the Statute
says his License shall be void, there it must have a clause of Non obstante;
that is to say, this clause, (notwithstanding any Statute) else it is not good.
As the Statute 23. H. 6. cap. 18. is, That the Kings Grant to be Sheriff of any
County, longer than a year, shall be void, notwithstanding that the clause of
Non obstante be in the Patent: yet with a clause of Non obstante such a Grant
is good, and not without it. But neither without nor by that clause, he can
dispense with a Statute before it be made. And therefore a license to carry
Bell-mettall out of the realm (notwithstanding any statute made or to be made)
is not good, if a Statute be made after that to prohibit it. For he cannot
dispense with an Act of Parliament before it be made.

Courts of Record which have an ordinary Jurisdiction, are either general,
whose Jurisdiction extends throughout the Realm, or but within some County:
wherefore these latter, for their order and 34. H. 6. 41.
course of proceeding, do in all things fashion themselves to the example of
those higher courts, as of the parents from whom they come.

The former are those that are holden in Term time only: the whole year
having four Terms, Michaelmas, and Hillarie Term, Easter and Trinity Term,
and every Term several days of Returns. If either the return day, or
first or last day of Term fall upon the Lords day, then the day following is
taken in stead of it.

Michaelmas Term (beginning the 16. of October, and ending the 28. of
November) has 8. returns Octabis Michaelis that is the 8. day after the feast
of Saint Michael. Quindena Michael, that is the 15. day after. Tres Michael,
that is at the end of 3. weeks after. Mense Michael, that is at the end of a
month after. Chrastino animarum, that is the next day after Chrastino Martini,
Octab. Martini, Quindena Martin.

Hillary Term beginning the 23. day of January, and ending the 12. of
February has four returns: Octabis Hillarij. Quindena Hillarij, Chrastino
purificationis. Octabis purif.

Easter Term beginning 17. days after Easter and ending the Monday next after
Assention day, has five returns. Quindena pasche, Tres paschae, Mense
paschae, Quinque paschae, that is five weeks after Chrastino Assentionis.

Trinity Term beeginneth 12. days after Whitsunday, and continuing, 19.
days, has five returns, Octab Trinitat. Quindena trinitat', Chrastino
Iohannis Baptistae Octab. Iohannis Baptistae, quindena Iohannis Baptista.

Statutes.
32. H. 8. cap. 21. Trinity Term shall begin the Monday after Trinity Sunday
for keeping of Essoynes, profers, returns, etc. The full Term shall begin the
Friday after Corpus Christi day. And have four returns only, Crastino
Trinitatis, Octabis Trinitat': quindena Trinitatis, Tres Trinitatis. The rest
are cut off.

To these Courts belongs the power of sending forth writs.

A writ is a Latin letter of the kings from thence in Parchment sealed with his
seal.

All Writs have a salutation, Rex to such a one salutem, And a conclusion
expressing the name of one which is witness to the writ, called Test (who in
writs out of the Chauncerie is the king himself: in other writs the chief
Justice of the place) the place as apud Westmonastarium, etc. and the time both
day and year of the making of it, if it be returnable, the day of the return
is also appointed in it.

The third writ (which is the Fluries) not served, is a contempt, whereupon an
Attachment 2. E. 4. 1.
lies. And therefore the third Fitz. Not. Br. 68. ^
writ has always this clause in it, Vel causam nobis significes. So may the
second which is the Alias also have, if the Plaintiff Fitz. Not. Br. ibid
will.

The officer of these higher Courts is the sheriff to whom is committed the
custody 2. H. 6. 7.
of the County.

For matters spiritual, as certifying excomengement and such like, the
ordenary 7. E. 4. 14.
is their officer.

And to the Sheriff the writ must be directed, though it be for a thing done
in a franchise, and he shall send to a Bailife of the franchise: who shall
serve it as a servant to the Sheriff, and the Sheriff return it.

And though the Sheriff serve an execution 2. H. 6. ibid.
in a Franchise, yet it is good. And the Lord of the Franchise is driven to his
action upon the case against the Sheriff, for the Sheriff is immediate officer.

But in a place excepted out of every 2. H. 6. ibid.
county (as the palace of Westminster is) it shall be directed to the Guardian of
the palace, for he is immediate officer to the court, and in the nature of a
Sheriff.

So certificates of excommengement and, 7. E. 4. 14. 8. H. 6. 3. 12. E. 4. 15.
such like must be made by the Ordinary, not by the Commissarie, Archdeacon,
or any other, though he have an immediate jurisdiction, unless he were
specially admitted an officer to the court.

These general courts, are the Chancery and two benches: the Kings Bench, and
Commonplace.

Chancery which beside that it deals with matters of Conscience, and
moderating the strictness of the common law by an absolute power, deals also
in ordinary course of law in diverse cases especially, in suits concerning the
King, as petitions. Scire facias to repeal his patents, etc. and so it is a
court of law and of record, where the Judge is the Chancellor having the
custody of the great Seal of England, under which pass all Writs out of the
Chancery with Test meipsos; and also the Kings 4. El. Pl. 213.
graunts, being therefore called letters patents, Though it be of things which
he has in his natural capacity, as by descent from his mother, etc. and are
(b) C^. Court^ fol. 108.
entered of record in this Court.

Statutes.
18. H. 6. cap. 1. The Kings letters patents must bear date the day of the
deliverie of the warrant to the Chancellor, and not before, otherwise they are
void.

3. E. 6. cap. 4. Every one that has any interest in any land or office by or
under authority of the kings letters patents (made after the fourth day of
February 27. H. 8.) may make his title auowrie plea, etc. as well against the
king as any other by an Exemplification (or constat) under the great Seal.

13. Eliz. cap. 6. So of the Patentees of King Henry, 8. E. 6. Queen Marie,
Philip and Marie, and her Majesty that now is and all claiming under them.

Such graunts are effectual to pass a freehold from the King without any
livery 38. H. 8. Br. Patents 101.
of Seisin. And therefore his letters pattents being Tenant in Tail make no
discontinuance. And being matters of record, which being no lyuerie, they take
effect from the time of the date. Therefore the Kings Charter of pardon shall
be pleaded 37. H. 6. 21.
without showing when it was delivered, because being a matter of record, it
shall have relation to the date, and not to the liuerie. Otherwise it is of a
deed.

In default of a Chancellor, the Lord Keeper of the great Seal has his
authority. Stat. 5. El ca. 18.


The Keeper (or Master) of the Rols, is an assistant to this Court.

In the Kings Bench and Common place, the Judges are one chief Justice, and
three (or sometimes more) other Justices. The test of their writs is, test
Iohanne Popham (the chief Justice, etc.)

The Kings Bench is that which deals 10. El. ploy. 320.
properly with Pleas of the Crown, both hearing and determining them.

The Common place which deals properly 10. Eli. ibid.
with common Pleas, such are those termed which concern possessions.

Prerogative.
The King has a proper Court of this kind, for all things touching his
revenues, 10. Eliz ibid.
called the Exchequer.

The Judges whereof are called Barons, or housebands for the Kings Revenue:
being one chief Baron and three other. And this also has a Court of Chancery
before the chancellor and Barons of the Exchequer, called the Exchequer chamber.

The Escheator here is a special officer, 4. E. 4. 24. He may take Inquisitions
virtute officij.
and has a kind of Court for finding out the Kings title to lands, tenements,
or other things.

Statutes.
14. E. 3 cap. 8. No Escheator shall tarry in his office above a year.

These are the Courts whose jurisdiction extends throughout the Realm.

Those which deal but within some County, are the Sheriff in his turn, and
the Coroners.

The sherifes turn is a Court of record F. N. E. 82.
for offenses which are common grieuances. As a robbery, 22. B. 4. 22.
bloodshed, clipping and washing of silver and gold, night walking, the not
repairing or making clean of a bridge or a ditch, 10. H. 6. 7.
fraies and assaults, etc. But not 22. E. 4. ibid.
murder or breaking of ones hedge, etc. for they are no common grieuances, but
a wrong to one singular person.

Whereunto every man of the age of 12. F. N. B. 161. Brit. per Br. leet 39
years and upwards (being within the precinct) owes suite, and must be sworn
to the Kings Allegiance. And this is called a suit 12. H. 7. 18. 25. E. 3. 23. ^
real, being not due by reason of men's freeholds, but of their body, because
they are resiant within the precinct of the Leet. But Brit. per Br. ibid.
women are not compellable to come thither nor to be sworn to the king. And
therefore when a woman is outlawed, she is said to F. N. B. ibid.
be waued and not outlawed, because she is never sworn to the Law.

Piers of the Realm are excepted: And Stat. Marl ca. 16. so recites it.
persons of Churches, and other men of Religion, as appears before.

The offender here shall be amerced, and distreined for that amercement,
throughout 2. H. 4 24. 8. R 2. auowry 194.
the whole precinct of the County.

Statutes.
Magn^ Chart. 35. The sheriff shall make his turn throughout the Hundred but
twice a year, that is to say, once after Easter, and again after Michaelmas.
And the view of frankpledge shall be made as she turn of Michaelmas.

31. E. 3. cap 14. Stat. 1. The turn must be yearly, once within a month
after Easter, and another time within a month after Michaelmas: if they hold
them in another manner, they shall loose their turn for the time.

1. E. 3. cap: 17. Endictments in Sherifes turns must be by Rols indented, one
part to remain with the enditors, the other with the sheriff.

1. E. 4. cap. 2. upon endictments and presentiments taken before Sherifes, or
their ministers, at their turns, or Lawdayes, they shall not attach, arrest,
or imprison, nor levy any fine, or amerciament of any person so indicted (or
presented) but shall deliver the same enditements or presentiments to the
Justices of peace of the same County, at their next Sessions, who shall
proceed thereupon, as if they were taken before them.

1. Ric. 3. cap. 4. None shall be returned upon pannell of inquiry of the
Sherifes turn, but men of good name and fame, having within the same freehold
land to the yearly value of xx. s. or copy land to the yearly value of xxvj.
s. viij. d. and every enditement otherwise taken shall be void.

The Coroners Court, is a Court for Stamf. ^^.
matters of the Crown. Battery, mayme, rape, murder, etc.

Statutes.
Westminster 1. cap. 10. Coroners shall be chosen in all Counties, of the wisest and
sufficientest Knights.

14. E. 3. cap. 7. That no Coroner shall be chosen, unless he have land in fee
sufficient in the same County, whereof he may answer to all manner of people.

28. E. 3. cap. 6. Al Coroners of the county shall be chosen in the full
Counties, by the Commons of the same Counties, of the most connenient and most
lawful people that shall be found in the same Counties to do the office.
Saved always to the king, and other Lords which owe to make such Coroners,
their seigniories, and franchises.

Westminster. 1. cap. 10. The sherifes shall have Conterrols with the Coroners, as
well of their appeals, as of enquests of Attachments; and of other things
which to that office does belong.

Westminster 1. cap 10. Coroners must take nothing for doing their office.

Upon just cause of exception to the sheriff, process out of the higher Courts
shall 14. H. 7. 31. 4. H. 7. 3.
be directed to the Coroners.

Prerogative.
The Steward and Marshall of the Kings house, have a Court, for all personel
Diu. of courts f. 102
actions, and pleas of the Crown, arising there. As debt, covenant, trespass,
etc. and by the common Law they might hold plea of freehold it self, as it
seems by the statute of Artic. super Chartas cap. 3. which says, from
henceforth they shall not hold plea of Diu of courts f 102 Stamf. 57. a.
freehold. Also they may enquire of treason, murder, felony, manslaughter,
bloodshed, etc and take appeals of al kinds of felony and maime.

Statutes.
Artic. super Chart. cap. 3. They shall not hold plea of any contracts and
covenants but such as one of the kings house makes with another of the same
house. Nor of any trespass, unless the party were attached, and the plea
determined before the kings departure from the place where the trespass was
committed.

Any thing attempted here against, is void.

Pleas of felony (that cannot be determined, before the Steward, because the
felons cannot be attached, or for other like cause) shall be referred to the
common law.

5. E. 3. ca. 2 and 10. E. 3. ca. 2. Enquests shall be taken there by men of the
county about, and by no men of the kings house, except it be in covenants,
contracts, and trespasses, when either party is of the kings house.

5. H. 6. cap. 1. The defendants may auerre that themselves or the plaintiff
(at the time of the suite commenced) were not of the Kings house against the
Record.

13. Ric. 2. cap. 3. The jurisdiction shall not pass above 12. miles about the
K. house.

33. H. 8. ca. 12. The Lord Steward of the Kings house alone, and (in his
absence) the Treasurer and Comptroler of the K. house, with the Steward of the
Marshalsy, or two of them (whereof the Steward of the Marshalsy to be one) may
without commission hear and determine all treasons, misprisions of treasons,
murders, manslaughters, and bloodshed, within the K. house, although the king
be removed before. The enquiring and verdict must be by the kings household
servants in the Check Roll.

No Clergy, nor sanctuary, to any that is found guilty before them.

By reason also of certain franchises, grow two other Courts of records, which
deal within some certain precinct: a Leet and Court of Pipowders.

A Leet is a Court of Record, having Fit. N. B. 82. 23. E. 3. 22.
the same jurisdiction within an hundred only, or some less preciuct, which
the Sherifes turn has in the County, the ^1. E. 4. 22.
profit of, it being to a common person. Therefore it 22. E. 4. 22.
deals with offenses that are common grieuances. And F. N. B. 161. Brit. per
Br. l^et 39.
all (but Piers of the Real me) owe suite unto it, and must be sworn to the
Kings Allegeanee. And the 2. H. 4 24. 8. R. 2 Auowry 194
offender for an amercement shall be distreined through out the precinct of the
Leete. And that as well out of the Land holden of the Lord of the Leete (where
the offense was done) as within it. The Sherifes turn as an ouerseer of this
Court, is to 31. H. 6. leet 11
enquire whether the tythings be whole, or no: to 12. H. 7. 18.
present defaults that are not redressed in the Leete: And if (for misuser or
other cause) the Leet be seized into the kings hands, all the people shall come
to the sherifes turn. But 29. E. 3 21. Auowry 247.
otherwise the sheriefe in his turn has no power to enquire of an offense
done within the Leete.

A Court of pipowders is a Court of record, 6 E. 4. 3. 7 E 4 23. A writ of
Error lies there, and not a writ of false judge.
incident Stat. 17. E. 4. ca 2 so recites it.
to Faires and Markets: but by 13. E 4 8. Ibid.
custom, a Court of pipowders may be held, out of Fair or Market: for all
actions arising there, by reason of any contract, covenant, trespass, debt,
etc. 4. M. Die. 133*
And the suite must at the same time be commenced.

Statutes.
17. E. 4. cap. 2. made perpetual, 1. R. 3. cap. 6. No plea shall be holden in
Court of Pipowders, unless the plaintiff or his Attorney swear, that the
matter of declaration was done in time of the same Fair, and within
jurisdiction thereof, but that oath shall be no conclusion to the defendant, but
that he may plead as he might before. Every Steward, etc. holding plea
contrary, forfeiteth C. s. 42. ass. pl. 12.


The King (by commission under his letters pattents) but not by writ, may erect
other Courts at his pleasure.

Such were Justices of Air, and such Courts of record in Corporations, and
other places, by special Charter.

The Kings Council also is a Court, to deal with the punishment of contempts,
and called the Star Chamber. But this is no Court of Law.

Statutes.
3. H. 7. cap. 1. The Chancellor, Treasurer, and privy seal, or two of them
(calling unto them a Lord Temporal, and another spiritual of the Kings
Council, and the two chief Judges) may examine ryots, maintenances, etc.

These are the Courts of record. A court Baron is the Court of a common person.
F. N. B. 239. pro Br. iurisd. 99. F. N. B. 239 g.
And is for personal accounts under the value of xl. s. For a Trespass lies
not in a Court baron of damages above xl s. And a Supersedeas lies to the
Sheriff, upon diverse plaints in the County Court, every one under xl. s. when
all are for one entire debt of xl. s. Or upon an Action of Covenant brought
there to the damage of above xl. s.

These cannot be kept oftener then ever is three weeks. But so it be not oftener
then Br. leet 32.
from three weeks to three weeks, it may be holden as often as the Lord will.
And therefore 21. E. 4. 5.
to hold of one by doing suite at his court of D. at Mich and at Easter, it is
to be intended at his Court Baron; for though a court Baron be commonly holden
from 3. weeks to 3. weeks: yet suite of Court may be once, twice, or thrice a
year, as it is first reserved.

The process here is by precept to the bailife, good enough, though it be but
by 16. H. 7. 14.
word: Inasmuch as the trial in a Court Baron is all by the Country, and not
by Record: for all is but matter enfait.

The suitors are the Judges, both in an hundred Court, County Court, or Court
6. E. 4. 3.
Baron, and the bailife and sheriff are but ministers.

A Court Baron is the Lords, or the F. N B. 82.
County Court. The Lords is either of a particular manor, or of a whole
hundred. For a Court Baron is incident to every 34. H. 6. 49.
manor, and to every 13. H. 7. 19. 12. H 7. 17.
hundred.

The hundred Court is that whereunto all the inhabitants within the hundred owe
suit. By reason of their tenements. And is in effect but a Court Baron.

The County Court, which is incident 12. H. 7. 18.
to the Sheriff. For the Sheriff has two Courts by the common law, for
government of the shire: his County Court, (wherein one shall have remedy
against another for any matter between them) and the sherifes turn. But the
pleas holden before him in the County Court are not of F. N. B. 1^.
Record, though it be by writ of Justices.

CHAP. 2.
Of Writs Original.

OF an action, there be two parts, Suite, and Judgment. 10. El. Dyer 2^^. 5.
El. Die. 220.


Suite, is the parties dealing in the action: and therefore all that while it
is said to depend in plea, but not after Judgment. The party that brings
the action, is called Plaintiff in a personal action: demaundant in a real:
he against whom it is brought, Defendant in the first, Tenant in the other: who
for their help are allowed council learned in the Law.

Statutes.
Westminster 1. cap. 25. No minister of the King may maintain another in any action
in the Kings Court to have part of the thing, or other profit by covenant upon
pain of punishment at the Kings will.

Westminster. 2. cap. 49. None of the Kings officers shall take, or purchase, or
bargain for land, tenement, or aduowson whilst the thing is in plea, upon
pain to be punished at the kings pleasure, as well the purchaser as the other.

Artic. super chart. cap. 11. Neither the Kings officer, nor any other shall do
so upon pain of forfeiting to the King so much of his lands as a mounteth in
value to that he purchases. Any may sue for the King before the Justices,
before whom the plea hangs.

32 H. 8. cap. 9. None shall, buy, sell, or get, or take promise, or grant to
have, any pretensed rights or titles to lands, etc. except the seller, or those
(by whom he claims) were in possessions, or took the profits, by space of a
year next before, upon pain that the Seller, etc. shall forfeit the value of
the land, and likewise the buyer knowing the same. Provided, he that is in
lawful possession by taking the yearly profits, may buy, etc. another
pretensed right.

Gloucest* cap. 8. Atturnies may be made in all pleas, where appeals lie not.

Met. cap. 10. In suits; at a County, tything, hundred, wapentake, or Court of
the Lord.

Westminster. 2. cap. 10. A general Atturny may be made, in all Counties where
Justices do journey.

3. H. 7. cap. 1. An appeal of murder or death, may be pursued by Attorney.

The suite has two parts, the beginning and proceeding.

The beginning is the proper duty of the plaintiff. And has two parts.

The first matter of the suite, and original process.

The first matter of the suite must always be brought in that County where
the cause of suite grows. As actions of 14. E* 4 4.
debt upon an escape, may be brought in the County where the arrest or escape
was. But not in any other County: A 2. Mar. Br. attaint 104.
trespass of battery, goods carried away, or writings broken, may be brought
in any County; for they are not local. Otherwise it is of trees, or grass
cut down, they must be (b) Br. bill 35.
brought in their proper County, if it be by bill, the County is set at the
margent.

Statutes.
6. Ric. 2. cap. 2. Debt, account, and all such actions shall be brought in the
county, where the contract was made.

The first matter of the suite is for every man by writ out of the Chancerie,
or in Courts where writs lie not by plaint or bill: for the King alone by
inquiry.

In all of the first kind, the plaintiff must find surety by some that will be
pledges to prosecute the suite. And so is the form of every original Si (the
Plaintiff) fecerit it securam de clamore suo prosequendo, The entry is, plegij
de prosequendo Johannes D^^. Rich. Roo. And these may be either to the 9. E. 4.
27.
officer, or to the Court where the suite is. But a poor man in stead of
sureties shall Regist fol. 228 et per Br pledge 29.
give his faith to prosecute it: whereupon the form for him is, Et nisi
fecerit and praedict, (the plaintiff) fecerit te securum de clamore suo
prosequendo per fidem suam quia panper est.

Writs that begin the suit, are original, or Commissionall.

Original which appoint the first process, if the plaintiff find pledges
returneable in the Kings Bench, or Common place.

This must be ^. E. 3. 4.
true Latin, for upon habeas ibi hos 9. H. 7. 16.
breue, or vxori 3. E. 3. 86.
where it should be vxor, and such like, the writ shall abate, and beside 3 E.
3 ibid. All this that follows is the rule of the Register.
formal, As (e) the General to be put in demand, and in plaint before the
special. As land is general to pree, pasture, wood, ioncarie, marsh, etc.
Wood is the general of all trees growing, and therefore shall be put in
demand before Alders and Willowes which are but species of it. The entier shall
be demanded before the moyetie or part or parts. The more worthy thing shall
be demanded before the less worthy, as a message before land: for land that
has building upon it, is more worthy then land without building. A Castle,
before a message, or a manor (and yet it may be parcel of a manor.) But
the reason is because a castle is more worthy. As being a place of force and
defense against the enemy in time of war, and against Rebels in time of
rebellion, a place in time of peace fit for the correction and imprisonment of
great Malefactors, and a magnifical habitation for Noblemen* So in a repleuin,
if it be of two Chattels, one quick and the other dead, the living thing
shall be first demanded.

Also it must express the name of baptism, and surname, or in liew thereof,
the name of dignity both of the plaintiff and defendant. But not the name of
his office, which is no dignity. As pr. q. r. Iohanni Duci 8. E 4. 24. E 4.
24. says, the reason is because there are in England no more Dukes of that
name: and so i^ may well enough be known of whom it is meant: and also for the
selemnitie of the creation. But otherwise it it of knights for there are 1000.
Knights in England. Therefore there the writ must be pracipo I. S. militi.
Lancast. is good, but not Iohanni Rectori 27 H. 6. 3.
de D. without expressing his surname. But when an officer is to sue by reason
of his office, as a 13. E. 3. br. 675 in act real.
prebendary 12. H. 4. 20. in Assise. 10. H. 7. 5. in wast. 18 Ed 4. 17. in
annuitie.
person, executor 30. H. 6. 5.
gardein 9 E. 3. 465. 33. H. 8 Die. 50. 37. H. 6 29. 27. H. 6. 3.
by Knight service, etc there he must express the name of his office: or when
one brings an appeal of murder, ^s brother and heir, etc.

Where there be many of one name, diversity of the names must be put by
addition of eigne puisne, etc. else the writ shall abate.

A Corporation may sue by the name that they are corporate, without name of
Baptism or surname, as pr q. r. maiori and comunici L. etc. or Decano et
Capitalo D. etc.

Statutes.
1. E. 6. cap. 7. The acceptance of a new name of dignity shall not abate the
writ.

The kings servants in his Court or other by special grace of the Chancellor
Regist. fol. 2^8. and per Br. pledge 29.
may here be admitted to find pledges in the Chancery. And then the form is,
Quia praed. (the plaintiff) fecit nos secures de clamore suo prosequendo pro C.
de com. L. et D. de com. S. summoneas, etc.

CHAP. 3.
Of Common pleas.

Writs original are concerning Lit. 116.
Common Pleas, or appeals that concern life.

Those that concern common Pleas, lie not for or against 18. E. 4. 4.
a fem covert without her husband, but 1. H 4. 5. Stamf. 62, a.
an appeal of felony against her does.

Many having or giving jointly cause of action, may sue or be sued together in
one: which is called Ioinder in action. As A. is bound to B. in one statute
merchant, and 20. E. 3. Audit. Querela 28.
after A. and diverse others are bound to the same B. in another statute, and B.
by one deed releaseth to them all, and after sueth execution severally: They
shall join in an Audita querela, because of this Joint release. So one Decies
tantum shall be against 36. H 6. 28.
all the Jurors that take money to give their verdict, for it is the entire act
of all.

Several actions of one nature, as debt, and detinue (for these are of one
nature, inasmuch 3. H. 4. 13.
as the warrant of Attorney in a writ of detinue, and also the essoin. shall be
in placito debiti) may be joined in one original with several praecipes, or
commandments to be executed.

Prerogative.
Here in place of action against the King, petition must be made unto him in
the Chancery, Sta^f. prer. 73.
or in Sta^f. prer. 73.
Parliament, for Stamf. prer. 42.
no action did ever lie against the K. at the Common Law, but the party is
driven to his petition, and 34. H. 6. 5.
if the Eschetor seize goods without cause, or seize the goods of one outlawed,
which outlawry is after reuersed, and account for them in the Exchequer; the
party must sue by petition for them. And that (in the case of hereditaments)
9. H. 6. 15.
though the King have granted the same away. For upon an office finding I. S.
(who was attainted of felony or treason by matter of record before) to be
seized of certain land, if the King seize and grant i^ over, yet a stranger
that has right to enter or bring his action may do neither against the
patentee, but must to the K. by petition. Whereupon process shall go out
against the Grantee to maintain his title. As the Stamf. prer. 76.
king grants over his wardship, or any other certain estate in the land: the
Scire facias for him that sueth the petition, must be against the patentee, not
against the heir, in whose right the king is seized, for he is not to plead
with the Heir, but with the King or him that has his interest. And in a
petition to revoke letters pattents made to two 7. H. 4 33*
etc. a Scire facias upon it: the death of one of the patentees abateth not the
petition, for the petition is not sued against the patentees, but against the
king, nor they need not to be named in the petition, but in the Scire facias.

But whilst personal things seized for the King, remain in the officers
hands, ^. E. 4. 24.
the party that has right may trauerse the Records that entitle the King, and
so have his goods again, or sue the officer, or disturb him to take the
profits: As where it is found that one outlawed in a personal account, was
seized of certain land; and in this case he shall not be driven to a petition:
otherwise it is in case of a freehold, or inheritance.

Petition is a supplication declaring the ^. E. 4. 52.
parties right, where mention must be made of all the Kings title; else it
shall abate. For upon an issue in the petition found against thc king, he shall
be concluded for ever to claim by any of the points contained in the petition.

CHAP. 4.
Of Real Actions.

THese Writs concerning Common pleas are Real or Personal. And Lit. 116.
they both again are precipes, or Si fecerit te securum.

A precipe is that which wills the Sheriff to command the defendant to do
somewhat in certain that the plaintiff sueth for, which if he do not, then to
serve the first process. The form is, Praecipe A. quod reddat B. etc. Et nisi
fecerit, etc, tunc somon', etc. And is a praecipe quod reddat which lies for
things in render. As of real things, land and such other things in demesne,
rent, corody, etc. of personal things, money, goods detained, and the like. A
praecipe quod faciat which lies for things not in render, whether they lie in
Feasaunce as a writ de consuetudinibus et seruities, Secta ad molendium, etc.
or in sufferance, as a quod permittat, or in other things of any such like
nature.

A Si fecerit te securum, is that which wills the first process to be served
without more a do. The form is, Si A. fecerit te securum de clamore suo
prosequendo tunc sumon', etc.

Real actions where a freehold shall be 10. E. 9. 23.
recovered are possessory or in the right.

Possessory which are to recover a possession, as all Assizes, Writs of Ayell,
Besayell, and Cosinage.

In the right which are to recover a possession mixed with the right of all
which examples do follow after.

And both these may either be of a possession F. N. B. 5 ^.
or right in himself, or descended from his ancestors: which we call
auncestrell.

Real actions in the right, are either founded upon the right, or for the
mere right.

Statutes.
Merton cap. 8. Seisin of ones ancestor in a writ of right shall be from the
time of Henry the second.

In a mort dauncestor writ of Niefe and of entry, from the last return of
king John out of Ireland.

In an Assise of Novel disseisin, from Henry the thirds first passage into
Gascoygne.

Westminster 1. cap. 38. Seisin of ones ancestor in a Writ of right, shall be from
the time of Richard the first.

In an Assise of Novel disseisin and nuper obijt, from Henry the thirds first
passage into Gascoigne.

In a mortdancestor cosinage, ayell, entry, and Writ of Niefe, from Henry the
thirds Coronation.

32. H. 8. cap. 2. Seisin in a Writ of right shall be within lx. years.

In a mortdancestor, or in another possessory action, upon the possession of
his Auncestor or Predecessor, shall be within l. years.

A Writ of the possession of the plaintiff himself, shall be within xxx.
years.

An Auowrie or Cognizance, for rent, suit or services of the seisin of his
Ancestor, or of his own, shall be within xl. years.

Formedon in remainder, reuersion, Scire facias, upon a fine, shall be within
l. years after the title accrue. If a man prescribe in land, rent, or such
like, of the possession of his ancestor, or predecessor, he shall allege
seisin in them within lx. years next before the time of the prescription,
title, or claim.

1. Mar. cap. 5. The Statute of limitation of 33. H. 8. cap. 2. shall not
extend to a writ of right of Aduowson. Quare impedit, Iure patronatus, Assise
de Darrein, presentment, droit de guard of any lands holden by knight service,
but the time of the seisin alleged shall be as it was at the Common Law.

These kind of real actions, viz. where the freehold shall be recovered, lie
only against the tenant of the Freehold. Therefore Lit. 115.
a release of all actions reals, is no plea, unless he were Tenant of the
Freehold at the time of the release, for else he had no cause of any such
action against him. Neither Old tenures fol. 2.
is any such action maintenable against lessee for years, for he has not the
Freehold. Nor the disseisee cannot have a praecipe quod reddat against the
disseisor, which is parnor of the profits for years only, notwithstanding 6
E. 6. Pl. 87.
the Statute, because by the Common Law, no action lies against 4. E* 4. 32.
him. And for this cause also, non tenure of the whole, or though it be but of
parcel of the thing demanded. Ioynttenancie with one not named in the Writ.
Entiertenancie of the whole, or several tenancie of parcel, 19. H 6. 32. 22. H
6. 12.
when the Writ is brought against two or more, are good pleas in abatement of
the (a) 45 E. 3. 5.
Writ. (b) 37 H 6 8. 27. H. 8. 30.


Statutes.
25 E 3 cap 16. Non tenure shall not abate the writ, but only for the
quantity.

37 E. 3. cap 17. No writ shall be abated by knowledgement of villenage, if the
demaundant or plaintiff will auerre that he that alleged the exception was
free, day of the writ purchased. With the freholder, may be joined in action,
any having title to enter: as the morgagor with the morgagee, 41. E. 3. 16.
the Lord with his villeine, but not the disseisee with his disseisor.

CHAP. 5.
Of a Plea of Land.

A Real praecipe quod reddat, is that which is for real things in render. And
is a plea of land or other such real precipe

A plea of land which is for land or other such things in demesne, where land
in certain is demanded, it must always be brought in a ville, or place
known out of any ville And not in a hamlet which is parcel of a vill. But
personal actions, as trespass, and such like, may be in a hamlet. So of Dower
and Assise, for there no land in certain is demanded; and also in an assise,
he shall recover by view of the Jury. So in a Scire facias out of a fine nuper
obijt, a Writ of mesne, covenant, wast, quare impedit. These may be in a
Hamlet. Otherwise it is of a Writ of right of Aduowson.

A plea of land is a Writ of Entry, or a writ showing the demandants title.

A writ of Entry is that which is to disprooue the Tenants possession by the
means of his entry.

Wherein Tenant in fee simple demanding Old N. B. 124. Fit. N B. 201 ^ and f.
of the possession of his ancestor shall say in the writ, Quod clamat esse ius
and hereditatem suam. Tenant in Tail or for life, shall not so. But in his
declaration set forth Fit. Not Br. ibid.
his special estate.

A Writ of Entry is either against the first party, or in the degrees.

Against the first party, when it is against him to whom the first allienation
was, or that made the first disseisin.

That in the degrees, is in the Per, or in the Per and Cui.

In the Per, when he against whom it is brought comes in immediately under the
first party, as heir unto him, or by alienation from him.

In the Per and Cui, when he against whom it is brought comes in immediately
under the first parties heir or allience: For if more then these two
alienations (the Per, or the Per and Cui) pass, the demandant is driven to his
writ of right. And the reason is, that there may be an end of suits. For no
Writ of Entry in the Post lay at the Common Law. But the same is given by the
statute of Marlebridge. cap. 29. Which writ of Entry in the Post given now by
that Statute, lies when he against whom it is brought comes in neither in
the Per not Per and Cui, then the Writ shall be In quod, etc: nisi post
dimissionem, etc. Out of all degrees, as by abatement, disseisin, eschete,
recovery, Election, Succession, Dower, Judgment, etc. or as the third or more
feffees.

The form of all which is thus In a writ of Entry, in the nature of an
Assise, against the party himself that did the disseisin, Praecipe A. quod
reddat B. vnum Messuagium, etc. de quo A. unjust et sine Iudicia disseisiuit
B. etc. or in the other form disseisiuit C. patrem, or other ancestor of B.
cuius here is ipse est, etc. In the Per thus. In quod idem A. non habet ingressum
nisi per C. qui illud ei dimisit qui unjust B. etc. (or in the other form)
qui unjust, etc. E. patrem, etc praedict. B. etc. In the Per and Cui thus. In
quod, etc. nisi per C. cui D. illud dimisit qui inde unjust B. or (in the
second form) qui unjust E. patrem, etc. praed. B. In the post thus. In quod,
etc. nisi post disseisina^ quam D. unjust fecit praed. B. or (in the other
form) unjust fecit E. patri, etc. praed. B. etc. In such like manner it is of
a Dum fuit infra aetatem, and of all other Writs of Entry upon an alienation.
Marleb. cap. 29.

Writs of Entry grow either without wrong at the first, or upon a wrong.

Those without a wrong at the first, are grounded upon a determination of the
first estate, or a dishabilitie in the person that made it.

Upon a determination of the estate, either by reason of a particular estate
ended, or a condition broken.

Of a particular estate ended is an ad terminum qui praeterijt, or Enter ad
Communem Legem.

Ad terminum qui praeterijt, is upon a deforcement by the lessee or a stranger
after a Lease for years, or life expired, whether the Lessee did allien, or
not. But not after the death of Tenant in Dower, or by Courtesy, for that is
not properly called a Term

Entry ad communem legem, is when tenant for life, be it his own or another
life, tenant in Dower or by courtesy of England does alien and die, and he in
the reuersion for life, may have this writ.

Of a condition broken, as Causa matrimonij praelocuti. Causa matrimonij
pralocuti, is for a woman that gives land to a man to marry her, and he will
not: but it lies not for a man that gives lands to a woman.

Grounded upon the disabilitie, are a Dum fuit infra aetatem, and a Dum non
fuit compos mentis.

Dum fuit infra aetatem is by the infant, when he comes to his full age, upon
an alienation by himself, or his auncestor, being within age.

But the clause that he is of full age, viz. qui plenae est aetatis, shall not
be inserted in the Writ, if either it be brought in the degrees Per, cui, or
post, or upon the ancestors alienation.

Dum non fuit compos mentis, is upon the alienation of himself, or his
ancestors being of non sane memory.

Those upon a wrong at the first are either upon a discontinuance, or an
ouster.

Upon a discontinuance, as a Cui in vita, or a Sine assensu capituli.

A Cui in vita, for the wife after the husbands death upon his alienation of
her fee simple, fee tail, or freehold, whether whether dower or otherwise, or
of such a joint estate in them.

And in this writ claiming a fee simple, but not an estate Tail or a freehold,
for there the Writ shall make special mention of the estate, she shall say,
Quod clamat esse ius et hereditatem suam, though it be of her own possession.

Statutes.
Westminster 2. cap. 3. A cui in vita given to the wife after her husbands death,
upon his losing of the land by default. And the Tenant that recovered against
her husband must maintain his own right.

If it be an estate of fee simple, and she bring not in her life time a cui in
vita, the heir shall have a Sur cui vita. But of an estate tail only, a
formedon lies in this case for the heir.

And of this nature is a cui ante diuortium, when it is brought by the wife
after diuorcement, upon such an alienation as before.

A fine assensu capituli is for the Successor of a Bishop, Abbot, Prior, Deane,
Prebendarie, or Master of any Hospital after the discontinuance of the
Predecessor, viz. when they alien the lands they have in the right of their
Church, house, Abbey, or Priorie, without the consent of their covent, Chapter,
or Confrers, etc.

Upon an ouster, or either upon an intrusion or a disseisin.

That upon an intrusion is called a writ of intrusion, and is for him in the
reuersion or remainder in fee simple, or for life, not in tail (for he shall
have a formedon) nor for years, because he has not the freehold, after the
death of tenant for life in Dower, or by courtesy.

And if land be given to two, and the heirs of one, and he that has fee
dies, and after him tenant for life dies. Now the heir of him in the
remainder shall have this writ. And it lies also for the assignee of the
assignee of him in the remainder.

Upon a disseisin, is when the disseisin is done to him or his Ancestors. As a
writ of Entry in the Quibus; or which is all one in the nature of an Assise.

Writs that show the demandants title, are mere possessorie, or in the right.

Mere possessorie are those which are brought by the next heir upon an
abatement after the death of any auncester, other then his father, mother,
brother, sister, uncle, Aunt, Nephew, Neice, for upon an abatement after the
death of any such auncestor, an Assise of mortdauncestor lies as shall appear
afterward: seized in demesne as of a fee simple the day of his death, though
he were disseised the very same day, and so died not seized at all. Of this
nature are,

A Writ of Ayell after the death of his grandfather or grandmother.

A writ of Besayel after his great grandfather or grandmother.

I writ of Cosinage after the death of his great great grandfather or
grandmother, or any other collateral Cousin, as the great great grandfathers
brother.

Statutes.
Westminster 2 cap. 20. In a Writ of Cosinage, Ayell, and Besayell, the point shall
be enquired whether the demaundant be next heir as well as in a
mortdauncester.

In the right, is that which is to disprove the right of the Tenant, and is a
Writ of right in his nature, or a Praecipe in Capite.

A Writ of right in his nature which shows how the demaundants right is
grown. And is a formdon or a writ of Eschete and Dower, vnde nihil habet.

A Formdon is a Praecipe quod reddat, entitling the party by the form of the
gift.

And is a formedon in remaynder, or a Formedon in reuerter: for a formedon in
descender lies not at the Common Law, but is given by the Staute of Westminster 2.
Old Not. Br. per Br. Formd 69. 3. El. Pl 235.
cap. 1.

A Formedon in remaynder is for him in the remaynder for Old Not. Br. 148. 149.
life, or in F. N. B. 217. d.
fee upon a Lease for Fitz. ibid.
life expired. For after an estate tail expired, it lay not at the Common Law:
because it was a fee simple, whereupon a remainder could not depend.

A formdon in reuerter is for the donor Fit. N Br. 219. c. 30. E. 1. formd. 65.
alter the issue in tail determined, as at the Common Law, if the donee alien
before issue had, and after die without issue: or if he have issue, and after
he or his issue dye without issue. Contrary it is if he had issue and then had
aliened, and dyed without issue.

A writ of Eschete is for the Lord that has a seigniorie in fee, or for life
upon an eschete.

Dower, vnde nihil habet, is a writ for Old Not. Br. 6.
ones dower, which has received no part at all of it.

Statutes.
Westminster 1. cap. 48. A writ of dower vnde nihil habet, shall not abate though she
have received part of her dower before the writ purchased, unless it were of
the same party against whom the writ is brought, and in the same Town.

A writ of dower lies against gardein Br. pr^^. quoth rodd. 35
by knight service, though he be not tenant of the freehold.

A praecipe in capite is a praecipe quod reddat, for the mere right: and
therefore lies Fit. Not. Br. 5. f.
only for Tenant in fee simple of lands holden in Chief.

Statutes.
Washm^ 2. cap. 4. In place of a writ of right, a Quod ei deforceat is given to
Tenants for life or in tail upon loosing by default.

CHAP. 6.
Of a writ of right of ward, and a Writ of right Sur disclaimer.

OTher real praecipe quod reddats, are those which are in respect of a
seigniorie, as a writ of right of ward, and a writ of right sur disclaimer.

A writ of right of ward, is to recover the wardship. If of the body, it lies
both for gardein in soccage, and by Knight service: Fitz. Na. Br. 139.
If of the land, it lies only for gardein by Knight service.

Statutes.
Marleb. cap. 7 In a writ De communi custodia, if the deforcer come not at the
grand distress, the same Writ shall be reitterated, as often as well it may be
within half a year following, and every time the Writ read, and Proclamation
made in the County Court, if he come not to answer, nor the Sheriff find him
within half a year, he shall lose the custody. Saving his action another
time, if he have right.

Westminster. 2. cap. 35. In a Writ of ward of land, or heir, or both, either of the
parties dying before the plea determined, a resomons shall be. And in the
grand distress day must be given that three County days may be holden before
the return, in every of which Proclamation shall be made, whereupon the
defendant not appearing, Judgment shall be given for the Plaintiff. Saving the
right of the defendant, if afterward he will claim it. So shall it be done in
a writ of eiectment of guard.

A writ of Right Sur disclaimer is for the Lord to prove the Lands to be holden
of him, when in an action where the services should be recovered, As in an
auowrie made upon the Tenant for them: for there 13. H. 7. 27.
he shall recover the services inclusiue, inasmuch as he is to have a return
in an Assise ibid.
or praecipe quod reddat of rent (for there the services are expressly demanded)
but not in a per quae seruitia (for there no services but an Atturnement only
is demanded) nor in a 5. E 4. 2. 13. H. 7. 27. 15. E. 4. 29.
Justification, in a repleuin, or an auowrie in an action of Trespass (for
there the defendant shall never have a return, nor recover his seruises
expressly nor includedly, the Tenant in Court of record, viz. in Old Not. Br.
162.
the Common place, but not in Court Baron or County Court. For there if the
Lord make auowrie upon the Tenant, and he disclaim to hold of him, the Lord
shall be amerced, disclaimeth to hold of him.

And if in this writ of right sur disclaimer, Ibid.
he can prove the land to be holden of him, he shall recover the land it self
for ever: because the disclaimer is of record. 16. H. v. 1. 34. E. 3. Dis^. 24.
Therefore by such a disclaimer, he is barred of all possessorie actions for
the services, as an Assise, Cessauit, rauishment of ward, and such like: but
not of a Writ of Eschete, Right of ward, right of customs, and services, etc.
And though the Lords distress and 16. H. 7. 1.
auowrie were lawful, yet the Tenant so disclaiming, shall recover damages of
him, for the disclaimer gives the Lord a better advantage, viz. the Land it
self.

Statutes.
Westminster. 2. cap. 2. If the Tenant disclaim in County Court, or other Court not
of Record, the Lord may remove the plea before the Justices to cause it to be
of Record. So as he may have a Writ of right sur disclaimer.

Glocest. cap. 4. ^ Explanat. cap. 4. when land is given in feefarme, rendering
or doing so much as amounts to the fourth part of the value of the Land, if
he (whose land is charged) let it lie fresh by two years, so as no distress
can be found in it, nor render, or do that which is contained in the writing,
the other shall recover the land by a Cessauit. But the donee coming before
Judgment, if he render the arrerages and damages, and find sufficient to do
from thenceforth, that which is contained in the writing, shall tetaine his
land.

Westminster 2. cap. 21. If a man detain from any Lord his service due by two
years, the Lord shall recover the land by a Cessauit. This lies also for the
heir of the Lord against his Tenant, his heirs, or those to whom he alieneth
the land.

Westminster. 2. cap. 41. So if religious houses that have land given them, etc.
withdraw the alms, etc. by two years, the donor shall have the like action.

CHAP. 7.
Of a Writ, De cousuetudinibus and Seruitijs, and Secta ad moiendinum.

A Real praecipe quod faciat is either to recover hereditaments, or some real
thing that concern them.

Those that are to recover some F. N. B. 151. g.
hereditament demanding of (...) own seisin are in the debet and solet,
demanding of the ancestor seisin, they are in the debet only, and then are in
all respects as writs for the mere right, that is to say, are triable by
battle, or grand Assise

These are either in respect of a seigniorie, or to recover some other
hereditament.

In respect of a seigniorie, as a writ De Consuetudinibus et Seruitijs, and a
secta ad molendinum.

A writ De consuetudinibus et seruitijs lies Fit. N. B. 151. b.
for the Lord that has an estate for life or a greater estate, in the
seigniorie, and is deforced of his services

Secta ad molendinum lies for the Lord, when the Tenants that hold of him by
Fit. N. B. 122. ^.
grinding their corn at his Mill, withdraw their suit, and grind elsewhere.

Statutes.
Marleb. ca. 9. The Process either where the Lord distreineth against the
form of this Statute, or the Tenants withdraw the suits due, is attachment,
(wherein only essoin is allowable, and deliverance of the distress
incontinently to remain so till the plea be ended) Venire facias, and the
grand distress. At which day not appearing, the distresses delivered shall so
remain till recovery in the Kings Courts, til which time the Lord (in case he
be defendant) must distraine no more; and the Plaintiff shall be dismissed
without day, if the defendant come to answer, and the matter pass, against
him, the Plaintiff shall recover damages.

This of damages to be recovered (in case where the Tenant is defendant) is to
be understood of withdrawing the suit from the Lord himself, and not from his
predecessors.

CHAP. 8.
Of a Quare impedit, and a quod permittat.

FOr other heraditaments are a quare impedit, and a quod permittat.

A quare impedit lies upon a disturbance, Fit. Not. Br. 33. h.
where he, or his ancestors, or those from whom he claims, having at any time
before presented to a Church, himself is now disturbed.

Statutes.
25 E. 3. cap. 3. Stat. 3. Upon the Kings collation or presentment to a
benefice, his title shall be well examined, and being found before Judgment
untrue, or unjust, the collation or presentment shall be repealed. And the
patron or possessor which shows the false title, shall have thereupon Writs
out of the Chancerie, as many as are needful.

Marleb. cap. 12. In a Quare impedit, and Assizes of Darrein presentment, day
shall be given from xv. days to xv. days, and from three weeks to three weeks.
And in a quare impedit the process shall be a summons, attachment or grand
distress.

Westminster 2. cap. 5. If Coparceners make partition to present by turn, and one
of them present accordingly, he that is afterward disturbed shall have a Scire
facias, (and not be driven to his quare impedit) and recover his presentation
with damagess.

An auowson (after the death of one that has presented) being assigned in
dower, or to Tenant by Courtesy, and they present, the heir if he be disturbed
after their death shall have a quare impedit, or darrein presentment at his
pleasure. So of an auowson demised for life, years, or in tail, when 6.
months pass hanging a quare impedit or darrein presentment, so as the Bishop
presents by lapps, the patron shall recover damages to two years value of the
Church. Otherwise damages to half a years value: The disturber not being able
to render damages, shall in the first case have imprisonment of two years, in
the second of half a year.

A Quod permittat lies for one that has Common of pasture for his beasts,
being Fit. Not. Br. 123. ^.
disturbed by a stranger, so as he cannot use his Common.

CHAP. 9.
Of a Curia claudenda, Writ of Covenant real, mesne and warrantia chartae,
where of fines.

THose that are to recover some real thing concerning hereditaments are a
Curia claudenda, or a Covenant real, and other writs sounding in that nature.

A Curia claudenda lies for a F. N. B. 128. a.
freeholder, not for a Tenant for years, when one that has a Close next
adjoining to him, (b) F. N. B. 127. b. and 128. a. F. N. B. 146. f.
which he should keep enclosed, will not do it. A writ of Covenant real,
lies upon a Covenant to do a thing real, as to levy a fine of lands, etc.
Writs in the nature of a covenant real, are a writ of mesne and a warrantia
chartae.

A writ of mesne lies for the Tenant ngainst the mesne, when the Lord
paramount Fit. N. Br. 135. m.
does distreine the Tenant whom the mesne ought to acquit.

Statutes.
Westminster. 2. cap. 9. The Tenant distreined by the chief Lord may have a writ in
the County where he is distreined against the mesne, who having land in that
County, and not appearing till the grand distress, day shall be given in the
grand distress, so as two Counties may be holden before the return. Wherein
the Sheriff shall proclaim that he come to answer the Tenant at the day. At
which day if he come not, he loses his service, and the Tenant shall hold of
the chief Lord by the same services that the mesne held. The chief Lord may
not distreine the Tenant of the demesne if he offer the service due. And
exacting of him more then the mesne ought to do, that Tenant shall have the
remedy that the mesne might have.

Upon a return that the mesne had nothing to be sommoned by an attachment
shall go out, and upon a nihil returned, the grand distress with proclamation
as before.

The mesne having no land in that county but in another upon such a return by
the Sheriff, the party shall have a Writ Judicial to summon the mesne in that
County where it is testified that he has lands, and both there and in the
other County shall proceed to the grand distress, and proclamation and
Judgment as before.

The mesne coming into the Count and acknowledging, or being adjudged to
acquit his Tenant, and not doing it, the Tenant shall have a Judicial Writ of
acquittance. Whereupon if the mesne come in, and the Tenant can aver that he
has not acquitted him, he shall be satisfied of his damages, and be quit of
the mesne, and hold of the chief Lord, and if the mesne come not at the first
distress, then another distress shall go out, and proclamation, and so proceed
to Judgment as before.

This statute extends only where there is but one mesne between the Lord
that distreineth and the tenant, the mesne of full age and the Tenant, tenant
in fee simple.

A Warrantia Charta lies for him that has lands or Tenements warranted unto
F. N B. 134. d.
him, either by feoffement, 12. H. 4. 22.
release, or confirmation with clause of warrantie, where his hereditaments are
liable from Fit. Not. Br. 134. k ^2. H. 6 22.
the time of the action brought. Therefore it is policy for one to bring his
Warrantia charta before he be sued. For upon vouching when he is once sued, he
recouereth in value but such lands as the vouchee had at the time of the
voucher.

And upon these writs of 42. E 3. 5.
Covent real, T. H Eitz.
mesnes John per Die. 179.
warrantie of Charters, as also upon a Writ of 21. E. 3. 18.
customs and service, s a fine may be levied.

A fine is the acknowledging of an hereditament in the Kings Court according to
the covenant, to be his right that does complain, He that complains is
called plaintiff, and the other deforceant. And this acknowledging of it to be
ones right is called, A fine sur conueyance de droit, But if the right be
ackowledged to be his, as that which he has of the gift of the Conisor, it is
called a Fine sur conisance de droit come ceo quel ad de son done. The form of
a fine is, Haec est finalis concordia facta in curia dn'i Regis, etc. vnde
plac' conuentionis pendet in ead' curia sc. quoth. prad' I. S. recognouit
tenementa praed esse ius ipsius A. etc.

A fine may be levied upon a writ of warrantie of Charters, for it is in effect
but a 42. E. 35. 40. E. 3. 7.
covenant between the parties before the Justices, and entered of record. And
before the Statute of Westminster. De his quae concordata sunt (which gives a scire
fac.) if the fine were not executed, the party should have a writ De fine
fracto, and recover damages only, which proves that a fine is but a covenant
of record.

Where one of the^ must needs have such an estate at the time of the fine
levied, for against the plea that the parties to the fine 22. N. 6. 57.
had nothing etc. it is no good replication, that the parties were seized etc.
for if one 27. H 8. 4. 37. H. 6. 5.
of them were seized it is sufficient. Which form of pleading (viz that one of
the parties was seized) proves that if he have 7. Eliz. Ploy. 360.
left an estate for years the fine is void. And a fine of the land it self
will pass away a reuersion depending upon an estate estate for life. And this
is as it were a feoffement of record. So as a freehold passes (a) Lit. 12. is
that in a feoffement made on pai^. etc. where a freehold passes, be it by deed
or without, there must needs be livery of seisin, which words (en pais) are put
to exclude fines that are feoffements of record.
thereby without any liuerie of seisin. That where of the fine is levied, or
any thing contained in it, as a rent Common, etc. out of the land, an estate
for years, or other estate in the land, etc. may be granted back again to
the Conisor by the same fine. And this is called a fine sur grant and render.
The form whereof is: Et pro hac recognitione, etc. the conisee concessit, to
the conisor, praed' tenem' cum pertiu^ and illa ei reddidit (b) 18. E. 422.
in ead' curia haben', to the conisor, etc. (c) 36. H. 8. Br. fines 118.
for none can take the first estate but those that are named in the Writ of
covenant. But every stranger may take a remainder. As A. leuieth a fine to B.
who renders it back to A. and E. his wife, etc. In this case E. has no
estate, for she was not party to the Writ.

Statutes.
27. H. 1. Stat. 1. cap. 1. De finibus leuatis. Exception against a fine, that
the plaintifes or defendants, or their ancestors, were always seized of the
lands contained in the fine shall not from henceforh be admitted in the parties
to the fine or their heirs.

The fines shall two days in the week be publicly and solemnly read, and
all pleas cease in the mean time.

5. H. 4. cap. 14. All Writs of Covenant and other, whereupon sines be levied,
the Dedimus potestatem, and all knowledges and notes of the same, before that
they be drawn out of the Common bench by the Chirographer, shall be enrolled
in a roll to be of record for ever Out of the which execution shall be had, if
the notes or fines shall be imbezilled.

23. Eliz. cap. 3. Every Writ of Covenant, or other writ whereupon any fine is
levied, the return thereof, the Dedimus Potestatem and return thereof, the
concord, note, and foot of the fine, the proclamations and the Queens silver:
Also every writ of Entry in the Post or other writ, whereupon any common
recovery is suffered, the Writs of sommons ad warrantizandum, and the returns
of all these writs, and every Warrant of Attorney may at any man's request be
enrolled. Which enrolment shall be of as great force to all purposes in Law as
the things themselves if they were extant.

No fine, proclamation, or common recovery shall be reuersed by writ of Error,
by reason of false Latin, rasure, enterlyning, misentring of the Warant of
Attorney, or of any proclamation misentring, or non return of the Sheriff, or
by reason of any other defect of form in words, and not in matter of substance.

Fines executed bind all persons if Lit. 104.
claim be not made within a year, therefore it is called a fine, Quia finis
finem sitibus imponaebat. And in a fine upon a render, if 7. Ed. 2. 37. Contin.
cl^^m 7.
the Conisee sue not execution within the year but after the year, by a scire
facias, no strainger need to lay to his claim.

Statutes.
34. Ed. 3. cap. 18. The plea of non claim, of fines from henceforth to
beleuied, shall not be any bar.

34. H. 7. cap. 24. Every fine after the engrossing shall be proclaimed in the
Court, the same Term and the three next, four several days in every Term,
all pleas ceasing the whilst. Which proclamations so made, the fine shall
conclude all priuies and strangers, except women covert, persons within xxj.
years of age, in prison, out of the Realm, or if non save memory (being no
parties to the fine.) So they or their heirs take their action or lawful
entry within five years after those imperfections removed. Saving to all
persons and their heirs (other than parties) the right claim and interest
which they have at the time of the fine. So that they pursue it by action or
lawful entry within five years next after the proclamations. And saving to
all other persons such right, title, claim, and interest as first shall grow,
remain or come to them after the proclamations, by force of any matter before
the fine. So they take their right according to the law within 5. years next
after it grow, etc. And those that be covert Baron, etc. at the time when it
grows, etc. that they or their heirs take their actions or lawful entry
within five years after those imperfections removed.

Saving also to all not parties, nor priuies the exception that none of the
parties, nor any to their use, had any thing in the lands at the time of the
fine.

31. H. 8. cap. 36. All fines levied by any person of xxj. years of age of
lands entailed before the same fine, to himself or his ancestors in
possession, reuersion, remainder or use, shall immediately after proclamation
made, be a sufficient bar against him and his heirs, claiming only by such
entaile, and against all other claiming only to his use, or the use of any
heir of his body.

1. Marl. cap. 7. All fines whereupon proclamations be not, or shall not be
duly made (by reason of the adiournement of any Term by Writ) shall be as
good as if any Term had been holden from the beginning to the end, and
proclamations therein made according to the statute.

^1. Eliz cap. 2. Proclamations of fines shall be only four times, viz. once
in the Term wherein the fine is engrossed, and once every of the three Terms
next after.

A femecouert joining with her husband Lit. 14^.
in a fine it binds her for ever. Therefore here the Justices must examine
her to see that she do it willingly. For if she say 15. E. 4. 1.
upon her examination, that the husband did imprison her to levy the fine,
this fine is not to be received. A grant by fine of a seigniorie, rent charge,
rent seck, remaynder, or reuersion, is presently good. Save for bringing
actions that run in priuitie between the Tenant and him. As an action of
Waste or Cosimili casu, when the reuertion 48. E. 3. 15.
of Tenant for life is granted by fine, and after Tenant for life a lieneth in
fee, a Writ of Eschete or Ward when the Tenants services are granted by fine,
and after the Tenant dies without heir, or his heir within age. But in these
cases he may enter for a forfeiture or eschete, and seize the Ward: and shall
also be received upon default of Tenant for life. 37. H. 6. 5.


CHAP. 10.
Of an Assise and Iuris vtrum.

THus much of real praecipes. Real si fecerit te securum, are an Assise, ^
Iuris vtrum, or other.

An assise is such a real Plea Fit. Not. B. 177. ^.
merely in possession.

An Assise of ones own only possession is an assise of novel disseisin, or
an assise or Nusaunce. An assise of novel disseisin is for a freeholder
against his disseisor, whether it be of land or rent, or the Baylife of the
disseisor if himself cannot be found. And being of a rent charge, or rent
seck, all the Tenaunts of the Land, we call them terretenants must be named,
and the whole land put in view, though he were 31. ass. Pl 31. 32. ass. Pl. 10.
disseised by one Tenant only. If the Lord distreine the Tenant too often for
the rent or services: that is to say, such as too great a distress may be
taken for, as rent service, etc. but not for fealty suite of Court, etc. for
which there cannot be any too great distress. And whether it be the Lord
mediat or immediate, the Tenant may have an assise: the reason is, for that
the tenant cannot make rescous.

Statutes.
Magn^ chart. cap. 12. Assizes of mortdauncester and of novel disseisin shall
not be taken but in their proper County by the Justice of Assise, and if they
cannot be determined there, they shall be determined by the same Justices in
their journey: upon a difficulty of any points, they shall be reserved to the
Justices of the Common place and there determined.

Westminster 2. cap 18. 13. E. 1. Stat. de Mercator 27. E. 3. cap. 9. Tenant by
elegit by Satute merchant, and by statute staple, shall have an assise or
redisseisin.

Westminster 1. cap. 47. The gardein or chief Lord enfeoffing one of parcel of
land in his hand, the heir may presently have an assise of novel disseisin
against the gardein and tenant, and the gardein shall lose the ward, and all
the remnant that he holds of the heirs for life.

Westminster. 2. cap. 25. A man shall have an assise for estouers of wood, profit to
be taken in wood of nuts, accornes, and other fruits of Corodies, delivery of
corn, and other vittailes and necessaries of money to be received yearly in
a place certain of Toll, trorage, passage, pontage, pawnage, and such like, to
be taken in places certain. Custodidies of woods, parks, forests, Chases,
warrens, gates, and other Bailywicks, and offices in fee. And in all these
cases the writ shall be de libero tenemento. Likewise an assise is given for
common of Turn land, fishing, and such like. Commons which a man has
appendant to a freehold or without a freehold by special deed, at the least
for term of his life.

Westminster. 1. cap. 24. An Assise given against Eschetor, Sheriff, or other Baylife
of the King, that seiseth any lands by color of his office, without special
warrant or commandment, or certain authority that belongs to his office so
to do, and double damages to be recovered.

Westminster. 2. cap. 25. When Tenant for years, or in ward alieneth in fee, the
remedy shall be by an assise, as well against the feoffor as the feoffee,
during the life of either of them. If by the death of either of them, remedy
fail by that Writ, then the remedy shall be by a writ of Entry.

7. Ric. 2. cap. 10. An assise of novel disseisin of rent out of Tenements in
diverse Counties, shall be in the confine of the same Counties.

Westminster 2. cap. 25. In an assise, if one named a disseisor do personally allege
an exception whereby the taking of the assise may be deferred, as that another
time an assise of the same land passed between the same parties, or that there
is a Writ of higher nature hanging, etc. and hereupon voucheth Rols or records
to warrantie, and at the day given him, he fail of that he vouched, he shall
be adjudged a disseisor without taking an assise, render double damages, and
have a years imprisonment. If such exception be alleged by the Baylife in the
absence of his Master, the taking of the assise, and judgment shall not
thereupon be delayed. But his master afterward offering to prove before the
same Justices, such an exception shall have a venire facias for the record,
which if the Justices see, might have been available to have barred the
plaintiff, they shall award a Scire facias against him that recovered, wherein
the defendant shall recover again his seisin and damages, with his double
damages sustained since the first judgment and imprisonment of that party
that recovered. In like manner if the defendant, against whom an assise passed
in his absence, show any deed, release, whereupon the Jury were not, nor could
not be examined, because there was no mention of them in the pleading, the
Justices upon sight of those writings shall award a Scire facias against the
party that recovered, and cause the same Jurors to come before them. And the
writings being proved true by their verdict, or by the enrolment of them, like
punishment shall be as before.

Westminster 2. cap 30. The Jurors shall not be compelled to find a disseisin or no
disseisin, but may give their verdict at large.

Merton. cap 3. A man disseised recovering his seisin by assise of novel
disseisin, or confession of the party, and having the same delivered him by
the Sheriff, if he be again disseised of the same Tenement, by the same
disseisor shall have a writ of redisseisin to command the Sheriff, taking with
him the keeper of the Pleas of the Crown, and other lawful Knights in proper
person to go to the land, etc. and by the first Jurors and other lawful men to
make inquiry. This must not be without special commandment of the king.

Westminster. 2. cap. 26. A writ of redisseisin shall lie for them that have
recovered by default, redicion, or otherwise, without recognition of the
assizes and Iuries.

Merton. cap. 3. The redisseisor shall be imprisoned.

Marleb. cap. 8. And not delivered without special commandment of the King,
and besides shall pay a fine.

Westminster. 2. cap. 26. He shall answer double damages, and not be repleuiable by
the common writ.

Westminster 2. cap. 8. In fine, writs of redisseisin must be enrolled in the
Chancetie, and a transcripsit thereof shall be sent into the Excheker in the
end of the year. An assise F. N. B. 184. g.
of nuisance is for him whose freehold is spoiled by any nuisance, for if he have
but a lease for years in the land, he shall not have an assise of nuisance,
but an action upon his Case.

Statutes.
Westminster 2 cap. 24. Gives an assise of nuisance against him to whom the Tenement
is alienated after the nuisance is made

6. Ric. 2. cap. 3. The plaintiff, if he will, may have a writ of nuisance in
the nature of an assise, determinable before the Justices, of one bench or
other, or before the Justices of assise.

An assise of his ancestors possession only called an assise of mortdancestor,
is for The form of the writ F. N. B. 195. 14. El. Die. 310. is that the 3
points to be inquired in a Mortdancester (all expressed in the writ) are 1
whether the ancestor were seized in see day of his death. 2. whether the
demanda^t be his next heir. 3. whether the ancestor died within fifty years
next before the writ purchased.
the next heir upon an abatement after the death at his father, mother,
brother, sister, uncle, aunt, nephew, or neice: for of other ancestors, a writ
of Ayell, Besayell, or Cosinage, and not a mortdancestor lies, who was seized
in demesne as of a see F N. B 196. k
simple the day F. N. B. 195. d 4 El. Pl. 239.
of his death, though he were disseised the very same day, and so dyed not
seized at all. But upon lands given to one and his second wife (he having a
son by a former) and the heirs of their two bodies, their son cannot have
a mortdancestor, (after the death of his father ouerliuing the second wife) for
he is not next heir, but his elder brother: and therefore, by the Common Law,
he was driven to a Formedon endescender, which was nothing else but a Writ
formed upon his case. So if the auncestor were seized in tail, the remainder
F. N. B. 195. d.
to his right heirs, a mortdauncestor lies not, for there, of the demesne he
is seized in tail, not in fee.

Statutes.
Magna charta, cap. 12. vide supra.

Marleb. cap. 16. A mortdancestor given against the Lord that will not render
the land to his ward at full age.

Westminster. 2. cap. 4. If a woman having no right recover dower against a gardein,
the heir at full age shall have a mortdauncestor against her.

Gloucest. cap. 6. All the heirs whereof one is son or daughter, brother or
sister, nephew or niece, and the other in a further degree shall join in a
mortdauncester.

Gloucest. cap. 3. The heir shall have an assise of mortdauncestor, if Tenant
by courtesy alien and leave no assets.

An assise which may be either of his own or his ancestors possession, called
an assise of darrein presentment is upon a disturbance when F. N. B. 31. g. old
N B. 33.
himself or his ancestor did last present: and therefore lies for F. N. B.
31. i. 5 H. 7. 16.
tenant in years as well as for him that has an estate of inheritance, or for
life.

Statutes.
Magn. chart. cap. 13. An assise of darrein presentment shall be always taken
before the Justices of the Common place.

Marleb. cap. 12. and Westminster 2. cap. 2. A F. N. B. 48. r.
Iuris vtrum is such a real plea founded upon the right for a Parson or Vickar
upon his predecessors altenation.

Statutes.
14. E. 3. cap. 16. A Iuris vtrum, and other Writs according to their case,
given to Parsons, Vickars, and Wardeins of Chapels, Prouosts Wardens and
Priests of perpetual Chauntries for lands in frankalmoigne, as well as to
Parsons of Churches, or Prebends.

CHAP. 11.
Of a Writ of Partition, Nuper obijt, and a Quo iure.

THis is the nature of an assise, and Iuris vtrum. Those that follow are either
a Partitione facienda, and nuper obijt, (which both lie between priuies in
blood) or a Quo Iure.

A Particione facienda lies between copercenors to compel particion to be
made, Lit. 53, 65, 72.
but not between Ioyntenants, or Tenants in Common, yet partition made there
by Lit. 98. 5. E. 3. parti^. 11.
assent between them is very good, but the husband of one of the coapareeners
coming to be Tenant by courtesy, such a Writ lies for the other Copercener
against him because he comes in of the state of his wife; but not for him,
against the other. Therefore here for equality of partition, things that
otherwise cannot may be granted 2. H. 7. 5. 11 H. 4. 3. 28 H. 6. 2. 21 E. 3. 7.
28 H. 8. Die. 29.
without deed: As a rent, reuertion, seigniorie, way, auowson, composition to
present by turn, etc.

Statutes.
31. H. 8. cap. 1. Ioyntenants, or Tenans in Common of an estate of
inheritance, may be compelled to make partition, and afterward shall have aid
to deraigne the warrantie paramount, and to recover for the rate as coperceners
(after partition) should.

32. H. 8. cap. 32. Ioyntenants, or Tenants in Common for life or years, or
where one or many hold for life or years with another that has the
inheritance, may be compelled to make partition. Such partition shall be
prejudicial to none but the parties, their Executours and Assigns.

Nuper obijt lies against one privy in F. N. B. 197.
blood, that enters after the death of the auncestor that dyed seized in
demesne. And therefore being but to try the priuitie of blood, view, nor
voucher, lies not, neither is non tenure any plea.

A Quo iure lies for the tenant of the F. N. B. 128.
land when one challenges common, there to try whether in right he ought to
have any or no.

CHAP. 12.
Of Debt and detinue, whereof a Writ of Annuitie.

THus far of real actions. A personal action is that where damages are to
be recovered, for at the Common Law neither shall 22. H. 6. 27.
any but the Plaintiff recover damages, Br. Costs 29.
nor damages lie but in personal and mixed actions, not in real, as Dower
writs of Entry, sur disseisin, Ayell, Cosinage, etc. for in them damages are
given by special Statutes. Which being but once suspended, or but against one,
is gone for ever, and against all. As if the Creditor be made an (c) 21. E. 4.
3.
Executor to his debtor and once administer, or take to wife one of the
Executors of his (d) 11. H 4. 83.
debtor, she having administered before, the action of debt is gone for ever. So
if two (e) 8. E. 4. 3.
be bound in an obligation to a fem sole, and after she takes one of the
obligors to husband, the whole duty is extinct.

Erecutors bringing an action, must do 21 E. 4. 23. 16. H. 7. 4.
it in all their names, as well of those that refuse administration, as of the
rest. But an action may be brought only against 32 H. 6. 25.
those that do administer.

Statutes.
9. E. 3. cap. 3. Stat. 1. In a writ of debt brought against diverse executors,
they shall have but one essoine before appearance, and one after appearance. He ot
they that do first appear in the Court at the grand distress, shall answer to
the Plaintiff, and the Plaintiff (if it pass for) shall have judgment and
execution of the goods of the Testator against all named in the writ, as well
as if they had all pleaded. In personell actions growing in respect of a
possession in Common, Tenants in Common are in all respects as Iointenants, for
they must join in an action of Trespass, for a trespass 22. H. 6. 12. 38 E.
3. 7.
done upon their ground: in an action of account, against their Bailife of a
wood, and if one of them dye, the suruiuor shall have an action of the whole.
So if Tenant for life 45. E. 3. 3.
the reuertion to two sisters commit waste, one sister dies having issue, and
the Tenant commit wast again, the issue and her Aunt shall join in an action
of wast, and the Aunt sole recover treble damages for the wast done in her
sisters time.

In personell praecipes, damages only shall be recovered where the thing*
cannot be had: for 1. E. 5. 6.
damages shall not be recovered in a Writ of Detinue, if the thing it self
may be delivered, damages Br. Detin. 48.
I say to the value of the thing demanded: but damages for the detaining shall.

Personell praecipe quod reddats are debt and detinue.

Debt, when any thing is due upon a contract.

Which if it be 50 E. 3. 16. ^1 H. 7. 5.
money due from one to another in their own right, is in the Debet and
Detinet, otherwise in the detinet only. As in debt, for the rent 50 E. 3. ibid.
of Wheat, and Hens reserved upon a lease for years, or of any Chattell,
quick or dead, in debt, 19 H. 8 8.
by or 10 H. 7. 5.
against an executour for rent, upon a lease of land, though it be behind after
the Testators death: or ibid.
upon a former recovery of debt or damages against executors, or for arrerages
found in an action 15 El. Pl. 441.
of account brought by them, for all is in the right of their Testator. But
against an heir upon an obligation, etc. of his ancestor, it lies in the
debet and detinet, for the assets which he has in his own right, makes it
his proper debt. So for an 47 E. 3. 33.
Abbot or Prior upon an obligation of the predecessor, and though he be behind
himself only, and against husband ibid.
and wife upon a recovery of debt and damages against the wife whilst she was
sole.

Statutes.
Magn. Chart. cap. 8. The pledges shall be free so long as the principal
debtor is sufficient. And answering the debt, shall have the lands and rents of
the principal till they be satisfied.

2. Ric. 2. cap. 12. No Wardein of the Fleet shall suffer any prisoner in
execution to go out of prison by mainprise, bail, baston, without making gree
to the party, unless by Writ, or other commandment of the King, upon pain
to lose his office, and the party to have a writ of debt against him.

33 H. 6. cap. 10. Every obligation taken by a Sheriff or his ministers by
color of their office, of any person in their Ward by course of Law, shall be
by the name of their office, and upon condition that the prisoners appear at
the day and place mentioned in the Writs, Bills and Warrants, taken in any
other form, it shall be void.

32. H. 8. cap. 37. The Executors or Administrators of him that has any rent
or fee farm in fee in tail, or for life, shall have an action of debt for the
arrerages, in the Testators life time against the tenants that should then have
paid it. Or may distreine (and make auowrie upon his matter) in the lands so
long as they remain in the possession of the said Tenant, or of any claiming
only from him.

A husband seized of any such estate ^ any rent or fee farm in his wives
right, shall (after her death) himself, his Executors, or administrators, have
the same remedy for arrerages due in her life.

So of him his Executors and administrators, that has a rent or fee farm
during another life, and cesti qui vi, die, the same being unpaid.

Prerogative.
When any of the Kings goods come into a subjects hands, whether by matter of
record 10. El. Pl 321.
or enfait, so as he is accomptant for them, his land all times after is
chargeable for the same, and subject to the Kings seizure, into whose hands
soever it come, whether by descent, purchase, or otherwise.

Statutes.
34. H. 8. cap 2. The land of the heirs of high Collectors of any Task,
Subsedie, or lone, and of the receiuors of Courts, shall be chargeable
therewith, as well that the heir has by descent in fee tail, as in fee
simple. And also that that is given him by the collector or receiuor
couenously, and thereupon the heir may have an action of debt against the
Executors and administrators of his auncestor, wherein no essoine, protection,
or wager of law is allowable. And have execution of the goods of the auncestor,
^eing in their hands at the time of the acti^n brought.

13. Eliz. cap 4. The lands, profits, and ^ereditaments of every accomptant, or
of ^im that receives money for the Queen, ^r her Successors, to be employed
to the use ^f the Queen, shall be extended (in the nature of a Statute
Staple) for the payment of the arrerages. Or the Queen if he do not satisfy
within six months after the arrerage found, may sell his land, and the party
may have the surplusage to be delivered unto him, by him that received the
money upon the sale, without further warrant: this sale to be of any land,
whereof it is found by inquisition, that the accomptant takes the profits:
which inquisition, if it be not true, the party grieved after trauerse of the
office, and that found for himself, shall have his land again without any
petition, liuerie, or ouster lemaine. If any such buy land with the Queens
Treasure, since the beginning of her reign, and pay not the arrerages as
before, the Queen shall seize and retain the land according to the rate that
the party had it. This sale extends not to to those officers that have used
to disburse the arrerages about their charge, or offices which continue, except
the Queen command present payment to be made, and then they shall have six
months as before.

This Statute extends not to the accomtants, whose yearly rent, or whole
receip^ from the beginning exceeds not C C C ^ nor to Sherifes, Eschetors,
Baylifes of liberties. Also the surerties shall be ratable according to their
habilities charged for the surplusage only which remains not satisfied by
such sale of the lands of such officers.

39 Eliz. cap. 7. The former Statute of 13. of Eliz. shall extend to sales to
be made after the death of the Accomptant or debtor, and to an account made, or
debt known within eight years after his death.

And none shall be taken a debtor but such officers and accomptants (in this
act mentioned) as upon their accounts finished (all reasonable petitions being
allowed) shall remain debtor upon the foot of the account.

After one year after the account made or known (all reasonable petitions
allowed) the Queen may by her Letters Pattents sell so much as shall suffice
to satisfy it, if any land which he had at any time since 2. April. 13 Eliz.
or which otherwise are to be sold by the intent of 13. Eliz. The overplus, if
any be, shall be redeliuered without petition or fee. Every such sale shall
be as good as if the party himself had made it for money, or other valuable
consideration by bargain, and sale, deed enrolled, feoffement, or recovery
with voucher. And shall bar the party and his heirs, and all claiming under
him, after he shall be debtor or person accomptable, and ^ll whom he might have
barred by any re^ouerie, and all whose lands are to be sold ^y the intent of
13. Eliz. And shall be good against the Queen and her Successors, and ^ll
claiming under them for any charge or ^combrance to the Queen or her
Succes^ors by the party.

Provided, it shall not avoid any lease by ^he Queen in other sort then it
should at ^he Common Law, if the Queen were sa^isfied.

This act and 13. Eliz. shall extend to under collectors of Tenthes and
Subsedies of ^he Clergy, shall not impeach any assu^ance made before this
Parliament, bona fide nor any lease of xxj. years, or three lives whereupon so
much yearly rent shall be reserved yearly payable, as has been within xxj.
years before, nor customarie estates made according to the custom.

And of this nature is a writ of annuity, which lies for him that has an
annuitie F. N. B. 152. a
in fee for life, or though it be but for years be F. N. B. 152. b.
it money or other things, as clothes, bread, etc. And is in the debet for them
F. N. B. 152 c.
all: that is to say, for any other thing as well as for money, not in the
detinet contrary to an action of debt Detinue Old N. B. 62.
when any thing is withholden, which is called De catalis reddendis: if it be
for writings, Old N. B. 65.
it is called De chartis reddendis.

CHAP. 13.
Of an Action of account, and an action of Covenant.

Personal praecipe quod faciats are ^n action of account, and an action of
Covenant.

An action of account which is for an account to be made: as if one be made a
Baylife of a manor, etc. then it is F. N. B. 116. p.
against him as Baylife; if receiuors of his rents, debts, etc. then as
receiuor: if both Baylife and Receiuor, then as Baylife and Receiuor.

Statutes.
Marleb. cap. 23. Attachment given in an action of account against Baylifes
that withdraw themselves, and have no lands nor tenements to be distreined by.

Westminster. 2. cap. 11. He to whom the account is to be made, may assign Auditors
to take it, who may immediately commit to the next jail the accomptant (being
found in arrerages) till he fully satisfie^ whereupon the accomptant finding
himself grieved, may bring the matter by a Scire facias before the Barons of
the Eschequer.

Prerogative.
The King may have it against executors. Lit. 118.
And so can no other man.

An action of covenant which is for a covenant, that is to say, an agreement by
deed to be holden.

CHAP. 14.
Of writs where the peace is not broken.

PErsonell Si fecerit te securums are of things done without force, or where
force is coupled with it.

Of those without force, some go not so far as breach of the peace, others
do break it.

Those that break not the peace, are these that follow.

Rationabili part bonorum, for the wife and children of one deceased to have
their part of the goods.

Valor maritagij for gardein in Knight service, when the heir at full age
refuses to satisfy him for his marriage: and therefore F. N. B. 141. d. f.
there in the writ are no words of the heirs intrusion into the land.

A writ of forfeiture of marriage is to recover the double value against such
an heir marrying himself within age, without the F. N. B. 141: g.
Lords assent, and at full age putting out the Lord.

Entrusion of word, when the heir of land by Knight service enters, and
puts out the Lord, whether during his nonage or after his full age, if the
heir both intrude and deny the value of the land also, then this writ of
Intrusion of ward may be brought for both.

Eiectione custodiae for any gardein by knight service or soccage, against a
stranger, F. N B. 140.
eiecting him of the land, or body of the heir, or both.

Quare eiecit infra terminum for lessee for years, against the fe^^^e in fee,
or for life F N. B. 197.
of his lessor, for in such a case an Eiectione firm lies not against the
feoffee or lessee for life, because he is not the person that does oust him,
but his feoffor. And therefore was this writ devised. And here the term it
self shall be recovered, if it be not past, as in an Eiectione firm that
comes after.

Trespass upon the case of things not against the peace, as Assumpsits for an
assumption So is the Law now adjudged.
to be performed, and such like: and this lies not against Executors.

Here and in all other actions of Trespass upon the case, the writ must
comprehend 38. H. 6 9.
all the matter of substance, and which is trauersable as clearly as the count,
unless it be the day, quantity of the land, or such like.

CHAP. 15.
Of Trespasses upon the case, against the peace, deceit, and conspiracy.

THe other that break the peace but not vi, are called trespasses against the
peace.

And of this kind specially are an action of deceit and conspiracy in the
nature of such a trespass. An action 22. H. 6. 4^.
of deceit is upon any deceit committed, where if it be upon a non sommons in a
plea of land, whereby he loses the land by default, or such like, it must be
brought during the life of the Sommoners, but not when all the Sommoners and
veighors be dead.

In a writ of deceit the Plaintiff shall recover all that he has lost. As if
it be brought upon a recovery in a quare impedit, 33 H. 6. 10.
etc. then damages: if in a formdon then the land only, but no damages, for he
lost none in the formedon before.

Conspiracy in the nature of a trespass is upon conspiring by many to
prejudice F. N. B. 116. a, b, ^.
a man wrongfully. As if men conspire to endite one, because he arrested not a
felon that passed by the Town of M. And thereby they cause him to be endited
and amerced in the Leete of R. and F. and to be taken and imprisoned for this
amerciament till he be thereof acquitted in the Leet Or if men affirm and
say to one A. that he has right to such land, and procure him to sue B. tenant
of the land, whereby B. is compelled to sell other of his lands for defense of
this. Or if men procure one to be endited for hunting in a Park, whereby he is
taken and imprisoned, and put to expenses till he have acquitted himself of
this trespass.

CHAP. 16.
Of Trespass whereof Parco fracto, rescuous, and eiectione firmae.

SVch are those without force: coupled with force is an action of Trespass,
for a trespass done whether in goods or upon his land. And so if it be of a
bodily trespass, as battery, etc. But in maime and rape it is called an
appeal. An action of Trespass brought in a Court baron, F. N. B. ^39. d. F.
N. B. ^5. f. 86. a.
whether by plaint in the Court of a manor, hundred, or County Court, or by
writ in the County Court, must not suppose it to be done by force and arms,
for then a (^) F. N. B. 239. d.
Supersedeas lies showing that a plea of Trespass Quare vi and armis shall
not be holden in a lower Court then before the King or other Justices by his
commandment. And therefore no Capias lies there either in Process or
execution, but in Courts of 3. H 6. 54.
Record only.

Statutes.
Marleb. cap. 38. A writ of Trespass is given to the Successors (in religious
houses) for goods taken away from the Predecessor, whether he commenced action
in his life, and died without Judgment, or though he commenced no action.

And likewise to recover their own seisin against intrudors in time of
vacation, wherein damages are also given.

Marleb. cap. 4. If the Lord distreine for his services when none are due, yet
he shall not be punished by fine and ransom, but only be amerced.

Weshm^ 1. cap. 20. Trespassors in Parkes and ponds attainted at the suite of
the party, besides making large amends according to the Trespass and fine, at
the Kings pleasure, shall have three years imprisonment, and find good surety
not to commit the like trespass. And if he cannot find surety, he shall
abjure the Realm. Being a fugitive, and having no land nor tenement, whereby
to be justified, he shall be proclaimed from County to County, and if he
come not thereupon outlawed, if none do sue within a year and a day, the King
shall have the suite.

5. Ric. 2. cap. 7. None shall make entry into lands or Tenements, but where
entry is given by Law. And in such case not with strong hand nor multitude of
people but in peaceable manner.

He that is convict of the contrary shall be imprisoned, and thereof ransomed
at the Kings will.

15. Ric. 2. cap. 2. At all times that such forcible entries be made, and
complaint thereof comes to any Justice of peace, he shall take sufficient
power of the County, and go to the place, and if he find any that hold such
place forciblie after such entry made, they shall be taken and put into the
next jail, there to abide, convict by the Record of the same Justice, till
they have made fine and ransom to the king.

8 H 6 cap 9 The like for them that make such forcible entry into lands or
other possessions, or them hold forciblie.

And whether the parties be present or voided before the Justices coming, yet
he shall enquire of the matter by the people of the same county in some
convenient place, and shall cause the Tenements so entered or holden to be
reseised, and restore the party (so put out) into full possession.

The party put out or disseised in this manner, shall recover treble damages
against the disseisor, or any feoffee coming in by fraud.

31. Eliz. cap. 1^. No restitution upon an enditement of forcible entry, or
holding with force, shall be good, where the party has been in quiet
possession three whole years next before the enditement, and his estate not
ended.

Merton cap. 6. A lay man rauishing, or marrying a Ward within 14. years of
age shall be imprisoned, besides loss of the value of the marriage.

Westminster. 2. ca. 35. One that has no right, taking away the Ward, shall be
imprisoned two years, rhough he restore the child not married, or satisfy for
his marriage. Not restoring him unmarried, or not be able to satisfy for his
marriage, (in case he have married him) he shall abjure the Realm, or have
perpetual imprisonment. The form of the writ both when the heir is in the
same County or carried into another, is there set down.

If the defendant there come not upon the distress, he shall be outlawed.

The plea shall proceed though the heir dye. If the Plaintiff die before the
plea determined, etc. a resommons shall be against his executours or heirs (if
the executours have no assets) to satisfy the value of the marriage.

Special actions of Trespass are these F. N B. 100.
that follow.

De parco fracto for taking a distress of beasts and other things distreined
for damage fesant, or for rent and services behind, not of the pownd, whether
common pownd or other place that is a lawful pownd, and whether he that so
brake the pownd be proprietor of the beasts, or no. And this lies for him
that distreined, not for him whose the close was, where one distreineth and
puts the beasts by license into his friends Close, for it is not the pownd
of the owner of the soil, but of him that did distreine, and the other shall
have an action of Trespass, Quare clausum fregit.

Rescous for taking such a distress away F. N. B 101. c. F. N. B. 102. f.
before it be impounded. And here the party must needs have possession of the
beasts, or things so recussed; for if he be disturbed before he do attach or
distreine them, a writ of rescous lies not, but an action upon the case.

Eiectione firm when F. N. B. 220. h.
lessee for years of land is ousted, be F. N. B. 220 f.
it by the lessor or a stranger, where the term it self shall be recovered
if it be not past, as in a Quare eiecit infra terminum before.

CHAP. 17.
Of Appeals that touch life.

THese are the Common pleas, an appeal that concerns life is the parties Lit
116.
private action, prosecuting also 8. El. Pl. 476.
for the crown in respect of a felony, be it a 33 H. 8. Die. 50
petie Treason, or other felony whatsoever. But for 33. H. 8. ^. Stamf. 50.
high Treason no appeal lies.

Appeals of the death of a man are given to the heir of the party slain,
for the husband shall not have an appeal of the death of his wife, but her
son. So the puisne 7 E. 4. 15.
brother of the whole blood shall have the appeal, and not the elder brother
of half blood. But the elder of the whole blood shall.

Statutes.
Glocest cap. 9. An appeal of the death of a man must be brought within the
year.

Magu^ chart. cap 33. A woman shall have none but only of the death of her
husband.

2. E. 6. cap. 24. Enditement or appeal good in the County where he dies,
though the poisoning or stroke were in another.

3. H. 7. cap. 1. One acquitted upon an enditement of murder, or manslaughter,
or as accessarie shall go at large till the year and day be passed, within
which time no appeal may be brought (if no Clergy be had before) and all
advantages therein saved, as if the acquitall had not been.

So against the accessories, though the principal were attainted at such suit
of the King.

CHAP. 18.
Of writs of right Pattent.

THus far of original writs, Commissionall Old N B. 12. A writ of right
pate^t. F N. B 85. of Trespass. F N. B. 2 f. of a Writ of right pate^t. F N.
B. 86. of Trespass vicontiel.
are those which are not returnable but determinable before the parties to whom
they are directed. And are but in effect commissionarie, or mere commissions:
of the first sort are those that give authority to a Court baron to hold plea
where the suitors are the Judges, not the sheriff or steward. These are a writ
of right patent or a Iusticies. In both which the some course is 6 E. 4 3. ^5
H. 6. 5.
holden, as in those that went before, viz. pledges as before, count as in
them, and the same both process that is in the writs original of that nature.
As in a writ of right patent, a praecipe in the nature of a grand cape and
petit cape. Trial by battle or grand assise, etc. in Justices or
viecontiell, writs of debt, account, etc. Somons, of trespass, etc attachment,
but not a capias in any case, for that lies only in a Court of record. Also
many actions of one nature may be joined in one Iusticies with several
praecipes. So in plaints, bills, etc.

A writ of right patent is a writ for the F. N. B. 1. b.
mere right of Tenements holden of a common person, as land, F. N. B. 30.
auowson, or rent 14 E. 3 dr. 31.
service: but not ibid.
rent charge, rent secke, or a F. N. B. 1. b.
Common, to be brought in the Lords Court of that manor. But F. N. B. 3 c. and
8. a, b.
if he hold no Court, or otherwise (f) Old N. B. 1.
F. N. B. 2. f.
yield his Court to the King for that time, at the prayer either of the Tenant
or demaundant, then it may be in the Kings Court with this clause, Quia B.
capitalis dominus nobis inde remisit curiam.

And this must show by what service the F. N. B. 1. i. F. N. B. 4.
land is holden. The writ remains always with the party himself So does no
(b) Old N. B. 10. F. N. B. 9. b. Old N. B. 10. Ibid. 8 El. F. N. B. 9 b. It
lies also where the Ancestor died seized. F. N. B. 9. b. Old N B. 10.
other writ original. If one privy in blood not past the third degree, enter
after the death of the auncestor that died in demesne not seized As where a man
lets for life, and dies in the life of the Lessee, having many coheires,
and after that Lessee for life dies, and one of the Coperceners enters into
al, or where the ancestor is disseised and dies, and one copercener enters
into all, there such a writ of right patent, F. N. B 9. g.
for the other coparcenar, or for the elder brother, if the younger enter into
all, is called a writ of right De rationabili part terrae. And therein the
grand assise nor battle Old N B. 10. F. N. B. 9. g. F. N. B. 9. n F. N B.
197. ^. d. 7. H. 6 8.
shall not be joined for the priuitie of the blood: nor view nor voucher
lies, neither is non tenure any plea, for it is to try the priuitie of blood,
as a Nuper obijt that went before. F. N. B. 6.


A woman that has received part of her dower shall have a writ of right of
dowry patent for the remnant, whereof she is to be endowed, wherein the same
things are to be observed that were in ^ writ of dower, vnde nihil habet before.

CHAP. 19.
Of Iusticies.

A Iusticies is a writ that gives the County court power to hold plea. And
therefore is called a Vicontiel writ, of this sort are.

1 An assise of petie nusaunce is where a mill, or such like, is levied to ones
F. N. B. 184 b.
nusaunce.

All of them are comprehended in these verses; (...) rica ca (...) gultum ges
lendi^^ Fab, fur, porta domus, vir, gur, ^^, murus ouile: (...) Et pons;
traduntur haec vicecomitibus.

2. For admeasurement of things, as, F. N. B. 148.
Admeasurement of dower by the heir, when his gardein or himself endowed the
wife in his nonage of more than she ought. ibid.
But by this writ she shall have no new land assigned to her in dower. But only
there shall be taken from her so much of the land as amounts above the third
part of the land, whereof she ought to be endowed.

Admeasurement of pasture by a commoner F. N B. 125. b and d
whom another commoner wrongeth by putting in more beasts into the Common then
he should, whether the Common be appendant or appurtenant, so it be to a
certain number, wherein all the Commoners as well those that have not
surcharged, as those that have, and also the Plaintiff himself shall be
admeasured But it lies not for the Lord against his Tenants surcharging, for
he may distreine the surplusage for damage fesant. And as some say, may have an
assise, for it is a disturbance of the profit of his soil. Nor for the Tenant
against his Lord surcharging, but he shall have an assise of common.

Statutes.
Westminster. 2. cap. 7. A gardein may have a writ of admeasurement of dower, and the
heir also at full age, if the gardein follow it faintly.

In Writs of admeasurement both of dower and pasture after the great distress,
Proclamation shall be made two County days, whereupon if the party come, the
plea shall proceed: if not, admeasurement shall be made in his default.

Westminster 2. cap. 8. When the same party after admeasurement another time
surchargeth, a writ to enquire if that second surcharge shall go out either
judicial, if the former admeasurement were before the Justices, or otherwise
original out of the Chancerie. And the beasts surcharging the pasture, or
their value, shall be answered to the King.

3 A Natiuo habendo for the Lord that F. N. B. 77. a.
has an inheritance in any villeine, but not an estate for life or years, for
this writ is in F. N. B. 77. b.
his nature a writ of right to recover the inheritance of his villeine When his
villeine departs away from him. And here if the defendant plead that he is
frank, the Sheriff F. N B. 77. a.
cannot proceed.

4 Rationabilibus diuisis for that Lord whose land or waste has by little and
little Old N B. 73.
been encroched upon within time of memory until now, by a Lord whose
seigniorie adioyneth in another ville, against the Lord so encroching. But if
the encrochment Ibid. 73, and 74.
be at once, whether now or before time, there an assise of novel disseisin
lies, and not this writ.

5 A homine replegiando, for one imprisoned, F. N. B. 66 ^.
or in prison detained where he should not. As being baileable, or claimed as
F. N. B 66 f.
a villeine, or in F. N. B. 67.
ward, where in deed he is frank out of ward.

6 A repleuin for goods or chattels distreined, F. N. B. ^8. d 4 H. 6. 30.
which according to the nature of the plea ministered by the parties, grows to
be either a real or personell plea, as upon property claimed then is it
personell, if the defendant auow the taking, for services or rent behind, etc.
then it becomes real, etc. and as strong as a praecipe quod reddat, inasmuch
as he is to have a return. And therefore he shall in that case have aid
before any plea pleaded, as in a praecipe quod reddat. And this may be both by
Writ and F. N B. 70. ^, b.
plaint in any Court baron, as well as in the County Court. And being by
plaint, F. N. B. 70. b.
though in the County Court, it shall not proceed if any thing touching the
freehold come in question, as if the defendant auowing for damage fesaunt, the
Plaintiff justifies by reason of Common of pasture.

Upon the pluries not served by the Sherifr, his power is determined, and the 2
H. 7. 6.
parties shall plead in Bank.

Statutes.
Marleb. cap. 21. The sheriff may repleuin beasts not only without but within
a liberty also, if the baylife of the liberty will not.

Westminster 2. cap. 2. The sheriff or baylife shall take pledges of the plaintiff
not only de proseque^do before they make deliverance of the beasts, but of
returning of the beasts if a return be adjudged, he that takes pledge
otherwise shall answer the price of the beasts. Upon a return awarded to the
defendant, the writ De returno habendo shall have this clause, (that the sheriff
shall not deliver them without writ, wherein mention shall be made of the
judgment.) And thereupon the plaintiff (if he will) may have a judicial writ to
the sheriff to deliver him the beasts.

Upon a return awarded, after which if a return another time be awarded,
there shall be no more repleuins. And if upon his default the second time, or
otherwise the defendant be adjudged to have a new return, the distress shall
remain yereplegiable.

1. and 2. Ph. and Ma. cap. 12. Every Sheriff of a Shire (being no City)
shall at his first 4. Deputies to make Repleuins.
County day, or within two months after receipt of his pattent, proclaim in
the Shire town four deputies at the least, dwelling not past twelve mile one
from another, which in his name shall make repleuins as the sheriff might do
himself.

7 Many of the actions that went before, both for Real things to be done as,
(a) F. N. B. 151. b. Ibid. 123. a. Ibid. 123. f. Ibid 135. ^. Ibid 148. b.
Ibid. 152. b. Ibid 119. g. Ibid. 138. b. Ibid. 117. b. Ibid. 145. c. Ibid. 85 f
86 g. In Ibid 86. For they are as a^ Commission in effect. And the Sheriff may
determine them by Enquest, according to the course of the common Law.
Consuetudinibus and seruitijs: secta ad molendinum. Quod permittat: mesne:
Dower, vnde nibil habet: and also personal actions, a^ Annuitie, debt,
detinue, account, coue^^, trespass, to what sum soever, may as well be
brought in the County by Iusticies, as to be returnable in the Common place.

CHAP. 20.
Of mere commissions.

Mere commissions are these that follow: Being all of them to be F. N. B.
110. b.
directed to choice persons, such as it shall please the King.

Oyer and terminer to hear ^ determine upon some heinous trespass committed,
as rebellious assemblies, insurrections, Ibid.
and such like. And these are called Justices of oyer and terminer.

Statutes.
2. E. 3 cap. 3. It shall be granted only to Justices of the one Bench or
other, or to Justices errants.

In these and such like commissions lie properly a writ of Association, and Si
non omnes.

Association is a writ for other to be associate into their company, as fellow
Justices together with them, and may be directed to the Justices themselves to
admit them, or to the parties that shall be so associate F. N. B. 111. b.
to signify their association. That F. N. B. 111. d F. N B. 185. ^. in an
assise.
to the party is patent. The F. N. B. 111 d Fit. Not. B. 111. c.
other to the Justices to admit him is always close.

Si non omnes is a writ for the rest to proceed, although the other come not.
To be directed as well to the party to be associate as to the other Justices.
Patent F. N B. 186. ab.
to the party, close F. N. Br. 221
to the Justices.

Ad quod damnum to enquire what hurt it may be to the King, or country, or any
other for the King to grant such or such a thing, as a license to alien in
mortmaine, or to alien lands holden of the King in chief: or to grant
liberties to any City or such like.

Perambulacione facienda to enquire of the Old Not. Br. 74.
bounds of two Seigniories or Towns, where an encrochment by little and little
is supposed to have been made. And this must be by the mutual assent of both
the Lords. But if such encrochment were at once, whether now or heretofore an
assise of novel disseisin lies, and not this writ.

CHAP. 21.
Of Plaints.

SO far of Writs, it follows to speak of Plaints and Bills. Both being in
such Courts as hold plea without original writ.

A plaint is in matters that concern common pleas.

A plaint of Trespass brought in a court baron, whether manor, hundred, or
county 22. Ass pl. 64. Br. Iur 98. 14 H. 8. 15. Ibid.
Court, shall not proceed if the freehold come in question. But a suit by writ
in the County Court may. Therefore in such case upon a plaint in the County
Court, the party has no remedy, but a writ of Trespass vicontiell, and
thereby the Sheriff may determine the issue, though the freehold come in
debate. But that is no remedy in other Court Barons.

CHAP. 22.
Of Bills.

A Bill is in pleas of the Crown. Stamf. 64.
As an appeal of felony, mayme, tape, etc. may be by Bill before any (a)
Stamf. 55. ^
one Coroner of the Shire, as well (b) Stamf. 64.
as by writ original, finding first sureties to the Sheriff.

One whose attendance is necessary in 6 E. 4. 3.
any Court, as the officers and Atturnies there, shall sue and be sued in
form of plaint, without writ original, which is called a Bill privilege. But
albeit the Cook or Butler of a Judge, or other officer of a Court shall have
their privilege if they be suedels where, yet a Bill lies not against them:
But against the officers and Atturnies it does, for they are members of the
Court, and their attendance necessary. And they shall be foreiudged of their
office, if being demanded to do them they make default. But an Atturny in the
Kings shall not be sued by Bill, for no Atturny is there of record, nor his
presence necessary. Otherwise it is in the Common place.

CHAP. 23.
Of a Quo warranto.

Prerogative.
THe King has a special me(...) 10 H. 7. 14.
suite for trying of the right ^^ fr^^chise usurped upon him, called ^ Quo
warranto: and i^ to be brought before the Justices of Eyer. Therefore here the
allowance of a franchise before them, binds the King Otherwise (...) upon a
suite in the common place.

Statutes.
18. E 1. A Statute of, Quo Warranto. Quo warranto in Justices circuits.
Pleas of quo warranto from henceforth shall be pleaded and determined in the
circuits of the Justices.

18 E. 2. Stat. of Quo warranto. A public proclamari fac', shall be awarded
to those that claim liberties to know by what warrant they claim them, wherein
they shall have a warning of forty days. The party that claims liberties
being before the King, it shall not be in default before any Justices of
their circuits. And being impleaded before one or two Justices, the same
Justice before whom he is impleaded, shall save him harmless before the
other. If he come not at the day, the liberties shall be taken in the Kings
hands in name of a distress, and when they, appear, be repleuied upon their
demand. In which repleuins they shall answer immediately.

If their ancestors died seized, then the K. shall have a sommons for them to
appear before the King, or his Justices of assise: at which day if they come
not, nor be assoygned before the King, and the King do tarry longer in the
same Shire, such order shall be taken as in the circuits of the Justices. And
if the King depart from the same Shire, they shall be adiourned unto short
days, and have reasonable delays according to the discretion of the Justices,
a^ it is used in personal actions.

CHAP. 24.
Of Offices for the King.

THese are the suits that every one may have. Inquiry for the King is when
matter for the King is found by a Jury called an enquest of office, whether
the inquiry be by officers themselves, as Sherifes, Eschetors, Coroners, etc.
virtute officij, or virtute breuis, or commissions to them directed. And here
the just number of twelve is not of necessity, but may be sometimes F. N. B.
1^^. ^.
more or less.

An inquiry is an office or presentment. An office which finds matter to
entitle 21 E. 3 2.
the King to some possession, for an office is a title for the King, but
finding but for a common person it is but an evidence.

If such an office be found for hereditaments, and the King entitled by matter
enfait, 3 H. 7. 3.
that is to say, by no other record but that only, as if the office find that
I. S. the Kings Tenant died seized, the party may either trauerse, to say, I.
S. was not seized, or confess and avoid it by saying, that himself was the
Kings Tenant, and disseised by I. S. and so I. S. died seized being in by
disseisin, etc. And this is called a monstrans de droit. But if the office
entitle the King by matter of record, as that I. S. was attainted of Treason,
and ceised of certain lands there only, a petition lies to the King, because
this is a double matter of record, and therefore neither can the party
trauerse it by denying I. S. to be so seized, nor have his monstrans de droit
to show that I. S. did disseise him; etc. or that he enfeoffed I. S. upon
condition, and that I. S. brake the condition before the attainder. All this is
to be understood so long as the record of the attainder continues in his
force. But the party may trauerse the attainder well enough, as to say, null
tiel attainder. j. that 4 H. 7. 7
there is no such attainder, and upon that being found for him he shall have
the land, without being driven to his petition, otherwise not, and the reason
is because the office entitling the King by a matter of record, this title
cannot be avoided, but by as high a matter, and not by the plea or allegation
of the party: upon as high a matter of record to avoid the office, as the
office it self, a man may trauerse it though the K. be entitled by double
matter of record. As being found by office that I. S. was attainted of Treason
by Parliament, and his lands forfeit, and that he was seized of B. acre,
whereby the King seiseth it. Now if another act of Parliament restore the heir
to all the lands whereof the ancestor was seized, and adnull the ancestors
attainder, his heir shall have this by way of plea without petition.

If the office be for personal goods, the 4 E 4. 24.
party may always have a trauerse or plead any matter unto it, and so have his
goods again, unless the eschetor have accounted (a) Ibid. 34 H. 6 5. 4 E. 4*
ibid.
for them. And that though the office find the Kings title to be by matter of
record: as that I. S was attainted of felony or treason, or outlawed in debt or
trespass, and was at the time possessed of a horse, or of such and such goods,
wherein truth the property was unto a stranger. That stranger may have a
trauerse.

The King upon office finding for him, if his entry be lawful, and the
possessions to be had at the time, is presently in possession, as in wardship
or eschete of land found by 14 H. 7. 23. 25.
office: but an office finding that the kings tenant has ceased, or his tenant
for life committed Stamf. Prer. 54.
wast, vesteth no possession in the K. for his entry is not lawful, but he is
driven to sue a scire facias. So if an office entitling the K. to things not
manuell, that is to say, where of no profit is to be taken, forthwith until
they fall as a rent common, etc. this vesteth no possession till the day. Also
he shall be answered of all the mean profits from the time of his title. As upon
an alienation in mortmaine found by office, from the time 41 E. 3. 11. 11 H. 4.
5.
of this a lienation appearing of record, upon the kings letters parents
adnulled for insufficiency from the very time of the grant.

An Eschetor here may find offices ex officio, 4 E. 4. 24. ^ H. 4. 5.
as well as virtute breuis, or Commissionis. But not of outlawry of felony, or
such high matter of record without warrantie paramount and certification by
writ of record Those virtute breuis o^ commissionis are returnable in the
Chancerie. The other properly in the Exchequer. But may also be returned into
the Chancerie.

Statutes.
36. E. 3. cap. 13. Stat. 1. No Escheter shall take enquests of office but
indented between the Jurors and him, else they are void.

33. H. 8. cap. 22. Set virtute officij only to find an office of lands
holden of the King of v. l. value or above, pain v. l.

8. H. 6. cap. 16. Take enquests but of people impanelled by the Sheriff, and
those enquests must be returned within a month after the taking. Pain xx. l.
So of Commissioners.

23. H. 6. cap. 17. Take enquest virtute breuis, but within a month after
delivery of the writ, his fees are set down.

1. H. 8. cap 8. Made perpetual. 3. H 8. cap. 2. Sit unless he have lands,
etc. to the clear yearly value of xl. Marks. Pain xx. l.

Delay to take the verdict when the Jury offer it, pain C. l* So of
Commissioners.

Be Eschetor in three years again after that year ended.

34. E. 3. cap. 13. Stat. 1. A Trauerse given to the party whose lands are
seized by office for alienation without license, or nonage of the heir in
Ward, it shall be sent to the Kings Bench to be tried.

36. G. 3. cap 13. Stat. 1. Upon a trauerse or Monstraus de droit, the
Chancellor may let him (that tendreth it) the Lands holden to farm finding
surety to do no wast.

8. H. 6 cap. 16. They shall not be let to farm till the enquests returned,
nor in a month after, within which time the party grieved may have the
benefit of the former Statute.

All letters pattents within the month shall be void.

18. H. 6. cap. 6. All letters pattents made of lands or Tenements before
office found or returned shall be void.

1. H. 8. cap. 16. The party shall have 3. months liberty after the office
returned to tender his trauerse.

2. E. 6. cap. 8. Where an office is found for the King, he that has interest
for years or by Copy in the bond, or any rent Common, office, fee, or any
profits of whatsoever estate out of the land shall have them, though they be
not found in the office in such sort as they should if no office had bin at all.
When land is found holden of the K. immediately, and that it should descend or
come to an heir within age, which is or ought to be in the Kings ward, that
heir within age may have a Trauerse.

The party grieved may have a trauerse immediately or after at his pleasure,
when one is found heir where another indeed is heir, or when one is found
heir in one County, and another found heir to the same person in another
County, or when one untruly is found lunatic, idiot, or dead

The party grieved may have trauerse or Monstrans de droit (and shall not be
driven to petition) when it is untruly found that one attainted of treason,
felony, or praemunire is seized of lands, whereunto another has just title of
an estate of freehold. And ^lthough the King be entitled in such ^nds by
double matter of record.

Upon every such trauerse a Scire facias shall go out as in trauerses or
petitions before, and the defendant therein have the ^me advantage that they
had in a Scire fa^ias in a petition before.

In every trauerse pursued by virtue of ^his act, where by the Common Law the
^artie were driven to petition, two writs of ^earch shall be granted. After
Judgment upon a trauerse sued by virtue of this act, if ^t appear by matter
of record that the king ^ath a former title, the same shall be saved unto him.

Artic. super chart. cap. 19. When the Es^hetor or Sheriff seize land into the
Kings ^and without cause: upon ousting of the Kings hands the party shall have
the mesn ^ssues restored to him.

20. E. stat. De Escheatoribus If the Esche^or by Writ out of the Chancerie
seize land unto the kings hand, and after upon inqui^ition no title is for the
King to have the ^ustodie. An ouster lemain shall be awarded ^or the party out
of the Chancerie.

Provided, that if any thing afterward ^ay be found in the Chancery,
Exchequer, ^r Kings Bench for the King, a Scire facias shall go out against the
party. And if the King have right it shall be answered of all ^he issues from
the time of the Eschetors first seizing of the land.

23. H. 6. cap. 17. In a Scire facias upon ^ Trauerse against any pattentee no
protestion allowable Upon an office found virtute 14 E. 4 5. 6 H. 7. 15.
officij, whereby the King is entitled ^^ ones wardship, the heir shall never
have livery, that is to say, the land delivered (...) of the Kings hands. But
upon a perfect office (a) Stamf. prer. 52.
virtute breuis, or commissionis, if it b(...) (b) F. N. B. 235. c.
special writ or commission, not a gener(...) one to enquire of all wards he
may. Therefore here the heir is allowed these commissions following, or writs
in the nature of such commissions: viz. First, for the (...)ding of an office
for the King, then for the having of the land out of the Kings h(...). Those
for the finding of an office are, 1. ^ (c) F. N B. 252.
Diem clausit extremum, Mandamus, and Deuenerunt, to enquire what lands holden
of the King, and what of other, the ancestor (...) seized of the day of his
death, the value, the day of his death, who is the next heir, (...) of what
age.

The Diem clausit extremum is to be ^^ed within the year after his death. 14
E. 4 c. F. N. B. 253. c.


Statutes.
14 E. 3. cap. 12. Lands by ward in the Kings hand shall be let to the next
friends of the infant, to whom the enheritance cannot descend, if they offer
speedily after Diem clausit extremum in the Chancerie to render till the
Infants age, as other will without fraud.

The Mandamus after the year. And Stamf. 52. F. N B. 253. ^. F. N. B. 253. b.
Stamf ibid^. Fitz ibid. 4 ^. ^ 24.
^ere it must further be enquired who took ^e profits. The Deuenerunt is when
the ^uncester dyed in ward to the King. 2. a ^uae plura, melius inquirendum,
and Datum est ^obis intelligi, upon defect in offices found by ^ertue of such
writs or commissions, but ^hese shall never go out upon an office ^ound
virtute officij. Quae plura upon leuy^ng F. N. B. ^^5.
out of any land in those offices.

Melius inquirendum upon any other de^ect in the office, as if the office were
insufficient E. 4. 24.
or uncertain, or the F. N. B. 255.
land of greater value, then is found in the office: or ^eld by other services,
or the Tenant seized of other estate.

Datum est nobis intelligi, upon an office finding 2 H. 7. 2.
lands to be holden of any other person, when there is a record to prove that
is holden of the King, but this writ shall not be upon a bare surmise.

Those for having the land out of the Kings hand are an Aetate probanda, and F.
N B. 257.
a writ of Lyuerie. Aetate probanda is to enquire whether he be of full age, or
not, before which time he is not to have lyuerie. A writ of Lyuerie is after a
perfect office, Stamf pr^. 52.
(for no liuerie shall be upon an insufficient office) finding a tenure in
chief whether by knights service or soccage: and whether F. N. B.
the heir then be within age, or of full age. But he that holds of the King
by knight service, but not in Capite, shall not sue liuerie. 32 H 8. Br.
liuerie et ouster lemain 62
But because none can enter upon the King, the heir (if he were within (...)
when he comes to his full age shall (...) an ouster lemain, to have all the
la^^^ ^^liuered to him at once by the King, which (a) 44. E. 3 25.
is called a liuerie, for if this be sued and ^^ mention made of an auowson,
all shall ^^ reseised, and the King answered of all t^^ mesne issues. And a
liuerie must be entire, and not by parcels. The manner thereof i^ (b) 2 H. 7.
12.
this, when the heir in the Kings Ward i^ (c) F. N. B. 156.
of full age, he shall have a writ out of the Chancerie to the keeper of the
privy seal, testifying that he is of full age, and hereupon he shall have a
privy seal to the Chamberleine of the King to receive his homage. And when he
has received his homage he shall have a writ from the Chamberleine to the
Chancellor testifying that he has received his homage, and thereupon he shall
have a writ of livery.

Statutes.
28. E. 3. cap 4. The rents given to them that sue liuerie when the rent day
comes, how soon soever it come after the liuerie.

32. H. 8. cap. 46. The Court of wards ^^cted to be a court of record, officers
appointed: a Master of wards that shall keep the Seal, an Atturny, a
Receiuor, two Auditors, two Clarks, a messenger and an usher.

All wards with their lands, etc. shall be in the ordring of the Court.

They may sell and grant the K. wards or their lands during their minority,
etc.

The same to pass by the Kings Bill as^gned, which shall be a sufficient
warrant ^o the Lord Chancellor for the great seal.

They may (without the Kings bill as^igned) make good sales of underwoods, and
appoint timber for necessary reparati^ns of the ward lands, and make leases
du^ng their minority, etc.

Widows and the fines for their marri^ge are in the survey of this Court.

So are Idiots and their lands, and the Court may let and set their lands.

The grantee of the custody of Wardship ^f any of the Kings wards shall sue
forth ^is patent within four months next after ^e assignement of his bill,
else the bill and ^ffect thereof to be void.

Process shall be made out of this Court against wards intruding upon their
lands before liuerie, or ouster lemaine under the ^reat seal.

With many other matters concerning ^he authority of this Court, and the
offices ^hereof.

33. H 8. ca 22. The office of the M. of the ^uerie united to the Court of
wards.

A survey or of the liueries added and ap^ointed to be the second officer.

A Clarke of the liueries also added.

All liueries suing shall be in the ordring ^f this Court.

None that has land over the clear year^ value of v. l. (otherwise it is where
the la^d is under that value) shall have liuerie before inquisition or office,
by the King^ Writ or Commission, which shall not pa^^ out of the Chancerie or
other Court without a warrant directed to them out of the Court of Wards under
their hand.

They shall set rates for liueries, and appoint days of payment, etc. and
their Bil^ for liuerie shall be a sufficient warrant ^^ the Lord Chancellor.

A general liuerie may be sued where the yearly value of the land exceeds not
11. l^ but such general liuerie shall not be without warrant from this Court.
The pa^^^^ for liuerie may be sued forth within thr^^ months next after the
assignement of the Bill by the King or his Court.

Two being found heirs by one and ^^ 1 H. 7. 28.
same title, whether twinlings that a^ males, found heir by one self same
office or diverse men by several offices found heirs to the same auncestour,
and by the same title (for if one office find that the K^ gave land to A. and
the heirs of his body, and that B. is his Cousin and heir, and another office
finds that the gift was in general tail, and that four daughters are (...)
heirs. There must be a Trauerse and no enterpleading, for they claimed not by
o^^ ancestor and title) the King shall not (...) liuerie till by enterpleder
the truth ^ee ^^^cussed 5 E. 4 4.
at his full age that was found (...) first: for if A. of v. years is found
heir ^^ the kings Tenant, and after by anoth^^ office B. is found his heir,
and of full age, B. has no remedy till A. come of age, and ^hen they must
enterplead. And in every enterpleading, an office must be found for both. And
if one be found heir of full age, and after another within age, the
enterpleading shall not stay till the full age of the second, because the other
was found heir first. Among coparceners the King upon liuerie shall make
partition. And that is for Stamf prer. 58.
the Kings benefit, because upon that partition every one shall have some part
of the lands in chief. For if any should have for their portion only the
lands holden of other men, then the King should lose his pre^ogatiue in those
lands for ever, because ^hey that have them when they shall dye ^old no lands
of the King in Capite. And therefore in the writs of liuerie there is a
^rouiso, that every one shall have in her ^urpart, parcel of the lands holden
in ^hiefe.

CHAP. 25.
Of Presentiments, or enditements.

A Presentment is an inquiry finding some offense against the King, which is
also called an Enditement. Therefore it is as it were the Kings ^ction,
whereupon the party shall be ar^aigned, or put to answer by the King: and
tried by another Jury, which (in case ^^ felony or treason) we call the Jury
of ^^ and death.

Every strong suspicion of such ^^ ^^fence, though it be in case of felony,
(...)ring of record has the force of an (...)meant: as in an action of
trespass of (...) carried away, if the defendant plead (...) 31 E. 1 Endite.
31.
guilty, and be found guilty as a felon: in 9 E. 4. 10:
an appeal of murder, etc. if the Plaintiff after declaration be non suit. But
so is not 2 E. 3. 28.
the Sherifes return, as where he returns upon one an escape of felony, etc.

Without which the King can have ^^ 7 E. 3. 324.
suite upon a wrong done, principally to another: but done to himself he may.

For 12 H. 7. 18. Constables and Borsholders are Consernators of the peace at
the Common law.
preventing of certain of th^^ offenses, that is to say, trespasses to the
^^die and felonies, and committing them (...) offend to prison till they may
be endited, and so duly punished, as 22 E. 4. 35.
to arrest him that makes an affray and send him to the next jail, or upon
reasonable cause (as if it be night time, or there be that would rescous him,
etc.) keeping him in the stocks till he can safely bring him to the jail: o^
to 9. E. 4 26.
arrest him till he find surety by obligation: every hundred has his
Constable. And every several tithing within the h^^dred has his Borsholder.
The conse(...) of peace in an hundred is called a Constable, or high Constable:
In a Tything, a pety Constable, Borsholder, Headborough, Thirdborough,
Boroughhead, Tything*man, or chief pledge.

Statutes.
1. E. 3. cap. 16. Stat. 1. For the better keeping and maintaining of the
peace, the King will that in every County good men lawful, which be not
maintainers of ill, or barrettors in the County, shall be assigned to keep
the peace.

18. E. 3. cap. 2. Stat. 2. Two or three of the best in reputation in the
Counties shall be assigned keepers of the peace by the Kings commission, and
at what time need shall be, the same with other wise and learned in the Law
shall be assigned by the Kings commission, to hear and determine felonies and
trespasses done in the same Counties.

34. E. 3. cap. 1. In every County of England shall be assigned for the safe
keeping of the peace a Lord, and with him three or four of the most worthy men
in the county, with some learned in the Law, and they shall have power to
distreine evil doers, riotors and barrettors, and to pursue, arrest, take, and
chastise them according to their trespass and offense, and to do them to be
imprisoned, and duly punished according to the Law and customs of the Realm,
and according to that to them shall seem best by their discretions and good
aduisements, and also to inform themselves, and to enquire of all those that
have been pillars and robbers in the parties beyond sea, and be now come
again, and go wandering and will not labor as they were wont in times past.
And to take and arrest all those that they may find by enditement, or by
suspicion, and to put them in prison, and to take of all them that be not of
good fame (whersoeuer they shall be found) sufficient surety and mainprise for
their good abearing toward the King, and toward his people, and to punish the
other duly, to the intent that the people be not by such riotors troubled and
endamaged, nor the peace blemished, nor Merchants nor other passing by the high
ways of the Realm, disturbed, nor put in fear by the peril which might
happen to them by such evil doers. And also to hear and determine at the
Kings suits all manner of felonies and trespasses done in the same County,
according to the laws and customs aforesaid.

13 Ric. 2. cap. 7. They must be sworn to keep and put in execution all the
Statutes and ordinances touching their offices.

2. H. 5. cap. 4. Stat. 1. The Justices of peace must make their Sessions four
times by the year, that is to say, in the first week after the feast of Saint
Michael, in the first week after the Epiphanie, In the first week after the
clause of Easter, and in the first week after the translation of S. Thomas the
Martyr, (which is the 7. Iulij) and more often if need be. And that the same
Justices hold their Sessiions throughout the whole Realm of England in the
same weeks, every year from hencefotth.

2. H. 8. ca. 5. Justices of peace from henceforth to be made in the Counties
of England, shall be made of the most sufficient persons dwelling in the same
Counties, by the advice of the Chancellor, and of the Kings Council, without
taking other persons dwelling in foreign Countries, to occupy such office,
except the Lords and the Justices now named, and to be named by the King and
his Council. And except also the Kings high Stewards of the lands and
seigniories of the Duchy of Lancaster, in the North and South parts, for the
time being.

18. H. 6. cap. 11 None shall be assigned Justice of peace if he have not
lands to the value of xx. l. by year. This extends not to Towns corporate,
Boroughes, etc. nor to persons learned in the Law.

1. Mar. cap. 8. No Sheriff shall exercise the office of a Justice of peace by
force of commission, or otherwise in the same county during the time only that
he exercises the office of the Sherifewicke.

Any 9. E. 4. 26.
man suspecting another of a felony committed or but 9. E. 4. ibid.
intended, ^^ where one lies in wait to rob the people that pass by, and
draws his sword upon one willing him to deliver his purse, etc. may arrest
him 20 E. 4. 6.
so as thereupon he commit him to the jail, as 11 E. 44.
common voice and fame that he did the fact, or being present where a murder
was done, and found with a sword drawn in his hand: or when a robbery was
done, and found with some part of the goods; are just causes of suspicion. So
if I would arrest one that has robbed me, and I. S. say I shall not, this is
good cause to suspect I. S. as accessarie: and what is sufficient cause of
suspicion, and what not shall be tried by the Justices. But 9 E 4 ibid.
neither can any man arrest one for a Trespass, unless it be the Constable,
nor for a felony, except 11 E. 4. ibid.
himself suspect the party (though he does it by the commandment of one
that does suspect him) and that the same felony be indeed committed.

As if it be for robbery, the self same thing must be stolen: for to say,
that diverse 27 H. 8. 3.
beeues were stolen, and because he suspected I. S. to have stolen six beeues,
he did arrest him, is not good, without alleging expressly, that those six
beeues were stolen.

With enditements of Trespass, information upon penal Statutes (such as
inflict a pecuniarie mulct or other penalty upon offenders) have a near
affinity. Concerning which informations, these Statutes following were made.

Statutes.
4. H. 7. cap. 20. Where a penal Statute gives whole or part to whosoever
will sue a couenous release or recovery (except it be by action) tried upon
the point of the writ shall not prejudice him that will sue bona fide.

31. Eliz cap. 5. All informations and enditements where the forfeiture is
limited to the Queen only, must be brought within two years after the
offense committed, when it is limited to the Queen, and any other that shall
sue within one year, or (in default thereof) for the Queen within two years,
except Statutes of Tillage. All brought after the time shall be void: where a
shorter time is limited in any penal Statute the suit must be brought within
that time.

27. Eliz. cap. 11. Information for the Queen upon Statutes of Tillage, shall
be brought within v. years after the action accurred unto her.

31. Eliz cap. 5. Every information except champerty buying of extortions and
offenses against

1. Eliz* cap. 1. Against forrestallers, etc. must be brought into the county
where the offense was indeed done But officers of record using to pursue
informations by virtue of their office may do as before.

31. Eliz. cap. 5. All suits for using unlawful, or not using lawful game,
not having bows or arrows, using any art or mystery wherein he has been
brought up, shall be sued and prosecuted in the general quarter Sessions of
peace, or Assizes of the same County, or in the Leet within which the offense
is committed, and not out of the same County.

29. Eliz. cap 5. The defendant in an information in the Kings Bench, Common
place, or Exchequer, where he is baileable, or by leave of the Court may
appear by Atturny, may the first day appear by Atturny of that Court without
putting in bail.

31. Eliz. cap. 10. This former Statute (29. Eliz cap. 5.) shall extend only
to natural subjects and free denizens.

18. Eliz cap. 5. made perpetual.

27. Eliz. cap. 10. An Informer shall not compound or agree with the party
before his answer nor after his answer, but by the order and consent of the
Court: if he delay his suit, or discontinue it, or be non suit, or if the
matter pass against him by verdict or Judgment, then he shall render to the
party his costs and damages to be assessed by the Court.

In which act also many other disorders in common Informers are redressed.

Enditements of the death of a man are 35. H. 6. 27.
to be taken before the Coroners. So is it not of any other felony, for the
Statute 4. E. 1. called officium Coronatoris sets down the office of a
Coroner to be so by the common Law, and the whole order how he is to proceed in
the inquiry.

Statutes.
Artic. super chart. cap. 3. The Coroner of the Shire shall join with the
Kings Coroner in inquiring of the death of a man with in the Kings house.

33. H. 8. cap. 12. The Coroner of the kings house shall enquire alone without
the Coroner of the Shire, by a Jury of the yeomen officers of the Kings
officers.

CHAP. 26.
Of Original Process.

HItherto of the first matter of the suit, it follows to speak of original
Process.

Original process is that process which is till the defendant do appear.

Original process is single or (...) Single, which is by the possessions
(...), (land or goods) or only by the person.

That by the land is of two sorts. First sommons and grand cape in a praecipe
q^^d reddat.

The Sommons is a warning of the tenant in his land, but not by his goods,
(...) by a rent service, rent charge, rent seek, or a Common which he has,
for there the land is another by certain sommoners, two at the least. The
Sommons upon ^^ action brought against one as heir, (...) 13 ^. 2 Judge. 170.
be in land that did descend, otherwise it is in any land.

If it be to recover the freehold of (...) ^7 H. 6. 26.
it must be in the same land, else making default, he may at the grand cape
wage his law of non sommons. But if he appear, it makes no matter in what land
he be sommoned. A grand cape is a pr(...) Old N. B. 177. 50 ^. 3. 16.
to take the land into the Kings hands by the view of lawful men, called
thereupon Veyors, as the other are Parnors, with a sommons of the Tenant to
answer 38 H. 6. 33.
as well to his default, as to the demaundants action, and therefore it is
called a grand Cape. Therefore here the Tenant is suffered Old N. B. ibid.
to save his default as to say, that he was not sommoned according to the Law
of the land, and thereof is ready to do his law; or that he was in prison, or
disturbed by water, etc.

And the King shall have the land to his S(...). P^^r. 84.
^wne use, the Sheriff being accomptable of ^e issues thereof from the default,
til iudge^ent for the demandant.

Statutes.
31. Eliz. cap. 3. Upon a Somon in a real ^ction fourteen days before the
return, a ^roclamation of the Somons shall be on a ^onday immediately after
divine service, at ^he door of the Parish Church where the and lies, and
returned with the names of ^he Sommoners. And till that done, no Grande cape
shall go out, but an alias and ^luries as the case requires.

If the Tenant be returned sommoned, 22 H 6. 41.
where in deed he was not, the writ shall abate.

Secondly, it is sommons and resommons, or another like sommons in a
mortdauncestor, Iuris vtrum, and an assise of darrein presentment.

By the goods, as in assizes of nouel disseisin and nuisance, where the
original process is a Pone per vadios and saluos plegios. A Pone per vadios
and saluos plegios is a process to attach the defendant by certain of his 35
H. 6. Br. Attachment 20.
proper goods not borrowed, or in pledge unto him, being mere personal
chattels, neither a 7 H. 6. 10.
chattell real, as a ward, etc. nor 27 H. 6 2.
parcel of his freehold as a clod of earth, etc. which he shall 9. H. 7. 9.
forfeit if he appear not. ibid.
And the Sheriff may take those goods with him, or leave them with the party
at his pleasure. But whethersoeuer he do, the property is no^ out of the
party till he make default.

The original process by the person is ^ Capias (which is process to
imprison him) then an exigent or solemn Br. per Stamf. 15.
demand ^^ five several County Courts immed(...) following one another.
Therefore 32 E. 3. Exigent 14.
no Allocato comitatu lies if a County be holde^ after an exigent returned,
and for not app^^ring, judgment, to be out of the protection of the King and
his Laws, which we call outlawry. The (c) judgment whereof i^ to be given
by the Coroner in the f(...) County. For 35. H. 6. 6. Br. Exigent 24. 11. H.
7. 26.
at the Common Law there is no outlawrie, but where the writ is vi and armis,
as in trespass, conspiracy, felony, etc. And the reason why it lies there,
is, because they are acts founded upon the sole tort of the defendant. And this
is in m(...) felony and treason.

Statutes.
1. H. 5. cap. 5. In every original writ of actions personals, appeals, and
enditements, in which the Exigent shall be awarded: to the names of the
defendants in such writs, original appeals and enditements, additions shall
be made of their estate and degree or mystery, and the Towns, Hamlets and
places, and the Counties whereof they were or be in which they were or be
conversant: Otherwise all outlawries thereupon pronounced shall be none. And
before these ^utlawries pronounced, the said Writs and ^nditements shall be
abated by the excep^ion of the party omitting the said addi^ions.

6. H. 6. c^. 1. All Exigends and outlawries upon enditements in the K. Bench
of felony and treason shall be void, if before the ^xigend awarded, a Capias
be not directed to ^he Sheriff of the County, whereof they be ^amed in the
enditement, having six weeks space (or larger, by the discretion of the
Justices) before the return.

8. H. 6. cap. 10. In every enditement or appeal of treason, felony, or
trespass after the first Capias returned; forthwith (before an Exigend)
another Capias shall be awarded to the Sheriff of the County where the
enditement is supposed to abide returnable, before the same Justices, etc.
containing the space of three months (where the Counties be holden from
month to month) of four months: (where they be holden from six weeks to
six weeks) by which Capias the sheriff shall be commanded to take his body
if it be found in his Bailiwick, if it be not found, then to make proclamation
(for his appearance) in two Counties before the return of the writ. Any exigend
or outlawrie otherwise pronounced shall be holden for none.

10. H. 6. cap. 6. The like is to be observed when any such enditement or
appeal(...)ken before Justices of peace, or other ^^uing power, shall be
removed before t^^ King in his Bench, or elsewhere by C(...)rari or otherwise.

6. H. 8 cap. 4. Upon every exigent a writ^^ make three proclamations
(returnable (...) of the return of the exigent, and the p^^clamations to be
made, two in the full County Court, the third at the genera^^ Sessions) shall
go out to the Sheriff of every other County (viz. than that where the action
is brought) where the defendant i^ named to be, or late to have been; if the
Kings writ run there: otherwise to the County next adjoining to that where
he i^ so named. Being named late of London ^^ Middlesex, the writ of
proclamation shall go out to every other County where he i^ abiding, time of
the exigent awarded. Every outlawrie to the contrary shall be avoided by plea.

27. E. 3. cap. 2. A writ of Idemtpitate (...)nis given to those whose lands,
goods, or chattels be seized by any officer, surmising them to be outlawed
(where they be not) because they bear such names as those that be outlawed,
for default of good declaration of the surname.

9. H. 6. cap. 4. Such an Idemtpitate (...) given to their Executors.

If the Exigent be returned not fully ser^ed without any folly in the
Plaintiff, as 22 E. 3. 11.
where the defendant after demand at ^o Counties renders himself in Court, ^d
upon mainprise found has a Superse^eas, and yet appears not at the day. But
^therwise it is upon a 38 E. 3. 1.
Supersedeas by another person bearing the same name, or in ^se where no 14 E.
3. E^. 17
more Counties but four ^n be holden between the delivery of the ^rit to the
Sheriff and the return, for it is ^e Plaintifes own folly in the first case
to ^ut no difference between their names, ^d in the second to take so short a
time. though it be in the 17 E. 3. 43.
hustings of Lon^on which are holden uncertainly: the ^laintife bringing a new
exigent which we ^ll an Exigent de nouo 22 E. 3. 11.
before any other County holden, but else not, shall have the ^enefit of the
former Counties. And therefor it is called an exigent allocato Comitatu, ^r
allocato hustingo, if it be in London, where their hustings are as the County
Courts.

Outlawry dishableth him from suing a^y Lit. 43.
action.

Statutes.
5. E. 3. cap. 12. In case where the Plain^ife has recovered damages, and he
against who^ the damages be recovered, is outlawed ^t the K. suit, no charter
of pardon shall be granted, except the plaintiff be satisfied for ^is damages.
When one is outlawed by process appearance no such charter shall (...)ted,
except he yield himself before (...)stices from whom the exigend issued; ^^
shall cause the party to be warned to ^^peare before them at a day.
Where(...) the Plaintiff appear, they shall plead (...) the first original,
as if no outlawrie ^^ been. If the Plaintiff appear not (and ^^ warning be
duly witnessed) he that (...) lawed shall be delivered by virtue of ^^
Charter.

31. Eliz. cap. 3. Upon every extent in a ^^sonall action a writ of
proclamation (...) go out of the same Court to the S(...) the County, where
the defendant at t^^ time of the Exigent shall be dwelli^^ Whereupon three
proclamations shall ^^ made; one in open County Court, anot^^ at the quarter
Sessio^s, the third one m(...) at the least before the Quint' exact at ^^ door
of the Parish Church where the ^^fendant shall be dwelling at the time of t^^
exigent, upon a Sunday immediately after ^^uine service. All outlawries
otherwise sh^^ be void.

But before reuersing of any such outlawrie in this respect, the defendant
shall put i^ bail, not only to answer the plaintiff in ^ new action, but to
satisfy the condemnation, if the Plaintiff begin his suite within two Terms.

Prerogative.
By outlawrie all his chattels, whether ^eall as a 9. H. 6. 20.
term for years (and there^re there the King may seize the land it ^fe, and
plow and sow, and occupy it as ^e term or might) wardship, etc. or per^nal, as
ones 30. H. 6. 20.
goods (the property where is presently in the king, and he may have ^ detinue
against every man that has a ^ossession of them) profits 9. H. 6. 20.
of land, ^herein he has a freehold or inheritance, ^iz. rents, corn,
mannurance of his pasture ^et in this case he cannot, etc. seize the land
^selfe, nor occupy, plow, or sow it, or grant ^ away. And if the party so
outlawed make ^ feoffement, this feoffement is good, and ^he King after that
shall have the profits ^o more.) But not 20. H. 7. 13.
a furnace table fixed upon the land with posts, boords, doors, windows, and
such like annexed to a free^old are forfeit to the King, not only those in
possession, but even such as he has a right unto, as debts, (viz 50. ass pl.
1. 19. H. 6. 47.
due by specialty, but not 16. E. 4. 4. 50 ass pl. 1. 9. El. Die. ^62. 3. E. 3.
Cor. 343. contr. Sta^f. 188. b.
by a simple contract, for the reason supra fol.) matters in So ass. pl. 5. 28
E. 3. 92.
account, Stamf. 188. b.
goods taken away, etc. But not damages which he is to recover, as by reason of
28. E. 3. 92.
trespass done to his land, Stamf. 188. b.
battery, false imprisonment, or such like.

In case of mayme there must be three Capias, two in felony, as stealth,
robbery, and burglarie, one duly in the death of a man, be it murder or
manslaughter, and high Treason.

Statutes.
25. E. 3. cap 14. The second* Capias i(...) of felony must be returned three
w(...)ter. In case of Felony and high (...) they that tarry the Exigent,
though t(...) 22. ass. pl 81.
they render themselves, forfeit th(...)tells.

Mixed, is that which is so by his (...) as for want of goods he may res(...)
person. As first in all Praecipe quod f(...), 22. H. 6. 38. 34. H. 6. 49.
and other personal praecipes, and in per^^nall Sifecerit te securums, not
being (...) the peace, and likewise in all Insti(...) F. N. Br. 92. g. 2. H. 4.
25.
vicontiell writs, the process is a S^^mons by the defendants goods, an
(...)meant or Pone per vadios and distress (...)nite. Or if upon the Sommons a
Ni^il ^^ returned, that is to say, that the party (...) 21. H. 6. 56.
nothing whereby to be sommoned, th(...) continual Capias.

Distress infinite is a process to (...) him continually after, till he do
appears ^^ certain of his goods, and profit of his lands, or as we use to say,
issues: which (...) loses if he appear not.

Statutes.
Westminster 2. cap. 37. No distress shall be but by Baylifes sworn and known.

Westminster. 2. cap. 39. The plaintiff may a^erre that the Sheriff might have
returned greater issues, and thereupon shall have a ^udiciall writ to the
Justice of assise to enquire of what and how great issues he might have
answered from the day of the purchase of the writ to the day of the return,
and the Sheriff shall be charged of the surplusage not returned.

1. E. 3 cap. 5. The like auerment of two small issues returned given against
the bailifes of franchises as well as the Sheriff.

Upon this distress must be returned in ^^^ues the value of all his lands from
the Test of the writ until the day of the return. As if his land be worth
xij. C. by the year, and a months space between the 24. El. Fairfaxes case
in the Common place.
Test and the return a C. l. issues must be returned upon him.

And with these issues whether in this case or in any other case of a distress
infinite, as after a venire facias to return Jurors, etc. the land is charge
able into whose hand soever it come after. As if issues be returned D. Stud.
per Br. issues 23.
upon Tenant in tail, tenant for life, or a man seized in the right of his
wife, the land shall be charged after their death: or 22. H. 6. 4.
if an Abbot lose his issues, and after be translated and made a Bishop, the
successor during his life shall be charged. And in this respect because the
land is charged, the beasts of any stranger coming upon the same land may be
distreined for the issues 5. H. 7. 1. Br. (...) 41.
lost.

In such process ^^ these where (...)me^t or distress should go out, (...)dant
be a (...) clark he (...)ned by his person, or (...) if (...) lay see else. as
if the Sheriff re(...) Cleric^^ been fieat^^ non hab^^^ (...) Process shall
go out to the (...) make him appear by the ^^^es of (...)nefice, which is
called a ve^ire f(...)ricum.

A Capa^as lies not here against (...) Br exigent. 72. It ^^ error if he be
outlawed. 26. H. 8. 7.
of the Realm. But against a Knight (...)eth, for a man may be a Knight (...)
freehold: So cannot an (...) common e^endement. (...) if (...) thing in the
County where he is (...) party shall have an Elegit sure (...) such a County
where he has assets.

In a repleuin in the County (...) it by writ or plaint, if the go(...)ed F.
N. B. 73. and 74.
away, so as at the Tenants (...) cannot be restored, As if he that (...) drive
them to a Fortlet or Castle, or (...) the County, etc. whereby the Sheri(...)
turn upon the pluries that they are (...)ned, process of with e^^^am lies,
(...) for the plaintiff to have of the others (...) till restitution of his
own.

Statutes.
Westminster 1. cap. 17. The Sheriff or Baylife may take the power of his County ^^
Bailiwick, and beat down a Castle or (...) ^here such beasts are enclosed, if
he that ^oke them will not make deliverance.

Secondly in Trespasses upon the case against the peace, and in all other
trespas^es, whether it be a writ of deceit or Tres^asse vi, or though it be a
Writ from the King himself upon a contempt or breach ^f the peace, as refusing
to come at the King, being sent unto him with money to ^ide him in his war,
and spoiling and wanting men's lands, goods, and chattels, and other unlawful
acts doing, and so every contempt it is attachment: And if a Capias ^n these
cases go ou^ first, and the party be taken thereby, he shall be dismissed,
because ^t should be by pledges, distress infinite, and upon a Nihil
returned, a Capias, as before.

Here for contempts a Capias lies against Piers of the Realm, as for
rescousing of one arrested by the course of the Law, etc. And that is in
respect of their disturbance of the Law.

In actions of trespass with force, whether a common action or enditement of
trespass, appeal of battery, or such like, after the attachment returned
nihil, it is three Capias, viz. a capias alias and pluries, and then process
of outlarie.

Statutes.
Westminster 2. cap. 11. Process of outlawrie given in an action of account.

25. E. 3. cap. 17. Such process shall ^^ made in a writ of debt and detinue
of c(...)tells, and taking of beasts by writ of (...) and by process of Exigend
by the S(...) as is now used in a writ of account.

7. H. 5. cap. 1. In writs to be purchased against those that forge or make
(...) Charters or minuments, and them (...)claim or cause to be read, like
process s(...) be made by capias and exigend, as in w(...) of Trespass.

19. H. 7. c^. 9. Like process given in actions upon the case sued in the
Kings Bench, and Common place, as in actions of Trespass and debt.

23. H. 8 cap. 14. Like process given in every writ of annitie as in an action
of debt

CHAP. 27.
Of Counts.

THus far of the beginning (...) suite: The proceeding has (...) parts,
Count and pleading (which two are but one in pleading) (...)there mean acts.

A condition (annexed to an (...) 11. H. 7. 22.
freehold) cannot be alleged in (...) or pleading unless it be by deed: Be
it ^^ ^ersonell or real actions. But a condition ^nit to a lease for years,
or grant of a ward^hip, 11. H. 7. ibid. Lit. 85.
or other chattell Real may. Yet the Iu^ie upon the general issue (as ^ultor^
null ^isseisin in an assise) may find it if they will. and thereby the party
shall have aduan^ge of it.

Count is a larger declaration for the ^me, place, quantity of the land, and
other ^ch things of the substance of the original ^rit. And therefore in a
formedon of four ^cres and Count but of one, all the Writ 8 E. 4. ^. 45. E. 3.
25.
shall abate, for it is not pursued. In an ap^eale of murder, he cannot declare
that the ^efendant traitorously killed him as he was ^oing to succor the King,
in his wars ^ith xx. men in his company, etc. for the ^rit supposes no
treason.

Statutes.
36. E. 3. cap. 15. Declarations shall be ^ood enough if they have matter of
sub^tance, though the terms be not apt.

In real actions which are in the right but not in mere possessorie ones) the
de^andant must allege the taking of the ^rofits, we call it esplees, in the
declaration. As in pleas of la^d, the taking of the profits ^f the land as
errable, meadow, and ^asture, etc. if of a pond, then by taking the ^ish there,
as Breames, etc. In a writ of right ^f auowson, the esplees shall be laid in
his 8. E. 3. 381. 26. H. 8. 3.
Clarks taking the great and small tithes. In an assise of an office as of a
filizarie, etc. seisin shall be alleged by the taking of ^. Mar. Die. 114. 13.
H. 8. 16. 19. H. 6 32.
iiij. d. for making out a capias, or such like. In a quod permittat, by the
taking of common by the mouth of his beasts. In a native habendo, esplees shall
be alleged in the villeine, viz. in taxing him high and low at his pleasure,
in making his profit of him; to drive his cattle, to carry away his doung,
and to do all other kind of villeine service, Br. Esplees. 11. 21. H. 6. 22.
etc. But in a writ of Eschete, in a writ of right sur disclaimer, and such
like, which are founded upon the seigniory, and not upon any seisin of the land
it self, no esplees shall be alleged. And these esplees where they are to be
alleged, must be alleged in himself, if the action be brought of his own
seisin in his ancestor; if it be brought of his ancestors seisin, where it
cannot be brought but of the seisin of some other, there it must be alleged in
those other. As in a formed on en descender the esplees shall 9. H. 6. 53. 50.
E. 3. 1.
be alleged only in the donee. In a formedon en remainder for an estate
tail, only in the particular Tenant to prove the estate tail executed. In a
formedon en reuerter, they must be alleged both in the donee and the donee,
for there a fee simple is demanded. In a lease for life the remainder in tail,
and the lessee for life, and he in the remainder in tail dye, the issue in
tail shall have a formedon en descender, and make no mention of the Tenant for
life. And therefore the esplees shall be only alleged in tenant in tail,
otherwise it is in the like case of a reuersion in tail granted.

In stead of Count, a plaint shall be made in assizes of novel disseisin, and
in writs of dower a demand.

CHAP. 28.
Of pleading.

PLeading is the parties debating of the suite.

Every plea, as Bar, replication, reioynder, Surreioynder, etc. must be 7.
El. Ploy. 343.
assered to be proved true. By saying in the plea, Et hoc patro natus est
verificare, which we call an auerment. But no auerment need to be in auowrie,
for it is in liew of a Count and declaration. And the auowant is in a manner
actor and plaintiff, and to have a return,

An advantage of a matter which cannot be pleaded, shall be saved by protesting
not acknowledging it to be true, although matter pleaded pass against him As
if an infant bring an action of waste against his 48. E. 3. 10.
gardein, and appear by Atturny (which none should do but one of full age) if
the gardein take his nonage by protestation because he cannot plead it, it
shall save him from all mischief. But in detinue brought by the Executor of A.
the defendant cannot take by protestation, that A. made not the 4. El. Plo. 276.
plaintiff his executour, for that is the very ground of the suit, and may be
denied by answer, and issue joined upon it. And a protestation is but a saving
to the party that takes it, from being concluded of some matter alleged
against him, whereupon he cannot join issue.

Pleas are either of the defendant when he is first brought in to answer, or
the mutual pleas of both. In a joint action against two or more: as in 48. E.
3. 1.
an action of debt. But otherwise it is in a writ of 1. H. 7. 25.
conspiracy against two, for they are several wrongs, one of them appearing
shall not answer. But must have idem dies till the other come in to answer, or
41. E. 3. 3.
the suit be finished against him. As by death or outlary in a personal
action, debt, account, or such like.

An action by or against an Infant as heir, as 48. E. 3. 33.
a formdon en descender brought by him, or a writ of 9 H 6. 46.
error against him where his auncestor recovered; but age 16.
not where he comes in of his own wrong shall not proceed till his full age,
unless it be apparent that by proceeding he cannot be prejudiced. As in 48.
E. 3. 33.
a formedon en descender by an Infant, if the tenant plead a warrantie with
assets against him, the parroll shall demurre, for if he trauerse the assets
he should acknowledge the deed of warrantie. But 48. E. 3. ibid.
if the tenant plead a recovery in auoidance of the estate tail, the parroll
shall not demurre: for there the Court shall plead for him. But 12: E. 4. 17.
Age 18.
it shall not demurre in a writ of entry sur disseisin by an infant, though
the tenant plead a matter enfait, as a feoffement with warrantie by the
ancestor of the infant, for there the infant claims of his own possession.
And if an infant and his ancestor be Iointenants 48. E. 3. 35.
in fee, and the infant suruiueth: in a praecipe quod reddat against the infant
he shall not have his age.

Statutes.
Westminster 2. cap 40. The husbands heir called to warranty by the alience by a Cui
in vita shall not have his age.

Glocest. cap. 2. An infant holden out of his heritage after the death of his
father, cousin, grandfather, great grandfather, in an action thereupon shall not
have his age.

Westminster. 1. ca 46. In a writ of entry by the heir of the disseisee the suit
shall not stay for his nonage, no more shall it for the nonage of the heir of
the disseisor, if the disseisee bring his assise, and before the assise pass
the disseisor dye. The like incorporations where the lands go by succession.
But in a writ of dower an infant heir shall not 39. H. 6. 39.
have his age, 44. E. 3. 4^.
nor the heir of the vouchee, in a Quod ei deforceat upon a recovery in a
writ of dower, for it is in the nature of the fitst writ.

CHAP. 29.
Of Pleas to the Jurisdiction and Person.

THe Defendants first pleas are dilatorie, or to the action.

Dilatorie, which are before (...) plea in bar.

When an action is brought against many, they must join in the plea ^^ 12. H.
7. 3.
they plead these dilatories, for in a praecipe quod reddat, one cannot demand
the view, and the other pray in aid, nor one pray in aid of one man, and the
other of another man.

Dilatorie pleas are exceptions, or foreign Advantages.

Exceptions are such dilatories g(...)ded upon the matter it self of the suit.
And are in dishabilitie or abatement. Those in dishabilitie, are to the
Jurisdiction or Person. Bracton.
Both which must be before the count made.

To the Jurisdiction, when it is alleged that the Court ought not to hold plea
of it.

To the Person, when it is alleged that the Plaintiff ought not to be
answered, as 3. H. 6. 40. Lit. 44.
if he be outlawed, excommunicated, etc. In which latter case the suite shall
be put without day, only till he be absolved.

CHAP. 30.
Of Pleas in Abatement.

THose in abatement are for any fault in the first matter of the suite, for
which cause the defendant may have oyer of any thing tendered by the plaintiff,
and not being parcel of the record, as of the writ, condition, etc.

Pleas in abatement are to the Count first, and then to ihe writ, for after
pleading to the 30. E. 3. 20.
Count or to the 4. E 3. 166.
plaint in an assise, a man may plead unto the writ, but 4. E. 3. 134. 135.
not to the Count after plea to the writ, but 24. E. 3. 47. 35.
to the matter of the Count he may.

And among pleas to the writ, exceptions that arise upon the view of the writ
3. E. 3. 70.
are to be pleaded before those that are foreign, or dehors the writ as non
tenure, several tenancie, etc.

Pleas to the Count are for insufficiency, variance from the writ, etc.

Pleas to the writ are for default of form, false Latin, etc.

By waging of Law of non sommons in a praecipe quod reddat the writ shall
abate. 22. H. 6. 41.


In assizes of novel disseism and nuisance, in appeals of felony and Iuris
vtrum Stam. 82. ^ of an assise. F. N. B. So k of a Iuris verum also. 1. E. 4. 4.
the defendant may have many pleas, two, three, or more in abatement. As that
there is no such town, Hamlet, or place known by the name, etc. and if that
be not found, then that no Tenant of the freehold is named in the Writ, etc. So
in an appeal of felony, whether the same matters be of several natures (that
is to say) one triable by record, the other by the Country, as that the
appeal was purchased hanging another, and also that there is no such Town,
nor Hamlet, nor place known out of the Town and Hamlet as C. whence the
defendant is supposed: or all of one nature triable by the Country, as that
his name is William, where he is named in the appeal John, and also that
there is no such Town, etc. or that the party whom he is supposed ^2. E. 4 39.
by the appeal to kill, was dead such a day, which was two years before the
appeal commenced. Or that the Plaintiff is a Bastard: or being a woman which
brings an appeal of the death of her husband, that they were never accoupled
in lawful matrimony.

The writ abating for some cause that cannot be imputed to the Plaintifes
folly: as for 38. E. 3* per 46. E. 3. 14.
false Latin, non 46. E. 3. 14.
sommons of the Sheriff, 32. H 6. 24.
Ioyntenancie, and such like: but not for non 33. H. 6. 3.
tenure, or 33. H. 6. ibid.
naming one an Esquire when he is a Knight, himself bringing another with
speed in the same Court against the same party, we call it a writ purchased by
Iourneys accounts, shall have all advantages of the former, for he shall
recover 9. E. 4. 5.
costs for the first suit: the 2 H 4. 21.
defendant being Executor shall be charged with the assets which he had day of
the first writ. 46. E. 3. 14.
Being tenant day of the first writ, he shall not plead non tenure, being
41. E. 3. 4.
sole tenant then he shall not plead Ioyntenancie: being 43. E. 3. 16.
Ioynttenaunt, th^n he shall not plead several tenancie. But no writ by
Iourneys accounts lies by or against any other then the self same parties,
and in the same Court that the former was: for 4. E. 6. Br. Iourneys accom. 23.
if the Plaintiff in a several action dye, his executors cannot have an action
by Iourneys accounts. And 7. H. 6. 16. ^3.
if two coperceners bring a formedon, and one dies, the other as heir to her
father may have a Writ of all by Iourneyes accounts. But as heir to her sister
of her part she cannot. So if 14. H. 4. p^^ 7. H. 6. 34.
the Tenant in the praecipe die upon a writ of dower brought, or such like, no
writ lies by iourneys accounts. But 7. H. 6. 23.
upon the death of one of the Ioyntenants in a praecipe quod reddat, where the
other has all by suruiuour it does: lastly, if an assise of fresh force be
abated in the franchise, a new assise by Iourneys accounts cannot be in the
Guild hall before the Justices of assise.

CHAP. 31.
Of Oyer of the writ or bond, etc. view and prayer, voucher, garnishment,
Enterpleader to the Writ and Sainctuarie.

Foreign advantages are delays without exception to any thing. ^^ in all
actions, oyer of the writ, etc. In real actions, view, aid, prayer, and
voucher.

View is in real actions of the thing demanded, or of the land whence it
comes, Stat. West. 2. c. 48. from henceforth view shall no^ be granted, but
where it ^^ necessary, etc. shows that it did lie in those cases at the
common Law. And this view must be demanded before any plea in bar, and. may be
after pleadieg to the writ: for though one plead a plea that goes to the
action (as that the plaintiff in a writ of dower is an alien) yet if he
conclude to the writ, he may have view after 3. H. 6. 55.
when it is so necessary as without view the defendant cannot well answer.

Statutes.
Westminster. 2. cap. 48. From henceforth view shall not be granted but in case
where the view is necessary, as if one lose land by default, and he that
loses, moves a writ to demand the same land. And in case where one by an
exception dilatorie, abateth a writ after the view, as by non tenure or
misnaming of the Town, or such like, if he purchase another writ in this
case, and i^ the case before mentioned, from henceforth the view shall not be
granted if he had view in the first writs. In a writ of dower where the demand
is of the land that the husband alienated to the tenant or his Ancestors
where the tenant ought not to be ignorant what land the husband did alien unto
him, or his ancestors; though the husband died not seized, yet from henceforth
view shall not be granted. In a Writ of Entry also that is abated, because the
demandant misnamed the Entry; if he purchase another Writ of Entry, if the
tenant had view in the first writ, he shall not have it in the second. In all
writs also where lands be demanded by reason of a Lease made by the demandant
or his ancestor, as that which he leased to him being within age, not whole of
mind, being in prison, and such like, view shall not be granted hereafter: but
if the demise was made to his ancestor, the view shall not lie as it has don
before.

Stat. De visu terre and essoyne de seruiti^ Domini Regis: View shall not be
granted in a Writ of Ward, in a Writ of Customs and Services, in a Writ of
Aduowson of a Church (but no^ in case where there be no more Churches than one
in a town, and all of one Saint) in a Writ of Dower, and in a Writ of Nuper
obijt.

Aid Prayer is for Tenant for life, to 31 E. 3. Ioind in aid 10. 33 H. 6. 29.
request him that has the Inheritance, to help him plead. And therefore here
the tenant himself remains always party, and is never out of Court: and
this Aid Prayer is for the feebleness of his estate.

So must an Incumbent, the Patr(...) Ordinary. Else no recovery against h^^
binds the successor or them. And th^^ is in respect of their interest to the
Church; the Patron to present, and to have an I(...)cauit of the tithes: the
Ordinary to adm^^ and to present by Laps. But upon Aid prayer it does, though
they make default, and confess the Action.

Statutes.
Westminster. 2. Cap. 3. He that is in the ^^uersion shall be received in default of
the Tenant for life. If judgment be given by reddition, or default, he in the
reuersion shall have a Writ of Entry after the death of the Termor: so shall
the heir where the Tenant was Tenant in Tail.

20. E. 1. De Defensionis Iuris: he in the reuersion desiring to be received
before judgment, shall find surety (as the Court shall allow) to answer the
value of the issues of the Tenants from the day of the receipt, till judgment,
if it pass for the demandant.

13. R. 2. Cap. 17. The like receipt shall be for him in the reuersion upon the
faint pleading of such a Tenant, and he shall plead in chief without delay.
And the Judges by discretion shall give days of grace between the demandant
and him that is received; without giving the common day in plea of land,
unless it be by the demandants assent. Surety of the issue shall be found (as
before 20. E. 1.) as well where the receipt is counterpleaded as where it is
granted.

Glocest. cap. 11. Tenant for years shall be received before Judgment
rendered, to say that the action was by couin.

Westminster. 2. cap. 3. Receipt is given to the wife in her husband, if he lose her
land by default, and the tenant that recovered against her husband must
maintain his own right.

Voucher is the calling of one that should warrant in to answer the action.
Therefore 31. E. 3. Joined. ^^ aid. 10. F. N. B. 1^4. ^*
upon the vouchees entering into warrantie the tenant is out of Court. And
notwithstanding a recovery in a Warrantia chartae, yet if he be afterward
impleaded in an action where voucher lies, he must vouch him against whom the
recovery was: else he shall have no benefit of that recovery.

Statutes.
Westminster. 1. cap. 39. In mortdauncestor nuper obijt, intrusion, or other such
like writs in which land is demanded which should defend, covert, remain, or
eschete, after the death of any ancestor or otherwise, if the tenant vouch, it
is a good counterplea to say that the tenant or his ancestor was the first that
entered after the death of him of whose seisin he demands, unless the vouchee
be ready, who if he vouch over, the demaundant shall have his counterplea.

Also in a writ of Entry in the degrees none shall vouch out of the line. Also
in writs of right or of possession (as before) that is a good counterplea, that
the vouchee nor his ancestor had never seisin of the land or any thing in the
services by the hand of the Tenant, or his ancestors from the time of the
seisin whereof the defendant declares till the writ purchased, so that he
might a feoffement make unless the vouchee be present, who if he vouch over,
the demaundant shall have his Counterplea. But warrantie of charters lies in
these cases.

20. E. 1. Stat. de vocat^. ad warrant^. This Counterplea of voucher that the
vouchee nor his ancestors had neuet any thing, so as he could a feoffement make
with warranty shall be received, although the vouchee be ready to enter into
warrantie.

14 E. 3. cap. 18. If the tenant voucha dead man, the demandant may auerre he
is dead, or there is none such.

Westminster. 2 cap. 6. If the vouchee counterplead the warrantie, and it be found
against him, he shall lose the land. Where the vouchee F. N. B. 134. k. 22. H.
6. 22.
losing the Tenant shall recover in value against him any hereditaments that he
had at the time of the voucher. And therefore a voucher is in liew of an action
where the original process is Somons ad warrantizandum (or 45. E. 3. 23. 14.
H. 6. 2. Br. Seq sub, etc. 3.
if one be vouched within age a Somons ad habendum visum first, and being
awarded of full age, then a Somons ad warrantizandum, if he be awarded within
(b) Old N. B. 1^ Old N. B. ibid.
age the parroll shall demurre) and a Grande Cape ad valentiam. If the sommons
ad warrantizandum or habendum visum, alias, and pluries, be not served, then a
sequatur sub suo periculo is to go forth. And if the tenant cannot get that
served, he loses his warrantie. Therefore it is sub periculo of the tenant.
And if upon vouching of an heir the 13. E. 3. Judgment 117
Sequatur sub suo periculo be returned nihil in the land by descent, but that
he was sommoned in land that he had purchased, the tenant loses his warrantie,
for the sommons must be in lands descended. But if the Sequatur sub suo
periculo, or the Cape ad valentiam 3. H. 7. 13. Br. rec^^. en value 40.
be returned served, there the Tenant shall recover in value.

But in exchanges the hereditaments are liable from the very time of the
Exchange.

In partition among coperceners, from the death of their ancestor. So as the
wives dower whom he takes before any voucher by reason of such an Park. 61. ^.
exchange, or whom a Park. ibid.
coparcener in gauell kind marries at any time, shall be defeated upon a
recovery in value or pro rata, for so is the recovery in value called in the
case of coparceners.

Prerogative.
The King shall not be vouched, but prayed in aid of which in that case has
the force of a voucher. As if the King by 15. H. 7. 10.
his letters pattents give lands to one by this word (Dedi) the patentee shall
have aid of him, because by the same word he might 9 H. 6. 4.
vouch a common person. And when one prays in aid of the King in liew of a
voucher, the special cause must be entered, else he shall never have in value
by petition.

So of Coperceners.

And if two parceners make partition, one alienateth part of her purpartie, the
other is 1. E. 3 4.
impleaded and prays in aid of her coparcener, and they lose. In this case
she shall recover according to the rate of the moitie which she lost, whether
the other alienated before aid prayer, or after.

In an assise of novel disseisin and nuisance, voucher lies not, unless the
vouchee F. N. B. 178. c.
be present in Court, and will by and by enter into warrantie.

He that is impleaded in any action wherein he may vouch and does not, shall
never have the benefit of a Warrantia chartae.

Advantages in certain personell actions are Garnishment and Enterpleader.
Garnishment is upon a writ of detinue, when being alleged by the defendant to
have been upon a bailement by the plaintiff, and another or for another upon
condition. 14 E. 4. 2.
As that if I. S. do such a thing the goods shall be delivered to him (for
though the plaintiff sole delivered the goods, and I. S. were a stranger, yet
I. S. is to have advantage of the condition, and may have a writ of detinue) if
not, then redeliuered to the plaintiff, that other shall be brought in to show
whether by reason of that bailement which the defendant so alleges both for
the 21. H. 6 35.
place, 40. E. 3. 11.
condition, 20. E. 4. 13.
and matter of the bailement, viz. who bailed it, etc. from which the Garnishee
cannot vary (d) 40. E. 3. 11.
howsoever it agree or disagree with the (e) 4. E. 3. ibid.
plaintifes declaration, himself or the plaintiff ought to have them, for
garnishment is but to know whether the condition, etc. alleged by the
defendant were performed or not. And if they were delivered upon other
condition then the defendant alleges, the garnishee is at no mischief but
the defendant: for the garnishee may recover them by a writ of detinue, and the
defendant by his false plea makes himself chargeable both to the plaintiff
and to the garnishee. But if the defendant affirm not any certain bailement
for place, condition, 21. H. 6. 35.
matter, etc. as if the plaintiff declare of a bailement upon certain
conditions, etc. and show which, and that he has performed them, and the
defendant pray garnishment generally: there the garnishee may vary from the
bailement alleged by the Plaintiff, for the defendant has not affirmed the
same.

Enterpleder is when diverse bringing several writs of 33. H. 6. 25. 8. H. 6.
30.
detinue, ward 3. H. 6. 44.
or Quare 19. H. 6. 68.
impedit against the same person in the same County, and for the same thing,
though 8. H. 6. 30.
they vary in time and place of delivery (for the place is not material
being all in one County) so as they vary not (e) 33. H. 6. 25.
in the substance of their declaration, as for to declare of a chest sealed,
without alleging any deed in certain: and the others to allege a deed in
certain. They 8. H. 6. ibid.
all shall enterplead together, as much to say, the rest shall answer him that
brought the first writ, and therefore shall have the same 33. H. 6. ibid. 8. H.
6. ibid.
day given them, if the writs be returnable at several days. And the reason
of enterpleding in detinue is, because otherwise if one recover against the
defendant, yet the others action is not abated, but continues still. Otherwise
it is in a real action as in a formedon praecipe quod reddat.

Prerogative.
The King may appoint any place he thinks good to be a safeguard for all
offenders flying thither, that they shall not be molested or compelled to
answer, whether one fly thither for 1. H. 7. 25.
treason, Stamf. 111. The Abbot of battle had so.
murder, theft, or other crime, for which he should lose life or member. And
therefore this taking effect by the Kings grant only (for touching the Kings
prerogative so nigh it cannot 1. H. 7. 26.
be by prescription) and being an immunitie to one that offends the King and
his Crown, is a 1. H. 7. 25.
temporal matter pertaining to the temporal coertion and Jurisdiction, and
need no consecration. But yet when it is consecrate by the Popes unholy
Ceremonies, it obteineth the name of Sancturary.

Statutes.
Taking of sanctuary away.
26. H 8. cap. 17. In high Treason.

2^. H. 8. cap. 7. In Petie Treason.

27. H. 8. cap. 4. and 28. H. 8. cap. 15. In treasons, felonies, robberies, and
confederaces, in or upon the Sea, or other haven, river, creek, or place where
the Admiral has or pretends jurisdiction.

32. H. 8. cap. 4. In wilful murder, rape, robbery, in or near the high way,
or in any house, putting any person within in fear of his life, felonies,
burning of houses or barnes with corn, robberies of Churches, Chapels, or
hallowed places, and all procurors, and abbettors, and all offenses where
sanctuary lies not by the Law, or is taken away by any former Statute.

32. H. 8. cap. 12. In Treason, Misprision of treason, Manslaughter within any
of the places or houses of the King, or his heirs, or where the King in person
is abiding. So in stealing or in feloniously carrying away any plate, jewel or
other goods of the king or his successors, above xij. d. value.

32. H. 8 cap. 1. made perpetual. 32. H. 8. cap. 3. 1. E. 6. cap. 12. In
murder or poisoning of malice prepenced, breaking of any house by day or night,
any person being in it and put in fear thereby, robbing in or nigh the high
way, felonious stealing of horses, geldings or Mares, or stealing goods out of
any Church or Chapel. But in all other cases of felony it shall be granted.

2. E. 6. cap. 33. In felonious stealing of ones Horse, Gelding, or Mare.

1. Mar. cap. 6. In counterfeiting coin that is not the coin of the Realm,
or current in the Realm, the Queens sign, manuell privy signet, or privy
seal: and all procuring and abetting.

1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. cap. 4. From these that call themselves Egyptians.

27. H 8. cap. 19. All in sanctuary for murder or felony out of the house,
wear a badge in length and breadth ten inches: they shall wear no weapon but
their meat knives, and that at meal only. Both these upon pain of loss of
the privilege.

They shall not be out of their lodging before Sun rising, nor after Sun
set upon pain of imprisonment two days in that sanctuary for the first time
he is so taken, the second time six days imprisonment, the third time loss
of his privilege, upon substantial and indifferent proofs before the Lord
Chancellor. And it is felony for any sanctuary person that shall of prepenced
malice make rescues, or resist any officer in imprisoning the privileged
persons as before. Contracts under xl. s. trespass and covenant between the
privileged persons, and other inhabitants in the sanctuary, shall be
determined before the Governor.

32. H. 8. cap. 12. All sanctuaries adnulled other then Churches and
Churchyards, and certain places named in that Act, and in 33. H. 8. cap. 15.
which are appointed places of Tuition, for term of life to the offenders in
capital offenses. The privileged persons shall every day be called by name,
and making default three several days with lawful cause, forfeit the
privilege: committing any offense punishable by death is forfeiture also.

CHAP. 32.
Of Pleas in Bar.

THus far of Dilatorie pleas.

Pleas to the action are those that go to the body of the matter.

And are pleas in bar or c(...)ssions. Pleas in bar are th^se which are to
bar the plaintiff of his ^^^ion, where the Defendant must make defense, as to
say, Defendit vim and ini^ri^^ quando. But this defense shall not be i^ 34. H.
6. 33.
dower assise of novel disseisin, Per quae seruicia, and attaint.

The Tanant may plead a warrantis i^ Litl. 150.
bar of him that should warrant if he bring the action. As if there be
grandfather, father and son, the grandfather is disseised, the father
releaseth to the disseisor with warrantie, and dies after the grandfather
dies. Now if the son bring an action to recover the land, he shall be barred
by the warrantie made by his father, and this is called a Rebutter.

Statutes.
Glocest. cap. 3. The heir shall not be barred of his mothers inheritance by
the warrantie of the father, being Tenant by courtesy, or alienating without
fine in the mothers life time except he leave assets.

And though the Tenant of the land be a stranger to the warrantie, as a
disseisor or one that comes in by a recovery, may plead that he has a
third persons estate and 42. E. 19.
rebut, but not vouch by a warrantie made unto the person. But in 21. E. 4. 82.
writs of dower the ancestors warrantie is no bar. (c) Lit. Chap. of G^^ranty.


A warrantie made by the disseisor at the time of the disseisin: we call it a
warrantie commencing by disseisin. As the feoffement with warranty of a father,
or other ancestor, lessee for years or at will, of the demise of his son, or
of gardein in Knight service or soccage, or where one which has not right
enters into the land, and presently makes a feoffement with warrantie,
barreth not his heir, 50. E. 3. 12.
for then his action and right should be lost for ever. But by such a warrantie
the heir may be vouched, for that is in the nature of a covenant against him
as heir to his ancestor. So that if he have other land descended to him from
the same ancestor, it is reason that he warrant that which he may do, saving to
him his action that he may have by reason of the disseisin.

In an assise of novel disseisin and trespass the defendant pleading a title
in bar must give color of title to the Plaintiff, for if either it be no
title, as either in trespass to plead 22. H. 6 50.
it is his freehold, or 2. E. 48.
the freehold of I. S. and that he entered by his commandment, or 15. H. 7. 10.
when one prays in aid of I. S. or of the King, or Rege in c^^suleo, though
he entitle himself by a lease at will, etc. color needs not. Otherwise it is
21. E. 4. ibid.
if he entitle another to a lease for years, and justify by his
commandment. So 32. H. 6. 1.
if a matter that destroys the plaintifes title, as a release in an assise,
in a Trespass of goods a sale by a stranger in (f) 21. E. 4. and 5.
market ouert, and that the plaintiff took them out of his possession, and he
retooke them, there color needs not.

No more it does where he pleads to the writ and not in bar, though the plea
indeed go in bar. As in trespass of goods, that I. S. was possessed and made
Alice S. and I. D. his executors and died. Alice S. took the Plaintiff to
husband and was covert day of the trespass and after died. So should the writ
be brought by I. D. who is yet in full life, not named in the writ, Judgment
of the writ, etc.

And in giving color these things must be observed.

1. It must be to the plaintiff, not to a 38. H. 6. 7.
stranger, nor to the defendant.

Not to a stranger, as in trespass that A. was seized and him enfeoffed, and
I. S. claiming by color of a deed of feoffement from A. where nothing in truth
passed, etc. entered and enfeoffed the plaintiff. This is no good color, for in
a stranger matters en fait must always be alleged, as to say, that I. S.
enfeoffed A. who enfeoffed the Plaintiff: or that A entered and disseised I. S.
and enfeoffed the plaintiff, etc.

Neither must the plaintiff give color to the defendant, as where the
defendant pleads 19. H. 6. 31.
his freehold, now if the plaintiff say that before the defendant any thing
had, A. was seized and enfeoffed the plaintiff, and the D. claiming by color of
a deed of feoffement from A. where nothing passed, etc. entered, upon whom the
reentred is not good.

2. It must be of such a possession whereby he may maintain his action. 32. H.
6. 6.


As in an assise the defendant must give the Pl. a color of the Pl. own
possession, and not of the possession of his ancestor, as to say that the
plaintiff claiming by color of a deed of feoffement made unto himself where
nothing passed, etc. is good. But not to say that the plaintiff claiming by
color of a deed of feoffement made to his ancestor where nothing passed, etc.
for of such a possession in his ancestor he cannot have an assise.

3. The color must be a matter doubtful in Law, or otherwise difficult to
the 19. H. 6. 21.
lay people, else it is not sufferable, but he shall be forced to take the
general issue, as in an assise to say, Null tort, etc. or in an action of
Trespass, not guilty. As if I bring an assise against you, and you say that
you let the same land to one for term of life, and after granted the reuersion
to me, and the Tenant for term of life dyed, and that I claiming the reuersion
by force of the said grant, where the Tenant did never at(...) entered, etc.
This especial matter is suff^(...)ble, because that is dangerous to plead
(...) tort, etc. For the lay people will think th^^ the reuersion passes by
force of the g(...) without atturnment. The same Law it i^ where the Tenant
says, that he himsel^^ let the land to the Plaintiff, for term of h^^ life,
and then the Plaintiff did surrend^^* For the lay people know not that a
surrender may pass by word. The same Law it i^ where the Tenant says, that
the father ^^ the Plaintiff let unto him for term of another man's life, and
after released unto hi^* And the Plaintiff supposing that his father died
seized of the reuersion ousted him after the death of him, for whose life, etc.
because the lay people understand not (...) this release does inure, whether by
way of enlargement, feoffement, confirmation, ^^ extinguishment. The same Law
it is if the Tenant say that the father of the Plaintiff enfeoffed him, and
afterward suffered him to occupy at will, and he supposing, etc The same Law
it is to say, that the plaintiff claiming as bastard and eldest son entered,
because the lay people think th^^ the eldest son, though he be a bas^^rd,
may inherit. The same Law it is to say th^^ such a one was seized and
infeoffed, the ^^nant and the plaintiff claiming by a deed of feoffement made
before where nothing passed, etc. because the lay people think it a good
feoffement, though it be made without liuerie. But where the special matter
is not a matter in Law, or difficult, there the Tenant or defendant must take
the general issue, as if the Tenant say, that he was seized until he was by
the pl. disseised, whereupon he re-entred, this plea is not sufferable, because
all men know that the Tenant in this case is no disseisor: or otherwise if he
say, that the plaintiff claims as younger son, because that every man
knows, that the younger son cannot inherit before the elder. The same law
it is if he say, that he leased to the father of the plaintiff for term of
life or years, or for term of another man's life, and the plaintiff supposing
that he had died seized of an estate in fee simple, entered, etc. because in
these cases the Lay people do well understand that he is no disseisor: and
therefore in these and in all other like, the tenant shall take the general
issue.

In real Actions for the mere right when it is in respect of a disseisin done
to him or his ancestors, and not founded upon a seigniorie, as a Writ of
Eschete, a writ of right sur disclaimer, etc. the Tenant 16. E. 4. 9. 3. E. 3.
Dr. 26.
cannot trauerse the seisin, but may tender half a Mark to the King to have
it inquired by the Jury: and being found that the demandant was not seized in
the time whereof he counts, that shall bar him for ever.

Prerogative.
The tenant cannot tender half (...) against the King.

The heir or Executours in an Act(...) brought against them, where they are
c(...)geable pleading a matter in their (...) knowledge 3 and 4. P. and M. Die.
149. 21. E. 3. 9. 6 and 7. E. 6 Die. 81 34. H. 6. 22. Br. Exec. 22.
which goes in perp(...) bar, As for the heir to plead that nothing descended
to him from the same Ancester* the Executour to plead a release or acqui^tance
made unto himself, or that he was never Executor, nor never administered ^^
Executor shall be charged as in their (...) perdutie, if it pass against them.
Otherwise it is if the Executor pltad Mis(...), or another Executour alive not
named i^ the Writ, (for that is no bar but only ^^ the Writ) or Oriens inter
mains (for that is no perpetual bar, for a Scire facias lies if they come to
have lands after) or a release, or acquittance to their Testator: or Nie^^ le
fait of their testator, for they cannot have knowledge of it. Otherwise it is
also if ^^ther 6 and 7. E. 6. Die. 81. Where the heir is condemned by a Nihil
dicit, execution shall be of lands descended by a special Elegit not of his
goods, etc. nor no Cap. ad satisf. lies against him. 21 E. 3 ibid.
the heireor Executor be condemned by a Nihil dicit, or confess the
certainty of the assets. And in the first case, as whe^^ the heir pleads
nothing by descent, (...) which is found against him, the plainti(...) shall
have an Elegit of the moitie of all (...) lands as well purchased, ar by
descent: (...) in a Formedon en Descender, if the Ten(...) plead in bar a
warrantie with assets, and the demaundant said Rien per descent, and it is
found that he has by descent, he shall be barred of all that he demands by
his Writ (of how small value that be which descends) because the issue that
he tendered is false.

In Assizes of Nouel Disseisin, Nuisance, Mortdancester, Iuris vtrum, and in
Enditements and Appeals of Felony, the defendant may plead in abatement, and
over in bar, or take the general Issue also. As in a Mortdancester, 40 E. 3.
29.
that he has nothing but in right of his wife; or 2 E. 3. 62. 22 E. 4. 3^.
I. S. holds parcel of the land in demand, not named in the Writ: and if
that be found against him, then that he has abated. In an assise of
Iointenancie, or Misnomer, which are in Abatement, or any matter in bar:
(unless he confess a putting out of the Tenant, or that which amounts to as
much, as by pleading a release, or such like) and if that be not found, then
he has done no wrong. In a Iuris Vtrum the Tenant may plead 12 E. 2. Iur.
v^r. 12
Misnosmer of the Demaundant, or that a stranger holds parcel not named. And
if it be found, etc. that the demandant has received his fealty, etc. And if
it be found, etc. then that it is his Lay fee, and not Frank Almoigne, etc. In
an Enditement, or Appeal of death, misnomer of himself, or no such town; and
to the felony not guilty. But he cannot plead a Release, and to the felony
not guilty: for by the Release he has in a manner confessed the felony: 4. H. 6.
15. 22 E. 4. 39. Ibid.
also he may plead a matter in bar, and upon that found against him, then plead
not guilty, though he pleaded it not before.

In Assizes of Nouel Disseisin, and Nusanc, 1. E. 5. 5.
he may plead a special matter that amounts but to the general Issue. As in
an Assise of Rent by Deane and Chapter, to say that Rescous was made to the
predecessor, and no seisin in him, or in any Successor since that time. Though
in the pretense of him that pleads it, it amount to no more, but that the
plaintiff was never seized, so as he could not be disseised.

Upon 9. E. 4. 2.
Enditements of Felony (...) Treason, otherwise it is in Appeals, the
defendant being put to answer, which is called an Arraignement, is not allowed
council, if he deny Stamf. 151. b.
the fact. For either his conscience perhaps will sting him to utter the truth,
or otherwise by his gesture, countenance, or simplicity of speech, it may be
discovered; which the artificial speech of his Council learned, would hide
and color. Also himself can best answer to the fact. But if he plead
Sanctuary, or any other matter in Law, then he shall have ^ H. 7. 23. 32. H.
8. Die. 13. 41. E. 3. 27.
council. A presentment in the left or sherifs turn, after the day of the
presentment binds the party for ever, and is not trauersible but in cases
that touch ones Freehold: as that one ought to cleanse the Highway 5. H. 7. 3.
or such like rationae tenure suae: therefore the course is to remove such
presentiments into the kings Bench by a Certiorari, where he may trauerse them.

CHAP. 33.
Of Confessions.

COnfession is when the Defendant confesses the plaintifes action to be good.
The Defendant confessing an enditement of felony may accuse others, in which
case we call him an Approuer. And one cannot 9. H. 6. Co^^ ^
be an Approuer but in felony or Treason. And that upon an 1. H. 7. 5.
enditement only, and though it be 1. H. 7. ibid.
after not guilty pleaded, yet before verdict he may become an approuer. But
upon an appeal one cannot be an approuer. Nor without 1. H. 5. Co. 441
confession of felony before the Judges, which confession must be Stam. 143. ^.
upon an enditement precedent (that the Judge may at any time give judgment to
attaint him) not upon an arrest for felony of the same offense. But he cannot
approve one that Stamf. 143. ^.
received him, for it must be of such an offense as he himself did together
with the other: nor one that 10. E. 4. 14.
abetted and procured him to commit the felony, for he confesses not himself
guilty of the same offense, in as much as he cannot abet himself.

Statutes.
Westminster. 1. ca. 12. Notorious felons which will not put themselves upon an
enquest at the Kings suit against them, shall be put to a pain sort and dure,
as those which refuse to be tried by the Law of the land.

One that flies to a church The Stat. 32. H. 8 cap. 21. so recites it.
or churchyard, and confesses before the Coroner when he comes, the
certainty of any bar, felony, where life or member is to be lost before he
be thereof attainted, whether upon an enditement or appeal, as that he has
Stam. 119. b.
stolen such or such a thing, killed such or such a man. But at the first
taking of the Stam. 116.
Church, it is enough to say he takes it for a felony, which he has
committed generally may abjure, and so save himself But not in case of high
Treason, or petie treason, for the Coroner cannot attaint him upon his
confession thereof, because he is not his Judge of such a crime: neither can be
his Judge as he is Coroner, although he have a Commission from the King to do
it. And if the offender, being in the Church, will of purpose confess a
felony, to the intent to escape of treason, yet if the Coroner have information
that he is charged with a treason, he may not suffer him to abjure. And that
for the Kings advantage, who is to take more benefit if he be attainted of
treason then of felony, because of the eschete. The same law it is of petie
treason, for the Coroner can no more record his confession of that then of high
Treason: neither may the Coroner if he be informed that he have committed petie
Treason, suffer him to abjure of felony, and that in respect of the
heinousness of the offense, notwithstanding Br. Coro. 182.
the King be to have no more advantage in petie treason then in felony.
Neither can a man abjure for petie larcenie, because he is not to suffer death
for it likewise.

Abiuration is his Stam. 119. b.
oath before the Coroner himself to depart the Realm for ever at the time and
place set him: going the direct way thither: tarrying there but one flood and
ebb if he can have passage: and till he can so pass going every day into the
sea up to his kners to assay if he may pass over, and if he cannot pass
within xl. days then to put himself again into the Church as a felon, etc.
And this abiuration is an Stam. 122. c.
attainder in it self (and that the strongest that can be, being by his own
confession) and a 4. El. Pl. 262.
forfeiture of his lands. And there is a writ of eschete of land for felony,
pro qua abiurauit regnum. And therefore he 3. E. 3. Co 33. f
that is hanged upon judgment against him, and becomes alive again, cannot
abjure (but an abiuration in that case is an escape) for one cannot have two
judgments for one offense.

Statutes.
9. E 2. Stat. de artic. cleri cap 10. Those that abjure may not be molested
whilst they are in the street, and whilst they be in the Church their keepers
may not tarry in the Churchyard.

9. E. 2. Stat. de artic. cleri. ca. 15. A Clark shall not be compelled to
abjure, but to have his Clergy.

21. H. 8. cap. 2. Immediately after confession, and before abiuration, the
felon shall be marked in the hand with an hot Iron with the sign of an A. The
felon must take his passage at such a day and time as the Coroner shall limit,
else he shall lose the benefit of sanctuary, and be taken out and further
ordered according to his demerits, without restitution to sanctuary.

22. H. 8. cap. 14. If he be found out of the place, he shall dye for it.

22. H. 8. cap. 12. All abiurations shall be made to certain privileged
places within the Realm, mentioned in that Act, there to remain during his
life.

CHAP. 34.
Of Replication, Reioynder, Surreioynder, etc.

THe mutual pleas of both are the debating before issues, or an issue it
self.

Debating before issue, is the discussing of the material things, to draw it
to some one issue. As in an action of trespass or an assise, if the Defendant
claim by a lease from the Plaintiff to A. who grants his term to B. and to
B. the defendant, the Plaintiff must answer only to his own lease, for the
assignements of A. are but conueyances and not material. But in an assise if
the defendant derive his interest from a stranger, and that A. was seized and
enfeoffed B. who enfeoffed C. and C. the Tenant: there the Plaintiff may
trauerse any of the mean conueyances, for they are all material.

Therefore repugnance of a plea unto it self is a fault in pleading, as in an
action of Trespass of his house, and walls broken down, the Defendant cannot
plead touching the house, not guilty, and as to the breaking down of the walls
justify, for this carries a repugnancie in it, inasmuch as the house and the
wall are all one thing.

So is a departure, where he forfeiteth not the matter of his plea that went
before, but comes in with a new matter. As if the reioynder be a matter
puisne, underneath the matter of his bar, not above and going before it. As
in an action of Trespass, the Defendant pleads a descent unto him of the
land, the Plaintiff says, that after the descent the Defendant enfeoffed him.
Now if the defendant reioyne that the feoffement was upon condition, and he
entered for the condition broken; this is a departure for the matter of the
bar, that is the descent, is before the matter of the reioynder, that is to
say, the entry for the condition broken, whereby the feoffement is avoided. So
if in an assise, the Defendant pleads the feoffement of I. S. and the
Plaintiff make title to himself by descent, and that he was disseised by I. S.
who enfeoffed the defendant: or that he enfeoffed I. S. upon condition who
brake the condition, and afterward enfeoffed the defendant, etc.

Now if the defendant say that after the disseisin (or condition broken) and
after the feoffement of I. S. to the defendant, the Plaintiff did release to
the defendant, or confirm the estate of the defendant, this is a departure,
for that is a matter that grows after the feoffement pleaded in bar. But if
he plead such a release or confirmation from the plaintiff to I. S. that is no
departure, for it is a matter before the feoffement, or in an action of
trespass for goods, if the defendantentitle himself by the gift of I. S. and
the plaintiff says, that himself was possessed till I. S. took them from
him, and gave them to the defendant. Now the defendant may say that after the
taking the plaintiff gave them to I. S. who gave them to the defendant: for
although the defendant might have pleaded these things at the beginning, yet in
as much as it is pursuing and fortifieth his bar, and no puisne matter
underneath the title of his bar, but eigne and above the matter of his bar,
therefore it is no departure. So a plea in bar which is intendible at the
Common Law, cannot be maintained by a matter of custom, or by statute Law. As
in an assise the tenant pleads in bar a devise unto himself of the land
being deuisible by the custom, the plaintiff says that the deuisor was within
age at the time of the devise. Now if the tenant said that by the custom there
an infant of 15. years of age may make a devise: This is a departure, for the
custom pleaded in bar shall be intended of those that may make a devise by the
Common Law So if in an action of trespass the defendant plead in bar a lease
for 50. years from a house of Religion, and the plaintiff avoid it by reason
it was made within a year before the dissolution, and so void by the Statute
31. H 8. Now if the defendant will allege that by the same Statute it is
provided that all such leases shall be good for xxj. years, and so maintain
the lease to be good for so many years, this is a departure: or if one plead a
fine, and that being avoided because the parties to the fine had nothing, will
maintain the fine to be good by the Statute 1. R. 3. because he had levied the
fine cesti qui use. Lastly, when matters are pleaded which offer several
issues, that is termed a double plea, and is a fault in pleading As in an
assise to plead a feoffement of the ancestor with warrantie. In debt upon a
simple contract to plead payment and an acquittance. In an assise to plead
diverse descents of the land in fee simple, for every of them requires a
several answer. But in an assise to plead diverse descents in tail, is not
double, for one answer makes an end of all, that is to deny the gift in
tail. So as the matter cannot come but to one issue: So in an action of debt
to plead fully administered, and so riens enter mains, for one answer, assets
enter mains serves.

So is it also of two or three matters together with the general conclusion, as
in debt upon an obligation to say, that he is not lettered, and the deed was
read unto him in another sort: and further, that he delivered it upon a
condition which is not performed, so not his deed. So to justify an arrest for
twenty causes of suspicion of felony, is not double, for one answer serves
Des^^ tort demesne. No more to assign in a Writ of error as many errors as
appear in the record, for in millo est erratum answers then all. But to
assign diverse errors en fait is double, for these are to be tried by the
Country. And the reason of all this is, because upon diverse issues joined, ^f
one be found for the party, and another against him, the Court shall be
inueigled, and not know how to give judgment, whether for him or against him.
But to plead a feoffement with warrantie, and rely upon the warrantie only is
not double, for he cannot plead the warrantie without the feoffement.

Of the first sort are Replication, reioinder, surrender, etc.

In an assise against many, if each 33. H. 6. 36.
take the whole tenancie severally, a plead 33. H. 6. 36.
several matters in bar: or ces Br. ass. 383
one Null tort and the other in bar: otherwise 44. E. 3. 23.
it is if one plead in bar, and the other Ioyntenancie by deed: the Plaintiff
at his peril must choose his Tenant. And then after issue for the whole, that,
viz. the Tenancie, 8. ass. Pl. 1.
shall be first enquired of. And being found for the Plaintiff, then the other
issue shall be enquired. Being found against ce^ ibid.
him and no title made against the tenant indeed, the writ shall abate.

In an action of Trespass mere transitory, although the defendant justify
by any special matter, as in a 19. H. 6. 65.
Trespass of goods, by commandment of I. S. whose the property is, in 34. H.
6. 16.
assault and battery, or an 41. ass. Pl. 21.
appeal of mayme, in his own defense upon the plaintifes first assaulting of
him: in false imprisonment by 5. H. 7. 6.
being Constable of the Town, and that the plaintiff brake the peace, or 2. E
4 9.
by an arrest for suspicion of felony, or by 22 ass. Pl. 85.
the commandment of I. S. to seize the body of the Plaintiff in ward, by
reason his ancestour, whose heir he is, held of I. S. by Knight service, etc.
yet the Plaintiff may take issue that it was done De son tort demesne, which is
to say, wrongfully by the Defendant without answering to that matter. But if
the justification be by matter of writing or record, as in false imprisonment,
by 21 H* 6. 5.
a warrant of Justice of peace to arrest him, or a 5. H. 7. 6. 2 E. 4. 9.
Capias that came to him as Sheriff to take the body of the plaintiff, or if it
be any 44. E. 3. 18. 22. ass. Pl. 185.
title or license 12. E. 4. 10.
from the plaintiff, there de son tort demesne is no plea, but the special
matter must be answered. So H. 29. El. C. B.
always in a trespass local, as of his close broken down, etc. if the
defendant entitle a stranger to the land, whether to the freehold, or though it
be but to a lease of it, and justify by his commandment. And likewise in a B.
Roy.
repleuin which is real, the title or special matter must always be
trauersed. If it be a trespass upon land, the defendant justifying in some
other land then the Plaintiff means, the Plaintiff may make a new
assignement, setting forth the place more specially. As if the defendant 27. H.
8. 7.
justify in a place called A. as his freehold, the plaintiff may say the place
where, etc. is called B. other then the place called A. and then the defendant
may plead all anew.

CHAP. 35.
Of Issues.

AN Issue is when both the parties join upon somewhat that they refer unto a
trial to make an end of the plea. And it is of the fact, or law of the fact,
which is commonly termed by the general name of issue, when the proper
contradiction of that which one alleges is set down by the other, which is
properly termed a trauerse. As in debt upon an Obligation for performance of
covenants, and the defendant plead he has performed all, the plaintiff must
show some in 15. H. 7. 2.
certain which the defendant has broken, whereupon issue shall be joined: but
cannot reply that the defendant has not performed all. For in Lodgicke there
be three kinds of contradictions: General, when both the propositions are
general, as, All the covenants are broken, None of the covenants are broken.
Particular when one is general, the other particular, as, All the covenants
are broken, Some of the covenants are not broken, None of the covenants are
broken, Some of the covenants are broken. Proper, when both the propositions
are proper, as, This covenant is broken, This covenant is not broken. The two
33 H. 6. 9.
former make no issue in our Law, but the latter only: and every issue is of
an affirmative and a negative. After which if any insufficiency of pleading
appear in the record, whether the issue be joined thereupon, which we call a
Ieofaile, or no, the parties must replede or begin a new where the first defect
was. And in this case a Jury 35. H. 8. Br. repled. 54. 7. H. 7. 3.
is ready at the bar that to pass upon the issue, shall be discharged. As if
the bar be good, and the replication ill, and issue taken upon it, the
judgment must be that the plaintiff must make a new replication, and the
bar shall remain. So if the bar be good, and likewise the replication,
but the reioynder ill, and the issue taken upon the reioynder, the defendant
must make a new reioynder, and the replication shall remain. But if the bar be
il, and the replication good and the issue taken upon it, now they must plead
all a new because the bar which is first of all is vicious.

But no repleader shall be in an assise, ^ the Plaintiff have disclosed a
sufficient title: for in an assise no land in certain is demanded, but an
assise only prayed. And therefore where a sufficient title is disclosed the
Plaintiff shall have judgment upon seisin and disseisin found for him. And no
repleder shall be notwithstanding that the Tenant have made a 14. H. 7. 12.
vicious bar, or 5. H. 7. 29. 35. H. 6 37.
misreioyned. Otherwise it is if the Plaintiff take issue upon an insufficient
bar. (c) 5 H. 7. 29.


If the tender of this issue come on the Plaintifes part, the form is, Et hoc
pe^i^ quod inquiratur per recordu, vel patrid, etc. If on the Defendants part,
then it is, Et de hoc point se super recordum illud vel super patriam.

Issue in a writ of right cannot be joined, 19. H. 6. 57.
we call it joining of the mise, upon the mere right, but by the party
himself, not by Atturny.

Where the Plaintiff in his replication 15. H. 7. 13.
makes title at large, without traversing o^ confessing and avoiding the
bar, or any way meddling with it, the Tenant (...) join issue upon the title
by saying, V(...) assise sur la title, that is, Let the assise co(...) 15 H. 7.
ibid. 5. H. 7. 29.
upon the title, which is called a pleading ^^ the assise at large. This to be
understood where the title is by a matter en fait, but not record, or done 5.
H. 7. ibid
in a foreign County, for they are not triable by the assise. (b) 14. H. 7. 6.


And in a personal action, whether trespass (c) 46. E. 3. 11.
or repleuin where justification is made (d) 46. E. 3. 11. 10. H. 6. 26.
for damage fesant, for that is merely in the (e) 14. H. 7. 6. 4. H. 6. 10.
personaltie, where the title of the land comes in question, lies not till
issue joined. And yet in that case it never lies for Tenant for life, but
only for tenant for years, bailyfe, etc.

Prerogative.
Aid in these actions shall be of the King 5. E. 4. aid de Roy 50. 3. H. 6. per
Pl. 216.
before issue joined only, though the King be seized but in his natural
capacity, as in the right of his Duchy of Lancaster.

CHAP. 36.
Of Trial by Jury.

THis being of a matter en fait, that is to say, done in the Country. For 9.
H. ^. 38.
a Jury shall not be charged with a matter in Law, nor it shall not be given
in evidence unto them. But if they will take knowledge of the Law, they may
give their verdict generally, viz. 14. El. Pl. 410.
where a verdict may be given at large. As upon an issue of Null tort null
disseisin. So the Jury may find of themselves matters of record if they will,
and although it be not given in evidence. And therefore a fine or common
recovery may be given in evidence without showing it under the great seal,
or seal of the Court, or vouching the Roll of the recovery, for the Jury may
find them if they will. But peradventure they are not bound to find it upon
pain of attaint, unless it be showed under the seal is triable by the oath
of twelve free and Old N. B. 171. The form of the writ of venire facias.
lawful men of the same County, indiff^rently chosen, whom we call a Jury,
and the making of the Jury is called a panell or array. And these must be xij.
for the verdict of more or less, as of 41. ass Pl
xj. or xiij. (b) is void: free, not 26 ass. Pl. 28.
villeins, nor 14. H* 4. 19.
aliens: lawful, for one outlawed may not be a Iuror, because he is not
Legalis homo, 21. H. 6. 30.
and of the same County, for upon 9. H. 6. 63.
a trespass local, as grass cut down in the County of D. where the
trespass was in the County of S. if the defendant plead not guilty, (as he
may) and the Jury find him guilty in the County of S. the verdict is void.
But 28. H. 8. Die. 30.
if they find them guilty generally, an attaint lies. But upon an issue
whether the Executors have assets in their hands, the Jury may find the assets
in any County, for it is but a transitory thing. Lastly, the Jury must be
indifferently chosen, so as neither the Sheriff that makes it (for that is
good cause of challenge to the panell or array) nor the Jurors that are to
pass upon it (for that is good cause of challenge to the pols) bear either
favor or malice to any party. As for the Sheriff to put in any Iuror at the
parties denomination. And either 7. H. 4. 10.
the Sheriff or Iuror to be of his 8. ass. Pl. 23.
fee, or his 21. E. 4. 67.
servant, or within 20. H. 6. 39. for the Sheriff.
his distress, whether his tenant (imediate or not imediate, as 38 E. 3. 25.
holding of I. S. who holds of the party) or not his tenant, as where he is
(e) 38. E. 3. ibid.
to come to the parties hundred, or the party (f) 15. E. 4. 18. Br. chall. 68.
38. E. 3 ibid. makes a quaere of thi^
has a rent charge going out of his land. To be of kin to the party, for
Cosinage in the Sheriff is a good principal challenge to (g) 15. Eliz. Pl.
425. for the sheriff. 21. E. 4. 63. for a Iuror.
the array, and in a Iuror to the Poll: although it be in the ninth degree, and
that one cannot be heir to the other of the land in variance. As if husband
and wife be vouched (which is entendible for the warrantie and land of the
wife) and the Sheriff or Iuror be cousin in the ninth degree unto the husband;
the reason whereof is, for the affection which the law entendeth that the one
does carry to the other. And because one may be heir unto the other of other
land. And therefore it is a good challenge in personal suits also: To have
been 21. H. 6. 39. for the Sheriff. 3. H. 6. 24. for the Iuror.
arbitrators on his part in that matter. To 11. H. 4, 26.
have an action of battery depending against the party, or an action of debt
by the party against him, etc. The Iuror to have 49. E. 3. 2.
taken money for his verdict to have 49. E. 3. 1.
given it before hand, or to have 7. H. 4. 11.
passed formerly in the same matter: and such other things as of themselves
carry favor or malice in them, and are called principal challenges. So of
those which only do induce it: as to be the parties 21. E. 4. 67. for the
sheriff. 14. H. 7. ^ for a Iuror.
master, 49. E. 3. 1.
councellor, Atturny, 14. H. 7. 2.
Steward of his manor, to 11. H. 4. 26.
sue him in an action of debt, etc. to be 20. H. 7. 2.
of the same society with him, as if both be of Graies-Inne, or the 14. H. 7.
2.
party to be within his distress, or 18. E. 4. 13.
he to have passed before upon such another matter.

Statutes.
Westminster 2. cap. 38. In an assise no more shall be sommoned but xiiij.

Men above lxx. years of age continually sick, or sick at the time of
sommons, shall not be returned in Iuries or assizes: nor any that dwell out of
the County, unless it be in grand assizes.

Artit^ super chart^ cap. 9. 34. E 3. cap. 4. Iuries shall be made of the next
people of the County.

11. H. 6. cap 1. None dwelling in stews shall be of a Jury.

9 E. 3 cap. 4. A deed pleaded in a franchise shall be tried in the County
where the action is brought.

2. E. 6. cap. 24. Upon stroke or poison in one County, the party dying in
another, an enditement and trial may be in the County where he dies. And
an appeal sued there and tried by xij. men of the same County.

Likewise the accessaries in one County to a murder or felony in another
County, shall be indicted, arraigned, etc in the county where the offense of
accessarie is done.

33. H. 8. cap. 20. Enditement of a person lunaticke, being at the time of
confession of treason before the Council, of perfect memory, and so certified
by them, shall be tried by freeholders of any Shire to be appointed by
commission. And the trial whether he be culpable or not, shall be there in his
absence.

33. H. 8. cap. 23. Confession of Treason, Misprision of Treason, or murder
being made before the Council, or three of them, or they vehemently
suspecting one of such an offense, it shall be enquired, heard, and determined
by Commission out of the Chancerie, in the shire or place limited in that
Commission, by such lawful persons as shall be returned; wherein no challenge
for the shire or hundred shall be allowed.

28. H. 8. cap. 13. and 27. H 8. cap. 4. All treasons, felonies, robberies,
murders, and confederacies within the Admiralls jurisdiction shall be enquired
and determined in such form of Law as if it were done upon, the land by
commission directed to the Admiral and three or four other assigned by the
Lord Chancellor in the shire limited in their commission, where no challenge
shall be for the hundred.

32. H, 8 cap. 4. The enditement and arraignment of treasons and misprision of
treasons in Wales, or else where the writs out of the Chancerie of England run
not, shall be in such shires, and before such commissioners as the King shall
appoint.

35. H. 8. cap. 2. All treasons, misprisions, or concealments of Treason done
out of England, shall be enquired, heard, and determined in the Kings Bench by
men of that shire where the Bench sits, or else before Commissioners, and in
such shire as shall be limited by commission.

1. and 2. Ph and Mar. cap. Trials for treason shall be according to the course
of the common Law.

23. E. 3. cap. 3. No enditor be put in enquests upon the deliverance of
enditees of felonies or trespass.

Westminster. 2. cap. 38. None shall be put in assizes or Iuries triable in their
own shire, but such as have xx. s. a year freehold, nor in assizes triable
out of their own shire, unless they have xl. s.

21. E. 1. De ponend' in Assisa. None shall be put in assizes triable out of
their own shire but such as have lands to the yearly value of C. s. nor in
assizes triable in their own shire, unless they have xl. s.

2. H. 5. cap. 3. None shall pass in an enquest upon the trial of the death
of a man, nor between party and party in plea real or personal, whereof
the debt and damages amount to xl marks, unless he have lands of the yearly
value of xl. s.

33. H. 8. cap. 13. In Cities, Boroughes, or corporate Towns, an inhabitant
being worth xl. l. in goods, shall be admitted in trial of murders and
felonies in every Session and jail delivery for that Town, though he have no
freehold.

35. H. 8. cap. 6. made perpetual.

2. E. 6. cap. 32. The cause of having xl. s. value, must be inserted in the
venire facias: and be of lands out of ancient demesne. Where that clause needs
not, the Jurors must dispend some land of freehold out of ancient demesne
within the County where the issue is to be tried.

27. Eliz. cap. 6. Where the Jurors returned in the Kings Bench, Common place,
Exchequer, or before Justices of assise, ought to have xl. s. freehold, there
they shall from henceforth have xl. l. yearly freehold out of ancient
demesne, in the County where the issue is to be tried. And the clause thereof
inserted in the venire facias. These two Statutes extend not to corporations.

27. Eliz. cap. 7. No Bailife of liberty shall return to the Sheriff, or
deliver unto him the name of any person to be returned in a Jury without some
addition whereby the party may be known. Neither shall the Jury, etc.
return any Iuror out of a liberty without some addition whereby he may be
known, nor within a liberty with other addition than that is delivered unto
him by the Baylife, etc.

8. H. 4. cap. 3. Every Iuror returned within the County of Middlesex shall
be called the fourth day of the return, and appearing at the same day, their
appearance shall be recorded, and they shall not be amerced nor lose their
issues.

5 E. 3* cap. 10. A Iuror taking of the one part or of the other, shall never
be of Jury more. And besides imprisoned.

34. E. 3. cap. 8. The party or any stranger may sue him for it.

38. E. 3. cap. 12. And both the Jurors, and the embraceors to procure it,
being thereof attainted, shall pay ten times so much as he has taken.

Westminster. 2. cap 30. Assizes of novel disseisin, mortdancester, and attaints,
shall be taken thrice a year by two Justices assigned, associated with one or
two discreet Knights in the Shire where they come.

In every shire before their departure they shall appoint the day of their
return: And adiourne the assizes if the taking be by any means deferred.

Also in assizes of mortdancester being respited, they may adiourne into the
Bench if need be. And when it comes to the taking of the assise, the Justices
of the Bench shall send it back again to them.

All pleas in either of the Benches that require small examination, shall be
determined before them.

27. E. 1. cap. 4. Statutum de finibus leuatis. Such enquests being taken,
shall be returned into the Bench, and there judgment shall be given.

Enquests and Recognisances determinable before Justices of either Bench, shall
be taken in vacation time, before any of the Justices before whom the plea is
brought, being associate to one Knight of the same shire, where such enquests
shall pass, unless it require great examination.

12. E 2. cap. 3. Stat^ Eborat^. Enquests in pleas of land (that require no
great examination) shall be taken in the County before a Justice of the place
where the plea is accompanied, with a substantial man is the country, Knight
or other, so that a certain day be given in the Bench, and a certain day and
place in the country, i^ presence of the parties demanding of the same.

Enquests in pleas of land that require no great examination, shall be taken
in the Country (in manner abouesaid) before two Justices of the Bench.

2. E. 3. cap. 17. All such enquests in plea of land shall hereafter be taken
as well of the request of the tenant, as demaundant.

42. E. 3. cap. 11. Nisi prius shall not be granted before the name of the
Jurors returned.

7. R. 2. ca. 7. In all manner of pleas where an Nisi prius is grantable of
office after the great distress returned, and thrice served before the
Justices against the Jurors, and thereupon the parties demanded if any of the
said parties will pursue, or if the parties refuse to have Nisi prius in the
case, then at the suite of any of the Jurors that is present a nisi prius shall
be granted for ending of the quarrel.

14. E. 3. cap. 16. The Nisi prius in the Kings Bench shall be granted before a
Justice of that place, if any Justice of that place may well go into those
parts. Else before a Justice of the Common place, etc. otherwise the chief
Baron being a man of the Law, if, etc. or else before the Justices assigned to
take assizes in those parts. So that one of them be a Justice of one Bench or
other, or the Kings Serieant sworn.

18. Eliz. cap. 12. The chief Justice of England upon issue joined in the
Kings Bench or Chancerie, and the chief Justice of the Common pleas, and
chief Baron of the Exchequer, upon issues joined in their several Courts (or
in their absence two other Justices or Barons) or made Justices of nisi prius
for the County of Middlesex, in all issues joined to set in Westminster Hall within
the Term, or four days after.

4. E. 3. cap. 11. confirmed 7 Ric. 2. cap. 15. Justices of nisi prius shall
enquire, hear, and determine, as well at the Kings suite as the parties, all
mainteyners, conspirators, makers of confederacy, and committors of
Champertie, and all other things contained in the said Article, as well as
Justices of Eyer should do, if they were in the same County.

14. H. 6. cap. 1. Justices of nisi prius have power in cases of felony and
treason as well upon acquittaile as attainder, and thereupon to award execution.

Stat^ Eborat^. 12. E. 2. cap. 2. Upon a deed denied where witnesses are named,
process shall be awarded against the witnesses if they come not at the grand
distress, or upon a nihil non inuentus returned, yet the taking of the enquest
shall not be deferred. If he come at the grand, and the enquest remains
untaken for some cause, the witnesses shall have idem dies, and not appearing,
then the first issues returned upon them shall be forfeit, and the enquest
taken, notwithstanding their absence.

An enquest shall be taken notwithstanding the absence of witnesses dwelling in
a franchise where the Kings Writ runs not. Four of the Jury must also be
of the 7. H. 4. 17. 36. H. 8. Die. 61.
same hundred, and so many are enough though it be in an attaint where the
Jury is xxiiij. In an information upon the Statute of plurality of farms,
for having 7. Farms in 7. Towns in four several hundreds: If four of the
Jury have any thing, or dwell within any of the four several hundreds it is
sufficient.

Statutes.
15. H. 8. cap 6. made perpetual. 2. E. 6. cap. 32. Six sufficient Hundreds
shall be returned in every Jury.

27. Eliz. cap. 6. If two sufficient hundreds appear in any personal action,
it is enough.

If the thing in issue lie in the notice of two several Counties, and not of
one only, for 15 Eliz.
only two Counties may join, and no more. And two may though they be not the
next, as Kent and Devonshire, the Jury shall be made 49. ass. Pl. 1. 1.
equally out of both: That is, six out of the one, and six out of the other.
And this we call a Ioynder of Counties, as in 49. E. 3. 19. 21. H. 6. 3.
an action of trespass, if the defendant justify for common appendant to land
in another County: or in a writ of anuitie and Count of a seisin in another
County then where the Church is, out of which the annuitie goes.

Statutes.
7. Rit^. 2. cap. 10. An assise of novel disseisin of rent out of the
Tenements in diverse Counties, shall be in the confine of the said Counties.

But upon an enditement of an offense against the Crown, the trial shall
never 4. H. 7. Coro. 60. 6. H. 7. 10.
be by ioynder of Counties. Therefore an enditement that one stroke I S. in one
county, of which stroke he died in another County, is no good enditement,
because it cannot be tried, for that the Counties cannot join in an
enditement. And therefore before the Statute 2. and 3. E. 6. (which alters
the law in this case) they were wont to carry the corpse into the County where
the stroke was. But otherwise it is in an appeal.

But if the Defendant plead in any action, as in a homine replegiando, or
though it 19. H. 6. 18. by the common law. 40. E. 3. 36.
be but in a writ of trespass or debt, that the Plaintiff is a villein
regardant to a manor of his in another County, yet the same shall be tried
in the County where the writ is brought. And this is in Fauorem libertatis.

28. E. 3. cap. 3. confirmed. 8. H. 6. cap. 28. In every suit between an Alien
and a Demesne (though the King be a party) the one half of the Jury shall
be the Aliens. If so many be in that visne, and if there be not to that number,
then so many as be there not parties, nor with the party to the suite.

Where a Peer of the Realm is (...) to the action, a Knight must be returned
to 2. Mar. Pl. 117.
the Jury.

Statutes.
Magn^ chart^ cap. 29. A Peer of the Realm upon an enditement of felony or
treason shall be tried by his Peers.

20. H 6. cap. 9. Duchisses, Baronesses, Countesses, sole or married, shall be
tried (in such cases) as Peers of the Realm. In a Court of Pipowders the
trial is by Preamble of the Stat. 7. E. 4. ca. 2. so recites it. 39. E. 3. 2.
39. E. 3 2. 1. Mar. Die. 98. There must be 12. beside the four Knights. Bra^.
42.
the Merchants.

The Jury in a writ of right is called the Grand Assise. Being four Knights,
^^ other in default of Knights, choosing a Jury of 12. unto them. So note xvj
in all, for the grand Jury is always above xij. and therefore no attaint
lies for him that loses in a writ of right, because it passes by the grand
assise which is more then xij.

Challenges are here allowed for the parties (if they will) both to the array
(...) to the pols. And whether to the pannell or the pols, are to be tried by
some of the Jurors, if it be 27. H. 8. 26.
before any Jurors swor^, the Court shall choose the Triors, when any Jurors are
sworn they must try it.

Challenge to the array is when the Jury is not sufficiently empanelled upon
(...) cause of challenge to the Sheriff, and afterward to the Coroners, who by
reason (^) 14. H. 7. 31. 4. H. 7. 3.
of just exception against the Sheriff made or should make the array, the 8. H.
6. 12. 15. E. 4. 24.
Court must choose certain named Esloirs, 15. E. 48.
where the parties shall never have challenge to the whole array. Challenge to
the poll is when any of the Jurors are insufficient to pass upon the trial.
This challenge must be taken before the pannell be 27. H. 8. 26.
perused: For if the plaintiff challenge one, and when the pannell is perused,
the defendant challenge the same person, yet the plaintiff may release his
challenge, and then the Iuror shall not be drawn, because the defendants
challenge is nothing worth, in that it was not made till the pannell was
perused, and shall be tried by two of the Iutors chosen by the Court, against
whom 27. H. 8. 26.
no challenge shall be admitted, but challenges that sound not in reproach of
the iuror, as to be 49 E. 3. 1.
of counsel with the party, or 3. H. 6. 36.
within his distress, to have 19. H. 6. 9.
nothing within the hundred, or 21. H. 7. 29. 27. H. 8. 26.
not sufficient freehold, shall be examined upon his oath, which we call an
examination upon a voyri dire. He that challenged the array if it pass against
him, or (which is as strong) if he release it, shall never challenge the pols
without showing cause presently, which shall de tried out of hand. Before the
Clark (e) 7. H. 4. 46. 7. E. 4. 17.
pass thorough the pannell. So shall not any other challenge. And after
challenge to a Iuror for one cause, as favor, etc. which passes against the
challenger, he shall (...) challenge him for another, as for having nothing in
the hundred* etc.

In enditements and appeals of (...) the defendant may challenge xxxv. I(...)
Stam. 157. b. Doct. St. per Br. chall. 11. in an appeal.
without showing cause which is called a peremptory challenge.

Statutes.
22. H. 8. cap. 14. No person arraigned for any petie treason, murder, or
felony, shall be admitted to any peremptory challenge, above the number of
twenty.

When there lacks some to fill the I^^^, as the greater part being returned
dead, ^^ 20 E. 4. 11. Stam. 159. ^.
not appearing. But if all the pols be challenged and drawn, there no tales
shall be, but a new venire facias for tales referred ^^ (quales) some like
thing, other of the s(...) sort shall be taken, for there may be ma^^ tales
one after another, Stam. 155 c.
till it be (...) which we call a Tales, which must be^ ^^ Bract tales 11
even number 37. H. 6. 12.
less then the pr(...)pall pannell, As a december tales, octo tales, and ^ or in
an attaint where the Jury is xxiiij. ^ tales, etc. And 14 H. 7. 2.
every tales must be (...) less number then other. As after an O(...) tales,
a Sex tales, but not a december tales, not ^^ Octo tales again.

Statutes.
35. H 8. cap. 6. made perpetual. 2. ^. ^ cap. 32. A Tales may be made up
before Justices of Assise or Nisi prius of able persons of the same County,
then present at the prayer of the plaintiff or demandant.

4. and 5. Ph. and Ma. cap 7. So for the King upon request by any authorized
thereunto, or assigned of the Court, or by the party that follows upon a
penal statute as well for the King as for himself.

14. El. Cap. 9. Such a Tales de circumcibus before the Justices of Nisi prius
shall be granted at the prayer of the defendant or auowant.

But in Enditements and Appeals 14. H. ^. 7.
that touch life, a Tales may be of a greater number than the principal
Panell. As a xl Tales, or as many as the Court will award, and that is in
respect of the peremptory challenge of xxxv.

The Jury being charged, may neither eat nor drink (but by leave of the
Justices) 20. H. 7. 3. 6. H. 8. Die. 3.
before their verdict given; and doing it before they be agreed, it makes
their verdict void. After they be agreed, it is but fineable.

The Jury upon arraignement either at the 14. H. 7. 2.
Kings suit, 14 H. 7. ibid.
or in an Appeal acquitting one that was found guilty of the 13. E. 4. 3. 4. E
6. 12.
death of a man upon an inquiry 13 E. 4. ibid. 4. E. 6. ibid.
by the Coroners Super visum corporis must find who did the fact. But not upon
an Enditement 14 H. 7. ib*
before the Sheriff or Justices of peace, for that is not of Record, a^ the
finding before the Coroner is, 13. E. 4. ibid. 4 E. 6. ibid.
neither does this take place in an acquitaile upon an Enditement for the
felonious taking of goods.

The Jury in an Assise of Nouel disseis^^ (which are there themselves properly
called 7. E. 6. Pl. 91. Ibid.
an assise) shall inquire of the plea in abatement, though the issue be joined
upon the seisin and disseisin. And therefore no plea in Abatement is there
answerable.

34. E. 1. De Coniunctim feoffatis. The defendant in Assise alleging
iointenancie of his part with a stranger by Deed, the plaintiff may aver him to
be sole tenant; whereupon Process shall be made against both the defendant and
the stranger. And if at the day both of them justify the feofment, they shall
maintain the exception, and further answer to the Assise as if the original
had been purchased against him jointly. If the exception be proved false by
the Assise, they shall have a years imprisonment though the assise pass for
them. If the defendant absent himself at the day, the Assise shall pass
against him by default, though the stranger appear and justify the Deed.
Whither both, or one appear, if it be found by the Assise that the Exception
was truly alleged, the Assise shall pass no further, but the Writ shall
abate. Such an Exception shall not be alleged by the Bailife of any Tenant.
The like processes in assizes of Mortdancester and Iuris vtrum.

An Infant bringing an Assise, if a matter en fait, that is, done in the same
County be pleaded against him, whether in Abateme^t, (a) 11. Ass. pl. ^.
as in an assise of rent, that he had made his plaint of the same land whence
he supposes this rent to be issuing; or in bar, 48. E. 3. 33.
as the Deed of his Ancestour, with warrantie, the Jury shall inquire of all
the circumstances. Otherwise it is in a Writ 9 E. 4. 34.
of Entry sur disseisin, or other 48. E. 3. ibid.
Praecipe quoth reddat: for there the point put in issue, and no other, shall be
tried by the Jurors. Otherwise it is also in an Assise upon pleading a
recovery 48. E. 3. ibid.
against him, or other matter of Record: in that case he must answer, and the
Jury shall not inquire of the circumstances, fot the Court shall plead and
maintain for him.

The like inquiry of the circumstances 28. Ass pl. 21.
shall be, if in an assise brought against him he plead to the assise at large.
Otherwise it is if he plead in bar, for there if the plaintiff make himself
title as by a statute merchant etc. and the infant trauerse the title which is
found against him, the plaintiff shall have judgment without inquiring of the
circumstances, because the issue is taken out of the point of the assise, and
therefore is al one as if the infant were of full age. So that it is better for
an infant to plead unto the assise at large, than otherwise.

The form of an Assise of nouel Disseis^^ i^ Old N. B. 104.
this, Rex vic' salutem. Quastus est (...) B. unjust, and sine iudicio
disseisiuit e(...) tenemento suo in N. infra triginta ann^^ i^ ^ltimos clapsos.
Et ideo tibi praec' quoth si pradi^^ ^ fecerit te securu^ de clam' suo pr' os tunc
(...)nement' illud reseisum de catallis quae i^ i^s^ capt', and ipsum ten' cum
catall. esse in p^^^^sque ad proxima^ assisam, cum Iustic' ^^'i i^ p^^tes ill'
venerint. Et in earim fac' 12 liberos and legales homines de visum illo videre
tan' illud, and nomino eoru^ imbreuidri fac'. Et sum' en p^^ 14. El. D. 310.
for all.
bonos sum' quoth sint cora^ praefat' Iustic' ^r' i^ ^^ pr^fata^ assisam parati
inde facere recogn' ^^ pona per vadiu^ and saluos pleg' praed. B. vel (...)
suu^, si ipse inuentus non fuerit quoth tunc sit ibi ^^ illud recogn' anct'. Et
habeas ibi summ' (...) pleg': and hoc breue. Test, etc.

If the tenant in a Mortdancester (be it tenant of the land, or tenant by his
waranty) 40. E. 3. 48. 39. Ass pl. 13.
trauerse any point of the writ, as the dying seized of his Ancestor, etc.
which goes in abatement of the writ, yet the Jury (...) inquire of all the
points: as whether the d^mandant be next heir, and whether his ^^cestor died
within fifty years, etc. (...) one found against the demandant, (...) the
writ. But a plea in bar of the assise by matter of record, releas, collateral
war(...) or such other matter as is out of the (...) points of the Assise, is
peremptory to the Tenant, if it pass against him. And ^^ such a plea in
Bar be found agai^^^ the Tenant, and yet the Jury inq(...) further, and
find one of the points of the writ against the Demaundant, as that his ancestor
died not seized, etc. he shall recover notwithstanding that, for such an
inquiry should not be upon a plea in bar. Dyer thinks it to be so
likewise, where the Tenant voucheth, and the Demaundant does counterplead the
voucher, viz. that in that case though the counterplea be found for the
Demaundant, yet that all the points must be enquired and found for the
Demaundant, or else he shall not recover. But Fitzherbert thinks otherwise in
that case, because it is a plea in bar, and not to the Writ.

For the Iuries direction in their verdict greater liberty is permitted in
pleading, ^ 9. E. 4. 3^.
matter doubtful in Law, for a Trauerse may be omitted. As in debt against an
Executor, it is a good plea to say, Administration was committed to him, and
therefore he should be named Administrator, and not executor, without
traversing that he is not Executor, for the lay people know no difference
between one administering as Executor and one administering as Administrator.

The special matter may be pleaded together with the general issue, etc. As
that 9. H. 6. 38.
the Obligation put in suite, was sealed by him and delivered to A. to keep
till certain Indentures were made between the Plaintiff and him, before which
Indentures made, the Plaintiff took the Obligation out of the possession of A.
So is it not his deed. This is good, and yet by this general conclusion the
matter precedent shall not be waiued, for it were perilous to put the special
matter in the mouth of the Lay people.

The Count may be abridged before verdict, so as the original remain true, as
in an assise of his freehold, and make his plaint of land and rent, he may
abridge it 14. ass. Pl. 9. 4. E. 4. 33. 14. H. 6. 4.
for the rent. In an assise of his freehold in D. and demand two manors in D.
he may abridge his plaint for one. But being of his freehold in D. and S. and
demand one manor extending into both, he cannot abridge either of them, for
then the writ remains not true. In a writ of wast and assign it among other
things, in racing of a Copper 10. El. Die. 172.
fixed to the soil, he may abridge the wast assigned in that, so as thereby he
falsify not his writ. But if the writ be Quare vastum fecit in domibus boscis
and gardinis, he cannot abridge the wast supposed in domibus. In a writ of ward
De custodia terre et heredis, and 39. E. 3. 10.
count of the manor of D. and xv. acres of land, which in truth are parcel of
the manor, and pleaded by the defendant in abatement of the writ: he may
abridge his demand of the xv acres. In trespass de bonis et catallis captis,
and count of money taken away ^9. E. 3. 20. Br. abridgem. 111.
(for which this form will not serve, the money must needs be expressed in
the writ) he may abridge the count touching that.

Statutes.
21. H. 8. cap. 3. The demand of a thing entire may be abridged before
verdict, though thereby the writ become false. After acquitaile upon an appeal
or enditement of felony or treason, he shall never be drawn in question for
the same offense again. Therefore upon an enditement of manslaughter or
murder, the Justices (by discretion) were wont not to proceed to arraignment
22. E. 4 Coro. 44.
till the year and the day were past, for otherwise if he should be acquit
upon his arraignment, the parties appeal were lost.

CHAP. 37.
Of Trial by Battle.

IN Old Not. Br. 1
writs of right and in appeals See the manor of waging battails and performing
it. 9. H. 4. 3. in an appeal of robbery 17. E. 3. 2 ^n an appeal of murder.
that touch life, trial may be by battle at the Defendants choice. Therefore
Old N. B. ibid. 9. E. 4. 35.
the Demaundant in a Writ of right had need always to have his Champion
ready, else he may happen to be deceived.

The battle in a writ of right must be all by Champions. Therefore in a writ
of right an Infant may join the Mise and try it by battle. So can he not in
an appeal, for there it must be done in proper person: which Champions must
be Br. Chal. 1 96.
freem^n, not villeins, and 3. H. 6. 55.
so is the issue taken that he is ready to defend it by the body of I. S. a
freeman. Therefore Bracton.
for the Lord to offer his villein for his Champion in a writ of right, or in
an appeal, is a manumission of him. And the Demaundants champion Westminster. 1.
cap. 40. so recites i^.
must have seen him or his ancestors i^ possession, and thereof take his oath.

Statutes.
Westminster. 1. ca. 40. Touching the oaths of the Champions it is thus provided,
because it seldom happened, but that the Champion of the demaundant is
forsworn, in that he swears that he or his father saw the seisin of the
land or his ancestor. And that his father commanded him to deraigne the right,
that from henceforth the Champion of the demaundant shall not be compelled so
to swear.

The battle in an appeal must be in ^. E. 4. 35.
proper person. And therefore there the Defendant is restreined from the choice
of battle, and must needs try it by Jury. If there be any notorious
presumption of the fact in him, as that he brake prison, or escaped (a) 1.
ass. Pl. 6.
by flight being led toward prison for it, or was 22. E. 4. 19.
endited for it. So in an appeal of murder, that he was taken in the act with
a 6. H. 3. Coro. 411.
bloody knife, in an appeal of robbery, that upon fresh suite and hue and
cry he was taken with the manner, having some of the money about him, or 22.
E. 4. 29.
of imbecilitie in the Plaintiff, as if he be may med, or within age, etc.

But against a Peer of the Realm Discourse of the Cust. of London. fol. 13.
Stam. 108.
bringing an appeal, the Defendant shall not wage battle, much less against
the king either upon an enditement or appeal.

6. Ric. 2. cap. 6. Ousteth battle in an appeal of rape.

CHAP. 38.
Of Trial by witness.

IN a writ of dower issue taken upon the 8. H. 6. 23.
death of her husband shall be tried by witnesses. So shall no other case in
the Law.

CHAP. 39.
Of Trial by wager of Law.

IN some cases also the trial shall be by the Defendants oath, which we call
22. H. 6 41.
waging of his Law. As 1. where the tenant in a praecipe quod reddat alleges
that he was not lawfully sommoned according to the Law of the land. 2. in mere
personal contracts, we call them simple contracts, as 1. H. 6. 1.
debts for money lent, or rent upon a lease for years of a stock of sheep,
or such like: (but 9. E. 4. 1.
not upon a lease of land. And though it be of land stored with beasts, yet the
defendant shall not wage his Law for the rent due for the beasts, for it is all
but one entire contract) detinue of a horse, or other personal thing: but not
of a deed indented, or obligation, 34. H 8. Br. leygager 97. 18. E. ^ 23. 39 H
6 35. ^7. H. 8. 22.
or of a lease for years of land, nor in an action upon the case, for it is not
by reason of any contract growing without deed, for in debt upon sale of a
horse for x. l. if the plaintiff have a specialtie of it, he shall estoppe the
defendant to wage his Law. But upon detinue and count of a bailement by deed,
yet the defendant may wage his Law, for detinue is the cause of the action,
which may be discharged by matter en fait, as the defendants redeliuerie, or
the plaintifes taking 18. H. 8. 3.
of it back again, etc. or priuitie of others, for in detinue upon a
bailement by another man's hand, the defendant may wage his Law, because he is
not to answer to the bailement, but to the detinue. So in debt upon a Contract
by another man's hand. But not in account upon receipt by another man's hand, for
there he must answer to the receipt: the defendant may wage his law. Therefore
in such kind of actions exexutors 15. E. 4. 25.
are not chargable, as in debt upon sale of goods to the Testator, and 2^. E.
3. 40.
though the party have a tail ensealed of it, for that is no specialtie: or
for 11. H. 6. 48.
wages due by the Testator upon a retainer. Otherwise it is in such an action
brought by a Laborer (who is bound by Statute to serve) in 10 H. 6. Execut. 21.
debt upon arrerages of an account made by the Testator before Auditors (who
are Judges of record) or Br. Execu. 33.
upon a lease for years though it be made without deed, for in none of these
cases the testator could wage his law.

Prerogative.
No wager of Law shall be against the 24 E. 3. 39. 18. E. 3. 4.
King. Therefore in an attachment upon a prohibition the party shall not wage
his law that he did sue forward contrary to the Kings prohibition, for the King
is quod amodo party of the contempt. And for this cause 50. E. 3. 5.
also, debt upon a simple contract shall not be forfeit to the King by
outlawry, for then the party were in worse case then before, where he might
have waged his Law.

Statutes.
Magn^ chart. cap. 28. Wager of Law shall not be admitted without credible
witnesses.

5. H. 4. cap. 8. In actions of debt upon the arrerages of an account fayning
to the intent (to put the defendants from their law) that the same was found
before their Apprentices or servants Auditors assigned in, shall be in the
Judges discretion upon examination of the Atturnies, or whom else they please
to receive, or oust the defendants of their law.

3. In plaints in Court Barons personal things under 40. s. yet (by
prescription) 1^. H. 7. 18.
it may be by Jury: which i^ against the common course and order of it.

CHAP. 40.
Of Demurrers.

AN issue of the Law which we call a demurrer, is when admitting the 7. E. 6.
Pl. 85.
matters alleged either of them rests in the judgment of the Law. The form
of joining a demurrer is, Et praed. quer' dicit quod placitum praed. definimus
sufficiens in lege existit ad ipsum, the Plaintiff, ab action sua praed. etc.
praecluden. quodque ipse ad placitum illud modo and forma placitatum necesse
non habet, nec per legem terre tenetur respondere, vnde pro defectu sufficient.
responsionis petit Iudicium, etc. Et praed. Def. ex quo ipse sufficient. matter
in lege ad praed. quer' ab action sua praed. versus eum habend. praecludend.
superius allegauit quam ipse paratus est verificare, quam quidem (...) praed.
quer' non dedicit, nec ad eam equa^^^^^ respondet, sed verificationem illam
admitte^^ recusat petit Iudicium: and quod praed. quer' ab action suo praed.
versus eum habend. praec^^datur.

This being joined upon an exception 50. E. 3. 20.
to the original it self or count for some fault appearing in it, does only
drive the defendant to make a better answer, which we call a respondes ouster,
if it pass against him.

CHAP. 41.
Of Appearance.

THus far concerning pleading. The other mean acts are Appearance, and
Continuance, or Judicial process.

Appearance is the parties coming into the Court. where upon 12. H. 4. 24. 1.
H. 6. 4.
Common day given the fourth day after the very (b) F. N B. 25 ^. 1. H. 6*
ibid.
day is allowed, and so are all entries, obtulit se quarto die post. But so is
it not upon a certain day given unto him, as Monday, Tuesday, or such like.

When the party for not appearing 48. E. 3. 1.
should have some great loss or corporate pain, as to have a Charter of
pardon allowed where one before was outlawed at his suite, at a Sequatur sub
suo periculo, when if he appear not, the land is lost: in a repleuin, sicut
pluries, when a Capias in Withernam 7. E 4. 15. 8. H. 6. ibid. 3. H. 6. 14.
is to go against him, etc. he may appear though the officers return force
him not to it, as if in the two first cases he return a nihil, or (that the
beasts be esloined) in the latter.

If the Plaintiff will not appear when 8. H. 6. 8. 3. H. 6. 13. 3. H 6. 50. 8.
H. 6 ibid. 3. H. 6. 14.
he is demanded at the day, which is called a non suit, or say in Court that
he will not sue forwards, which is called a retraxit, and always of record,
this is peremptory, and loses him his action. But in real actions 10. ass.
Pl. 12. in an assise. Old N. Br. 46.
brought by many, if one will not prosecute the rest may alone. Except in the
writ De natiuo habendo, that is, fauorem libertati^.

For executors also Sommons and Seuerance lies in personal actions. 48. E 3.
14. Br Some and Seu. 9. 7. H 6. 39. 41. B^. default. 34.


If the defendant will not plead, which is a nihil dicit, this in all actions,
real and personal, is peremptory, and loses the action.

So in personal actions if he appear, and the 7. H. 6. ibid.
same term or otherwise, after 38 H 6. 33.
plea or 18. E. 4. 7.
demurrer joined make default. And this default shall never be saved, how good
cause soever he have to excuse it, as fall of waters, imprisonment, etc. for to
appear and plead, and not to maintain it, is a kind of nihil dicit. But
either of the parties may for once, for ones common essoyne 9. H 5. 5. 35. H. 6
33.
lies not after another without mesn degrees be excused of appearance, by an
essoyne which lies not for him that appears in proper person (for it is to
excuse his absence, whereunto his presence is contrary) nor that comes in by
exigent, or Cepi corpus (for he abides in ward, or by mainprise and therefore
cannot make default) if they cast an essoine, that is to say, demand it the 18.
E. 4. 4.
first day, or any of the four days, unless the other cast an exception,
that is to say, enter an exception that no essoine be received. And the fourth
day the essoine must either be allowed (and then it is said to be adjudged and
adiourned) or disallowed. But upon every mean appearance a new essoin lies,
27. H. 6. 2. 21. E. 4. 16.
though one were cast before (for the Pl and Def. if they list, may fourch
infinitely by the common Law) As after issue upon a custom bastardie, or ne
unque aco^ple en loyal matrimony, at the day of the certifying 39. H. 6. 29.
the defendant may cast an essoyne: After essoine of the demaundant, if the
Tenant at the second day be essoined, and at the third day demand the view and
has it. 27. H. 6. 2.
Now at the day after the view, he may be essoined again, and at the day
after that the demandant upon a wager of law in debt and day given to do it,
if the plaintiff be essoined at the day, and at the day given by the essoine
the defendant be essoined, now the plaintiff at the day may be essoined again.

And this is called essoin de male venir, or the common essoine. Beside which
essoines for special causes, as of being beyond sea, going ad terram sanctam,
of the Kings service, and d malo lecti are allowed And have 27. H. 6. 1.
a year and a days adiournment, whereupon an 2. E. 4. 16.
oath must be taken that the cause is true

But no such special essoine lies in an assiss 21. H. 6. 42.
of novel disseisin, 44. E. 3. 15.
dower, 27. H. 6. 1.
assise of darrein presentment, (...) Q^^^e impedit, for then the six months
would pass and so the Church come in lap, for such essoines must have a
year and a days adiournment. But a Common essoyn lies in all those cases.

Statutes.
Westminster. 2. cap. 12. In an appeal of the death of a man no essoyne shall lie
for the Appellor, for whatsoever cause in whatsoever Court the appeal be.

Westminster. 1. cap. 41. In assizes and Iuris vtrum after that the tenant has once
appeared, he shall be no more essoyned.

Westminster. 2. cap. 28. In like manner it shall be touching demandants in an
assise.

Westminster 1. cap. 42. Parceners and Ioyntenants in a praecipe against them shall
have but one essoyne.

Glocest. cap. 10. So of a man and his wife impleaded in the Kings Courts.

9. E. 3. cap. 3. Stat. 1. In a writ of debt against executours, they nor any
of them shall have but one essoyne before appearance, that is to say, the
summons or Attachment, nor but one after appearance.

Westminster 2. cap. 27. None allowed after the day given by Praece partium, in case
where the parties consent to come without essoyne.

Marleb. cap. 13. After a man has put himself upon an enquest, he shall have
but one assoine.

Westminster. 2. cap. 27. After one has put himself upon an enquest, an essoyne
shall be allowed him at the next day, but never after, whether he were essoyned
before or not.

Mar. cap. 19. None shall need to swear to warrant his essoine.

Westminster 1. cap. 43. The demaundant may aver against an essoyne (before
Justices) of being beyond sea, that the Tenant was within the four seas the
day that he was sommoned, and three weeks after.

Westminster 2. cap. 17. In an essoyne De malo lecti, the demaundant may aver by
enquest that the Tenant is not sick, nor in such plight but he may come before
the Justices. Such an essoine shall not lie in a Writ of right between two
claiming by one descent.

5. E. 3. cap. 7. Essoyne of the Kings service, nor protection shall not be
allowed in writs of attaint.

12. E. 2. Stat. of essoines. See many particular cases where essoynes lie not.

CHAP. 42.
Of Continuance.

COntinuance is from day to day till the end of the suite, else 24. E. 3. 48.
11. H. 7. 5.
if the Plaintiff do nothing, it is called a discontinuance: if any error be
in the continuing, as by awarding a Capias where ^ distress should be, it is
called a miscontinuance.

Statutes.
21. H. 3. De anno Bissextili. The day increasing in the leap year shall be
reckoned of the same month wherein it grows, and that and the day going
before shall be accounted for one day.

51. H. 3 Dies communes in Banco. Days shall be given in writs nine returns,
as coming in Michalmas term, from Octab. Mich. to Octab. Hillarij, etc.

51. H. 3. Dies communes in Banco, and 32: H. 8. cap. 21 Common days shall be
given in real actions nine returns. In writs of dower v. returns.

Marleb. cap. 12. In dower un de nihil habet, four or six days shall be
given in the year.

In Assizes of Darrein presentment and Quare impedit, from xv. to xv. days, or
from ^. weeks to 3. weeks, as the place shall be near or far.

5 E 3 cap. 6. and 7. In an attaint v. days shall be given at the least.

The suite of an excommunicate person shall be put without day, term paroll
(...) 3. H. 6. 40. Litlet.
Iour till he be absolved And so is it in all ^ther cases which happen without
the Plaintifes folly, as by the demise of the King (so we call the death of the
King, because in Law he never dies, but leaves his Crown to another) non
venu^t. of the Justices, cessor of the eyer, protection, etc.

Statutes.
1. E. 6. cap. 7. By the death of the King no action, suit, bill, or plaint
shall be discontinued, or put without day. But the process pleas; demurrers,
continuances, shall stand good, and be prosecuted in such manner and form as if
the same King had lived. After continuance taken, the defendant may for once
leave his former plea, and plead any thing growing since this latter
continuance, which we call a plea puis darrein continuance. As if the
defendant in an action of account plead receipt of parcel by the 21. E. 3. 49.
plaintiff who wageth his Law: now at the day which the plaintiff has to
perform his law, the defendant may plead a release puis dairein continuance.

Continuance is by process, or upon the Roll. That upon the Roll is a Dies
datus, 21. E. 4. 16. 7. H. 6. 39. 41. Br. defaut 34.
or Emparlance. Dies datus when the Court gives the parties day, and therefore
in a personal action the defendant shall not be condemned by default after
such a continuance: for it is the act of the Court, and he does not demand day
as upon an Emparlance, ^ this is always before the Count. 18. H. 8. 6. 41. E.
3. 1.


Such a continuance by assent of both the parties is called a Praece partium.
So as if the defendant come upon the exigent Br. Contin. 14.
by a reddit se, and be by mainprise, yet the plaintefe may have day by prece
partium, notwithstanding that thereby the defendant shall be let out of ward,
fot it is by assent of the parties.

But in assizes the continuance is by a Iusticiarij nondum auisantur, and not
by a Dies 22. H. 6. 12.
datus.

Emparlance is when the defendant demands day to see if he may end the matter
7. H. 6. ibid.
without further suite, which he may do once, but not oftener without the
plaintifes consent: and is always after the Court. After which he cannot plead
to the Jurisdiction, person, or in abatement either of 18. H. 8. 6.
the Count or writ. For 22. H. 6. 7.
after emparlance a Supersedeas of privilege out of the Chancerie shall not be
allowed: he cannot plead that the land is within the five (b) ports or (c)
ancient demesne, etc. or that the Pl is a villein, or 4. H. 6. 67. 16. E. 44.
32. H. 6. 33.
outlawry in the Plaintiff in debt upon a simple contract, or in trespass of
battery, or false imprisonment. (But in debt upon an obligation he may, for
that is to the action, inasmuch as the King is to have the debt) or that the
plaintiff is an alien, viz to the person in an action of trespass 13. H. 7. 17.
to his house broken down, but to the action he may: Nor misnomer as no such
Town of D. where he is named I. S. of D. But where a praecipe quod reddat is
brought of the manor of D. in D. there he may, for 32. H. 6. 27.
there it is in bar, or in an action of debt against an Executor that he is
an administrator and not an executor. But that he never was executor, never
administered as executor he may, for that is to the action, nor demand oyer of
the obligation, or such like, 4. H. 7. 10.
but he may plead variance after, and so come to have a view of the Obligation
and Condition thereof, whereby to plead any matter in bar.

But after a special empariance, Saluis 4. H 6. 67. Br, Contin. 6.
omnibus aduantagijs, he may plead to the Count or writ and have oyer, but yet
not in that case plead to the Jurisdiction or person.

In an appeal of Robbery, or such like, 22. E. 4. 1^.
that touches life, if the defendant plead a plea whereby his life should come
in ieoperdie, the Plaintiff shall not empatle unto it, but must answer Sedente
curia.

Default after emparlance, that is, at the day given by the emparlance is
pere^ptorie, and loses the action in all actions whatsoever, 38. H. 6. 33. 1.
H. 7. 11. Br. defaut 34. 39. H 6. 16. 38. H. 6. 33.
real or personal, for it is a departure in despite of the Court. As in debt,
trespass, or such like, the Plaintiff in this case shall recover his damages
in a praecipe quod reddat, if the Tenant appear and emparle, and after make
default, seisin of the land shall be awarded, and not a petit cape. In a writ
of right if the tenant vouch, and the vouchee enter into the warrantie and
emparle, and after make default, the demaundant shall recover seisin of the
land against the tenant, and the tenant over in value against the vouchee.

CHAP. 43.
Of Mesne; Judicial process.

IVdiciall Process is a Process out of that Court where the original is
returned, prosecuting the action. And therefore upon an original returned
^arde, an alias and pluries shall go out of the same 22. Eli. Die.
Court Test the chief Justice, for by the return the Court is possessed. But
if no return at all be made, the alias and pluries shall go out of the
Chancerie, Test Regem. This must be sealed with a seal Judicial, being in
the custody of the chief Justice of that Court.

Judicial process are mesne process ^^ in nature of new originals.

Mesne process which is for any necessary act to be done, not only for the
plaintiff against the defendant, but for either of them against any other,
whose presence in the Court may be necessary for them. As against one that is
vouched or prayed in aid 1. H. 6. 4.
of. So against Iuries, witnesses, etc. So to execute judgments given, or any
thing else necessary for the trial of any of their allegations.

Upon a fine levied before it be engrossed the writs to compel atturnement are
per Old N B. 171.
quae Seruicia, when the fine is levied of a Old N. B. 170.
seigniorie.

Quem redditum reddit, when it is of a Old N. B. 170.
rent charge or rent secke.

Quid iuris clamat, when it is of a remainder or reuersion. Old. N. B. 168.


Statutes.
23. Eliz. cap. 3. Plie entry of record of an Atturnement upon a fine shall be
utterly void, except the party (mentioned to atturne) first have appeared in
Court in person, or by atturny warranted by the hand of one of the Justices of
one Bench or other, or of one Justice of assise, upon a writ of Quid iuris
clamat, qu^m redditum reddit, or per quae seruicia, as the case requires.

In petitions whether in Parliament or Stam. praer. 73.
elsewhere, and though the king have granted the lands over, or wheresoever the
king being made party, may be at loss: as when he is prayed in aid of, in a
praecipe quod reddat, or other real action against his lessee, but not in 27.
H. 8. 28.
trespass 15. Die. 320.
Eiectione firm, or other 27. H. 8. ibid.
personal action, for there he is to lose nothing. A writ of search lies,
which is to search in the Tresury before the plea proceed, if by likelihood
some matter may be there to maintain his title. As upon finding by office that
A. died seized (of certain land holden of the King) without heir, and a
trauerse put in that A. held not of the king. But if one come and say that A.
had issue B. who enfeoffed him, there no search shall be, for no matter can be
in the tresorie to prove whether A. had issue, no more if the kings title be by
an alienation in mortmain.

Statutes.
14. E 3. cap. 14. In a petition and search granted after four writs, whether
any imminent or remembrance be found for the King, or nor, the party shall be
put to answer. So as every of the four writs be delivered to the Tresorer and
Chamberleins xl. days before the day of the return.

In real praecipes where a freehold is to 38. H. 6. 33. 8. E. 44. for the
Demurrer 38. H. 6. ibid.
be recovered upon default, after plea issue or demurrer a petie Cape shall go
forth in the nature of a grand Cape in all things, save that here the tenant
is to answer to the default only, not to the demand also, as in a grand Cape
And therefore it is called a pety Cape, and the other a grand Cape, because
there is less in the one then in the other.

So upon a voucher a petit cape advale^^ ciam. In those that are for other
hereditaments, Old N. B. 179.
not in point of seigniorie, as 2. H. 4.
annuitie, ^^. H 4. 1.
Quare impedit, Quo iure, 30 H. 6. 8.
quod perm^itat, etc. upon default as before, a distress (c) Old N B. 71.
shall go forth in liew of a petit Cape. And both there, and upon view
granted, day shall be given as in a plea of land, for it 30. H. 6. ibid.
is in the nature of a praecipe quod reddat, in as much as hereby he is to
recover the land it self.

The Process against Jurors is first a Venire facias to the Sheriff to return
Old N. Br. 171.
them, at which day if they appear not, then a habeas corpora.

And after that a distress infinite.

Statutes.
27. Eliz. cap. 7. No Iuror shall be returned without the true addition of the
place of his dwelling at the time of the return, or a year before, or some
other addition whereby he might be known, nor no estreet shall be without
such addition as is in the return.

35. H 8. cap. 6. In every Habeas corpora or distringas with a Nisi prius at
the first writ, v. s. at the least shall be returned in issues upon every
Iuror, at the second, x. s. at the least, at the third xiij. s. iiij. d* and
ever afterward the double of xiij. s. iiij. d.

2. G. 6. cap. 32 If the principal Jury appear not fully at the nisi prius,
those that make default, shall forfeit their issues, though the Jury be made
up de circumstantibus.

where in personal actions upon the defendants default, the Jury shall be
taken, which we call taking of the Jury by default: In an action of trespass
always Br. defaut 58.
whatsoever the issue be, 34. H. 6. 24. 2. H. 4. Br. enq de dam. 11.
release, 9. H. 5. 15.
Justification, etc. So in 5. E. 4. 6. 1. H. 7. 1.
debt, detinue, account, and the rest which are for things in certainty if the
issue be taken upon a matter en fait only, as 1. H. 7. 1.
payment, or that an 9. H. 5. 13. 42. E. 3. 1.
acquittance pleaded in bar by the defendant, was made by dures. But if it be
upon the acquittance it self, release or other matter in writing, the
plaintiff may there pray judgment if he will. But if he do not pray it, the
Jury shall be taken by default, as in an action of trespass.

But in assizes of novel disseisin, nuisance, mortdancestor, darrein
presentment, and Iuris vtrum, the original writ commands The form of all
these writs. (h) Old N. B. 106. in an assise of novel disseisin, and 25. in
darrein presentme^t.
a Jury, as well as the defendants, to be warned, which So^mons to the Jury,
serves in stead of a venire facias. So that the process here against the
Jury is, Somon' habeas corpora and Distringas.

And therefore there upon default after that original process ended, viz. the
Atachment in an assise of novel disseisin and nuisance, the sommons and
resommons in a F. N. B. 196. g
mortdancestor, darrein presentment, and F. N. B. 50. k.
Iuris vtrum, the enquest shall be taken by default, whether the default be
presently after the resummons or after essoine, or plea pleaded. As it should
be taken if the Tenant did appear.

CHAP. 44.
Of Judicial process in the nature of new Originals.

IVdiciall process in the nature of new 17. E. 3. 76.
originals (in none of which any freehold shall ever be recovered) but damages
only, are these that follow. First such as command to do some thing As,

1. Resommons or Reattachment, according as a Sommons or attachment lay in 5.
H. 7. 40.
the first action, to receive in the former plight a suite put without day. And
may either revive the original alone, or the whole proceeding by special
words, in that Resommons or attachment, as if it be against the tenant after a
voucher; the voucher is not received, unless special mention be of the vouchee
also, nor any plea at all is revived but the original only. But in every
Resommons after an issue, the issue is revived, for day is given to the Jurors
expressly; So is all the pleading by a special resommons. But no such resommons
nor re^ttachment shall be upon a discontinuance, 24. E. 3. 48. Br. res^^^. 33.
though it be in a writ of ward, where a re^ommons is given by the Statute, for
upon ^ discontinuance the original is deter^ined.

2. All certificatorie writs, as if in a F. N. B. 14.
writ of right close brought in ancient demesne the tenant vouch a foreyner to
warrantie, and after purchase a Warrantia chartae returnable in the Common
place against the vouchee, and thereupon a Supersedeat to the Baylife in
ancient demesne Now if the plea of Warrantia chartae be determined or
discontinued in the Common place, the demaundant in the writ of right close may
sue a writ out of the Chancerie, directed to the Justices of the Common place,
to certify the King in his Chancerie of it. To the end that if it be so, the
Baylife in ancient demesne may proceed. So upon a Monstrauerunt F. N. B. 16. c.
sued against the Lord in ancient demesne, and an attachment thereupon, because
he shall not be driven to answer to the attachment till the Court be a
serteyned whether the lands be ancient demesne, o^ no: the Plaintifes in the
Monstrauerunt must sue a special Writ to the Tresurer, and Chamberlayns of the
Exchequer to certify it. In like sort upon an Indicauit purchased, F. N. B. 52.
because the tithes amount to the fourth part of the value of the Church, the
other may have the Kings Writ directed to the Bishop to certify the King in
the Chancery of the value of the Church, to the end that if it amount not to
that value, he may ha^^ a Consultation. So upon surmise made i^ F. N. B. 59. b.
the Chancerie, that the Kings Comitee of ^ ward has done wast, a writ shall
go fort^ to the Eschetor to certify the King thereof and so in all other like
cases.

3. Cerciorare to remove a record out of 36. H. 8. Br. Cercior. 20.
Court of record into the Chancerie, for ^ record shall be removed into the
Com^on place, nor no enditement taken in the ^untrey into the Kings Bench
imediatly ^ any Certiorare, but first it must be certi^d into the Chancerie by
a surmise, and ^m thence sent into the Common place, ^ Kings Bench, as the case
is, by a Mitti^. 12. E. 4. 11.
And every writ of error is a Certiorare ^t self.

4. To remove suits out of Court Ba^s, for a Recordare, Pone, or such like, are
^no other intent but only to remove 3. H. 6. 3.
^ewhat into the Kings Court, and are in ^ nature of a Certiorare. And upon the
re^uethe recordare or pone is determined, for ^ plea shall not be holden upon
them, but ^n the plaint that is removed, and the ^t pledges shall stand. And
these may be ^thout showing any cause in the writ, if ^ remove be at the
Plaintifes suite: but ^ without showing good cause in the ^it if it be at the
Defendants suite. As ^ng to remove a plea in a writ of right to Fitz. N. B. 4*
b.
^w that the Baylife is heir to the land, or ^eth upon him to maintain the
matter have part of the land, or that the Te^t has alleged bastardy, or
pleaded a ^reine plea, or joined the mise upon the and assise, etc. being to
remove a plea in Fit. N. B. 70. b.
^pleuin by plaint, to show that the de^dant auoweth for damage feasant, and
the Plaintiff justifies by reason of C^^mon of pasture, which is a plea touc^^
freehold, and therefore should not be w^^ out writ.

These are either to remove pleas ^ writ, or by plaint without writ, Of the ^^
sort are a Tolt and Pone.

Tolt or Tollas is for the plaintiff, but ^^uer Old N. B. 2. Fit. N. B. 4. a.
for the Tenant, to remove a writ ^ right out of the Lords Court into ^^
County Court. And because this being ^ Old N. B. Ibid.
the plaintifes suite may be without ^^ cause, therefore this clause is put in
eue^^ writ of right patent, Et nisi feceris vice c(...) faciat. Pone is to
remove into the Co(...) place in all other cases, viz. F. N. B. 4. b c.
save on^^ in the case of a writ of right to be remo^^ out of the Lords Court
into the Cou^^ Court. As F. N. B ibid.
writs of right removed i^^ the County Court by a Tolt, F. N B. 125. f. In
admeas. of pasture.
Iusticies ^^ Vicontiel writs in the County Court, repl^uins by Writ either F.
N. B. 69. ^n.
there or F. N. B. 70. a.
in a^^ other Court Baron. And all this indiffer^^ly, F. N. B. 69 m. and 70 a
in a repleu. and 125. f. in Admeas of pasture. Old N. B. 2. in a writ of right.
either at the plaintifes or at the d^fendants suite. So upon a F. N B. 77. ^.
Native (...) sued in the County, if the defendant alled^^ himself frank, the
Lord is driven to ^^moue it by a pone. But a pone to remo^^ repleuin by writ
out of any other Co^^ Baron then the County Court cannot ^^ without showing
cause, though it be at t^^ plaintifes suite.

Of the second sort are a Recordare, ^^ 3. H. 6 30.
Accedas ad Curiam. In both which noth^^ ^t the plaint shall be removed, F. N.
B. ibid.
though ^ey be at issue.

Recordare F. N. B. 70. b.
is to remove plaints in ^ountie Courts. Every F. N. B. 18. a. b
Writ of false ^dgement upon a judgment given in the ^ountie Court is a
Recordare in it self.

Accedas ad curia, is to remove plaints in F. N. Br. 70. b. and 18. d.
^y other Court Baron F. N. B. 18. d.
Every Writ of ^se judgment upon a judgment given ^ any other Court Baron
then the County ^ourt, is an Accedas ad curiam in it self.

This also upon good cause showed in ^e writ, lies for the tenant to remove
the F. Not. Br. 4 a.
^a in a Writ of right out of the Lords ^ourt immediately into the Common ^ce.

5. Mittimus to send a Record out of the ^hancerie, whether being certified
thither ^fore by a Certiorare, or howsoever else be^g there, into another Court
of Record, to ^e end they may proceed upon it. But the ^hancellour may send
such a Record by F. N. B. 22. g.
^ own hands, without any Mittimus, if please him.

6. Procedendo to proceed in suits. As if F. N. B. 3. c.
^e Lord upon a writ of right sued in his ^ourt will not hold his Court, the
demaun^nt may have this writ unto him, if a man F N. B. 17. ^.
^use himself to be essoyned of the Kings ^uice in any action where indeed he
is not ^ his service, the Plaintiff or demaundant ^y have this writ directed to
the Justices ^mmanding them to proceed. So where F. N. B. 24.
^e Justices in any Court delay the Pl or the defendant, and will not give
iudgeme^ for him where they ought to do it, the p^^tie grieved shall have a
procedendo ad I^dicium.

Of this nature is a writ of consultati^^ to proceed in the spiritual Court,
wh^^ Old N. B. 32.
one suing there for matters belonging ^^ that Court, as for matters
testamentarie, ^^ concerning matrimony, etc. is by a prohibition restrained to
prosecute the suit.

Statutes.
24. E. 1. De consultacione. A consultation to be awarded by the Chancellor ^
chief Justice of the King, upon sight of the libell at the instance of the
Plaintiff.

50. E. 3. cap. 4. Upon a consultation (...) duly granted, the Ecclesiastical
Judge may proceed in the same cause notwithstanding any other prohibition. So
the matter of the libell be not enlarged, nor otherwise changed.

7. At writ of mainprise to set at liber^^ one baileable finding bail, that is
to say, sufficient persons to be bound for him ^^ F. N B. 249 g.
surety to answer the action, which in respect of delivering him into the
hands ^^ his friends the sureties, is called Bail, i^ respect of their taking
of him is calle^ mainprise.

Such persons baileable be they wh^^^ 4. E. 6. Pl. 67.
are taken upon a Capias original.

But not the defendant in 6. H, v. 1. c.
Appeal of Mayme, if the Mayme be heinous: nor (b) West 1. ca. 15. Stamf. 71.
and 72 In case of the death of a man.
the principal in an enditement, or appeal of Felome, Stamf. ibid.
nor the accessarie after attainder of the principal, Div. of courts fol.
nor any in high treason, where all be principals.

Statutes.
Westminster. 1. Cap. 15. Such as are accused of receipt of felons of commandment, or
force, or of aid in felony done, and a man appealed by approuer, after the
death of the prouer (if he be no common thief, or defamed) shall be let out of
prison by a surety.

8 Recaptio^ is for him whose goods being distreyned before for rent or
services, but F. N. B. 71. c. Fit. ibid.
not for damage fesaunt: for there as often as they are so found upon ones land,
it is lawful to distreyne them. For eury time is a new wrong, and a new
trespass, are Fit. ib. 72 g. Fi. ib. 72. c and 71. ^
distreyned again for the same thing, hanging the plea in the County Court,
or before the justices. Though the first distress were lawful, and though the
rent or service were behind again, or not: for by the first distress he shall
have a Return til he be satisfied of all. And here the goods distreyned, must
be the same parties goods. Fit. ib. 71. b. Fit. ib. 71. i.
For if the Lord first distreyned his tenant, and after the beasts of a
strager, no Recaption lies. But upon a distress of two men's beasts first, and
after of the beasts of one, it lies for that one: so upon a distress Fit. ib.
71. e. Fit. ib. 71. f.
of beasts which a man has in common with another, and after of such beasts as
are his own alone. Also he that takes the second distress must be the same
party that distrained first: as if the Lord distrained first, and then his
servant or Bailife distreineth again by his commandment, or without his
commandment, if he agree afterward to it, as by ioining with his servant or
Bailif when they pray in aid of him. Otherwise not, though the Bailife make
conisance in his right: for it may be he has no notice of it, and the party
has remedy against the baily by an action of Trespass. But this writ lies
not Fit. ib* 72. d.
after Non suits in the repleuin; because there the plea is not hanging: but
before auowrie in the Repleuin it does, for the plaintiff in the recaption may
well count that the defendant took them for the same cause: And that may make
a good issue, which the inquest may take notice of well enough by the evidence
of the parties. But upon a Fit. ib. 73. e.
Repleuin sued by plaint or writ in a Franchise, and not before the sherif or
the kings Justices, no recaption lies, though he be distrayned by the same
party again, and for the same cause, for the King will not direct this writ
but to the Sheriff. But if the suit be removed before the Justices by a Pone or
Recordare, there a Recaption lies as well for a distress before the Pone or
Recordare, as afterward. And here the plaintiff shall recover damages for the
second taking only, because it is a contempt against Law, for which the
defendant shall be fined if he be convict before the justices, or amereed, if
the conviction be before the sheriff, but shall recover no damages for the
taking nor the detaining of the beasts. And therefore here the defendant shall
not make auowrie, as he should in a Repleuin, but only may justify the
taking, as in an action of Trespass.

9 A writ De magna assisa eligenda to the sheriff, to summon four knights to
choose Fit. N. B. 4. ^.
the grand Assise, when the mise is joined thereupon in a writ of Right.

And this is a mere judicial Writ issuing out of the Common place when the
plea hangs there. But when the plea is in the Lords Court, or in the County
Court, then it is an original writ out of the chancerie.

10 A Certificate De Assise upon a verdict 7. E. 6. Pl. 85.
given in an assise that is no perfect, whether not well examined by the
Iustiees, or not fully inquired of by the Jury, to bring in the same Jurors to
give a more perfect one. And this must be sued in the same cou^tie where the
assise was sued, and may be F. N. Br. 181. ^
as well before other justices, as those that took the assise: if the kings
Bench, or common place be in the county where the Assise passed, the^ this
writ may be sued there. And beside the writ it self directed to the Fit. ibid.
d.
sheriff, the Justices must have a patent made unto them as in the assise it
self.

11 Proprietate Probanda unto the Sheriff to inquire whether the property be
to the plaintiff or defendant, when upon a repleuin F. N. B. 77. c. 2. El. Die.
173.
sued, the defendant claims property, which determines the sherifes power
to make Repleuin.

And this also may be mere judicial issuing out of the Kings bench 1. E. 4. 9.
or common 2. El ib.
place, 2. El. ib.
and returnable there.

Secondly hither belong those that be prohibitorie, or restrain from doing
something where the prohibition it self is in lieu of a Summons. And after
that, the process is an atachment and distress. So in every writ which is upon
a prohibition broken, F. N B. 163. d. Old N. B. 30. Old N. B. 28.
as a quare non admisit, quare incumbrauit: for every breach of a prohibitio^
is a contempt in it self.

Of this sort are

1 Prohibitions to restrain the party from suing in an inferior court, that
ought not to hold plea of it: as in the spiritual court, for Old N. B 30.
any plea that concerns not matrimony and wills, as for goods or debts, etc.
and 22. E. 4* cons. 2
though it be of matters for which the plaintifs have no remedy by the common
Law, as of a covenant broken without specialtie, or debt, etc. against
executors upon a simple Contract made by their Testatour. Or Pro laes^^ne fidei
against one which has waged his law in an action of debt upon a simple
contract 19. H. 6 Old N. B. 31. F. N B. Ph.
and sworn falsely. So if the Baylife in a Court baron hold plea of matter
above xl. s. the defendant may have a prohibition. And these prohibitions may
be directed to the Judge himself, not to hold plea in those cases, as well as
to the Sheriff, to restrain the party from suing.

Such a prohibition is an Indicauit for the Defendants patron when the right of
auowson of any part of ones tithes is in demand in the spiritual Court,
between two Clerks claiming from several patrons. So as the Indicauit is
always between 12. E. 4. 13.
four persons, whereof two are patrons, and the other two Clerks. One
claiming to hold of the auowson of one patron, the other of the other patron,
for an auowson being a lay hereditament, wheresoever the patronage should come
in question the Common Law is to decide it: But where that is not to come in
question, the Fit. N. B. 36.
spiritual court shall decide it, by suit in that Court called spoliation. As a
person accepting another benefice, or created a Bishop, and having a
dispensation to keep his personage, shall have a spoliation in Court Christian
against another Incumbent presented by the patron, and then shall come in
debate whether they have plurality or dispensation, or no.

And this Indicauit lies though it be 38. H. 6. 20.
but the right of the twentieth or thirtieth part of tithes that is in demand,
for at the Common Law the Court Christian had no power to hold plea of any part
of dismes, but a prohibition lay till the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 5. which
will have an Indicauit to be of tithes to the value of the fourth part of the
Church at the least. But before that, it might have been of the xx. part, and
the patron thereupon might had a writ of right, whereupon at the Common law
there was a writ of the auowson of the tithes of v. acres or x. acres, or one
acre. But now since by the same Statute an Indicauit shall not be granted of
less then the fourth part, therefore there is a writ of the auowson of the
tithes of the fourth or third part. But at the Common Law there was no such
writ.

Statutes.
Westminster 2. cap 5. When the Parson of any Church is disturbed to demand tithes
in the next parish by a writ of Indicauit, the patron of the parson so
disturbed shall have a writ to demand the auowson of those tithes. And after
the plea deraigned in the Kings Court, then it shall proceed in the Court
Christien.

18. E. 3 cap. 7. pro clero and cap. 47. Writs of Scire facias to answer of
dismes in the Chancerie, and to show why such dismes ought not to be restored
the demaundants shall not from henceforth be granted. Saving the Kings right as
he and his ance stors were wont to have

2. A Supersedeas to stay any further proceeding in the suite. As if a writ of
trespass F. N. B. 239. d. F. N. Br. 13. g.
vi and armis be brought in a Court Baron, if upon a writ of right close
brought in ancient demesne, the demaundant and tenant put themselves upon the
grand assise, or the Tenant vouch a forreyner, or plea a foreign plea which
cannot be tried there, if a Clark of the Chancerie or any of the servants of F.
N. B. 4(...)
the Chancellor, or Lord keeper of the great seal be sued in any other place
for a trespass, or other matter.

Of this nature are, a writ of peace for the Tenant upon a writ of right
brought in the Lords Court, vouching one to warrantie out of the power of that
Court, we 13. E. 3 vouch 269 c. E. 1. droit 45.
call it a foreign voucher, or joining the mise upon the grand assise to have
the matter c. E. 1. ibid.
respited till the Justices in Eyer come thither. Which if he bring not at the
next Court day, after such voucher or mise joined, he loses his tenancie, the
reason is, because the Lord cannot make a grand assise to come. But if battle
be joined, that shall c. E. 1. ibid.
be determined there, and after such a writ brought the plea may proceed by
leave of the Justices. As if the vouchee come before them and enter into
warrantie, they may award that he shall go to the Court of the Lord and there
warrant to the party that 13. E. 3. ibid.
vouched him, and assign a day certain of the Court, and also give leave and
power to the Lord to hold his Court.

De liberate probanda for the Defendant upon a Natiuo habendo sued in the
County, F. N. B. 77. f.
claiming to be frank to the Sheriff to adiourne the plea before the Justices
in Ei^r. And therefore must be brought before any Old N. B. 46.
pone delivered by the Lord to the Sheriff to remoueit. And this is a
Supersedeas to the Lord not to proceed til the day of adiournment, nor to cease
the villein till the plea discussed.

Statutes.
25 E. 3. cap. 18. The Lord may seize the body of his villein, notwithstanding
that a Writ. De liberate probanda be hanging.

Idemptitate nominis for one molested by a suite against another of the same
name. As if he be taken by a Capias or Exigent awarded F. N. B. 267. e.
against the other, or distreined by process out of the Exchequer. And this
Writ shall be either to the Escheator or Sheriff according as he is vexed, or
his goods taken by either of them, to surcease against him, or against his
goods.

3. Protections cum clausula volumus when the King in respect of the Defendant
being in his service takes him, for the plaintiff can never have a protection
for him, unless it be in special causes where the plaintiff F. N. B. 28. g.
does become defendant, into his protection for one year to be free from all
39. H. 6. 38.
suits.

Writs of dower, Quare impedit, assizes Old N. B. 21. 39. H. 6. ibid.
of novel disseisin, and pleas before the Justices in Eyer are accepted
Therefore it shall for that time save all defaults. So as 21. H. 6. 20.
upon a protection (cast in a plea personell) at the Nisi prius, and repealed
at the day in Bank, yet the enquest shall not be taken by default, for the
default was once saved. Otherwise it is of a protection disallowed at the day
in Bank. And a man may excuse Fitz N. B. 29. b. 39 H. 6. ibid.
his default at a Grand cape, or petit cape by casting of a protection. But a
protection can endure no longer then for one year, for otherwise it might be
for xx. xxx. or C. years, and by the same reason for a thousand years, which
were a great inconvenience and disherison to the party. But a protection for
one year is not so, for after the year ended he may have a resommons and
proceed in his suite: yet the King after the first year ended may take him
again into his protection for another year, though it be space of ten or
twenty years together, for in that case appears at the first no mischief
nor inconvenience, as there does when he takes him into his protection for so
many years at once.

Statutes.
5. E. 3. cap. 7. No protection shall be allowed in writs of Attaint.

This kind of protection is double. Protectio 39. H. 6. 38.
quia profecturus, when he is to go beyond sea in the Kings business.

Protectio quia moratur, when he stays F. N. B. 28. ^.
there about it. Of which nature is also a protection quia in prisona, when
being sent beyond Sea in the Kings wars he is there taken and detained in
prison. The going or staying about the Kings business in F. N. B. 28. g. 39.
H. 6. 39.
the marches of Scotland, or such like places is counted as beyond Sea. But a
protection quia moratur super altum mare, is not good, for it cannot be
intended that he does abide there.

Statutes.
13. Ric. 2. cap. 6. A protection in respect of going beyond Sea disallowed
(except it be in voyage Royal, or business of the Realm) where it bears
date after the suit commenced. And the Lord Chancellor has authority to
repeal it, if he go not in convenient time, when he returns.

A Statute of protection, 33. E. 1. Auerment is given against petition for the
kings service.

1. Ric. 2. cap. 8. Protection (volumus) not allowable for victual taken or
brought upon the voyage or service, whereof the protection makes mention, nor
in trespasses and other contracts made after the date of the same protection.

Prerogative.
The King may take his creditor into F. N. B. 28. b.
his protection, that no other creditor shall sue or atrest him, till the King
be satisfied, which is also a protection cum clausa volumus.

Statutes.
25. E. 3. cap 19. A Creditor shall have an action and judgment against the
kings debtor, notwithstanding such a protection. But not execution, unless he
take upon him to pay the king, and then he shall have judgment and execution
of both debts, as well of that due to the King as to himself.

He may also by a writ called Warrantia diei, rehearsing that one which should
appear F. N. B. 17.
in proper person, whether it be the plaintiff or defendant, is in his
service, will that for one day no default be recorded upon him. So as if the
tenant in a praecipe quod reddat make default at the grand Cape, or petit cape:
yet before Judgment upon that default, the King by his writ may make that it
shall not hurt him. And this stands with reason, because every man is bound to
serve the King in his affairs. Neither is it material whether he be in the
Kings service or not, when the King certifieth that he is: for it seems by
the words of the writ, that the King by his prerogative may for one day warrant
his default. And this writ cannot be granted but by the king himself.

4. Essoyne de malo lecti, is a writ to warrant 19. H. 6. 57.
an essoyne of lying sick a bed cast by the Tenant in a writ of right:
Commanding four Knights to see him, and if he be sick to give him day at the
end of the year, and the day for so long adiournment is in that essoine.

Statutes.
Westminster 2. cap. 17. In an Essoine De malo lecti the demaundant may auerre by
enquest, that the Tenant is not sick, nor in such plight but that he may come
before the Justices. Such an essoine shall not lie in a writ of right between
two claiming by one descent.

5. A Ne admittas for either party, plaintiff or defendant, in a quare
impedit, or assise F. N. B. 37. f.
of darrein presentment to the ordinary, not to admit the others Clarke till
the matter be discussed.

And this must be sued within 6. months and not after, for after the six
months it F. N. B. ibid.
is lawful for the ordenarie to present by laps, but being sued within the six
months the ordenarie may neither himself F. N B. 48 l.
collate within six months (but afterward by laps he may) nor Fit. ibid.
admit the others Clark at any time, F. N. B. 48. b.
though it be after the six months, and though it be found for him by a Iure
patronatus, which is a commission that the ordenarie may grant to enquire who
is the right patron.

6. A quare incumbrauit for him that sueth F N B, 48. c.
a Ne admittas, and after recouereth in a Quare impedit, or assise of darrein
presentment, though it be after the six months, but before recovery no
quare incumbrauit lies against the ordenarie for incombring the Church,
contrary to the ne admittas. But of a collation or admittance before a F. N B.
48. b.
ne admittas sued, no quare incumbrauit (but only a quare impedit) lies, for
the ordinary can have no notice till the ne admittas.

But no ne admittas, nor quare incumbrauit lies in a writ of right of auowson,
though F. N. B. 48 q.
the Church become void hanging the writ, and the Bishop do encomber it, for
the demaundant there shall not recover the presentment but the auowson. And if
he have title to present, he may present, and upon disturbance have a quare
impedit.

CHAP. 45.
Of Judgments.

THus far of Suit. Judgment 10. El. Die. 26. 8. The writ of false Judgment
shall be Recordare fac. loquela^ quae fuit in eadem curta and not quae est, for
by the judgment loquela is determined. 10. E. 3. Stam. praer. 78.
is the Courts final determination of that suit.

Upon Judgment against the King in a petition, he is presently out of
possession. And therefore every Judgment is in it self a moueas manu, or an
ouster lemaine In a writ of right the Judgment after issue joined is final on
either side, not only when it passes by verdict, or vanquishing of the others
Champion, but where the demandant is F. N. B. 6. 3. Eli Die. 301.
non suit, or the F. N B. 6.
Tenant makes default, or the 26. H. 8. 8. F. N. B. 31. d.
vouchee after such an issue joined by him, departs in despite of the Court,
etc.

Prerogative.
Against the King Judgment is not final, but is always with a Saluo iure
Regis.

Recoueries in a writ of right bind all 5. E. 3. 50.
strangers not claiming within the year. As being suffered by a disseisor, it
binds the disseisee by his non claim. Tenant for life suffering a wrongful
recovery, it shall prejudice his right that has the inheritance, though he be
prayed in aid and make 34. H. 6. 2. 4. H. 7. 3.
default. for no aid prayer is there necessary, in as much as the other being
tenant of the freehold, a recovery is good against him But that after the
death of Tenant 24 H. 8. Br. fau. reco. 41.
for life, he may falsify it by action of Ad terminum qui preterijt, or writ
of right which we call falsifying of recoueries. But he cannot enter, 26. H. 8.
2.
neither can lessee for years at the Common Law falsify for having but a
Chattell derived out of a freehold, there is no reason he should falsify a
recovery which draws the fee simple out of the lessor. Also the present
estate upon which the lease depends being destroyed, the lease must needs be
extinct.

Statutes.
14. Eliz. cap. 8. Every fraudulent recovery against any Tenant for life, or
whereupon any tenant for life, or he that has right to estate for life is
vouched, shall be void against him in the reuersion, or in the remainder,
unless it be by his own assent appearing by record.

21. H. 8. cap 15. Termors for years or in by execution of Statute staple,
Statute Merchant, or Elegit, may falsify recoueries only for their own Term
in such sort as Tenants of the freehold, neither party nor prinie to the
recovery might at the Common Law.

In a Writ of dower by gardein in soccage Lit. 9.
against gardein by Knight service, she shall at his prayer be adjudged to
endow her self wholly of the land in soccage. And this is called Dower de la
plus beale. But such dower shall not be where the woman is Park. 88.
gardein en fait by knight service, nor where all the husbands lands were
holden in soccage, and she brings her writ of dower against the heir: nor
where she brings it against her husbands feoffee with warranty, for he may
vouch the heir.

A debt acknowledged in Court of Record either to the King or to a Common, is
in the nature of a Judgment, and called a Recognisance. And therefore such a
matter acknowledged by an infant, cannot be avoided but during his nonage
only. As a 18. E. 4. 13.
fine by writ of error, a 7. El. Die. 232. 18. E, 3. 5.
Recognisance, Statute, or such like, by an Audita quaerela: for it shall be
tried by inspection of the Court, whether he were within age, or no.

In appeals of 41. E. 3. tres. 199
mayme, enditements or appeals of 40. E. 3. 42.
felony, the accessorie shall not be compelled to answer till attainder of 1.
Mar. Pl. 99. 3. H. 7. 12. 4. E. 6. Br Cor. 185
all the principals, by verdict, outlawrie, or though it be by taking him to
his Clergy, or abiuration So as if the principal die 21. H. 7. 31.
or have his 3 H. 7. 12.
pardon before, or if two men be endited, one as principal, the other (h) 12.
E. 3. Cor. 378.
as accessarie, and the principal be afterward attainted of another felony
and hanged: the accessarie shall be discharged And 3. Mar. Die. 120
if one of the principals be not attainted, the Accessarie shall not recover
damages against the A bettor, for he is not legitimo modo acquietatus. But in
case of high Treason all offenders are accounted principals, and there is no
accessarie at all.

He that is or by possibility may be with in orders, for one being within
orders (if Stam. 133.
he show them, or the ordenarie certify so much) shall have his Clergy,
whether he can read or no. Otherwise he must be able to read a verse, namely,
a Deacon at the least, may have the benefit of his Clergy, save him either
from Judgment when the Clergy is prayed before, or from execution if it be
prayed after, if he be found culpable by verdict, or his own Stam. 138. d.
confession either before the Coroner, or the Justices of any bar, felony,
where life or member is to be lost, be it upon an enditement or appeal, but
Stam. 124.
not for killing a man by misfortune, or se defendendo, nor yet for petie
Larceny, for in these cases he is not to have Judgment of life or member. No
more in case of high Treason, or petie Treason. And such a Stam. 130. ^.
Clarke might indeed by the ancient Law have had his Clergy before he were
endited But now he shall not have it upon his arraignment, unless he plead to
the fe^onie and be found guilty: for otherwise he should lose his goods by an
enquest of office, to which he could have no challenge ^s he may have to this.
But yet he may waiue this benefit and pray his book after ^he enquest, and
before their coming ^acke. In which case notwithstanding, the ^erdict
afterward shall be taken And that ^s in fauorem vitae: because if the Jury
find ^im not guilty, he shall be charged. And his possibility (there being
no other im^ediment) as if it be a woman, a blind, or a ^aymed man, shall be
tried by the Judges. And therefore if the ordenarie challenge ^im, where he
reads not as a Clarke, he shall be fined and the party hanged. Or if ^ee
refuse him when he does read as a Stam. 123. d. 9. E. 4. 28.
Clarke, the ordenarie shall be fined, and the ^artie discharged, for the Court
are Judges ^f his reading. And the ordenarie is there only to challenge him
for his Clergy, for the entry is, Legit vt Clericus ideo tra^tat^^ 9. E 4. 28.
ordinario, by his ableness to read a verk, though he cannot read without
spelling. But if he can read but here a word and there a word, and no three
words together, quert whether that be sufficient.

Clergy is the delivering of him to the ordenarie to be kept in prison.

If it be before Judgment, in which case we call him a Clarke convict, he
shall Stam. 138. 6.
be tried there by a Jury of Clerks. A^^ therefore purging himself shall go
^^ large. Therefore is a writ to command the Stam. 138.
ordinary to admit him to his purgation. Not purging himself, but being
found culpable by those Clerks, he shall be only degraded.

But upon an appeal of Robbery, or such like, no purgation shall be
admitted. Stam. 139. b.
The reason seems because then the plaintiff in the appeal should recover
his goods without cause, when by the purgation it did appear that the other
was not guilty of the felony.

A Clarke convict shall not answer to any Stam. 108.
offense committed before.

Prerogative.
A Clarke convict forfeiteth his chattels: And shall never have restitution, 5.
E. 6. Br fors. 113
though he make purgation. Notice (...) be given to the King of the time before
the Stam. 138.
party make purgation. If the Clergy be after Judgment, in which case we
call Stam. 138. ^.
him a Clarke attaint, he shall remain in perpetual prison.

Statutes.
25. H. 8 cap. 3. Revived. 5. E. 6 cap. 10. One arraigned upon an enditement of
pety Treason, wilful burning of houses, murder, robbery, or other felony,
according to the meaning of the same Statute, if he stand mute of malice, or
froward of mind, or challenge peremptorily above xx. or will not directly
answer, shall lose his Clergy, in such manner as he should if upon the
arraignment he had been found guilty.

25. E. 3. pro clero, cap. 4. Convict of pety Treason shall have it.

18. Eliz. cap. 6. None in felonious Rape, Rauishment, nor Burglarie.

18. Eliz. cap. 6. None in carnal abusing a woman within ten years of age.

25. H. 8. cap. 6. 5. Eliz. cap. 17. None in Buggerie.

5. E. 6. cap. 9. None for him that robs any person in any part of his
dwelling house, booth, or Tent, in any Fair or Market, himself, his wife,
children, or servants then being there, or within the precinct thereof, either
sleeping or awake.

4. and 5. Ph. and Ma. cap. 4. None for him that maliciously commands or
hireth any to commit petie Treason, or wilful murder, or robbery, in any
dwelling house, or in or near any high way, or within the marches of England
against Scotland; or wilfully to burn any dwelling house, or any part thereof,
or any Barn having corn therein.

25. H 8. cap. 3. and 5. E. 6. cap. 10. He that does a robbery or burglarie in
one County, and is taken with the goods so robbed or stolen, in another
County, shall lose his Clergy there, as he should do where the robbery or
burglarie was committed.

4. H. 7. cap. 13. 1. E. 6 cap 12. Grantable but once to one person, except he
be within orders.

4. H. 7. cap. 13. He that asks his Clergy the second time shall at a day
certain bring his letters of order, or a certificate.

4 H. 7. cap. 13. He that has his Clergy shall be marked in the hand, with an
M. if he were convict of murder, with a T. if he were convict of other felony.

1 E. 6. cap. 12. Lords of the Parliament in all cases where Clergy lies at
the common Law, or is restrained by Statute, shall upon his prayer be adjudged
as a Clarke convict, though he cannot read.

8. Eliz. ca. 4. and 18. Eliz. ca 7. After purgation he shall be put to answer
to any such offense (committed before his admission to the Clergy) whereupon
Clergy is not allowable, and whereof he was not before endited and acquitted,
convicted or attainted, or pardoned, and shall be demeaned in all things, as if
he had never been admitted to his Clergy.

18. Eliz. cap 7. He that is allowed Clergy shall not be delivered to the
ordenarie, but after burning in the hand shall be delivered forthwith by the
Justices out of prison: yet for further correction, they may detain him in
prison, so that it be not a boue a year.

Outlawry is a Judgment, which in case of criminal offenses we call an
Attainder in it self. So as he which is endited of trespass and outlawed
shall pay a fine, he which is outlawed for felony, forfeiteth his lands and
goods: and this fine and forfeiture remains, though he purchase a Charter of
pardon afterward. And there is a writ of Eschete of land for felony, pro qua
vt lagatus fuit.

So is abiucation an Attainder in it self (and Stam. 122. c.
that the strongest that can be being by his own confession) and a 4. Eli. Pl.
262.
forfeiture of his lands. And there is a writ of Eschete of land for felony,
pro qua abiuranit regnum. And therefore 3. E. 3. Cor. 33^
he that is hanged upon Judgment against him, and becomes alive again,
cannot abjure (but an abiuration in that case is in escape) for one cannot have
two Judgments for one offense.

The offender upon a presentment in the Leet or sherifes turn shall be
amerced. 2. H. 4. 24. 8. R 2. auowry 194


The defend ant in an appeal of felony, being acquitted shall have Judgment
also to recover damages against the Plaintiff. Stam. 167. c. Stam. ibid.
And if the plaintiff be not sufficient, then Common Law and common reason will
that he recover his damages against those that procured or abetted the
plaintiff to pursue the appeal. But these damages against the procurers or
abettors were to be recovered at the Common Law only, by writ original, that
is to say, by writ of conspiracy, and not otherwise.

Statutes.
Westminster 2. cap. 12. One being acquitted upon an appeal, or enditement of
felony, may have the abettors enquired, and have a Judicial writ for his
damages against, if the appellant be not sufficient.

8. H. 6. cap. 10. An action upon the case given for him that is duly acquit
by verdict against every procurer of any Judgment, or appeal of Treason,
felony, or trespass. And like process shall be therein, as in a writ of
trespass, vi and armis.

The plaintiff recovering shall be allowed his costs of suit.

CHAP. 46.
Of Judicial Writs to execute Judgments.

THese Judgments have their Judicial writs belonging to them, both mere
Judicial writs, for the execution of them, and new originals in the nature of
Judicial writs, to undo some matters concerning Judgments.

Mere Judicial writs in real or personal actions, are either such as lie
only within the year and day after the Judgment rendered, or a Scire facias.

Those of the first sort are between the 14. H. 7. 15. 19. 15. H 7. 5.
parties to the recovery, for otherwise though it be within the year, he that
recouereth is driven to his scire facias, as if it be for debt or damages
recovered against a 38. E. 3. Scire fac. 77 14. H. 7. and 15. H. 7. ibid.
fem sole, who afterward takes a husband, or by or a against ones predecessor
or Testator, and in the same Court where the recovery was, for if the record of
a recovery in an assise of novel disseisin be removed within the year into
the Chancerie by a Certiorare, and from thence to the Common place by a
Mittimus, or removed by writ of error out of the Common place into the K.
Bench, and the Judgment affirmed within the year, yet the party is driven to
a scire facias. So if a fine executory be removed out of the Common place into
the Tresurie, and come back by Certiorare and Mittimus, within the year no
execution shall be by an habere facias seisinam, but by a Scire facias only.
But although the Judges of the Common place should all dye within a year after
their judgment, and other Justices be chosen, yet in that case execution might
be well enough without a scire facias: for it remains still the same Court,
or if the Justices in Eyer come into the County, where one has recovered
before the Justices of Assise, they may award execution by a Scire sacias
within the year.

Of this kind are upon recovery in real or mixed actions.

Habere facias seisinam to put him in posfession upon a freehold recovered, in
an assise, F. N. B. 167.
praecipe quod reddat, etc.

Habere facias possessionem, upon a Term for years recovered, as in an
Eiectione firm, etc.

A writ to the Bishop to admit ones F. N. B. 38. b. and f.
Clarke upon a presentment recovered in a Quare impedit, or assise of darrein
presentment: If the suit be against the Bishop himself, then this writ may be
to the same Bishop, or to the Metropolitan at the parties choice.

Those upon a recovery in personal actions, are ^^^woforts, either to have
execution 27. El Coo. 11. Sir Will. Harbertie
of the profits of his land and Chattels, or a Capias ad satisfaciendum.

But in Court Barons Execution is only by distress, and impounding till the
4. H. 6. 17. 22. off. Pl. 72.
party be satisfied: for they have no power to sell or deliver the distress
to the party, neither does any execution by the body lie there.

In those of the first sort execution shall be of any Old N. B. 165. 42. E. 3.
11. 2. H. 4. 14.
land which the party had day of the Judgment rendered, but for Old N. B.
ibid. 2. H. 4. ibid.
chettels (though it be 24. Eliz.
leases for years) o^^ly those which he had day of the execution sued. 24.
Eli. ibid.
So as if he sell his goods bona fide, after Judgment, and before the writ of
Execution sued forth, those goods are not liable to the execution: or if a writ
of execution be sued forth, and never returned, and after the defendant alien
his goods, and then the Plaintiff purchases another writ which is returned,
yet execution shall not be of those goods, for writs which never are returned
are not of record, nor of any force at al. But an alienation made after the
Test of that second writ had been nothing worth.

Of this kind are a Scire facias, and a Leuari facias. Fierifacias to lent
execution of his goods and Chattels only. Leuari facias 15. El. Pl. 441. Old
N. B. 165.
to levy execution of the profits of his land and Chattels. The form is,
Praedicta pecuniam de terris and catallis praedicti (the defendant) leuari
facias, Ita quod ea habeas in ett' tali die praefat. (the Plaintiff)
deliberand. And this having words that he shall levy the money of his lands
and chattels, it seems that the Sheriff may take the rents payable by the
Tenants in execution of the debt, but not to seize the land, and deliver it to
the party.

Statutes.
West. 2. cap. 13. He that recouereth debt or damages in the Kings Court may at
his choice have a scire facias of the land and chattels of the debtor, or a
writ for the sheriff to deliver him all the Chattels of the debtor (except oxen
and plow beasts) and the moitie of his land by a reasonable extent till the
debt be levied. And if he be eiected out of the land, he shall have an assise:
and afterward a writ of redisseisin if need be.

^1. E. 1. Stat Acton Burnel. A debt acknowledged to a Merchant, before the
Mayor of London, York, or Bristow, or before a Mayor or Clarke (appointed by
the King thereunto) shall be enrolled. And if it be not paid at the day, the
debtors moueables shall be prised and sold in satisfaction by the Mayor, if he
have any within his jurisdiction, else by writ out of the Chancery upon a
Certificate of the Recognisance thither. The prisors to take them of the price
if they prise too high; if they have not moueables sufficient, then he shall be
imprisoned til, etc. The like process against pledges, in default of
sufficient moueables of the principal.

13. E. 1. Stat, De mercatoribus. A debt acknowledged to a Merchant before the
Mayor of London, or chief Wardein of a Town, which the King shall appoint, or
other sufficient men when they cannot attend, and before a Clarke which the
King shall assign, shall be enrolled, and if it be not paid at the day, the
debtor if he be a lay man shall be imprisoned by the Mayor till, etc. if he be
within their power, else by writ out of the Chancerie upon Certificate of a
Recognisance thither. And if he agree with the ereditor within a quarter of a
year after, then all the lands which were the debtors, day of the Recognisance
made, and also his goods, shall be delivered to the creditors upon a reasonable
extent. And of these lands so delivered, the conisee being ousted, shall have
an assise or redisseisin.

The writs out of the Chancerie shall be returnable before the Justices of
either Bench, and upon a Non est inuentus returned or that he is a Clarke,
writs to all the sherifes where he has lands or goods, shall go forth to
deliver the same upon reasonable extent, and to what sheriff he will to take
his body.

The like process shall be against the pledges if the money be not paid at the
day.

If the debtor or pledges dye, the creditor shall have execution upon the lands
of the heir at his full age.

27. E. 3. cap. 9. The Mayor of the Staple shall take Recognisance of debt
before himself and the Constables of the Staple, whereupon default of payment
being made the debtors body shall be imprisoned, and his goods sold in
satisfaction (if they be within the Staple) else upon a Certificate in the
Chancerie, a Writ shall go out from thence to imprison their bodies, and seize
their lands and goods which shall be returned in the Chancerie, and execution
thereupon in all respects as in the Statute Merchant. Save that the debtor
shall have no advantage of the quarter of a year.

5. H. 4. cap. 12. A Statute being once showed in the Common place, and the
process afterward discontinued, yet execution may afterward be awarded
without showing it again.

11. H 6. cap. 10. He that is in prison upon a Recognisance, shall not be
delivered out of prison upon a Scire facias against the party, and surety
thereupon found to the king alone, but shall find sureties severally as well
to the King as to the other party.

23 H 8 cap. 6. Either of the chief Justices, or in their absence out of the
Term, the Mayor of the Staple of Westminster with the Recorder of London may take
Recognisances. And they shall be executed in all respects as a Statute staple.

27. Eliz. cap 4. Every Statute Staple or Merchant, not brought to the Clarke
of Recognisances within four months next after the acknowledging, to enter a
true copy thereof, shall be against all persons, their heirs, successors,
executors, administrators, and assigns only, which for good consideration
shall after the acknowledging of the same Statute purchase the land, or any
part liable thereunto, or any rent, lease, or profit of it.

32. H 8. cap. 5. Lands lawfully delivered in execution upon a Judgment or
Recognisance, being euicted without any fraud or default in the tenant before
he have levied the whole debt and damages, the recouerer and the Recognisee
shall have a Scire facias out of the same Court where execution was awarded,
returnable there full forty days after the date And thereupon a new writ of
Execution of the nature of the former to levy the rest of his debt and
damages, if the defendant make default, or show no good matter in bar.

Magn^ chart^ cap. 8. The King shall not take the lands or rents of the
debtors, if he have sufficient chattels.

Magn^ chart^ cap. 18. The goods of the debtor may be attached after his death
by the view of lawful men. That nothing shall be meddled with till the Kings
debt be paid.

33. H. 8. cap. 39. All Obligations to the king shall be of the force of a
statute staple.

Prerogative.
The King may have a distringas to levy an amercement, or such like, by
distress ^ sale, whether it be an Amercement in the Leet, or Sherifes turn,
or otherwise.

A Capias ad satisfaciendum is to take his Old N B. 167.
body in execution, for satisfying of the party. And this is always upon a
recovery 17. El. Coo. 12. Sir Will. Harbertie 2. H. 4. 6.
in a personal action where a Capias lay. Therefore it lies not in any real
action as in a writ of dower, or other proecipe quod reddat, nor at the Common
Law in debt, detinue, account, etc. but in actions of 40. E. 3. 25. 49. E. 3 2.
49. E. 3 ibid.
trespass, and such like. And here an exigent shall be awarded upon the first
Capias, for if he were taken by the Capias, he should pay unto the King a fine
for a trespass adjudged against hlm.

Prerogative.
Of this nature are two special writs by the Kings prerogative. Capias pro
fine Regis, and capias vtlagatum.

Capias pro fine Regis, when the party is 1. H. 7. 20.
adjudged to pay a fine unto the King.

Capias vtlagatum, to take one outlawed, Old. N B. 168.
which is a kind of Judgment and determination of the original writ as
appeared before.

These are the Judicial writs within the year and day.

A scire facias which lies after the year and the day, is to warn the
defendant upon Old N. B. 163. 27. Eli Coo. 12. in Sir Will. Harb. ^.
recovery in real actions, for in personal actions debt only lay after the
year, which is a new original, till Westminster 2. cap. 45. gave a scire facias,
to show cause why the Plaintiff should not have execution. Therefore here the
defendant may plead matters Lit. 116.
growing after judgment rendered to oust the other of his execution, as
outlawry, etc. or a release of all actions, for in as much as he may plead upon
this scire facias, it may well be called an action, though it be but a writ of
execution. But notwithstanding that a man which recouereth debt or damages,
release to the defendant all actions, yet he may lawfully sue execution by a
fieri 8. E. 4. 15. 1. El. Die. 16^. 19. H. 8. 6. 22. H. 6. 41. 2. H. 7. 3. 24. H
8. Br. peremptory 63.
facias, Capias ad satisfaciendum, etc. for these cannot be called actions.
Here upon a Nihil returned, execution shall be presently against the parties
to the judgment. But not 1. Eliz. ibid.
against Executors, or Administrators, nor in a scire facias upon a 1. El. ibid.
Recognisance (a) 1. Eliz ibid.
or 1 Eli ibid. 2. El. Die. 172 8. E. 4* ibid.
Charter of pardon, upon an outlawrie, or such like, or to 26. H. 8. ^ Die. 198.
repeal a patent, for in all these cases two Nihils must be first returned.
And therefore a scire facias sicut alias shall go forth. And the The Stat.
West. 2 cap. 46. does so recite it.
Solemnities of so^mons, attachment, essoyne, view of land, etc. lie not in
this writ.

Statutes.
Westminster 2 cap. 46. For all things recorded before the Kings Justices, or
contained in fines (whether contracts, covenants, Obligations, services or
customs acknowledged, or any other things enrolled) a Writ of Execution shall
be within the year, so as the parties shall not need to plead: After the year
a Scire facias. The like is of mesne who by Recognisance or Judgment is bound
to acquit.

In case of life the Judge may command execution to be done without any writ.

A woman 22 ass. Pl. 71.
quick with child, 22. ass. Pl. ibid.
the trial whereof is by a Jury of women: and the writ for it is called a
writ De ventre inspiciendo, shall for 23 ass. Pl. 2.
once and no more, be respited 22. ass. ibid.
execution, but it is no plea upon her arraignment, to say, that she is
enseint, but she must answer to the felony.

CHAP. 47.
Of new Originals in the nature of Judicial writs, to undo matters concerning
Judgments.

THe new Originals in the nature of Judicial writs to undo some matters
concerning Judgments, whether it be the Judgment it self, or the verdict
whereupon Judgment is given, that so the judgment also may be undone, or to
avoid the execution growing upon the judgment, are either writs grounded upon
error, or an Attaint, and Audita quaerela.

Writs grounded upon Error, are a writ of Error and false Judgment; both which
lie upon any Error in the proceeding, as well in Redditione executionis, (as
upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum, awarded for damages 16. H, 7. 6.
recovered in a real action) as in Redditione Iudicij.

But Error in Process, may the same Term be reformed in the same Court,
Whether it be in the Kings Bench 7. H. 6. 28.
or Common place, F. N. B. 21. ^. 12. E. 4. 11. 5. H. 7. 25.
and that by writ or without.

The Process here is a Scire facias.

The party bringing a writ to reuerse error in the Judgment, may have a
Supersedeas to stay execution till the error be discussed, Whether it be matter
apparent, or matter en fait, that is alleged for Error. But no such
Supersedeas shall be upon an Artaint; for that which is found by the oath of
twelve men is intended true till it be reuersed, but it may as well be intended
that there is an error in the Record, as not.

A writ of Error is upon an Error in Court of Record.

And may be sued in the Kings Bench, or Parliament.

In the Kings Bench when the error is in any inferior court, whether the
judgment be given in the Common Place, F. N. B. 21. i.
Chancerie, 13. El Pl. 393
City, 14. H. 7. 1. 8. Eli. Die. 250. 21. El. So holden in the Common place,
contrary to Fitz. N. B. 21. i.
or Gorporat town, as before the Mayor of Excester, or other Court of Record;
for no Wait of Error is returnable in the Common place.

Statutes.
9 Ric. 2, Cap. 3. If tenant for life, or in tail, after possibility of the
issue extinct be impleaded, and judgment pass against him, he that is in the
reuersion at the time of the judgment, shall have a Writ of Error upon an
error in the record of the same judgment, as well in the life of such a
tenant, as after his death. And if at any time of reuersing of the judgment,
the Tenant for life, etc. be alive, he shall not be restored, etc. his
possession, with the mesn, issues, and he in the reuersion to the arrerages of
the same rent, if any be due. But if the tenant for life, etc. be dead at the
time of the reuersing of the judgment, then he in the reuersion shall be
restored to possession, with the issues after the death of their Tenant for
life, etc. and the arrerages of rent due in his life.

31 Ed. 3. Cap. 12. Error in the Exchequer shall be reuersed before the
Chancellor, and Treasurer, taking to them the Justices, and other such sage
persons, as they think fit. And after the roll shall be sent back into the
Exchequer, to make execution.

31, Eliz Cap 1. If either Lord Chancellor or Lord Treasurer, or both the
chief Justices, come at the day of adiournement in a writ of Error in the
Exchequer, it shall be no discontinuance.

32. H. 8. Cap 30. made perpetual. 2. E. ^. Cap. 22. After a verdict tried by
twelve men, or more, in any suit in Court of Record, no judgment shall be
stayed or reuerfed for any mispleading, lack of color, insufficient pleading,
miscontinuance, discontinuance, miscontaining of Process, misioyning of the
issue, lack of Warrant of Atturnie: for the party against whom the issue is
tried, or any other default or negligence of the parties, their counselors, or
Atturnies.

18. Eliz. Ca. 4. After a verdict of twelve men, or more, in any suit in Court
of Record, judgment shall not be stayed or reuersed for default in form, or
lack of form, as false Latin, variance from the Register, etc, in any writ
original or judicial, declaration, bill, or plaint, or for want of any writ
original or judicial, or by reason of any imperfect or insufficient return,
or for want of any Atturny, or for any manner of default in process upon, or
after the prayer or voucher.

27, Eliz. Cap 5. After demurrer joined or entered in any suit in Court of
Record, the Judges shall proceed and give judgment according as the very
right of the cause and matter in law shall appear unto them, without regarding
any imperfection, defect, or want of form in any writ, return, plaint, or
declaration, or other pleading whatsoever; except those only which the party
specially and perticularly shall set down and express together with his
demurrer. And that no judgment to be given, shall be reuersed by any writ of
Error, or by any such imperfection, defect, or want of form, as is aforesaid,
except as only be before excepted.

These two last statutes extend not to suits of felony or murder, nor to
enditeme^t or presentment of them, or of treason, or other matter, nor to
process upon any of them, nor to any suit upon a popular or penal statute.

In the Parliament, when the error is 1. H. 7. 19. 23. El. Die. 375.
in the Kings Bench: And is returnable before the king and the lords only. The
order whereof is this, viz. The party that sueth it must have a bill from the
king indorsed; and thereupon the Chancellor must make him a writ of Error, and
then the chief Justice of the Kings Bench shall bring with him (in the
Parliament) unto the Lords in the inner Parliament Chamber, the writ of Error,
and the bill endorsed, and all the Rols wherein are contained the pleas and
process in which error is supposed, and there shall leave the transcript of
all the Record and Process, etc. together with the said writ of Error with the
Clarke of the Parliament, who shall have the custody thereof. And by the Lords
only, and not the Cominalty shall a Steward be assigned, who together with the
Lords, by advise of the Justices, shall proceed to amend the error.

Statutes.
27. Eliz. cap. 8. An error in the Kings Bench in an action of debt, detinue,
covenant, account, action upon the case, Eiectione firm, or trespass first
commenced there (where the King is no party) may at the parties choice be
reuersed in the Exchequer chamber before the Justices of the Common place, and
such Barons of the Exchequer as are of the choice, or six of them at the
least, other then for error concerning the jurisdiction of the kings Bench, or
want of form in a writ, return, plaint, bill, declaration, pleading,
process, verdict, or proceeding whatsoever. And upon the Judgment affirmed or
reuersed, the Record shall be sent back into the Kings Bench, to proceed and
award execution thereupon.

The party grieved with such reuersall or affirmation, may have a writ of
Error in the Parliament as upon judgment in the kings Bench.

31. Eliz. cap. 1. Any three of the Justices and Barons (if the full number
come not) may receive writs of error, award, process, prefixe days for the
continuance of the writs of Error.

False Judgment is upon error in a F. N. B. 17. and 18.
base Court.

Thus much of writs of Error and false Judgment, there follows an Attaint,
and Audita querela.

Attaint is to enquire whether a Jury of 12. men gave a false verdict. That so
the judgment following upon it may be reuersed, 18. E. 4. 9.
and the party restored to all that he has lost, that is to say, if it be
the defendant to his damages and whatsoever else: if the plaintiff, to his
title, his action, etc. for an attaint lies not till Judgment be given, 9
ass. Pl. 21.
and if the Writ bear date before it shall abate. And this lies only upon a
Br. attaint. 42.
verdict by xij. for if he lose in a Writ of right no atraint lies neither by
the Common Law nor Statute, because it passes by a Jury of more then xij.
that is to say, the grand assise. No more does it in an enquest of office, and
upon a writ to enquire of damages 3^. H. 6. 1. 3. H. 6. 29.
in trespass, for that may be by a less number then xij.

And this must be brought in the life of him for whom it passed, and of some of
them that gave it, whom we call the petie Jury, for if either the 25. H. 8.
Die. 5 26. ass. Pl. 12.
party himself, or 13. E. 4. 5.
all the petie Jury be dead, or 34 ass. Pl. 6. 26. ass. Pl. 2.
all of them but one, the attaint fails, and lies only upon a verdict in
personal actions other than trespasses: for it seems that there was an
attaint at the Common Law, because Westminster 1. cap. 37. speaks of attaints Br.
attaint. 42.
without expressing any penalty. And 34. E. 3 cap. 7. gives it in plea real
as well as personal. So as it lay before in a plea personal, debt, detinue,
covenant, and such like: but not in trespass, for that is given by statute.
And the reason why it lay not in an action of Trespass, is because then upon
reuersing of the recovery the K. shall lose his fine. Neither did it lie at
the Common law in a plea real of land, for Westminster 1. cap. 37. gives it in
that case. And the reason of that was, because he that loses may have a writ
of right.

The Jury here called the Grand Jury, Old N. B. 111.
are 24. who are to be warned the first day. And the process is against the
party sommons, Old. N B. 112.
resommons, as in a mortdancester, darrein presentment, and Iuris vtrum,
against the petie Jury, venire facias and distress.

The petie Jury must be all present 22. H. 6. 8.
when the grand Jury is taken, else it can never be taken, which was a great
mischief at the Common Law, for it might be that some of them had nothing, and
so would never appear, And may plead in bar of the 35. H. 6. 30.
attaint, as a release, arbitrament, etc. for this excuses them of their false
oath, but not in abatement of the writ, as another attaint 19. ass. Pl. 15:
hanging, that the demaundant had jointly with another not named in the writ:
or if a woman bring it to say she is covert, etc.

The Plaintiff in the attaint can give no more evidence then was given at the
34. H. 8. Die. 53.
first. But the defendant in affirmance of the first verdict may.

Statutes.
Westminster 1. cap 37. An attaint is given in pleas of land or of freehold, or of
things that touch freehold.

1. E. 3. cap. 8. In writs of trespass as well upon the principal as the
damages, though Execution be not sued of them.

28. E. 3. cap 8. And that as well by bill as by writ, without regarding the
quantity of the damages.

34. E. 3. cap. 7. An attaint is given in every plea, real as well as
personal.

9. Ric. 2. cap. 3. Given to him in the reuersion living his Tenant for term
of life upon a recovery against him, with restitution of the Tenant that lost
his possession, with the mesne issues. And of him in the reuersion to the
arrerages of his rent. But if the Tenant that lost be either dead, or were of
couin with him that recovered, then restitution shall be to him in the
reuersion of the possession it self, with the mesne, issues and arrerages,
after such death and recovery by couin.

14* E. 2. Of Sherifes and green wax, if the pety Jury appear not at the
first grand distress against them, or a Nihil be returned the grand Jury
shall be taken by their default.

23. H. 8. cap. 3. made perpetual 13. Eliz. cap. 9. In a suite before Justices
of Record not concerning life, an attaint is given against the petie Jury, and
every of them, and the party himself.

The process against the petie Jury and fraud Jury, shall be sommons and
resommons, and distress infinite.

Open proclamation shall be made in the Court where the distress is awarded
more then xv. days before the return of the distress.

The graund shall be taken in default of the defendant, or petie Jurors, or any
of them.

The petie Jury that appear being the same persons, and the writ, process,
return, assignment of the false oath good, shall have no answer, but that he
made a true oath, except the plaintiff or demaundant has been non suite, or
discontinued, or had judgment against the petie Jury upon his suite of
attaint. But the party himself shall plead any thing only in bar of the
attaint. Notwithstanding which plea, the grand Jury shall without delay
enquire of the truth of the verdict. Such a day shall be given in the process
as in a Writ of dower, and no essoyne or protection allowable.

By the death of the party, or one of the petie Jury, the attaint shall not
abate, nor be deferred against the rest as long as two of the petie Jury shall
live.

Every attaint shall not be in the Kings Bench, or Common place, and the Nisi
prius granted upon the distress by the discretion of the Justices. And every
of the petie Jury may be by Atturny. The non suit or release of one when there
be diverse Plaintifes or demaundants in an attaint shall not prejudice the rest.

Every one of the grand Jury must have xx. marks a year land of freehold,
out of ancient demesne. But if the value of the thing in suite be under the
value of forty pounds, then v. marks a year, or a C. marks worth of goods
suffices for default of such sufficient Jurors, within the same County, a
Tales shall be awarded unto the next.

11. H 6. cap 4. The Plaintiff shall recover costs and damages against the
Iuror or defendant that pleads a fained plea in delay. Audita querela is for
one being or to be in execution to relieve him upon good matter of discharge
which he has no means to plead. As if one having a release be taken 22. H.
8. 56.
in execution in one Court, as in the Common place, by writ out of another (as
out of the Chancerie) returnable in the Common place, upon a Recognisance, or
condemnation in the Chancerie. (But if the Recognisance or condemnation had
been in the Common place, then they might have awarded process upon that
matter) If execution be sued of a Recognisance by Fieri facias or elegit: (but
not by Scire facias, 48. E. 3. 20.
for there he has day to answer, therefore it is his solly if he come not in
and plead it, that is to say, where the Sheriff returns him warned: otherwise
it is upon a Nihil returned) if a release or acquittance be made unto him after
the Scire facias sued, if after verdict and before judgment they have put
themselves into abitrement.

The process where the Audita quertla is sued, before execution is a venire
facias and 12. H 4 6. 15. Br. Audit. quaerela. 15. 22. H. 6. 56. 12. H. 4.
ibid. 47. E. 3. 1. 17* E. 3. 3. 28. E. 3. pro Old N. B. 66.
distress, and upon default after appearance and plea pleaded, a distringas ad
audiendum Iudicium, for thereby Judgment is to be given against him. And in
this case of an Audita querela sued before execution, he may have a Supersedeas
upon good matter of discharge surmised in the writ of Audita querela, to stay
for once the execution upon sureties, so 11. R. 2. Supersed. 14.
can he not being in execution. Neither 2* H. 7. 12. 21. H. 6. 34.
can he have a Supersedeas before execution oftener then once, though 43 E. 3
^8. F. N. B. 104. q. cont.
it be upon new matter. But if the F. N B. 204. q.
Audita querela be abated for variance from the Record, or such like, there in
another Audita querela he may have a second Supersedeas.

After execution the process is a Scire facias, as if he be brought in by a
Capias ad 22 H. 6. 56. 15. E. 4. 5.
satisfaciendum, for there he is in prison, otherwise it is if he be not taken
by a capias, but come in gratis. And this scire facias is only for the more
hasty expedition of the party that is in prison, for if the process should be
by distress infinite, peradventure the party would lose issues, to keep the
others body in perpetual prison.

CHAP. 48.
Of certain special writs wherein no Process lies.

THus far of an Action, and the several parts of it. And of writs both
Original and Judicial, that begin or prosecute the action. Beside which,
there be certain other originals out of the Chancerie, which are as it were
special anomalies and exceptions from the former. Being not diductory to bring
any matter into plea or solemn action, but only Commandatorie or Prohibitorie
to do or leave something undone. And therefore no Process at all lies in
these writs, but only an F. N. B. 6. b. 185 d. 134. a. Old N B. 15. 35.
Attachment upon a contempt, for not executing or obeying them.

Of which nature are,

1. Commandatorie ones, these that follow. F. N. B. 26 3. c.
Dote assignanda, is for the wife of the Kings Tenant, when the King is
entitled by office of land, whereof she is dowable, always directed to the
Eschetor. And may be either to deliver her such part of F. N B. 263. d.
her land as is already assigned to her in the Chancerie for her dower, or for
the Eschetor himself to assign her part unto her.

If her husband held in chief, then she F. N Br. 263. c.
must first take an oath in the Chancerie, not to marry without the Kings
license, before she can have this writ. But if he held of the King by Knight
service, as of a manor, or if he held from one that is in ward F. N. B. 264.
a.
to the King by reason of his nonage, there she shall not need to take any such
oath.

Homagio capiendo for tenant by homage auncestrell to compel the Lord to
receive 45. E. 3. 23.
his homage, and is to save his warrantie and acquitaile, which he loses if he
be impleaded before the Lord have received his homage.

Scutagio habendo for the Lord to have escuage of his Tenants by Knights
service, F. N B. 83 c.
when the same is due, by reason of any voyage royal made by the King in
proper person, or by his Lieutenants against the Scots, or them of Wales.

And to make his son a Knight, or to F. N. B. 82. a. c.
marry his daughter, for the Lord to have this aid of his Tenants, where it
is due.

De corrodio habendo, and de Annua pensione, for the King. The F. N. B. 230. a
first to have a corodie for his servant, the F. N. B. 231. g.
other to have a pencion granted to his Chaplein, F. N. B. 230 a
till he be promoted to a benefice. Both F. N. B. 230. a and 231. g.
these where the same are due. As F. N B. 230. a.
of common right a Corodie is due from every Abbey, Priory, or other house of
Religion, whereof the King is founder in the right of his Crown. A Fit ibid.
F. N. B. 229. b.
pension from every Bishoppricke in England or Wales.

De libertatibus allocandis, for one whether a singular person, Burgis,
Citizen, or other, or a body corporate, empleaded before the Kings Justices of
the one Bench or other, Justices errants, Justices of the forest, etc. to have
the liberties granted them by the King, or his progenitors, to be allowed
where the Justices will not make allowance of them And therefore is to be
directed to the Justices themselves, not to the sheriff, for he is but their
officer, and subject to be amerced by them, if he do not his office as he
should.

De executione Iudicij, to have a Judgment executed, whether the same were
given Old N. B. 15.
in a Court Baron, viz. the Court of the Lord, Hundred, or County Court, by
writ of right Iusticies, or plaint without writ, or in Court of Record. The
same to be directed to the sheriff, if judgment were given before the Baylife
in the Hundred or Lords Court, to the Coroners if it be before the Sheriff in
the County Court, to the Justices themselves if it be in a Court of record.
And this writ is a Iusticies.

De restitutione temporalium, where the temporaltie^ before seized into the
Kings F. N. B. 169.
hands, are to be restored to a Pryor or Bishop elect and consecrate. And this
must be directed to the Eschetor.

De securitate pacis, for him that is in fear of corporal hurt, to be killed,
beaten, assaulted, F. N. B. 79.
etc. or of the burning of his houses, to be secured of peace in that behalf,
against the party whom he feared And may be for either of these causes alone,
or for both jointly in one writ, where a corporal oath must be taken by him
that stands so in fear. And that was wont to be in the Chancerie before
some Master of the Chancerie, by the ancient course of Law. But now they use
to purchase such writs by their friends there without taking of an oath, which
makes them to be sued forth many times more for the vexation of the parties
then upon any just cause. The common form of this writ since the Statute 1. E*
3. cap. 16. which appoints Justices of peace, is for the ease of the people
somewhat altered, and it is called a supplicauit, directed sometimes to the
Justices of peace, and to the Sheriff, sometimes to the Justices or one Justice
sole, and sometimes to the sheriff only to compel the party to find
sufficient mainperors in a reasonable sum of money, that he shall neither do
nor procure any bodily hurt, or burning of the parties houses; or upon
refusal, to commit him to the jail till he do.

De vi Laica remouenda, to remove alllay force in any Church, especially where
debate Old N. B. 33.
is between two persons of a Church of prebends about the title, and one with
force and arms holds the other out: and F. N. B. 54.
this writ may be as well upon the bare surmise of the Incumbent or party
grieved, without any Certificate made by the Bishop into the Chancerie, of such
force as upon and by reason of such Certificat. And there be two several
forms of writ in these two cases, but hereby the sheriff may not remove the
Incumbent out of possession of the Church, whether he be in by right or wrong,
for then he may have a writ to restore him again, but only remove the force:
and this writ is returnable or not returnable at the parties pleasure that does
sue the same, and may be returnable in the Common place, as well as in the
Kings Bench.

Of clensing streets to have the ways, streets or lands of a Town Corporate,
F. N. B. 185. d.
of the Suburbs of it, to be made clean, and so kept, when they be stencht, by
dung and filth, hogsties, and such like, whereby the air is corrupted and
infected, to the indangering of the health, or other great discommoditie to the
Inhabitants or Travelers that way. But it seems that no such writ lies for
the Village in that Country, though they be not kept clean, but for corporate
Towns only.

De Leproso amouendo, to remove a Leper F. N. B. 234.
or Lazer, that will come abroad to Church among his neighbors from the
company of men to some solitary place of dwelling. And that is for fear of
infecting of them: but if he will keep in his house, and not come among his
neighbors, then it seems he shall not be removed thence, nor that any
Lepers or Lazars shall be removed by this writ, but only such as appear to be
so by their speech, ulcers, rottenness of flesh, stink, and such like, and
not those that though they be infected inwardly, yet appear not so without.

De excommunicato capiendo, upon a significauit, Old N. B. 34 and 35
so we call the ordinaries Certificate into the Chancerie, that one
excommunicate stands out forty days, and will not be justified by the
sensures of the Church to imprison, and so to justify him by his body, till
he satisfy holy Church for his contumacie and contempt, and this writ also is
a Iusticies.

De excommunicato deliberando to deliver Old N. B. 35. a. F. N. B. 63. ^. f.
him out of prison when the Church is satisfied, and has absolved him.

De cautione admittenda, when one taken by an Excommunicata capiendo offers
sufficient F. N* B. 63. c.
pledge or caution to obey holy Church, which is refuled to have that caution
admitted and to be delivered: and may be either to the F. N. B. ibid
ordenarie himself to command him to be delivered, which the ordinary may
do by word, or to F. N. B. 63 d.
the Sheriff to make such deliverance, and then it is withal, a de
excommunicato deliberando.

De heretico conburendo, to cause one convicted for an Heretic to be burnt.
And F. N. B. 269.
this as the other writs to be directed to the Sheriff, the party being
committed by the Clergy into the secular power. But by the Statute 2 H 4. cap.
15. Every Bishop in his Diocese may convict a man of heresy, and cause him to
abjure, and after convict him anew, and condemn him to the fire, and thereupon
make a precept to the Sheriff to take and cause him to be burnt, and the same
a sufficient warrant to the Sheriff without any writ of the King: but that
Statute is repealed by 25. H 8 ca. 14. So as now the ordinary cannot commit him
to the lay people to be burnt without the Kings writ first purchased.

De coronatore exonerando, to discharge a Coroner of his office upon just
cause. As if F N. B. 163. n.
he cannot extend his office for other businesses of the Kings that he is
employed about in the same County, or be old and feeble, or unfit for the
office, and have not lands and tenements sufficient in the county whereupon he
may dwell according to his state, or have the Palsy, or dwell in the remote
parts of the shire, so as he cannot conveniently exercise the office, or such
like.

And this writ is directed to the Coroner F. N. B. ibid.
himself.

De exonerando viridario forest^, to discharge a verder of the forest in like
sort.

De coronatore eligendo, to choose a Coroner, two or three if there be need of
so many, F. N. B. 163 k.
in full County, by the freeholders of the County. And this is commonly upon
the death or discharge of some of the Coroners, when it is upon the discharge,
then this writ renteth the cause of their discharge.

De electione viridariorum forestae, to choose F. N. B. 164. ^.
a verdor of the forest in like sort. Conge deslier, to Deane and Chapter, or
such like to choose their Bishop.

Statutes.
25. H. 8. cap. 20. For the election, nomination, presentation, inuesting, and
consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops.

A writ for the royal assent to signify to the ordenarie his assent to the
election of an Abbot, etc. and to will him to execute that which belongs to
him, therefore this is always to the ordenarie himself.

Desecuritate inuenienda quoth se non diuertat ad parts extera sine licentia
Regis, to compel one to find sufficient mainpernours in a reasonable sum of
money, not to go into foreign parts out of the Realm, without the Kings
license, nor any thing there attempt in contempt or prejudice of the king, or
hurt of the people, nor send any thither for any such cause. And as a
Supplicauit may be directed to the Justices of peace, or sheriff, or both. And
every one upon surmise to the Chancellor may sue this writ for the King: for
by the Common Law every one that will may go out of the Realm for
merchandise, travail, or other cause at his pleasure without the Kings
license. But the king may restrain any subject by this writ, or by his privy
seal, or signet, or by proclamation without writ, or other commandment,
because every man is bound of common right to defend the King and his Realm.

5. Ric. 2. cap. 2. None shall go out of the Realm without the Kings leave
upon pain of forfeiture of his goods, except the Lords and other great men of
the Realm, known Merchants and the Kings soldiers.

Statutes repealed. 4 Iac. cap. 1.

All dedimus potestatems. The principal of them are these.

Dedimus potestatem, to give the Kings royal assent to the election of an
Abbot, or F. N B. 170. ^b.
such like, made or to be made, and to signify so much by his letters to the
ordenarie, that he may do that which belongs to him, and to receive fealty,
etc. commanding the party to do the premises. And therefore is directed to
the party himself that must do these things.

Dedimus potestatem de fine leuando, to certain F. N. B. 146. g. Old N. B. 103.
persons to take the acknowledgement of a fine out of Court, when one that has
agreed in the Kings Court to levy a fine, is so feeble that he cannot
travail, for every such dedimus potestatem supposes a writ of covenant, or
such like, hanging. F. N. B. ibid. 1. H 7. 9. Old N. Br. ibid.
And they to whom this Writ is directed, must go in proper person to the
parties to take the conisance, which being certified to the Kings Justices of
the Common place, the fine shall be engrossed. The chief Justice of the Common
place may take the acknowledgement of a fine without any dedimus 1. H. 7. 9.
potestatem, so can no other Judge, de rigore Iuris. But a Justice of assise by
a general patent with a clause of non obstante may

Statutes.
Stat. Carlife. 15. E. 2. The dedimus potestatem shall be directed to two of
the Justices, or one Justice and a knight.

Prerogative.
Dedimus potestatem de Atturnato saciendo, for the Judges to admit an Atturny
for F. N. B. 25. ^.
one in a suite, whether it be for the plaintiff or desendant, demaundant or
tenant, and in what action or suite soever the same be. This writ must be
directed to the Judges themselves, and grows by the Kings prerogative, for at
the Common Law the parties must appear in proper person, not by Atturny,
although the Statutes gave power afterward to make Atturnies in diverse cases;
as appears before. But before those Statutes it seems that the King might
grant to any man to make an Atturny in any suite. And one reason thereof was,
because it is no error though the Judge admit any plaintiff or defendant to
make an Atturny, where by the Law he ought not.

Prohibitory ones are these that follow.

A protection cum clausula nolumus, to free ones possessions, land, rent,
corn, cattle, Old. N B. 29. a. and b.
carriage, etc. that nothing be taken against his will for the Kings business,
by his officers or ministers. This may be as well for a seculer as a spiritual
person, and grows by the Kings special favor.

Persons or other spiritual persons not to be charged to the payment of
fifteenes, F. N. B. 176. a.
for goods in their possession annexed to their Churches.

Quod clerici non eligantur in officium baliui, Old N. B. 175 b.
for a Clark, so is every termed that is within holy orders, not to be chosen
an officer, as Bailife, Beadle, Reeue, etc. for his lands, and this writ
recites that by the common Law they ought not, and commands that if any
distress or amerciament be levied, in this respect, it be restored.

A prohibition to forbid tenant in dower, or by courtesy of England, or gardein
by F. N. B. 55. e. 14 H. 8. 6. Shelly.
Knight service, or in soccage, to commit wast to the destruction of the
inheritance. Tbe form of the writ. F. N. B. 8. c. 14. H. 8. ibid.
But this writ lies not against lessee for life or years, for they come in by
their own lease: but in the other cases before the Law makes their estate.

Statutes.
Glocest. cap 5. A man may have a writ of wast out of the Chancery against
tenant by courtesy or dower, or otherwise for term of life or years, and
being attaint of wast, he shall forfeit the waste and treble damages.

Westminster 2. cap. 14 The process in a writ of wast shall be sommons, attachment,
distress: and if he come not, then a writ unto the sheriff, taking with him
xij. men to go to the place wasted, and there enquire of the waste, and upon
that waste returned, judgment shall be.

11. H 6. cap. 5. Where the tenant grants over his estate, but notwithstanding
takes the profits, and commits wast, an action lies against him.

Mag chart^. ca. 4. The gardein may not commit wast upon pain to lose the
wardship.

Cap. 5. And must repair and sustain the houses, of the profit of the land.

Glocest cap. 5. If the gardein commit wast, and the wardship lost answer not
the value of the damages before the heirs age, the^ he shall render the damages
to the heir.

Artic. super chart. cap. 18. Eschetor committing waste upon wards lands, shall
answer damages as is ordained before by Statute against them that do wast in
wards lands. So of a Subeschetor, and if he be not able his master shall answer
for him.

36. E. 3. cap. 13. Stat. 1. If the Eschetor have a ward to answer to the King
of the issues, and commit waste, the heir shall have an action of wast as well
within age as of full age, and whilst he is within age, if he cannot, his next
friends shall have the suite for him.

14. E. 3. cap. 12. The heir when he comes to full age shall have an action
of wast against the gardens and fermours to whom the King shall let the land
in ward according to that Statute.

Westminster 2. cap. 22. A writ of wast given for one Iointenant or Tenant in
Common, against another, wherein the defendant to be at his choice to take his
part in certain (and then to have for his part the place wasted) or to agree
from thenceforth to take nothing more then his Companions do.

Glocest cap 13. Hanging a plea by writ the Tenant may not commit wast, nor
estrepment of the land in demand, and if he do, the demaundant may have a writ
to cause the land to be kept that no wast nor estrepment be done.

A quo minus for grantee of estouers, as houseboote or heyboote, etc. to
restrain Old N. B. 159.
the grantors from committing wast, so as he cannot have his estouers.

De exoneratione sectae, for Tenants by suit of Court, or other rent or
services that F. N. B. 158.
they be not distreined to do the same for such time as they ought to hold
the land discharged. As one which is in ward to the King, a woman endowed in
the Chancerie of lands so in ward, and the Tenants parauaile of such a ward,
that is to say, where the other Lords of whom the heir holds do distreine,
for during such time as the heir is in ward, either to the King or to his
Committee, he is to do no suite of Court or other services, and if any
distress be taken, it is by this writ to be restored.

De deonerando pro rata, to discharge the F. N. Br. 2^5. k.
tenant of parcel of the land, according to the rate of his land when he is
lawfully distreined for all the rent or services. As where a man which holds
C. acres of land by the service of repairing a bridge, alien in fee xx. acres
to one man, and xx. to another, and after upon this presented one of the
alienees, is only distreined to make reparation, or where the Kings Tenant by
fealty and rent alieneth parcel of the land, and the kings officer distreineth
the alienee for all the rent, for the King is not bound by the Statute of Quia
emptores terrarum, which will that the feoffee shall hold pro particula, but
that he may distreine for all the rent in the part of the alienee, but such a
writ lies not where one that holds of a common person by fealty and rent,
alieneth part of his land, for there the Statute it self restrains the Lord
that he cannot distreine the alience, but after the rate and value of the land
which he has purchased

De effend. quiet. de Theolonio to officers of Towns or other places not to
grieve spiritual F. N. B. 226. i.
persons, or other that ought to be quit of paying of toll, murage, pannage,
pontage, etc. whether by the kings grant or by prescription.

De non ponendo in Iuratis, to discharge F. N. B. 165. a. d.
Peers of the Realm, or other persons privileged: as Clarks that are in the
kings service, etc. from being of Jury, unless their presence be for any
special cause necessary. And this may be directed either to F. N. B. 165. ^.
the Sheriff not to put them into Iuries, or to the Judges to discharge them.
But if a Piere of the Realm be returned, he must be sworn or lose issues, if
he appear not, unless he bring the writ.

Ne eueas regnum, to the party himself to inhibite him to go into foreign
parts without F. N. B. 85. ^.
the Kings license.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
ABatement of the writ, 49. for what causes. ibid. Acceptance of a grant
determines prescription. 22 Accessarie things are of the nature of the
principal. 23 Account. 302 Accord, what it is, 181 differs from an
arbitrament. 181. 183. Action what. 225. where local, and where not, 251.
Action of the case wherefore brought, 185, 186. for a corporal hurt dies with
the party. 17 Acquitall, of the donees in frankmarriage by the donor, 141. of
the donee in frankalmoigne by the donor. 139 Ad terminum qui praeterijt. 263
Age, of discretion, 28. that shall bind a man or woman in matter of marriage,
ibid. that makes a woman capable of dower, ibid. 126. of a woman to continue
ward. 146 Alien, trial between him and a denizen shall be per medietatem
linguae. 411. being enemy shall not have a personal action, 28 an obligation
made to him shall go to the king, ibid. his goods shall be to their use that
seize them. 178 Aid what. 145. 146 Annuitie what, 161. the use of the writ of
annuitie. 301 Amercement, the Qu. shall not be amerced, 185. in what cases the
plaintiff shall be amerced, 189. in what cases the defendant, ibid. officer
amerced. 229 Amendment done by the Justices of the Clarks error. 228
Apportionment, a duty growing upon a contract cannot be apportioned. 180
Appeal. 310 Approuer. 387 Assault, what. 202 Assise. 284 Atturnement of Tenant
by homage ancestrel destroys the warrantie, 144. in what cases it is
necessary. 156. of tenant of the freehold is sufficient. 157. Auerment cannot
be against an Indenture, 109. nor a Record of Court. 1^1 Authority, derived
cannot be greater then that from which it is derived. 11

B
BAilment, of two sorts. 179 Barons, what. 86 shall not be impleaded by that
name. 87 Bastard, who, 117. cannot inherit, ibid. in what case he may gain a
right of inheritance. 118 Battery, what, 203. when not punishable. ibid.
Boroughes what, 92. the difference between them and Towns. ibid. Burglarie
what. 217

C
CAuse, if that cease the effect cease also. 8, 9. things construed occording
to that which was the cause thereof. 10 Causa matrimonij praelocuti. 264
Challenge. 412, 413 Claim, 121 of villeins goods by the Lord. 159 Color, in
giving it what must be observed. 380, 381 Commissions. 318 Common what. 157
Commonwealth, things which concern it favored. 39 Confession. 387
Confirmation what. 108 Consideration, it makes the promise binding, 34. what
shall be a good consideration to raise an use. 25 Consolidation what, 90
Conspiracio, 305. how made and how punished, ibid. Consuetudinibus and
seruitijs. 272 Contempts what. 205 Coparceners, who. 118. the eldest shall have
the chief house, 132. she only shall do homage, 142. unless the land be held
of the king, 144. they may compel partition. 36 Corodie what. 157 Coroner, his
Court. 243. must take no fee, 244. in what case process is directed to him.
ibid. Corporation, 87. of two sorts, 91. a Parson is a Corporation, 88. regular
corporations what. 92. secular what. 93. those spiritual are either
presentatiue or dative. 9^. Churchwardens ^ Corporation. 178 Count what. 357
County what. 79 Countermand, where good and where not. 31 Cui in vita. 265
Curia claudenda. 276 Courtesy of England, in what case the husband shall take
benefit thereby, 129 shall not be of a possession in Law, ibid. why so called.
ibid.

D
DAy, the Sabbath is no day for Law cases, 7. Sale upon that day alters no
property, ibid. if the end of the term or day of return be on that day, the
day following is taken in steed of it, 236. things done in the day favored
more than those done in the night. 38 Debt and detinue. 294 Deceit, 305. what,
188. in what cases a man may have remedy. ibid. 189 Deeds what, 108. of two
sorts, 109. to whom they belong, ibid. void in the beginning cannot have a good
perfection, 12. not auailable if read falsely to an unlearned man. 109 Deodand
what. 214 Departure what. 50, 51 Discontinuance, what 190. how made. ib.
Disseisin what. 195 Distress, 135. what may be distreined, and what not,
ibid. the King may distreine where a common person may not, 136. where
distress may not be taken, ibid. it may not be driven forth of that Hundred
where it was taken, 137. A Millstone cannot be distreined 39 Dower, in what
case the wife shall be endowed. 125. 126. is forfeited by granting a greater
estate, 114. barred by living in adultery, 127. by detaining deeds concerning
the inheritance, 126. by consenting to the rauisher. 204 Dum fuit infra
aetatem. 264 Dum non fuit compos mentis. 264

E
Electione firmae. 310 Enterpleader, what. 374 Entry, whereof one copercener
shall be the entry of the rest, 118. gains right of inheritance to a
bastard eigne, 118. the writ. 261, 262 Eschete when, 130. of all Cities belongs
to the King. 132 Escheator, shall tarry in his place but one year. 241 Error,
being common goes for Law, 41. of the Clarke of the Court amended, 227. if the
Sheriff suffer a common recovery it is error: 19 Estoppell, made by pleas in
bar, and replications, 32. but matter in the writ or count does not. 33
Exchange, warrantie knit thereto by Law, 116. when good and when otherwise.
103. 104 Executours, they must prove the Will. 171. may not refuse after
administering, ibid. what duties they must first discharge 172. of an Executor
is executor to the first testatour, 173. must pay duties upon record first. 233
Extinguishment, if a woman marry the obligor the debt is extinct. 40

F
Fealty what? 138. Felony what? 210 Fee simple of two sorts 121, is by giving
lands to Mayor and and Comminaltie without naming successors 125. Fine for
lands aliened without License 143. by the defendant in an action of Trespass
189. Franchise what? 164. of diverse kinds 166. Frankalmoigne what? 138, 139.
the Lord must warrant such a tenant 139. Frankmariage what? 123. Land cannot be
given in Frankemariage with a man 123. Land so given is held by fealty only.
140, 141. Forfeiture, what shall not be forfeited by attainder of treason 15.
of a termour by plucking the inheritance out of him that has it, 113. by
alienation without license, 142, 143. of a franchise by misusing it, 164.

G
GAuelkind, 78. the custom thereof not changed by having a fine and recovery
at Common law 15. Grant, of an infa^t, 102. 103. by compulsion, 102. cannot be
of things in action. 107. what things may not be granted over, 17.

H
Heir what, 116. in what case he shall be bound by his ancestor, 119.
Hereditaments what. 111, 134. Heresy what, 219. the punishment thereof ibid.
Homage, what, and how performed, 142. to the King shall be taken by his
Chamberlain, ibid. ancestrell, 144. incident to Knights service, 149.
Hotchpot, what, 124. in what cases it shall be, ibid.

I
Idiot, the king shall have to his own use all his possession during his
ideocie, 95. his grant is void, 102, 103. Incidents cannot be severed, 15.
homage incident to knights service, 149. Infant, his will nothing worth though
he dies at full age, 12. his grant void, 102: unless for things necessary,
103. Ioyntenant who, 97. the suruiuour shall have the whole, ibid. cannot sue
one another, 37. Issue what? 396. Iuris Vtrum, 292. Jurors returned to appear
at the Sherifs turn, 243. trialls by Jurors 399, 400, 401. Iusticies, 314.

K
King, he is the Head of the Commonwealth, 81. he cannot be nonsuit, 82.
always present in Court, 81. when bound by act of Parliament, 84. 234 all land
is holden of him, 132. being tenant in Common of an entire Chattel real,
shall have the whole, 178. how his grant shall be taken, 101. cannot dispense
with an Act of Parliament before it be made, 235. Knights service, homage is
incident thereunto, 149.

L
LAnd what, 130. what is comprehended under that name, 131. Laps what, 90. Law
defined, 1. Native or positive, 2. it favors right, 45. Leases, what Leases
made by a Corporation are void. 192 Lunaticks, the King shall have their
possessions, 96.

M
MAintenance, a son may maintain his father, 25. Mayme what, and when 204.
Manslaughter what, 212. 215. is pardned by a pardon of murder, 21. Menace what,
201. when a trespass, 202 Mesne what, 140. must acquit the tenant of all
services against the lord paramount, ib. Misprision what, 209. Murder what,
215. when one may justify to kill another 35.

N
Necessity, it saves the party from punishment, 35. Notice must be taken by
the Court of all apparent faults proceeding from the action, 226. Nuisance what,
187. is to be removed, 188. the Kings License does not make it lawful, 234.
Nuper obijt, 293.

O
OAth taken by officers, 230 Office what, 162. a grant thereof to an unskillful
man is void. ibid. offices for the King. 323 Officers what. 229 Ordinary,
every Parson must be presented to him. 89. ^ay collate after six months
auoidance 90. by consent of patrons may unite two Churches, ibid. may
administer the goods where no Will is 173. shall be answerable for the
intestates debts, 174 immediate officer to Courts for spiritual matters. 237
Oyer of a deed. 366

P
PArson, is a corporation, 87. is freed from personal charges, 88. to whom
presented, 89 how inducted, ibid. the Church and Churchyard belong to him. 131.
One cannot present him self to a benefice. 19. chargeable for an annuitie
granted by his predecessor. 23 Peers, where one is a a party to the action,
a Knight must be of the Jury, 412. shall be tried by his Peers, ib. exempted
from doing suite at Courts. 241 Petie treason, what. 218 how punished, ibid. of
diverse sorts. 230 Plaints what, and where holden. 320 Pleading, what. 359. the
manner thereof. 360 of several sorts. 362. 363. Pleas in bar. 378 Pypowders,
that court incident to Faires and Markets. 246. trials there shall be by the
Merchants. 412 Possession what. 104. it prevails where the right is equal.
30 Possibility, may preserve an Act from being void. 33 Prescription, where it
makes right, and where not, 132. is as available as any grant. 104
Presentiments. 335 Property, not changed by sale upon the Sabath day. 7. cannot
be had in wild beasts and fowls of the air. 176. when the Lord has
property in an estray. 177. of goods may be in an alien. 178. when altered by
sale of another ma^s goods. 180. altered by an accord made of a personal thing.
182. deuested by wrongful taking of goods. 199. not altered by stealth. 210

Q
QVare impedit. 274 Queen, she may have an action in her own name. 86.
making leases, etc. they shall be good for her life. 86 she shall not be
amerced. 185 Quo warranto. 322 Quod permittat. 274

R
RApe, what. 204 Relation, of words to the next antecedent. 8 Release, what.
107. void without priuitie. 115 Remainder, what. 113 Remitter, what, 194. when
issue in tail shall be remitted. 18 Rent, charge what. 15^ secke what, ibid.
reserved upon a gift of lands in frank-marriage, when good. 18 Rescous. 310
Reuertion, what. 113 Right, what. 106. a writ of right, 270. of Right patent.
312 Robbery, what. 217

S
SEisin, the use thereof. 132. from what time it shall be alleged. 258
Services, are common to all certain Estates and proper inheritances 138.
Divine Service, what. 139. Knights service, what. 149 Sheriff, suffering a
recovery it is error. 19. felony in him to behead one that should be
hanged. 31 Sine assensu capituli. 265 Soccage tenure, what. 147 Sodomitrie,
what. 219 Suit of Court, what. 144 cannot be done by deputy, 16. who shall be
constreined to do it. 145. must be done at the Sherifes turn by every one of
12. years of age. 241. women and Peers of the Realm are excepted. 241. 242

T
TAles. 414. 415 Terms, when they begin, and end, and their several returns.
236 Tenement, what. 130. of two sorts. ibid. Testament, what. 167. all chattels
may be devised. ibid. what lands may be devised. 169. 170 Title what. 106.
pretensed titles when they may be sold. 250 Town, chargeable with the goods
of offenders. 207 Treason what, 220. 221

V
VAriance, between the writ and obligation. 49 View. 366 Villeine, what 159.
his original, 160. 232. the lord must claim his goods. 159. where the lord may
not seize him, 160. his children are villeins, 160. what shall be an
infranchisement, ibid. shall make free land to be villeine land. 23. being an
executour may have an action against his Lord. 27 Uncertainty makes the grant
void. 49 Void things good to some purpose. 62 Use, feoffement to the use of a
villeine the Lord may enter. 159 Usurpation, what. 196 how done. ibid.

W
Wager of bat tell shall not be by Cosins in a writ of right. 25 Ward shall be
his that can first hap him. 30 Warranty, what word makes it. 115. knit by
Law to every exchange. 116* occasioned by homage auncestrell. 144. which is
destroyed by Atturnment. ib. where it makes a discontinuance. 193 the writ of
Warrantia chartae. 278 Wast, the wife shall not be charged for wast done by the
husband. 26. judgment shall not be given in waste, where the waste is but 12.
pence. 29 Way granted over another ground shall be to the grantee only, 17.
and he cannot assign it over, 31. given by law to a thing excepted, 63 Women
may relieve their husbands though it be felony in another, 25. are free from
suite of Court, 241. when said to be waiued, 242. shall be endowed of the best
possession of her husband, 26. Wrecke, shall not be if any living Creature
escape out of the ship, 177. Writ what, 237. of two sorts, 252. abated for
false Latin, Ib.

FINIS.

