THE PRIEST'S Duty and Dignity.

Preached at the Trienniall Visitation in Ampthill 1635. August 18. by JASPER
FISHER Presbyter, and Rector of Willden in Bedford-shire.

And published by Command.

I magnify mine Office. Romans 11. 13.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. 1636.

December. XX. 1635.
PErlegi hanc Concionem (cui titulus The Priest's Duty and Dignity) quae
continet folia 9. in quibus nihil reperio quod non maxima cum utilitate publica
imprimatur, sub ea tamen condition, ut vel intra annum proxime sequentem typis
mandentur, vel haec Licentia sit omnino irrita.

Guilielmus Haywood, R. P. D. Archiep. Cant. Capellanus domest.

THE PRIEST'S DVTY and Dignity.
Malac. 2. 7. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should
seek the Law at his Mouth: for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts.
MY Argument, like my Auditory, is compounded of Priest and People: Both were
now faulty, the Priest ignorant and lazy, the People unrulie and lawless; the
unworthiness of the first, and the ungodliness of the second, mutually
producing and mutually pardoning one another; And in the proverb of Isaiah and
Hoseah ( Isa. 24. 2. Hos. 4. 9.) Like People, like Priest. Wherefore this doctor
angelicus our Prophet Malachi, in this verse roundly takes up both; intimating
their defects, by declaring their duties: For the Priests lips, etc.

We have here three general parts.

1. The first, ad patres conscriptos, What is required of the Priest; The
Priests lips should keep knowledge. 2. The second, ad quirites, what is
commanded the People; They should seek the Law at his mouth. 3. The third, is
a reason of both duties wrapped up in a brief description of the Priest; For he
is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts.
In the first general to examine the parcells, seeing every raiment of gold is
gold, and every word of Gods Word is true and weighty. 1. The word [ Cohen,
Priest] may include by concommitance the Levite, and by correspondence the
Presbyter and Deacon in the new Testament; for this duty of knowing and
teaching respects the Clergy in general, and is as large as both Covenants. 2.
By [ Lips] we gather that this knowledge must not be buried in his breast, but
uttered by his breath; for how shall the Laity believe without hearing? or
hear without speaking? and of all expressions a live-voice has the most
advantage: Again, we gather that this Office is not (...) but (...), not a
sanctifying grace, but an edifying gift; this cole from the Altar should warm
his heart, but it must touch his Lips. 3. [ Keeping] implies, says S. Hierome,
a thrifty employment of this heavenly indowment, non dixit proferent, sed
custodient, in due season to lay it forth, not to pour it out; to sow it in
the field, not to throw it away, so to hoord up this Aliment that the people
be not famished; so to disburse this Talent, that himself turn not bankrupt. 4.
[ Knowledge] 4
is a large word, and may equalize Sapience in Tully, the science of all humane
and divine matters, or S. Paul's possibility 1. Cor. 13. To speak with the
tongue of men and Angels, to be a universal Linguist, then to understand all
Mysteries and all Knowledge; to be cunning in the seven liberal Sciences and
the three Philosophies; then to have the gift of Prophecy; to expound aright
the holy Scriptures: For a Divines knowledge, and Divinity, are not terms of
the same extent. A Priest here must have [ Dahhath] and [ Torah] Knowledge to
expound the sense of dark Mysteries, and Law to pronounce Sentence in
doubtful Cases: Contemplative wisdom to certify the understanding, and
practical Prudence to satisfy the Conscience. The four Terms thus
explicated are again coagulated into this brief Doctrine, The Doct.
Priests Lips should keep knowledge, or Clergymen should be learned Teachers.

If Quintilians Roman Orator, much more the Divine Orator, should be a
mortal God omniscious: like a Be composing, or rather like honey composed of
the vigor and virtues of all flowers. Let thy Urim and Thummim be with thy
holy one, as dying Moses prays, Deuteronomy. 33. Then shall they teach Jacob thy
judgments, and Israel thy law. Urim and Thummim, that is, demonstration and
truth, as the Septuagint; illumination and integrity, as the modern; learning
and holiness, as Paulus Fagius; faith and love, as Saint Paul seems to render
them, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a
pomegranate round about the hemme of his robe, Exodus 28. that is, eloquence and
sapience, a sweet sound and a wholesome taste, a voice to awake, and a virtue to
nourish and heal a sinner. If the Priest looked upon his [ Hhoshen, his
breastplate,] the two mystical signs. if he looked upon his [ Mehhil, his long
robe,] the imbroidered fringes would put him in mind of this duty. In the
Tabernacle, the seven. lamps of a golden candlestick, were a Typical warning
of his illightning the minds; the twelve loaves of Shewbread, of his feeding
the souls of the people. Nay the whole Universe, with the seven planets,
twelve signs, four elements, meteors, and their affections, was lively
deciphered in that mystical building and Sacerdotall garments; teaching him
Astronomy and natural Philosophy, in those hieroglyphicall characters, as
Flavius Josephus wittily shows, Antiqu. lib. 3. cap. 8. It was enjoined a
Statute for ever to the Aaronites, soberly to put a difference between clean
and unclean,, Levit. 10. which referd to the peoples person, required skill in
the infinite cases of defilement and positive laws: or referd to their
leprosy, required some skill in diseases and medicines: or referd to their
diet, required some skill in the nature of beasts, fishes, and fowls: and this
one part of judging between clean and unclean fills up many Tracts in their
Talmud. In a word, They were not only to the people, Doctors, and Masters of
ceremony, but also Physicians, Counselors, Lawyers, Judges in peace, Heralds
in war: and above all, ready Scribes in the Law and Prophets.

For the new Testament, read the Canons of Saint Paul to Timothy and Titus,
(...), (...), Not to teach perversely, not to wrangle verbally, not to speak
emptily: three rules which will much contract us and direct us to a solid
preaching. Holy* fast a form of sound Words and public Prayers, give
attendance to reading and doctrine, be able by sound Doctrine to exhort and to
convince, to fill the mouth of the hungry, and to stop the mouth of
gaine-sayers; to be (...), which in Greece would signify, Able and ready to
teach; and confirms Master Calvin's, Omnes Sacerdotes sunt Doctores.

Thus a heavenly Scribe, like a good householder, brings forth out of his
treasure, the two Testaments, Things New and Old, says our Savior, Matthew. 13.
52. Thus is he well furnished from the two great Marts of the world, Athens
and Jerusalem, first dipped in all secular science, as the ground-colour; then
dyed in grain of true Theology, before he puts on [ Shani] the twice-dipt
purple. of the Priesthood. Thus his lips like lillies drop sweet smelling
myrrh: they are the garners of Joseph, the armory of David, the wine-cellar of
the Spouse: they are a precious casket, which once opened, a sweet perfume
fills all the Church, and a glistering jewel ravishes the eyes: Nay, they are
the very Arc shadowed by Cherubims, in which was nothing but Manna for
consolation, a Rod for correction, and the Tables of the Law for spiritual
instruction. The Priests lips should keep knowledge.

This truth is crossed by some in faction, Use.
by others in fact. First, the 1
Novelist can easily disclaim this precept of knowledge, by disclaiming the
Jewish name of Priest: For there is no Priest, as he fondly thinks, without a
bleeding Sacrifice, and a bloody Altar. But if not Ecclesiastical Writers, yet
Evangelicall Prophets might teach him; who foretold under the Gospel,
Sacrifice and Oblation, Isai. 19. 21. Malach. 1. 11. Altar and Incense, Isai.
19. 19. Mal. 1. 11. Psalm. 141. 2. with Revelat. 8. 3. Priests and Levites,
Isai. 61, 6. 66, 21. And how Christ now can be a high Priest, Heb. 2. 17. 3,
1. 10, 21. and have no inferior Priests, I cannot well conceive. Indeed the
word (...) in the new Testament, is not given to an Evangelicall Minister, but
to a Leviticall Officer; which was to avoid the ambiguity, and the danger of
confounding and mixing Law and Gospel, as some Christian Pharisees even then
desired to do. For when the Leviticall Priesthood was abolished and abandoned,
the next ages and ancient Fathers boldly call the Ministers of the Gospel,
(...), Sacerdotes, proper Priests. But seeing our word, Priest, is not derived
from (...), but from the Apostles (...), or Justine Martyrs (...), there is
less reason we should leave a rational etymology, for a reason-lesse fancy,
or be ashamed of the Title, when we must discharge the Office.

Secondly, The Scripturist will 2
circumcise and confine this knowledge to the written Canon only; all other
learning is Pagane, profane, unfanctified: but their ptojects return upon
their heads. 1. They would banish profane and lewd manners; and what sooner
way, then by pulling down Universities, and setting up illiterate teachers, to
bring in ignorance, the mother of profanesse and Atheism? 2. They would have
the pure word preached. And what better means, then by comparing Translations,
and consulting antiquity, to expound the sense and divide the Word aright?
Which cannot be done well without the whole Mass of real knowledge. But I
doubt, there is a loathing in them of what they never knew, and it is not their
piety but idleness, to condemn all other Authors: and the applauding of this
has a farther reach in some of their Abettors; the less learning, the less
stipend; and such trifling speakers will accept a tithe of tithes. For in this
we agree with them, and shake hands, that the sacred Word must be the Basis,
the predominant element, the principal ingredient in all teaching: the divine
Scripture must be the bracelet and frontlet of a Priest, in his hand and in
his head, this must close his eyes at night, and awake his thoughts in the
morning; that he may be eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures, like Apollos,
Act. 18. 24. And repeat as much verbatim, if possible, as blind John the
Egyptian could in Eusebius History, lib. 8. cap. 22. Yet to spoil the
Egyptians of their ornaments, and dress up the Tabernacle: to shave and pare
the captive woman, and then espouse her: to brandish Goliah's sword against the
Giant himself, was always thought lawful and laudable.

Thirdly, The Romanist will impropriate 3.
and restrain this text to the infallibility of their sole Bishop. His salt of
manners may be infatuated, but his light of doctrine cannot be obscured. His
feet may slip, but his lips cannot err. What, a man, and infallible? Yes,
says the Canonist, pronouncing in his chair. Why what virtue does his chair
add to his knowledge? Yes, says Bellarmine, For now Gods providence attends
that he shall not be rash or deceiving. A bold Fancy, to arrogate more to
their Pope, Then Moses in his Chair, or any Prophet, Then Saint Peter his
predecessor, or Christ himself upon the earth did ever challenge, namely, To be
believed upon his bare word: And a great Fondness, To transubstantiate A
common Admonition into a particular prophecy; A Priest in general into their
Roman Prelate; and a Manifest precept, as Ribera confesses, into a promise of
infallible knowledge, whereas this Injunction is too often, and easily broken,
as the next Verse shows. But just as the Jewish Synagogue vaunted, The Law
shall not perish from the Priest, Ier. 18. 18. when they resolved in the same
Verse, Not to give heed to any of Gods words: So the flattering Canonists and
Parasites then cried up most the Popes unerring judgment, when they did least
search the Scriptures, and most abuse the Christian World with new-coin'd
Articles.

Fourthly, But my doctrine suffers 4
more by Practice, then Opinion: When Sacerdotall ignorance ascends the
Cathedral Pulpit; And becomes a great dishonor to the God of Knowledge, A
Soul-murder to the hunger-starved children, Lament. 4. 4. And a curse to their
own labors; Toyling all night, in ignorance; and taking nothing, as it was,
Luke 5. 5. Nothing indeed, unless the wages of Balaam, of whom the Jews speak
in a Byword The Camel coveting Horns, lost his Ears; And Balaam loving
Hire, of an Open-eyed Seer, Number. 24. 3. becomes a false South-sayer, Ios. 13.
22. So these Mercenary Levites (for commonly slothful ignorance is joined with
busy worldliness) seeking themselves most and outward ornaments, do most
lose themselves and their native indowments. In this case, you may hear the
Lord complaining; My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; And then see
the Priest degraded, when the people was not instructed, As Crates struck the
Master for the Schooleboyes error: Because thou have rejected knowledge, I
will also reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to me, Hos. 4. 6. In this
case, The Prophets turn Satyrists, Isai. 29. 56. Ier. 23. Ezech. 13. Hos. 9.
Mich. 3. Zech. 11. Mal. 2. calling them, Blind Seers, Drow sie Watchmen; Dumb
Dogs, of no use to warn the Flock, or fright the Wolf; Clouds without
rain, hiding the Sunbeams and distilling no showers; Cisterns without water,
deceiving the thirsty passenger; Not stars leading unto Christ, but wandering
Comets and Ignes Fatui; Blind Leaders of the Blind; loving Saint Peter's, Kill
and eat, But not Saint Peter's, Feed my Flock; Aurei calices, Lignei Sacerdotes,
as Bishop Boniface complained, De Consecrat. did. 1. c. 44. Wooden Priests
and Church-Idols: To whom the Vision is a Book sealed, and must shamefully
confess, Isai. 29. 12. I am not learned; Or Zech. 13. 5. I am no Prophet, I am
an Husbandman; Or Amos 7. 14. I was no Prophet, nor Prophets son, but an
Herdman: So presuming to sit in Moses chair, before they sit at Gamaliels
feet, they make up a dangerous contradiction in adjecto, Doctor indoctus, An
untaught Teacher.

But some will say we live in knowing Ob.
times, and ( Pygmaei in turribus eorum, as the vulgar reads it, Eze. 27 11.)
though we are Pygmies in study and industry, yet exalted upon the ancient
Towers of Learning, by their help, we see farther then all foregoing ages;
and we laugh at the dunsery of old Monks and Friars: Graecum est, non potest
legi, bonus Grammaticus, malus Haereticus; when been con. been can. been le.
and the Latin of a neck-verse was sufficient for a Clearke. Indeed to Sol.
speak comparatively, those middle times were more infested with deaf and
dumb Spirits; Our age with lame feet and withered hands; they were
Noctambulones, sleep-walkers, who did move and go without sense and feeling;
we are Apoplecticks, who have wit and memory without action and motion, and
have more need of Devotion then Instruction, of practice then precepts, of
Discipline then Doctrine. Aut si quicquid in buccam venerit effutire, bullatis
nugis intumescere, facetiis aut mutuis convitiis plebem oblectare, longis
ambagibus and magno conatu nihil dicere-aut docere; adeo ut stultitia
praedicationis, 1. Cor. 1. jam transeat instultitiam Praedicantium; If this be
that type of doctrine, Romans 6. 17. and that Necessity of preaching, 1. Cor. 9.
16. 2. Tim. 4. 2. so urged by Saint Paul: Then, I confess, many may pass for
great Teachers, and boast themselves against all antiquity. But if by the least
homogeneous parcel I may guess at the whole bulk of good literature, and
judge of others wants by my own: while we consider either the great
difficulties of a direct and solid expounding the Canon against Atheist, Jew,
Heretic, and Libertine: or consider the many present dissentions and
controversies among Christians, which must needs be fathered upon Error, and
Error upon Ignorance: Or look up upon the two famous patterns of Jewish and
Christian Divines, viz. Moses learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and
Saint Paul wise in all the learning of the Grecians: a great Linguist, and a
good Artist: Or look down upon the voluminous books* of the Jesuits
Society, and the double harvest of Dutch Writers: Or regard the direction of
our late Sovereigne sent to the University; and both the counsel and exemplar
of our learned Prelates, for studying of Ecclesiastical Histories, Councels,
Fathers, Canon Law, Schoolmen, and public Liturgies: we may I fear, almost
turn Scepticks, and say we* know nothing, or only know this, that we know
nothing, or fall into Saint Paul's outcry, (...), And who is suffieient for
these things? For shall the benefit of Printing be revealed, and shall the
growth of Learning be decayed? Shall Colleges and Libraries increase, and
shall Knowledge decrease? Shall our studious Knighthood and Gentry flourish and
fructify in all kind of Science, and shall Aarons Bod only wither? Shall we
have so many encouragements from our Prince and Bishops, and shall we
confiscate all by an affected ignorance in teaching? So I pass from his Concio
ad Clerum, to his Homily ad populum: when the Priest is thoroughly qualified,
he may be safely consulted; And they should seek the Law at his mouth.

The peoples general duty is comprised 2.
in three terms. First, How? They should seek. Secondly, What? The Law.
Thirdly, Where? At the Priests mouth.

First, they should seek it; not lazy in their house, not drowsy in Gods
house; but with earnest desire and outward diligence they should search it and
pursue after it. They must not only learn the principal precepts of the Law,
for the Israelite was also bound to catechize his Family at home: nor only come
to the public lection of it in their solemn Assemblies; for (as some think)
Synagogues began to be erected before the second Temple: But they must
continually inquire of it in all doubtful cases of private actions with
customary carfulness and pious alacrity. As Ahab and Obadiah parted the Land,
to search for grass and water in the great drought, 1. King. 18. As Ismael lay
gasping for drink, Genesis 21. As the young children cry for bread, Lament. 4. 4.
So they should seek it with the Samaritan woman, Sir, Give us this water, John
4. 15. And with the Jewish people, Lord, evermore, give us this bread, Ioh. 6.
34. Rejoicing in themselves; I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into
the house of the Lord, Psalm. 122. exciting others; Come and let us go up to the
Mountain of the Lord, Isai. 2. Lest for their negligence and curiosity,
hunting more after the Man, then the Law; God send not a famine of bread, nor a
thirst for water, but of hearing the Word of the Lord, and they wander from Sea
to Sea, and take up voluntary pilgrimages to seek the Word, and shall not find
it, Am. 8. For as Pope Gregory wrote to our King Ethelbert, How shall God hear
the Priest praying to him for you, if ye will not hear him speaking from God
to you?

Secondly, They should seek the 2.
Law. By the Law is directly understood, The Codex of all Mosaic all Ordinances
contained in the Pentateuch; but largely taken, the whole Word of God, as the
rule of well and happy living, or all divine Truth necessary for man's
salvation. The Priest must have universal knowledge, but the people must seek
substantial law: the Orb of his comprehension may be larger then the Sphere
of their capacity. The Law: not Cobweb subtleties, not pleasing super
fluities, not scrupulous fancies; but the necessary rules of holiness and
righteousness: And that awful Doctrine, which was once proclaimed to the World
from the top of Sinai with blackness and tempest, and the sound of a trumpet,
and thunders and lightnings of Him,

-- Cujus excussum manu Utraeque Phoebi sentiunt fulmen domus. That Law, which
should make both their ears, not itch, but tingle; and pierce between the
joints and marrow; while the Sword of the Spirit in the mouth of the Priest,
sacrifices the soul, and executes judgment upon the conscience by a secret
freeingor condemning them, in a model of Gods own Tribunal, and the last
Assizes.

Again, the Law, which he speaks, not which he makes, of which he is the
Lawyer, not the Lawgiver. One is our Rabbi and Master. Math. 23 And there is
but one Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to destroy, Iam. 4. 12. It is a
Depositum, entrusted to thee, not invented by thee: which thou have received,
not conceived: a matter not of wit, but doctrine: in which thou art not the
auhour but the keeper; as Vincentius Lirinensis runs upon it in descant.

Again, the Law; here admire the order and wisdom of divine Economy, God made
his will manifest by Apparitions and inspired Prophets until the Law was
given: Then as the written Word increased, Miracles and Visions decreased, and
at the Captivity Urim and Thummim ceased: and now our Malachi being to close up
the Prophets also, there remained only this sole office of the Priest to teach
the Law: Here then he tells the people what they must trust to* as it is, Isai.
8. To the Law and to the testimony; and plainly warnes them, Chap. 4. 4.
Remember the Law of Moses: For ye must look for no more Angels, Prophets,
Dreams, or Visions; till that great Prophet come, ushered by another Malachie,
John Baptist.

Thirdly, They should seek the Law 3
at his mouth: not at a Counselors mouth to undo their neighbors by
litigious suites; but at a Priests mouth to save their own souls by religious
duties. To consult the Divine before the Attorney, would end many unchristian
controversies; at least it would make us know orderly, what case and cause that
is which cannot be regulated by Scripture. It is no praise for the people, to
be (...); self-taught, as Saint Austine reports of Antony the Monk, lest they
truly use Saint Ieromes word, Nullum praevium sequens pessimum magistrum
memetipsum habeo, having no leading Instructor, I was to my self the worst
Schoolmaster: But he must be (...), taught of God, inwardly by his Spirit,
outwardly by his Priest. The Priests mouth is the Lords oracle, and the peoples
speaking Law: Os justi, fons vitae. Prove. 10. In public and private matters
their conscience must be directed by his sentence* and though Plutarch so much
discommend (...), a mouth without a lock or a door, to let out words, and
keep in secrets; yet this mouth is best, when it stands wide open to all the
Parish.

But these three Rivelets fall into one channel, and general doctrine; viz.
Lay persons with all readiness should be ruled by the Priest in matters of
Religion. They must not expect visions and heavenly voices, broach Dreams and
fained Prophecies; dream of new Inspirations and Enthusiasmes; or challenge
the prophetical spirit of interpretation. They may repeat and ruminate,
examine and apply; but not expound the text, much less add any new doctrine
in their Conclave or Consistory. Interrogate Sacerdotes legem, as the Lord
himself gives example, Hag. 2. 11. In a point of law put the case to the
Priest: else they keep but a conventicle without either Ephod or Levite, and in
stead of obeying the Lord in his Officer at the door of the Tabernacle, they
worship a private god Lar in their Halls and Parlours.

Again, as the Laity is here bound to depend on the Priest for the Law, so the
Priest is limited to answer by the Law; which strictly taken as the Law of
Moses, was national and temporary; but as it involved the Law of God,
expounded amply by the Prophets, finished completely by Christ, it is a rule
eternal and universal; no wisdom of Senators, no tradition of Romanists, no
inspiration of Anabaptists, no invention of men or Angels, being able to add
any point necessary to man's salvation. For it were presumption, to coin a new
doctrine since the Son of his bosom in these last times has revealed the
whole will of his Father; to look for better counsel, since the wisdom of
God has directed; to speak a new speech since the Word it self has declared;
to talk of late revelations, since the Messiah has sealed up Vision and
Prophecy: or to add one word afrer Him, who is Amen; or one letter after him,
who is Omega. It remains then, that the Priest with solid knowledge
immediately teach the divine Law; and that the people with humble piety
immediately consult the Divine Officer, who is sequester dei and hominum, says
Saint Jerome, their mouth to God, and Gods mouth to them: that so the sacred
Scripture may be clearly expounded, Uniformity maintained, Schism and Heresy
banished, Devotion increased, Discipline restored, the people edified, the
Priest honored, Gods Law magnified, and God himself glorified.

Here I am to pass like Jonathan, Use.
between two sharp Rocks, Bozez, and Seneh, rightly to bound out, the Priests
authority and the peoples spiritual obedience: for there has been ebbng and
flowing, and a mutual incrochment. First, the Romanist will yield to his
Prelate absolute submission of conscience, without examination or appeal.
Secondly, the Anti-romanist will obey his Pastor no further then he speaks
apparent Word of God. Thus too servile or too saucy, they will be either his
fellow or his slave: between these two extremes, Truth is the mean
proportional. For it were senseless to conceive, that by this Ecclesiastical
Ordinance, either God should depart from any original Authority, or his Word
should lose any Canonical dignity; or that a prime power authentical were
settled in the Prelate: For (to omit usual Reasons) this were to accuse God of
unsufficient revelation, to make the Canon variable and subordinate, to exalt a
man above divine Law to the danger of an Oecumenicall defection. Again, it
were as senseless and more contradicting my text to maintain that the people
may disobey the Prelate in spiritual matters, except they plainly know them to
be true; since their knowledge is derived by the Priesthood, as the only
ordinary means; to which they are bound, except they plainly know the
contrary; And the Priest contradict himself or the fundamental points of the
Law. If himself might directly bind the Conscience by his rules, why is
knowledge and Gods Law here mentioned to direct him? If they may expound and
judge of the Law, why are they sent to his Mouth, and not to the Book it
self; and so by a more compendious and infallible way, they might have wanted
a Priesthood? If the Priest shall be obeyed only upon express warrant of Law
already known, he is not their Teacher but Remembrancer, they obey not the
person but the Law or their own judgment; whereas this Prophet binds them to
commend the whole regiment of their souls in public and private, to their
living law and Gods lawful Deputy.

For that the same intensive and conscionable obedience is not due to the
Ecclesiastical as well as to the Civil Magistrate; and to the Evangelicall as
well as to the Leviticall Priest seems very improbable: Let every Soul be
subject unto the higher powers. Romans 13. 1. And Obey them that have the rule
over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls. Hebr. 13. 17.
They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, 1. Sam. 8. 7. He that
hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me, Luke 10. 16.
The man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the Priest or
unto the Judge, even that man shall die, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. And every soul which
will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people, Acts 3.
23. Whereas now proud Libertines have turned Ghostly Father into Fellowspeaker;
and the body of ancient Discipline is changed like Sibyll, or echo into a mere
voice; and the profane vulgar, if a shoo leak, or a wall crack, or an Ague
shake, know what trade to resort unto: but let the conscience shake with doubt
before the fact, and quake for fear after the fact; let the soul be mortally
sick for want of evacuatio^; let a sinful leprosy require daily direction, and
our Savior to maintain Sacerdotall authority bid them, Go show your selves to
the Priests, Luke 17. 14. Yet they will venture their lives, their eternal
lives, and die in their sins; and we may burn all the Casuists, as having no
use of that sovereign Divinity. Dearly beloved, we are fallen into happy
times, when nothing does trouble the conscience of men, or men make conscience
of nothing, which is most to be feared. Thus having vilified the power of
Priesthood and Christ's Episcopal Crosier (as his regal Scepter) in the laws
Divine and Ecclesiastical, in the Sacraments and Sacramentals, as
Confirmation, Confession, Penance, Orders, Extreme Visitation, and particular
Absolution: We then fondly wonder at the profaneness of the times, and marvel
that preaching does no more good; as if the Flock could be fed, cured, and
governed only by the Shepherds Whistle. The hearer can easily contemn the
power of the Pulpit, and divert what is thrown at that distance: For if we
teach with authority, it is proud and stately: if reprehend sharply, it is
spleen and malice: if instruct meekly, it is not powerful: if admonish
lovingly, why not others? If they like the man indeed, they give him leave to
say what he list, and take leave to do what they list; but if they like not
the man, what they understand they despise; what they understand not, they
censure; And with the Donatists in Saint Austine, quod volumus, sanctum est; It
is not holy doctrine till they approve it.

The two Duties thus severally considered, are again naturally concorporated,
and so afford us many points and questions incident to the Times, and
pertinent to my Text. As, whether the Priest or Clergy may err in doctrine,
and how this may be avoided? Whether Prelates according to the Law may make
Orders binding the Conscience? Whether Clergymen may not meddle in Civil
Justice, if the Law here contains the Judicial part, as well as the
Ceremonial? Whether reading of the Law be not preaching; and whether
preaching, (...), be not a public declaring of Gods will by persons
authorized in due time and place, either verbatim, or paraphrastically, or at
the most by way of explication and application directly? Not but that other
discourses of Scripture may serve for the stall, or the deske, on some
extraordinary Assemblies. What is that eternal Law, without knowledge of which
none can be saved? Whether the Law of Moses is abolished, or established, or
partly altered, and how far by Christ? Whether Christ has not delegated as
much spiritual authority to the Evangelicall, as Moses did to the Aaronicall
Priesthood? Then by deduction, whether the English Church by her Constitutions
has not sufficiently provided for the salvation of every Parish, and
consequently of every person in the Parish? That so the envy of preeminence in
Priest and Parishioner; The curiosity and partiality of hearing the Word; The
fancy of wanting the means of Grace; The disturbance of settled Christians;
The giddiness of unsettled Sectaries; The discouraging conceit of an
impossibility in common people, ofever fully knowing the truth and their
duties, may be taken away: and obedient livers only counted religious
professors. But I dare not look upon these Controversies: I only observe,
there must be in GODS Church, an order of Priest and people, of Clergy and
Laity, of teaching and hearing, for the perpetuating of Religion, for the
congregating of the Saints, and finishing the Kingdom of Grace: but this point
also I dare not prosecute, for the time would fail me; though a doctrine most
excellent, both in the story and the uses. So I pass from the two Duties, to
his persuasive Reason, wrapped up in a short description of the Priest, For he
is the Messenger of the LORD of Hosts.

I but, He is the Angel, rather 3.
says the Hebrew; and so say, the ancient Greek and Latin, R. Solomon,
Junius, Luther, and the Spanish, and he alludes to his own name, Malachy, as
Saint Hierome thinks: At least, he is the Ambassador, as some modern
Translations: But our English runs low and flat. For though the word, Malac,
may largely signify all, yet to speak fitly, a private man sends Messengers,
a Prince Ambassadors, the Messiah Apostles, and the Lord of Heaven Angels.
Gods Nuntioes are Angels, either celestial, as Gabriel, Luke 1. 26. Or
terrestrial, and then either extraordinary Prophets, as John Baptist, Mal. 3.
1. Or usually and ordinary, as the Priest here. Neither is this testimony
denied him in either Testament: An Angel came up from Gilgal, Judge. 2. 1. that
is, Phineas the Priest, say the Jews: say not before the Angel, Eccles. 5. 6.
that is, the judging High Priest, say Expositors: A woman must be covered in
the Church 1. Cor. 11. 10. Because of the Angels, that is, the teaching
Ministers say Beza and Drusius: And the Angels of the seven Churches, Revel. 1.
20. are Bishops, say we: or Pastors and Superintendents, say they, who cannot
pronounce that Shibboleth. Dionysius de coelesti Hierarchia, cap. 12. will give
a Reason of this promiscuous naming: An Angel being the lowest order of the
Nine in the Church triumphant, and a Priest being the highest order of the
seven in the Church militant; They symbolize in nature, and have their names
counterchanged: To show the unity of one total Church in Heaven and Earth
under Christ: He is called a ministering spirit, this a spiritual Minister: He
a celestial Priest, this a terrestrial Angel: By a like Metathesis, as John
Baptist is called Malachi, Chap. 3. 17. To show the harmonious transition and
connection of both Testaments. They are those Angels upon Jacobs Ladder,
ascending by prayer, descending by doctrine: And as in old time, so still, the
glory of the Lord appears from between the Cherubims in the likeness of
winged Angels.

Or if they be Ambassadors and Messengers, they are sent from heaven by the
LORD of Hosts, about a peace between God the Father and sinful Mankind; and
then concerning a Marriage between his Son Christ, and the Church of Saints:
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we
pray yes in Christ's stead, beye reconciled to God, 2. Cor. 5. 20. For we are
jealous over you with godly jealousy, For we have espoused you to one
Husband, that we may present you a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle,
as a chaste Virgin to Christ, 2. Cor. 11. 2. Ephesians. 5. 27. But I come to the use
of this Description, for it reflects upon the duty of both parties.

First, it teaches the Priest humble 1.
Modesty in undertaking this message. To imitate rather Moses, I am slow of
speech, or Jeremy, I am a child, I cannot speak: Then forward Ahimaaz, Let me
run I pray. To such hasty Novices, John Pecham sometime Archbishop of
Canterbury, applies that of David, 2. Sam. 10. 5. Manete in Jericho donec
crescat barba vestra: And others most fitly that of our Savior, Luke 24. 49.
Sedete in Jerusalem, quoadusque induamini virtute ex alto. For what purity?
what gravity? what science? what prudence? what composed and prepared elocution
may be justly expected of an Angel? And how shall they preach, except they be
sent? Romans 10. sent, first by God secretly exciting them, then by the Church
lawfully ordaining them, then by their conscience plainly assuring them.

Secondly, it teaches him careful 2.
fidelity in reporting this message. The Egyptians did signify a holy Scribe
by the Hieroglyphicke of a Sive; and we know Him, whose Fan is in his hand, to
be the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls: both are separating instruments,
and denote that spiritual discretion, which is the soul of all judgment.
That he neither trust to his own wit or invention too boldly, nor rely upon
his memory, or nimble tongue too suddenly, nor vent himself too hastily; lest
he speak his own rude words, and not the Lords message. Here the word at my
mouth, and then give them warning from me. Is the tenor of Gods Commission,
Ezech. 3. 17. That he neither augment, nor diminish, nor corrupt, nor
confound, nor misplace, the substantial parts of divine Revelation: But can
truly say with the Prophets, Hear ye the Word of the Lord; and with S. Paul,
I received of the Lord, what I delivered unto you. For the Angels are thought
to speak no more on earth, then what they heard in Heaven: and the same is well
expressed by Homer, when he makes the Angels dispatched from his Gods, to
receive and to declare the same things by the same lines: Nor is this a
needless Tautologie, but a most observant veracitie.

Thirdly, it teaches him bold 3.
magnanimity in discharging this message. I know not how to imbreathe better
courage into a Priest then by representing unto him the solemnity of his
Ordination. When the Bishop laid his hands upon thy Head; Remember, thou art
set apart and separated from all common and profane businesses. When thou
heardest, Receive the Holy Ghost; remember, thou art elevated above this wicked
world, and endued with a heavenly power. When thou heardest, Whose sins thou
do forgive, they are forgiven; O then remember, Thou retain not thy own sins,
who art to loose the sins of others. When thou tookest the Bible, with
authority to preach the Word, and to minister the holy Sacraments; remember
thy Commission was sealed in the Court of Heaven, and thou dispatched a
messenger from the Lord of Hosts. Be not then flattered or terrified to please
the sinful multitude, and to abuse thy Masters trust. Keep thy Angelical
state, retain the habit and language of thy heavenly City, conform not thy
self to their base vices, and vicious customs.

-- Mitte ostia, Caesar, Mitte, sed in magna legatum quaere popina: If they
hate thee for this Nonconformity and strangeness, know they hated God and
Christ first: If ye were of the World, the World would love his own, as our
Savior pronounces upon his own experience: But now ye are not of this World,
but ye descend like Angels and heavenly Legates into this lower World; and
returning home, ye must expect a reward of your Master sending, not of those
foreign and mundane Nations to whom ye are sent: For ye are the messengers
of the Lord of Hosts.

Lastly, this description looks also back upon the people, as our Savior did
upon Peter: And teaches them, First spiritual obedience. 1.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, Heb. 13. If
sovereign Magistrates be Gods, I have said, ye are gods: I am sure,
consecrated Priests may be counted Angels: And there is a majesticall and more
then humane splendour in both Offices, and a dutiful submission due to the
dictates of both persons. Saint Paul's proviso had a better ground, then some
may at the first imagine; to reject an Angel from Heaven preaching against his
Gospel, Galat. 1. For if they will not believe one Angel, why should they
believe another? If not a Paul, why a Gabriel? Have thou then any matter of
faith to be resolved, any case of conscience to be cleared, any temptation to
be disabled, any suite in heaven to be ended, any petition to Christ to be
preferred, any soulebusinesse? Why, Levies curse is become the peoples
blessing, Divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, Genes. 49. God has
his Visores and Legier-ambassadours in every Parish: Repair to thy lawful
Pastor; what he binds and looses with the golden Zone of Christ, what he
shuts and opens with the key of David, shall be ratified in Heaven.

Secondly, it teaches them respectfull 2.
reverence, Let the Presbyters that rule well be counted worthy of double
honor, 1. Tim. 5. 17. The Lord could as easily have sent you true Angels, but
he was pleased in mercy to teach men by men: Yet that his Ministers should not
lose any due respect, the Angels themselves are joined in commission, and
attend upon our divine Liturgy. When Christ the Angel of the Covenant began
to preach, the Angels came and played the Deacons, Math. 4. Send men to Ioppa,
and call for Simon, says an Angel to Cornelius Acts 10. As preferring Saint
Peter before himself in this business of conversion. And the Angel
confesses, that he was but a fellow servants with the Ministers of the Gospel,
Revelat. 22. And indeed the word Evangelist, supposes him to be a good Angel.
Let then the majesty of his Master, excuse the defects of his person; let the
Law and Message which he brings, bear out the blemishes of his nature: And
let both persuade thee, to give him a loving and hearty welcome. If Abraham
and Lot had known them to be Angels in the shape of men, they would (if
possible) have given lower obeisance, and higher titles, Genesis 18. and 19.
Achilles was not so proud and furious, but he would with courtesy salute these
Messengers in the very style of our Prophet, (...). Nor were the Galatians so
rude and barbarous, though so taxed by Saint Jerome; but they received the
Apostle Saint Paul, as an Angel of God, Nay, even as Christ Jesus himself.
Galat. 4. 14.

Thirdly, It teaches them liberal 3.
beneficence. Beside their appointed portions by the Laws of God and Man; If
we did truly love the sender, how kindly would we entertertain his servants?
How Michah rejoices, when he had got a Levite into his house, Judge. 17. How
the old man of Gibeah bestirres himself, to lodge and feast a Levite, Judge. 19.
Take heed to thy self, that thou forsake not the Levite, as long as thou
live, Deuteronomy. 12. 19. Much more take heed, that thou Fear the Lord, and honor
the Priest, Ecclus 7. 31. But, O how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet
of Evangelicall Messengers, cries the true Church: If their feet be so
beautiful, how glorious are their bodies dressed up in Sacerdotall ornaments?
Let then profane Edomites, and Sacrilegious Hypocrites scoff at their name,
person, office, and attire; Let them send Gods Messengers upon their base
errands, place them below their Servingmen, esteem them below their Parasites;
nay, deride and abuse, persecute and destroy them for their message: But let
them know, if the injury of Legates has been so deeply and bloudily revenged;
as the law of Nations, and the Records of History do fully testify: If foolish
Hanun lost his Crown, and the Ammonites their lives for misusing David's
servants, 2. Sam. 10. If the King in the Parable sent forth his Armies, and
destroyed them, who slew his Ministers inviting to the Marriage of his Son,
Matthew. 22. Then hear a tumultuous noise of the Kingdoms of Nations gathered
together: The Lord of Hosts mustereth the host of the battle, Esa. 13. And
will revenge the great indignities done to many of his Messengers: Especially
when they bring you good tidings of great joy, a Gospel of peace, a covenant
of grace, a promise of everlasting salvation.

In one word, let the Priest be as an Angel of God in knowing good and evil:
Let the people piously seek the Law of him, as an Angel sent from God: So
shall both Priest and people become (...), like the Angels in purity of
holiness, in perfection of happiness, in patheticall singing that Trisagium,
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath; Heaven and Earth are full of the majesty
of thy Glory; to whom the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be all power
and praise Amen.

I submit all to the judgment of my Ecclesiastical Superiors.

Aut aberrantem dirige,
Aut dirigentem sequere.
The end.

