A supplication of the poor Commons.

Proverbs. xxi. Chapter.v.13 Who so stops his ear at the criynge of the
poor, he shall cry him self, and shall not be heard. Whereunto is added the
Supplication of Beggars.

To the most victorious prynte Henry the. viii. by the grace of God ^yng of
England, France, and Ireland, defender of the Faith, and supreme head of the
Church of England, and Ireland, immediately next unto God: his humble and most
faithful subjects of the realm of England wysh life everlasting.
PItuously complains the pore commons of this your majesty's realm greatly
lamentyng their own mise rabble poverty, and yet much more the most
lamentable and more the^ wretched estate of their children and posteri^e. Whose
myserie forsene and thoroughly consideredis and ought of very nature, to be more
do: lorous and sorrowful unto cuerye natural heart the^ that which we our selves
feale and sustain. Not many years ^fore, your high nes poor subjects the
lame, and impotente creatures of this realm, presented your high nes with a
piteful and lamentable complaint imputyng the head and chief cause of their
penury and lack of relief, unto the great and infinite nombre of valiant and
sturdy beggars, which had by their subtle and crafty demaner in begging,
gotten into their hands more then the third part of the yearly reutnewse and
possessions of this your highness realm. Where upon (as it seemed) your high nes
(seeking a redress and reformation of this great and intolerable enormitie:
as a merciful father over this your natural coun try, moved with pity toward
the misera ble and pitiful nombre of blind, lame, lazar and other the impotent
creatures of this your realm) has with most ernest diligence, sup planted,
and as it were weeded out a great number of valiant and sturdye Monckes.
Friars, Chanons, Heremites, and Nuns Which disguised ypocrites, under the
name of the contempt of this world, wallowed in the sea in the worlds wealth.
And to the en ^ent your loving and obedient subjects might the better be able
to releue the neadie and impo tent creatures, you took from them the great
nu^bre of gilted beggars, whose holiness was so fast roted in the hertes of us
your pore co^ mons: through the false dilusio^s of the foresaid sturdy and
valiant beggars, that we would not stick to go an. C. miles on our bare fete to
seek one of them that we might not only bestow our alms upon them, but also do
the^ reverence and honor none other wise then if they had been very Gods. Yea,
when your hyghnes had ordained that al these foresaid beggars should be utterly
abolished, never to deceive us of our alms any more, we like me^ always
brought up in folish supersticio^ of these false Phariseis and flateryng
Hypocrites: knew not the obedience that we owe to you our natural and most
rightful prince but in contine^t fell in an uproar criyng. Our holy days,
Abbayes, and Pylgrimages. None oher wise, than the Ephesians did against the
elect vessel of God sancte Paul, when Act. 17. 24. ^sa. 66. 1.
he said, they are not Gods, which be made with hands, and as the Iewse did
against holy Steven when he said that God dwells not in an house made with
man's hand. A^t. 7. 48.
Yea, had not God wrought on your part, in apeasing that sturdy thronge: this
realms had even then, ben like to have been utterly decayed. For even those
whom your highness had called together to assiste you in that dangerous time,
were (for the most part) so bente to the opinion of the other, that many of
them would not stike to say. When we shall come to the battle: we know what
we have to do. But now (the lord be thanked therefore) that your highness has
finished that your godly purpose, without bloudshede of your poor commones,
and that the word of god has been so set forth and taught by your co^mandent,
that every man that lusts may therein learn his duitie and office: we are
fully persuaded, that all such as resist the pours, whom God has ordained
and appointed to rule and govern the multitude of this world, do not resyste
man, but Ro^. 13. 2.
God. Be you certain therefore (most graciouse prince) that we (your most
obedient subjects, walkyng in the fear of the Lord, will not from hense forth
(so long as the knowledge of gods word shall reign amongeste us) attempt any
such so diuilishe enterprise, as to rebel against your highness our most
natural sovereign and leage lord, either for our forfathers popyshe
tradicions, or other our own fantastical dreams, not withsta^dynge that the
remenaunt of the sturdy beggars (not yet weaded out) do daily in their
writings, counsels and preachynges: stere us thereunto. For what mean they in
their Sermons when they lament the great discord and miserable estate of this
our time, wishynge that all thing were now as it was. xx. years since: but
that they would have a Pope, pardons, lightyng of candels to Images, knockyng
and knelyng to them with runnyng hither and thither on pilgremage? Besides the
infinite number of purgatory horseleches, on who^ the vengeance of God is so
manifestly declared for their beastly buggery: that the very places where they
dwelt, are not thought worthy to be thr dwellinges of me^, but the ca^es of
bruit bestes and veuemous worms. They tell us what vice, uncharitableness,
lack of mercy diuercitie of opinions and other like enormites, have reigned
ever sense men had the Scripture in English. And what is this other, then to
cause men's conscience to abhor the same, as the only cause and original of
all this? They say that it suffices (...) lay man, to believe as they teach,
and not to meddle with the enterpretatio^ of the Scrip tures. And what means
that, but that they would have us so blind again as we were when we would have
fought against our^ natural Prince, for the mayntenaunce of their popyshe
traditions and purgatory patrimony? They cannot abide this name, the word of
God: but they would have the scripture called the commandment of God, and what
means this, but that they are the same enemies of God, whom that two edged
sword shall destroy? Finally, they have procured a law, that none shall so
hardy have the Scripture in his house, unless he may spend. x. pound by year.
And what means this, but that they would famysh the souls of the residue,
witholdyng their food from them. We appeal to your highness judgment in this
behalf, whither this law be indifferent or not. If none should be allowed me^t
in your highness house, but such as were clothed in velvet with chains of gold
about their necks, what servants would your majesty have shortly? what
steruelynges would your seru^untes be above all other? For no man within your
realm may refuse to do your grace service. Has God put immortal souls in
none other but in such as be possessioners of this world? Did ^t C^yst send
word to Ihon the Baptist that the pore received the Gospel? And the Mat. 11. 5.
Gospel that they shut up from us, was i^ not the writings of poor fysher
men and Mat. 4. 18-22
simple creatures, even taken for the dregs of the world? Were not the
setters furthe of it and the Prophets also persecuted, tor Heb: 11. 35-37
mented and slain? And why do these men disable them for readers of the
Scriptures, that are not endued with the possessions of this world? vndoutely
(most gracious souerayn) because they are the very same that shut up the
kingdom of God before men, they enter not them selves another suffer they them
to enter that would. They are like to Mat. 23. ^3. Luk 11. 52.
(...) curre Dog liyng in a cock of hay. For he will eat none of the heye
him self, neither suffer any other beast that comes to eat thereof. But some
will peradventure say they were not all sturdy beggars that were in the
Parliament when this law was stablished. For many of the^, and the most part
were seculer men. And not of such habilite that this law would permyt them to
have the Scripture in their houses: Wherefore, this law is in different, and
takes not the word of God from us, but we with our full consent have
committed it to them in the said law limytted. Where unto we answer, that if
we have given it over from us to the possessioners of this world, we may well
be lykened to the Gedarites Mark. v. Man. 5. 14-17. Man (...). 34.
which desired Christ to depart from they^ country. And the lurking night
birds which cannot abide the bryghte beams of the So^. We may boldly affirm
that what man soever does wyttyngly and willingly forsake the knowledge of the
lively word of God (the food of our solles, and light of our footesteppes,)
is none of the flock of Christ Forasmuch as his sheep hear his voice, and
(...). 10. 27.
rejoice in the same. Did they that took their names of any Philosopher, shut
up they; masters doctrine from them self? Did they not think them selves
unworthy to be na med after their masters, unless they knew their precepts
and rules? Did not the Mo^ kes, Friars, and other the supersticious religious:
employe all they* study to know their rules and statutes? Do not the
Coelginers at this day set the book of their statutes at liberty, streightlye
commaundyng each fellow under pain of punishemente to employ them, to have the
through knowledge of the same? And should we glory to be the flock of Christ,
and to be called of him Christians, when we do willyngly and wit tyngly exclude
our self from the knowledge of the rule which he has commanded us to follow
on pain of dampnation of our souls? Would your hyghnes think that man were
willing to do your commandment, that would not diligently read over your
highness letters sentfrom you to certify him of your will and pleasure in his
office? And what other thing is the whole Scripture then the declarion of the
will o^ God? Were it lykely therefore, that we exclu dyng our selves from the
knowledge thereof should be willing to do his will? If we have therefore rejected
this merciful profer of our most merciful father when he used your hyghnes,
as his instrumente, to publyshe and set forth his most lyuelycke word,
wherein is declared the inestimable love that ^e bear toward us, in that he
gave his ^oh. 3. 16:
only son to be an acceptable sacrifice for our sins: and the unspeakable
mercy which caused him to accept us as just even for his sons sake without
our works or deseruinges: let us now humbly fall down prostrate before his
majesty, with perfect repentance of this the contempt of his mer cifull
gyf^e. Most humbly besekinge him of his infinyte goodness, tenderly to behold
the doloures of our hertes, for that we neg lected so merciful a profere. And
to forget our obstinacy there in, geuynge your hyghnes such desire of our
salvation, that you will as favorably ^ore unto us the scripture in our
english tongue as you did at the first translation thereof set it abroad. Let not
the adversaries take occasion to say the By ble was of a traitors settinge
forth and not of your hyghnes own doing. For so they report, that Thomas
Cromwell late Thomas Cromwell.
earl of Esse^ was the ^hyfe doer, and not ^oure hyghnes, but as led by him.
All this they do to withdraw the minds of us (your hyghnesses subjects) from
the readyng and study thereof. Which thing does easily appear by the diligence
they show in setting forth and execution of your hyghnes proclamatio^s and
injunctions consernyng the same. For when your highness gave commandment that
they should se that there were in every parysh Church within this your
highness realm, one Bible at the least set at liberty, so that every man might
freely come to it, and read therein* such things as should be for his
consolation: many of this wicked generation, as well preystes as other their
faithful adherentes, wuld pluch it other into the Quyre, ^ther else into some
Pue where pore men durst not presume to come. Yea, there is no small number of
chur ches that has no Bible at all. And yet not suffised with the withholdyng
of it from the pore of their own parishes, they never ^ested till they had a
commandment from your highness, that no man, of what degree so ever he were,
should read the Bible in the time of Gods service (as they call it) a^ though
the hearing of their Latin lies and ^oniuryng of water and salt were rather
the service of God, the^ the study of his most holy word, the only food of
our souls, and light of our footsteps: without whi che no man can walk
vpryghtly in perfect life worthy our name and profession. This was their
diligence insettynge forth the Bible at your highness commandment But when
your highness had divised a pro clamation for the burning of certain
translations of the new testament, they were so bold to burn the whole
Bibles, because they were of those men's translations. And if your highness
would enquire of them who took the pains in translatinge the great bible
that your highness has authori sed we think they could not for very shame
deny but even against their wylles grant, that those poor men, whose pains
and great travail they have rewarded with fire and banishment, were the doers
there of. See, gratiouse prince, how they play bopipe with your highness
commandments sup pressinge in all that they dare the thing that your
highness has authorized, even as it were men that looked for a fair day,
which we trust in the Lord Jesus, they shall never see. As we herd say they
proffered your high nesse, that if it would please you to call in the bible
again (for as much as it was not faithfully translated in all parts) they would
over see it and with in. vii. years set it forth again. A wiles: we think they
have red the story of a certain man who being condemned to die proffered that if
he might have his life he would do his prince such a pleasure as never man
did, for he would within the space of. xiiii. years, teach him an ase to
dance, where upon he had his life (...) him upon condition that if he did not
per: form his promessed enterprise that then he should never the less suffer
death. Thy^ done he was demanded of one of his familiers, why he was so mad
to take upon him such an enterprise so far beyond all reason and
possibilytie. He answered, my friend, hold the content, I have wrought wysly,
for with in these. xiiii. years other the king, I, or the ass, shall be dead,
so that by this means I shall escape this reproachful and shamfull death: So
your byshopes (most victoriouse prince) if they might have gotten in the bible
for. vii. years they would have trusted that by that time, either, your highness
should have been dead, or the bible forgotten, or else they the^ selves out of
your highness reach so that you should not have had like power over the^ as you
have now. Well go to we trust ere the. vii. years be past God shall reua^e unto
your highness much more of their subtle imaginations then we are worthy to know
of Moreover, will your highness se how faithfully they did your commandment,
when you appointed two of them to over look the translation of the bible. They
said they had done your highness commandment therein, yea they set their names
there unto, but when they saw the world some what like to wrynge on the other
side they denied it, and said they never medeled therewith, causyng the Prynter
t^ take out their names which were erst set be fore the Bible to certify all
me^ that th^i had diligently perused it according as your high nes had
commanded. One other point of their diligence your highness may note in the
setting forth and vsyng of your hyghnes Primer both in Englysh and Latin. And
in the diligent readyng unto the people, the exhortation to prayer, which you
ordained and commanded to be read always before the Prossession in Englysh.
We thynk no man can blameles say, that ever he heard one of them read it twyse
over. Yea, when your highness was returned from your victory done at Bullyn:
they did what they could to have called it in again. In so much that they
caused all such parishes as they might command: to use their old Kyre
eleyson again. And yet to this day, they use on solemn feasts to follow
their old ordinary not withstandyng your highness commandment. But when they
katch any thing that sounds to the contrary, it shall not escape so we
warrant you. It shall be swynged in every pulpyt, with this is the kings
gracious will, and yet these heretics wylbe still doing in the Scriptures. A
shomaker, a cobbler, a tailor, a boy not yet. xx. years of age: shall not stycke
to reprove that a learned manne of. xl. years study shall affirm in the
declaration of Gods word. O how god ly were the people disposed, when they knew
nothing of the Scripture but as they were taught by profound clerks and well
learned men? The^ were there hospitals builded for the poor. Then were there
Coleges builded for the maintenau^ce of lernyng. Yea, if they durst they would
say, then were Abbayes and Chauntries founded for the realyfe of the pore
souls in the bitter payns of Purgato ry. Then were our purses filled with the
of ferynges of the devout people that used to seek the blessed Images, and
relickes of our savior Christ, and of his blessed mother Mary with the residue
of his saints. If your high nes would raise up but one Abbe, Chauntry, or
pilgremage, you should easily perceive which way they are bent. We dout not but
for these. vii. years following Maso^s occupation with other belongyng to
buyldyng would be the best handy crafts within this your royalme. We pray God
their subtle imaginations may always come to light before they preua^, to
the hindera^ce of Gods verity. And that it may please him always to assist
your highness in the defendyng and setting forth of the same, ^o his glory, and
the soul health of us your highness most faith full and obedient subjects. And
that you leave not of, till you have roted out al these sturdy beggars, that
the pore members of Christ may have that porsion to live upon, which was from
the beginnynge appointed for them. We mean the. x. part of every ma^s yerly in
^ease. For though, at the coming of Christ and long before these tenthes were
given t^ the Pristes of the law: yet was it not so from the beginnynge, for at
the first, be cause the world was not so replenished with people but that
every man was a great pos sessioner: it was thought good to take of the best of
their increase and to offer it to the living God in sacrifice, as it appears
by the story of Abel and ^ain. But when the people grew to so great a number
that every man could not have a sufficient porsion to live upon unless he
were able to labor and till the ground: Then was it provided that every
possessioner should set the tenth of his yearly increase, in the porche of
his house, that the lame, blind, sick, and dise^ sed, might be there releued.
This order continued till the time that Moses by the com maundement of God gave
a law to the Is raelites, and appointed that a certain kyn ^ed amongst the^,
that is: the Levites should be always their priests, and mynisters of the
Tabernacle, unto whom he appointed certain parts of every sacrifice, that
they might live thereby. For as yet there was no te^thes to be paid, for the^
they were in their journey from Egypt, which iorny continued full xl. years, but
after that they were once settled in the land of promise, and gathered the
fruytes of the ground, they thought good to give the tenthes of their increase
to the priests that ministered in the tabernacle that they might live there upon
according to the words of the prophet mal. ii^. Bring in eueri tenth (...). 3.
8. 10. 11.
into my barn that there may be meat in my house But the^ there was an other pro
uysion for the poor Leui. xxiii. For no man leu. 23. 22.
might lease, rake, or gleane his ground after he had gathered of his croppe.
No, they might not gather their grapes nor fruits twyse, but must leave the
latward fruit with the scateryng of their corn for the poor to gather that
they inyghte have some relyefe thereby, this order continued to the coming of
Christ. After whose coming, the christian sort had all things commune so that
no man knew of any increase, for as much as no man took any thing for his
own, Acts. iiii. But when the number of christians A^: 2. 44. 45. and 4: 32.
increased so much that they possessed hole cities, countries, and kingdoms:
it was thought good that every man should know his own to the intent that
such as other wise would have lived ydly should there by be provoked to
labor, as apeareth by the rule that saint Paul gave to the Cessa 2. The: 3.
10. (...).
lonians. ii. Cessaloni^. which was this: who so labors not let him not eat:
yet was there no tenthes paid to the ministers, for Paull wrytinge to the
Lorinthians. i. Lorin. ix. desires the^ to be good to such as labor in the
ministration of the Gospel, affirminge that it is but mete that such as serve
the altar should have a living the^ (...). 9. 13.
by, and that it were far vndesent to m^sell the ox that trauaylleth all the
day in 1. c^r 9. 9.
treadyng the corn out of the straw. Deutro. xxv. which thing he neded not
to have done, if the tenthes of each man's increase had as tha^ ben given to
the^, for that might have sufficed the^ well enough (unless they had been as
gredye as our ministres be, which be never satisfies) yet after this when
the christian religion was thoroughly stablyshed in many congregations, and many
men had labored over the scriptures, they thought good to provide for the
poor impotent creatures accordigne to the example of the ancient fathers of
the old law. And because they were persuaded that Christ offering up him
self upon the cross had ended all sacrifice. Hebre. x. so that the Heb: (...)
10.
ministers among the^ neded not to be pestered with any other thing the^
preaching, they agreed to add unto the preachers an other sort of ministers,
which might supply the office of holy Steue^ and the other which in the
primative church were appoin ted to distribute the goods of the congregation,
according as every man should stand in neade. Actu: vi. To these men they
Act* 6. 1. 2.
gave the tenthe of their yerlye increase, to the intent that they should
there upon minister all necessaries, as well to the preachers, as to the poor
impote^t members of the church.

But after that persequutio^ began to sease and the prechers of the word of
God lived in peace, and that the people were fully bente to learn and follow
the doctrine of Christ: they did by the preachers: as the I sraelites would
have done by Christ, when he had feed so many of them with so little bread.
John. vi. They made the^ their rulers thinking Ioh. 6. 5-10-14:
that those men which had brought^ the^ out of the darkness of error, and
instructed the^ in the true knowledge of God could best govern the pub^ke
weal. And would walk most vpryghtly in example of life, co^pellinge the
people there by, to embrace all godly and honest lyuinge, and to detest and
abhore the co^trari. This was their intent (most gracious prince) wha^ they
gave rule to the preachers of Gods truth and verite. And in very deed the
thing proved according to their expectation, for a season.

But alas, after the true shepherdes were departed out of this life: there
entered into the foulde most ravening woulfes, of who^ saint Paul gave us
warnyng wha^ he said I know for a certenty, that immediately after my departinge
from you: there shall enter in among you certain in sheppes clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolfes. Act. xx. 29.


The like thing did saint Peter forsee when he premonished the elders, that
they should not behave themselves toward the people, as me^ having dominion over
the^. 1 Pet^ ^3.
These hierlinges intended not to mainta^ (...) increase the spiritual treasure
of the congregation, but to fyl their own coffers with gold and vain
treasure, to bring the^ selves above Kings and Emperors, yea to be taken for
Gods vicars upon earth. And that they might the sooner bring this their
purpose to pass, they persuaded the people that it should be much more
convenient that they had the tenthes and patrimony of the church (as they call
it) the^ the deaco^s, who^ the people had elected there unto. And that it
should be more beseaming that the deacones were at their fyndinge, then that
they should be at the deacons findinge for they would keep hospitality for
the poor according as the institution of the Apostles was that they should,
which thing they could not do onles they had where withal to maintain it. By
these means were the peo ple sone persuaded to give unto the^ not only the
tenth but certain possessions also to thentent they might maintain the more
liberal hospitality for the relieve of the pore This done all their study was
to set them selves so high in the conscience of the peo ple that they should
take all their traditions to be of no less authority then the commandment
of God, to do this they could find none so ready a way as to name their
traditions the laws of the church. For if we believe that Christ is the head
of the church, and that he is God: then must we neades grant that the laws
of the church be gods laws. O devilish subtlety, more then serpentical?
what subtyl fouler could have divised a more subtyl train to bring the poor
simple birds into his net? Le^ tes if all the deuels in hell had been of their
counsel (as we think they were) they could not have concluded upon a more
subtle imagination. Now have they enough, what ne^ death the^ to seek any
further: now may they command us to build them goodly churches with high
steaples, and great belles to tyng our pence into their purses when our
friends be dead. Now may they make us believe that their masses be helpful
sacrifices both for the quick and the dead. Now must we believe that the popes
pardons do release us both from pain and fault, but Christ releaseth the fault
only. Now must we believe they can make of two creatures one, that is to say
conjure water and ^alte that it be made a medicine both for body and soul,
and of such force that it may be able to root out the deuell him self with all
his angels and ministers. Now must we believe that repentance auayl^th us not
onles we declare all our sins with the circumstaunce thereof to one of them,
and do such satisfaction as they shall appoint us to do. Now can we not deny
but that the outra ^iouse belowing of a sort as sodomiticall bulls, myngled
with the proud pipyng of organs: is the service of God, and worthy to be
preferred before the redyng and preching of Gods word. Now must we believe that
God will not hear our prayer onles we be in favor with some of the dead
saints which will be our advocate. Now must we believe that the making and
giiting of images, building of abayse, churches, chau^tri^s gyldes, hermitages,
and gyuinge of book, bell, ca^delsticke, basen, yower, crwetes, pax, chalyse,
corporate, vestime^tes, altar clothes curtens, hanginges, towels, torches,
tapurs, sheep, sensoures, pixese, coopes, cannebes, and runnyng on pilgrimage:
is more acceptable to God the^ the. vii. works of mercy. Now must we believe
that they ca^ not err, though they set up the blood of a ducke to be hono red
for the very blood of Christ, though they made the roode of kente to wagge
his yies, though they were baudes and fornicators with the holy whore of kent.
We may not think they ought to marye wives though we take the^ daily abusinge
other men's wy ues. We must not say that they are rauenynge Act. 20. 29
woulfes, but the true shepherdes of Christ, although we see the^ both bye and
sell the co^gregacions of Christ, and when they have them love for naught else
but what yearelye rentes may be clearlye r^ased thereof. Your hyghnes knows
right well what desire they have to fead the flock, for it is not yet many
years sense your highness in your high court and parliament, was by their
negligence constrained, to establishe a law, that under pain of a forfayte
they should preach in every of their paryshes four times in a year at the least, and that none should have more benefices then one, whereupon he should
be reasident. But here they put your highness in mind of all such chapelyns as
do service to your hyghnes, and to other your nobles of this your realm, be
sides other, certain graduates of the vniuer sities. Whereupon it was provided,
by the authorite of the said parliament, that every such chaplayn might have
many benifices and be non reside^ce to lie at the university or else where at
his pleasure so he were in any of your nobles se^uice. Oh gracious prince, here
are we your natural, and most obeisa^t leage people, constrained to forget
(with all humble subiec^ion we speak it) that we are of nature and by the
ordinance. of God your most bounden subjects, and to call to remembrance that
by our second birth we are your brothers and fellow servants (although in a
much inferior ministry) in the household of the lord our God. Most humble
beseking your highness to forget also in this point that you are our leage
lord and sovereign, taking our words as a toke^ of the fervent desire that we
(your most faithful subjects) have of yo^ soiles salvation. A^habe king of
Israel, wha^ he intended to make a viage and to take by force the country and
(...) tantes of Ramo^h Giliade, he caused hy^ prophets to the nombre of. LLLL.
fals^ prophets, to be brought before him that he might know by the^ whether
the lord wo^ prosper his journey or not. These false prophets standing in the
sight of the king, and being dmau^ded of him whether he sh^lde make
expeditio^ against Ramoth or not: an swered with one voice, make expeditio^,
the lord shall give it into the hands of the king iii. Reg. xxi^. In like manner
(most dread sovereign) your hyghnes and your most noble prodicessours have
alwais co^sulted a great no^bre of false prophets, which as Achabes prophets
did: prophesied unto you lies, wringyng and wrestynge the scriptures to sta
blishe your hyghnes in all such things as they perseyued you bent unto. And if
at any time any true Micheas have prophesied unto you the truth of Gods
word, one Sedechias or other boreth him on the che^ v. 24.
ke that he re^neth straight into the fire. So that hitherto they have led your
highness in this detestable error that you thyncke it lawful for you and your
nobles to reward those false flattering Babiloncall prophethes with tha^
portion which by the ordinance of God is dwe to the poor impote^t creatures
the lame, blind, lazer, and sore me^bres of Christ, we beseke you (most dear
sovereign) eue^ for the hope you have in the redemption by Christ: that you
call to rem^brau^ce that dreadful day wha^ your highness shall stand before
the judgment ^eat of God in no more reputation the^ one of those miserable
creatures which do now daily die in the streets for lack of their dwe porsi on
wherewith you and your nobles do reward those gnatonical elbo whangers your chap
laines. If their ministry be so necessary to your highness that you can not
lack them: yet let not the vnsasiable dogs devour, the bread that was
prepared for the children Mat. 15. 26.
let the^ be appointed lyuinges worthy the ministration. What reason is it that
a surueyer of bildinges or lands, an alckmist, or a goldsmith, should be
rewarded with be nefice upon benefice, which of very reason ought to be
committed to none other but such as through godly lerninge and co^uer sation
were able and would apply them selves to walk amydes their flock in all god ly
example and purity of life, how great a number is there, of them that under
the name of your chaplynes may dispend yerly by benefices, some one. L. some.
LL. some LLL. some. LLLL. some. LLLLL. yea, some. M. marks and more. It is a
comone saying among us your hyghnes pore commons: that one of your highness
chapplene, not many years since, used when he lusted to ride a broad for his
repast, to carry with him a scrowle, wherein were written the names of the
parishes whereof he was parson. ^s it fortuned, in his journey he aspied (...)
Church standing upon a fair hill, pleasauntly beset with groves and plain
feldes the goodly grene meadows liyng beneth by the banckes of a Christalline
river garnished with wyllouse, poplers, palm trees, and alders, most beautiful
to behold. This vigilant pastoure, taken with the syghte of this terestial
paradise, said unto a servant of his (the clerk of his signet no doubt it
was, for he used to carry his ma^ters ryng in his mouth) Robin said he, yonder
benefice stands very pleasantly. I would it were mine. The servant
answered. Why sir quoth he, it is your own benefice, and named the Parish. Is
it so? quoth your chaplen. And with that he pulled out his scroule to se for
certentie whether i^ were so or not Se (most dread souerayn) what care they
take for the flock. When they se their parysh churches they know them not by
the sittuation. If your highness had so many swyne in your royalme as you
have men: would ye commyt them to the keeping and fedyng of such swynherdes as
did not know their swynsecotes when they saw them? Oh merciful God how far
wide is this our time from the primative church. Defer not (most dear
sovereign) the reformation of this mysse: for the day of the Lord is at hand
and shall come upon us as a the^e in the 1. These. 5. 3.
night. ii. Peter. iii. Disceiue not your sel^ through the false gloses of
these flatteryng 2. Pet. 3. 10
Ipocrytes. Turn them out after their bre thren the pyed purgatory patriarchs:
and re store to the poor members of Christ, they^ due portion, which they
trusted to have received when they saw your highness turn out the other sturdy
beggars. But alas the^ failed of their expectation and are now in more penurye
then ever they were. For, although the sturdy beggars gat all the devotion of
the good charitable people from them yet had the pore impotent creatures somer^
lefe of their scrappes, where as now thy^ have nothing. The^ had they
hospitals, and almeshouses to be lodged in, but now they lie and storue in the
streets Then was their number great, but now much greater. And no merueil for
there is in sted of these sturdy beggars, crept in a sturdy sort of
e^torsioners These me^ cesse not to oppress us your highness pore co^mo^s in
such sort that many thousands of us, which here before lived honestly upon our
so^e labor and trauayl, bryngyng up our children in the exercise of honest
labor are now constrained some to beg, some to borowe and some to rob and
steal, to get food for us and our poor wives and children. And that which is
most like to grow to inconvenience, we are constrained to suffer our children
to spend the flour of their youth in ^es, bringyng them up other to bear
wallettes, other eles if they be ^urdy to stuff prisons, and garnysh galow
trees. For such of us as have no possessions left to us by our predicessours
and elders departed this life, can now get no Ferme, tennement or cottage at
these men's hands without we pay unto them more then we are able to make:
yea, this was tolerable so long as after this extreme exaction, we were not for
the residue of our years oppressed with much greater rentes then has of
ancient time been paid for the same grounds, for tha^ a man might within few
years be able to recover his fine and afterward live honestly by his travel.
But now these extorsioners have so improued their lands that they make of. xl.
s. fine. xl. pound, and of. v. nobles rent. v pound. yea, not suffised with
this oppression within their own inheritance: they buy at your highness hand
such abbay lands as you appoint to be sold And when they stand ones full seized
therein they make us your pore commons so in dout of their threatynges that we
dare do none other but bring into their courts: our copies taken of the
couentes of the late dissolved Monastaries, and confirmed by your high court
of Parliament, they make us believe that by the virtue of your highness sale all
our former writings are void and of none effect And that if we will not take
new leases of the^, we must the^ furthwith avoid the grou^des as having therein
none entre^. Moreover, when they can espy no commodious thing to be boughte at
your highness hand: they labor for, and obtain certain leases for. xxi.
years, in and upon such abbay lands as lie commodiously for them. Then do they
dashe us out of countanaunce with your highness authorite, making us believe that
by the virtue of your highness leas, our copies are void. So that they compel
us to surrender al our former writings where by we ought to hold some for. ii.
and some for. iii. lives, and to take by indenture for. xxi. years, oueryng
both fynes and rentes beyond all reason and conscience. This thing causes
that such possessioners as here to fore were able and used to maintain their
own children, and some of ours, to lernyng and such other qualites as are
necessary to be had in this your highness royalme, are now of necessite
compelled to set their own chil dren to labor, and al is little enough to pay
the lords rent, and to take the house anew at the end of the years, so that
we your poor commons, which have no grounds, nor a^ able to take any at these
ertorsioners hands ca^ find no way to set our children on work no though we
profer them for meat and drynk and poor clothes to cover their bodies. Help
merciful prince in this extremite, suffer not the hope of so noble a realm
utterly to perysh through the insatiable desire of the possessioners. Remember
that you shall not leave this kyngedome to a stranger, but to that child of
great towardnes our ^host natural prince Edward, employ your study to leave him
a commune weal to govern, and not an Island of brute beasts amongst whom the
strongest devour the weaker, remember that your office is to defend the
innocent and to punysh the oppressar God has not suffered al your nobles to
distayne their consciences with this most ungodly oppression. If your highness
would take in hand the re press of these great oppressions, d^ ye not you
could lack no aid, for he is faithful that has promised to prosper al them
that seek his glory and the wealth of his pore me^bres in this church mylitant.
Contrariwyse if you suffer his pore me^bres to be thus oppressed look for none
other then the ryghtefull judgment of God, for your negligence in your office
and mynistery. For the blood of all them that through your negligence shall
perysh, shall be required at your hand. Be mer ciful therefore to your self, and
us your most obeisant subjects. Endanger not your solle by the sufferyng of us
your poor commo^s to be brought all to the names of beggars and most miserable
wreches Let us be unto your highness, as the inferior members of the bo dye to
their head. Remember that your hoar hears are a token that nature makes have
to absolve the course of your life, preuente the subtle imaginations of them
that galpe and look after the crown of this realm af ter your days. For what
greater hope can they have as concerning than detestable and deuylysh
imagination: then that they might win the hertes of us your hyghnes commons,
by the deliueryng us from the captivity and mysery that we are in? We beseke
God your highness may live to put away al such occasions, and to se the
confusion of all such traiterous hertes, and that your grace may se that
worthy Prince Edward able to govern and defend this your realm vanquishyng
all his enemyse both far and nere, as your highness by the aid of almighty
God, has done hitherto. Defer not, most dread sovereign Lord, the reformation
of these so great enormities, for the wound is even unto death, if it continue
any while longer. A prince well-beloved of his people is much more rich then
he that has houses full of gold. And yet is he much more rich that is beloved
of God. For if God be on your part: who can prevail against your Ro^. 8. 31.
hyghnes? By this we mean the great and myghtie abomination of vice that now
rayneth within this your highness realm this day. For hordome is more esteemed
then wedlock, although not universally, yet amongst a great number of
lycensious persons. Simoni has lost his name, and vsery is lawful gaynes.
These things unless they be redressed, will bring the ire of God upon the
realm. For what does it less the^ declare us to be clean fallen from the
doctrine of Christ who taught us to le^de lokinge to have no gain thereby? Luke
6. 34.
what example of life is in us this day to declare that we rather, be the
people of god the^ the jews or maometanse? Certes (most ^enomed prince) none
but that we confess him to be God. And that were sufficient if our deeds did
not deny him, if the rulers have given the occasion of these things, alas for
them, they had been better to have had mylstones hanged about their necks, ^ar.
9. 42. ^at. 18. 6. 7. Luke 17. 1. 2.
and have been cast into the sea, but if the peo ple have taken it of them
selves: and be not punished of the rulers, but be permitted fre lie to use it:
the blud of the^ that perish shall be requered at the watchma^s hand. Ezechi.
Eze. 33. 8. 9. and 3. 18. 21.
xxxiii. Thus princes are punished when the people offend. But now (most dear
sovereign) your highness may in this matter try your prelates whether they be of
god or not, for if they were of God they would, accor dinge to the words of
the prophet, never sease, but openly and with a criynge voice, declare unto the
people their faults. Esai. lviii. and not be hus^ed with an act in par Isa.
58. 1.
liament, for that declares them to be the set ters for the of man's tradicyons
and not of Gods laws, so that this saying of our sa uiour Christ is verifyed
in them, this people honoreth me with their lyppes but their heart is fare from
me they teach the doctri nes and commandments of men. Math. Mar. 7. 7. 8.
Man. ^5. (...) Isa. 29 13.
xv. But here they think to stop our mouths with the fear of your
highness displeasure, they say your highness laws are gods laws, and that
we are as much bound to observe them as the law of God given by Moses.
Truth it is (most dear lord) that we are bound by the commandment of God,
to obey your highness and all your laws set forth, by your high court of
parliament, but if they dissent from or be contrary to any one jot of the
scripture, we must with Ihon and Peter say. Actu. iiii Judge you Act. 4. 19.
and 5. 29
whether it be better for us to obey God or man. We speak not this because we
think by this, that we may rebel against you, our natural prince. But that if
your hyghnes would enforce us by a law to do any thing contrary to that god
has commanded us that the^ we ought ma^fully to cleave to the truth of Gods
word, boldly confessing the truth thereof, fearing nothing the death of this bo
die, and yet most humble submittinge our selves unto you, ready to abide and
pacient lie to suffer what kind of torment so ever should be leyd upon us
knowing for certe^ty that we are happy when we suffer persecution Mat. 5. 10.
for the truths sake, and that he is faithful that has promessed to be
reue^ged of our injuries. But these dombe dogs Isa. 56. 10. 11.
have learned to feign upon them that use to bring them bread, and to be
wonderful ha sty when they be mantayned and cherished, but if they be but ones
bide cowche they know their li^ipope so well that they draw the tail betwine
the legs and get them selves straight to the kennell. And the^ come who so
will, and do what they will, these dogs will stere no more till they hear
their master say hye cut and long tail. So frayd they are of stripes and
lest they should be tide up so short that they might not raynge a broad and
wory now and than a simple lamb or two. Before it was passed by act of
parliament that men might take. x. li. by year for an ho^dreth pound lone:
how vehement were they in the matter? All their sermons were little other then
inuecti ues against vsery, The^ they could allenge both Christ and the Psalmist
to prove that Christian men ought to lend what they may Luke 6. 34. 35
spare, and to look for no gaynes thereof. But now they do not only hold them
selves still as concerning this matter: but also they endeavor to imitat yea
and to pass the example of the extorsyoners, and vserers. For even the last
year they obtained by their importune suit: a grant which if it be not
revoked, will in continuance of time be the greateste impouirishme^t of us
your poor commons (and chyfly in the ^itie of London) that ever chanced sense
the first beginning thereof, they have obtayn^ and it is enacted, that every man
within the said city, shall yearly pay unto them accor dynge to the rentes
they are charged with. xvi. d ob. of every. x. s. so that if the lords of the
grounds do double and triple the rentes (as they do in deed) the^ most the
pore tena^tes pay also double and triple tenthes as dwe increase of their
riches, this is not unlike unto that which is practiced in the co^try amongst
us your highness poor co^mones For when it has pleased God to punish us with
the ro^ of our sheep, so that perhap pes some one of us has ^ylded. C. sheper
then have some of the persons constrained us to give (...). of the (...), for
they call it increase so long as we sell the^. And therefore must they (as Gods
debities) take the tenth thereof. Have co^pessio^ upon us (most gracius
sovereign) ^uffer not these insatiable dogs thus to eat us out of all that we
have co^ Isa. 50. 11.
sidre that it is against al reason and conscience, that we your pore co^mones
should be thus oppressed, that where the la^dlorde takes of us duble and
triple rent: that the^ we shall pay also to the person duble or triple tenthes.
But see (most dear sovereign) how craftily they have wroughte this feate,
they require not the tenthes of the land lords that have the increase, but of
the tenauntes which of necessitye are constrained to pay to the lords their as
king at^ else to ^e without dwellinge places, they know right well that is
they should have matched the^ selves with the landelordes, they happelye
should have been to weak for them at the length. But they were in good hope
that we (your poor commons) should never be able to stand in their hands,
as in very deed we shall not onles your hyghnes will voultsafe to take our
cause in hand, for is we have not wherewith to pay the^, they may by the virtue
of the act distress such implementes as they shall find in our houses They
know our co^ditio^s of old sense they took their mortuaries. We had rather in
manner famysh our selves for lack of fode, and to make right hard shyft,
besides the^ that we would be troubled for any such thing. And doutlesse
(most renomed prince) if the oppression were not to much beyond all reason and
conscience we would never have troubled your highness with all. Yea if there
were any hope that they would be satisfied by this: we would rather fast. iii.
days every weak, then we would scame to be slack in doing all such things
as the law byndethe us to. But we se daily so great increase of their
insatiable desire: that we fear lest in process of time they will make us all
beg an bring to the^ all that we can get. It is no rare thing to se the
poor impote^t creatures beg at Easter to pay for the sacrament when they
receive it. And it is no less common to se me^ beg for such dead corpses as
have nothing to pay the pristes diuitie. Yea it is not long sense there was
in your highness city of London a dead corpse brought to the church to be bury
ed, being so poor that it was naked without any cloth to cover it. But these
charitable men which teach us that is one of the works of mercy to bury the
dead, would not take the pains to bury the dead corpse, unless they had their
duty, as they call it. In fine, they caused the dead corpse to be ca ryed into
the street again, and there to remain till the poor people, which dwelled in
the place where the poor creature dyed, had begged so much as the pristes call
their dwe. O merciful lord, who can be able worcester thily to lament the miserable
estate of this time? when those men which in all thing profess to be the
light of the world, the tea Romans 2. 19. 20
there is of the ignoraunte, and the leaders of the blind, are so fare without
mercy (which Christ preferred before sacrifice) that they mat. 9 13. and 12.
7. Hos. 6. 6.
will not do so much as wast a little of their breathe in readinge over a few
psalms at the buryall of one of the poor members of Christ: unless they have
money for their la boure? and when those persons whom the other, called
spiritual, do count but as brute beasts, calling the^ temporal: shall show
more mercy, the badge of the christian soldiers, toward the poor me^bres of
christ: then they which glory to be the true prophets of Christ, and
successoures of the Apostles. Yea when those painted sepuleres be mat. 23. 27.
so merciles that they pity not them, whom the very infidelles would pity.
Where is their so little mercy showed as amongst the^^ in so much that their
couetouse is grown into this proverb? no penny, no pater noster For they will
not do that thing which eve ry christian is bounds to do for other: onles they
may be waged for money, they wedde and bury, and sing full merry but all for mo
ney. If your highness would call a count of them, and cause them to show the
books of the names of them that have been buried, and married with in this year
conferringe that nu^bre with the sum of money they take for every such burial
and marriage: you should easily perseaue how little neade they have to oppress
us with double and triple tenthes, judge the^ (most victoryouse prince) what an
unreasonable su^me the whole and gross su^me of these enhanced tenthes with
other their petryt b^y burrye draws to. They receive of every ho^dreth li.
xiii. li. xv. s. and of the thou sand one hundredth, and. xxxvii. li. x. s.
then may your highn^s soon be certifyed what they receive of the whole rentes
of the city, no doubt (gracious prince) they receive of us yearly moore then
your hyghnes did at any time when you were besette on every side with mortal
enemies. And yet their conscience would serve them well ynowgh to take three
times as much as they do if your hyghnes would suffer them. For they use to
say that for as much as it is establyshed by a law they may with good con
science take it if it were more. Yea if your hyghnes would suffer them, their
conscience would serve them to lie with our wi ues every tenthe night, other
else to have every tenthe wife in the paryshe at their pleasure. But our
trust is that your highness will tie them shorter, and to say the truethe it
is time: for if you suffer them a while they will attempt to make your high nes
pay the te^thes unto the^ as long as they have paid them to you. For they
have already sought out our ware houses, store houses, stables, wharffes, and
barnes, causynge us to pay, not only the tenthe, for that we never paid
before: but also the. vii. penny of the whole re^tes, raised throughout the
whole city. Who can judge either therefore (most dread sovereign) but that
they would, if they wist how, cause your highness to pay unto the^ not only the
tenth of your ye ^ely revenues, but also the te^the penny of all such spoils as
your highness shall take in wars: for they carp much upon Abraha^s ge uinge
of the tenth of his spoil to Melchisedech. Genesis 14. 20. Heb. 7. 4.
wherefore most merciful prince, consider with mercy this pitiful complaint of us
your most faithful subjects, delivering us from the mouths of these insatiable
beasts which do daily employ the^ selves to devour us, our wives and
childerne, even as we were fode prepared for the to deuonre. Let the or der
that Paul took with the faithful of the primative church: take effect in
these our days, the last days of this miserable world. Let none eat that
labors not. ii. Thessa. 2 The. 3. 10. 11. 12.
iiii. Let them also that be called to be preachers, have the reward of
preachers, ouerlode them not with the possessions and riches of this world, for
the cares thereof do choke the word. Let not each rauenynge woulfe Mat. 13. 7.
22
that comes with a shepehoke in his hand be receued as a shepherde. Let not
the simple lambs of Christ be committed to the tuitio^ of these so raueninge
woulfes. Let not the portion of the poor be committed to the^ that distribute
not but rather gather and heap up coumptynge all fyshe that comes to the uet.
Let the worthy prophets that walk di ligently in their vocation, be called to
the governance of the spiritual flock of Christ and let them be repelled that
come uncalled, we mean such as sue to bear the name of your highness
chaplaynes only because they trust to obtain thereby lordlyck liuinges out of
the porsio^ of the poor. Take pity (most merciful prince) upon us your
poor, and faithful leage people, take pity upon your own soul which shall
at the last day be charged with all abuses that your hyghnes suffers freely
to raygne. Be leave not those gnatonicall adherentes that will not stickt to
affirm and deny so that they may trust to please you thereby. Let the^ not
persuade your highness that al is good that is concluded in your high court of
par liament, remember O how they led your hyghnes when you sent forth your
letters under your brood sease streyghtly co^mau^dinge every and singular your
highness sub iectes: under pain of your highness displeasure, to aid,
supporte, and forther all and singular prockters and pardoners. Remember in
what case they had brought iour high nes when you thought it godlynes to viset
in your own parson the graves, images and relickes of dead saints, doing to
the divine honor and reverence. Let them not persuade you that God is or can
be better served in the latin tongue then in the englysh, consider what great
folly saint Paull counts it for men to pray, which is to talk with almighty
God, in a tongue they understand not 1 Cor. 14: 9-16-19.
i. Lorin. xiiii. yea and how much greater folly it is to thyncke holiness in
hearing a tale told in a strange tongue. Your hyghnes com mau^ded that none
should receive the sacrament at Erster, but such as ^oulde and did use the
Lords prayer with the articles of the faith in the englysh tongue. But they bid
us use that which is most ready to us.

They baptyse our chylderne in the latyne tongue beding us say, Uolo, and,
Credo, wha^ we know not what it is that they demand of us. By this mean is it
brought to pass that we know not what we profess in our baptism, but
superstitiously we think that the holiness of the words which sound so
straungly in our cares, and of the water that is so often crossed is the doing
of all the matter. Yea we thyncke that if our children be well plunged in the
fou^te they shall be health full in all their lims ever after, but if they by any
misaduenture, receive any hurt in any of their me^bres, incontinent we ley the
fault in the prist, saying: that member was not well christened. Oh merciful
God what heart can be able worthily to lament this more then Iewdaical
superstition? the thing that ^s mere spiritual, we apply whollye to the
flesh, was there ever any vain ydolatours that would honor their gods in a
language they understood not? were the monckes, friars and chanons with other
superstitious religions, professed in a strange to^g? is not the oath of
obeysaunce that we your leage people take unto you, ministered in the English
tongue? And for what other purpose but that we may thereby know our most
bounden deuirie toward you our natural prince and leage lord? is it then
bescamyng that we taking an oath of obeysaunce to the king of all kings, the
God of all the ^id, and maker thereof? should not know what is demanded of us
nor what we answer again? If we hold us still as co^cer ning this more then
hell darkness: the very stones of your pallayce would make er mat. 3. 9. L^.
19. 40
rlamation. Prevent therefore, most gracious prince, the ire of God which
hangs over this your royalme. Remember that his lo^^ sufferance shall be
recompensed with the ^r Romans 2. 3. 4: 5. 6
tremitie of the punyshme^t. Wherefore, most worthy prince, we humbly beseke
our heavenly father the geuear of al goodness, even for the Lord Jesus Christ's
sake our sauyoure and redeamer that he preserve you always gruinge you grace
to walk circumspectly in your vocation and ministry that at the last day you
may r^eaue the incorruptible 2. Tim. 4: 8. 1. pet. 5. 4.
crown of glory and reign with our elder brother the first begotten son of
God the father almighty, to whom with the h^ly ghost be all honor and glory
for ever and ever All true Englysh hertes say Amen.

Psalm. xli. 1. Happy is the man that pitieth the poore^ for in time of
trouble the Lord shall deliver him. THus have we (your most obeisant subjects)
declared the fervent desire we have not only of your prospe^ous succes in the
affairs of this life, but also of your eternal reign with the lord ^esu in the
telestial kingdom, of whose faith ye are in earth, defender. And of the
faithful congregation, in this little angle of the earth congregate, the
supreme head immediatlye next unto him, by whose mighty hand you have
hitherto vanquished, not only the ex terne enemies of this most noble
re-alme: but all such as have most dyuilyshly ymagi ned, conspired and at
tempted treason against your hyghnes, their most natural ^age lord and
governor. What histories should we read to know of so many and so dangerous
conspirations, so wonderfully detect and avoided? Who might so sone have
wrought the most detestable purpose of tree ason: as she that slept in your
boso^. What mighty princes have been betrayed by them that they have loved above
all creatures? And how wonderfullye, even at the very yoynt, and in the time
of most danger: has the mighty hand of the Lord delivered you? Besides
this, that most abominable ydoll of Rome which sat so high not only in the
consciences of us your most bounde^ subjects and poor co^mones but also your
nobles (eue^ from the highest to the lowest) were all his faithful adherentes,
in so much that some of them would not styck to shead* the best blood of their
bodies in his quarrel. And yet how wonderfully has the lord our God, made
himyour footstool? Reioise (dear sovereign) rejoice. The lord is your right
hand, he has found you faithful in Mat. 25. 21. 23.
a little, and shall ordeyne you over much more. Only beware that you pu^yng
your hand to the ploughe do not look backwarde. Go Luke 9. 62.
forth manfully to conquete, and turn not again till you have purged this
vineyard of the Lord: so that there remain not one little impe besides those
that our heavenly Mat. 15. 13. Ioh. 15. 2.
father has planted ^et not that noble prince Edward be oppressed in the
days of his youth, with the combrouse weadynge out of such ^otton and
sruyteles trees, lest perchance they take deaper root the^ that his tender
youth may be able to mou^. Forget not your own youth, when these at ulterine
trees were to strong for you. Think not but that you shall leave behynd you a
great no^bre that would be glad to se the old stom pes of these fruitles trees
spring again. The Lord bring them all to confusion, geuyng your highness long
life with assiste^ce of his grace to perform that which you have begone. The
wysdom of the Lord eure God lead you into all truth. Amen.

Your most faithful and obeysaunt subjects: the pore commones of the royalme
of England.
Anno. M. ccccc. (...).
The supplication of Beggars, compyled by Simon Fyshe.

Anno. M. ccccc. xxiiii.

Psalmus. xciiii. v. 12. 13. Blessed is the man, whom thou learnest (O Lord)
and teach him in thy law. That thou may give him patience in time of
adversity, until the pyt be dug up for the ungodly. TO THE (...) our
soueraygne Lord.
Most lame^tably compley neth their woeful misery unto your hyghnes your poor
daily bedemen the wretched hydyous monsters (on who^ scarsly for ho^ any e^e
dare look) the foul unhappy sort of lepres, and other sore people, ^dy,
impotente, blind, lame, and syke, that live only by alms, how that their
number is daily so sore increased, that all the alms of all the well
dysposed people of this your realm is not half enough for to sustain the^,
but that for very constreint they dye for hunger. And this most pesty^ lent
myschefe is comen upon your said poor bedemen, by the reason that there is
(in the time of your noble predecessors passed) craftily crepte into this
your realm an other sort not of impote^t, but of st^ge puysaunt and
conterfeyt holy, and y^ beg gers and vaga^ondes which syns the time of their
first enter by all the craft and wylynes of Satan are now increased under
your sight not only into a great number, but also into a kingdom. These are
not the herdes, but the ravenous woulfes going in herdes clothing deuow^
ring the flock, the Bysshoppes, Abbates, Pryours, Deacons, Archedeacons, Su^
g^nes, Prestes, Monks, Chano^s, Friars. Pardonners, and Somners. And who is
able to noumber this ydell rauenouse sort which (settinge all labor aside)
have begged so importunatly that they have gotten into their hands more then
the third part of all your realm. The goodlyest lordshyppes, manners, lands,
and territoryes are theyrs Beside this they have the tenth part of all the
corn, meadow, pastut, gras, woll, coltes, calves, lambs, pigs, gese, and
chykens. Over and besides the tenth part of every servants wages, the tenthe
part of the wolle, milk, honey, ware, chese, and butter. Yea, and they look so
narowly upon their profyttes that the poor wives must be co^table to them of
every tenth egg, or else she gets not her rites at Easter, but shall be taken
as an heretic, here to have they their four offering days. What money pull
they in by proba^es of testamentes, privy tithes, and by men's offerynges to
their pylgrymages, and at their first masses Every man and child that is
buried must pay sumwhat for masses and diryges to be song for him, or else
they will accuse the deades fre^des and executours of heresy. What money get
they by mortuaries, by hearing of confessions (and yet they will keep there of
no council) by halowyng of churches, aulters, super altares chapelles, and
belles, by cursyng of men and absoluinge the^ again for money? What heaps of
money gather the perdonners in a year? How much money get the So^ners by
extorcio^ in a year? by assitynge the people to the commissaryes court, and
afterward releasynge the apparau^ce for money? Finally the infinite no^ ber of
beggars friets, what get they in a year? Here if it please your grace to mark
ye shall se a thing far out of joint. There are within your realm of
England. lii. thousand paryshe churches. And this standing that there be but
ten householdes in every paris^, yet are there five ho^dreth thou sand, and
twentye thousand housholdes. And of every of these housholdes has euer^ of
the five orders of friars a penny a quater for every order, that is for all the
five orders five pens a quarter for every house That is for all the five orders
twenty pe^s a year of every house. Summa five hundredth thousand and twenty
thousand quar ters of angels. That is. cclx. thousand half angels. Summa.
cxxx. thousand angels Summa, totalis. xliiii. thousand pounds and
cccxxxiii. li. vi. s. and eyghte pens sterlinge. Whereof not four hundredth
years passed they had not one penny. Oh grievous and pain full exactions thus
yearly to be paid, from the which the people of your noble prodecessours the
kings of the ancient Bryto^^ ever stood free. And this will they have, o^
else they will procure him that will not gy ue it them to be taken as an
heretyke. What tyrant ever oppressed the people like this cruel and vengeable
geueratio^? What subjects shall be abel to help their Prince that be after this
facio^ yearly polled? What good christen people can be able to socour us pore
lepres, blind, sore and lame, that be thus year ly oppressed? Is it any
maruayll that your people so complain of poverty? Is it any maruayle that the
taxes, fyftenes, and subsydies that your grace most te^derly of great
compassion has taken among your people to defend the^ from the thretened
ruin of their common wealth have been so slouthfully, yea paynfully leuyed?
Seeing that al most the vttermoost penny that might have been leuyed has been
gathered before yearly by this rauynouse cruel and insatiable generation. The
Danes nether the Saro^s in the time of the ancient Brytons should never have been able to have brought their armies from so far hither unto your land to
have conquered it, if they had had at that time such a sort of idle glot^ns to
find at home. The nobyll king Arthure had never ben able to have carried his
army to the fore of the mountains to resyste the coming down of Lucius the
Emperor if such ye arely exactions had been taken of his people. The Greeks had
never ben able to have solonge continued at the syege of Troy, if they had had
at home such an ydell sort of cormorauntes to find. The ancient Romans had
never ben able to have put all the whoole world under their obeysaunce, if
there people had been thus oppressed. The Turk now in your time should never be
able to get so much ground of christendom, if he had in his empire such a
sort of locustes R^. 9. 2. 3
to devour his substance. Lay the^ these sums to the foresaid third part
of the possessions of the realm, that ye may se when there it draw nighe unto
the half of the hole substance of the realm or not. So shall ye find that
it draws far above. Now let us then compare the number of this unkind ydel
sort unto the number of the lay people, and we shall se whether it be
indifferentlye shyfted or not that they should have half, Compare them to the
nombre of me^, so are they not the. C. person. Compare the^ to me^, women and
children, the^ are they not the. cccc. person in number One part therefore in
cccc. parts divided were to much for the^ except there did labor. What an
unequal burden is it that they have half with the multitude and at not the.
cccc. parso^ of their number? what to^g is able to tell that ever there was any
common wealth so sore oppressed sins the world began. And what do al these gredy
sort of sturdy ydel holy thieves with these yearly exactio^s that they take of
the people? Truly nothing but exempt the^ selves from the obedience, and
dignity from your grace unto them. Nothing but that your subjects should
fall into disobedience and rebellion against your grace and be under them. As
they did unto the noble prodecessoure King Ihon, which for because that he
would have punyshed certain traitors that had conspired with the French
king to have deposed him from his croune and dignity (among the which a
clerk called Stephen whom afterward against the kings will the pope made
Byssope of Lantorbury was one) en terdyted his Land. For the which matter your
most noble realm wrongfully (alas for shame) has stand tributarye (not to
any kind of temporal prince, but unto a cruel deuyllyshe blood supper
droncken in the blood of the saints and marters of Christ) euersyns. Here were
an holy sort of prelates that thus cruely could punyshe such a ryghteous
King, all his realm, and suc cession for doing right.

Here were a charitable sort of holy me^ that could thus enterdyte an hole
realm* and pluck away the obedience of the people from their natural lyege
Lord and King, for his ryghtuousnes. Here were a blyssed sort not of meke
heardes, but of blood sup pers that could set the french king upon such a
ryghtuouse Prince to cause him to lose his croune and dignity to make effusi
on of the blood of his people. Onles this good and blessed king of great
compassion, more fearing and lamenting the sheding of the blood of his
people then the loss of his croune and dignity against all right and
conscience had submytted him self unto them. O case most horrible that ever so
noble a king Realm and succession should thus be made to stoop to such a
sort of bludsuppers. Where was his swerd, power crown and dignity, become,
where by he might have done justice in this matter? Where was their obedience
become that should have been subject under his high power in this matter? Ye
where was the obedience of all his subjects become that for mayntenaunce of
the common wealthshould have helped him manfully to have resysted these
bloudsuppers to the shedinge of their blood? Was not all together by their
polli cy translated from this good king unto the^. ^e and what do they more?
Cruely nothing but apply the^ selves by all the sleyghtes they may to have to
do with every man's wife, every man's daughter, and every man's maid that
cuckoldryi and husbandrye should reygne over all among your subjects, that
noman should know his own child that their basterdes might enheryte the
possessions of every man to put the right begotten children clear beside their
inheritance in sub uersion of al estates and godly order. These be they that
by their absteyninge from marriage do let the generation of the people whereby all the realm at length (if it should be continu ed) shall be made desert, and
inhabitable.

These be they that have made an hundredth thousand ydel hores in your realm
which would have gotten their lyuinge honestly in the sweet of their faces had
not their superfluous riches illected the^ to unclean lust and ydelnesse.
These be they that corrupt the hole generation of mankind in your real me,
that catch the pockes of one woman, and bear it to an other, ye some one of
the^ will boste among his fellows that he has med led with an hundredth wymen.
These be they that when they have ones drawn men's wi ues to such
inco^tinency spend away their husbands goods, make the women to ru^ne away
from their husbands, ye run away the^ selves both with wife and gooddes,
bring both man wife and children to ydelnes, theft, and beggary. Ye who is
abell to number the great and broad botomles occean see full of euels that this
myscheuous and sinful generation may lawfully bring upon us unpunished.
Where is your swearde, power, croune, and dignity, become that should punish
(by punishment of death even as other men be punished) the Felonyes, rapes,
murdres, and treasons committed by this synful generation? Where is their
obedience become that should be under your high power in this matter? Is not
altogyther translated and exempte from your grace unto them? Yes tru^lye. What
an infynyte number of people might have been increased to have peopled the
realm, if these sort of folk had been married like other men? What breach
of matrymony is their brought in by them? Such truly as was never syns the
world began among the whole multitude of the Heathen.

Who is she that will set her hands to work to get three pens a day, and may
have at least twenty pens a day to sleep an hour with a friar, a monk, or a
preeste? What is he that would labor for a grote a day, and may have at the
leest twelfe pens a day to be baude to a priest, a monk, or a friar? What a
sort are there of them that mary prestes soueraygne ladies but to cloak the
prestes incontinencye, and that they may have a living of the priest them
selves for their labor? How mani thousands does such lubrycyte bring to
beggary, theft, and ydelnes, which should have kept their good name, and have
set them selves to work had not been this excess treasure of the spi
rytualtye? What honest man date take any man or woman in his service that
has been at such a scole with a spiritual man? Oh the grievous shipwrake of the
common wealth, (...). Tom. 1. 19
which in ancient time before the coming in of these rayenouse wolves was so
prosperous, Act. 20. 29.
that the^ there were but few thieves ^e theft was at that time so rare that
(...) a^ Caesar.
was not compelled to make penalyte of deark upon felony as your grace may well
perceive in his institutes There were also at that time but few pore people,
and yet they did not beg but there was given the^ enough vnared, for there
was at that time none of these ravenous woulfes to are it from the^ as it
appears in the acts of the Apostles. Is it any maruayle though there be now
so many beggars, thieves and ydel people? Nay truly. What remedy? Make laws
against the^? I am in doubt whether ye be able. Are they not stronger in your
own parli ament house then your self? What a number of Bysshoys, Abbotres,
and Pryours are lords of your parliament? Are not all the lear ned men in your
realm in fee with them to speak in your parliament house against your
croune, dignity, and common wealth of your realm a few of your own learned
counsel only excepted? what law ca^ be made against them that may be
anaylable? Who is he (though he be grieved never so sore) for the murder of his
auncester, rauyshment of his wife, of his daughter, robbery, trespass made,
debt or any other offense dare leye it to their charge by any way of actio^,
and if he do then is he ^y and ^y, by their wylines accused of heresy. Ye they
will so handle him or he pass that except he will bear a faggot for their
pleasur he shall be e^comunicate, and the^ be all his accions das^hed So captyue
are your laws unto the^ that no man that they list to excomunicate, may be
admitted to sue any action in any of your courts. If any man in our sessions
dare be so hardy to endite a priest of any such crime he has or the year
goes out such a yoke of he^resy leyde in his neck that it make him wyshe that
he had not done it. Your grace may se what a work there is in London, how the
Bishop cageth for enditinge of certain curates of extorcio^ and incontinency
the last year in the warmol quest. Had not Rychard hunne co^menced accion of
praemunire against a priest he had been yet alive and none heretyke at all, but
an honest man. Did not diverse of your noble progenitors seeing their croune^
dignity run into ruin and to be thus craftily translated into the hands of
this mischeuous generation make diverse statutes for the reformation there of,
among which the statute of mortmayne was one? to the intent that after that
time they should have no more given unto the^. But what aaualed it? have they
not gotten into their h^ des more lands syns then any duke in England has,
the statute notwithstanding? Yea have they not for all that translated into
their hands from your grace hal^e your king dom thoroughly. The hole name (as
reason is) for the auncity of your kingdom which was before theyrs and out of
the which theyrs is growe^ only abidinge with your grace? and of one
kingdom made twain, the spiritual hyngdo^ (as they call it) for they will be
named fyrst^. And your temporal kingdom. And which of these two kingdoms
suppose is is like to ouergrowe the other, re to put the other clear out of
memory? Truly the kingdom of the bloudsuppers, for to them is given daily out
of your king dome. And that that is ones given them comes never from them
again. Such laws have they that none of them may neither give nor sell any
thing. What law can be made so strong against them that they either with
money, or else with other policy ^yll not break and set at daughte? What
kingdom can endure that ever gives thus from him, and receaueth nothing
again? kingdom how all the substance of your Realm forthwyth your sword,
power, croune, dig nitie, and obedience of your people, rinneth head long into
the insatiable whirle pole of these ^edy goulafres to be swalowed and deuored.
Ne^her have they any other color to go there these yearly exactio^s into their
hands but that they sey they pray for us to God to deliver our souls out of
the pains of put gatory without whose prayer (they say) or at lesee without
the popes pardon we could never be delivered thens which if it be true then is
it good reason that we give the^ all these things all were^. l. times as much.
But these be many men of great literature and judgment for the love they have
unto the truth and unto the comen wealth have not feared to put the^ selves
into the greateste infamy that may be, in abiection of all the world, ye in
peril of death to declare their opinion in this matter which is that there is
no purgatory but that it is a things inue^ ted by the couerousnes of the
spiritualty only to translate all kyngedomes from all other princes unto
the^, and there is not one word spoken of it in all holy scripture. They say
also that if there were a purgatory: and also if that the pope with his pardons
for money may deiyuer one soul thus, he may deliver him as well without
money. if he may deliver one, he may deliver a thousand if he may deliver a
thousa^de he may desiuer them all, and also destroy purgatory. And then is he
a cruel tyraunte without al charity if he keep the^ there in pryso^ and in
pain till men will give him money.

Likewise say they of all the hole sort of the spiritualty that if they will
not pray for any man but for the^ that give them money? they are tirau^tes and
lack chatitie and suffer those souls to be punished and payned uncharitably
for lack of their prayers. These sort of folks they call heretykes, these
they burn, these they rage against, put to open shame and make them bare
lagottes. But whether they be heretykes or no, well I wot that this purgatory,
and the popes pardons is all the cause of translation of your kingdom so fast
into their hands. Wherefore it is manifest it can not be of Christ, for he
gave more to the temporal kingdom, he him self p^de tribute to Caesar he took
nothing Mat. 17. 27. Ro^. 13. 1. 2-7.
from him but taught that the high powers should be always obeyed, yea him
self (although he were most free lord of al and innocent) was obedient unto
the high powers unto death. This is the great seabbe why they will not let the
new Testament go abroad in your mother tongue lest me^ should espy that they
by their cloked ypochrisy do translate thus fast your kingdom into their
hands. That they are not obediente unto your high power. That they are cruel,
unclean, unmerciful, and ypocrites. That they seek not the honor of
Christ? but their own. That remission of sins are not ge ue^ by the popes
pardon, but by Christ, for the sure faith and trust we have in him. Here may
your grace well perceive that except (...) suffer their ypochrisye to be
disclosed all is like to run into their hands, and as long as it is
covered, so long shall it seem to eve ry man to be a great impiety not to give
the^ For this I am sure your grace thinks (as the truth is) I am as good a
man as my fa there, why may I not as well give them as much as my father did.
And of this mind (I am sure) a^ all the Lords, Knights, Squyers, Gentylmen,
and yemen in England Yea, and until it be disclosed all your p^ ple will
think that your statute of mortmayne was never made with any good co^
conscience seeing that it takes away the li berty of your people in that they
may not as lawfully bye their souls out of purgatory by g^uinge to the
spirtualtye as they^ predecessoures did in times passed.

Wherefore if ye will e^chue the ruin of your croune, and dignity let their
ypocrisy be uttered and that shall be more spedeful in this matter than all the
laws that may be made be they never so strong. For to make a law for to
punysh any osfendoute except it were more for to give other men an ens^ ple to
beware to commyt such like offense, what should it avail? Did not doctor ^lyn
most presumpteously now in your time against all his allegiaunce all that ever
he could to pull from you the knowledge of such pleas as long unto your high
courts unto an other court in derogacyon of your croune and dignity? Did
not also doctor (...) sey and his accomplices most heynousely as all the world
knows murdre in prison that honest merchant Richard Hunne? For that he sued
your write of praemunire against a pryste that wrongfully held him in plea in a
spiritual court for a matter where of the knowledge belonged unto your high
courts. And what punishment was there done that any man might take example of
to beware of like offen^? Truly none but that the one paid five hundredth
pounds (as it is said to the building of your sterre chamber) and when that
payment was ones passed the capytaynes of his kyngedome (because he faughte so
manfully against your crown and dignytye) have heaped to him benefyce upon
benefyce so that he he is rewarded ten times as much. The other (as it is)
said paid six hundredth pou^dees for him and his complyces which for because
that he had likewise faught so ma^fully against your crown and dignytye was
immediately (as he had obtained your most gracious pardon) promoted by the
captains of his kingdom with benefyc^ upon benefice to the value of four
times as much. Who can take example of this punishment to be ware of such like
offense: Who is he of their kingdom that will not rather take curage to
commit like offense seeing the promocions that fill to these men for their so
offending? So weak and blunt is your swearde to strycke at one of the
offenders of this crooked and per^rs generation. And this is by the reason that
the chief instrument of your law yea the chief of your counsel and he which
has your sweard in his hand to whom also all the other instruments are
obediente, is always a spiritual (...) which has ever such an inordinate love
unto his own kingdom that he will maintain that, though all the temporal
kyngedommes and common wealth of the world should utterly therefore be undone.

Here leave we out the greatest matter of all lest we declaringe such an
horrible cara^ne of evil against the minysters of iniquitye should seem to
declare the one only fa^e or rather the ignorance of our best beloved mi
nister of ryghtnousnes which is to be hy^ ryll he may be learned by these small
enormitees that we have spoken of to know it plainly him self. But what
remedy to re leave us your poor, syke, lame and sore bed demen? To make many
hospitales for the relefe of the poor people? Nay truly. The moo the worse,
for ever the fa^te of the hole foundacyon hange^ on the priests be^ des.
Diverse of your noble prodecessours kings of this realm have given lands to
to monasteryes to give a certain sum of money yearly to the poor people
where of for the auncienty of time they give never one penye. They have likewise
given to the^ to have certain masses said daily for the^ whereof they say never
one. If the Abbot of westminster w^ld singe every day as many masses for his
fou^ders as he is bound to do by his foundacio^. M. monks were to few.
Wherefore if your grace will build a sure hospital that never shall fail to
releue us al your pore bedme^, take from the^ al those thin (...). Set these
sturdy lobbies a broad in the (...) (...)


