Finch his Alphabet, or, A Godly direction, fit to be perused of each true
Christian.


ADAM our Father being the first man,
Through EVE his wife the which vile sin began:
But God of his mercy thought it very good,
We should be fau'd through Christ our Saviors blood.
BEtimes in morning when thou do awake,
Unto the Lord see thou thy Prayers make:
And after that then go to thy Vocation,
This is a way that leads to salvation.
COmfort of comforts, none that I do find,
So great as for to have a constant mind:
Trusting in God, and in his only Son,
Comfort of comforts like to this is none.
DEath as a Sergeant comes unto all,
Prepare thy self therefore against he call:
For he that is prepared well to dye,
Shall live with Christ in heaven eternally.
Envy thou not to see ^^y friend do well,
Envy is a fiend that leads souls to hell:
Through envy Cain did slay Abell his brother,
When on the earth there was not found another.
Fly thou from sin, and eke from fond delight,
And fear the Lord of heaven both day and night:
For he that only God the Lord does fear,
No evil ever to him may appear.
Give laud unto the Lord of heaven on high,
Which made the earth, the sea, and eke the sky:
And men he made him only for to serve,
Then from his statutes see thou do not swerue.
Have mercy Lord on me I do thee pray,
And eke conduct me in thy holy way:
And let thy precepts always be to me,
As sweet as ever honey from the Be.
IN thee, O Lord, I only put my trust,
For thou, O Christ, art only true and just:
There is no other God I know but thee,
In whom I only trust saved to be.
KNowledge a virtue is most excellent,
If to know Christ the mind be only bent:
But not to know him, and know all beside,
No goodness to the soul there can betide.
Love God, in him put all thy trust and stay,
Both day and night unto him do thou pray:
And be not idle either day or night,
So shall thou please the Lord of heaven aright.
Mark well my words, and ponder in your mind,
And then no doubt but you shall comfort find:
Put trust in Christ who for mankind did die,
So may thou live with him continually.
NO man there is that two Masters can serve,
To one he cleaues, from other he will swerue:
He that on Mammon sets his delight,
He cannot serve the Lord of heaven aright.
OMnipotent Lord, send to me thy grace,
Here in this life, in heaven a dwelling place:
And when my soul depart from body is,
Grant me sweet Christ to live with thee in bliss.
PVt all thy trust and confidence in God,
And he will guide thee with his holy rod:
For he that trusts in him, and to him pray,
Shall live in bliss with him another day.
QVit thou thy self always from worldly care,
And see that thou the Lord of heaven do fear:
For he that fears the Lord of heaven aright,
Shall live eternal with the Lord of might.
REmember man that thou art borne to die,
And not to live on earth eternally:
Then live on earth while here thou do remain,
Though being dead, to live with Christ again.
Sin not, but stand in awe of God the Lord,
Who made the heaven, the earth, and sea by word:
The sky, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars also,
And every creature that on earth do go.
TRust thou in God the Father of all might,
And pray unto his Son both day and night:
Entreat his Spirit may thee always guide,
So from his statutes thou shall never slide
Unto the Lord see that thou call and cry,
So may thou live with him eternally:
He is the Judge that Widows cause does take,
And fatherless, when moan to him they make.
Wisdom in man is a most precious thing,
When God did say to Solomon the King,
Ask what thou will, and I will give to thee,
^Visedome (good Lord) grant wisdom unto me.
XErxes for his beastliness he had great blame,
(...) Galba for his virtue he did get much fame:
T(...) afirmes that nothing is more pure
In man, then for in virtue to endure.
YOuth in it self vain glory often does show,
But age experience brings, whereby men know,
The idle follies that wild youth does bring,
Which makes them sigh when they may sit and sing.
Zeal mixed with faith, and in one heart combind,
Does please the Lord, and comfort man's mind.
So to conclude (with zeal) I make an end,
Zeal joined with Faith unto the Soul is friend.
FINIS.
Printed at London for John Wright, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Gilt-spur-street.


