SIR FRANCIS DRAKE, His Honorable life's commendation, and his Tragical Deaths
lamentation. *

Conamur tenues grandia. AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be
sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bible. 1596.

TO THE BEAVTEOVS, AND virtuous Lady ELIZABETH, late wife unto the highly
renowned SIR FRANCIS DRAKE deceased.
Divorced by Death, but wedded still by love,
(For love by Death can never be divorced)
Lo Englands Dragon, thy true turtle Dove,
To seek her make is now again enforced.
Like as the Sparrow from the Castrels ire
Made his Asylum in the wise-mans fist:
So he, and I his tongues-man, do require
Thy sanctuary, Envy to resist.
So may heroique DRAKE, whose worth gave wings
Unto my Muse that nere before could fly,
And taught her tune these harsh discordant strings,
A note above her rural minstralsie,
Live in himself, and I in him may live,
Thine eyes to both vitalitie shall give.
Your Ladyships virtues devoted, CHARLES FITZ-GEFFREY,

To the Author.
ONce dead, and twice alive, thrice worthy DRAKE,
And worthy thou by whom he lives again:
O would that thou who him alive do make,
A life unto thy self by him might gain!
But if thou can not get this for thy pain,
Yet will I offer heart and pen to thee,
And if one fail, the other thine shall be.
Sure one will fail; the other thine shall be,
Admitting thee into her chiefest part;
Wishing that art with nature would agree,
To join an able pen with loving heart,
That to the world she might her mind impart:
So heart imagine should, and art indite,
And art and heart should both thy praises write.
But now let DRAKE, unto whose shrine thou singest
These lamentable accents on his tomb,
Retribute part to thee of that thou bring,
And make thee famous, though himself be dumb;
So by thy praising, shall thy praises come:
Then let thy swan-sweet verse sing to a DRAKE,
And that which makes him, shall thee famous make.
R. R.

To C. F.
When to the banks of sweet Elysium
Came worthy DRAKE, to get his passage there*
The ferriman denied his ghost to come,
Before his exequies solemnized were:
But none to adorn his funeral hearse did prove:
And long he sat upon the hoplesse shore.
Until thy Muse (whom pity still did move)
Helped thee to rise, and him to rest no more:
And sent her mournful tears unto his ghost,
And sweet (though sad) complaints as exequies,
Passing him to those fields which long he lost,
And won his soul the joy, thy pen the prise:
So still thy funeralles shall adorn his name,
And ^^ll his funeralles shall enlarge thy fame.
F. R.

To the Author.
ENglands Ulysses, slain by mortal fates,
His body Tethys caught within her arms,
Jove placed his soul amid the heavenly states,
Setting him free from fortune-tossing harms,
From Scylla's gulfes, and Circes deadly charms:
And both did choose a place to keep his pray,
Tethys her lap, but Jove the Milke-white Way.
Yet shall his fame, his worth* his worthy deeds,
Eternized by thy verse, among us dwell,
And whatsoever after-age succeedes,
Unto posterity the same shall tell,
And make thy praises with his own excel:
Time that does all things else in time devour,
Shall never have thy name within her power.
Old GEFFREY CHAVCER, Englands ancient Muse,
And mirror of the times that did ensue,
Yielded to death, that nere admits excuse;
But now in thee he seems to live a new,
(If grave Pythagoras sage sawes be true:)
Then since old GEFFREY's spirit lives in thee,
Rightly thou named art FITZ-GEFFERY.
D. W.

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE HIS HONORABLE LIFE'S commendation, and his tragical deaths
lamentation. *
DARK night, the sov'raigne of Cymmerian black,
The inhabitant of pitchie Acheron,
Mounted upon Alastors snaky back,
From Taenarus (her black pavilion)
Rides through the world in sad progression;
Dew-dropping mists, and darkness duskie bloome
Attend, as Heralds, to proclaim her room.
Blind Vesperugo, clothed in sable shade
(Night's cloudie harbinger, cold Hesperus)
Runs on before to see that way be made;
And being authorized her Prodromus,
Rides on the Vulture-bearing Caucasus,
Vailing the golden tapers of the light,
And bids Olympus entertain the night.
She bristling up her leaden-plated crest
Of feathers, broader then the dragons wings,
Whose space disioines the Lycaonian beast
From Cynosure, whose praise the seaman sings,
That she as patroness directs his rings;
Enclaspeth with her winged eminence
The worlds orbicular circumference.
Now only is she earth's high Monarchesse,
And tirannizeth ore this massy round;
For he, whose puissance quel'd her monstrousness,
Enchaining her beneath the weighty ground,
By deaths fierce Heben trident has his wound,
Repaying unto greedy destiny,
The interest of his life-lent usurie.
Drowned is the day star in the Hesperian deepes,
The radiant Eos of white Albion:
Tithonus love-lasse, fair Aurora, weeps,
And day-reducing Phosphorus does moan,
That he unto the other world is gone;
Denying them the traffic of his sight,
From whose fair luster they derived their light.
See how Apollo tasks his wearied teames
Unto the Occidentall Ax^ltree,
Making the Horizon mask in sable seames,
Abandoning the earth from mirth and glee,
Swearing it never more his lamps shall see,
But means (except the fates his wrath appease)
To live immured among the Antipodes.
As when he left the Olympique starrie rocks,
Living an exile long in Thessalie;
And near Amphrysus fed Admetus flocks,
Only accompaned with Mercury:
Or when for Phaetons sad tragedy,
Enraged with passionate woe he fell at ods
With thundering Jove, and all the minor-Gods.
But now nor Clymenes audacious boy
Torn by the morning-breathing horses rage;
Nor Amyclaean Hyacinth's annoy
Cause this his grief, impatient of assuage;
These woes long since gave place to time and age:
The pains that now exagitate his soul,
Time cannot tame, nor swan-white age control.
He, from whose sun the sun derived his shine,
(As does his sister-planet from his light)
Whilome than cristall far more cristalline,
Now is oppressed with deaths eternal night,
Exempt from intercourse of Phoebus sight;
Who wailes his loss, but sollaced in this,
That his immortal soul survives in bliss.
The Gods Pandora, heavens bright firmament,
Fair Albions bulwark, castle of defense,
The worlds rare wonder, the earths rich ornament,
Hearts adamant, minds sacred excellence,
Wisdoms grave Delphos, virtues quintessence,
Right perfect workmanship of skillful nature,
Some semi-God, more then a mortal creature.
Great God of prowess, thunderbolt of war,
Belionae's darling, Mars of chivalrie,
Bloody Enyo's champion, foe-mens fear,
Fames stately Pharus, map of dignity,
Joves pearl, pearls pride, prides foe, foes enemy:
Spaine-shaking fever, regent of wars thunder,
Undaunted DRAKE, a name importing wonder.
All this, yea thrice a thousand times and more
Than this untold, though Angels eloquence,
Though all the souls of Poets heretofore,
And modern Muses made their residence
In mortal mould to pen his excellence;
More then all arts Arithmetique can sum,
Ay me! are now enclosed in DRAKES rich tomb.
Tomb? ah no tomb, but Neptunes froathing waves:
Waves? ah no waves, but billow-rouling seas:
Seas? ah no seas, but honor's hallowed graves:
Graves? ah no graves, but bones eternal ease:
Ease? ah no ease, but rest borne to displease:
What ere it be where worthy DRAKE does lie,
That sacred shrine entombes a Deity.
If Deity in earth can be enrold,
Or may participate with brickle claie,
Or can be compas'd with so frail a mould,
Or be invested in so base array.
As transitory flesh borne to decay;
Then wheresoere it be that DRAKE does lie,
That sacred shrine entombes a Deity.
If Deity may be a thing created,
The quaintest workmanship of skillful nature;
Or by a parliament of Gods enacted,
Or be appropriated to a creature,
Omnipotent Joves richest architecture:
Then wheresoere it be that DRAKE does lie,
That sacred shrine entombes a Deity.
But if man's soul his Deity define;
Which is an essence metaphysicall,
Immortal, heaven-infused, and divine;
And flesh be but a prison temporal,
That for a season holds the soul in thrall:
Then in DRAKES tomb does this his prison lie,
But heavens bright shrine contains his Deity.
O who will lead me to that two top't mountain,
The Heliconian Muses laureat hill?
Who will conduct me to that sacred fountain,
Whence soule-infusing Nectar does distill,
That Poets sp'rites with winged furies fill:
Where naked Graces use to bathe and swim,
While Nymphs and Fairies dance about the brim?
Where no Actaeon straggling through the fields
Defiles those Dian's with polluted eyes;
No Pyreneus this chaste forest yelds,
Whose sugared words and soothing flatteries
Joined with constraint would cause them wantonize:
No such polluted pessaunts haunt these places;
For lust is sacrilege unto the Graces.
Phoebus fair wel-springs, fountains cristall bright,
Oil of invention, Poets paradise,
Impressures of conceit, sap of delight,
Souls sweet Emplastrum, unguent of the eyes,
Drops, making men with Gods to sympathize,
Baths of the Muses, Hebes sugared wine,
Pure Helicon, the very name divine.
Mount me, fair offspring of Mnemosyne,
Upon Bellerophon's winde-winged steed;
Lift up my leaden sp'rite, Euphrosyne,
Above the pitch of pastors rural reed:
For he that sings of matchless DRAKE, had need
To have all Helicon within his brain,
Who in his heart did all heavens worth contain.
No common theme is subject of my verse,
One Muse cannot suffice to pen this story:
He that intends DRAKES merits to rehearse*
And pen the process of his famous glory,
Should in his heart all Muses spirits carry:
Yet all inferior to his worthiness,
Whose soul did all the Worthies sp'rites possess.
Audacious infant, proud presumpteous boy,
That dares presume to name with faltring tongue,
And voice untaught to tune an humble lay,
A name which thundering Zephyrus has song,
And thousand Echo's through the world have tongue*
With fames triumphant trumpet often spread,
From the Artique to the Antartique famosed.
None but old Atlas heauen-up-holding arms*
Or great Alcides adamantine breast,
To whose exploites all Poets singe alarmes,
Should under-prop the Axel of the west,
And wield the heaven that DRAKES name has addressed,
Whose weight will bruise the shoulders of the weak;
Let children cease of such exploites to speak.
Yet may we weep, although we cannot singe,
And with sad passions volley forth our fears;
While others accentes in the air do ringe,
Our Anthems may detain the vulgar ears,
And what we want in words, supply in tears*
While Philomela tunes sweet melody,
Progne may weep her dismal tragedy,
Then you, sweete-singing Sirens of these times,
Dear darlings of the Delian Deity,
That with your Angels-soule inchauntinge times
Transport Pernassus into Britanie,
With learnings garland crowninge Poesy;
Sdaine not that our harsh plaints should beat your cares:
Arts want may stop our tongues, but not our tears.
SPENSER, whose heart inharbours Homers soul,
If Samian Axioms be autenticall:
DANIEL, who well may Maro's text control
With proud Plus ultra true note marginall:
And golden-mouthed DRAYTON musical,
Into whose soul sweet SIDNEY did infuse
The essence of his Phoenix-feather'd Muse:
Types of true honor, Phoebus Tripodes,
Hell-charminge Orphei, Sirens of the sense,
Wits substance, Joves braine-borne Pallades,
Souls Manna, heavens Ambrosian influence,
True centers of renownes circumference,
The graceful Graces fair triplicitie,
Of modern Poets rarest trinarie.
Imbath your Angel-feathers lofty quill
In fluent amber-dropping Castalie.
That liquid gold may from your pen distill,
Encarving characters of memory,
In brasen-leav'd books of eternity:
Be DRAKES worth royalized by your wits,
That DRAKES high name may coronize your writs.
Let famous RED CROSS yield to famous DRAKE,
And good Sir GVION give to him his lance;
Let all the MORTIMERS surrender make
To one that higher did his fame advance;
Cease LANCASTERS, and YORKES iars to enhaunce;
Sing all, and all to few to sing DRAKES fame;
Your Poems need no laurel save his name.
Had he been borne in Agamemnons age,
When stout Achilles lance scourged Troies proud towers:
When men against me^, and Gods against Gods did rage,
Aenaeas, Achilles, nor Ulysses powers,
Had been so famous in this age of ours:
All Poets would have written in his praise
Their Aeneads, Iliads, and Odysses.
But now (o shame!) the virtuous are forgotten,
The Heroes are contemned and Neroes told:
The ancient orders all are dead and rotten;
Gone is the purity of Poets old,
And now eternity is bought and sold:
Free Poesy is made a merchandise,
Only to flatter is to Poetize.
Wel-worth Augustus laurel crowned times,
Pure Halcion hours, Saturnus golden days,
When worthies patronized Poets times,
And Poets times did only worthies praise,
Sdaining base Plutus grooms with fame to raise:
When now, save mercenaryes, few do write,
And be a Poet is be a Parasite.
But you (sweet souls) the Graces trinarie,
Strain up your tunes with notes angelical;
From heavens fair house (o Fames Trium-viri)
Fetch Orpheus harp with strings harmonicall;
And music from the Spheres melodicall;
And with sweet quires of Swans, and Nightingals,
Sing doleful ditties at DRAKES funerals.
My Muse all mantled in death's livorie gown
Shall mourn before his hearse in sad araie,
With sable Cyparissus hanging down
Her mornefull breast, whole boughs shall fan away
Titans bright beams, bedarkning all the day:
And while with tears you sit melodying,
She shall weep with you, though she cannot sing.
Even as the Lark, when winters wast draws near,
Mounteth her basinetted head on high,
And through the air does tune her trebles clear
Quav'ring full quaintlie forth her Tireli,
Beyond the ken of any piercing eye;
While as the Red-brest on an humble thorn,
With weeping notes the summers lost does mourn.
Ye that attend on Cytherea's train,
And feed her silver-feathered turtle-doves,
Which in their golden-wired cage remain,
Whether at Paphos shrine or Cnydus groves;
Whose livet-laps do swell with full-vain'd loves,
While damsel Ladies do imparadize
Your thoughts within the Eden of their eyes.
Whose Muse is so inravish'd with the looks
Which from your Mistress ivorie brows do fall.
As makes you fill the largest volum'd books
With soule-perswasive songs patheticall,
And minde-alluring speech methodicall;
Tasking your pens to pen a woman's praise,
And she the actresse of your own disease.
O let your Muse make an Apostrophe
From Venus courts unto Bellona's camps;
Give but a glance on DRAKES high dignity,
Impressed with magnanimities true stampes:
And when your sense is lightened with these lamps,
Solemnize to the world his funerals,
In all your sonnets and your Madrigals.
Cease (fondlings) henceforth to idolatrize
With Venus, your Carpathean-sea-borne Queen;
And to heroique DRAKE do sacrifice
Of expiation for your former sin,
Erect his statue whereas hers has been;
Make DRAKE your Saint, and make the shrine, his hearse;
Your selves the Priests, the sacrifice your verse.
O you the quaint tragedians of our times,
Whose stately shanks embuskind by the Muses,
Draw all the world to wonder at your rimes;
Whose sad Melpomene robs Euripides,
And wins the palm and price from Sophocles:
While Poe and Seine are sick to think upon*
How Thames does ebb and flow pure Helicon.
Who at your pleasures draw, or else let down
The floud-hatches of all spectators eyes;
Whose ful-braind temples decked with laurel crown,
Ore worlds of hearts with words do tirannize;
To whom all Theaters sing Plaudities:
While you with golden chains of wel-tun'd songs.
Link all men's ears and tears unto your tongues.
Cease to eternize in your marble verse
The falls of fortune-tossed Venerists;
And strain your tragic Muses to rehearse
The high exploites of Jove- borne Martialists,
Where smoakie gunshot clouds the air with mists;
Where groves of spears pitched ready for to fight,
Dampe up the element from Eagles flight.
What need you summon from the silent hell
The souls of Hector and of Priamus,
And thousand others that beneath us dwell,
Wafted long since through Styx to Erebus,
Or to the Elysian Tempe glorious?
Whose acts by ancients often have been told,
And all love novels, few like that is old.
Lo here a modern subject for your wits,
But loftier than any heretofore
Eternized by former Poets writs;
Whose worth their sacred Muses did adore,
And he scarce entered yet the Elysian door;
Whom dead, yet all men's thoughts alive do make:
For who would think that death could co^quere Drake*
Here Poets, spend your wits chief quintessence,
And bandie verses with the God of verse,
Imbalme him with your wits best influence,
All intellectual powers his praise rehearse,
And with your poems bewtisie his hearse:
Fear neither Theons tooth, nor Critique looks,
DRAKES only name shall patronize your books*
Be DRAKES heroique deeds the argument,
His name the prologue of your tragedy,
The acts and scenes, his acts all excellent,
Himself chief actor of Spaines misery,
His lance the Scorpion-scourge of Hesperie;
Fettring with golden chains their principates,
And leading captive Spaines chief potentates.
The Muses hill shall be the Theater,
And all the world spectators of the shows,
A quire of Angels shall the Chorus bear,
The massacre shall be of Englandes foes,
And such as think to work Eliza's woes:
And when DRAKES death ends the Catastrophe,
Heaven shall clap hands, and give the Plaudite.
But ah! our days are stamped in envi's mint,
And this our age cast in the iron mould,
Our hearts are hewed out of Caucasean flint,
And two-leav'd plates of brass our breasts enfold;
Hate waxes young, the world thus waxing old:
And best we like them that do love us least,
And least we love them whom we should like best.
Impiety of times, virtues chief hater,
The dying worlds twise-infant-waxen dotage,
Worth's cankar-worme, desert's ingrate abater,
Hard yron-ages death-declining sottage,
Foul serpent-eating envi's loathsome cottage:
Poyson-tooth'd viper, impiously that bites
The womb of those who are her favorites.
False touchstone, not discerning gold from brass,
False sooth-sayer, divining always lies,
False clock, not telling how the day does pass,
False friend, forsaking in adversities,
False pilot, leading through extremities,
False in election, false in amity,
And only true in infidelity.
Such is the world, as one that dotes with years,
Loathinge things present, though of greater price,
Liking that which is past and not appears,
And says, the elder age was far more wise,
Of higher worth, and of more sound advise:
All that it sees, it think's not worth the sight,
But what it wants, it craves with maine and might,
Bleare-eyed elde, not seeinge dark from day,
Blind with affection, ignorant of truth,
Vnwain'd from self-love, never at a stay,
Leaning upon the crabbed staff of ruthe;
Untoward to forecast for that ensues,
Injurious to those that most befriend it,
Obsequious to those that most offend it.
The ancient nobles are most noble deemed,
And in Fames calender Saints registered,
While present worthies vassals are esteemed,
Though worthier to be canonized
Than those that are in Legendaries red:
Nor Hercules, nor Mars were Gods accounted,
Before they died, and unto heaven were mounted.
What marvel then though some base humorists,
Foul whelps of fierce Hyrcanean tygars seeds,
Extenuate the worth of lovialists,
And such as merit heaven by famous deeds,
Returning base disdain for worthy meedes:
Oule-sighted eyes, that dazzled are with light,
But see acutelie in the darkesome night.
Some such there are, (o shame! too great a sum!)
Who would impeach the worth of worthy DRAKE,
With wrongful obloquies sinister doom,
And eagerly their serpent-tongues they shake,
And since they cannot sting, a hissing make:
But he, who made all Spain quake with his fame,
Shall quell such mush-rumps only with his name.
Monsters of nature, Nile-bred Crocodiles,
Sight-slaying Basilisks, poyson-swolne toades,
Fame-fretting cankers, shames infectious biles,
Earth-gaping Chasma's, that mishap aboades,
Presumpteous giants, waging war with Gods:
Aire-putrifying Harpyes loathsome brood,
Echidna's offspring, sworn foes to the good.
These serpents mouths with tongues and teeth are filled,
With tongues they sting, with teeth they fiercely bite;
By stinging, minds; by biting, hearts are killed;
The minds with grief, the hearts with deadly spighte:
This spighte kills joy, this grief does slay delight.
O what fierce hell begot this monstrous kind,
Whose tou^g, whose teeth, kills, slaies, the heart, the mind?
Their breast, the harbor of an envious heart;
Their heart, the storehouse of a pois'ned hate;
Their hate, the quiver holding slanders dart;
That dart they shoot at men of highest state;
That state, that soon is subject to debate:
And that debate breeding dissension,
Procures all commonwealth's destruction.
Their heads lay complots, strife how to procure:
Their hands do practice what their heads desire:
Their hearts approove what hands have put in ure:
Their minds in mischief with their hearts conspire:
Their souls consent to that their minds require:
Who will not say they are spronge from the devil.
Whose heads, hands, hearts, whose minds, whose souls are evil?
Celestial Goddess, eviternall Fame
Minerva's daughter by fair Maia's son,
Of all the inhabitants of heavens fair frame
Most highly honored since the world begone,
And shall be, till the fatal Glass be run;
Souls sweet receipt, the health's restorative,
Hearts cordial, the minds preservative:
Goddess of thoughts, Muse animating spirit,
Altar of honor, temple of renown,
Shrine of devotion yielding art her merit,
Life's richest treasure, virtues gorgeous gown,
Heavens best habilement, Ariadne's crown;
The Cynosura of the purest thought,
Fair Helice, by whom the heart is taught:
Send honor down (o chief of Goddesses,)
Honor thy royal persons messenger,
To ravish DRAKE from earth's unworthines,
(As Jupiter once sent his armor-bearer
To transport Ganimed from Ida thither:)
And as that boy was honored of Jove,
So honor DRAKE, and let him be thy love.
Daughter of time, sincere Posterity,
Alwaie newborn, yet no man knows thy birth,
The arbitresse of pure sincerity,
Yet changeable (like Proteus) on the earth,
Sometime in plenty, sometime joined with dearth:
Alwaie to come, yet alwaie present here,
Whom all run after, none come ever near:
Impartial Judge of all, save present state,
Truth's Idioma of the things are past,
But still pursuing present things with hate,
And more injurious at the first than last,
Preserving others, while thine own do wast:
True treasurer of all antiquity,
Whom all desire, yet never one could see:
Be thou religious to renowned DRAKE,
And place him in thy catalogue of saints;
In steed of Neptune, God of sea him make,
Either to loose, or bind the winds restraints;
Let seamen offer him their vows and plaintes:
Envy lives with us, while our selves survive,
But when we die, it is no more alive.
And you, eternal Joves high progeny,
Whom at your birth the Gods, your parents, blessed,
To consecrate unto eternity
In never-dying registers of rest
Your selves, and others that deserve it best;
To whom they sealed this chartar at your birth,
Your souls should live in heaven, your fames on earth:
Joves dearest darlings, Gods best favorites,
Saints paragons, of purest earth refinde,
Scorned of the world, because heavens chief delights,
Inheritours of Paradise by kind,
Which was to you before your birth assigned:
The golden rings where honors jewels shines,
Whose sun is Fame, heaven Zodiake, you the Signs:
Imbathe your Phoenix quils in Nectar streams
Of milken showrs, that Juno's breasts did rain,
Let DRAKES high excellence be all your theames,
Whereon to spend the chiefest of your brain,
His worth in honors purest dye engraine;
That after-ages may him deifie
In holy heavens celestial Hierarchy.
GRINVIL, a name that made Iberia tremble,
Whom Jove would make the Atlas of the west,
(So well he did his Hercules resemble)
Had not a waightier charge his mind possessed;
For having placed him in Elysian rest,
In heavens star chamber held a Parliament,
And made him Prorex of his regiment.
Well has his Poet royaliz'd his acts,
And curiously described his tragedy;
Quaintlie he has eternized his facts
In lasting registers of memory,
Even coeternall with eternity:
So that the world envies his happy state,
That he should live when it is ruinate.
Some fiery Muse with heavenly heat enflamed,
Mount DRAKE likewise above the azur'd sky;
Be not the Eagle Joves thunder-bearer named,
Let DRAKE possess that glorious dignity,
Or rather let himself the thund'rer be,
And make the world his majesty to wonder:
For who more fit then DRAKE to rule the thunder?
He ruled earth's thunder while he did survive,
Which, when he list, could make great Neptune quake,
Angry with Jove that any man alive
Should terrify, and make his kingdom shake;
But when he heard it was renowned DRAKE,
He gave to him his trident, and his mace,
As one more fit to rule that stormy place.
Spain trembled at the thunder of his name,
And when those Giants proudly did rebel,
No thunderbolt had needed but his fame,
Their hawtie-minded forces for to quell,
And send them by whole Myriads unto hell;
That Charon cursed their coming on so fast,
And knew not how so many could be past.
The proud Tartessian Caligula fears,
And hides his doting head for very horror,
If but DRAKES name do thunder in his ears:
And lies astonished with an uncouth terror,
Exhaling forth his gasping breath with dolor,
While DRAKE (our new Alcides) vanquished
This Spanish Hydra's ever-growing head.
The Pyrenean cloudie-topped mountains,
At his approach, with mists their faces veiled,
The hills shed tears, and made increase of fountains,
Still fleeting down the clifts, and never failed,
When through the Ocean waves his navy sailed:
And if clear waters in the fleet were scant,
He made his foe-mens tears supplye the want.
Often did the sourges, plowed up by his ship,
Seem to ore-whelme the Cassiterides;
While the Cantabrian-Ocean sea-nymphs skip,
Together with the fair Nereides,
And all the lovelie Oceanitides,
Dancing about to have a sight of DRAKE,
Or of his ship a lovelie kiss to take.
As often as near the Gades both he sailed,
And by Cape-Sacers sky-top'd promontory,
Their heads (like dappers) under waves they veiled,
The Herculean maine it self seemed to be sorry
Grieving it should such pondrous forces carry;
For though it could bear him who bare the sky,
It could not DRAKE, for DRAKE was more the^ he.
The Baleares wished them-selves unknown
Or joined in league unto the British maine,
Dreading they should by DRAKE be overthrown,
And ravished from their neighbour-bordring Spain,
Whose weakened powrs it self could not maintain:
They wished some God would metamorphose them
To sea-nymphs, that they might be safe from him.
Toledo's towers, and Compostella's Saint
Kept not Hesperia secure from dread;
The towers declind, the Saint with fear was faint,
Faint Saint, for fear that durst not show his head,
Dreading least greater dangers followed:
Alas! what could such fearful Saints prevail,
Where such great Joves, as DRAKE, meant to assail?
Iberus river in Cantabria
Often wished he had still kept him under ground;
His head-spring near to Juliobrica
Thrice hid himself, and could no where be found,
Thrice overwhelming, all the land was drowned,
For hearing that the conquering DRAKE came by,
Poor coward river knew not where to fly.
What profited the Herculean Calpe now,
That Titan in the Occidentall line
Trav'ling unto the Antipodes below.
Daynes to salute him with his radiant shine,
As to the other world he does decline?
One means to dispossess him of his might,
Who dispossessed Titan of his light.
Tagus, thy gold could not redeem thy fear,
Nor all thy sands thy grief could countervaile;
DRAKE comes, and leads with him the Gods to war,
With victory displaied on his sail:
What can thy gold and water now avail?
Thy precious water shall his thirst alaie,
Thy gold shall serve to give his soldiers pay.
Spain annuallie prepared a royal fleet,
To sweep the seas unto the Indian coast.
That coming home they might our Dragon meet,
And pay him tribute at their proper cost;
England, thou had the gain, and Spain the lost:
Had he survived, Tempe had been our land,
And Thames had streamed with Tagus golden sand.
Such as the Hyperborean Dragon, was,
That bare the inchaunting daughter of the sun
On scaled crest of triple-plated brass,
When through Campania's coast he used to run,
And ceased not ranging till his course were done;
But with irrefragable force and might
Made obstant lets give way unto his flight.
Such was our Dragon when he list to soar
And circuit Amphitrite's watrie bower:
The rampant lion, and the tusked boar,
The ravenous tigar borne still to devour,
To bar him passage never had the power:
Whole herds and hoasts could never make him stay,
His only sight sufficed to make him way.
Forth of his nostrils burning flakes of fire
(As from an ovens gaping mouth) did flame,
Wherewith he wasted in his raging ire
All that opposed themselves against the same;
All the sea monsters trembled at his name:
And when it pleased him progress through the sea,
His fame was herald to proclaim him way.
O what an heavenly sight it were to view,
And with the eye survey him on the maine,
Incountring with a proud Tartessian crew,
The choysest Martialists of warlike Spain,
And swarthy Moors, and Indian slavish train,
Mantling all Tethys with their Argos eyes
With high-topt masts included in the skies.
Their galleys fraughted full with men of war,
Whose oars plowed furrows in the swelling waves
Than towred whales, or dolphins, larger far,
Of sise sufficient to be giants graves,
Rowed with an hundred Indian captive slaves;
Made glaucie Nereus groan, and seem to shrink,
Who often wished to see their navy sink.
Sea-castles, which they Galeazos named,
Guarded (like bul-warks) all the mighty fleet,
Whose masts of seven conjoined oaks were framed
By skillful architecture made to meet,
Whose tops might seem the element to greet:
Hoysed aloft their sails displayed on high,
As though they meant to veil the shining sky.
Who so beholding from the bordring shore,
Had viewed their navy floating on the maine,
Would swear they were no ships, that Neptune bore,
But woods of cedars growing on a plain,
Whose tops above the region of the rain,
Were damped with circumfused clouds from sight,
Which no transpiercinge eye could ken aright.
Neptune encircled in his watery arms
His silver-shining darling Albion,
And in his bosom shielded her from harms,
That might endanger his chief paragon,
Fearing of nothing save his lovely one:
And like as Perseus kept Andromeda,
So kept he her from monsters of the sea.
Now had our Dragon roused him from his cave,
Against his foe-men bending forth his flight:
All the sea-sourges passage to him gave,
Until he had his enemies in sight,
Against whom he bended all his force and might:
And in approach the adversary deemed
That all heavens host to march against them seemed.
Who so had ever seen in Arcadye
The Molorchean Lion, through the feilde
Whole herds of beasts pursuing eagerly,
That none escape but such as meeklye yield,
Until desire of pray be largely filled:
He might have judged how our Dragon raged,
Till full reveng his thirst had quite asswag'd.
On some he breathed a fatall-burning fire,
That blew them up in ashes to the sky:
Others aghast, dreadinge his wrathful ire,
Duck'd down their fearful heads immediately
Under the waves to save themselves thereby:
So that their fleet invincible by fame,
Christninge anew he gave an other name.
As on Ulysses Circe did bestow
A blather, where the winds imboweld were,
That at his pleasure he might let them blow,
Or keep them in when danger did appear:
So DRAKE about him still the winds did bear:
And if misfortune forced some ships to fall
Jove into sea-nimphs did transform them all.
If fates had framed him in the Giants age,
When ^erra's high descent made heaven to tremble,
And Titans brood against the Gods did rage,
Whose trumpets (that did thunders noise resemble)
Whole myriads of monsters did assemble;
Whose coale-black ensigns in the sky displayed,
Out-bearded Jove, and made the Gods dismayed.
When Phloegra's feilds and proud Pellene's coast
Swarmed with troops of gastlie Giants bands;
Where sturdie Typhon general of the host,
Summoned his kinsmen with the hundred hands
To come and fight with Jupiter for lands,
Under the conducte of great Briareus,
With Gya^, Caeus, and Halcyoneus.
Their pondrous weight did make their mother groan,
Dreading she should be pressed down to hell*
Their father Titan seemd himself to moan,
As often as from their mouths and nostrels fell
(Broad, like Abyssus gulf where devils do dwell)
Forth issued mighty clouds of mistye smoke,
Whose duskie fogs his fiery beams did choke.
Ossa they pressed down with Pelions weight,
And on them both imposed Olympus hill;
Upon whose crooked top (by strength made strait)
Black pitched pavilions all the space did spill,
The which before the subtle air did fill:
Which being exiled from his proper place,
Wandered, and could not find a vacant space.
Porphyrio, Crius, and Enceladus,
With Ephialtes, and Polybotes,
Pallas, Lapetus, Clytius, Euritus,
Gration, Agrius, and Argyropes,
With millians more as big and large as these;
Followed the colors of Typhoeus bands,
Swearing to batter heaven with their hands.
They wore no harness to defend their breast,
But marched naked against their foe-mens face;
They thought their skin was armor of the best,
To shield them woundlesse in the eager chase:
Such was the proof thereof in every place,
As scarce a thunderbolt could enter in
But was rebated with the very skin.
Typhon, whose ribs resembled cedar trees,
A quiver full of mountains by his side
In-steede of darts did bear, and at his knees
Two dragons heads in knotted joints were ti'd,
Which in their mouths two fiery tongues did hide:
Against whose sting no plaster could prevail,
Nor Moly, nor Dictamnum once could heal.
In steed of trumpet, Briareus did roar,
And straind his high-resounding voice aloude;
Whose ougly note a base so ghastly bore,
As when amid the air some uncouth cloud
Meets with an other, and together croude
With such a deadlie-sounding fearful voice,
As heaven and earth do tremble at the noise*
Heaven hid his head, and seemed to fly for fear,
The dastard Gods betook themselves to flight,
And unto Egypt forthwith made repair,
Not daring to encounter them by might,
But trusting more to flight than unto fight:
Near unto Nilus (hoping so to escape)
Each one of them resumed a diverse shape.
Jove (like a ram) did wear both horns and wool,
(A livorie which of late he gave to many)
Hence Ammon yet does bear a horned scull:
Juno became a cow unknowen to any,
To save her from the Giants tirany:
Men to themselves their wives enjoined now,
While he did play the sheep, and she the cow.
Swift-footed Mercurye his talars changed
Into the serpent-slayeinge Ibis winge:
Venus (turned to a fish) the seaes now raunged,
Supposing that, which first her life did bring,
Should save her life again from perishing:
Phoebe did play the cat, Phoebus the crow,
Bacchus disguised like a goat did go.
O had victorious DRAKE among them then
In heaven (as now he is) been deifi'd,
They needed not have dreaded mortal men,
Nor for a world of Giants have denied,
Their God-heads, and, like cowards, in caves abide.
DRAKE should have pierced the^ with his burning darts,
Though all their thunder could not wound their hearts.
Not to a fearful ram, or feeble cow,
But to a dragon DRAKE himself should turn;
From whose fierce nostrils flakes of fire should flow,
That in a moment all their tents should burn,
And headlong from their mountains overturne
Their big bon'd carcasses to Orcus evils,
And bid them there wage battle with the devils.
O where is now that cunning Tarentine
Archytas, far renowned for his skill,
That could Arts purest quintessence refine,
And in fair Practiques limbecke at his will
The purest juice of Theoriques flowrs distill;
And by proportion Geometrical,
Make wodden doves to fly, and not to fall?
Where is that cunning man of Syracuse,
The first inventour of our Globes and Spheres,
So deeply skild in Mathematiques use,
As that whole armies only one man fears,
Whose skillful stratagems their might impaires;
And what a thousand could not do by fight,
One could atchive by arts celestial might?
Such as were they, such was our worthy DRAKE,
Whose head a storehouse was of policies,
That (like his valor) forced his foes to quake,
Making their hulkes to caper in the skies,
And quaver in the air their Argos-eies:
So by a proper slight he knew full well,
To send their ships to heaven, their souls to hell.
Sometime, when number virtue did surprise,
(As virtue sometime is surprised by number)
His policy could soon a way devise,
To fly their forces that might bring him under;
And how he could escape, it made them wonder:
For of their Indian gold he made him wings,
And (like a Phoenix) safely from them flings.
Think how the Eagle, armourer to Jove,
Espying Ganimede on Ida's plains,
Intended to convey him to his love;
Which being noted by the Phrygian trains,
And other sturdie rutters, Trojan swains:
They flock together with confused cries,
To rescue from the bird his lovelie prize:
An hundred yron-pointed darts they fling,
An hundred stones fly whistling by his ears,
An hundred deadlie-dinted staves they bring,
Yet neither darts, nor stones, nor staves he fears;
But through the air his plumed crest he reares:
And in derision safely scapes away,
Presenting unto Jove his long-lov'd pray.
So DRAKE (divine ELISA's champion)
Ceazing upon a pray of Indian gold,
Meaning to ship it home to Albion,
Ballasts his bark with treasures manifold;
Which when the grieved Iberians do behold,
They swarm in troops to take his prize away,
And to disrob him of his gained pray:
A thousand hel-mouth'd canons deadly shot,
A thousand rattling muskets hayle-stones fly,
Yet thousand deadly canons hurt him not,
Nor thousand rattling muskets reckneth he,
But still rebeates them all as eagerly;
And, maugre all their beards, brings home the spoil,
Ritching ELISA, and ELISA's soil.
Those peereles Peers, that through the world have spread
Their predecessors virtues, and their own,
And both with honor have enobeled;
Who to nobilities chief point are grown,
The sage attendants on ELISA's crown;
Desired to venture on the foe with DRAKE,
And with his fortunes good or ill partake.
When forth they marched against their eager foe,
HOPE, and REVENGE did bear them out to war;
Guarded with NON-PERILLE did they go,
While BONADVENTVRE still their ensign bare,
And cowardice by DREAD-NOVGHT bandon'd far:
SWIFT-SVRE their race, though swift, yet always sure*
And good FORESIGHT to HOPE-WEL did allure.
Watchful ADVISE did march in equipage
Together with her sister PROVIDENCE;
RELIEF with AID, and AID with high Courage,
Courage was guided with Experience,
And both did guide and guard their high pretense:
Where all such worthy virtues captains were,
What coward would not be a conqueror?
The soldiers followed eager for the fight,
Known to the foe by face, not by the back*
Skillful in fight, but ignorant in flight,
Swift in assault, but in retiring slack;
Never returning but with foe-mens wrack:
Who would not be a soldier in that band,
Which, ere it fought, held VICTORY in hand?
Art-tamed TYGARS made way with their paws,
The VNICORN's sharp horn the foe did goare,
The ravenous BEAR with blood imbrued his jaws,
The LIONS with their tails did hurt them soar,
And cut them short for coming once a shore:
And he that went out WHITE against his foe,
Returns home RED, for blood imbrued him so.
A silver GRAYHOVND led a GOLDEN-HINDE,
Now reconciled to his utter foe:
A ROE-BVCKE that did bear a lions mind,
Together with DIANA still did go,
And dreaded not her darts and murdering bow:
The PHOENIX in his fleet her nest did make,
And HERCULES himself attended DRAKE.
GODS-GIFT he had, and God his gift did SPEED,
No misadventure cros'd, where God did guide,
Where GOD did SAVE, none other salve did need,
He sped the journey, he did give the tide,
He saved the fleet from foes insulting pride:
How could the enterprise ill issue have,
Where GOD himself did guide, did Speed, did Save?
FORTUNE her self was present in the fleet*
But stood not on her fickle-rowling wheel;
Constant stabilitie ballassed her feet,
And being constant knew not how to reele,
But ruled the rudder and direct'd the keele:
How could mischance unto that ship betide,
Where FORTUNE was the pilot, and the guide?
Guarded with these associats royal train,
Forth marched valiant DRAKE to martial arms,
And makes an earthquake through the coasts of Spain,
When as his thundering drum resoundes alarmes,
And roaring trumpets vollie forth their harms:
HOPE and REVENGE to war conducted DRAKE,
And VICTORY and TRIVMPH brought him back.
Such were magnanimous DRAKES accomplices
Not of the vulgar, base, inglorious sort,
But such did follow wars as ruled in peace,
Whose very names their fortunes did import:
Such rare adherents did to DRAKE resort,
As he that but their ominous names once heard,
Did either vanquished yield, or fly affeard.
Neither in wars his worth was only known,
(Although his worth was chiefly known in wars)
But all as well at home in peace was shown,
In moderating public wealth's affairs,
As quieting his foes tumultuous iars:
And as the Laurel crowned him conqueror,
So did the Olive show him counselour.
Like as abroad with unresisted arms
He tamed his foes proud insultations;
Even so at home with lenity he charms
His iarring friends discordant passions,
Rescu'ing the poor from proud vexations:
So all his life he made a warfare long,
Abroad against enemies, at home against wrong.
In war he strove (and striving still did gain)
To vanquish all with never daunted might:
In peace he sought (and seeking did obtain)
All to excel in equity and right:
A iusticer in peace, in war a knight:
Though hard it were for him that might take ease,
Scipio to be in war, Cato in peace.
The mighty son of more than mighty Jove,
Heaven-bearing Hercules, most famosed
For twelve atchivements, and disaster love
Of Deianira being captived,
After so many monsters vanquished,
Having subdued all monsters saving one,
(Woman) ordained to master him alone.
Heaven-honor'd Poets in eternal verse,
Among his many brave atchivements done,
As not the last, nor least act do rehearse
His fair fame (though by filthy service won)
Making the Augaean Oxe-stall shine as sun;
(Which more then thirty years vnclens'd had bin)
By forcing of Alpheus river in.
Equal with Hercules in all, save vice,
DRAKE of his country has deserved grace,
Who by his industry and quaint devise
Enforced a river leave his former place,
Teaching his streams to run an uncouth race:
How could a simple current him withstand,
Who all the mighty Ocean did command?
Now Plymmouth (great in nothing, save renown,
And therein greater far, because of DRAKE)
Seems to disdain the title of a town,
And looks that men for city should her take;
So proud her patrons favor does her make:
As those, whom princes patronage extold,
Forget themselves, and what they were of old.
Her now-bright face, once loathsomly defilde.
He purged and cleansed with a wholesome river:
Her, whom her sister-citties late revilde,
Vp-brayding her with her unsavory savor,
DRAKE of this opproby does now deliver:
That if all Poets pens conceald his name,
The waters glide should still record the same.
Now Fame, the Queen of immortality,
Sommons my Muse from home-atchieved praise,
(Abandoning all partiality,
A fatal sin to Poets now adays)
Her leaden-winged crest aloft to raise,
And soar, in famous DRAKES memorial,
About the compass of this earthly ball.
Honor enmoves her to attempt the flight,
And wave her feathers (unneath taught to fly)
But faint despair does urge her feeble might
(That durst not yet her homebred nest out-prie)
About the world to soar audaciouslie:
Honor replies, that if she chance to fail,
The brave attempt the shame shall countervaile.
Bound on an high adventure she intends
To tell the world that all the world can tell,
How all the triple earth's unbounded ends,
And lands where no inhabitants do dwell,
Where dark obscurity still keeps his cell,
Whereas the sun dares scarce appearance make,
Have heard, and seen the fame of famous DRAKE.
Whose heaven-affecting thoughts could not remain
Confined within the confines of the earth,
But still contended higher to attain,
Since that the stars portended at his birth,
His praises plenty neu'r should feel a dearth,
But grow to that high exaltation
Of all the worlds peregrination.
A GOLDEN-HYNDE, led by his art and might,
Bare him about the earth's sea-walled round,
With un-resisted Roe-out-running flight,
While Fame (the harbinger) a trumpe did sound,
That heaven and earth with echo's did abound;
Echo's of DRAKES high praise, praise of his name,
Name royalis'd by worth, worth raised by fame.
Heart-stealing Homer, marrow of the Muses,
Chief grace of Greece, best pearl of poetry.
Drowner of souls with arts ore-whelming sluices,
Embellished with Phoebes lunary,
Decked with the Graces rich embroyderie,
Sweet hony-suckle, whence all Poets sp'rites,
Suck the sweet honey of divine delights:
Cease to solemnize Anticleas son,
That famous Ithacensian roavers praise,
(Who great Achilles arms from Ajax won)
His hard adventures, and his weary ways,
His wandering pilgrimages through the seas:
His dangerous travels, and his ten years toils,
Discovering newfound lands, and uncouth soyles.
First, how he bare himself ten years at Troie,
And slew by skill the two Dardanian spies;
How from his foes he ravished with joy
Their tall Palladium by quaint policies,
(Where Priams heart, and hope, and help relyes:)
Then, how he spent ten other years at sea,
Before to Ithaca he found the way.
Raze forth his name out of the Odysses,
Be he no more the subject of thy verse;
But let thy Muse record DRAKES worthiness,
And in Ulysses lieu his fame rehearse,
That far beyond Ulysses fame did pearse:
Searching the confines of this earthy round,
And provinces, that carst were never found.
Tell how he bare the round world in a ship,
A ship, which round about the world he bare,
Whose sail did winged Eurus flight outstrip,
Scorning tempestuous Bore as stormy dare,
Discrying uncouth coasts, and countries rare:
And people, which no eye had ever seen,
Save Days fair golden Eye, and Nights bright Queen.
Tell how he has escaped warily
Loud-barking Sylla's ever-howling dogs,
And sealed his ears, and lips up charilie
Gaynst Sirens songs, and Circes poisned drugs,
That metamorphose men to uglie hogs:
Nor Sirens songs, nor Circes drugs he fears,
Virtue had locked his lips, art sealed his ears.
Tell how he passed Charybdis whirle-poole waves,
Whereas two mighty roaring channels mere,
To swallow ships, and make their womb their graves,
And cause their high-top't masts the gravel greet;
Tell how Caphareus could not hurt his fleet:
Neither the straights, nor quicksands him amated,
Nor waves, nor winds his valor once abated.
Homer tell how; but ah, how can thou tell
Homer, how DRAKE to purchase glory wonted,
Since that sweet sp'rite that in thy soul did dwell,
And that sweet soul, sweet above all souls counted,
Long since to souls sweet paradise is mounted;
Where thou with DRAKE to saints do sing DRAKES praise,
Here we bewail his loss, our deep disease.
O thou so high renowned for thy art,
In memorizinge base atchivements don
By one that bare a fearful hares faint heart,
While subtle foxes head his credit won;
O had thy Muse once shined with DRAKES bright sun,
Or had thy golden verse his praise recounted,
Homer himself had Homer far surmounted.
Thy glory, DRAKE would more have glorified,
His travel eased thee, that eased it,
In him thy self thou had historified,
His fame would raise thy Muse, that raised it,
His name would praise thy verse, that praised it,
That after-ages should a question make,
Wheth'r DRAKE graced Homer more, or Homer DRAKE.
Mark how a civet-smellinge damask rose,
In laurel-leaved garland quaintlie placed,
Yelds beauty to the baie, where best it shoes,
And nether by the other is defaced,
But graceth that wherewith it self is graced:
So each the other should more famous make,
DRAKE Homer should adorn, and Homer DRAKE.
The fierie-sparkling precious Chrysolite,
Spangled with gold, does most transplendent shine:
The pearl graced by the ring, the ring by it,
The one the others beauty does refine,
And both together bewties both combine,
The jewel decks the golden hair that wears it.
Honor decks learning that with honor rears it.
Valor, and art are both the sons of Jove,
Both brethren by the father, not the mother,
Both peers without compare, both like in love,
But art does seem to be the elder brother,
Because he first gave life unto the other:
Who afterward gave life to him again,
Thus each by other does his life retain.
Art is nobilities true register,
Nobility arts champion still is said;
Learning is fortitudes right calender,
And fortitude is learnings Saint and aid:
Thus if the balances twixt both be way'd,
Honor shields learning from all injury,
And learning honor from black infamy.
Why should Ulysses be opposed to DRAKE?
DRAKE, that Ulysses worth excelled so far,
As Hyperion's golden chariots slack
Surmounts his silver sisters two-wheel'd carre;
Or as her planet does the smallest star:
DRAKE did Ulysses worth exceed so far,
As sun exceedes the moon, the moon each star*
Ulysses was constrained to go to Troy,
DRAKE unconstrained, except constrained by fame:
Ulysses fayning fury feign would stay,
A heavenly fury DRAKES mind did inflame,
To purchase glory to Elysa's name:
He mad among his friends, mild with his foes;
But DRAKE was mild to them, and mad with those.
Both left their ladies, fair, and chaste: (a wonder:)
O who could leave a lady chaste and fair!
But fortune for a while their loves did sunder;
That sundred love could never love impair:
Ulysses left a lady with an heir:
DRAKE left a lady bounteous, fair, and wise,
For whose sweet love the Gods would leave the skies.
Ulysses did the innocent betraye,
And in extremes forsook his aged frinde;
No such defaults did ever DRAKE bewraye:
This difference between them both I find,
Wherein great DRAKE Ulysses came behind;
Ulysses Homer had to pen his story,
DRAKE has no Homer to emblaze his glory.
Envy her self is forced to say the truth,
(And yet the truth does envy seldom say)
Since Brute trained hither first the Trojan youth,
(If ever Brute trained hither youth of Troy)
The small remaynder of the Greeks destroy,
Noblye descended from a virtuous line:
Noble discents make virtue more divine.
How still the silver rocks of Albion,
Lightened translucent luster from the shore,
(Like to the carbuncles that shine upon
The fair suns golden palace ivorie door)
Whose radiant splendor, and whose beauties lore,
Upon the world's extremest walls reflect,
Dazzling the eyes that gaze on such aspect.
How that their lofty minds could not be bounded
Within the cancels, that the world do bound;
How that the deepest seas they searched, and sounded,
Beyond all lands that ever have been found,
Making the farmost seas our praise resounde:
And nations, which not Fame her self had seen,
To carrol Englands fame, and fames rare Queen.
How they have traversed sundry foreign lands,
Lands, all environed with the swelling seas,
Seas, ignorant of ends, devoide of bands,
Bands, that might yield some harbor to their ease,
Ease, to refresh them in their weary ways:
Lands, bands, seas, ways their minds amated not,
By lands, bands, seas, and ways they honor got.
Unto the confines of Assyria
Honor led princely EDWARD, (HENRY'S son,
The third that did the English scepter sway)
Whose brave achievements both in Acra done,
And Galile, when Nazareth was won,
Inroles in ancient records of renown,
The tributorie fame to Englands crown.
Rich heart of Lion, RICHARD Lyon-hart,
Twice matched by name, but never in renown:
Two more in RICHARDS title bare a part,
But none save he (that wore the English crown)
The name of Lyon-hart claimed as his own:
His heart was richest, that a lions was,
Save her rich heart, whose heart all hearts does pass.
Tancred can tell, and all Sicilia,
But most Messana his great victories,
The coasts of Palestine and Syria,
And Cyprus captivated Emprour's eyes,
Saw him attired in triumphs iollities:
And on the Pagans, in defense of Syon,
His lance bare witness, that he was a Lion.
Clio her self (I fear) would be offended,
And whip me down with laurel from her mount,
If WILLIAM Peregrine be not commended,
If I should not that pilgrims praise recount
In verse, who did in verse so far surmount:
Since thou were that I am not, but would be,
How can I not (sweet Poet) write of thee?
Brave LONG-SWORD in the coasts of Asia,
Displayed the ensign of the English fame;
And near Nile-bord'ring Alexandria,
Engraved with steeled sword fair Albions name
In characters, which valors art did frame;
Where against the Saracens (who Christ defied)
He boldly dying fought, and fighting died.
Renowned MADOCKE, Princes son of Wales,
Brave Cambro-britton uncontrol'd by might,
Blown by successful fortunes prosperous gales,
In coffeehouse (most victorious knight)
Left his rich Princedome, left to him by right,
Between his brethren in dissension:
A crown twixt brethren breeds contention.
Before COLVMBVS ere set foot in Inde,
He did discover Nov' Hispania;
Before VESPVCIVS lived, did MADOCKE find
The world, called after him America;
He saw the famous Terra Florida:
Little regarding all their gain and store,
Honor he gained, and MADOCKE sought no more.
What coast or country knows not MANDEVIL,
His pilgrimage of three and thirty years,
A vowed votarie to honor still,
Vnequaliz'd by valors chiefest peers?
Whose travels legend whosoever hears,
May doubt (if men for merits sainted be)
Which should be Albons saint, ALBANE or he.
Courageous CABOT, brave Venetian borne,
Fostred with honour-breathing English air,
Victorious, HENRY'S name the more t'adorne,
And to emblazon Troynovant the fair,
Unto the farmost climates made repair;
And by the Southern and Septentrion,
Measured the fame of famous Albion.
Light-lesse and name-lesse Prima-vista lay,
Till from his eyes it borrowed name and light;
Flora did never Florida array,
Roses, nor lillyes showed their shining sp'rite,
Till it was ros'd and lilied with his sight:
Thrice happy sight that verdant spring composes,
By strewing lands with lillyes, and with roses.
By Labradars high Promontorie Cape,
Beyond the Isles of Cuba, CABOT sailed,
Discovering Baccalaos uncouth shape;
The mighty Silver-river not concealed,
His tributorie sands to him revealed;
Nor sdained it to be a tributour,
Unto the Oceans mighty Emperor.
Honor of England, brave SEBASTIAN,
Mirror of Brittan magnanimity,
Although by birth a right Venetian,
Yet for thy valor, art, and constancy,
Due unto England from thy infancy:
Venice, thou claim'dst his birth, England his art,
Now judge thy self which has the better part.
WYNDAM, although thy rash temeritie,
Hastening to rendlesse gain, gained hastened end;
And though improvident celeritie,
Too soon accelerated death did send:
Yet since so far thy valor did extend,
And death for rashness made full satisfaction,
Why should not fame advance thy valorous action?
When valors fire enflamed young Isadas,
Rashly to venture battle unregarded;
His rashness by a mulct corrected was,
But with a crown his valor was rewarded,
Because his prowess had the Spartans guarded:
For if by rashness valor have got honor,
We blame the rashness, but reward the valor.
Then WYNDAM, though thy high-resolved thought,
A hare-brain'd hardiment had ill prevented;
Yet since so dear thou have this rashness bought,
Which at the fatal rate of death was rented,
Let envy with misfortune be contented:
Had thou Ulysses head to Hectors heart,
The world a braver peer could not impart.
With like misfortune (though unlike advise)
Did fame-enobled WILLOUGHBY intend
A famous actions hapless enterprise;
Arzina saw his lamentable end,
Which her eternal-winters frost did send:
Though freezing cold benumbed his vital flame,
Heat shall not hurt, nor cold consume his Fame.
Fortune not alwaie good, nor alwaie ill,
Willing to show her mercy with her power,
Feasted on others falls (as seemed) her fill,
Smiled with a mild aspect on CHAVNCELOVR,
Making herself his daily orator:
Hereby (quoth she) the world shall know my powrs,
How Fortune sometime laughes, as well as lowres.
Forthwith for him a bark her self she framed,
Inchaunting it with an almighty charm;
Which she the blis-full Bon-adventure named,
Which wind, nor wave, nor heat, nor cold could harm,
While her omnipotence the same did arm,
Guiding it safely to Moscovia,
Safely reducing it from Russia.
Bold with success, and proud on fortunes favor,
Again his lofty sails he does advaunce,
Allured by silvers soule-attractive savor:
But fortune (like the moon in change and chance,
That never twice does show like countenance)
At Pettislego drenched him in the seaes:
Thus most she hurts, when most she seems to please.
O tempt not Fortune, she will not be tempted,
Her thunder follows, when her lightning's done;
Her dangers are foreseen, but not prevented;
When she does frown, think she will smile anon;
And when she smiles, think not her frowns are gone:
What does her laughter but her lowr's importune?
Misfortune follows him that tempts fortune.
Ask the Wingandicoa savages
They can relate of GRINVILE, and his deeds*
The Isles of Flores, and Azores, these
Extol his valor and victorious meedes;
While Spaines grip't heart fresh streams of anguish bleeds:
His worth withal the world his praise made even,
But he scorned earth, and therefore went to heaven.
What time out-sliding thought so far could fly,
As did heroique CAVENDISH drive his sails?
The great Magores kingdom did he see,
Where freezing Boreas rings his northern peales,
Against whose benumming blast no heat availes:
His prowess has been known to Mallaca,
And to her neighbour-bord'ring Bengala.
Knighted by honor in deserts fair field,
Death-scorning GILBERT, chronicled by fame,
To Englands Monarchesse did force to yield
The savage land (that Newfound now we name)
Making wild people mild, submisse, and tame.
O were men's lives unto their praises tied!
Then, noble GILBERT, never had thou died.
But cursed fates did cross brave CHIDLIES thought,
(O that brave thoughts by fates still crossed should be!)
Nothing but worth his hungry humor sought,
Nothing but honors Nectar thirsted he,
When death untimely did exact his fee:
But CHIDLIE, that which death took from thy days,
Honor shall add to thine immortal praise.
If searching labyrinths inextricable,
By hard adventures, and ambiguous ways,
To purchase glory, and renown be able,
And meritorious of eternal praise;
Then FROBISHER out-lives the Sybils days:
What death took from his life, this gives his name:
Death has no dart to slaie deserved fame.
Out of the concave cavern's of the earth,
Her golden-oared entrals he descri'd,
Exiling famine, poverty, and dearth,
These precious bowels having once espied,
Where massy gold ingorged did abide:
He recompensed natures injury,
That gives earth gold, and leaves men poverty.
Rich China, and fair Met' Incognita,
Admired his valor, and extold his fame,
Cathaia, and the great America,
The dangerous straights that yet do bear his name,
Are monumentall annals of the same;
Annals, wherein posterity shall read,
How fame the living salves, revives the dead.
Now drop my pen in ink of drery tears,
A name of late of laughter, and of joy;
But now (o death, the agent of our fears!)
A name of dolor and of dire annoye,
The sad memorial of the fates destroy;
HAVVKINS (o now my heart cleave thou a sunder!)
In naming him (me seems) I name a wonder.
Epitome of Gods, heavens conterfaire,
Fames Pyramid, honors imagerye,
High throne, wherein all virtues made their seat,
True prospective of immortality,
Fair mirror of celestial majesty:
White palm, whose silver boughs inharbour'd rest,
Snowe-feath'red swan, the Nestor of the West.
Nestor in wisdom, art, and policy,
Nestor in knowledge, skyll and prudencie;
Nestor in counsel, and in gravitie,
Nestor in wit, foresight, and modesty,
Nestor in might, and magnanimity:
O would he had (as he had Nestors hairs)
Enjoyed Nestors age, and Nestors years!
A mortal man more then a man of late,
(If mortal man more then a man may be)
Since his life's calender is out of date,
And deaths new-yeare exactes his custom'd fee,
No more a man, nor mortal now is he:
No more a man, because of breath bereaven,
Mortal no more, because a saint in heaven.
CLIFFORD, a name that still was ominous,
Prefiguring an high-resolved mind,
Victorious, venurous, virtuous, valorous,
Eternal adiunctes to that noble kind,
By natures secret influence assigned;
Who can deny that names are ominous?
For CLIFFORDS name has still been valorous.
O had he perished in his enterprise,
(As did the inventour of that brazen beast)
Who first that fatal engine did devise
The dismal Gunne, the actour of unrest,
Whose thunderbolts do pearce the strongest breast:
O had he perished in his mothers womb,
And that which gave him life, had been his tomb!
(...) (...) Now is the consummation of your grief,
The fates have set full period to your pain*
He, who on earth was all your hearts relief,
Whose absence you in heaven it self did plain,
(If plaints attach them that in heaven remain)
In heaven is now associate of your joy,
Your glad, our grief; your pleasure, our annoie.
You, whose exploites the world it self admired,
Admire the strange exploites of peereles DRAKE;
And you whom nether lands nor sea's have tired,
Have tired your tongues when they rehearsal make
What hard adventures he did undertake;
Then if that such Atlantes are too weak,
What marvel, if this weight our shoulders break?
O you once matchless monarchs of the seas,
But now advanced to an higher place,
Invested Viceroy's and high Satrapes,
In that fair palace near the milken race;
O think not that his praise does yours deface:
If he be justly praised, you justly graced,
Your graces by his praise are not defaced.
What though his worth above yours is extold?
Yet thereby is not yours extenuated:
What though your neighbors jewels dearer sold,
Than for the price whereat your gemme is rated;
What thereby is your Diamond abated?
Wherefore to give both him and you your due*
I say he was the best, the next were you.
Like as some travel-tired passenger,
By silent-sliding Thames rose-shadow'd side
(Poor care-accloyed pilgrim traveler,)
Sits down to view the sight-reviving slide,
The wanton-bubling waters gentle glide;
Smiling to see the rivers quav'ring flanks,
Dally upon the daysie-diap'red banks.
Thus while he feasteth both his eyes and ears
With native music sweeter then a man's,
(Like to a shower of silver snow) appears
A flight of alabaster-feath'red swans;
Whose number while his sense amasing scans,
Forthwith an other flight his mind does comber,
And thus does number bring him out of number.
(...) (...) So in the May-tide of his summer age.
Valor enmov'd the mind of ventious DRAKE,
To lay his life with winds and waves in gage,
And bold and hard adventures to undertake,
Leaving his country for his countr^'s sake;
Loathinge the life that cowardice does stain,
Preferting death, if death might honor gain.
At Cuba silver, at Coquimbo gold,
At China cloth and precious silks he found,
Pearl at the Pearled Isles he did behold;
Rich Couchanelo hoarded did abound,
Imbosom'd in Tichamachalco's ground:
Thus his industrious labor still did raise
The public profit, and his private praise.
As Nilus with his inundation
Upon all Egypt fertile fat less showrs;
Or as Euphrates on the Chaldee nation
An overflowing flood of plenty powrs,
And graceth all the continent with flowrs:
So DRAKE his country filled with store and plenty,
And filling it, himself was almost empty.
Whereas the night can never find a place
The suns eternal shining to assuage;
Whereas the sun durst never show his face,
For fear of icye winters choking rage;
Nations unknown unto the antique age:
There has he been, and made eternal light,
Where, but for him, had been eternal night.
Plunged in the Ocean of perplexities,
With waves of death, and winds of black despair,
Amid the Scyllas of uncertainties,
With sourges of sad death and drery fear,
Which to the skies their billows often did rear:
Scorne-fortune DRAKE by fortunes rage was borne,
The more she raged, the more he did her scorn.
Where dismal dread, and agonizinge death
Hovers about them with their hellish wings,
Still threatening to intoxicate their breath,
And stop the conduicts of the vital springs,
That nutrimentall spirits to them brings;
Even in the laws of death did valor bear him,
That death himself might know DRAKE did not fear him.
(...) (...) O heavens, why take you that which late you gave?
O seas, why hold you him that once held you?
O earth, how have thou missed that thou did crave?
O England, how art thou bereft thy due?
O unto whom will thou for comfort sue?
To earth? why that is partaker of thy moan:
To heavens? ah they withold that is thine own?
O now descend my ever-mourning Muse
Down from the by-cliffe of thy sisters mount;
Forsake Cytheron, nor frequent the use
Of the amber weeping Pegase-hoofe-made fount,
Now prune thy wings, aloft thou may not mount:
Sighe forth the humble model of thy woe;
For joy ascends, but sorrow sings below.
Now change thy winter-scorning laurel boughs,
That made thy temples swell with mounting brain:
And with sad cypress all begirt thy brows,
The drerie ensigns of ensuing pain,
Sad presentations of a tragic vain;
In whose broad leaves spectatours cies may see,
The deepe-grav'd characters of ecstasy.
Now leave Pernassus heaven-aspiring mountain,
For sad Avernus hel-depressed plains:
Leave Aganippes hony-bubling fountain,
Whereby the Muses Chorus still remains,
And to the waters warble forth their strains:
Leave Aganippe for the Stygian lake,
And for the fiendes the Muses songs forsake.
In steed of Helicons greene-varnisht grove
Walk in the silent shade of Erebus:
In steed of Ida (where the ladies strove,
Before the braine-sicke son of Priamus)
Frequent the bloomy walks of Taenarus:
Wear sable Heben for the springing bay,
Change ioies aucoutrements for griefs array.
Sorrow be thou my Muse, sadness my song,
And death the subject that I versifie:
The destinies despite, and fortunes wrong,
Is that which now I must historifie,
In silent cell of sad Melancholy:
My Heben pen shall pour out ynkie tears,
That he may weep that reads, he sigh that hears.
(...) (...) But that which Jove and destiny has don,
Men may lament, but never disanull:
And they that check me for presumption,
(When love constrained me write, though I were dull)
Blaming presumption, must praise love at full:
And easily the fault may be redressed,
Where love and duty only have transgressed.
Now was the mon'the that old Sextilis name
Chaung'd by the Roman Senates sage decree:
And gloryinge so to innovate the same,
To have himself new-christ'ned did agree,
Proud, that Augustus godfather should be:
While Ceres clad him in a mantle fair
Of bearded corn still quavering with the air:
When as a royal fleet, with joyful minds,
(O how mishap is nearest still to joy!)
Daringe their hopes, and lives to sea, and winds,
(Two trustlesse treasurers, full of annoye)
Did toward the western Indes their course employ:
Whose guide to DRAKE, and HAWKINS was assigned,
When they went forth, o who would stay behind?
Whether to win from Spain that was not Spaines,
Or to acquit us of sustained wrong,
Or intercept their Indian hoped gains,
Thereby to weaken them, and make us strong;
Here to discuss, to me does not belong:
Yet if grief may say truth by natures laws,
Ill was the effect, how good so-ere the cause.
Now are they on the seas, resolved to prove
The mercy of a mercie-wanting wave:
England behind them lies, there lies their love;
Before them, and about them air they have,
And sometime foggie mists their sight bereave:
Beneath them, seas; above them, skies they find:
Seas full of waves, skies threatening storms and wind.
O Neptune, never like thy self in show,
Inconstant, variable, mutable,
How do thou Proteus-like thy form renew?
O whereto is thy change imputable?
O whereunto art thou best suitable?
Rightly the moon predominateth thee,
For thou art all as changeable as she.
Thus still ambiguous twixt fear and hope,
Fear in the storms, and hope in calmer tide;
Passing saint Michaels promontorie top,
At length the bay of Portingale they spi'de,
Where not determining long time to abide,
Again they venture on their dangers source,
And to the Grand Canaries bend their course.
Now pass in silence, o my drouping pen,
So many famous towns and ports past by.
Some took, some burnt, some unassaulted then,
As that Port Rico, place of misery,
Where (o!) great HAWKINS, and brave CLIFFORD lie;
The taking of the city Hatch conceal,
Nor many other brave attempts reveal:
Only two base ignoble places tell,
Famous for nothing, but for death and dread:
Where (o!) that, which my Muse lamentes, befell,
The stages where our tragedy was plaide,
The one Scudo, the other Portabella said:
Both to be rased out of memory,
But for memorial of this tragedy.
O wherefore should so many famous places,
Worthy eternal memory and fame,
Be here concealed, unworthy such disgraces,
And these two should be registered by name,
Though meritorious of eternal blame?
But some are sometime named to their shames,
And therefore must I tell these places names.
Whether of both was in the greatest fault,
I know not, nor I care not much to know:
(Far deeper passions now my mind assault:)
Thus much I know (o that I knew not so!)
Both jointly ioin'd to aggravate our woe;
Since he on whom his countries hope relied,
At Scudo sickned, at Portbella died.
Accursed I Will, whose life-impoys'ning air,
Intoxicates his sanctified breath!
But most accursed port that did impair
That flesh, compacted of the purest earth,
And made the same a sacrifice to death!
O let them languish in eternal night,
That did extinguish earths faire-shining light!
O let these places be earth's dismal hell,
The inhabitants eternall-tortur'd ghosts,
The snaky-hayred Furies loathsome cell,
Swarming with fiends and damned spirits hoasts,
And palpable thick fogs infect the coasts:
And be this never-ending purgatory
A place of penance for DRAKES woeful story.
O soul, exhale out of thy deepest center
The sorrow-sobbing sighs of ecstasy;
O let thy voice heavens territories enter,
Breathe forth into the aires concavitie
The dismal accents of thy tragedy:
Call heaven and earth to witness of thy woe,
How that thy grief does heaven and earth oreflowe.
O let our clamours to the skies repair;
O let our smoake-exhalinge breaths enfold
A mighty cloud of sighs amid the air,
Like vapors in the element enrold
By Sol's attractive power expellinge cold;
Till being dissolved, they shall on earth again
Power down a deluge of teare-showring rain.
Now dusky clouds have overcast the sun,
That lately bright translucent splendor shed
In radiant rays, that from his beams did run
Into earth's eyes, with darkness dazeled,
Since first these clouds his face incurtained:
A dark eclipse obscures his shining light,
That lately made clear day in darkest night.
Behold the lofty Cedars stately top,
Whilome attired in summers rich array,
That in the skies his proud head did enwrap,
Now are his greene-silke leaves gone to decay,
His tufted boughs, and branches fallen away:
And since his nutrimentall sap is perished,
He falling breaks the trees he lately cherisht.
He, that the bravest Champion was accounted
Boldly to encounter with the proudest foe;
Now from his stately courser is dismounted,
And has by death received an overthrowe,
Unto the worlds inconsolable woe:
The tournament turned to lamenting fears,
And all the triumphs into ruthful tears.
A sacred Temple edifi'd to Fame,
Where honor annuallie did sacrifice
An holy Hecatombe to her name,
Now, levelled with the earth, everted lies:
This only comfort have the votaries;
That though the temple thus be over-blowne,
The sacred saint shall nere be overthrown.
The vulture anguish ^ireth on my mawe,
Sorrow has ceazed on my grieved heart:
There does he without intermission gnawe,
From hence the other never can depart,
But still begins, and never ends my smart:
And thus poor I, twixt sorrow and twixt anguish,
Do neither live nor die, but alwaie languish.
Ay me! what shall I do this grief to alaie?
Shall I with fained smiles my smart conceal?
Ah no! like fire, it will it self bewraie:
Or shall I sue to heaven his back repeal?
Ah no! such suits with heaven can nere prevail:
What therefore shall I do this grief to alaie?
Still grieve, till Death take grief and life away.
O Death inhous'd in hells profundities,
Now exercise on me thy tyranie:
Anatomize me into atomies,
Set period to my full fallen ecstasy,
Prolong no longer this long tragedy:
O Death some ease unto my sorrow send:
For Death, they say, does grief and sorrow end.
What say they? Death does grief and sorrow end?
O how they are deceav'd in saying so!
Death only did this grief and sorrow send:
Death was the only agent of our woe,
Death was our drerie and our dismal foe:
For had not Death himself subdued DRAKE.
The world beside could not him captive make.
This only comfort is unto us left,
(O simple comfort in so great distress!)
That no proud Spaniard has his life bereft,
No man may boast he caused our wretchedness,
Nor triumph he subdued earths worthiness:
But only Death our treasure has bereaven,
And that was due to earth, he gave to heaven.
To heaven? ah why is heaven covetous?
Why are the Gods (o pardon grief) so greedy,
To ravish from the earth, the precious,
And leave to us the unworthie, base, and needy?
O heavens, what can our harms and losses steed ye?
Ah Jove! if thou be rightly termed a giver,
Why do thou take from earth that should relieve her?
An high disdain enraged the Macedon,
And gall did grate against his eager breast,
Dreading, his father all the world had won,
And measured with his sword from east to west,
And he should languish in ignoble rest:
Wherefore he often wished, two worlds had bin,
One for his father, one for him to win.
As great as Alexander in renown,
In virtue greater far then ever he,
Great DRAKE on nature sometime seemed to frown,
That but one world, and that all known should be;
Wherefore he sought some other world to see:
Until at length so heaven he did attain,
And finding heaven scorned to return again.
As one, that vows a solemn pilgrimage
To some canonized Saints religious shrine,
Does leave his solitary hermitage,
And with a new-incensed zeal divine,
Unto devotion does his mind incline:
Passing the way and day in meditation,
Beguiling both with holy contemplation:
At length with often-tired tedious race,
Alwaie invoking Saints successive aid,
Arriveth at the sanctified place,
Where after all his orisons are said,
And due oblations to his Saint are paid;
Ravished in spirit with devoted zeal,
Becomes a Priest, and will not home repeal.
So DRAKE, the pilgrim of the world, intending
A vowed voyage unto Honors shrine,
At length his pilgrimage in heaven had ending,
Where ravished with the ioies more than divine,
That in the temple of the Gods do shine:
There did a never-dying life renew,
Bidding base earth, and all the world, adewe.
Intending for to work his countries pleasure.
O cruel chance! he wrought his countries pain:
And minding to augment fair Englands treasure,
(Alas!) he drowned in the Ocean maine
The richest treasure England did contain,
Save one rare jewel, whose rich price is such,
As none can either prize, or praise too much.
What treasure was it then that DRAKE has lost?
It was not silver, silver yeeldes to gold:
It was not gold, pearl is of greater cost:
Nor pearl, for precious stones are dearer sold:
Yet precious stones this treasure did not hold:
O no! it was himself, more worth alone
Then silver, gold, or pearl, or precious stone.
O dire mischance! o lamentable loss!
Impov'rishing the riches of our I Will,
O wherefore should sinister dest'nie cross,
And with her frown incurtaine fortunes smile?
O now I see she smiles but to beguile!
O Fortune alwaie to deserts unkind!
That England lost, not all the world can find.
O let us loose our sight with shedding tears,
And with eternal weeping loose our eyes,
Loose breath with sighs, loose mind with drerie fears,
Loose sense with terror, and loose voice with cries,
Still meditating on our miseries:
Since we have found his loss, he lost his breath,
Since we have lost his help, he found his death.
But oh! why do we break our hearts with grief,
And to the senseless air sigh forth our groans?
Since all in vain, heavens send us no relief,
But stop their ears against our piteous mones;
Our sighs as soon may penetrate the stones,
As heavens hard ears: o therefore do we plain,
And therefore weep, because we weep in vain.
We weep in vain, because for him we weep,
Since he with saints in thought-surmounting joy*
At Joves great festival does revell keep,
Where neither scarsitie does him annoie,
Nor loathed satietie his mind accloy:
O since that he from us is gone to bliss,
We do lament our own mishap, not his.
The fairest plot in all the Elisian field,
By Joves command, is unto him assigned;
And heavens eternal Summer House does yield,
A paradise unto his soul refined,
For sacred contemplation of the mind:
And as of men to Gods he was the nearest,
So now to Jove of Gods he is the dearest.
And if his death be rightfully respected,
Some joy it has to mitigate our woe;
For that which for our country is effected,
Is good, though death with these effects does go,
And well he dies, that dies against countries foe:
Therefore though death unto him did betide,
(O joyful end!) DRAKE for his country di'd.
DRAKE for his country di'd, o joyful end!
This joyful end began his countries woe:
His glorious death his country did defend,
And yet his death did grieve his country so,
As floods of sorrow do her overflowe:
Well did he die, that for his country died,
Had not his countries death to his been tied.
This end began our woe, ended our pleasure,
This end did end our weal, began our pain,
This end began our loss, ended our treasure,
This end did end our mirth, began our plain,
This end began our grief, ended our gain,
This end did end relief, began annoy;
O then no joyful end, but end of joy!
Spain, clap thy hands, while we our hands do wringe,
And while we weep, laughe thou at our distress,
While we do sob and sighe, sit thou and singe,
Smile thou, while we lament with heaviness,
While we our grief, do thou thy joy express:
Since he, who made us triumph, and thee quake,
Has ceased to live; o most victorious DRAKE.
Proud Spain, although our Dragon be bereft us,
We rampant Lions have enowe for thee:
Magnanimous ESSEX (heavens delight) is left us,
And o long may the heavens let him be!
Great COMBERLAND and HOWARD yet have we;
And o long may we have them, and enjoy
These worthies to our wealth, and thine annoy.
These yet survive (o may they so for ever!)
To make eternal thunder in thine ears
With their hart-daunting names, and (like a fever)
To make thee tremble all distraught with fears,
When thou the alarume of their trumpets hears:
ELISA lives, and while ELISA reigns
One England need not fear an hundred Spaines.
And that dear body held in Neptunes womb,
By Jove shall be translated to the sky:
The sea no more, heaven then shall be his tomb,
Where he a new-made star eternally
Shall shine, transparent to spectatours eye:
A fearful comet in the sight of Spain,
But shall to us a radiant light remain.
He, who alive to them a Dragon was,
Shall Be a Dragon unto them again,
For with his death his terror shall not pass,
But still amid the air he shall remain
A dreadful Meteor in the eye of Spain:
And as a fiery Dragon, shall portend
Englandes success, and Spaines disaster end.
Known to the heavens by honor long before,
Now by the presence of the immortal soul,
O new-made saint, (for now a man no more)
Admit my tender infant Muse to inroule
Thy name in honors everlasting scroule:
What though thy praises cannot live by me?
Yet may I hope to live by praising thee.
And may thy praises live a while by me,
Though praising thus I do but stain thy praise:
And I awhile may live by praising thee:
Until some heavenly Muse begin to raise
Thy fame from grave to live eternal days:
If ominous birds beguile not with their song,
I augurize, this shall be done ere long.
Phoebus himself shall chronicle thy fame,
And of a radiant sunne-beame make the pen;
The ink, the milk whence Via Lactea came;
The empyrean he aven, the volume shall be then;
To register this miracle of men:
The sun and moon, the letters capital;
The stars, the commas and the periods all.
Joves silver foote-stoole shall be library
That shall these Acts and Monuments contain;
Which that they may to after ages tarry,
And as a true memorial still remain,
Eternity is the adamantine chain:
And that the heave^s still on DRAKES praise may look,
The Gods shall read, and Saints peruse the book.
Quis Martem tunica tectum adamantina Digne scripserit? FINIS.

