THE LIFE AND GATE OF CHRISTIANITY, ENTREATING OF THE SACRAMENT OF BAPTISM,
DIVIDED INTO FIVE BOOKS.

Containing the effects, the matter, the form, the Baptiser, and the party
Baptized: with the reasons and use of all the ancient rites and Ceremonies.

Wonderful necessary, duringe these times, to be understood and perused of all
sorts of persons.

Composed, gathered, and written by O. A.

Effundam super vos aquam mundam, and mundabini ab omnibus inquinamentis
vestris. Ezechi. cap. 34. With permission.

Anno M.DC.XIIII.

THE PREFACE TO THE CVRTEOVS READER.
COnsidering with my self (Gentle Reader) what should be the principal cause
and most effectual motives, that should urge the kings majesty and most high
Court of Parliament, to enacte and make that rigorous law and penal Statute
concerning the Baptism of Catholics Children: First that they should not be
Baptized by their own Priests: nor any Catholic Layman or Mydwife of their
Profession in Religion: Secondly that they must be forced contrar^e to their
consciences upon pain of forfeiture of an hundredth pounds, to bring or cause
their Children to be brought to a Minister of a contrary Profession in
Religion, and that Publicly in Church or Chapel there to be Baptized; unless
the Child were in danger of death, then the Minister to be sent for home to the
Catholics house, and there to minister this Sacrament.

The first reason or cause may be; The first reason of t^ Statute.
for that perchance they thought it could not be so sufficiently performed by
any other then of their own ministry, profession and Religion. But if they
imagined any such thing surely they were mightily deceived: and some of the
learned amongst them (I mean the Lords Spiritual) might have informed them,
that this conceit or opinion inclined to the practice of the old Heretics the
Donatists, against whom S. Augustine writ many books above a thousand years
ago, Aug. lib. 1. con. Donat.
who were persuaded that the Children Baptized by any other then them selves,
were not sufficiently Baptized: but they Rebaptised again even Catholics if
any returned or came to be of their profession. Not much unlike by reason of
this statute it is now practiced. For if any Catholic do present his Child
at Church or Chapel for avoiding the penalty with protestation that the
Child is all ready christined: yet not withstanding, say the most part of the
unlearned ministers, I will do my duty and office, and so rebaptise the
Child, although this be expresslie contrary to the constitutions of the Canon
Law: De Co^secra. did. 4. can. qui bis.
and by the same Canon Law they incur by the act of Rebaptization
Irregularitie. Some in deed of the Ciuiller and learneder sort of Ministers,
do not absolutely Rebaptise, but with Condition: If thou art not Baptized, I
Baptize thee. But this will not serve their turn, but rather betrayeth their
ignorance? For they ought not to Rebaptise, upon Condition, but when there is
probable doubt, that the party presented unto them is not Baptized. Here is no
such matter, but protestation made by the parents or others that the Child is
already Baptized.

For a second reason The Second reason.
I imagine they could not so much as think that the Baptism practiced in the
Roman Catholic Church or by a Roman Catholic Priest was no Baptism, was not
auaylable, and therefore they made this statute and law. For if this doctrine
were true, woe then to their Protestanticall congregation. For first, then many
of them were not Christians. Secondly they never had any head of their Church a
Christian. They have had but four heads of their Church, and they of diverse
sorts: An old man, a man of middle age, a woman, and a child; and these four
all different in age, or sex, and all four baptized Catholiklie by a
Catholic Bishop or Priest according to the Roman use. But if Baptism acted
and done by a Catholic Bishop or Priest according to the Roman use were not
auaylable, why then no Baptism no Christianity, and consequently the head of
their Church no Christian. For K. Henry the eight the first head of the Church
of England, was Catholikly Baptized before Protestancie was preached. King
Edward the sixth a Chid a boy, he also was Baptized according to the Roman use
by Henry his Father. And for the woman Queen Elizabeth she was baptized
Catholiklie, and God save all good tokens) as the report goes, she berayed the
font. And for our King James, Premonition.
who now reigns, he reports him self that he was Baptized by a Catholic
Bishop. And for the Circumstances I had rather an other should examine then my
self. But what milk he sucked from his nurces breast I know not, but sure I am
his mother, from whom he had his being and first entrance into this world, was
a Constant Roman Catholic and a worthy Queen and Martyr. But to conclud the
statute sure was not acted upon conceat that Catholics did not truly Baptize,
and that by Catholic Baptism they were not true Christians. Some other reason
they had, and what may that be?

Thirdly their motive surely might be to get money, The third reason.
and beggar and impouerish Catholics. This in deed has wrought some effect.
For some Gentlemen have been brought in question by some Promoters for not
bringing their Children to the Church to be Baptized, W. C. R. B.
and so forced to compound, or else by Public Court to have been censured for
the whole penalty. The Composition has cost, some twenty pounds, some ten
pounds, some more, some less. We know that God does suffer temptations,
tribulations, miseries, wants, poverty, and some time beggerie it self to fall
upon is servants, 1. Cor. 10. v. 13.
yet we are instructed by the Apostle S. Paul: Deus autem fidelis est, qui non
patietur vos tentari vltra id quod, etc. That God is faithful, and will not
suffer us to be tempted above that which we are able. But will make also with
tentation issue, that we may be able to sustain, and withal to take cheer
and Comfort. Tobi. 2.
We read that old Tobie by reason he did observe his Religion, bury the dead,
relieve and comfort the afflicted, who were persecuted for their Consciences
(and this he did contrary to the laws and commandment of the King
Sennacherib) he grew into miseries, was stricken blind by mischaunce, had
wants, became very poor: yet afterward the Scripture says: God sent his
Angel restored him to his sight, and he became again very rich. In like
manner God suffered Job to be tried in the loss of his wealth and goods, Job.
1. and 2.
in the death of his Children and sore punishment of his body: yet afterward
his wealth was restored, his Children multiplied, and he recovered his former
health. Almighty God commanded Abraham that he should with his own hand, Genesis
22
sacrifice his own Son: yet presently God sent his Angel who said: Ne
extendas manum tuam in Puerum: Extend not thy hand against the Child. So I hope
God will one day at his pleasure put you in a better mind to recall these
Cruelties and penal exactions, incline you to mercy, send his Comforts to his
afflicted, and give to every one in the end their right.

In the Intherim this must be our daily prayer which the Church uses on the
Sabaothe of Quatuor Tempora in Lent: Missa Romans
Adesto quaesumus Domine supplicationibus, etc. Be thou Present o Lord, we
beseech thee to our supplications, that we may deserve thou being the giver of
all graces in prosperity to be humble, and in adversity secure and steadfast.
And thou o Lord our Protector look upon us, that we who are pressed down with
the weight of our miseries, may, being partakers of thy mercy, serve thee with
freedom of mind and courage. Some envious or litigatorious fellow may say,
that by these kind of words we should seem to look for a day and liberty of
Conscience. I answer. Herein we must refer our selves to the goodness and
mercy of God. And thus far we assure our selves, and this Confidence we have
upon the verity of our cause, that if we have no restitution, or relaxation of
our miseries in this life, we hope to receive Centuplum, Matthew. 6. ver. 20.
an Hundred sold in the next, Where neither thief can steal^; nor canker
corrupt.

Fourthlie I think the principal cause and true motive and intention of the
Parliament might be, to with draw the, The fourth reason.
Lay Catholic People from all conversation with their Priests and Clergy, in
that they should have no use of them in Sacraments and Ceremonies; and therefore
they intended to forbid them all, and put a great penalty even upon Baptism,
Marriage and Burial. For preach they must not, by reason of the Statute of
Persuation: say Mass they may not, you know the penalty and danger: hear
Confession they may not, the Statute of Absoluing forbids: nor bury the
Dead: nor Baptize: nor marry. So that they would have them cast of as
unprofitable servants. What think you of the Counsel of Julian the Emperor?
Was it not as grave, as wise, as politic as the Parliament of England to
suppress Catholic Religion? Did they not shed their blood and martyr them?
Did they not disarme them, take from them all their forces? Did they not by
laws and Statutes spoil them of their Lands and goods and beggar them? Yet
Christianity florisheth, and Iulians Counsel confounded. Was not also the
Counsel of the Jews as politic, wise, careful, and provident to suppress
the Apostles and command they should not speak in the name of Jesus, as the
Parliament is to expel Catholic Priests, and the use of their Religion and
function? I would to God they would hearken to the Counsel of Gamaliel a grave
Counselor, a doctor of the law, honorable to all, people, who brought up and
instructed. Act. 5.
S. Paul in the law, what was his Judgment: Let these men alone (says he)
for if this Counsel or work they go about be of men it will be dissolved:
but if it be of God, you are not able to dissolve them, least perhaps you be
found to resist God also.

Finally and fifthly, The fifth reason.
It may be I have missed my aim all this while in the reasons alleged. For
the true meaning and purpose in deed was to bring the Catholics to obedience
and Conformity with the Protestants in the Administration of this Sacrament,
and other public practices of their Religion. In very deed there were great
reason in making and enacting this law, and imposing these grievous penalties,
if the Catholics of England were innouators, bringers in or deuisers of
novelties; or in administration of this Sacrament should derogate or take away
any essential part, or should practice any rite or Ceremony which they had
not received from their Ancestors, even from their first Conversion to
Christianity. But considering that the Catholics are very respective, and
more careful in the due administration of this Sacrament, then Protestant or
Puritan; there is small or no reason in my opinion for this severe penal
Statute and law, to urge and force them to bring to the Church upon so great a
penalty, their Children to be Baptized of Puritan or Protestant. For it is
manifest to the whole world, where Christianity has been professed, and may
appear by this small ensuing treatise, how obseruant and vigilant the
Catholics have ever been in the provision of Baptism, as well in time of
necessity in Private Baptism, both concerning the Minister, as also touching
the matter and the form, which are the two principal parts: and also in
public and solemn Celebration, in observing the ancient rites and Ceremonies
thereof. Farther it is open and plain to the eyes of all men, that the
Catholics do not decline nor swerve one jot from the Institution of Christ,
bur are guided by the Canon of holy Scripture, ^^an. 3.
especialy concerning the two essential parts, that is: that by the special
ordinance of Christ the matter must be true elementall water: and the form to
be: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: which
was prescribed by no other then Christ himself after his glorious Resurrection,
Matthew, 28.
when he gave Commission to his Apostles to Baptize. And as for the rites and
Ceremonies which we Catholics use (as shall appear in the 5. Book of this
treatise) they are not idle, nor superstitious, as the Protestants would have
them: but most honorable, significant, instructiue, profitable, and comfortable
to Christian people. And for Confirmation of them we have the practice of the
Apostles, the Tradition of the ancient Primative Church, the testimony of all
ages, with the approbation of the Fathers, and holy Doctors of the Church.
And it is worth the noting and in particular to be observed, that the
Catholics at this day in England, use in the Celebration of this Sacrament no
other matter, nor no other form, nor Ceremony then that which was delivered
them by antiquity even from the first founders and Conuerters of this Island to
Christianity, either among the Britons: Beda. li. 2. hist. Angl. cap. 17.
partly by those who were sent from Rome by Pope Elutherius at the instance of
King Lucius: or afterward by S. Germanus and S. Lupus appointed by Pope
Celestine for their Reformation concerning the Pelagian heresy: or amongst the
Scots or Picts by S. Palladius: or finally amongst us English by S. Augustine
the monk, sent by S. Gregory the Great. All which considered (Gentle Reader)
I refer to thy own Judgment what great necessity there should be so
eagerly and with such penalty to urge Catholics to present their Children at
Church or Chapel, to be Baptized of Puritan or Protestant.

Now having diued into the view why the Parliament enacted so severely against
Catholic Baptism, by compelling all Catholics upon such penalties to Baptize
publicly at their Church or Chapel by their Ministers. I will briefly put
down the motives that moved me to write this small ensuing treatise.

The motives to write this treatise.
And first (Good Reader) I took this matter in hand to let thee understand what
Baptism is, and the necessity thereof to salvation. It is here on earth the
Christianity: the entrance into the Catholic Church the house of God: The
reason of the title of the book.
the highway to all other Sacraments, in so much that without this no other
Sacrament is auaylable: a washing and cleansing our souls from all sin
Original and others: a Satisfaction for all pains due for sin eternal or
temporal: a delivery from the bondage and power of the Devil: a restorer of
Innocence: an incorporation to Christ as members of his body mystical: and
finally a reconciliation unto the grace and favor of God Almighty, whereby we
are made the adopted Sons of God, Coheyres and inheritors with Christ of the
kingdom of heaven. Has it all these effects? Take heed then that thou lay the
foundation sure of thy Christianity, that is: that thou be truly Baptized and
Christened.

The second motive was to lay open Sacrament; For that thou being more fully
herein instructed, thou may have a more especial care to have it perfectly
effected and truly performed in these dangerous times of heresy. For
assuredly this is the gate that opens to heaven: which if it should be shut
and not duly ministered, there were no hope of salvation, but all open to hell
and damnation.

The dangerous points of Doctrine concerning Baptism.
which are taught and spread abroad of this Sacrament by the Sectaries of this
age. The first dangerous point of doctrine is, that the Sacrament of Baptism
was institued by S. John Baptist: and that the Baptism of Christ, and S.
John's, is all one and the self same; which is against Scripture and reason.
For then we must needs say, that the first and chief Sacrament of the new
Testament and Gospel of Christ, should be instituted by a precedent prophet,
and not by Christ him self, which were absurd, seeing all Sacraments of the New
Testament, have their institution by Christ, and their force and virtue from
his death and Passion. Secondly that this Sacrament does not confer grace,
cleanse the soul from sin as an efficient isntrumental cause by Christ
instituted and endued with that virtue; which were to destroy Baptism. Thirdly
that it Christianity indelible for ever; which is to make no distinction
between Jew, Gentill, Pagan and Christian. Fourthly that he, who Baptized,
can not be damned; which were to set all at liberty; and make men careless of
all other Christian life. Fifthly that the only memory of Baptism does
justify from our sins, which we shall commit after Baptism, which were to
take away all satisfaction, repentance and penance; and other such like
absurdities, and dangerous points of Doctrine against Scripture, Counsels,
Fathers, and all antiquity.

Finally I would have thee to consider with what subtlety the Devil has
endeavored in these latter times by his instruments the Heretics, The fourth
motive.
to disgrace the beauty of Christ's Spouse the Church, to depopulate root up,
and destroy like wild boares the vineyard of our Lord. And I compare the
Sacrament of Baptism to the tree of life placed in the midst of Paradise;
which the Heretics of this age, some of them have hacked and hewed at the
very chief boughs and branches thereof: some others have pilled the bark,
and pulled of all the leaves, the beauty thereof: and some others have
destroyed all the fruit and virtue thereof, and put the axe even to the very
root to destroy all. Martin Luther endeavored at one blow to cut of two of
the essential parts of this tree of life; that is: the form and matter of
Baptism; Luther in Symposiaticis collo. ca. 17.
For (says he) no form of words is necessary. It is sufficient with him: To
Baptize in the name of the Lord. And as for the matter, any liquor that is
apt to wash, as Ale, beer, or milk, is sufficient. Thus this Impe and
instrument of Satan, makes no scruple to destroy the two essential parts of
this Sacrament to appoint any liquor for matter, and no form of words.
Although this error of Luthers be against Christ's institution, and express
Commandment, who has ordained water to be the matter: and the form to be:
In the name of the Father, Joan. 3. Matthew. 28.
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: M. Brentius will make himself so
bold with Christ and his Church, as to set down an order of his own, never
heard of before: Let the Minister (says he) recite the Creed, and say:
Brentius de Baptis.
In this faith I Baptize thee; and this shall pass for current without any
other form of words.

But M. John Calvin goes farther, almost impudent and blusheth not to say:
That the form of words in Sacraments are mere Magical charms and
enchauntments. Calvin li. 4. institu. cap. 17.
And thus you may see how these Agents for Satan do dismember the essential
parts of this Sacrament of Baptism, and do cut of the principal boughs of
this tree of life. Protestants. Read S. Aug. li. 2. de nup. and Concupisc. ca.
29.
Then come the Protestants in part joining issue with the Pelagians, and pull
of the leaves, and pill of the bark of this tree of life, that is: they
deride, neglect and conte^ne the ancient Ceremonies of this Sacrament of
Baptism, as well the precedent Ceremonies, such as go before the act of
Baptism, as exorcismes, exsufflations, hallowing of the font etc: as the
Subsequent such as are after Baptism, videlicet: holy unction, with holy
Chrisme, the use of the waxe-candle or taper light, the clothing with the
white garment commonly called the Chrisome. All which Ceremonies although they
be ancient, profitable, significant, and delivered by Tradition as from the
Apostles, as shall appear in the sequel: yet are these derided, neglected,
and contemned by the Protestants.

Last of all come the Puritans Puritans.
with the axe of M. Calvin, laying load at the very root of this tree of
life, to overthrow all, to beat down this gate and entrance to salvation. This
Sacrament say they, is not necessary to Salvation for all men, because
Children borne of faithful Parents may be saved without Baptism; either by
Predestination, or by the faith of their Parents; the elder sort being of
understanding, may be sure of their Salvation only by faith. Also they
extinguish and condemn the two principal effects of Baptism that is
Remission of sins, and infusion of inherent grace whereby the soul is
cleansed and justified. Although this be contrary to Christ's own words, who
expresses the necessity of Baptism unto all saying: Joan. 3.
Nisi quis renatus, etc. Unless every one be borne again of water and the
holy Ghost, he can not enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Also that Baptism
does remit sin the ancient Fathers when they compiled and made the Nycen
Creed, which is one of the three Creeds believed of all Protestants, have these
words: Confiteor vnum Baptisma in Remissionem Peccatorum: I Confess one
Baptism unto Remission of sins. Some will have it only an external
washing, no internal cleansing. And the Anabaptists exclud all Infants and
Children from Baptism, and only will admit such as have the use of reason,
are aged, and me^ of understanding.

Take heed therefore (Courteous Reader) of this dangerous doctrine, beware of
these wicked brood, who hack and hew, pill and poll, yea cut down even at the
root this tree of life, planted in Paradise by God himself, instituted by
Christ in the Church as the only ordinary means, gate, and entry to
salvation. They will have it used only as a Commanded Ceremony to
incorporate us as the members of the Church, and as a bare sign^ and seal of
Justice: not as the ordinary means for all to salvation, not as conferring
grace inherent, not as cleasing and washing the soul internallie, not as
remitting sin; And so cutting down by the root the efficacy, force, virtue
and power of this Sacrament, which is to aim at the overthrow of all
Christianity. For if no Baptism no Christianity: no Christianity, no Christ
Vigila ergo and Vale. Be watchful therefore, and so farewell. This 30 of Iulie,
1614.

Thy true friend and well willer in Christ O. A.

The general Points contained in this treatise are five.

1. First of the effects of this Sacrament, and the necessity thereof to
Salvation. 2. Of the two essential Parts of Baptism, that is: Concerning the
matter and the form, the water and the word. 3. Of the Baptiser, that is of
the ordinary minister, to whom by office, function, or Commission it belongs
to Baptize: or the Extraordinary who are allowed to Baptize in case of
necessity, as the layeman, midwife, or any other woman. 4. Of the Parties who
are to be Baptized, as Infants, and Children, and such as have use of reason,
as aged, and men of understanding. 5. Of the reasons, use, and antiquity of
the Rites and Ceremonies of this Sacrament.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE LIFE AND GATE OF CHRISTIANITY, ENTREATING OF THE
EFFECTS OF THE SACRAMENT OF BAPTISM.
CAP. I. What a Sacrament is, and why God would use external sensible things
for the Sanctification and Justification of man.
AFTER our most great, Almighty, and good God had taken by the singular
benefit of our Redemption mankind into his guardion safekeeping, and
protection, being, corporal and carnal men (I say) consisting of flesh and
blood: would of his ineffable omnipote^cie, power, and singular goodness
confer and give us his invisible grace, using and appoynting external
elements and creatures, as it were condesce^ding to the weakness of our
natures, state, condition, Chrysostom. ho. 60. ad populum. and 83. in mat.
and necessity, where upon S. Chrysostom says: Si incorporeus esses, nuda,
and incorporea tibi dedisset dona: sed quoniam anima corpori inserta est, in
sensibilibus intelligibilia tibi praebet: If thou werte a man incorporeus
without body, flesh and bone, God had given thee gifts ba^e, uncovered, and
vncorporate: but because thy soul is inserted and put to thy body in sensible
things subject to sense he does offer unto thee things of understanding.
Wherefore a Sacrament is defined to be: A Sign of an holy thing; or. A visible
form of an invisible grace. Or a Sacrament is: A matter, or thing subject to
our senses, which has by the institution of God power both to sign^fie, and
also to effect sanctity and Justice. Or it is that, by which the Divine power
under the cover of visible things does work mo^e secretly salvation, health,
and sanctity in the soul of man. And such is the wisdom of God to use and
institute these inferior and base creatures, whereby it may clearlie appear
that the grace which is given by these Sacraments, proceeds from God only.
And for this cause Christ did give sight unto the borneblind man with mire and
dirte made of spittle; Joan. 9.
and did not use any precious ointments, that it might appear to come from
Christ God alone, ad by his instit^t on to work his effect. This is the power
of God only by base, and bare external elements according to his institution
and word to work internal effects: Genesis 1.
Ipse dixit and facta sunt: He said the word, and it was done.

CAP. 2. What Baptism is, how it is defined, and what are the effects in
general.
IT may be defined briefly out of the third of S. John's Gospel, Joan. 3.
Ephesians. 5.
and out of the fifth of S. Paul to the Ephesians, to be the Sacrament of
Regeneration by water in the word of life. It is called Regeneration or second
birth, in respect of our natural and carnal birth. As no man can enter into
this world, nor have his life and being in the same, unless he be borne of his
carnal parents: no more can any man enter into life and state of grace, which
is in Christ, or attain to life everlasting, unless he be borne of water and
the holy Ghost. You must understand, that I say it is by water, for it is not
the water it self, that is: the element permanent, but the lauer, ablution,
washing, or the use of water. And therefore S. Paul says: That Christ so
loved his Church, Ephesians. 5.
that he delivered him self for it, that he might sanctify it cleansing it by
the lauer of water and making us safe by the lauer of Regeneration. And as by
the washing of the water the body externallie is cleansed: so also by the
water and word, by the virtue and power of this Sacrament and operation of the
holy Ghost the soul internallie is sanctified, and borne anewe in Christ
Jesus. Or we may make a more full definition, or rather an absolute description
of Baptism, containyng the matter, form, institution, effects, and necessity
thereof to salvation, saying: Baptism is the first and principal Sacrament of
the new law and Gospel, consisting (according to to inisttution of Christ)
in an exterior ablution and washing of the body, with a due and lawful
pronuntiation of the form of words: which is of necessity to Salvation for
all sorts of people as well children and Infants, as those of riper years,
aged, or men of understanding: and we receiving by this Sacrament a full and
perfect remission of our sins, are spiritually regenerated and borne again
a new creature: also we, who were before the children of wrath, now are made
the Children and heirs of God, and in deed the Coheyres of Christ our
Redeemer. Which description shall be particularly discussed and proved
hereafter.

The Prerogatives of Baptism.
Now the effects and prerogatives of this Sacrament are great and many. First
it is the beginning of Christianity: the first entrance into the Catholic
Church, and house of God here on earth: the very highway to all other
Sacraments; insomuch that no other are auailable without this: It is the first
gate that opens to the Kingdom of heaven; by this we receive such singular
grace, that thereby we are cleansed from all manner of sin: as Original,
Actual, be it mortal or venial. The Infants not having actual, are cleansed
from Original: and the elder sort, or at man's estate, young or old have by
this Sacrament their souls cleansed and washed of all manner of sins, as
Original, actual, mortal, or venial, and the pains due for sin either
eternal or temporal fully satisfied. Yea we are delivered from the bondage
and power of the devil, restored to innoce^cie, incorporate to Christ as
members of his body, reconciled to the grace and favor of Almigtie God: made
his adopted sons, and coheyres and inheritours with Christ of the Kingdom of
heaven. The soul is beautified, made beloved of God, splendent and shining in
the sight of Angels. Hear what S. Basil, called ^he Great for his
sanctity, holiness, and ^earninge, in his exhortation to Baptism says: It
is, Mors peccati, animae regeneratio, ami^tus spendens, Character indelebilis,
Coeli iter, Regni coelestis conciliatio, adoptionis gratia: The death of sin,
the Regeneration of the Soul, the splendent amise or glorious apparel, the
indelible Character, or the mark, badge, printe of a Christian man, the way or
journey to heaven, a winning of the Caelestiall kingdom, the grace of
adoption. And to this holy Father subscribeth almost in the same words S.
Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem saying: Protocathesi.
Baptismus est Captiuitatis liberatio, Peccatorum remissio, mors Peccati etc.
Baptism is the delivery out of captivity, the remission of sins, the death
of sin, the regeneration of the soul, the white garment wherewith they are
clothed who follow the lamb immacu^ate, the holy and indelible seal, the
chariote into heaven, the delight of Paradise, the winning of the heavenly
kingdom, the Chrisme or unction of the children of adoption. These
privileges, graces, prerogatives and efects, I have the rather expressed that
in these dangerous ^ymes of heresy parents may take greater care to have this
sacrament duly executed, and truly ministered to their children, considering
it so much concerns the life and eternal salvation of their souls.

CAP. 3. Whether if by error or other ways this Sacrament of baptism be not
duly administered, one be capable of the other Sacraments.
To this question it may be answered, that it is a chief privilege and
prerogative of this Sacrament, that it only and by it self without any other
Sacrament may be received to salvation; and all other Sacraments suppose this
at the gate and entrance, so that without this they can take no effect. For
how can the body be strengthened, or take arms and weapons to fight against
his enemies that has no life in it. So (...) say of Confirmation the next
Sacrament after Baptism, Confirmation.
which strengthens and armeth the soul by the invocation of the holy Ghost
to fight against the enemies of mankind, that is the world the flesh and the
devil; and to stand constantly in confession of faith in time of persecution
of Pagan, Turk, or Heretic: to wear the cognizance of a Christian: to
receive the standard of Christ, that is his Cross, that he be not ashamed to
profess Christ crucified. But how can this be if the soul be dead in sin,
have not the life of grace, and never entered the gate of Christianity?
Sacrament of the Alt.
As for the Sacrament of the Altar S. Paul says: Qui manducat etc. He that
unworthily receaueth, does eat and drink his own damnation. And how can he
worthily eat Christ's Body, 1. Cor. 11.
whom Gods grace has not yet made worthy, and who in deed as yet is no
Christian? Confess.
And for the Sacrament of Confession, if it be as S. Jerome says: Secunda
tabula post naufragium: A second table or planke after shipwreck: it must
needs suppose a first entrance before a recovery of the ship. And how can
he have help by the table or planke who never entered the ship? Also in
Extreme unction, Extreme unction.
how can the Priest by holy unction and prayer purge the remainder, before the
soul has ever been cleansed? Or obtain pardon of venial sins, who has
not as yet Original sin remit^ed? Or offer the soul to the hands of Angels
to be presented before the throne of God, who has not as yet the character,
sign, or seal of a Christian? And for Matrimony Matrimony.
how can it be a Sacrament where Christianity is not professed? Dico magnum
Sacramentum in Christo and Ecclesia. Holy Orders.
I say (says S. Paul) it is a great Sacrament in Christ and his Church. And
for holy Orders certainly it is generally concluded, that he can be no Priest
or minister of Christ, who is no member of his Church. Innoce^. de Presbit. no^
Bapti. can. ve niens Apost.
Read the decree of Innocentius the third, written to the Bishops of Ferrara,
where he concludes: that he who is not Baptized can not be a Priest. How can
any house be builded, where no foundation is laid? wherefore I conclude, he
that is not truly Christened, can not be capable of any other Sament, for
that the effect of Baptism is to give life, to open the gate, and give power
to the receiving of all the other Sacraments.

CAP. 4. Whether all punishment due for Original sinn^ be remitted in
baptism.
THere is no doubt, but he that shall die immediately after Baptism shall be
freed from all manner of punishment temporal or eternal^ due for sin, and
his soul shall incontinentli^ fly to heaven. The difficulty of this question
is for that we see and feel our selves after Baptism to be subject to hunger,
famine, thirst cold; and Concupicence to reign in our flesh and we to tremble
at death and other calamitie^ which were inflicted upon man as punishmen^ of
our first parent Adam. How then are we free by Baptism from all manner of
punishment an^ penalties of this life, which were due for Original sin,
seeing these infirmities were inflicte^ for sin; and yet remain in us after
Baptism I answer; First we must consider the state o^ man as he is in this
world, and also as he shall be in the next: Seco^dlie we must note that there
is temporal pain and punishment and also eternal. The eternal is by
Baptism utterly abolished in this life and in the next: but part of the
temporal punishment, which was inflicted for Original sin, only does
remain in this life. As for example death was a punishment imposed for sin,
yet notwithstanding all must die. Also hunger, cold, nakedness, sickness, and
other such like molestations and penalties of this life we sustain after
Baptism, and are not thereby taken away, but remain in this life as the
miseries of mortality. But in the next life they shall be utterly
extinguished, according to that of S. John. Absterget Deus etc. God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes, and death shall be no more, nor mourning nor
crying, neither shall there be sorrow any more. Also the reason why
Concupiscence reigns in our flesh not vterlie extinguished by Baptism may
be: that man may by striving to suppress and co^quere it, merit the more But
if by Baptism our bodies should be made impassible in this life, that is, not
subject to death, hunger, nakedness, and other calamities, we should fly unto
Baptism rather for this present life, then hope for the life to come, which
were a great inconvenience in Christian profession. Thom. 3. p. q. 69. ar. 3.
Therefore I say with S. Thomas the great Divine: that the Sacrament of
Baptism has power and virtue to take away all the penalties and punishments
due for sin: yet notwithstanding it does not De facto take them away in this
present life, but by the virtue thereof in the death and Passton of Christ they
shall be extinguished, and utterly taken away in the general resurrection:
when these our mortal bodies shall be endued with immortality, as it is said.
1. Cor. 15.
And this not without reason by God ordained; First because by Baptism man is
incorporate to Christ, and made his member; And therefore it is convenient that
the same should be performed in the member incorporate, which was acted in the
head. But Chrict from the beginning of his Conception being full of grace and
verity notwithstanding had a passible body which after his death and Passion,
was raised to a glorious life. Wherefore although every Christian in Baptism
does obtain grace for the beautifying of his soul: yet not withstanding
because he has a passible body to suffer for Christ and with Christ, he must
for the time present sustain the penalties thereof: yet shall he be raised at
the general resurection to an impassible life, Romans 8.
which S. Paul declares: Qui suscitauit Iesum etc. He that raised up Jesus
from the dead, shall quicken also your mortal bodies, because of his spirit
dwelling in you. Wherefore although Baptism has power and virtue to take
away all the penalties of this life, and punishment due for sin: yet it is
convenient they remain temporallie, and for a time in this life; and be
accomplished and fulfilled in the general resurrection in the next life, when
we all shall receive our bodies again.

CAP. 5. Whether Baptism does remit sin and give grace Ex opere operato,
that is: By force of the word and work done and said in the Sacrament.
It is a general conclusion amongst all Catholic Divines, that the Sacraments
are causes of our Justification, and that God does apply the merits of Christ's
Passion unto our souls. Wherefore we conclude that in Baptism, by force and
virtue of the word and work done and said, sin is remitted, grace given and
Justification wrought. Therefore we do not attribute the obtaining of grace and
Justification to the merits of the minister ministering it, nor to the party
receyuinge but as Christ has taught us, to the water and the holy Ghost
working it. And for better understanding of Justification and grace wrought in
Baptism, let us consider how many things concur thereunto. First does
concur Almighty God, who is the principal and chief agent, worker and
first cause of Justification. Then Christ's death and Passion by which we are
redeemed, and he has meritted this grace for us. Then the sacramental action
that is the concurring and applieing together the water and the word in due
form according to the Institution and ordinance of God. This external action
is this Sacrament, which God does use as his instrument for the justification,
washing and cleansing of the soul of man: Then is the Priest ordained the
ordinary minister of God to execute this sacrament or external action in
whom there is required that he have power, authority and commission to do it
and intention to effect it. Finalie in the receyuer that is, in him who is to
be Baptized, if he be of age and understanding, there is required a will and
desire to receive it, also faith and belief in Christ, with a penitent heart.
These are not causes of Justification, but dispositions in the soul only to
make the soul apt to receive the Sacrament, and to remove obstacles and letts
that the Sacrament may work his effect. And this S. Peter after his first
sermon in the day of Pentecost insinuated and told the people, when they asked
him after the preaching was done, what they shoud do. Act. 2.
Dispose your selves says he, do Penance, and be every one of you Baptized.
But for Infants what is required in them, we will entreat afterward.
Wherefore we will conclude Baptism to be the instrument of God, and by Divine
ordinance to have as an isntrumental cause, efficacy and efficiencie to remit
sin, and work salvation and justification in the soul of man.

CAP. 6. Whether Baptism be reallie and in deed an isntrumental cause of
justification, or only a means to excite, stir up or move to faith.
IT is an absurd and unconscionable dealing, yea a great slander and calumny
of Calvin and his accomplices to say that Catholics in their Doctrine, do
resign and tie the virtue and power of God to external simboles and signs.
As though they taught that in Baptism the water and the word without God did
remitte sin. It were a vain thing to think that when the carpenter does
use his saw as an isntrumental cause to break, cut or divide timber, to say
that the saw does cut, work, or break timber of it self without the
carpenter. So Almighty God, although he use the external signs, that is the
word and water in Baptism to cleanse the soul and remit sin as secondarie
and isntrumental causes: yet not so that they should work of themselves
without God, but God by them does effect justification and remission of sin.
Neither does he resign his power so to these external signs, that they work
these effects in them selves, and not he in them and with them: but as in the
precedent chapter I said, God does use in Baptism water and the word as his
instrument, and by force of the word and work done grace is given, and sin
remitted. Therefore they are not used (as some heretics of this time auerre) as
bare signs and simboles, or only means to excite, stir up, or move to
faith; and the^ afterward by faith only to be justified. This were to destroy
the efficiencie and force of the Sacraments, and to make no more of them, then
we make of an Iuie garland, which is only set forth to signify that there is
wine to be sold, bought, and drunk. It is manifest that the Gospel, the word
of God preached is a great motive, and forceable means to move us to believe
and to strengthen our faith: and S. Paul says it is: Virtus Dei in salutem
omni credenti: Romans 1.
the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes: much more then
is the Sacrament of Baptism the power of God, not moving only to faith, but
working in it self as his instrument to salvation. And in deed faith, because
it comes unto those of age and understanding by hearing as S. Paul says:
Romans 10.
Fides ex auditu: Faith is by hearing: therefore faith is in them as a
necessary disposition to Baptism. Where upon Christ says: Qui crediderit
and Baptizatus fuerit, Mar. 16.
saluus erit: He that believes and is Baptized shall be saved. So that faith
going before Baptism is a cause dispositiue and necessary unto Baptism, but
not the only effect of Baptism, as some would have it. For that the
immediate effect of Baptism by applying the merits of Christ Passion, is
remission of sins to salvation, is a new regeneration and opening the gate
to heaven. And this plainly Christ spoke to Nicodemus: Io. 3.
Nisi quis etc. Unless a man be borne again of water and the holy Ghost, he
can not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Where we see our regeneration and
second Birth attributed unto Baptism, which consists in an external element
of water and an internal power of the holy Ghost, and that no man can enter
into heaven without it. Who sees not then, that it is the instrument of God
working to salvation, and not a bare sign or motive only to faith.

That the effect of Baptism is the remission of sin the Scripture is plain.
The people of Jerusalem and Jury at the first sermon S. Peter made, act. 2.
being as it were converted: Et compuncti cord: and compuncte of heart, said.
What shall we do? S. Peter answered: Be every one of you Baptized in the
name of Jesus for remission of your sins. Note that he says for remission
of your sins, showing the effect of Baptism to be remission of sin. Act.
22.
And S. Paul as he reports himself being stricken blind, and called of Christ
to be the vessel of election, for the conversion of the Gentiles, Ananias came
unto him, restored him to his sight, and then said unto him: Et nunc quid
moraris? Act. 22. v. 16.
Surge, Baptizare, ablue peccata tua, inuocato nomine eius. And now what
tarriest thou? Rise up, be Baptized, and wash away thy sins, inuocating his
name. S. Paul believed before he was Baptized, but his sins were washed away
by Baptism. I will therefore conclud upon these testimonies of Christ and his
Apostles, that the Scripture is plain that Baptism of it self as the
instrument of God, does wash away sins by the force and virtue of the word
and work done and said, and that faith going before Baptism is but a
disposition to remission of sins.

Avoid then the doctrine of Heretics, who affirm and teach that this
Sacrament of Baptism does not remit sins, but signify remission of sins,
and does work of it self nothing, but is as a bare sign and simbole only to
excite and move to faith: as the Iuie garland is only a bare sign to excite
and move men to buy wine, and to signify that in such a place it is to be
sold. Fly this Heretical doctrine (I say) which kills the life of the
Sacrament, contrary to the Doctrine of S. Paul: Christus dilexit Ecclesiam,
Ephesians. 5.
and tradidit seipsum pro ea, mundans eam lauacro aquae. Christ (says he)
loved his Church, and delivered him self for it cleansing it by the lauer of
water. Also in his epistle to Titus: Saluos nos fecit per lauacrum
regenerationis: he says: Christ has saved us and made us safe by the lauer
of regeneration, and renouation of the Holy Ghost. Ad Titum. 3.
Can any man more forcibly, or plainly express the working, effect, and
force of Baptism, then S. Paul, in caling it the Lauer of regeneration; and
that we are to be cleansed, made safe, and saved by this lauer of water? And
withal let us consider what Ezechiell the Prophet prophesied of the effects
and force of Baptism: Ezech. ca. 27.
Effundam super vos aquam mundam, and mundabimini ab omnibus inquinamentis
vestris: I will power out (says the Prophet in the person of God) clean
water upon you, and you shall b^ cleansed from all your filthes, and stains.
Baptism therefore reallie and in deed is an isntrumental cause of our
Justification, and not a bare sign and means only to excite, stir up, and
move us to faith; or a Single seal, or sign (as Calui^ would have it) of
former Justice.

CAP. 7. Whether he, who once is Baptized, can not sin, but shall be saved.
Bellar. li. 1. de Bapt. ca. 14.
This controversy is excellently and compendiouslie handled by that most
worthy learned Prelate Cardinal Bellarmine. It was the error of Iouinian the
heretic against whom S. Jerome wrote: That he who was truly and in deed
Baptized, Ioro. li. 2. con Iouin.
could not be damned, or become a reprobate or sin after Baptism. And for
this his error he brought Scripture (as all other Heretics do) Christ's own
words, and his Apostles S. John's. Christ said: Non potest arbor bona malos
fructus facere: A good tree can not bring forth evil fruit. Therefore being
made good by Baptism, can not sin and consequently can not be damned. But
what if this tree be corrupt, the root be withered? either it will bring forth
no fruit or bad fruit; which this Heretic considered not. And for that he
alleges out of S. John: Io. ep. i. ca. 3. and 5.
Every one that is borne of God commits not sin; because his seed
abides in him, and he can not sin because he is borne of God. By which words
of the Apostle this Heretic would prove that the Baptized can not sin. But
the sense of the Apostle is, that no man continuing the son of God,
commits mortal sin; because mortal sin can not stand together with
the grace of God: therefore so long as we keep the Innocence of Baptism, we
can not sin. S. John then would not say that the Baptized could not fall from
their first estate of Innocence, For S. Paul does reprove this as an error,
Romans 11. ver. 19. 20.
and proves that he who now has faith, may fall and become incredulous: as
the Jews were the faithful people of God, but by incredulity are become
rep^obate, so also may do the Gentiles And therefore says he: Tu fide stas:
noli altum sapere, sed time: thou by faith do Stand: be not too highly
wise, but fear. Wherefore beware the vain presumption and security of
Heretics; for he who stands by faith may fall: Aug li. 20. de ciuita. Dei
ca. 25.
and he who has the Innocence of Baptism, may loose it. S. Augustine does
reprehend some Catholics of his time of gross error who held that, those who
were Baptized, should not be damned, although they lived wickedlie, so that
they kept themselves in the Catholic Church. Against whom he wrote a whole
book intitleing it: de fide and operibus: Of faith and good works. Also
against this heresy spoke. S. Paul, proving that by the law of Christ by
Baptism we are freed from the state of damnation, unless we again willfullie
give our selves over to the flesh. Romans 8. ver. 13.
And therefore he concludes: Si secundum Carnem vixeritis moriemini. If ye
live according to the flesh ye shall die. And he plainly tells the
Corinthians, and wills them to know: that the unjust, the wicked (although
they are Christians and Baptized) shall not possess the kingdom of heaven And
bids them not err in their opinion: 1. Cor. 5.
Nolite errare: for neither fornicatours, nor seruers of idolles, adulterous,
nor the effeminate, nor thieves, nor the covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers,
nor extortioners shall possess the kingdom of God.

Calvin lib. 3. inst. ca. 22.. 11.
Yet after all this comes M. John Calvin with his Heretical proposition: vera
fides semel habita non potest amitti. True faith once had can not be lost.
Which is contrary to the express words of the Apostle before cited, and
examples in Scripture (...) the Acts of the Apostles it is written of Simon
Magus, Act. 8.
that at the preaching of S. Phillippe the Deacon he believed, was baptized an
cleaued to Phillippe: Yet it is also manifest that he became a reprobate. For
S. Peter said of him that his part was not right before God: and saw in him
the gall of bitterness, 1. Timo. cap. 1.
and obligation of sin. S. Paul exhorts Thimothie to be steadfast in faith,
and have a good consience: Quia quidam naufragauerunt circa fidem: For some
repelling their good conscience, have made also shipwreck about the faith. And
he absolutely affirms that there shall be Apostatates in the latter days: 1.
Timo. cap. 4.
In nouissimis diebus discedent quidam a fide: In the last days certain shall
depart from the faith. Also Martin Luther has this libertine proposition: Non
potest homo Baptizatus damnari: Luther lib. de Capti. Babil. cap. 6.
nisi nolit credere: He that is Baptized can not be damned: unless he will not
believe. Against which idle position I will set down the decree of the
general council of Trent: Si quis dixerit Bapizatum, non posse etiamsi velit
gratiam amittere, quantumcumque peccet, nisi nolit credere, anathema sit: If
any man shall say, that he who is Baptized, can not loose grace, if he would,
let him sin never so much, unless he will not believe, let him be accursed.
Werefore I may well conclude, that he who has been once Baptized, may sin,
may be damned, may be a reprobate. It is too frequent to hear of renegate
Christians who becomes Turks, and Apostatates, and Chatholikes also, who fall
from their Church and faith.

CAP. 8. Whether Baptism has force to remitte sin committed after Baptism.
THere is no question (as has been declared before) but that Baptism has
force te remitte all manner of sins, either contracted in our first parents,
or committed in act by our selves, that is either original or actual, be
they mortal, or venial. The difficulty now is, in that there are sins
besides Original precedent, that is: sins past and going before Baptism in
those of perfect age: and there are sins subsequent; that is committed after
Baptism. Now the question is, whether Baptism extend it self to sins
committed after, or only contained it self within the bound of those
committed before. Ins the general doctrine of the Catholic Church, that if we
commit any sin after Baptism, we must seek to relieve our selves not by
Baptism, but by other means; that is: by the sacrament of Penance. Aug. ep.
23. ad Bonif.
And S. Augustine expresses saying: Semel acccptam paruulus gratiam Christi
non amittit, nisi propria impietate, si aetatis accessu etc. The Infant
Baptized loses not the grace of Christ, unless it be by his own proper
impiety and wickedness. For if he become evil, when he comes to
understanding and use of reason, then properly shall he begin to have sins,
which sins may not be taken away by regeneration and Baptism, but are to be
cured by some other medicine. This S. Augustine: So that it is plain by this
ancient Doctor, and learned Fathers opinion, that sins committed after
Baptism, are not relieved by Baptism, but by other means. S. Paul exhorts
men to be perfect, and warns them to be careful that they fall not from
their faith and grace they received once in Baptism: Heb. 6.
Impossible est eos qui sunt illuminati, iterum renouari ad Poenitentiam: It
is imposible (says the Apostle) for them whom are illuminated and Baptized,
to be Baptized again, to be renewed again by Baptismall Penance: that is: by
that easy remedy that Baptism affords. But if thou sin after Baptism
then must thou go to the Sacrament of Penance, which is open to all sinners,
called the second table after shipwreck, a remedy, a medicine more painful
then Baptism, requiring much fasting, praying corporal affliction,
confession, contrition, Ambr. li. 2. de Paenite^. cap. 3.
satisfaction etc. So taught S. Ambrose entreating of Penance; so preached S.
John Chrysostom in his ninth Homily upon the sixth chapter to the Hebrews.
And there is no doubt to be made, but Christ after his resurrection gave
commission and commandment to his Apostles to Baptize all nations and people
in remission of their sins and those who believed, Mat. 28.
and were Baptized should be saved. So it is also as plain as may be in S.
John's Gospel, Mar. 16.
that the same day of Christ's Resurrection, he instituted the Sacrament of
Penance, knowing the infirmity and weakness of man, that after Baptism he
might loose his first grace, and former estate, and fall into mortal sin:
therefore he provided a second remedy to revive him again. And as he gave
commission to remitte sins in Baptism: so also after Baptism he gave power,
authority, and commission to forgive sins. The words of Christ in the
Gospel are these. As my Father sent me, I also send you When he had said thus
he breathed upon them and he said to them: Receive ye the Holy Ghost, Whose
sins you shall forg^ue, they are forgiven them: and whose you shall retain,
they are retained. Lo the institution of the Sacrament of Penance. Wherefore
Baptism is not the remedy for sins committed after that Sacrament received,
but we must recurre to the Sacrament of Confession by Christ's own institution.

Let therefore no Heretic lull you a sleep in this plausible doctrine and
Epicurian practice: that if you fall out of the ship you entered into by
Baptism, and make shipwreck, and loose by sin your first grace received in
Baptism, that you shall not need to take hold and handfast of the second
table, that is the Sacrament of Penance: but that the memory only of
Baptism, shall be sufficient to recover you without contrition, confession, or
satisfaction either to God or man, or any other punishment due for sin. It
was also decreed in the great and general council of Lateran, under Pope
Innocentius the Third, at which council were our English Ambassadors and
orators amongst the rest of the Princes of Christendom the words of the
Council are: Council. Later. cap. 1.
Si post susceptionem Baptismi contingat prolabi in peccatum, per veram
Penitentiam potest semper recuperari: If it happen that any man, after he has
received the Sacrament of Baptism, fall down into sin, he may always
continually from time to time recover himself by true repentance.

Wherefore I conclude with the venerable council of Trent: Si quis dixerit
peccata omnia, Con. Trid. sess. 7. canon. 9.
quae post Baptismum fiunt, sola recordatione, and fide suscepti Baptismi, vel
dimitti, vel venialia fieri, anathema sit: If any man shall say; that all
sins, which are committed and done after Baptism, are by the only
recordation, remembrance and faith of Baptism before received, either
remitted, or become venial, let him be accursed. It can not therefore be, that
those sins we shall commit after Baptism, by Baptism should be relieved:
but the Sacrament of Penance must be our refuge and thither must we fly with
an humble and contrite heart. This is Christ's ordinance and institution for the
help and succor of man.

CAP. 9. Whether Baptism be necessary to salvation.
THere is no doubt in Catholic Doctrine, but ordinarlie it is of necessity to
salvation, and the only means by Christ's institution to enter into the
kingdom of heaven, according to that saying of Christ: Joan. 3.
Nisi quis renatus etc. unless a man be borne again by water and the Holy
Ghost he can not enter into the kingdom of heaven. As no man can enter into
this world, nor have life and being, unless he be borne of his carnal
parents, no more can any man enter into life and state of salvation, unless he
be borne of water and the Holy Ghost. He must be, denuo natus: Borne again:
who will see the kingdom of God. Therefore they can no way be saved (says S.
Thomas) who receive not this Sacrament: S. Tho. 3. p. q. 68. articu. 4.
In re, or in voto; that is: In deed, or: In desire, vow and will. For they
that receive it not: are neither in deed, nor in vow, neither Sacramentallie,
nor mentallie incorporated to Christ, nor made his members, by whom only,
salvation is obtained. He therefore that shall be prevented by death before he
actually obtain this Sacrament in act and deed realie, if he have an ardent
desire to be Baptized, may be saved for and by the desire of Baptism, which
did proceed of faith working by love, by which God inwardly sanctifies him.
The reason is because God has not so bound himself or his power to these
external Sacraments (although he have made them his ordinary instruments) but
that he may and does in some cases of necessity, accept them as Baptized, who
either are martired before they could be Baptized, or else depart this life
with vow and desire to have the Sacrament, when by some extreme necessity it
could not be obtained. Con. Trid. sess. 7. ca. non. cap. 5.
Therefore I conclud that he, who shall neglect or contemn the Sacrament of
Baptism as necessary to salvation, and so commanded by Christ, can not be
saved. For this cause the general council of Trent does Anathematize those
who affime Baptism to be free at liberty, and not necessary to salvation.

CAP. 10. Whether in the third of S. John Christ did treat of Baptism.
I move this question in respect of Calvin, because he willing to maintain
Baptism not to be necessary as the ordinary means by Christ instituted to
salvation, does absolutely deny, That Christ here in this Chapter recorded by
the Evangelist, does entreat of the Sacrament of Baptism: Calvin lib. 4.
inst. ca. 16.. 25.
and so abuse the express words of Christ, with idle glosses, and false
interpretations, contrary to the understanding of general Counsels, ancient
Fathers, and meaning of universal Church. And therefore by these words:
unless a man be borne again by water and the Holy Ghost he can not enter
into the kingdom of heaven. Antido. con. Triden. ses. 6.
Christ intends (says he) only internal renouation, no external
Sacrament: therefore by this word (water) we must understand only the Holy
Ghost to make clean and purge as wather does. But this gloss is absurd, and
the interpretation fained. For if Christ did not intend an external Sacrament
consisting of water, but only an internal renouation, what need had he to use
this word (Water) at all, but he might have said absolutely: unless a man be
borne of the Holy Ghost only he can not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
But he plainly said: unless a man be borne of water and the Holy Ghost to
signify the Sacrament of Baptism externallie to be water, and the Holy Ghost
internallie to work: and therefore he put them jointly together, that by
water and the holy Ghost our entrance to heaven should be effected. I call it
a fained interpretation, because it proceeds from Caluins own fancy. For he
can bring no general council, no consent of Fathers, no practice of the
primitive Church for his interpretation, because they all stand firm in this
place of Scripture: and the words of Christ here related are manifest for the
Sacrament of Baptism, as the ordinary means for man's salvation, and that by
Christ's institution; as shall and may appear by the process of this treatise.
Ob.


But Calvin may say: If I have no counsels nor Fathers: Yet I have Scripture
for my purpose. It is said, Matthew. 3.11. Luc. 3. ver. 16.
that Christ shall Baptize in the Holy Ghost and fire: but fire makes no
Sacrament, nor is necessary to salvation, but only expresses the effects of
the Holy Ghost: so why should the word (water) do any more. I answer: Sol.
these words recited: that Christ should Baptize in the holy Ghost and fire,
were not spoken by Christ himself, but by his Prophet S. John Baptist whereby
he might foretell and prophecy of the the power of Christ in sending the Holy
Ghost upon the Apostles in the day of Pentecost visible in the form of fiery
tongues: Where upon the Apostles and Disciples might be said to be Baptized in
the Holy Ghost and fire. But this was but once effected and done and that upon
the Apostles only, and never proposed by Christ as an ordinary means for all
men: and therefore as much difference in these two places of Scripture, as
between fire and water, two contrary elements.

Secondly Calvin might have marked, if he (Holy Ghost) as expressing the
effects, that the Holy Ghost may work: as to illuminate, inflame, and heat
the heart and soul with faith and Charity, as fire does the body
externallie. But the word (water) is put before the Holy Ghost by Christ as in
his proper signification, and concurring together with the Holy Ghost to the
spiritual generation and new birth of man to life in Christ: therefore ^here
is not like reason in the one as in the other.

Thirdly S. John Baptist spoke those words Christ, who was to be after him,
should Baptize in the Holy Ghost, and fire: and that he was not worthy to
carry his shoes after him: to signify that his Baptism was but weak, did
not remitte sin, but move to Penance, had not so absolutely conjoined with it
the operation and power of the Holy Ghost: and therefore no way comparable
with that of Christ's. How then can that saying of Calvin and his partakers be
approuable and allowed. That John's Baptism and Christ's is all one, Ob.
and that John's was as forceible as Christ's? I answer: the proposition and
saying is most untrue; and it was spoken by Calvin not so much to extol John's
Baptism, Sol.
as to derogate from Christ's. And therefore he would that Christ's Baptism:
should not have efficacy and force to remitte sin to give grace, to cause
Justification, and so Consequently not necessary to saluation^ but only an
external sign of admittance to the Congregation. And thus shall Christ's
Sacraments be disgraced, to maintain Caluini conceit and idle dream against
all antiquity.

CAP. 11. When and at what time Christ institute Baptism.
Math. 3. Mat. 1. Luc. 3.
THere are three diverse opinions concerning the institution of this Sacrament,
by reason that three several times in holy Scripture Christ has in act or
word made special mention Io. 3.
Nisi quis renatus etc. unless eueri^ one be borne again of water. and the
Holy Ghost, h^ The third opinion is: that this Sacrament was instituted after
Christ's Resurrection, when he gave Commission to his Apostles to Baptize all
nations and people, and withal prescribed unto them the form thereof saying:
Omnis potesta^ data etc. All power is given me in heaven and in earth; Going
therefore teach ye all nations, Baptising them, In the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. To make as it were a reconciliation of
these three opinions, I will put down what I think, submitting not
withstanding my self to better judgment.

In the first action I suppose that Christ decreed the institution of this
Sacrament, when personally himself was Baptized. In the second action, when he
instructed Nicodemus, he gave as is were the precept, showing the necessity
thereof. Finally in the third action after his Resurrection, Tho. 3. par. q.
66. a. 2. Tertul. li. con. Iudaeos cap. de passione Hilla. c. 2. in Math. Amb.
li 2. in Luc. Iero. in dialogo con. Lucifera Greg. Nazi in orat. in Sancta
Lumina.
when he gave Commission to Baptize all nations and people, and withal
expressed the form, he declared the obligation thereof, that then it was
obligatorie, and began to bind all men to receive it. For proof of the first
that ^t was decreed and instituted in Christ's Baptism, is the opinion of S.
Thomas, and by common consent the ancient Fathers do teach: that Christ, when
he was Baptized in Jordan, did give force and virtue of Sanctification to the
waters. Read Tertullian, S. Hillarie, S. Ambrose, S. Jerome and S. Gregory
Nazianzen. And no doubt he determined water to be the matter of Baptism when
he would vouchsafe to consecrate, illustrate, and make famous the water by the
touch of his most holy and pure flesh. The form also was sufficiently
declared (although not in words expressed, as it was in the last action after
the Resurrection) for the voice of God the Father was heard from heaven: the
Holy Ghost appeared in form of a dove: and Christ JESUS the Son of God was
there present in humayne flesh. So that here was the form and matter declared.

Christ gave as it were a precept and declared it necessary to salvation, it
is plain by the words of Christ to Nicodemus. Yet that men were not bound to
receive Baptism, nor this precept obligatorie before the Passion of Christ,
and promulgation of the new Law, and abrogation of the old, S. Thomas proves
in the place before cited. For the third: that the obligation, and necessity
to use Baptism was declared and proclaimed unto all men after the Passion and
Resurrection of Christ, it is manifest. Because at that time, and after the
Passion of Christ all the Ceremonies and figures of the old law ceased, and in
place of them succeeded Baptism, and other Sacraments of the Gospel and new
law. And also because man by Baptism is configurated and fashioned alike to
the Passion and Resurrection of Christ. For as Christ died for sin: so also
man should die to sin. And as he rose to life and glory: so also he should
begin the new life of Justice. Therefore Christ must first suffer his Passion,
and rise again to life, before man could of necessity configurate and
conform himself.

Wherefore I conclude, that Baptism might be instituted, and commanded by
Christ in his life time: but not obligatorie, nor of bond necessarily to be
observed before the death and Passion of Christ. It were no improbable opinion
to think, that Christ might have instituted this Sacrament of Baptism, when
he in person Baptized his Apostles.

CAP. 12. Whether the Sacrament of Baptism by Martyrdom or Contrition of
heart may be supplied. And whether the definition of three Baptismes, that is:
Of Blood, of Charity, and water be in holy Scripture.
THere is no doubt but from the beginning in the Primitive Church, and all a^es
unto this day the threefold distinction of Baptism that is: Sa^guinis,
flaminis, and fluminis: Of Blood, charity and water, has been approved and
allowed of all; and that the Sacrament of Baptism might be supplied by the
other two, that is: a man by Martyrdom may be said to be Baptized and bathed
in his own blood, cleansed and washed from sin. Also by the flames of
Charity and love toward God, the Holy Ghost working with the tears of
Contrition and compunction of heart, may be said to have his soul purged from
sin; and the rust and canker thereof consumed. It is manifest that Martyrdom
in Scripture is called Baptism. Mar. 10.
For Christ said to John and James the sons of Zebede: Potestis bibere
calicem, etc, Can you drink the Cup I drink: or be Baptized with the
Baptism, where with I am to be Baptized? And he said, they should, signifiyng
that Martyrdom is Baptism. Also it is said in the Apocalypse: Hi sunt qui
venerunt ex magna, Apoc. 7.
etc. These are they who are came out of great tribulation, and have washed
their stoles, and have made them white in the blood of the lamb. And for
flammis, no doubt but, when the soul shall be enflammed with perfect Charity,
and the heart by the work of the Holy Ghost be moved to believe in God, to love
him, to be penitent for his sins, it is a kind of Baptism, and will supply
the want of the Sacrament in case of necessity. And it is plain in Scripture
that Penitencie is called Baptism; for it is said: Luc. 3. Mar. 1. Ezech. 18.
John was preaching the Baptism of Penance unto remission of sins. And thus
much Ezechiel the Prophet confirms: If the impious man shall do Penance fore
his sins, I will remember no more his iniquity. Wherefore I conclude, that
by Martyrdom, and Penance in necessity, the Sacrament of Baptism may be
supplied.

CAP. 13. How there can be unity of Baptism, if there be three in distinction.
Ephesians. 4
WE make no doubt, but S. Paul says: Vna fides, vnum Baptisma, vnus Christus.
Thereis one faith, one Baptism, one Christ. Also the Nicene Creed makes
profession of one Baptism: Credo vnum Baptisma in remissionem peccatorum: I
believe one Baptism unto remission of sins. How then can there be a
distinction of Baptismes? Or how can these three keep unity of one Baptism?
S. Thomas answers: That the unity of Baptism is not taken away by this
distinction, Th. 3. p. q 66. a. 11 ad 1.
because the two first of Blood and Charity Sanguinis and flamminis, are
included in the third of water, which has his efficacy and force from one
^untaine the Passion of Christ and the Holy Ghost. ^lso they work all one
effect, and by one princi^all cause: the effect is Remission of sins,
confe^ng of grace, washing and cleansing of the soul; ^he principal cause is
the Holy Ghost. For ^lthough the means be different, that is: By ^loud, by
fire by water: yet the effect and prin^ipall Agent being all one, the
difference of ^eanes does not take away unity.

Moreover the two first are included in the Sa^rament of Baptism, and only
take place in case of necessity, when Baptism can not be had. As ^or example:
If a man should be justified, and have Original sin blotted out by Penance,
by ^oue toward God, by Contrition and vow of Baptism: yet afterward,
although his sin should be thus remitted, and he made Just, if ^he should
contemn the Sacrament, that is Ba^tisme of water, he should for this his
con^empt be damned, and never enter into heaven. And this is proved by the
example of Nicodemus; for although when he came to Christ he had faith and
Charity and believed in him: yet Christ said unto him. Unless one be borne
of water and the Holy Ghost, Ioa. 3. Aug. li. 4. de Bap. ca. 21. Act. 10.
he can not enter into the Kingdom of heaven. And S. Augustine writing against
the Donatists, says: Although Cornelius the Italian Centurion, of whom it is
written in the Acts of the Apostles, were a Just man, and had received the Holy
Ghost: yet if he should have neglected the Sacrament of Baptism: Conte^ptus
ta^ti Sacramenti reus fieret: He should have been guilty of the contempt of
so great a Sacrament, which is the gate to salvation.

CAP. 14. Whether if one Baptized in his own blood should ouerliue, were after
of necessity to be Baptized with water.
THe case is, if one sholud be leaft by his Persecutour as dead, but yet after
revive again (as it happened to S. Sebastian) although he were ready to shed
his blood, and yeald his life for Christian faith: yet I make no doubt, if he
should thus ouerliue, but that he ought to be baptized with water; And in no
respect, nor for any reason of being ready to suffer martirdom or other ways,
to contemn or neglect the Sacrament. My reason is, because this Sacrament
being ordained and commanded by Christ as a necessary remedy for the soul
of man, is of necessity to salvation In re, or In voto, that is: In deed, or
In vow: Wherefore he that should neglect it, or contemn it, although other
ways justified, should do against the ordinance and commandment of Christ.
For Christ said unto Nicodemus a believing man, a faithful man, but not
fully instructed in Baptism: Ioa. 3.
unless a man be borne of water and the Holy Ghost, he can not enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Also the example of Cornelius is more apparent, Act. 10.
and conuinceth that Baptism is necessary, because the Scripture does say:
That he was a Just man, in respect of his moral virtues: one that feared God,
who also had received the Holy Ghost at the preaching of S. Peter, yet was he
Baptized by S. Peter. Although such may be the grace of God to some, that they
may have remission of sins and sanctity, also receive the Holy Ghost before
any Sacrament be ministered: yet not withstanding they must of necessity be
Baptized with water. Wherefore I conclude that although martyrdom and
Contrition may in necessity supply the want of this Sacrament: yet they are
not sufficient to salvation, but in case of necessity, when the other can not
be had: but if ever it come so to pass, that they may receive it, they are
bound unto it. And I am of opinion, that if one should be a Martyr and die, and
after be raised miraculouslie again to life, and ouerliue, that he ought to
seek and receive the Sacrament of Baptism, that he may thereby receive the
indeleble Character of a Christian.

CAP. 15. Whether Baptism of Blood be more worthy then Baptism (Flaminis) of
Charity, or then the Sacrament.
TO suffer death for confessing of Christ to be true God and man, to shed his
blood for testimony of the true Church of God, to suffer persecution for Gods
cause, to yield his life for Religion and Justice sake, finally to be a
Martyr, has ever been accounted the perfectest act, and greatest sign of
the love of God that could proceed from man in this mortal life. And this
Christ has confirmed: Maiorem charitatem etc. Ioa. 15.
Greater love then this no man has, that a man yield his life for his friends.
Wherefore no doubt, but the worthiest, and perfectest Baptism is, to be
Baptized in their own blood. Aug. li. de eccles. dogma. cap. 74.
And S. Augustine comparing them together, prefers Martyrdom: Baptizatus
aqua confitetur fidem suam coram Sacerdote: Martyr coram persequutore, etc. He
that is (says this holy Doctor) Baptized with water, does confess his
faith, but before the Priest: but he that is Baptized in his blood, does
confess his faith, does proteste Christ and his Church in the face of the
Persecutour and enemy of Christ and his Church. The first is vvashed with
water: the second is cleansed with blood. Thus S. Augustine. And no doubt but
Martyrdom infuseth more grace, then either Contrition or the Sacrament. Thus
much the Holy Church has defined, all ages have confirmed, and S. Augustine
makes it a rule: Qui orat pro Martyr, iniuriam Martyri facit: It is injury
to pray for a Martyr: to doubt of the glory of a Martyr, were but impious.

Tho. 3. p. q. 67. ar. 12.
Wherefore I conclude with S. Thomas, that the worthiest Baptism is in Blood:
because therein is expressed lively by imitation the Passion of Christ, and
the virtue of the Holy Ghost by the fervor of love: But if we speak of the
necessity (as we did in the precedent Chapters) then the Sacrament is to be
preferred before them both, as has been said.

CAP. 16. Whether by Baptism a character, or indeleble Sign be imprinted in
the soul of the Baptized.
IT is the general opinion of Catholic Divines ancient and modern; that the
Sacrament of Baptism does not only give grace, but imprinteth and seals the
soul of the Baptized with a spiritual sign, mark and badge indeleble, which
can never be blotted out, but remains for ever, the soul being immortal, as
the Cognizance and badge of their Christendom, whereby they shall be known as
a distinct people from those; who were never under Christ's ba^ner, nor of his
fold. Therefore S. Paul says: 2. Cor. 1.
That God also has sealed us, and given the pleadge And he does exhort the
Ephesians: Ephesians. 4
That they do not contristate the Holy Spirit of God, in which they are
signed unto the day of Redemption: that is, the day of regeneration by
Baptism. And if by Circumcision, which was but a figure of Baptism, God would
that the jews should have a mark and token in their bodies, whereby they
should be known to be his special people, and thereby discerned from others,
why then should it be impious or inconvenient to think, that Christ's Baptism
would have the soul of euere Baptized man to be marked and sealed with the
Character and sign of a Christian, whereby he may be known for the soldier
of Christ, and distinct from Jew, Turk, or infidel? This is not only the
opinion of Scholasticall Divines, but conform to the consent of ancient
Fathers, and defined in the Council of Florence and Trent. Therefore Anathema
to Calvin and his followers, who would seem to impugn so ancient and
consonant doctrine.

THE SECOND BOOK. Of the matter and form of Baptism.
CAP. 1. Whether water be by Christ's institution the matter of the Sacrament of
Baptism.
THERE is no doubt, the Scripture is most plain, that Christ ordained and
instituted water for the matter of Baptism as an essential part of this
Sacrament. And first when Christ our Savior would vouchsafe to be Baptized in
the waters of Jordan by John the Baptist, out of question he decreed,
instituted and sanctified the waters to be the matter of this Sacrament, even
at that time by the touch of his holy body. This is the common consent of the
ancient Fathers as I have before cited. C^b. 1. cap. 11.
Also when Christ told Nicodemus that there was no way to heaven but by
regeneration, by a new birth, he expressed the water as necessary when he
said: Ioa. 3.
Unless one be borne ex aqua: of water. And moreover by the practice of the
Primitive Church it is pregnant and plainly proved; Act. 8.
for when S. Philippe the deacon had instructed in the belief of Christ a man
of Aethiopia, one great in authority under Queen Candaces, queen of the
Aethiopias her chief and high Treasurer, and as they went by the way, they came
to a certain water, the Treasurer said: Lo water, quis prohibet me Baptizari?
Who does let me to be Baptized? And commanding the Chariote to stay, they
went both into the water and he was Baptized. And S. Peter when he came into
Caesarea unto the house of Cornelius the Italian, who expecting S. Peter's
coming, Act. 10.
gathered together his kindred and special friends, S. Peter Catechizing and
instructing them of JESUS and Christian faith, as he was speaking, the Holy
Ghost fell on them; Where upon he said to the faithful of the Circumcision:
Can any man forbid water that these be baptized. Whereby it is most manifest,
that water is the only matter of this Sacrament. I need not allege S. Paul
who says: Ephesians. 5.
That the Church was to be sanctified and cleansed in the lauer of water. And
S. Peter compares Baptism to the water of the Deluge. 1. Pet. 3.
For as the waters bearing up the Arc from sinking, the persons in it were
saved from drowning, that is eight souls were saved by water: so now Baptism
bearing up our souls, we do swim and are saved by water. Aug li. 2. con.
Faust. cap, 14. and 17.
Whereupon S. Augustine says: As Noe and his was delivered by the water and
the wood: So the family of Christ by Baptism signed with Christ's Passion on
the Cross.

That water should be the matter of this Sacrament the Prophet Ezechiel did
prophecy, saying in the person of God, Ezech. 37. Nu. 29.
Effundam super vos aquam mundam: I will power out upon you pure clean water.
Also as Moses the first Redeemer of the people of Israel out of the
Captivity of Aegypte did make the waters of the well to ascend: so the second
Redeemer Christ our Savior in a higher degree then to refresh the body, has
exalted the waters to the cleasing of the soul. And Joel the Prophet foretold
as much prophesieing of the Sacrament of Baptism: Joel. 3.
Et fons de domo Dei egredietur, etc. And a well shall go forth of the house
of God, and shall water the brooks of thorns. By the brooks of thorns is
understood the multitude of sinners, which this water shall wash and cleanse.
Zacharias prophesiyng of the Baptism which was to be instituted by Christ,
Zacha. ca. 13.
says: In illa die, etc. In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the
house of David, and to all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem: In ablutionem
peccatorum and menstruate: For the ablution and cleansing of sins, and
distayned with flovvers. Wherefore I may conclud by the foretelling of the
Prophets; by Christ's institution, by the practice of the Apostles, by the use
of the Primitive Church, by the consent of Fathers, and the agreement of all
ages, water to be true and only matter of this Sacrament.

CAP. 2. What are the reasons why water above all other things was chosen and
taken for the matter of this Sacrament.
Principally because water by operation does mundifie, purge, cleanse and
wash all filth away: and being thus significatiue does express the effects of
Baptism, that is: to mundifie, purge cleanse and wash the soul from sin.
And S. Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem does yield abundant reasons. First, Cyrillus
Catech. 3.
water is one of the chiefest elements of the four, and no terrene Creature
has a being of life without this element; So of the Sacraments Baptism is the
first and chief Sacrament, and no terrene earthly man borne into this world
has ordinarily his being and birth in Christ, his spiritual life without the
water of Baptism. Second heaven is the habitacle of Angels; but the heavens
are from the waters: so man, Genesis 1.
being borne to be Citizen with Angels, is to have his heaven and habitacle
from and by the water of regeneration. Third, the earth is the place for the
waters, but the earth is from the waters: so man, although his place and nature
be earth: yet he has a spiritual being by the water of regeneration. Fourth,
before the distinction of all things created, and the division of the six
days, the spirit of God moved over the waters: so that as water in the
beginning of the world, Genesis ca. 1. v. 2.
received certain virtue of the Holy Ghost to give life and produce living
creatures: so the water of Baptism receaueth virtue of the same Holy Ghost,
to regenerate man anewe, and to give him life in Christ. Fifth. At the waters
of Jordan, Math. 3 Mar. 1. Luc. 3.
when Christ came to be Baptized, the distinction of persons in the Blessed
Trinity showed it self. God the Father spoke from heaven: This is my Beloved
Son. God the Holy Ghost in the form of a dove light upon the shoulders of
our Savior. And God the Son Christ Jesus in humane nature came to be
Baptized of John. So in Baptism Christ commanded the form to be in the name
of the Blessed Trinity the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Sixth. S.
Mark began his Gospel with the Baptism of John, and the waters of Jordan:
so we begin to enter into the Church of God, to be members of Christ's Body
mystical, and to enjoy the fruits of the Gospel by the waters of Baptism.
Genesis 1. ver. 6.
Seventh. As water was at the first the beginning of the world: so the water of
Baptism. by Christ's institution is the beginning of spiritual life Eight. Ezo.
14
The delivery of Israelites from Pharao was effected by the waters of the
seas: so delivery of the world from sin was in the lauer of water in the
word of God. Ninth. After the deluge and ouerflowing of the earth with water,
God made a league, Genesis 9.
pacte, and promise with Noe that he would never destroy the world with water
again; but as water was used as a punishment for sin: so should it now be a
preservative against sin. 4, Reg. 2.
Tenth. Elias first passed the waters of Jordan, and then after he was rapte
into heaven: so we must first pass by Baptism, before we can enter into
heaven. Eleauenth. Aaron and his sons by the commandment of God, Exodus 29.
were to be washed in water before they could be made Priests. so in the law
of Christ no man can be capable of holy Orders, or made Priest, before he be
washed in the water of Baptism. Exodus 38.
And the brazen lauer or cesterne of water, which God commanded Moses to make
in the old Testament, was a figure of Baptism. And it was commanded to be set
and placed between the Tabernacle of testimony, and the Altar being filled
full of water: Exo 40.
and that none should enter under the roof of the Covenant, no ^ot Moses, nor
Arron, nor his sons, before ^hey had washed their hands and feet: to
signify, how clean in all parts the water of baptism did make the soul of
man.

These are the reasons, which S. Cyrill gives, why water especially was
elected and chosen ^o be the matter, and one of the principal and essensiall
parts of Baptism. Tho. 3. p. q. 66. a. 2. Arist. li. 2. Phys.
And S. Thomas ^ddeth: that there is no generation of terrene and earthly
Creatures, but by humiditie and ^ater; and therefore as Aristotle reports,
according to the opinion of some Philoso^hers: Aqua erat principium omnium
rerum: ^ater was the beginning of all creatures: so Bap^isme is the beginning of
all Spiritual life: and we are borne anewe and regenerated by water and the
Holy Ghost. Water is humide, and moist, and therefore apt to wash and
cleanse. It is frigide and cold: and therefore apt to refrigerate, cool and
temper heat: It is Diaphanike, and clear as Cristal: and therefore apt to
receive light; So Baptism does wash and cleanse the soul from sin, cool
and temper the heat of Concupiscence, clear and illuminate the soul with the
light of faith and true belief in Christ Jesus.

CAP. 3. What kind of water was instituted the matter of this Sacrament.
THere is no doubt, and it is generally concluded of all Divines, that
elementall water is the true wather and matter of this Sacrament. And the
elementall water, we call either fountain water, well water, rain water,
river water, running water, poole water, or standing water, and sea water.
Concernig sea water, some there are; who move some question, and make some
difficulty, because it is not simple and pure water as the other waters are;
but troubled, mixte, muddie and salt: yet all Divines generally hold, that
sea water is sufficient, and true water for this Sacrament. Because it is
elementall, has the Species and form of true water, and all other elementall
water does issue, spring, and has his beginning from the seas, and never
rests, but runs continually until it arrive unto the sea again, from
whence it had his beginning, because the sea is the natural and proper place
for the waters. And no doubt Christ made choice, and instituted this natural,
elementall, and common water, for the use of this Sacrament, because it is
usual, and ordinary in all places and countries, and common to all people,
rich and poor. This was most convenient, for that this Sacrament is of
necessity to salvation, the gate and entry to life eternal, and wthout this
no Christianity. Therefore it was necessary as S. Thomas and other Do^tours
say, that the matter thereof should ^e easy to be gotten of all, usual in all
places, and common to all people.

CAP. 4. Whether one may be Baptized with Ice, Snow, or hayle.
IT is the general opinion of all Divines, that Baptism can not be ministered
in any of these ^hree, Snow, Ice, or hail. The reason is for that they are,
Corpora densa, non fluida: thick, ^ot resolved, liquid, not fluent bodies.
Although ^n the opinion of all Philosophers (as in deed ^rue it is) that in
every one of them there is ^eallie and truly contained the element of water,
and that they are nothing but aqua Congelata: water congealed. Yet as long as
they contain these species, and want the proprieties of water, they can not be
the sufficient matter of Baptism. The proprieties of water are, to be liquide,
fluent, and abluent, which neiter Ice, show, nor hail have, remaining in that
form of Ice, snow, and hail. But if they be melted and receive again the
form of water, and proprieties thereof, that is to be liquide, fluent, and
abluent, there is then no doubt but they may be the true matter of Baptism.
So also if you take a sponge or linen cloth, and dippe them in water, no doubt
there is water contained in them both: but yet with them you can not Baptize,
unless you wring or squiese out the water, that there may be apparently the
form and Species with the propriety of water, as I said before.

CAP. 5. Whether water of the Bath, Brimstone-water* Allume-water, or
wyche-water whereo^ Salt is made, may be used in Baptism.
I Ask this question, and make a doubt, for that we have here in England in
the City of Bath, the water of bathe, which does spring up very hoate, and
the water of S. Anne of Buxtons also hoate, but somewhat more temperate. This
calor or heat of these waters, is contrary to the quality and propriety of
elementall water, which is cold and frigide by nature. Also there be springs,
and wells, where the water of some of them have the taste of Brimstone, some of
Allume, some of Salt, as it is well known, and proved by experience. But the
Philosopher says, that the elementall water ordinarily is not Saporosa, Has
no sapor or taste at all. Ob.
The difficulte does arise, for that I said in the third Chapter before, that
Christ instituted the natural elementall water for the matter of this
Sacrament? But these waters have their propriety and qualities contrary to
the element of water, as to be hot, to taste of brimstone, of allume, and of
salt. Notwithstanding I say in necessity these waters may be ^sed in Baptism.
Sol.
For that I make no doubt ^ut in these springs, wells and waters, there is ^he
true elementall water, although the Acci^entall proprieties or qualities be
altered. As ^he water of the Bath or Buxtons passing or ^pringing from some
hot metal or matter ^auseth this alteration of heat. So also the brim^tone or
allume-water have those tastes and ^apours by springing and passing through or
from some mine of brimstone or allume. Wher^ore for a further resolution, I
will put down ^he opinion of S, Thomas the most worthiest Schoole-diuine: Th.
3. p. q. 66. art. 4.
In quacunque aqua quomodocunque transmutata, dummodo non soluatur spe^ies
aquae, potest fieri Baptismus: In any water howsoever it be altered, so that
the species or form of water be not altered, or taken away, Baptipme may be
effected and done in it.

The reason why these waters of the Bath, brimstone, allume and wiche may be
used in necessity for Baptism is, because they retain the nature of
elementall water, and only are altered Accide^tallie by spring or passage of
those mines.

CAP. 6. Whether one may Baptize in Rose Water, or any other distilled water.
I Answer with all Catholic Divines, that no water made by art, as
Rose Water, and all distilled waters are, can be used in Baptism: but of
necessity it must be natural elementall water. And thus much I have poued
before by they institution of Christ, by the practice of the Apostles, and
consent of the universal Church. I have heard of one who was baptized in Rose
Water; but I dare boldly pronounce he never had true Baptism.

CAP. 7. VVheter one may Baptize in Wine, Al^, Bear, or Milk in necessity,
when water ca^ not be had.
I Answer absolutely, that in no case, i^ no necessity there can be Baptism
in wine, ale, beer or milk. My reason is, because by the institution of
Christ himself this Sacrament must have his due matter, which is no other then
natural elementall water; Ergo there can be no Baptism nor Sacrament
ministered in them. But if you ask me, if there be no doubt or question of it,
why the^ do I move it? I answer only to give you warning to beware of the
error and madness of Martin Luther, Luth. in Colloquijs fimposiaticis ca. 17.
the prime Apostle of Protestancie. For in his banqueting Communications, or
rather I may say his drunken Conferences being asked the question, at first he
stood doubtful and said, it was to be remitted to the divine Judgment: but
afterward he added and resolved himself saying. Whatsoever was fit to be
applied for bathing, or to make a bath might be applied to Baptize; but there
is no doubt, but wine, ale, beer and milk may be used for bathing. Therefore
in his idle conceit used also in Baptism. But against this error, and fond
imagination of this Heretic the Council of Trent has defined: That true and
natural water is the only matter or Baptism, And therefore: Co^cill. Triden.
sess. 7. can. 2.
Si quis dixerit aquam veram and naturalem non esse de necessitate Baptismi,
Anathema sit: If any man shall say that true and natural water is not of
necessity of Baptism, let him be accursed.

CAP. 8. Whether it be convenient the font should be hallowed, and the water
blessed before Baptism.
WE never held that it was of the essence o^ Baptism that the font should be
hallowed, or the water consecrated and blessed; but in case of necessity we
always allowed Baptism to be avayleable without benediction of the water.
And it was decreed as a matter in question above 1200. Years ago by S. Victor
Pope and Martyr: Vt quauis aqua, modo naturali, si necessitas cogeret
quicunque Baptizari posset: That any one, if necessity did urge and compel
might be Baptized in any kind of water. So it were natural elementall water
whether it were hallowed, or not hallowed, consecrated or not consecrated. Yet
you must understand that this decree does take place only in case of
necessity, as in imminent danger of the child, or some other vrge^t cause.
Otherwise no doubt but the font ought to be hallowed, and the water blessed.
And we Catholics make no question but that the consecration of the font,
Exorcismes and blessing of the water was instituted by the Apostles, or their
immediate Successors, and ever used as a solemn Ceremony in the ancient
Church of Christ Therefore no reason why it should be abrogated and abolished
by the Sectaries of this age, and not used by the Protestants of our Country,
having continued so many ages and hundred of years both in the universal
Church and our Church of England. Is it not convenient, that water being common
and triuiall to all profane uses, being assumed and taken to the use of a holy
Sacrament, should be consecrated and blessed? Considering that water by Christ
was constituted for the matter of regeneration of mankind for the washing and
Cleansing of sin, to make us ready for heaven, and fit Companions whit
Angels, (I say) to so high and holy a use: What inconvenience were it to have
the water consecrated, and blessed before Baptism, that we may learn to
discern and distinguish sacred and holy thing, from profane and Common
thing? By this hallowing and Consecration of the water says S. Thomas: Tho.
3. p. q. 66. a. 3. ad 5.
Excitatur deuotio fidelium, and impeditur astutia Daemonis ne impediat
Baptismi effectum: The Devotion of the faithful is stirred up, and the craste
and subtlety of the Devil hindered that he may not with stand the effects of
Baptism. And S. Paul his rule was: Let all things be done honestly, Bonauen.
in Quarto. Siluest. ver. Bap.. 2. number. 10. Dionis. Are op. Eccles. Hier. p. 2.
c. 2. Basil. lib. de Spir. S. ca. 27. Amb. li. 2. de Sacramentis ca. 25. Cyp.
Aug. li. 6. de Baptis. co^. Donat. tract. 8. in Ioa^. and epist. 118. ad
Ianuarium.
comely and according to order among you Altough (says S. Bonauenture) it be
not of necessity, that before Baptism the water be consecrated: Yet it is:
Congruum: It is convenient and comely, that the water be consecrated and
Sanctified by the prayer of the Priest. And Therefore says Siluester: that
the Priest sins mortallie, if he Baptize: Extra necessitatem: Except in case
of necessity: If the Water before be not consecrated and sanctified. Dionisius
S. Paul his Scholar, advised that before Baptism the waters be consecrated
and sanctified: Regenerationis aqua sacris inuocationibus prius consecretur:
Let the Water of Regeneration whit Sacred and holy inuocations and prayers
before hand be sanctified and Consecrated. S. Basil makes no doubt
constantly to affirm: That the Benediction of the font descended to them in
his time from the Apostles, and was used by Apostolical Tradition. S. Ambrose
one of the four principal Doctors of the Church, says: That the Priest
before Baptism comes to the font and makes his prayers, and inuocateth the
name of God over the water etc. And S. Cyprian warns that before Baptism
there must be Consecration of the font: Oportet mundari and consecrari aquam
prius a sacerdote: The water must first (says he) be cleansed and Sanctified
by the Priest. And finally S. Augustine in many places speaks of hallowing
the font, and santifiyng the water.

CAP. 9. What is the form of Baptism.
Having sufficiently entreated and spoken concerning the matter of Baptism:
now follows to speak of the form, for these two are essential parts of
the Sacrament, if either should be wanting, there could be no Baptism. There
is no doubt but the form of this Sacrament was instituted and determined by
Christ our Savior himself, after his glorious Resurrection, when he appeared
to his eleauen Apostles upon the mount in Galilie saying: Mat. 28.
All power is given me in heaven and in earth: Going therefore teach ye all
nations, Baptizing them, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. This records S. Matthew in his Gospel. The form then the
Church gives and commands according to the institution of Christ is: N.
Ego. Baptizo te, In nomine Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus Sancti. Amen. John
or Thomas, I Baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost: Amen.

I say these two are essential parts of Batisme; for neither the water
without the word, nor the word without the water, can work any effect; but it
is necessary that the matter and the form go jointly together. For if I
should say these words over the child: I Baptize thee in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and have no water it were no
Baptism. Also if I had water and powered it upon the child, and did not say the
words, it were nothing. The word then and the water must go together jointly
that Baptism may have his effect. Ephesians. 5.
And this S. Paul expressed when he said: Mundans eam lauacro aquae in verbo
vitae. Cleansing her. (that is: his Church) with the lauer of water in the word
of life.

In this form says S. Thomas, are expressed the two causes of Baptism, that
is: Tho. 3. p. q. 66. a. 5.
the Principal cause, and the isntrumental: the Principal cause in these
words: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Whereby is singnified that this Sacrament has his efficacy, virtue, power and
effect from Almighty God: and that the Blessed Trinity is the principal
Agent, and worker of remission of sins, and cleansing the soul of man by
this Sacrament. And here note that we are taught in this form of Baptism by
Christ and his Church to say: In the name, and not In the names: to signify
that there is but one God in essence and substance; Yet also we must say: the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; to understand and know, that there are
three persons and one God, all three concurring to the sanctifieing of the
soul of man. The Isntrumental cause is declared in these words: Ego Baptizo
te. I Baptize the; Whereby it is declared that necassarilie the Minister must
concur as the isntrumental cause externally, to deliver and give this
Sacrament to the people, and God internallie to work the effect of it.
Therefore Christ said to Nicodemus: Joan. 3.
Unless one be borne again of water and the Holy Ghost, he can not enter
into the kingdom of heaven. Whereby Christ would have us to understand that the
Sacrament, that is, the water and the word externallie must be ministered,
delivered, and given us by the Priest, and the Holy Ghost working internallie,
and both concurring jointly, the one as the Principal cause, the other as the
Isntrumental, or else no entrance into the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 28.
In the last of S. Matthew (as I cited before) Christ says to his Apostles:
Go ye Baptising in the name of the Father, and of the the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Where he appointed his Apostles as the Isntrumental cause, to
minister and deliver this Sacrament to all nations: but in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: to signify that the Blessed
Trinity was the principal cause. Whevpon says S. Augustine: Sacerdos tangit
corpus, and Christus interius abluit: Aug. co^. Petil. li. 3. c. 49.
The priest does externallie touch the body, power Water on it, or dippe it
saying the words: but Christ inwardly does wash and cleanse the Soul.

CAP. 10. Whether it may not laufullie be said that the Priest, or that man
by this Sacrament does wash and cleanse the Soul of the Infant from
Original Sin.
I Think no man Protestant or other can with reason deny, but the Baptizer,
that is he that Baptiseth, may lawfully say after Baptism, that he has by
this Sacrament washed, and cleansed the soul of the Infa^t from Original
sin as the isntrumental cause, and that God has given this power unto him
to work this effect, that is to wash away sin as the Instrument and
Minister of God. And therefore Christ said to his Apostles: Go ye Baptising,
washing and cleansing of sin. Mat. 28.
The form also of Baptism, which the Church prescribes importes no less:
Ego Baptizo te: I Baptize thee, is as much to say, I wash, I cleanse thee from
thy sins in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
And that the Disciples, nor any other should think this no strange, nor
unlawful matter, Christ gave the reason saying: All power is given me in
heaven and in earth; And this power to this end, I give unto you as my
Ministers, and inssrumentall causes. Therefore go ye, teach ye all Nations,
Mat. 28.
and Baptize them, cleanse them, and wash them, In the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

So I think there ought to be no doubt, but the Priest in the Sacrament of
Confession by the power that Christ has given and left in his Church, may
lawfully and truly say: Ego te absoluo ab omnibus peccatis tuis, In nomine
Patris and Filij, and Spiritus Sancti. Amen. I absolve thee from all thy
sins, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen. For as Christ instituted and gave this power and Commission for the
Sacrament of Baptism: so also did he institute and give the like power in the
Sacrament of Confession. And thus much S. John as plainly expresses in his
Gospel, as S. Mathewe did for the Sacrament of Baptism. Read S. John, he
records thus: After the glorious Resurrection the same day Jesus came where
the Disciples were gathered together, Ioa. 20.
and stood in the midst and said unto them: Peace be unto you; as my Father
sent me, I also send you (Lo the force of Commission.) And when he had thus
said, he breathed upon them, and said to them: Receive ye the Holy Ghost,
whose sins ye shall forgive, they are forgiven them: and whose you shall
retain, they are retained. Mark the Circumstances of the Commission for the
one Sacrament and for the other. First as Christ gave his commission after his
gloriours Resurrection for the Sacrament of Baptism: so also upon the same day
of his Resurrection did he institute and give his commission for the Sacrament
of Confession. Secondly as in Baptism, that there should be no doubt of his
power, he made mention thereof, and told them: All power was given him in heaven
and in earth so also in the institution and commission for the Sacrament of
Confession he said to his Disciples: As my Father sent me, so do I send you.
If then Christ as he was man, had power here on earth to remitte sins (as no
Christian man can deny) no doubt but the same power he left and gave his
Apostles, and all Priests their Successors to do the like.

And for further Confirmation hereof, that men should not misdeeme of those
high functions of his Apostles and Priests, he breathed upon them and said:
Receive you the Holy Ghost, whose sins you forgive, are forgiven etc. to
signify that they should do those things, that is: remette sins, not of
them selves, but by the commission of Christ, and by the virtue and power of
the Holy Ghost. Wherefore S Cyrill says: Cyr. lib. 12. ca. 56. in Ioa^.
It is not absurd that Priests forgive sins, for when they remitte or retain
the holy Ghost remitteth or retains in them: and this they do both in
Baptism and Confession. And no doubt as they are the Instruments of God in
Baptism to purge and cleanse Original sin: so no doubt they are the
Instruments of the Holy Ghost after Baptism to remitte and retain Actual
sin.

S. Ambrose contending with the Nouatians old Heretics, S. Amb. li. 1. 6. 7.
de Panite^.
who denied this power in Priests to remitte and retain sin asked of them
this question: Why it should be more dishonor to God, or more impossible or
inconvenient for men to have their sins forgiven by Confession then cleansed
by Baptism: seeing it is the power of God, and the Holy Ghost that does work
it by the Priests office and ministry in them both, as well the one as the
other? I think the same demand may be made to the Protestants of this age,
and I suppose they will answer with as much shame as the old Heretical
Nouations did: Who can (say they) forgive sins but God only? True it is that
he is the only Principal cause of releasing all sin: Yet we may not deny
but the Priest is Gods Instrument and vicar here on earth to minister his
Sacraments; Whereby first we are received to be of the household of God, and made
his Children, and then after, if we offend him, we have the means to be
reconciled and united to him again, the one no doubt as beneficial,
profitable, and necessary for man, as the other.

CAP. 11. Whether it be necessary that all the words be spoken, that are of
the form of Baptism.
THe form of Baptism is (as I said before) John, or Francis, I Baptize thee
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. which
words (I say) it is necessary distinctlie and truly to be spoken, or else
there can be no Baptism. The reason is, because first the Minister of this
Sacrament, must express the fact he intends; secondly, he must declare the
person for whom he intends it; thirdly, he must manifest in whose name; and
by whose virtue and power he effects it. The Minister, and the fact intended
are declared in these wordx: I Baptize thee: the person unto whom this
Sacrament is given by these words: John or Francis. In whose name, and by whose
^ower it is done, is showed in these word: In the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. All which three points (I say) ^re necessary
to be expressed. For if one should ^ake or leave out the first words: I Baptize
^hee; and only repeat the words following: In the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, it were no Baptism. Also if one should say
only these words: I Baptize thee: and leave vnsayd the words that follow,
which are: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
it were also no Baptism. This I say for a Caveat, and warning to all
middwifes, and other Lay Persons, that if in necessity, or danger of death
they be urged to Baptize, that they have a special care to speak and
pronounce, truly, and distinctlie, the whole form of Baptism, not leaning
any part or word out, for if they do, nothing is performed. Also I would
advise them to be careful, not to inuerte or change the form of Baptism,
that is, when one says that last which is to be spoken first. As for example
to say: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen. I Baptize thee Francis: whereas they should say as before is expressed:
Francis I Baptize the: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: Amen.

If you ask me to avoid scruple, whether if the words should be thus inuerted,
altered, or changed, the Child were truly Baptized: I dare not say that the
words thus altered, did take away the form of Baptism, and so consequently
that the child were not Baptized. For although words be altered: yet if the
sense remain, Baptism is effected: yet I must needs confess, that he or
she, who shall willingly and wittingly inuert, alter, or change the words
from the form prescribed and ordained by Christ, and his Church, should sin
greatly. Wherefore let them be careful, who undertake a matter of such
importance, that they know the form of Baptism prescribed, and truly and
distinctlie pronounce it accordingly.

CAP. 12. Whether if one should leave out to express the party who were to
be Baptized, it were Baptism.
THe difficulty of this question consists in the word (thee) which
expresses and designeth the person, who is to be Baptized. I said in the
precedent Chapter that the denomination, and designation of the party present
to be Baptized, was necessary in the form of Baptism particullarlie to be
expressed and declared. Wherefore if any one should leave out to express the
party who is to be Baptized, it were no Baptism. As for example, if one
should say: I Baptize: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: and leave out this word (thee) which does express the person to
be Baptized, it were of no valewe. Mat. 28.
For Christ insinuated as much when he said not only: Go ye Baptising: but
also added: Baptising them; which word (them) was particularly added by
Christ, to ^ignifie that the person, or party to be Bapti^ed, were necessary
to be expressed. So also if ^he Priest should say, when he absolueth his
Penitent; I absolve, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; lea^ing out this word (thee) and so should not ^ay: I obsolue the,
designing and denoting the Penitent and party present, it were no Absolution.
Wherefore I conclude, it is necessary to express the party, who is to be
Baptized, in ^aying: John or Francis I Baptize thee.

CAP. 13. Weather the form which the Greek Church uses, be sufficient for
Baptism.
THe reason of this question is, because the Greek Church does differ
somewhat from the form of the Latin Church. Their form is: Baptizetur seruus
Christi. N. talis. In In nomine Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.
The servant of Christ John or Thomas, be he, or let him be Baptized: In the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. The Latin
Church, that is, the Roman has always used this form. John or Thomas, I
Baptize thee: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. The difference of and in these two forms of Baptism is, that the
Greeks in their Baptism do not attribute the act of Baptism unto the
Priest, or Minister, who Baptizeth, as the Roman Church does. For they say
commanding, or in the Imperative Mood: Be he, or let him be Baptized: but the
Priest in the Roman institution does absoutlie say in the present Tense: I
Baptize thee. The reason of this difference and alteration in the Greek
Church, and amongst the Grecians was, because at the first in the very
beginning of Christianity amongst them, there grew a Schism and error in
that they did attribute too much unto the party, who Baptized them; As
appears by S. Paul, who dehorteth the Corinthians from their Schifmaticall
boasting against one an other in their Baptisers, 1. Cor. cap. 1.
telling them that they must boast only in Christ for their Baptism. Some
contentiously say: I certes am Paul's; and I Apolloes. But I take Baptism of
Cephas, I of Apollo; I of Paul. So that to avoid this error and Schism, this
alteration of the form of Baptism grew: Yet not with standing there is no
doubt but this their form is sufficient and auailable: For although the person
Baptising, or the Baptizer, be not particularly declared: Yet the act, which
is performed by the Sacrament is expressed, which is sufficient. And the form
in substance really does not differ from the Latin Church: neither is there
any essential part left out, nor real alteration in the form. And this was
defined and decreed in the Council of Florence. Co^ Floren sess. vlt. de Bap.
Whereby it may be gathered, that by the general consent of the Church, for the
avoiding of Contention Schism or Heresy, there may be alteration, in the
very form of Sacraments, so that they do not take away or touch any
essential part thereof. So teaches S. Thomas, Tho. 3. p. q. 60. ar. 8.
and practice confirms.

CAP. 14. Whether the Arrian Heretics in their form did truly Baptize.
THe Church of God always acknowledged the Baptism of Heretics to be
sufficient, when they have not altered any essential part of the form. Only
the Arrian Heretics, and some of their followers have been condemned, for that
some of them would alter the form of Baptism according to their erroneous and
Heretical conceit and opinion of Christ: in that they would have Christ not
equal, but inferior to his Father. So that some did Baptize, as reports
Nicephorus Calixtus in this form: Niceph. hist. lib. 16. c. 15.
In nomine Patris, per Filium, in Spiritu Sancto: In the name of the Fhather,
through the Son, in the Holy Ghost. And some otheres: In nomine Patris
maioris, and Filij minoris: In the name of the Father the greater, and the
Son the lesser: as records S. Thomas. Tho. 3. p. q. 60. art. 8.
Which forms of Baptism do pervert the essential parts of the true form,
and consequently take away the effects of Baptism. Therefore there was
great care taken in the first Arelatense Council, Conc. Aret. de Conse. did.
4. cap. de Arria.
and commandment given to examine those of the Arrian heresy, when they
returned to the Catholic Church, how and in what form they were Baptized; and
if they were not found to be Baptized in the right form, then to be Baptized
again. Not that they allowed Rebaptization, but because Baptism took no
effect without the right form. Wherefore I conclude that the Arrian Heretics
in this their particular form did not truly Baptize.

CAP. 15. Whether Baptism given only in the name of Jesus Christ be auaylable.
THe diffigultie of this question does arise ou^ of two difficultes and hard
places of Scripture, that is: the tenth and ninth of the Acts o^ the Apostles.
In the first S. Peter commaunde^ Cornelius the devour Italian, with his kinre^
and friends to be Baptized in the name of ou^ Lord Jesus Christ. In the second:
S. Paul coming to Ephesus, Act. 10. v. 48.
finding some twelve Baptized only with John's Baptism, told them that John's
Baptism, was not sufficient; for that John Baptized the people with the
Baptism of Penance: saying that they should believe in him that was to come
after him, Act. 19.
that is to say: in Jesus. They hearing these things, were Baptized in the name
of our Lord Jesus. Out of which two places some have gathered, that Baptism
only ministered in the name of Jesus without the invocation of the Blessed
Trinity, the Father, the Son, the holy Ghost, was sufficient and auaylable;
also so commanded and permitted by the two Chief Apostles S. Peter and S.
Paul.

Not withstanding these two places of Scripture, in mine opinion there ought to
be no doubt (as has been proved before) but that the form of Baptism was
instituted, determined and commanded by Christ himself to be: In the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And therefore no way to be
altered, because it was Christ's Institution; nor sufficient or auaylable
without the Invocation of the whole Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost. Wherefore as I said, these two places of Scripture are hard and
difficul^e. The general doctrine of the aunce^t Fathers, and the practice of
the Church has ever been to Baptize: In the name of the Father, and of the
Son and of the Holy Ghost: and never to awarrant or approve Baptism
ministered only in the name of Jesus Christ, or only in the name of the
Father, or only in the name of the Holy Ghost. Therefore we are not to think
that S. Peter, nor S. Paul commanded or permitted Baptism to be only in the
name of Christ or Jesus. As concerning S. Paul it is plain he asked the
twelve he found at Ephesus, whether they had received the Holy Ghost? They
ansuered: Act. 19.
Nay neither have we heard whether there be a holy Ghost. But he said: In whom
then were ye Baptized? As if he should have said: why then no Baptism without
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. They answered: In John's Baptism.
But that not being sufficient, he farther instructed them in Christ, and the
Holy Ghost. So that there is no doubt but Christ's Baptism according to S.
Paul was: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Werefore we must understand S. Luke who writes the two Apostles to have
commanded Baptism in the name of our Lord Jesus, not so, that it was only in
the name of Jesus, but with all in the name of the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
Or we may suppose that S. Luke named Christ Jesus only for the greater honor
of his name: altough the Baptism was in the name of the whole Trinity. Or we
may interpret S. Luke that he would say the Apostles to have Baptized in the
name of Christ Jesus that is: In the faith of our Lord Jesus, or by the
authority of Christ, or with the Baptism, vhich Christ had instituted; and so
for breuities sake to have named only Christ, not deni^ing the Trinity. And
Justinius Martyr thinks that the Apostles might add the name of Jesus to the
form which Christ had instituted saying: Ego Baptizo te, In nomine Patris, and
Filij eius Jesus Christi, and Spiritus Sancti: I Baptize thee, In the name of
the Father, and of ^is Son Jesus Christ, and of the Holy G^ost. And this they
might do at that time for to make more honorable the name of Jesus, because
his name was in contempt and hatred amongst the Jews.

Wherefore I conclude, if any should upon mistaking or error of these places
Baptize only in the name Christ, or only in the name of Jesus, not inuocating
the Blessed Trinity, it were no Baptize.

THE THIRD BOOK. Of the Minister Baptizing, and the Party Baptized.
CAP. 1. Whether Christ in his own Person with his own hands did Baptize.
SAINT Chrysostom was of opinion; Dionis. Car. in ca. 3. Joan.
as reports Dionisius Carthusianus, that Christ did not Baptize in his own
person with his own hands, because the Scripture says: Quamquam Jesus non
Baptizaret, sed Discipuli eius: Howbeit Jesus dit not Baptize, Ioa. 3.5.
but his Disciples. Secondly if Christ did Baptize any in his own person with
his own hands, it must be in most likliehood his Apostles and Disciples: but
after his resurrection upon the day of his ascension Christ said to his
Apostles: Act. 1.
Vos Baptizabimini Spiritu Sancto etc. After these few days yea shall be
Baptized with the Holy Ghost. Therefore it may seem Christ did not Baptize any,
for that the Apostles may be said to have been Baptized upon the day of
Pentecost by the Holy Ghost.

Yet not withstanding S. Augustine is of opinion, that Christ did in proper
person with his own hands Baptize his Apostles, and some of his Disciples,
which opinion is rather to be approved as more probable. For S. John in his
Gospel said: Ioa. 3. v. 22.
That Jesus came and his Disciples into the Country of Iewrie, and there he
abode with them, and did Baptize. Secondly no man can or will deny; but that
all the Sacraments were instituted by Christ, and the two principal, as
Baptism and the Sacrament of the Altar, or holy Mass were executed and
performed in proper person with his own hands. For as we have said, the first
Sacrament, which is Baptism, Christ in proper person with his own hands did
Baptize the Apostles. And for the other Sacrament of the Altar, or holy Mass,
the three Evangelist with the Apostle S. Paul record; Math. 26. mar. 14. Luc.
22. 1. Cor. 11.
that Christ after his last supper: Took bread in his hands, blessed it, brake
it, gave it to his Apostles saying: Hoc est Corpus meum; and so consecrated it.
And in like manner took the Chalice in his hands saying: This is the new
Testament in my blood, which shall be sed for you Wherefore we may conclude,
that seeing it is plain that Christ did Baptize and minister this Sacrament in
his proper person with his own hands, it is likely that it was first to his
Apostles and Disciples. For if Christ thaught it good for others, why also
should it not be profitable for the Apostles? why should any man think that
Christ would ba wanting with his own hands to Baptize his Apostles, Ioa. 23.
who did not disdain with his own hands to wash their feet? And surely
considering Christ, was to commit this office and function of Baptizing by
special commission to his Apostles and Disciple^, it is likely he would first
Baptize his servants, who were to be Baptizers of others. We must take heed
(says S. Augustine) that we do not say, Aug. ep. 108.
that the Apostles were not Baptized with water, but only with the Holy Ghost,
least, we give occasion to others to contenme Baptism, and that we our selves
in so saying, be not found to strive against Apostolical practice, discipline
and order. For Cornelius, and those who were with S, Peter, although they
received the Holy Ghost: yet notwithstanding they were Baptized with water. So
that the receiving of the holy Ghost did nor take away the Baptism of water.
Ibid.
And further says this holy doctor. We ought in no case to doubt, although
there be no exprese mention in Scripture made thereof, but that the Apostles
were Baptized with water in respect of that general sentence which Christ has
pronounced: Ioa. 3.
Nisi quis renatus etc. Unless a man be borne again of water and the Holy
Ghost, he s^all not enter into the kingdom of heaven. And in particular he
proves S. Peter to have been Baptized out of those words of Christ: Qui lotus
est, non indiget nisi vt pedes lauet etc. He that is washed, needs not but to
wash his feet, but is clean wholly. As if he should have said: you have
been washed and Baptized by me already, and therefore you are wholly clean,
now you need no more. Or, my will is no further but to wash your feet only.
When. S. Peter upon humility thought himself unworthy that Christ should wash
his feet. Christ said: If I do not wash thy feet, thou shall have no part
with me. S. Peter hearing this made this petition: Non tantum pedes, sed caput
and manus: Then o Lord, not only my feet, but my head, and hands. Christ
answered: He that is washed, needs not but to wash his feet. So that I may
conclude that Christ with his own hands did Baptize his Apostles or some of
them: it remains only to accord those two places of Scripture in S. John,
which seem contrary.

Christus Baptizabat; and: Christus non Baptizabat, Io. 3. and 4.
sed Discipuli eius: Christ did Baptize; and: Christ did not Baptize, but his
Disciples. I answer they are not contrary but both true. Christ did Baptize
at the first institution and beginning of his Baptism: and then afterward
Christ did not Baptize himself, but committed this office and function to his
Disciples as proper unto them; and he himself took a higher charge and care
upon him, which was: to preach, and teach and confirm by miracles. So did also
the Apostles after Christ's ascension in the beginning Baptize them selves: but
afterward that their preaching might not be hindered, they committed this
office and function as proper to the Priest, and betook them selves, To
Euangelize, 1. Cor. 1.
and not Baptize, as S. Paul says. So that we may understand S. John, when
he says: That Christ did not Baptize, but his Disciples: that is, he did not
ordinarily by himself with his own hands Baptize all sorts of people, but
only some of his Apostles and Disciples. And when he had done thus, he gave
commission to them as his Ministers to Baptize all others. Wherefore when Christ
said upon the day of his ascension, that his Apostles should be baptized with
the Holy Ghost upon the day of Pentecoste, we must not so understand, as though
they had not been Baptized before with water: but that they should be cleansed,
Baptized, and inflamed with a special internal infusion of the grace of the
holy Ghost, under the visible form of fiery tongues, as having thereby no
ordinary baptism, but an extraordinary gift of the Holy Ghost to speak with
tongues, and by an especial grace of his heavenly spirit, that they might
Euangelize with courage Christ crucified, which was then: Scandalum Iudaeis,
and stultitia Gentibus. A Scandal to the Jews, and foolishnes to the
Gentiles, and therefore stood in need of extraordinary gift, grace and
fortitude.

CAP. 2. Whether it does belong to the Priest only, Ex officio: by Office and
frunction to Beptize.
IT is the general opinion of Catholic Divines, that ordinarily by office
and function it appertains only to Priests to Baptize. This word (only) must
not exclude Bishops, for that they are also Priests, and do Baptize as
Priests. Yea in the opinion of some, although the Priest by office and function
in his ordination, in that he is made Priest, has this power to Baptize: yet
because it is a matter of Jurisdiction, he does exercise it with a
subordination and dependencie of the Bishop. As also the Priest has by
ordination, in that he is made Priest, power to absolve from sin: Yet because
the act of Absolution is an act of Jurisdiction, and Jurisdiction is proper
to a Bishop, he can not use and exercise this power except in case of
necessity, but within such limits as the Bishops shall appoint. So then
ordinarily by office and function it, appertains to the Priest only to
Baptize, and not to the Bishop as Bishop. Werfore altough the Bishop may do
it: yet we can not say he does it: Ex officio, as Bishop, but as Priest. And
this appears and may be proved out of S. Paul, of whom there is no doubt but
he was a Bishop: yet he says that Christ sent him: 1. Cor. 1.
To Euangelize, not to Baptize: for that it is not by Christ's Commission and
institution the office of a Bishop to Baptize by himself as in his own person,
but ordinarily it is committed by office and function as belonging to the
Priest. Yet in the same place S. Paul records that he Baptized some few as
Crispus and Caius, and the house of Stephanus, but not as belonging to the
office of a Bishop, but as he was a Priest.

Mat. 28.
but the Bishophs are successors to the Apostles: Therefore the Bishops have by
office and function also to Baptize. To this objection I answer with that
worthy Doctor S. Thomas: Tho. 3. p. q. 67. art. 2.
that Christ gave in charge to his Apostles, and so consequently to Bishops
both functions, that is: to teach and to Baptize; The first as principal to be
exercised, and performed by themselves in their own persons; The second, that
is: to Baptize, to be committed by them to the Priests as proper to their
office. To manifest and make this plain S. John in his Gospel says: That
Jesus himself did not Baptize, Io^. 4.
but his Disciples were they, that did Baptize. Whereby it is gathered, that it
is ordinarily the proper office of Priests to Baptize; for that the Priests
are the Successors of the Disciples, as the Bishops are to the Apostles.
Werfore I conclude that ordinarily it belongs Ex officio: By office and
Function, to the Priest to Baptize, although with subordination and dependencie
of the Bishop: and that also the Bishop may Baptize, because he is a Priest;
for no man can be a Bishop, unless first he be a Priest. Whereupon I leave to
your Judgments what Bishops we have now in England considering there has been
no true ordination, Consecration, or imposition of hands of Bishop, or Bishops
amongst them, since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's raignie, and so
consequently neither Bishop nor Priest; 2. Tim. cap. 1.
for both Bishop and Priest must have their ordination by imposition of hands
from their Predecessors. But no one, but all the Bishops in England forsook
Queen Elizabeth's new-deuised Religion, so that she remained without Bishop.

CAP. 3. Whether a Deacon may Ex officio, by office minister this Sacrament.
I Answer that absolutely he has not by office and function to baptize; but
he may by subordination or dependencie of the Priest; that is in absence of the
Priest, or in imminent danger of the Child, or by commission or permission of
the Priest. For properly his office and function is to assist the Priest, to
read the Gospel, to minister at the Altar, to compose, set in order, and
provide althinges necessary for the administration of the Sacraments; also to
serve the widows, and other such like offices. Therefore Gelasius the Pope
decreed: Gelas. ep. ad Episco. per Lucania^. ca. 9. and 10. Act. 8.
that Deacons did usurp the office of Priests, if the did presume to baptize
in presence of priests, they not commanding or permitting of it. True it is
that S. Philippe the Deacon baptized the Eunuch the Queen of Aethiopia her
high-treasurer but it was not Ex officio, but in absence of the Apostles. Read
Gratiam. Did. 93

CAP. 4. Whether a mere Layman, who has no holy Orders, neither Priest nor
Deacon, may lawfully Baptize.
YOu must note and understand that one thing it is to Baptize by function and
office, and an other thing to Baptize in necessity, that is when the Priest
can not be had, or in danger of death. The general opinion of Catholic
Divines is, and the practice of the Church has ever been A Cunabulis, From the
Cradle, that in absence of the Priest, in case of necessity a mere Layman
may lawfully Baptize. The reasons for proof of this Conclusion are pregnant
and many. First it is not of the essence of Baptism that the Minister, that
is, he that Baptizeth, be in holy Orders: therefore in necessity it may be
lawful for a mere Layman to minister this Sacrament. Secondly it stands
with the mercy of God, who would have all men saved, that in those things,
which are of necessity to salvation, man may easily find a remedy. But
amongst all the Sacraments Baptism is most of necessity to salvation (as has
been proved) therefore seeing Christ our Savior would ordain that common water
should be the matter of this Sacrament, because it was common to all and in all
places to be had, that it might not be wanting to this Sacrament being of such
necessity to salvation: there is no doubt also but the minister in case of
necessity should and might be every man, not only of the Clergy, but also
of the layety: that for want of a minister the Infant, or any other in danger
of death should not per^sh, or be in way of damnation, or destitute of the
remedies of their salvation. For Christ has spoken the word: That unless a
man be borne anewe an regenerated by water and the holy Ghost he can not enter
in to the kingdom of heaven Therefore said Saint Jerome: Iero. dial. cont.
Lucif,
Baptizare, si necessitas cogat, scimus etiam licere laicis: We know also, if
necessity urge or compel, that it is lawful for every Layman to Baptize.
Thirdly Ananias in the first year after Christ's Passion Baptized S. Paul:
but Ananias was none of the Apostles, nor Deacon, Act. 9.
nor Priest; therefore in absence of the Bishop, Priest or Deacon a Layman may
lawfully Baptize. And although Ananias in Scripture be called a disciple: yet
that makes him not a Bishop, Priest, or Deacon; For Tabitha a widdowe woman is
called also a Disciple. Act. ca. 9.36.
Wherefore we have example in Scripture that Ananias a Layman by vision and
special commandment from God was sent unto S. Paul, restored him to his
sight, and in absence of the Apostles in case of necessity did Baptize him; We
need not then doubt, but in absence of the Priest a Layman may lawfully
Baptize. This confirms Saint Isodorus, and gives the reason why Laymen may
Baptize: Ne quisquam sine remedio salutari de saeculo euocetur: Least (says
he) any should be called out of this world without the saving help and remedy
of Sal^ation.

Not withstanding these reasons and the ne^essitie of Baptism with the
general consent and practice of the Primitive Church, and all ^ges sithence;
Calvin to cross all antiquity, Call. li. 4. Inst. cap.
^eremptorilie does deny: That in any case of ^ecessitie a Layman ought to
Baptize: Because Christ said only to the Apostles: Go ye and Bap^ize; which
we grant, and have proved in the precedent Chapter that by office ordinarily
it ^elongeth and appertains to the Priest: but extraordinarily; and in case
of necessity we allow it lawful for all men. And our reason is, because in
the same place it was also said only to the Apostles: Teach ye all Nations:
yet notwithstanding not only the Apostles, but also the Disciples and others
did theach; why may not others also in case of necessity with the Apostles
Baptize? If Calvin should mean, or any other should think, that none were
truly Baptized, but those who were Baptized by true Bishops or Priests, and
that Laymens Baptism were not auailable or of force, which does consequently
follow in his opinion; Or else why should they be denied in case of necessity,
but that he would make the minister an essential point for the rightful
administration of this Sacrament? In what case then were our poor Country of
England, which has had no true Bishops, nor Priests since the first of Queen
Elizabeth, as has been said. For all the ancient Bishops of Queen Mary's
time, standing firmlie to the Catholic faith, there was by them no impositio^
of hands, nor co^secratio^ upon any Protestant Bishop: but only letters
Patents from Queen Elizabeth, and Confirmation afterward by Parlame^t. But how
auaylable, or of what force the one or the other, or both jointly are to make
Bishops, may easily be discerned, and discried. Let us then allow the Baptism
of Layme^ to be auaylable, or else we shall prove the most part of England to
be Infidells, and no Christians. Idle then and erroneous must needs be the
opinion of Calvin, And not only are the Sectaries of this age content to
approve and allow with Calvin, that parents rather should permit their
Children to dye without Baptism, then in any case whatsoever to seek or
suffer there Sacrament to be given or ministered by any Lay person, Not only (I
say) do they mayntaine this wicked position and dangerous doctrine concerning
children and Infants: but also would counsel and advise men of age and
understanding newly converted, if they should be in danger of death, not
having any Priest or minister ready, rather to rely upon their faith, then to
demand Baptism at a Lay-mans hand. This is manifest, for at the Conference
the Sectaries had at mount Peglier (as reports Florimond de Roemond in his
History of the heresies of this age) where Beza being present, Flor. Roem. li.
8. ca. 11.
asked this question of Smedeline Brentius Disciple; what he would do, or what
Counsel he would give, if a Jew or Pagan in case of necessity should demand
Baptism at the hands of a Layman, not having a minister ready. I would
advise him (says he) to repose himself upon his faith, and not to require
Baptism at the hands of any lay person. But put the case (said Beza) that the
Jew or Pagan thought with himself and were fully persuaded, that his faith
were not sufficient to salvation without Baptism. Then answered Smedetine: I
would say unto him; Go then to the Devils and dwell with them. Whereupon Beza
jesting replied: what M. Doctor, I perceive you will be a miserable Conforter,
in this miserable case of necessity.

CAP. 5. Whether Baptism may lawfully be ministered privately in private
houses, by private Persons.
IT is manifest and doubted of few or none that in the Primitive Church in the
beginning of Christianity this Sacrament was ministered in private houses and
not in public places, by reason at that time there were no public Churches or
Chappells builded, neither were the Christians suffered any public use or
exercise of their Religion; but continually pursued by Purseuants, and other
such like officers, and extremely persecuted by the Pagan Empeperours. I may
well compare this time and state now of England with that of the Primitive
Church. For it is evident to the whole world, that Christian Catholic people
of England, are forced to Baptize priuatlie in their houses, and that with
hazard of great penalty, they are allowed no public Church, nor Chapel, no
public use or exercise of their Religion, but their Priests, the true
Ministers of this Sacrament, are continually pursued by Purseuants and other
Officers, and extremely persecuted by Protestans even to death. But after the
Church began to be settled, persecution to cease, Christianity to flourish, the
use and exercise of Religion permitted, then were Churches builded, fonts and
Baptisteries publicly erected, as is evident and at this day extant in the
Mother Church of the world in the City of Rome; There is now standing:
Baptisterium Constantin^ The Baptisterie of Constantine the first Christian
Emperor, And the like you shall find by the general use and practice of the
whole Church throughout all Catholic countries publikes fonts and Baptisteries
erected in their Churches, for the public use of this Sacrament. And in
process of time because, some began rather to Baptize in their private houses,
then publicly at the fonts and Baptisteries of the Church, in the Council of
Vienna private Baptism was forbidden in houses, and public communded, as may
appear by the Constitution of Clement the Fifth; Clem. tit. de Baptis.
except always in case of necessity, in danger of death, or as a prerogative
for Princes Children. Wherefore I may conclude that in England, notwithstanding
this. Constitution, we may lawfully Baptize in private houses, because we are
in case of necessity as in the Primitive Church: no Churches, fonts, nor
Baptisteries allowed, no public exercise of Religion, our Priests pursued, and
persecuted to death. So that our necessity compels us not to be subject to
this Constitution: but exempteth us as the Gloss does express: Necessitas
legi non subiacet: Ibid. lor. cit.
Necessity has no law. And thus much for the place.

Now concerning the Persons, whether a private Person may lawfully Baptize.
First we must not what we understand by a private person; A private person is
he, who has no public authority by imposition of hands, or holy Orders
solemnlie to Baptize, that is: we call a private person, a mere Layman. And
private Baptism, we call that, which is performed in case of necessity by a
Layman or woman priuatlie without solemnity or Ceremonies, not in Church, nor
Cappell, but in private houses. I suppose in the precedent chapter I have
sufficiently proved, that it may lawfully be done, and being so done, to be
sufficient and auaylable, This controversy was particularly handled between
the Proetstant Bishops, and the Puritans, in the presence of Kinh James at the
Conference at Hampton Court, 1603.

The Bishop of Worcester to prove that other besides Bishops, or Priests, Bills.
of worces.
mere Lay-me^ might also lawfully Baptize, and that their Baptism might be
sufficient, brought, and vrget the fact of the Apostles, that upon one day
three thousand were Baptized: Which was (says the Bisoppe) impossible, or at
least improbable for the Apostles to perform in their own Persons. Wherefore
in case of necessity in this multitude of people, they permitted Laymen (for
there were no other at that time) to assist them, and Baptize, and approved
their Baptism as sufficient and auaylable. Bish. of winch.
Also D. Bilson Bishop of Winchester earnestly urged, that to deny private
persons in case of necessity to Baptize, were to cross all antiquity, seeing
it had been the ancient and common practice of the Church, when the Priest or
minister can not be had, that Laymen perform it. Also that it was a rule
agreed upon amongst Divines: That the Minister was not of the essence of this
Sacrament, Bills. fo. 18.
therefore in case of necessity it might lawfully be executed by any other
then Priest or Minister. Not withstanding the Kings majesty being earnest
against private Baptism by Lay-persons, answered the Bishop and replied:
Although (said the King) the Ministers be not of the essence of the Sacrament:
yet is he of the essence and lawful righ and ministry of the Sacrament; But
if it be an essential point in the administration of Baptism, that the
Baptizer be a lawful Bishop, Priest, or Minister, then it must needs follow,
if it be acted or administered by any other then a Bishop, Priest, or Minister,
that it wants an essential part in administration, and consequently not
auaylable, of no force, nor perfect. For nothing is perfect that wants his
essential part. Why then do they admit for baptized those who have had
Laymen for their Baptizers, and not Rebaptize them again? For either they
must needs say, that Baptism is not absolutely necessary to salvation, and
therefore not necessary to Rebaptise them again: or else they must needs
confess, that they had the Sacrament sufficie^tlie and auaylable, being
administered by Laymen, although there were mortal sin committed in the
administration, because some essential part was nor performed. And thus they
cast them selves into many encumbrances and inconuenie^ces, which might be
avoided by admitting private Baptism by a Layman in case of necessity,
conform to the Traditions of the Apostles, the practice of the Church, and
consent of Fathers.

CAP. 6. VVhethe the midwife or any other woman may in case of necessity
Baptize.
Calvin detesteth the midwife, Calvin. Cont. West. pa. 157. 128.
and contendeth that it were better that the Infant should die without
Baptism, then to give power or allow a woman to Baptize, let the necessity be
never so great. And our Puritans at home following M. Calvin, are very
peevish, froward, and obstinate in this point. For they will by no means grant
that the midwife, or any other woman may lawfully in case of necessity what
soever Baptize. This has been a great Controversy between the Puritans and
the Protestants: but the Protestants have in some sort yielded, for they have
reformed their Communion-booke, Book of Com. Pray. Baptis.
and that liberty which was before for midwifes is blotted out, and taken
away. And by the way we may note, that the Puritans in this point disagree and
depart from their first Evangelist martin Luther, and the Protestants in thus
yielding, from them selves. Also the Puritan party in their letters to their
friends at Oxford write, that King James the first day of their Conference, In
the end of the book of Co^fer.
was so earnest against Private Baptism of women, that he should say: That he
had as liefe, and liked as well, that an Ape, as a woman should Baptize. But of
my Conscience I think they misreport his majesty.

Let us but consider that the principal Agent in Baptism is Christ, and that
he only as the principal cause, does work the effect thereof; and that man
is but the Isntrumental cause, and minister only of Christ's. If then in the
absence of the Priest, who was by Christ appointed as the ordinary minister of
this Sacrament the Lay man in case of necessity may lawfully supply his
room and Baptize, (as I have proved before) why may not also in the like case
of necessity the woman supply the place of the man in his absence? Cap. 3.
The difference of the sex in this case of necessity, whether it be male or
female, is nothing. But because the man is the head of the woman, 1. Cor. 11.
and Christ the head of the man, the woman ought not to Baptize in the presence
of the man, nor the Layman in presence of the Priest Christ's minister. And for
that it is not convenient nor decent that men should be present at the birth of
Children, the Church has commanded that the midwife upon pain of sin,
learn distinctlie the form of Baptism: because she has special license and
commission in danger of death to minister this Sacrament. It is true that the
fourth council of Carthage does forbid women to Baptize, that is: Council.
Carth. ca^. 99. and 200.
publikelie or with solemnity, or in the presence of men, or not in case of
necessity; and so all Canonists understand. Also it is thus at this day
observed, commanded, and only permitted, that women priuatlie in case of
necessity, and when it is not fit men to be present, to Baptize.

For Confirmation that women may Baptize, we have an example in Scripture of
Sephora Moses wife; Exo. 4.
she circumcised her son in case of necessity, and although Moses was
present: yet he was sore sick, vexed with an angel, threatened death that he
could not perform it himself. For no doubt (although he had delayed it) at
that time if he could, he would have done it himself, and therefore signified
to his wife that she should do it, which when it was done, Moses was
delivered from that sickness, or vexation of the angel. But Circumcision was
a figure of Baptism: Therefore as in circumcision, so also in Baptism in case
of necessity as Sephora did the one, why may not the midwife do the other? It
is a world and wonder to consider, that these kind of men can approve and allow
a woman to be head of the Church, and not permit in case of necessity a
woman to Baptize. Whereas otherwise for want of this Sacrament the Infant were
in danger to perish eternally, as has been proved.

1. Cor. 14. 1. Tim. cap. 12.
And that he would not permit them to teach, but be Silent. Therefore (say
they) they ought not to Baptize, nor to minister any Sacrament.

True it is in deed, and they may wnderstand if they will, Sol.
that S. Paul does forbidd women publicly to preach or teach in Churches or
public assemblies, for that it is the proper function and office committed by
Christ only to Bishops and Priests: yet I think they will not deny, nor no
man can mislike, but women may lawfully admonish, instruct, and teach
priuatlie both women, and men, and children: and olso deliver their mind
concerning matters of faith, doctrine, good life and piety. And this is
confirmed when Priscilla and Aquila took priuatlie Apollo the eloquent Jew,
Act. 18.
who preached and taught Jesus but not sufficiently grounded, and they women
instructed him, expounded unto him diligently the way of our Lord. Wherefore we
doubt not, but that a woman may lawfully in extreamitie, in danger of eternal
salvation of the poor Infant priuatlie, Breden. li. 1. c. 51. Coll. sacra.
Baptize and minister this Sacrament. And for farther confirmation hereof, you
may read a miracle related by Bredenbacius: In the year of our Lord 1579. it
happened in Amsterdame that a Catholic woman being married unto a Caluinist,
and delivered of a child, she caused the Infant priuatlie to be Baptized by a
Catholic woman of her own profession in Religion, because she would be sure
her child should be truly Baptized. So it fell out, that the husband being
hot and earnest on the contrary, caused the child to be brought to a public
preachind, where after the sermon the minister being ready in the assembly of
people to Baptize the Infant, suddenly he became dumb, not able to speak one
word. Whereat the Father being astonished took his child in his arms, came
home to his wife, and charged her to tell him the truth, whether she had not
caused the child before to be Baptized Catholiklie according to her profession.
She confessing the truth said, that it was so. Whereupon he with the rest of
his family, seeing the work of God, were converted from their heresy, became
Catholics, were reconciled unto the Church, and so lived and died.

This question was moved in the Conference had at Poissi by a minister of Mets:
whether the Infant Baptized by the midwife ought again to be Baptized by the
Minister. Beza cont. Hessu. page 533.
Beza in the name of all present at that Conference answered: That a great
number of the Ministry had already judged, and that with his consent, that
this Baptism of the Midwife was of no effect. Yet forasmuch (says he) that
the Contrary opinion is not without ground of reason, it is fit and very
convenient, that the matter be remitted to the Resolution and determination of
the Congregation of Geneua and Zurike. Whereupon worthelie (says Florimond)
the Catholics of France iested at their Conclusion in this their Conference,
Florim. li. 8. c. 11.
ane could not but marvel at the madness of these kind of people, who could
not decide this difficulty by Scripture, by the written word, whereupon they
would seem wholly to rely in decideing matters of Controversy, but were now
forced to refer themselves and the subject to the Censure and Judgment of
men, that is: a few Ministers of Geneua and Zurike gathered together in a
corner of the world. And in this and the like cases stike not to skorne and
cotemne the decisions, resolutions and indgments of general Counsels lawfully
gathered of the most virtuous, Council. Later, Floren. Trid.
the wisest, and best learned throughout the Christian world and no doubt, but
according to the promise of Christ, they were guided by the Holy Ghost. As for
example: 1. That Children ought to be Baptized in their infancy. 2. That the
Baptism of Laymen is allowable and auaylable in case of necessity in absence
of the Priest. 3. That the midwife in extreamities in danger of death may
Baptize. The resolution and determination of these cases have been decided by
general Counsels, and have been delivered unto us as a Tradition from the
Apostles, as a practice of the primitive Church, as the sentence of antiquity,
descending in the Church throughout all ages until this day. And now to be
condemned and censured by a few unlearned ministers of Zurike and Geneua? I
say no more but leave this (Gentle Reader) to thy best thoughts and
considerations.

CAP. 7. Whether an Heretic, an Infidel, or a Jew may Baptize, and if they
do, Whether it be auailable.
I Join these three together, and first I put an Heretic; for that heresy
is a kind of infidelity or misbeleefe of Christ, of his ministeries, his
Sacraments, and his Church. Or heresy is: An obstinate resisting or striving
against the true faith of Christ, his ministers, his Sacraments, or his Church.
S. Thomas says: More grievous, Tho. 2. 2. q. 10. art. 6.
or greater is the infidelity of heretics, then of Pagan or Jew. For the
Heretic, in that he is a Christian has promised true faith and fidelity to
Christ, to his Sacraments, and Church, which neither Jews nor Pagan did. It
was the opinion of Saint Cyprian, or rather his error: That Baptism given out
of the Church by Heretics was no Baptism, nor auaylable. Concerning which
point S. Stephen Pope and Martyr writ to S. Cyprian: That there should be no
Innovation in the Church; but that the ancient Tradition should be observed,
forbidding those who were Baptized of Heretics to be Baptized again. Whereupon
this question was much agitated, handled and disputed in his time, and by the
Church concluded: That if the Heretics did Baptize in the name of the most
Blessed Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, with intention to
do and effect that which Christ instituted, that their Baptism was auailable,
and those by them Baptized, were not to be Baptized again.

Aug. li. 10. de Baptis. con. Donat. c. 1. Idem. ep. 48. ad Don. Aug. li. 5. de
Baptis. con. Donat. ca. 20. Aug. li. 1. cont. Cresco.
And S. Augustine confuted this error in many books; his reasons were; for
that Baptism was: Vnitas orbis: One through out the whole world: And that
Heretics agreed generally with Catholics in this point. And that it was not
the goodness of the Ministres that caused this Sacrament, but Christ the
principal cause therefore in necessity auaylable of whom soever it was given.
And in his fifth book of Baptism against the Donatists, he proves that God
does give this Sacrament by evil persons, because they do not minister this
Sacrament: Sua potestate, sed virtute Dei: By their own power, but by the
virtue of Christ. And therefore he concludes: Although there be no certain
example brought forth out of Scripture to prove that Baptism of Heretics is
true Baptism: yet because the whole Church has decreed it, we observe (says
he) the truth of Scripture; for that the Scripture commends her authority,
and tells us that the Church being guided by the Holy Ghost can not err in
her decrees, and deciding of doubtful questions. Therefore we doubt not of the
Baptism of heretics so long as they observe the true form instituted by
Christ and commended by his Church.

Some difficulty there was in the time of the Arrian heresy, for that they
held Christ not to be equal with his Father and consequently not God but man,
Yet it was concluded that their Baptism was auaylable so long as they kept
the form of Baptism instituted by Christ, and commanded by his Church.
Niceph. lib. 16. ca. 15.
Nicephorus Ca^ixtus records in his history of one Deutrius ^n Arrian Bishop
Baptizing at Constantinople one who was called Barbas, and not observing ^he
ancient form of the Church, but altered and changed it according to his
heretical humor saying: Baptizetur Barbas in nomine Patris, per Filium, in
Spiritu sancto: Barbas be he Baptized In the name of the Fater, through the
Son, in the holy Ghost: the water presently dried up, and vanished a way out
of the font. At which miracle Barbas being moved, ran forth, and published
the fact: where you may see how God by miracle condemned the Arrian heretic,
wen he did not observe the form of the Church. Council. Nicen. can. 19.
Gratia^. 1. q. 1. can. Si quis co^nfugerit. Grego. li. 9. epistol. epis 61.
Ide^ de cons. did. 4. cap hi. vero.
Wherefore those Heretics who keep not the form of Baptism by Christ
instituted, as the Paulianists and Cataphrigians, not believing aright of
Christ, nor the Holy Ghost: the Council of Nice appointed that those should be
Baptized again: Statutum est eos omnino rebaptizari: we decree and appoint in
any case those to Baptized again. If any of the fore named heretics fly for
help unto the Catholic Church. Read Gratian. And the same has S. Gregory of
the Cataphriges and Bonosians, who did not Baptize in the name of the Trinity,
because they thought the Father only to be God, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost to be but men. I will conclude with this Corrolarium or addition;
Although in case of necessity an Heretic may Baptize, and that the Baptism
of Heretics observing the form of the Church be auaylable, also that their
ought not to be Rebaptization: Yet notwithstanding this can not be no warrant
for Catholics or Schismatikes to sent their children to be Baptized of
Heretics, or to communicate with them in this Sacrament, or to permit them to
be by them Baptized. For no penal statute, or Commandment to the contrary
can free them from the Censure of Communicating with Heretics in Sacraments
and Divine things Besides no man knows how far he may endanger the soul
of the Infant thereby, considering that some of them maintain this dangerous
opinion: That baptism is not necessary to Salvation. And so grow careless
whether they Baptize or not.

Now concerning the Pagan and Jew, who never were themselves Baptized, whether
they could give an other that they never had themselves. Nichol. de cons. did.
4. can. a quoda^ Iudaeo.
It was decreed by Pope Nicholas at the consultation and petition of the
Bulgars, what was to be done with those, who were Baptized by Pagan or Jew;
his resolution was, that if they were Baptized in the name of the Holy
Trinity, whether by Jew or Pagan, they were not to be Rebaptized again.
Wherefore I will put the case: If two Jews or Pagans were together where no
Christians were being in danger of death, and both desirous of Baptism:
Council. Floren. can. de ministris Baptismi^
if in that case the one should Baptize the other, no doubt they both should be
saved and their Baptism auaylable. Wherefore I conclude with the Council of
Florence: Minister huius Sacramenti etc. That the Minister of this Sacrament is
the Priest, to whom by office and function it appertains to Baptize: but in
case of necessity not only the Priest or Deacon, but also the Layman and
woman yea also the Jew Pagan, and Heretic may Baptize, so that they observe
the form of the Church, and intend to do that the Church does.

CAP. 8. Whether Catholic Parents or others may send or permit their
Children to he Baptized of Heretical or Schismatic Ministers, without
grievous mortal sin.
ALthough the Baptism of Heretics, as I have proved in the precedent Chapter,
be auailable, and that those children, who are Baptized by them, are not to be
Rebaptized again: yet you must understand this not be lawful but in case of
necessity.

Now the question is: whether it be a grievous mortal sin for Parents to
send their children to be Baptized of Heretical or Schismatic ministers. I
think no man can justly make any doubt thereof. My reasons are. First if it be
a grievous mortal sin for any man to participate or communicate, In Diuinis:
In Divine service or Sacraments with Heretics or Schismatikes, as generally
all agree it is: but they who send their children to be Baptized of, or by
Schismatikes, do communicate in Sacraments with them. Ergo it is a grievous
mortal sin to send their Children to be Baptized of such kind of persons.
The Parent can not excuse himself saying, that he does not communicate, but the
child, for the Infant is capable of no such action more then is imposed or
laid upon him: Therefore the act of communicating is the Parents, and not the
Child's. And if it be a heavier offense to God to communicate in Sacraments,
then to be present, at their service: then I may lawfully conclude, that they
have more to answer for before God, in sending their Children to Church to be
Baptized, then in being there present them selves. The second reason may be,
for that they expose their child to great danger of Irregularitie if he be a
boy. For if he were Baptized at home either by the midwife or otherwise, and
be rebaptized again, he is irregular, that is, not capable of Holy Orders. De
Co^se. did. 4. Can. qui bis. Scie^ter.
The Constitutions and Canons of the Church are: that Rebaptizans, and
Rebaptizatus: The Rebaptizer, and the Rebaptized are both Irregular. But the
Canonists do interpret the law, if they do it willingly and witinglie. But
you will say; some of the ministry if they be told the Child is Baptized,
will not absolutely Rebaptize, but Conditionally If thou be not Baptized, I
Baptize thee. And so they avoid Irregularitie in them selves, and the Child:
Yet they can not be excused from sin in this their doing; because they ought
not to doubt of the Baptism, and thereupon take occasion to Rebaptize again,
but upon probable cause, which in this case is not. The third reason. Siluester
a learned Casuist affirms: Siluest. verbo Baptis. cap. 3. number. 7.
That it is a mortal sin for any man to require Baptism at the hands of
him, whom he knows probably to be either an Heretic, Schismatike,
Excommunicate or suspended person, unless it be in extreme necessity; For in
such a case (as has been said) I may require it at the hands of an Heretic,
Jew or Pagan. But you will say: The law urges and compels upon forfeiture
of an hundred pounds; I answer: Iniqua and iniusta est lex: Wicked and unjust
is that Law, that urges and compels a man against his Conscience to
commit a mortal sin, and consequently no law. Therefore not to be
obeyed. Read the Constitutions of Pope Felix the Third in his first Epistle and
second Chapter. Felix. de Co^se. did. 4. can. Eos quos.
And the Gloss has: Magis mors est eligenda, quam consentire rebaptizari:
That one ought rather to suffer death, then to consent to Rebaptization,

For a Caveat to Catholic Parents for sending their Children to Church, to be
Baptized of Protestant or Puritan, I have thougt good to relate what happened
here in England in the County of Gloucester about the year of our Lord 1583.
as was reported unto me by an ancient grave man, worthy of credit, who came
immediately after the fact was done. So it was that a Catholic gentlewoman
being brought to bed of a Son, a Protestant Lady their neighbor, Cas. cas.
being very desirous to be Gossippe to the Child; the parents refusing to have
it Catholiklie christened at home for satisfiyng the Ladies request, were
content it should be carried to the Church to be Baptized of a Protestant
Minister. But what happened? Presently as the Minister laid water upon the
Child, it fell a crying vehemently, and could in no case be stilled, but
continued crying all that day and night following, even so long as it had
strength, and was able to cry, and so dyed. A worthy punishment no doubt for
the parents fault. Also I have read of a child in Flanders, who being brought
by the Father unto a preaching Minister to be Baptized, the Infant suddenly
appeared as dead: but being returned back unto the mother being a Catholic,
the child miraculouslie revived again. Brede^. li. 7. coll. Sacra. ca. 50.
Bredenbachius relates the history from D. Walter, Canon at Antwerpe as an
eyewitness.

A Catholic woman being married unto a Caluinist brought forth a child, whom
the Father secretly, his wife being a sleep, took away and brought him unto
a preaching minister to be Baptized; who being ready to Baptize in the
presence of the assembly, perceived the child to be dead. Whereupon presently
he did expostulate and reason with the Father, what he meant to delude and
mock him, and to bring a dead child to be Baptized? The father being stricken
in a maze with this unlooked for mischance returned home and laid again the
dead Infant by the mothers side; And so secreetlie departing from the chamber,
a little after returning, called upon his wife, and asked how she and the Infant
did. She being ignorant what was done, answered all was well, and turning her
self with pleasing countenance, offered the child alive and in good liking to
the Father. He being astonished with this miracle rejected his Caluinian
errors and heresies, embraced the Catholic faith, became one of his wifes
profession, and caused the Infant to be Baptized Catholiquelie.

And for the Minister that he be not too hasty to Rebaptize the Child already
Baptized by a Catholic midwife, let him read what happened at Amsterdame in
the year of our Lord 1579. as testifies Bredenbacius. Brede^. li. 7. coll.
Sacra. c. 51.
So it was a Catholic woman being married unto a Caluinist, and delivered of a
Child, she caused the Infant privately to be Baptized by a Lay Catholic woman,
because she would be sure of Baptism. The Father took the Child according to
Caluins rule, brought it to the preaching to be Baptized by the Minister. So it
fell out that the minister being ready to baptize in the assembly of all the
people, suddenly he became dumb not able to speak one word. Whereat the
Father being astonished, took his child in his arms, and came home unto his
wife, charging her to tell him the truth, whether the Infant had not been
Baptized before according to the Catholic order. Which she confessed to be
true. Whereupon he with the rest of his family were converted, reconciled to
the Church, and became Catholics.

CAP. 9. Whether one may Baptize many at one time.
I Say one may under this form saying: Ego Baptizo vos: I Baptize ye: which
is as much to say: I Baptize thee, and thee, determining every person. But you
must understand that this must be only in case of necessity, as in danger of
death, or some extraordinary cause, otherwise it is not to be done. For this
Sacrament bing of such necessity; that without it no salvation it must and
ought carefully, and respectiuelie to be ministered. Therefore it is more secure
and better that it be severally done and acted, that the water and the word
may go togeater, and the intention of the Baptizer may particulerly be applied
to every party who is to be Baptized.

Act. 2.
There were three thousand Baptized upon one day by the Apostles, but the
Scriptures do not express in what manner they were Baptized. It may be they
had help of others of the Disciples: but very probable they Baptized many at
once. Wherefore I may conclude, that in case of necessity, or upon some
extraordinary cause one may Baptize many: at once otherwise it must and ought
to be done severally and distinctlie, that is: one by one.

CAP. 10. Whether many at one time may together Baptize one Child.
Tho. 3. p. q. 67. art. 6.
SAint Thomas is of opinion that many can not well concur together to the
Baptizing of one. For when there are multiplicite of Ministers, there may be
many Baptismes, which were dangerous. For if the one should be before the
other, then the first did Baptize, and the other Rebaptize, which were a great
fault. Also S. Paul says: Ephesians. 4.
There is one God, one faith, one Christ, and one Baptism. So it were fit
there should be but one Minister to Baptize one party.

CAP. 11. Whether one may Baptize himself.
THe general opinion is that one can not Baptize himself, no not in danger of
death, or what other necessity soever. For better understanding I will propose
the case: For example. A Jew or a Pagan having heard or read of Baptism, or
lived sometime amongst the Christians, and being desirous of Christianity
lying at the point of death amongst his own, near no Christian, and so
consequently haueing no means to get any other man to Baptize him: takes
water putting himself therein saying: I Baptize thee in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. The question is, whether in this case
he be Baptized, and receive the Sacrament of Baptism. The resolution is, that
he is not Baptized, nor can of himself receive the Sacrement of Baptism. The
reason is, for that Baptism is a spiritual birth or regeneration but no man
can be generated or borne of himself, but necessarily of an other: so no man
can be Baptized of himself, but of necessity must be Baptized of an other.
Also it is gathered out of Christ's own words; that the Baptizer must be a
different person from the Baptized. For he said to his Apostles: Go ye and
Baptize all nations. And to signify thus much, we may also think that Christ
would not Baptize himself, but be Baptized of John. If you do ask me what I
think of this Jew or Pagan, in this case, whether he should be saved or not?
I answer with Pope Innocentius the Third: that he could not be saved by the
Sacrament of Baptism, for that he had it not: but no doubt he might be saved
by the faith, vow, and desire of baptism, and the zeal, fervor and love to
Christ, and so he might have it supplied by Christ in will and affection. Read
Innocentius libro 4. decretalium. tit. 42. de Baptismo and eius effectu.

CAP. 12. Whether the intention of the Minister be necessary that the
Sacrament take effect.
ALL Divines agree, and it is decreed in two general Counsels of Florence,
and Trent, and deduced expresslie out of Scripture, that to the substance of
Baptism as necessary are three things; that is: water as the matter, the
words as the form, and a minister to do it and effect it. For the two first I
have sufficiently proved before in my second book, that they are the two
essential parts of Baptizme: now that the minister must of necessity have
intention to do this act I will briefly show. When Christ instituted this
Sacrament, and gave the form he said to his Apostles: Go ye Baptizing: no
man can think, Mat. 28.
but that Christ meant that they should intend, what he had instituted.
Secondly, if a man should take water, say the words, and cast it, and power it
upon an other, and have no intention to Baptize, it were no Sacrament, no
Baptism, because there was no intention to do the act of Baptism. As also
if a player upon a stage should but show the act of Baptism, no man would say
he Baptized: And why? There was water, the word, the minister, and all other
things. Because there wanted in the player intention to do the act of
Baptism. In like manner if a drunken man, who had lost the use of reason, or
if a mad man, or if a Priest should rise in his sleep, and do all that
belongs to Baptism: Yet it were no sacrament; because in none of these thee
there were properly any humane act with freedom of will or intention to
direct this action, or free mind to work or not to work, to Baptize, or not
Baptize. So also when the nource does wash or bath the child, if she should
say: I bath or wash thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost; no man would be so mad, as to think she Baptized the child.
And why? For no other reason, but because she had no such intention as to
Baptize. Wherefore I conclude, it is necessary to the true effecting of this
Sacrament, that the minister ought to direct this his exterior act to this
end and purpose, that is to Baptize, that thereby he intend to perform that
which Christ instituted and commanded to be done.

Absurd then is the opinion of M. Luther and other his followers, Luth. de cap.
Bab. cap. de Bap.
who do not require any intention in the Minister of this Sacrament but
mayntaine that Baptism is sufficiently performed, if there be the water and
the word, although they do the act of Baptism like a minstrell or player, in
jest or in earnest, idly or fainedly. No man can think that the Jews, when
they bowed their knees to Christ and said: Aue rex Iudeorum: Hail king of the
Jews, they intended in deed and verity to adore him, but rather to jest and
scorn him. Worthily therefore is this opinion condemned as Heretical by the
Council of Florence against the Armenians. Council. Floren. Arm. Trid. sess.
7. can. 11.
And now also by the Council of Trent, where Anathema and curse is laid upon
him, who does not require in the Minister of this Sacrament intention to do
that, which Christ instituted when he Baptizeth. Not without cause then was
Doctor John Rainoldes one of the agent for the millinarie ministers by the
Bishops of England rejected, Co^fer. at Hap Court. 1603. Fol. 71.
when he moved the King, that this proposition should be inserted in their
book of Articles: That the intention of the Minister was not of the necessity
of Baptism.

CAP. 13. What kind of Intention is necessary.
THat the minister of this Sacrament must of necessity have intention, I have
declared in the precedent Chapter. The schoole-Diuines dispute what kind of
intention may suffice. For there are three kinds of intention, Actual,
Habitual, and virtuall. The Habitual all Divines exclude as not sufficient;
for that it may be (say they) in a drunken man, a mad man, or in any man that
is asleep, for it extends not to the act, but only to an inclination or
promptitude gotten by the habit. Arist. Phys. 2.
And therefore the Philosopher Aristotle said, that Habitus non est actus: The
Habit cannot be the act, but a promptnes and power to the act. The Actual
intention is very good, and to be wished to be in all, who Baptize, which is:
De facto, and in deed to have and produce a mental intention to execute the
act of Baptism, and to do that the Church does, and Christ instituted. But
this is not always of necessity of the Sacrament; For that men are often
subject to many distractions, and hardly it is in man's power, to be always
attentive upon those things we have in hand, although they be holy. Wherefore,
if this actual intention were always of necessity, it would often breed much
trouble and scruple in the minds of the pious Baptizers, and make uncertain
the act of Baptism. Therefore it is generally holden, that the virtuall
intention is sufficient, that is when one provides and intends actually to
Baptize: but yet when he does the act, his mind may be so dulled, that he
think of nothing, or so distracted, that he have quite other cogitations.
Therefore when we purpose to Baptize, it is sufficient to intend the external
act of Baptism, as instituted by Christ or used by the Church although our
mind at the time of the act, may be wandering upon other things. Neither is it
necessary, that we extend our intention to the effect of Baptism, that is
that we intend by this actio^ to give grace, to remitte original sin, and to
sanctify the soul. For if this were necessary, we might justly doubt of the
Baptism of many Heretics. For the Pelagians, and some in these days, denied
that Baptism did remitte Original sin. Also it may be thought, that neither
Pagan nor Jew, do think of grace or sanctification of the soul when they
Baptize. And it is probable, that the Caluinists and Puritans of England will
not be behind any of them in this point, their dangerous opinion leading them
thereunto. Wherefore to conclude, it is sufficient to have internal intention,
to do in deed and verity the act of Baptismes, in the manner a foresaid for
there in is included to do that which the Church does and Christ instituted.
To take away all intention in the Baptizer (as Luther would) were to make a
Parrate that can speak, to Baptize.

CAP. 14. Whether the Devil can Baptize.
I Move this question, the rather that you may understand what a friend M.
Luther is to the Devil. Luth. de mis. pri. v. painted 1554.
For in his opinion, the Devil can Baptize, if he observe the form. Which
Baptism of the Devils, he approves and allows as auaylable. But to me it
is strange and unheard, to imagine that the Devil should sanctify a soul,
being the common defiler and corrupter of the soul of man. That you may not
think this an idle dream of his, or a fained story of mine, you must
understand that he goes about by argument to prove it Judas (says he) The
betrayer of Christ, and traitor to his Master did Baptize: but Judas was a
limme and member of the Devil; why then cannot the Devil do as much as any
limme or member of his can do^. M. Luther might have considered if he would,
that Judas when he Baptized, he was an Apostle, and no traitor at that time.
Also he might as easily have conceived; that Judas Baptized as an Apostle and
minister of Christ's, and not as a limme and member of the Devil. Finally it is
most manifest by Scripture, that Christ gave his commission for ministering of
this Sacrament, only to men for their good, and not to Devils the utter
enemies of mankind. Therefore let us leave M. Luther with his Devils, it is
likely he is amongst them; take heed and beware of his doctrine least thou be
brought were he is.

CAP. 15. Whether an Angel may Baptize.
THere is no doubt but the ordinary commission for the administering of this
Sacrament, was granted and committed only to man; Haeb. 5. Omnis pontifex.
therefore no angel by ordinary Commission can Baptize. But if God has or
should send an Angel from heaven, with extraordinary commission and
warrantise to Baptize, I would make no doubt, but his Baptism were auaylable,
because it is ordinary for Angels, to be assistants and friends to Gods
people here on earth.

Now having spoken of the minister Baptizing: it follows that we entreat of
the parties who are to be Baptized; that is of Infants and children, and those
who are of riper years, and of understanding, at man's estate, young or old.
And first we will examine concerning Infants, whether they contracte original
sin, and whether the only ordinary remedy for that sin be Baptism. And
if they die without Baptism, what place and punishment they shall possess,
and have after this life. And so forth as follows.

THE FOVRTH BOOK. Of the party to be Baptized, as Infants and others of
understanding and age.
CAP. 1. Weather Infants do contracte Original sin.
IT is manifest both in the old and new testament, that every man borne by man
and of woman since Adam, are subject to Original sin, and in, and by them
are con^eaued, borne, and constituted sinners. The^e ^s exception to be made of
Christ who was not ^orne by man; and also the blessed virgin is to be exempted
by special privilege, because Christ was borne of her. That all others are
subject and borne in Original sin S. Paul proves saying: Romans 5. ver. 12.
Per vnum hominem peccatum etc. By one man sin entered into this world, and
by sin death and so unto all men death did pass, in which all sinned. But
this sin wherewith we are infected by Adam can not be Actual sin, because
Infants are not capable to do good or evil; therefore it must needs be
Original sin. And holy Job plainly tells us: that no man is clean from
the filth of sin, no not the Infa^t of one day old, Job. 14.
Nemo mundus a sorde, ne Infants cuius est vnius diei vita super terra^. And
there upon asked this question of Almighty God: Quis potest etc. who ca^ make
clean him, who is conceived of unclean seed? No^ne tui qui solus es? Is it
not thou Lord, who only art? So that it is plain by the testimony of holy
Job, that Infants are borne in sin, and by nature unclean, and that God
only is to purge these uncleanness contracted by Conception. And kind David in
the Miserere Psalm confesses of himself, and consequently of others: Ecce in
iniquitatibus conceptus sum, Psalm. 50.
and in peccatis concepit me matter mea: Behold I was conceived in iniquities
and my mother conceived me in sin. But no man can imagine any other sin,
that king David should be conceived in, then Original sin: therefore there is
no doubt but Infants in conception contracte Original sin. And S. Paul has
this general proposition: Romans 3.23.
Omnes peccauerunt, and egent gloria Dei: All men have sinned, and do stand in
need of the glory of God. If all men have sinned, why then no exception to be
made of Infants and Children; But children have no actual sin; therefore it
must needs be that they are infected with Original sin. And the same
Apostle confesses. Eramus and nos natura Filij irae sicut and caeteri: Ephesians.
2.3.
And were by nature the children of wrath as also the rest: But they could no
way be the children of wrath, but only by Original sin: therefore every one
was, and is subject unto it. And thus by Scripture it is manifest, that all men
are conceived in Original sin, and borne sinners. The like may be proved out
of the ancient Counsels and Fathers of the Primitive Church, especially after
the time of Pelagius the Arch-heretike, who maintai^ed this heresy: That
Infants and children did not contract Original sin; and therefore were not of
necessity to be Baptized in remission of sin. Concerning which subject, and
against this heresy S. Augustine wrote diverse books: As De Peccato
Originali, and four books Contra duas epistolas Pelagiani, three books De
Peccatorum meritis, and in diverse other places of his works. Wherefore if any
man desire to be farther satisfied in this point, let him read S. Augustine.

CAP. 2. Whether it be of necessity that Children be Baptized for remission
of this original sin.
IT is necessary, and as has been proved by the sentence of Christ himself.
For he has made this general decree without exception of young or old: Ioa. 3.
That no man shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, unless he be regenerated
and borne again by water and the Holy Ghost. But there is no cause to exclude
Infants and children from the kingdom of heaven but Original sin, therefore
it is necessary they be Bap^ized for remission thereof. Secondly the Church of
Christ, even from her cradle and infancy, has ever had a Vigilant eye, and
careful solicitude grounded upon the Tradition of the Apostles, continually
to Baptize Infants and children, especially if in that age they were in danger
of death. But this was principally that they should not depart this life
without the Sacrament of Baptism, which is the ordinary means by Christ
instituted for remission of Original sin, because it is necessary they be
regenerated and borne again by water and the Holy Ghost. Also they, who are
Baptized are said by the Apostle: To die to sin, that they may walk in
newness of life; Ro^ 6.4. Ephesians. 5.26,
And to be cleansed by the lauer of regeneration. So it is manifest they have
sin from which they are to be purified and washed; wherefore it is of
necessity that children be Baptized for remission of this sin. Thirdly the
Apostle S. Paul writes to the Romans that: Ro^. 6.23.
Stipendium peccati est mors: The stipend of sin is death. Therefore where
death is, there is also sin. But death is as well amongst children as aged
folks; Therefore Children are also subject to sin. Christ is said by the
Apostle: To die for all, as well Infants as aged. 2. Cor. 5.15. 1. Pet. 3.18.
Romans 5.8.
But S. Peter said: That Christ died for the unjust and wicked. And this does
S. Paul also prove, asking the question: why Christ died for the impious? He
yields the reason, and gives answer: for herin God commends his Charity
in us; because when we were Sinners Christ died for us. But Infants and
children are no way unjust and wicked by any act of their own; wherefore it
must needs be they are unjust and wicked by Original sin. The conclusion
the^ follweth that they must be co^sepulted and buried again with Christ in
his death and Passion by Baptism, that they may rise with him to glory;
necessary the^ it is, that children be Baptized in remission of sin S.
Agustine to prove that Infants are infected with Original sin, and so
co^sequentlie under the power and might of the Devil, uses this argument: The
Church does use that most ancient Cer^monie in Baptism, Aug. li. 1. de pe.
m^ritis ca. 34. and l 6. in Julian. c. 2.
that is, by exorcismes and Insufflations to expel the Devil even from
Infants and children, before the^ be Baptized, which she would not use, but
that thereby she intends to instruct and teach, that eue^ children by
Original sin were subject to the power of Satan. The Meleuitane council
under S. Innocentius the First of that name, has decreed and Anathematized
those: Quicunque paruulos recentes ab vteris matrum Baptizandos negat, aut
dicit eos in remissionem peccatorum Baptizari, sed nihil ex Adamo trahere
originalis p^ccati, quod lauacro regenerationis expietur, Anathema sit:
Whosoever does deny that children newly borne, are not to be Baptized: or
does affirm that children are to be Baptized unto remission of sin, but so
that they co^tracte from Ada^ nothing of original sin, which is to be purged
and cleansed by the lauer of regeneration, let him be accursed. Wherefore to
conclude, it is necessary that Infants and Children be Baptized for remission
of Original sin.

CAP. 3. Whether Original sin does appertain or be to be imputed to
Child^e^, borne of Christian Parents.
I Have in general proved in the precedent chapters that all men borne of man
and woman since Adam (except Christ and the B. virgin) are conceived and borne
in Original sin and thereby constituted and made sinners: also that it is of
necessity that Children and Infants be Baptized in remission of this sin,
and for the cleansing and taking away thereof. Now the question is in particular
whether to be borne of Christian parents, be a sufficient means to remove
Original sin from their children, that it may not appertain, or be imputed
unto them. I move this question not that Christian people should make any
doubt of the val^^, virtue and force of Baptism instituted by Christ unto
remission of sin, as the ordinary means for Original sin in children and
Infants: but to decypher the dangerous doctrine of Calvin, Calvin li. 4. Inst.
c. 16.. 24. Antid. ad can. 5 sess. 6.
who dares not avouch with the Pelagian Heretics, condemned by the Church of
God above some twelve or thirteen ages past, that Children borne of Christian
Parents do not by birth and conception contract Original sin.

Yet notwithstanding has this new Ghospeller found out this new devise, that
this sin shall not be imputed, nor laid to the charge of children borne of
Christian Parents, but covered and hidden in the sight of God. And what is his
intent hereby? Surely no other then. Iudaizare, to play the Jew, to debilitate
and weaken the virtue, power, and strength of the Sacrament, and to take away
the necessity thereof for the salvation of Infants and Children, and withal to
make Christian men careless of Christianity in their children and posterity.
If I should demand of any in different man, whether it were not better and a
more safer way, to have Original sin clean washed by Baptism, utterly
abolished, and taken away by the Holy Ghost, working in, and by that Sacrament,
and so to have the wound and sore perfectly cured, then to have the sin
remain, although not imputed, but covered, not perfectly cured, but
plastered? I think this would be a sufficient argument to confute this error,
and to make me^ beware to enda^ger their childre^s salvation upon this
slipperie doctrine. For what warrant has Calvin, or any of his Accomplices; or
partakers our Contreimen out of Scripture; That children borne of Christian
Parents, shall not have Original sin imputed unto them? But sure I am, that
we have the testimony of Christ and his Apostles, that Baptism does open the
gate to heaven, and regenerate, and cause us to be borne a new to Christ. Ioa.
3. Ephesians. 5.
And that it is a washing and cleansing of our souls, in the word of life. And
that we thereby die to sin, that we may walk in newness of life. Ro^. 5.
Therefore let all Christian Parents of our country, with all their
Predecessors, and the whole Christian world round about them, seek the
salvation of their children by the Sacrament of Baptism, and not trust unto
the new devise of Caluins not imputation, least they be guilty of their
Childrens damnation.

But for further confutation, I will allege two or three examples out of
Scripture, that to be borne of faith full parents, is not a sufficient means
to free them from contracting Original sin, or being contracted, therefore
not to have it imputed. David was the son and child of faithful parents, and
true believers in God, as also of the seed of Abraham: yet he confesses: That
his mother conceived him in sin. Psalm. 50
But where can it be found in Scripture, that his Parents was the cause that
this sin should not be imputed, and not rather Circumcision to be, the true
cause which was a figure of Ba^tisme? And S. Paul when he was borne, his
Parents were of the faithful and true believers: yet said he, that he as well
as the rest, was by nature the child of wrath. But how became he the child of
God, and to be cleared of all sin? By his Parents, in that they were true
believers? No. The Scripture tells us no such thing; but rather by the
Sacrament of B^ptisme. Act. 22.
For Ananias bid him arise, and be Babtized, and so to w^sh away his sins.
And the same Apostle proves the Jews to be reprobate; although they came of
Abraham's flesh; And that to be the son of God, goes not by birth, but by the
grace of God. For example Esau, twinne to Jacob, was borne of Isaac the Father,
Ro^. 9.
and Rebecca the mother faithful Parents, and immediately from Abraham: yet
Esau was a reprobate (says S. Paul) from his birth. Wherefore we may
conclude, that it is not the parents that freeth their children from Original
sin, let them be true believers and faithful before Christ, or now
Christians after Christ.

Cyp 11. 3. Epist. ep. 8. de Infa^t. Baptiza^dis.
Therefore S. Cyprian writing to fidus the Priest concerning Baptizing of Infants
before the eight day, wills that no man be hindered from Baptism and the
grace of God, but especially children and Infants newly borne, taken even from
their mothers womb. For although they have no actual sin: yet because they
are borne carnally according to Adam, they must needs contract Original
sin. Worthily then we may conclude with S. Augustine: Quicunque dixerit etc.
Aug. ep. 28, non long a fine.
Whosoever shall say that children ^lso shall live in Christ, who depart this
life without participation of the S^crament of Baptism by him instituted, in
very deed that man does oppose himself against the open Apostolical
declaration, and condemns the whole Church, seeing that for that cause, she
does hasten the Baptizing of c^ildren; because without doubt it is believed
that no other way at all they can be saved, or have life life in Christ.

Thus S. Augustine. Idle then is this not imputation of sin by Calvin
maintained, because they are borne of Christian Parents.

CAP. 4. Whether Infants and children are to be Baptized, before they come to
years of discretion.
THe Anabaptist maintain this heresy, that children and Infants ought not to
be Baptized, but only those who are of years and understanding, and do seek
it and desire it of themselves. And some of this sect do contend, that they
ought to stay until they come to thirty years of age, because Christ was at
that age Baptized of John. All men may plainly see in this age the work of
the Devil, who not only by heresy endeavors to destroy in Christendom the
souls of a great part of the elder sort, but also to send to hell, even the
poor Infants and children, in taking away from them the use of this Sacrament
of Baptism.

The Catholic Church, and all Catholic Doctors, have always practiced and
taught, that Infants and children ought to be Baptized. And first they prove it
by example out of the old Testament: Colos. 2.
Circumcision says S. Paul was a figure of Baptism: but Circumcision was
commanded to be given to children of eight days old. Wherefore then may not
Baptism be ministered to children? Ge^. 17.
Secondly Christ has pronunced, and given this sentence generally without
exception, that there can be no salvation without Baptism. I^a. 3.
Unless (says Christ) a man be borne again of water and the Holy Ghost he
can not enter into the kingdom of heaven. And that we may not think children
to be excluded, Christ has recorded by three Evangelists: Mat. 19. Mar. 10.
L^c. 18. Esaias. 49.22.
Sinite paruulos etc. Suffer children to come unto me for the kindome of heaven
is for such; To signify that he would not that children and Infants should be
lest without remedy to salvation. And that children should be members of the
Church of Christ prophesied Esaias: Ecce leuabo ad gentes etc. Behold I will
lift up my hands to the Gentiles, and will exalt my sign unto the people, and
they shall bring their sons in their arms, and shall carry their daughters
upon their shoulders. Therefore Children are to be admitted to the Sacrament of
Baptism.

Thirdly the Church has ever taught, observed, and delivered it as from the
Apostles to be lawful, yea necessary to Baptize children and Infants. And no
man can deny, but that Baptism of children has been ever held as an
Apostolical tradition. Wherefore although it be not expressly commanded in
Scripture, yet it is sufficiently collected and deducted (as I have proved)
and no way contradicted, therefore lawfully to be practiced. We read in the
history of the Apostles: Act. 16.
that they Baptized whole families. No doubt but their were some children
amongst the family.

Wherefore we must needs conclude that Baptizing of children proceeded from the
direction of the Holy Ghost, or else we must confess, that the Apostles spoke
and practiced not with the Spirit of God which were blasphemy. Dionisius
Areopagita S. Paul's Scholar says: Dionis. Areop. Eccle. Hier. ca. vltimo.
Duces diuini nostri, scilicet Apostoli probauerunt Infantes recipi ad
Baptismum: Our heavenly guides the Captains of our God, the Apostles have
approved and allowed Infants to be received unto Baptism. Finally no man can
doubt, unless he will become a Pelagian Heretic, but that Infants are borne
in original sin; therefore it is of necessity that children be Baptized, or
else that they be left without remedy for their salvation, as the Anabaptists
would have it. Which were against the mercy of God, who would have all saved,
The difficulty of this question is, because there is faith required in the
Baptized, and a will and desire to receive the same. How this can be in
children that they may be admitted to Baptism is the question. Wherefore in the
next ensuing Chapter, we will put down, what faith is required in children,
and how this may be performed.

CAP. 5. What faith is required to the Baptism of Children and Infants.
Mat. 28.
WE must understand when Christ said to his Apostles: Go ye first and teach,
and then Baptize. as S. Matheu reports. And: me^ must believe before they be
Baptized, as has S. Mark. Mar. 16.
And when the Eunuch asked whether he might not be Baptized, S. Philippe
answered: Si credis licet: If thou believe thou may, Act. 8.
to signify that he must first believe before he could be Baptized. And S.
Paul says: That faith is by hearing: Fides ex auditu, and other such like
places of Scripture we must understand (I say) that Christ spoke of the
Conversion of nations, of men of understanding, and such as had use of reason,
who were by preaching; teaching, instructing, and miracles to be brought to the
faith, and belief in Christ. And for those, who are at man's estate, capable of
understanding, apt to be taught, ready to hear the word of God preached, I
say it is requisite, yea necessary that they have actual faith and belief in
Christ, and that of themselves they seek and desire Baptism, before it can,
or ought to be ministered unto them; because the Scripture does require this
actual faith and belief in full age, the elder sort, and those at man's
estate, making no mention of Children.

Therefore, say these Anabaptists, that Children are not to be Baptized before
they be capable of teaching, and preaching to receive actual faith, and to
require of them selves Baptesme. So that Infants and children, if they never
come to age, should perish, and be without remedy of salvation in these men's
opinion. But to confound these Heretics, and satisfy any reasonable man, in
the precedent chapter it has been sufficiently proved, that children may and
ought to be Baptized in their childhood and infancy. Now because they are not
capable of actual faith, for that they can not distinguish between good and
evil, Deu. 1. Jonas. ca. vltim^.
nor be able to know the right hand from the left (as Jonas the Prophet
says. Therefore it is sufficient for them to be Baptized: In fide aliena: In
the faith of an other; that is in the faith of their Parents, or those who
offer, and bring them to be Baptized, if they be Christians; Or In fide
Ecclesiae: In the faith of the Church, if they be the children of Infidells.
This is the doctrine of the Church, and the opinion of Catholic Doctors, both
ancient and modern, and that with reason. For as these Infants contracted
Original sin from their first parents Adam and Eve and were infected in
their souls: Alieno peccato: with an others sin: so now also they should be
cured, and have this sin remitted in the faith of an other. Therefore Saint
Augustine writing to Bonifacius says: In Ecclesia Saluatoris paruuli per
alios credunt etc. Aug. ep. 23.
In the Church of our Savior Children believe by others, as by others they
contracted sin, which is remitted in Baptism. And considering that Baptism
is a spiritual generation, and has some similitude with carnal generation,
therefore we say; even as children, when they are in their mothers womb, do
not receive nourishment from or by themselves, but are maintained by food from
their mothers: even so we say as yet not having use of reason, being as it were
placed in the womb of their mother the Church, do not receive salvation and
Baptism by and from themselves, but by the faith and act of the Church.
Therefore S. Augustine says: Our Mother the Church does offer and lend her
mouth to Children and Infants, Aug. li. de Pect meritis and remeff. c. 33.
that they may be endued with holy Mysteries; for as yet they can not believe
with their own hearts, nor make confession to salvation with their own
mouths. Wherefore we conclude, that children and Infants have intention to be
Baptized, answer the Priest, and are Baptized by the intention, by the mouth;
by the faith of their mother the Church.

Whereupon the Church has instituted, that when the child is brougt to the
font to be Baptized, the Priest asks him: Quid Petis? what intend? what
seek you? what ask you? The child answers by the mouth of the God-fater and
God-mother, or by the standers by: Pet^ Baptismum: I intend, and ask Baptism.
Then the Priest says: Vis Baptizari? will thou be Baptized? The child
answers as before, or the Church for him: Volo: I will. Then the Priest goes
forward: Credis in Deum Patrem omnipotentem etc. Do thou believe in God the
Father Almighty: and in Jesus Christ his only Son etc. The child answers
as before: Credo: I do believe. Then the child is Baptized, receaueth the
sign and Character of a Christian, Origiginall sin is remitted, and in the
soul is infused the habit of faith, hope, and Charity, and so the Child is
made. Vere fidelis: A true faithful soul. This is the doctrine and practice
of the Catholic Church. Anathema then, and fie upon these Heretics and
heresy, who would leave the poor Infants remediless of salvation, because
they are not capable of actual faith. And Isidorus says: Paruuli alio
profitente Baptizati sunt, quia adhuc loqui vel credere nesciunt etc. Children
are Baptized, an other making profession of faith for them; because the know
not as yet to speak or believe. In like manner also it is with them, who are
sick, dumb, or deaf, in whose steed and place an other does make profession,
that he may make answer for them, while they are Baptized.

I think M. Luther has much to answer for before God, who gave occasion of
this heresy, for that he would needs maintain that Infants had actual
faith, which is impossible, and against reason; and not to be content with the
general doctrine of the Church, that habitual faith, and the faith of an
other was sufficient for Baptism in the Infant. And being dealt for and
reasoned with, co^cerninge this difficulty, notwithstanding did stifflie
defend against Cocleus: That Children have use of reason, do actually hear,
and believe, whilst they are Baptized. And also the Lutherans maintained the
same in their Synod held at witenberg, in the year of our Lord. 1556.

CAP. 6. Whether Children if they die before Baptism can be saved by their
fathers faith.
I Have proposed this question, not that there is any probability in the
affirmative part. Because according to S. Paul: Not only the children of the
unbelieving, Ephesians. 2.
but also of the faithful, all are borne the children of wrath, and all
conceived in original sin.

Therefore I absolutely answer that they can not be saved by the parents faith.
For (as I have sufficiently proved before) that the ordinary means for the
salvation of Children, and remission of Original sin is Baptism, and
therefore not the parents faith. Let this then be a Caveat and warning to all
Catholics and wellminded Christians, to beware of the dangerous doctrine, that
many of our Countrymen following M. Calvin are not ashamed publicly to
preach; that Baptism is not necessary to Salvation in Infants; so that they
be borne of Christian Parents. As though the Patents faith could make safe the
child; which is against Scripture, Counsels, Fathers, and all antiquity. For
that the ordinary means (as I have said before) for the salvation of
children is Baptism.

It was decreed by S. Innocencius the first Pope of that name, who flourished in
the time of S. Jerome and S. Augustine: That children, althought borne of
Christian Parents, ought to be borne again by Baptism, that in them that
which they contracted by birth and genration, should be cleansed by
regeneration and Baptism. True it is (as we have proved in the precedent
chap^er) that Infants are Baptized in their pa^ents faith, if the Parents be
Christians, or ^n the faith of the Church, if they be Infidells; but it is the
Sacrament that makes them safe, and not the Parents faith, for that is but an
introduction to the Sacrament. This priui^edge and special help children have
being borne of Christian Parents, that they them^elues being Christians, will
and ought to have a special care that they be brougt to Baptism, and in this
respect the faith of the Parents, may profitte the Infant, and be a secondarie
cause of his sanctification. Therefore no doubt it is a deadly and mortal
sin in the Parents, if by their negligence the child die under their hands
without Baptism. Surely then I may conclude that this doctrine of Caluins, is
but a trick of Satan to make Parents careless of this Sacrament, that he may
bring their Children to utter danger of salvation, and to make themselves not
free from sin. I have heard of some great personages, who for pomp at
Christening, and to have some honorable person for Godfather, have delayed and
neglected Baptism, and so the Infant dying without it, by the Parents pride
and negligence have been sent unto hell. What grief this ought to be in
Parents judge you, and what sin it was in them, I have censured before.
Because this opinion of Calvin is too pregnant in our Country of England, Call.
li. 4. Inst. ca. 16. Object.
and some of the best seem to incline unto it, I will solue all his arguments.

The first objection is out of the old Testament, where God made pacte and
promise to Abraham, Genesis 17.
that he would be a God unto him; and this promise was not only made unto him
for his own person, but to his seed and posterity after him: but all the
Children of the faithful are of the seed of Abraham. Therefore they are not so
properly justified by the act of Baptism, as by the promise God made to the
seed of Abraham. Sol. Kelli. ^. lib. 4. Suruay.


But this argument has Doctor Kellison most learnedly answered. First
although God made this promise to Abraham's seed, yet after he instituted
Circumcision, and threatened all those who had it not, that they should perish;
but Circumcision was a figure of Baptism; Therefore although we be partakers of
the benediction; yet we must be Baptized, or else we perish eternally.
Secondly this promise and benediction is to be understood either carnally or
spiritually; If carnally; then it belongs only to the Jews, who where of
the seed and flesh of Abraham, and the carnal children of him; If
spirituallie, then they only are partakers, who, Romans 9.
as S. Paul says: Do imitate the faith and works of Ahraham. For so are
they made the Children of Abraham. But the Children of the faithful do no way
imitate Abraham's faith or works, until they be Baptized, and receive the
Sacrament of faith, whereby they are in deed: Vere fideles, and become truly
faithful. For as we have proved before, the Children ca^ not have faith but by
Baptism. For actual faith they are not capable of, and habitual faith they
have infused in them only by Baptism. Therefore that they be the children of
Abraham, it is necessary they be Baptized to receive faith. Thirdly this
absurdity would follow, that children should not contract Original sin,
which were to revive the Pelagian heresy. For if children be justified by this
that they are of the seed of Abraham, if you understand it according to the
flesh, there is no doubt, but in the first instance of their conception, they
are of Abraham's seed, and so consequently justified; Therefore not borne in
Original sin. Wherefore we must needs conclude, that this place of Scripture
no way can prove M. Caluins opinion.

The second objection is out of S. Paul, Ob. 1. Cor. 7.
where he says: That the unbelieving man is sanctified by the faithful
woman; and that the Children of them are clean and holy. Therefore the children
may be borne sanctified by the Fathers faith. To this I answer, Sol.
that no man will think if a Turk should marry a Christian woman, and be
content to live with her, and let her use her conscience, that the Turk thereby
should be sanctified and made lust. Or if a Protestant marry with a Catholic
woman, and be content to live with her, and let her use her conscience, that
therefore the Protestant becomes a Papist. But it may very well be thought,
that by the prayer of the wife, by her persuasion, by her good example of life,
the Turk may become a Christian, the Protestant a Catholic, but the one must
be Baptized, and the other reconciled, or else the faith of the woman will not
suffice. So I say the faith of the Parents without the Sacraments of Baptism
can not cleanse or wash the soul of the Infant from Original sin
contracted. But this benefit the Child may have being borne of Christian
Parents, that they will, and are bound to have care, and seek the only
remedy for the soul of their Children, which is Baptism. Therefore Saint
Augustine says: Aug. li. 3. de anima. etc. 9.
Si vis esse Catholicus, noli dicere, noli docere, noli credere, Infantes etc.
If thou will be a Catholic, do not say, do not teach, doenot believe, that
Infants dying before the come to Baptism, can obtain indulgence, pardon, or
remission of original sin.

Secondly I answer that the Pelagians urged this place of Saint Paul against
Saint Augustine, to prove that Children borne of faithful Parents did not
contract Original sin; and so consequently were not to be Baptized to take
away Original sin. And Calvin urges the same place, not daring plainly to
say, that Infants do not contract from their Parents Original sin, but to
prove by their Fathers faith, that they may be saved without Baptism, because
Original sin shall, not be imputed. Therefore the same answer Saint
Augustine gave to the Pelagians I think may also satisfy the Caluinists. Aug.
li. 2. de Pect. meritis ca. 26. and l. 3. ca. 12.
First Saint Augustine says, that the cleanness, sanctity, and holiness,
that the children have from their parents, the Apostle does not mean to be
sanctity or holiness to Justification, salvation, or to remission of sins.
For then it would follow, that the Turk or Infidel should be sanctified by
the believing woman, and that by the very conjunction of matrimony he should
become Just and saved, which were against Scripture and reason, Haeb. 11.
because it is impossible to please God without faith.

Also it is manifest by Scripture that Christ has laid an other foundation of
Justification and salvation then the believing woman for the husband, and the
faith of the Parents for the Infant, and that is, to be borne again by water
and the Holy Ghost, and to be incorporate to Christ by Baptism. No doubt but
the true sense and meaning of the Apostle was, not to separate man and wife,
although they were different in Religion; because who knows whether one may
be an occasion of the others Conversion, says the Apostle.

So also the Parent may be a cause of the Salvation of the Infant, in seekeing
to have the Sacrament duly ministered. And thus expounds S. Chrysostom upon
this place of S. Paul the Infidel man to be sanctified by the faithful
woman, Chry. in hunc loc.
Quia spes est quod (...) fideli pertrahatur ad fidem, because there is hope
that by the faithful woman he may be drawn to true faith and belief. And
concerning the Infants of the faithful: Saint Jerome does interpret those
words of Saint Pau^e: Nunc Sancti, id est: Fidei Candidati, Iero. li. 1. cont.
Ioui. c. 5. and ep. ad Paulin.
^oc est deputati ad Christianam fidem: Now ^hey are holy, that is: now they
are cloa^hed in white, endeavoring to obtain ^aith. That is as much to say:
Now ^hey are deputed unto Christian faith and sanctity, esteemed and admitted
as Christians; because there is a great hope that by the industry and care of
the one Parent being faithful, the children may be brought to Baptism. This
was S. Ieromes opinion, and this I hope may satisfy any reasonable man.

CAP. 7. What punishment Children dying without Baptism shall have after this
life.
Having sufficiently proved in the precedent Chapters, that Infants and
Children contract Original sin, and are by nature thereby become the Children
of wrath and in dee^ constituted sinners, and that the only ordinari^ means to
restore them to grace and Innocenci^ again, is by Christ's institution the
Sacramen^ of Baptism, without which if they depart thi^ life, they can not be
saved: It must needs consequently follow, that they shall absolutely b^
deprived of the Kingdom of heaven, that the^ shall never possess eternal
beatitude and blessedness, which consists in the fruition an^ sight of God,
they shall perpetually want the blessed vision that is, never to see God, an^
consequently they shall be no companions o^ blessed Angels nor Saints of
Christ in heaven So that it is the general opinion of Catholik^ Divines, that
Children dying without Bapti^me, being their ordinary only means of
sa^uation, shall suffer the pains of damnation You must understand there are
two kinds an^ manners of punishments or pains to be executed upon sinners
after this life; that is: Poena damni, and poena sensus: The Pain of Damnation
and the Pain of sense. The first does consist of the perpetual want of the
blessed vision and fruition of the sight of God: The other which is Poena
sensus: The pain of sense, does consist in the eternal torment of hell fire,
wherewith the soul for the present shall be tormented, and after the general
resurrection, both soul and body eternally witthout intermission. For the
first (as has been proved) it is manifest that children dying without
Baptism, are subject unto death eternal, and accounted as damned, who shall
never see God. And the reason is plain out of Scripture as has been said,
Io. 3.
For by Original sin, even children are deprived of, and exiled from the
glorious city and kingdom of heaven; they are become by nature the children
of wrath. Ephesians. 2.
Also they have the ire of God hanging over them, and continue as Captives
under the power of Satan Prince of darkness; but those who are in this estate,
are in state and way of damnation. Therefore children dying without Baptism are
subject to eternal death, and are accounted as damned, and so consequently
never in possibility to ^nioy the fruition and sight of God: but incur
Poenam damni: The punishment of damnation. So that now the question is whether
Infants dying without Baptism shall feel and suffer the torments of hell
fire. Fulge^. de fide ad Pet. 3.27.


There are some of opinion as Fulgentius an ancient writer, who seems to make
no doubt therefore, but that they shall in some degree endure the very torments
of hell fire. And to this inclines Ariminensis a Scholeman. Arimi. 2. did.
33. q. 3. Dried. de gra^. and lib. arbit. tract. 3. c. 2.
And Driedo writing of controversies. But the general sentence of Fathers and
Divines is to the Contrary: that Infants dying without Baptism, shall not
suffer the pains and torments of hell. The reason is, because Positive actual
punisheme^t is not inflicted, but for actual offense: but Infants never did
nor can offend actuallie (for Original sin is in them but habitual)
wherefore it is sufficient for them to be rejected from the sight of God, and
banished the kingdom of heaven, and not to be punished with the torment of
hell fire. Wherefore the want of the blessed vision and sight of God is
attributed the ordinary penalty and pain for Original: and the torment of
hell fire as the pain due for actual sin. And Saint John heard the voice
from heaven speaking of the sins of Babylon saying: Quantum se glorificauit
etc. Apoc. 18.7.
As much as she has glorified her self, and has been in delicacies; so
much give her torment and mourning. As if he should have said; the measure of
pains and damnation, is according to the wicked pleasures, and unlawful
delights of this life, but children and Infants could not any way be proud, nor
give themselves to any sensual delight or pleasures of this world: therefore
no way sensibly to be tormented. And Esaias the Prophet says that God, Reddet
increpationem etc. will show his threatenings in the flame of fire; Esai. 66, 45.
because our Lord shall judge between the good and the badde in fire. And S.
Mark the Evangelist describes the punishment for them, who commit scandal,
that is to go into hell; Into the fire unquenchable, where their worm dies
not, Mar. 9.45.
and the fire is not quenched. But there is no action to be discerned good or
badde in Infants; neither can they commit any scandal, or have remorse of
conscience, or worm gnawing for any evil works; Therefore the pains of hell
fire are not due or to be executed upon them but upon elder sort, who commit
actual sin. Wherefore we may conclude, that Children dying without Baptism,
shall have: Poenam damni: the punishment of damnation, that is to be damned for
their Original sin: but not have Poenam sensus: The pain of hell fire,
because the have no actual sin.

CAP. 8. Vhether that Infants shall after this life be here on earth, and enjoy
the pleasures as men do now, or be in hell, or what place they shall possess.
SOme there are of opinion, that children dying without Baptism, after the
general resurection, shall have amiddle place neither in heaven, nor in hell,
but shall live here on earth, Bellar. lib. 6. de statu peccati. c. 2.
and enjoy a certain kind of natuall felicity and pleasure such as the earth
can yield. But this opinion, or rather I may say this error, is worthelie
confuted by that religious Cardinal Bellarmine. I call it an error, because
Saint Augustine does record it as specially maintained by the Pelagian
Heretics. Aug. li. de haer. ca. 8 8. and l. de Orig. animae. ca. 9.
And writing of the origin of the soul says: Nemo non Baptizatis paruulis
promittit inter damnationem and regnum coelorum locum quietis etc. No man does
give or promise to children dying without Baptism, as it were a middle place
of quiet and felicity between heaven and hell, damnation and salvation. And
why? Because (says S. Augustine) Hoc enim haeresis Pelagiana eis promisit:
thus much the Pelagian heresy has promised. Aug. li. de orig. animae. ca. 14.
And entreating of the same matter, he says further: Nouellos Hereticos
Pelagianos iustissime etc. Most justly the late new-sprong up Pelagian
Heretics has the Catholic Counsels and sea Apostolic by their authority
worthily condemned, because they presumed boldly to appoint and give to
children not Baptized an other place of quiet and felicity besides heaven.
Wherefore I doubt not but that it may lawfully be called an error, to assign
to children not Baptized, a middle and third place of quiet and felicite, as
shall be proved hereafter by Scripture and reason.

First S. John in the Apocalypse says: Blessed and holy is he that has part
in the first resurrection, Apoc. 20.9.
for in those the second death has no power Also he says: He that is not
found written in the book of life, shall be cast in stagnum ignis into the
lake or poole of fire. Ibid. 16.
But Children dying without Baptism are not partakers of the first
resurrection, that is the washing and cleansing the soul from Original sin,
that thereby they may have the grace of God to rise to salvation, and
consequently have not their names written in the book of life. Whereupon it
follows, that the second death, that is damnation must reign in them, and
their place of a bode must be the lake of fire, which is hell. And S. Paul
does tell the Collossians: Colos. 1.13.
That by Christ we are delivered from the power of darkness. But the only
means by Christ instituted to deliver Infants and children from darkness and
the power of Satan, is Baptism; wherefore until they be Baptized, they remain
captive and under the power of Satan in darkness. But they, who converse with
Satan in the dungeon of darkness can not be in place of pleasure, nor enjoy
great felicity. Ergo it is manifest they remain in hell. It is plain in the
Gospel that in the latter day, when Christ shall come to judge the world, Mat.
25.23.
all men must go either on the right hand, or on the left. There are then but
two ways; but children dying without Baptism are not for the right hand, then
of necessity they must go on the left hand; but the way on the l^ft hand is
damnation and hell: if damnation and hell, then no place of pleasure and
felicity.

Werfore to conclude, what care ought Parents to have that this Sacrament of
Baptism be duly ministered to there Children? And what grief it ought to be in
them, if by their negligence, or by inclining unto this new devise of Calvin,
they should send their Infants unto the dark dungeon of hell under the power
of the devil, and captivity of Satan? There is but one difficulty or
objection of any importance, God will make all new: Apoc. 21.
A new heaven, and a new earth; but this new earth shall not be vacant without
inhabitans: The Angels and Saints, and servants of Christ shall have heaven,
the devils and damned shall have hell; It sounds probably that the Infants
and children dying without Baptism, who never committed actual sin, may
have this middle place, inhabit the earth, and enjoy the pleasures thereof. To
this argument I answer: Sol.
that this earth shall not be inhabited neither by man nor beast. And that by
the heaven is understood the air. Heaven and earth shall be a new: that is;
all the four elements, the air the water, the earth and the fire shall be
renewed, made pure without mixture, and put in their natural places. The air
shall have no living thing in it, the birds and fowls of the air shall be
gone, the waters shall enuiron and compass about the whole earth, there shall
be no fish in it, the earth shall have no cattle, no beasts, no living creature
in it, no trees, no fruit, no flowers, no grass on the ground: Non erit
arida: There shall be no dry land. But as I have said, all shall be environed
and compassed about with the wathers. The reason is pregnant out of Saint John.
Apoc. 21.
Who says: Prima terra abijt, mare iam non est: The first earth is gone the
seas now are not. For the wather shall be without term or limitte. For what
are the seas but waters limited within such a compass that they shall not
pass to enuiron, or ouerwhelme the whole earth. Therefore after the first
creation of the elements God said: Genesis 1.9.
Congregen^ur aquae in locum vnum, vt appareat arida: Congregationesque aquarum
appellauit maria: Let the wathers be gathered to geather in one place, that the
dry land may appear: and the gathering to geather of the wathers he called
the seas. So thar we may conclude that when in the innovation the seas shall be
no more, the waters shall have their full course over the face of the whole
earth. Tho. in sup. a. q. 91. ar. 5.
And the reason in this innovation of the destruction of all things both in the
air, the wathers, and on the earth may be, because all these creatures as the
fowls of the air, the fishes of the seas, the beast and fruits of the earth,
were ordained of God only for the use, maintenance and comfort of man: but man
being taken away, all the elements shall be renewed and restored to their
natural course; So that there can be no ^abitatio^ at all upon the earth of
man or beast. Two places there shall remain only habitable that is; heaven and
hell; heaven for the good Angels and Saints, and hell for the devils and
damned souls. Therefore the ordinary opinion of School-diuines is, that the
place for Children dying without Baptism, In. 2: senten. did. 33. v. in 4.
did. 45.
shall be ^he horrible prison and dungeon of hell. And ^his only relief they
shall have (as has been ^ayed) they shall not suffer any sensible pai^e, nor
be tormented with hell fire, nor have any worm of conscience grawing on them,
nor remorse for any fault they did upon earth, because they never committed,
^nie actual sin: Wherefore I conclude, they can have no middle place between
heaven and hell: neither can they inhabit or live on the earth to enjoy any
natural kind of felicity or pleasure.

CAP. 9. Whether they shall have any excessive grief in hell, for that they
are deprived of the fruition and sight of God.
Aug li 6. in Iulianu^ cap. 4. vltra medium. B. Greg. lib. 9. moral. c. 16.
Fulge^. de fide ad Pet.
IT is the opinion of some Doctors, as S. Augustine, S. Gregory, and
Fulgentius, that the Infants dying without Baptism, can not be exempted, nor
freed from all sorrow and grief; because they know they were created to the
Image and liknesse of God, and that they want their final end, for the which
they had their beginning, which was to praise God, to see God, and to have a
certain beatitude and blessedness, the want whereof can not but be a certain
great grief unto them.

Yet it is the more general opinion of the greater part of Divines that their
sorrow and grief can be but small and little; because they have many causes to
lenifie and mitigate this their grief and sorrow. Although they had a knowledge
of God, and were not ignorant of some kind of beatitude and blessedness: yet
because they never had any act or habit to execute it, whereby they might
attain unto it but a weak, remote, and far of disposition only, which
could effect nothing: therefore their grief ca^ not be great for the loss of
that, whereof they never had perfect knowledge, nor in them selves means to
attain.

Again it was nor by their proper negligence, but by the fault of an other,
that they have lost so great a good: Also these Infants never tasted of the
delights of heaven or earth; but we know by experience, that we never grieve so
much for the want of those things we never had, as we do for the loss of
those things we have possessed, or were in power to enjoy. We are easily
content to want tose things we never had use of, and never looked after neither
in Spe, nor In re: Neither in expectance nor in deed, But so it is with the
Infants: therefore their grief can not be great. Besides all this it must needs
be a great relief and comfort to them, when they shall see great multitudes
far more unfortunate, and in more miserable case then themselves. Because
they shall see others for their own proper action grievously tormented by the
torment of hell fire, and with all the know themselves freed from it, because
they never had any proper use of action in themselves, whereby actuallie they
could offend. Wherefore we may conclud their grief and sorrow to be but
remiss and small, although they are deprived of the sight of God, and want of
some kind of beatitude and blessedness, because they had but an imperfect
knowledge thereof, and no means to obtain it.

S. Thomas his opinion is, Tho. de malo. q. 5. a. 3.
although Children unbaptized be in hell, and suffer Poenam damni: punishment
of damnation: Yet for all that they shall take no serrow nor grief at all,
neither external, nor internal; because (says he) they have no perfect
knowledge that they are frustrate of their beatitude; and understand full well,
that they never had any natural means to obtain it. For what man but a
fool would grieve and sorrow that he were not a king or Angel, when he
knows there is no means for him to become a King or Angel. And S.
Bonauenture says: Bon. 2. Sent. did. 33.
That so it comes to pass that the consideration of the lose of the kingdom
of heaven is in such manner tempered with the escape of the pains of sense;
and the evasion of the torments of hell, that all grief and sorrow is avoided.
So that we may conclud that children although damned in hell, yet they have no
excessive grief in respect of their deprivation of the fruition or sight of
almigtie God.

Dolor amissa beatitudinis grauissimus est: The grief of the loss of
beatitude and the blessed vision of God is the greatest and most grievous
torment that is in hell; But children have lost bea^itude and the blessed
vision of God; therefore their grief must be great: I answer; Sol.
that the Proposition and saying of the Divines is most true, that the loss of
beatitude, and the blessed sight of God is the greatest grief and torment that
can be; But this Proposition must be understood as proper only to the elder
sort of men and women, who are damned by their own fact, and not as
appertaining to Infants, who have no fact of their own, but are punished for
an others, In very deed it can not but be an excessive grief in the elder
sort of the damned, because t they lost heaven and blessedness by their own
proper actual offense and sin. And therefore have with all conjoined to their
damnation, the perpetual torments of hell without intermission; and their
grief the greater by reason they had by faith a confident hoppe to have
obtained that which they have lost. Wherefore we conclud, that Infants and
children damned may have some small grief, but no excessive sorrow for their
loss of beatitude, and deprivation of the sight of almighty God.

CAP. 10. Whether the Infant in the mothers womb may be Baptized.
SAint Augustine solueth this question and says, Aug. ep. 57. ad Dard.
that the Infant in the mothers womb can not be Baptized; and yields the
reason: Quia nemo renascitur nisi primo nascatur: No man is said to be borne
again, unless he be ^^rst borne carnally. Also to the same effect spea^eth
Isidorus: Isidor. li. 10. sent de summo bono c. 24. Tho. 3. p. q. 68. art. 11.
Qui adhuc natus non est secundum Adam, non potest per Christum renasci: He
that (...) yet is not borne according to Adam, can not be borne again by
Christ. And S. Thomas proves it by an other reason. It is of necessity and
the essence of Baptism that the body of the Infant be dipped in water, or
have some water laid upon it; But the body of the Infant can not have wather
in the womb of the mother before it be Borne. Therefore it cannot be Baptized
before it be borne.

CAP. 11. Whether if some part of the Child appear, although the whole body
be not borne, it may be Baptized.
THe difficulty of this question arises, because the child may be said to be
borne totallie, wholly, and perfectly, also to be borne in part, that is:
when the hand, foot, or head appears out of the womb of the mother; as
happened to Thamar, when she brought forth Phares and Zaram, Ge^. 38.
for Zarams hand first appeared. The question is, when it so happens, that
part of the child appear out of the womb of the mother, that then according
to that part the child may be Baptized. The opinion of some learned Casuists
is: That it were convenient and good to expect the whole and perfect birth of
the child. But if it be imminent danger of death, and the principal part
appear, as the head, and no hope of total birth (for the hand and foot there
is more difficulty) then the child may and ought to be baptized. If thou
desire to be better informed concerning this case, read Siluester a learned
Casuist, In Summa, verbo Baptismus.. 4. nu. 2. And S. Thomas. 3. p. q. 88. ar.
11. ad 4.

CAP. 12. Whether if the mother being great with child being Baptized, the
child also in her womb b^ also Baptized.
THe case is, if a Jewish or Turkish woman, being converted to Christianity,
and being great with child desire to be Baptized, whether the Infant in her
womb at the same time, and by the same action be also Baptized. For if one
part of the body be Baptized, all the members of the same body be also
Baptized. But the Infant in the mothers womb is a member of her body.
Therefore it is also Baptized with the Baptism of the mother. Tho. 3. p. q. 68.
ar. 11.
S. Thomas resolves this doubt and says; That the Infant is not Baptized by
the Baptism of the mother, because properly the child is not a member of the
body of the mother; but has a distinct body and soul from hers; only
until it be borne it is knitte and tied to the body of the mother, but this
does not make it a member of her body.

There was one Iulianus an Heretic who lived in S. Augustines time, and he was
of opinion, that the Infant was part of the mother; and therefore Baptized in
the mothers womb by the mothers Baptism. Against whom S. Augustine wrote
many books. Habetur d^ Co^sec. did. 4. C. si ad matris.
Read him in his sixth book and fifth Chapter against Julian the Heretic.

CAP. 13. Whether if the mother should be martired, the Infant in her womb
were also a martyr.
I Think in this case the Infant should be Baptized in his own blood, and so
consequently a martyr with his mother. The Infants who dyed for Christ after
his birth, the Church always honored for Martirs, and they Confessed Christ:
Non loquendo, sed moriendo: Not by tongue and mouth, but by blood and death.
Therefore as the mother by constant confession and death was a Martyr: so also
the Infant in her womb being slain in contempt of the mother, and the cause
she died for, must also be a Martyr by blood and death. I may put for example
that worthy woman mistress Cleathrow, who was put to death at York in Queen
Elizabeth's time for receiving a reverent Religious Priest into her house, and
for constant confessing the Chatholike faith. She was a worthy martyr and true
Imitatrix and follower of S. Alban the Protomartyr of England. If she were
with child, and confessing as much, but the Judges not regarding it, I make no
doubt, but the child dieyng in her womb dyed also a Martyr.

CAP. 14. Whether the Mother may be cut and opened if other wise the Child ca^
not be borne and so taken from her alive that it may be Baptized.
Th. locis sup. citatis.
I answer with S. Thomas and learned Siluester, that the mother, so long as
there is life in her, in no case is to be cut and opened. For no man ought to
kill the mother for the Baptizing of the child. But if the mother die, and the
child be alive in her womb, then f^^e ought to be opened and the child
Baptized. You may object that te^porall death in the mother is less evil,
which must needs follow if it die without Baptism; but of two evils the
lesser is to be chosen. Wherefore we should rather choose the temporal death of
the mother, then the eternal damnation of the child. Sol. Ro^. 3.
To this objection we answer with S. Paul: That no man may do evil that
good may come of it. Therefore we may not murder the mother that the child may
live spirituallie or corporally.

If it be true (as is reported of King Henry the eight, when his Queen Jane
Seymer could not be brought a bed, and delivered of her Son Edward the sixth,
he yielded and gave consent that she should be opened and cut, and said: I
may have an other wife, but I doubt whether I shall have an other child; and so
the mother dyed for the life of the child. But what followed? The child never
lived to be a man, and by reason of his noneage, the whole realm was
disturbed, Religion contemned, and heresy planted. A plague no doubt for the
Fathers iniquity and sin.

CAP. 15. Whether the children of Jews or other Infidells, may lawfully be
Baptized against their Parents will.
IT is a hard and difficulte question, especially were Jews and Infidells are
subject unto a Christian Prince, as both Jews and Indian Infidells are to the
King of Spain. A man would think it were but Christian duty and Charity to
take the children of these Jews and Indian Infidells and Baptize them,
educate, instruct and bring them up in Christian faith and belief whether the
Parents will or nill. For if upon malice or other displeasure; the Father
should endanger the corporal or temporal life of his child, one might
lawfully by violence resist him. Why not also may one for the eternal and
spiritual life of the soul against the parents will, or contrary to their
consent, baptize their children? Notwithstanding it is the general opinion of
Divines, and practice of the Church, not to Baptize Jews and Infidells
children, without the parents consent and freewill. And the reason is (as
says S. Thomas) because it is against the law of nature. Tho. 3. p. q. 68.
For by the law of nature children are under the government, tuition and care
of their parents until they come to the use of reason, and years of
understanding; but the law of grace does not destroy the law of nature;
therefore they cannot be Baptized without the parents consent.

CAP. 16. Whether Jews, Turks or Infidells being converted are presently to
be Baptized.
Having spoken of the Baptism of children: now (...) will entreat of those,
who are at men's estate adults, and elder sort, what is required of them before
they are Baptized. First concerning Jews, Turks and Infidells converted, it
was the practice of the Primitive Church, and is continued until this day in
the Catholic Church, that presently after their conversion they are not
Baptized; but for a time instructed and trained up in the belief and life of a
Christian, and therefore called, Cathecumeni, Men to be instructed and
Cathechised. True it is in deed, that the Apostles in the beginning did not use
this practice: for in the Acts of the Apostles we read that on the first day of
S. Peter's preaching, Act. 2.
there were three thousand Baptized, and afterward on an other day five
hundred. And S. Philippe the Deacon, presently the same day after conference
with the Eunuch the Queen Candaces Treasurer, Act. 8.
he Baptized him. Also S. Peter at the first meeting, Baptized Cornelius the
Italia^ with his kindred and Friends. Yet we must not think that the Church
immediately after the Apostles, and so continues until this day in making
Cathecumins, does any thing contrary to the Apostles proceedings. For we must
understand, why the Apostles did immediately upon the conversion of the people,
Baptize. Because at those times the Holy Ghost fell upon them, and they were
sufficiently instructed by the Holy Ghost himself. Yet ca^ we not say for the
approving of this practice of the Church, but that they were also instructed
and Catechized by the Apostles, as partly by S. Peter's preaching, partly by
private conference, as S. Philippe had with the treasurer, and S. Peter with
Cornelius. But to conclud they were all taught to believe before they were
Baptized. The reason of this practice of the Church, that they should not
presently after their Conversion be Baptized, but for a time instructed,
Catechized and made Catecumins, is, because Baptism is a certain profession
of Christian faith, and therefore called the Sacrament of belief: but faith
comes by instruction: Romans c. 10.
Quomodo credent etc. How shall they believe in him whom they have not heard?
And how shall they hear without a preacher? Therefore in these kind of men it
is necessary, Mat. 18. Mar. 16.
that instruction and Catechizing go before Baptism. Wherefore Christ in his
commission for Baptism, spoke first of instruction, then of Baptism: Going
ye (says he to his Apostles) teach and preach Baptizing.

CAP. 17. Whether Jews and Infidells may be compelled to Baptism.
TRue it is that Sisebutius King of the Goaths when he entered into Spain about
the year of Christ 595. the Jews, who at that time dwelled in Spain, he
compelled by force and fear of punishment to receive the Christian faith;
which fact of the Kings was not then approved, but after in the Council of
Toledo decreed and commanded that none should be forced to the Christian faith.
For: Cui vult Deus miseretar: and quem vult indurat: unto whom God will he
shows mercy; and does indurate whom he will. Those who come of their own
accord Christ accepts, and not those who are forced. Therefore says the
Council: Non vi, Con. 4. Toleta. can. 56.
sed liberi arbitrij voluntate vt conuertantur suadendi sunt: They are not by
force to be compelled, but they are to be persuaded that freely and willingly
they may be converted. For it is necessity that the party, who is to be
Baptized, give his Consent and good will to Baptism. For if by force without
his consent not having faith he be urged, he has no Sacrament, no Baptism.

In thise case of Sisebutius, the Jews being compelled either to make their
choice to be banished and depart the realm, or else to be baptized, they
consenting by this coaction or compulsion rather to be Baptized then to be
banished (because it is a consent although coacte and by compulsion) they
receive Baptism, that is the Character and sign of a Christian, but not
grace, salvation or Justification, as shall be proved in the sequent chapter.
Read C. maiores de Baptismo and eius effectu. lib. 3. docretalium titulo 42.

CAP. 18. Whether he who comes to this Sacrament fainedly, not having in deed
faith in Christ, be Baptized.
TRue it is and we can not deny, that he who fainedlie comes to be Baptized,
does and may receive the Sacrament of Baptime, that is the character, sign and
seal of a Christian, and therefore not to be rebaptized when he comes after to
believe aright. But he that thus fainedlie and without faith does approach,
shall never be saved. for as S. Paul says: Romans 3.
The Justice of God is by faith of Jesus Christ. He that will come to God must
believe. H^b. 11.
And it is impossible to please God without faith. Therefore Christ said:
Quicre. diderit etc. He that believes and is Baptized, Mar. 16.
shall be saved: and he that believes not shall be damned. Wherefore seeing and
considering, that faith is so necessary to the obtaining of Baptism, we
conclud, that even in children and natural fools there must be faith. And
because neither of them, children nor fools, are capable of actual faith as
those at man's estate and understanding, are therefore we Catholics say that:
Aliena fides: The fait of an other, that is of the Church is sufficient for
them. But for those of the elder sort and of understanding, we defend that it
is necessary they have actual faith, or else it will be with them as it was
with Judas, who received the Sacrament of the Body of our Lord at the hands of
Christ in his last supper, but not the effect of the Sacrament, because he
received unworthily to his own damnation. So also he that approaches to
Baptism fainedly without faith may and does receive the Sacrament, and has
the character and sign of a Christian, but he shall never have the effect and
end of the Sacrament, that is grace, Justification, or salvation. For example,
some Jews desire Baptism, not for the faith they have in Jesus Christ, but
because their flesh and skin does savor and stink: therefore they are
called: Iudai foetentes: stinking Jews. But as soon as they are Baptized this
filthy savor of their bodies is gone, and they smell as sweet as any other
Christians do; so that some of them may for this cause only require Baptism,
I say they may have the Sacrament, although they come with this corrupt
intention: but never shall they have the effect and end of this Sacrament.

In like manner we read of some Sarracens and Turks, who desire baptism, not
with true faith in Christ, but being sore sick or troubled and vexed with an
evil spirit, having experience that by Baptism they may be delivered, they
seek and desire Baptism, for this cause only that they may receive their
health, and be delivered from the vexation of the Devil. These kind of men
also may receive the Sacrament, but they shall not have salvation and
justification, if they have not true faith and belief in Christ. Wherefore to
conclud, one may come to this Sacrament faineldlie and with a false heart,
without faith, with a corrupt intention, and be Baptized: but he shall never
have salvation and justification thereby, as has been proved.

CAP. 19. Whether he that is Baptized may be compelled to live according to
Christian Catholic laws.
NO man ought to be compelled to Christian faith, nor forced to receive
Baptism, as has been proved, but they must approach and come voluntarily and
willingly, and to be won by reason, persuasion and preaching. And therefore
the Church has no authority, jurisdiction nor power to force or compel
those, who never received Baptism, to the observation of Christian laws, or
Ecclesiastical Constitutions. And this S. Paul has taught, and practiced,
and would not judge them, 1. Cor. 5.
who were not Baptized: Quid mihi de ijs, qui foris sunt, iudicare? what is it
to me to judge of them that are without? But if once they submitted themselves
under the yoke of Jesus Christ, received the Sacrament of Baptism, and were
incorporate as members of the body of Christ mystical: then no doubt but they
are under the jurisdiction and power of the Church. And therefore S. Paul,
although he would not judge the Infidel or unbaptized: yet it is plain he
excommunicated the public incestious Corinthian, 1. Cor. 5.
and commanded not to keep company, or so much as to eat with him. Therefore
in so much as one by Baptism is incorporate and made a member of the Church,
he is subordinate to the Jurisdiction of the Church; and so consequently
subject to the Censures, laws and Constitutions of the same, and therefore may
be compelled to observe Christian rites and Constitutions, and be forced to
live accordingly.

THE FIFTH BOOK of the Ceremonies.
CAP. 1. What a Ceremony is.
A Ceremony is an external act^ of Religion; which is exhibited, acted, and
done to the honor and worship of God.

Considering that man does consist of soul and body, and not of body only nor
of soul only, but of both jointly: therefore there is internal worship and
honor proceeding from the soul, and there is also external exhibited, acted
and done by outward acts and signs. The first honor or adoration, which we
call internal, is the chief and principal, and that which most pleases God,
and it is threefold, that is; exercised by three special virtues; ffirst by
faith and true belief in God: secondly by a firm hope of Gods mercy and
grace toward us, a confidence of life eternal, and a trust that God will
perform his promises made to his Church; thirdly by a fervent love of God
Above all creatures. These are the three Theological Divine virtues faith,
hope, and charity, proceeding from the operation of the soul, working
internally by the assistance of the Holy Ghost. Therefore Christ said: Io^. 4.
God is a Spirit, and they that adore him must adore in spirit and verity.
Yet there is also external adoration and worship of God, which is guided and
governed by the internal, as the Sacrifice and ceremonies were of the old law.
And in the new law instituted by Christ are the Sacraments of the Church, the
making of the sign of Christ crucified, the cross, the bowing of the knee at
the name of Jesus, praying with our mouth, lifting our eyes and hands toward
heaven etc. In Baptism making the sign of the cross upon the Infant, using
Exvfflations, Exorcismes, holy unction, Chrisme, and the rest. Therefore the
very wisdom of God in ordaining and instituting this Sacrament, would
express the state and condition of man and institute and ordain the Sacrament
of Baptism, to consist of water and the Holy Ghost, externallie signifying
what internallie should be wrought; The water washing externallie the body,
and the Holy Ghost internallie sanctifying the soul, both jointly concurring
to the cleansing of man.

CAP. 2. What distinction and division there is of the Ceremonies in Baptism.
THe ceremonies of Baptism are of three sorts: Some precedent, going before
Baptism: Some concurring with Baptism; and some subsequent, and following
Baptism. Or we may make our division: some before the Baptized come unto the
font: some at the font and other some after he is taken out of the font. The
precedent, or before the Infant come to the font, are such as are given for
the better preparing of the Infant to be Baptized, and to take away all
obstacles, lettes and hindrances that the Sacrament may have his full effect.
Also to weaken the power of Satan, who would plead posession by reason of sin
in the soul: The other Ceremonies, such as are, when the party to be Baptized
comes to the font, are the naming of the child, the Godfathers and
Godmothers, the abrenuntiation of Satan, and all his pompes and pride, the
profession of faith, the Baptizing with the water and word jointly, with three
mersio^s. The ceremonies subseque^t, or after the Baptized is taken out of the
font, are the use of holy Chrisme, the annoynting on the crown of the head,
the Godfathers and Godmothers laying their hands on his head, the clothing
with the white garment commonly called the Chrisome, the giving him the candle
or taper light in his hand; all which in this book and sequent treatise in
several Chapters I will set down, and show the use and reason of them. And
there is not the least rite or ceremony of this Sacrament of Baptism now used
in the Catholic Church, which either die not descend by Tradition from the
Apostles, or were not instituted by the Holy Church, confirmed by the ancient
Fathers, and practiced for many ages, until of late time these Nouelants and
new-opspronge Heretics began to bay and bark against them.

CAP. 3. Whether these Ceremonies are of necessity to this Sacrament of
Baptism.
I answer they are necessary: Ad been esse, but not simpliciter, that is they
are no essential parts of the Sacrament: yet they are to the Decorum and
beauty of the Sacrament. For in case of necessity there is no doubt (as I
have proved before) but this Sacrament may be ministered without these
Ceremonies, because they are not of the essence and substance of Baptism. Yet
no man shall or can deny; but that they are helps and comforts to the
Baptized, instructions, and signs to the standers by, and ornaments for the
more solemn receiving of this Sacrament, Which is the gate and first entrance
to Christianity. We know full well, that the leaves of the tree are not the
substance of the tree: yet no man can deny, but that they are the ornaments
and beauty of the tree. Also the hedge is no essential part of the vine: yet
all men know it is a protection and defense to the vineard. Wherefore I hold it
a grievous mortal sin in Catholic Christian people, negligentlie and
caressely, otherwise then in case of necessity, to omit these ceremonies;
and statte Schism and an open sign of an Heretic proudly and contemptuously
to reject and contemn them; having been practiced in the Primitive Church,
descended from an^iquitie, and used generally in the Church of God. Tho. 3. p.
q, 66. a. 18.
And why the Church uses Ceremonies S. Thomas gives the reason: The Church
(says he) which is guided by the Holy Ghost, uses and commands the rites
and Ceremonies of Baptism for three several causes and considerations;
although they be no essential or substantial part of the Sacrament: yet are
convenient for the Decorum and solemnity of this Sacrament. First because they
are means to stir up and move the minds of the believing and faithful people
to greater devotion and reverence unto this Sacrament, for that there is
greater mystery in this Sacrament more then the external washing which is
showed by water. Secondly because these Ceremonies instruct and teach many
things more then do the bare essence and substance as shall appear hereafter
in the examination of every rite and ceremony of this Sacrament. Thirdly
because by these Ceremonies the force and power of the Devil is much weakened,
that he may not hinder the effect of Baptism in the Baptized. Thus far S.
Thomas. Council. Trid. s^s. 7 canon. 13.
Not without cause therefore, the General Council of Trente does Anathematize
and condemn, whosoever shall contemn the approved and received rites and
ceremonies of the Catholic Church, which are accustomed to be used in solemn
celebration of Sacraments. Marvel not (Good Reader) that the Heretics of this
age regard not the Ceremonies of this Sacrament, seeing they endeavor to take
away all force from the Sacraments themselves.

CAP. 4. Whether the child be not to be Signed with the sign of the Cross in
the forehead and breast.
THe Custom of the Catholic Church is, that the Priest come to meet the
Child at the Church door, to signify that the Infant as yet is not of the
household of the faithful and congregation of Christ, but stands at the gate
ready to enter into the Church of God. And the first action he does is to
sign the Baptized with the sign of the Cross first in the forehead saying:
Signum Saluatoris etc. The sign of our Savior our Lord Jesus Christ I place
or put in thy Forehead. And then to the breast saying and doing the like: The
sign of our Savior our Lord Jesus Christ I put upon thy breast. This is the
practice of the Chatholike Church. Concerning this Cheremonie of the Sign of
the Cross, the Protestants Commend highly as a lawful Ceremony, and
honorable badge, whereby the Infant is dedicated to the service of Christ, who
dyed on the Cross. Confer. fol. 72.
Therefore it is Commanded in their Communion-Booke, approved by the supreme
power the King and Clergy, and defended against the Puritan, and preciser
sort of Ministers in their book of Constitutions; Can. 30.
and to satisfy thee better, I will put down the reasons of this Ceremony.
First because amongst the Jews the Cross was ignominious and hateful, and
the Apostles were derided for believing in Christ, who was Crucified upon the
Cross. Notwithstanding the Apostles and Primitive Christians thereby were not
dismayed, but the rather gloried in the Cross of Christ, according to that of
S. Paul: God forbid that I should glory, saving in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Aug. tract. in Ioa. 43.
And therefore says S. Augustine: The Cross is fixed and fastened to the
forehead of the faithful, that they being Christians may say: God forbid that
I should glory, saving in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and not be
ashamed of Christ crucified. Gal. 6.
Secondly in the Apostles time the sign of the Cross was of such honor,
dignity, and esteem among Christians, that not only the used it in all their
actions to sign themselves with the sign of the Cross, but also to dicated
their children by that sign to the service of Christ, when they were to be
Baptized; therefore an ancient, honorable and lawful ceremony: Thirdly it
began not only to be a bage and Cognizance of a Christian, to be distinguished
from Jew and Gentill, but also a defense and weapon against Satan, and the
assaults of the devil. For Satan when he saw the sign of the Cross made,
he remembered the victory Christ had over him upon the Cross; and therefore
abhors and flies from that sign, as a sign of his destruction and
Calamity: And we read that not only Christians, who have faith in Christ
crucified, have been defended from power of Satan by the sign of the Cross,
but such virtue has God showed by that sign, and daily does, that even Jews
and Pagans have been protected by it. Read the history of Julian the Apostata
recorded by S. Gregory Nazianzen, Greg. Naz. orat. in Julian. Epiph. haeres.
30.
and of Joseph the Jew as Epiphanius. Julian being desirous to practice with
Coniurers, and consult with devils that he might know whether he should be
Emperor or no, he was by a Necromancer brought into a Temple of the Idols,
where the devils solemnly appeared, at whose presence and sight being sore
affrighted: Terrore compellitur in front sua Crucis formare signaculum: tunc
Daemones, Hist. Eccle. trip. li. 8. ca 1.
etc. Was (says Theodorete) for fear compelled to make the Sign of the
Cross in his forehead: then the devils looking back, and seeing the figure of
our Lords banner, and remembering the fall and overthrow they had by the Cross
sodenlie vanished out of sight. Gr^g. Naz. orat. in Julian.
And S. Gregory Nazianzen records, that after he had been once frighted, yet
being animated, and encouraged again the second time the devils appearing, he
also again fled to the refuge of the Cross, and so put the wicked spirits to
flight. Greg. lib. 3. dial. ca. 7.
And S. Gregory one of the four Doctors of the Church, reports the history
of a Jew, who had no faith nor hope in the Passion of Christ: yet in travel
being benighted, and so forced to lodge in the temple of Apollo, he made the
sign of the Cross upon him; and as he thus lay signed with the Cross, a
great company of devils entered. The master devil seeing one ly in the
temple, sent some of the other devils to see who he was that presumed to take
up his lodging, in the temple of Apollo. They brought word that he was: Vas
vacuum, sed signatum: A void and empty vessel, but signed with the sign of
the Cross. At which words the whole company vanished out of sight. By which
examples and authorities, we may gather the sign of the Cross to be a defense
against devils, and a putter to flight of evil spirits, as also spiritual
virtue against the snares and wiles of Satan. Wherefore worthily used not
only as a badge of a Christian, but also as a protection against all ambushes
and crastie fetches of the enemy of mankind. And this may be effected either
by the apprehension of the devil, for then they fly when they see the Cross,
whereby they were conquered; or among the Christians by him that makes the
sign of the Cross with devotion, for that the Cross is a memory and a
certain invocation of the merits of Christ's passion; or amongst the Infidells
and Pagans, in whom there is no faith nor belief in Christ, it does work even
by the very doing and making of the Cross, as may appear in the examples
alleged, where the very making of the sign of the Cross made the devils
to fly. Wherefore to Conclude laudable, ancient, and profitable is the use of
the sign of the Cross in Baptism.

Although the Protestants agree and accord with us to use the sign of the
Cross in Baptism: yet because they will be Schismatikes from the Catholic
Church, and from the first founders of Christianity in this land, both among
the Brittons and Saxons, they differ in three points. First, for that they
sign the child after Baptism and not before, as we Catholics do, as though
the Cross were not a means as well to expel Satan the enemy of man, as to
be a badge and Cognizance of Christian profession. Secondly, they omit to
sign the Child in the breast, for if it be lawful and convenient to use the
Cross in the forehead, for an outward sign of profession of Christ crucified
upon the Cross, why also do they not use it upon the breast, where the heart
is, that it may signify that this profession of the Cross, proceeds also
from the heart and inward affection. Thirdly, the Protestants seem to
insinuate that the Catholics make the sign of the Cross an essential and
substantial part of Baptism, as though we held that there could be no
Baptism without it, which is a slander and calumny. For if it be but a
ceremony annexed to this Sacrament (as we have said) it can be no essential
part of Baptism.

CAP. 5. Whether they who are of years and understanding being converted,
ought to be Cathecumines before they be Baptized.
I have spoken something of this ceremony in the precedent book. It was a
laudable ordinance, ri^e and ceremony used in the Primitive Church, and to
this day diligently observed in the Catholic Church, that those who being at
man's estate, and were converted and desired Baptism, should before they were
Baptized be Cathecumines, that is to be instructed and trained up in Christian
belief and life, and taught the rudiments and principles of Christian
Catholic Doctrine, Council. Bracha. can. 1.
The second Bracharense Council, appointed twenty days before Baptism, that
the newly converted should be cathechized, instructed and learn the Creed
etc. And this practice is plainly proved out of S. Augustine, Aug. d^ Symb. ad
Cathe. li. 4. ca. 1.
for he wrote a book of the exposition of the Creed, and delivered it to the
Cathecumines, that is, the newly converted. This ceremony is most observed in
Italy, Spain, and the Indians, east and weste, in which countries daily are
converted unto the Christian faith, Ieues, Turks, and Pagans; but in England
there is no use of this Cheremonie and that for two causes First because there
are neither Jews, nor Turks, nor Pagans, who publicly inhabit, or are
permitted in the land, and therefore no dealing for their conversion. I will not
say there are no Infidells, for that Atheism and heresy (as has been said)
is a kind of Infidelity or misbeleefe; but how that country swarmeth with
such kind of people. Notum est omnibus: It is known to all the world. The
second cause why this ceremony is not in use in England is, because it was
never heard of as yet, that ever any Protestant converted to Christianity any
Jew, Turk or Pagan, although it be most manifest, they have had dealing and
traffike with all three and have of late sought to plant them selves in some
Pagan parts of the world, as Guiana and Virginea: yet did we not hear of any
Conversion to Christianity in any part or place of the world. And will you
have the reason why they can not effect this Conversion of Infidells? Surely
Schismatikes and Heretics divided from Gods Church, have always been
peruerters, no Conuerters, destroyers, no builders of Christianity; and
therefore we must not look nor expecte that Protestants should convert
Countries, or bring Jews or Pagans to Christianity. Tertul. li de Praes. ad
Haer.
And this observed Tertullian in his time, that Heretics scarce ever
endeavored to convert Heathens and Pagans, but always were ready to pervert
Catholics: Nostra suffodiunt (says he) vt sua aedificent: They undermine and
dig up our foundations, that they may build their own. Niceph. de Eccl.
histo.
And for confirmation o^ this read the history of Alamundarus, a most mighty
Prince and potent King of the Saracens, being converted to the Christian faith
by the Catholics; and coming to be Baptized, the Eutychean Heretics labored
all they could that he would be Baptized by their Bishops, and profess their
heretical doctrine? D. Antoninus Chron. p. 2. tit. 11. ca. 2. ss. 5.
And the rather they presumed to prevail with him, because at that time the
Emperor Anastasius was also an heretic. But so it fell out by the providence
of God, and that the world may understand and take notice that heretics can
not prevail with Infidells, that this great King utterly refused to
communicate with Heretics in the Sacrament of Baptism; and with al^ so
confounded their heretical doctrine, that their Bishops with shame and
confusion departed.

It was my Chance being in Spain, to have some Conference with one Mustafan a
Mauritanian by birth, a Turk by profession, to become a Christian. His answer
was, that in deed the new Christians in England, (for so he termed them in
respect of their new opinions and revolt from the old) came nearer to his
Religion then the old Christians in Spain did. For that they of England had no
Images, nor pictures of Christ nor his Saints. Also they of England loved them
better then they of Spain did; yet said he, if I should turn Christian, I
had rather turn to the old of Spain, then the new of England, for the elder
the nearer to Christ, and so the more likelier to be true. Thus this
Mauritanian Turk could distinguish and make his choice between new and old
Christians, and new and old Christianity. Therefore I may conclude that the
Protestants neither have, nor can have ordinarily the use of this Ceremony of
the Cathecumines in their Church, nor be Baptizers of Turks or Pagans, nor
Conuerters of Countries.

CAP. 6. Whether the solemnity of Baptization, were especially to be reserved
for the feasts of Easter Pascha, and Pentecoste.
ALthough in case of necessity (as has been said) we are not to expect time
nor stand upon the performance of ceremonies of Baptism; yet it has been a
laudable custom, and solemn ceremony in the Catholic Church, even from the
time of the Apostles unto this day used and observed, at the feasts of Pascha
and Pentecoste that is Easter and Whitsontyde to have honorable Baptization,
and solemn celebration of this Sacrament. And the reason is, first for the
feast of Pascha or Easter, because in the death and Passion of Christ was given
the full power to the effects of Baptism, Quicunque Baptizati sumus etc. Romans
6.
All men (says S. Paul) who are Baptized in Christ Jesus, in his death we
are Baptized: But at Easter is a special memory and recordation of the death
and Passion of Christ, therefore worthelie does the Church reserve a solemn
Baptization at the feast of Easter. Secondly becau^^ in our Baptism is
represented the death of Christ, and his glorious resurrection. For as the same
Apostle says, Heb. 6.
we are buried together with Christ in Baptism unto death, that (...) Christ
is risen from the dead by the glory of the Father; so we may also walk in
newness of life. Therefore true it is that remission of sin, new life and
sanctification are given by Baptism, because it resembles in us, and applies
unto us Christ's death and resurrection. And Baptism does represent both; For
as Christ once being dead, does always live: so we being dead to sin, by
Baptism do live again. And as the death of Christ was cause of our
Purification, and his Resurrection first opened us the gate of heaven: so
Bapti^me is the Sacrament that cleanses and washes our souls and makes the
first entrance to Christia^itie. Thirdly Christ after his death upon the day of
his Rasurrection gave commission to his Apostles to Baptize all nations, set
down and appointed in what form they should do it, that is: In the name of
the Father, Mat. 18
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Not without cause then does the
Catholic Church at the feast of Pascha, use a solemn hallowing of the font,
and reserve a public Baptization and celebration of this Sacrament, in memory
of gratitude of this great benefit Christ lest in his Church. And for the
feast of Pentecoste or whit suntyde, there is as great reason as for the other,
that on that day there should be used a public solemnization of this
Sacrament; because on that day the holy Ghost visiblie fell upon the Apostles
and Disciples of Christ, Act. 2.
in so much that they may be said to have been Baptized with the Holy Ghost.
Also on the same day was performed by the Apostles a most solemn public
Baptization, after S. Peter had spoken and preached unto the people, there were
Baptized three thousand. Finally Christ has said: That our regeneration and
new birth must be by the Holy Ghost. Ioa. 3.
Worthelie then does the Catholic Church at this feast also of Pentecoste
reserve and appoint a solemn and public Baptization and celebration of this
Sacrament; and Consequently with ignominy and shame do the Protestants
exile, banish and reject this Ceremony. Read the fourth epistle of Pope Leo
written to all the Bishops of Sicilie, Leo ep. 4. ca. 3.
where he exhorts to this Ceremony, and proves it by Apostolical
authority. And in the sixth Chapter of the same epistle, he gives the reason,
why the Romain Catholic Church does not use any solemn Baptization on the
Epiphanie day commonly called the twelth day, although in the opinion of some
upon that day Christ himself was Baptized in Jordan by John Baptist. Because
John's Baptism was instituted to an other end and purpose then Christ's
Baptism, De Co^secra. did. 4. can. Si quis Epiph.
neither had it that effect as remission of sins or especial operation of
the Holy Ghost. And therefore no such reason for solemn Baptization upon the
Epiphanie day, as upon the day of Pascha, and Pentecoste.

The puritan or preciser sort of Ministers, would seem to aim at this
laudable ceremony and custom of the Catholic Church; for willingly they
would, if any Child be borne in the week day, differ and put of his
Baptization until the Sunday. Which if they do, because every sunday is and
so we account it as the Octaue day of Pascha or Pentecoste; then I think, if
the Child be strong and no way in danger of death, this ceremony of differing
Baptism until the sunday, may be approuable. But if they do differ
Baptization for an other end and purpose, which rather is to be feared, and
that is to broach, approve and allow the opinion of M. Calvin, that Children
may be saved without this Sacrament, and so to induce and breed in the mind of
the Parents a carelessnes, and negligence to see this Sacrament duly
performed; and so consequently to endanger the salvation of the child, then
this Ceremony is not to be sufferred, but dangerous and intolerable. For in
doubtful and dangerous cases, the securer and safer way is ever to be
followed. And for confirmation of this I will recite the history of Samuel
Hubert the minister, Rescius in Athism.
who baptized a child on the weak day, being called up at middinght by the
Parents, and urged there unto, in respect the Infant was in danger of death.
Musculus the superintendent hearing of it, complained to the counsel of the
city, because he did baptize before the soundaye. Hubert being cited to
appear was accused for this fact of heresy and rebellion: but he pleadinge
for himself, said, that he did baptize before the soundaye in case of
necessity, which he thought lawful in respect of the danger of the child, who
dyinge without baptism might be in danger not only of death of body, but also
of soul. But Musculus with other ministers replied, yet the want of baptism
did not hinder the Infant from the sight of God and salvation. But Hubert
constantly auerred before the counsel and senate that this proposition was
heretical, because it mayintaned yet children could be saved without baptism.
Upon this contention Beza in his oldage, (for this was in the year of our
lord 1595.) was called and consulted with all, also other ministers of basil
and Zurike were present, the matter being debated among them, Hubert was by
them for this fact condemned, and deprived of his ministry: so that we may
conclud, that this delayinge of baptism until soundaye, is but to pach up
this heresy, and make parents careless of Christianity in their posterity.

CAP. 7. Whether the Imposition of the Priests hands, with his benediction and
prayer be a Ceremony allowable.
AFter the Priest has signed the Infant with the sign of the Cross (as has
been said) he lays his right hand upon the head of the Child using this
Benediction or Ceremony: Omnipotens, etc. Omnipotent sempiternall God the
Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST vouchsafe to look back upon this thy servant,
whom thou vouchsafed to call unto the first Documents or instruction of faith:
expel from him all cecitie and blindness of heart, break a sunder all the
bands of Satan, with which he has been tied and bound: open, O Lord, unto him
the gate of thy piety, etc. This is the benediction or prayer. And for the
lawful use of this Ceremony we have the example of Christ himself. In the
Gospel of S. Mathewe we read, Mat. 19 Mark. 10. Luc. 18
that the people brought, offered, and presented unto Christ Children that he
might and should touch them, impose his hands upon them, and pray over them,
And this no doubt Christ did to leave an example for his Apostles and Disciples
to do the like. And this the Church does especially before Baptism, Dionis.
Areop. de eccles. hier. ca. 7.
that the enemy of man may not hinder the effects of this Sacrament. For the
antiquity of it and that it was practiced in the Primitive Church we have the
testimony of Dionisius Areopagita S. Paul's scholar.

CAP. 8. Whether Exorcismes, adiurations, and exvfflations are convenient to be
used before Baptism.
NO man can deny but Christ gave to his Disciples commission and power over
devils to exorcise them, to suppress them, Mar. 9. Luc. 10. Act. 10.
to cast them out of the possessed persons for all which the Scripture is
plain. No man also can deny unless impudent and ignorant of Ecclesiastical
histories, but that the same power, authority and practice over devils to
exorcise them, to suppress them, to weaken their power by Exorcismes,
Adiurations, Exufflations, prayer and fasting, has been continued and
practiced in the Catholic Church of God, even from her cradle and infancy
ever to this age 1614. Further also no man can deny but that among the holy
Orders given in the Church, the third of the Minores Ordines is Exorcist^, the
Exorcist, and so called for the power and authority he has given him over
devils, in so much as his function and office is by Exorcismes, holy prayers,
adiurations, insufflations, imposition of hands to expel devils, to weaken
his power in Infants and Cathecumines, that the enemy hinder not in them the
effects of Baptism; and for full proof of this, Pet. Greg. lib. 16. cap. 5.
Mar. 9.
read Syntagmata Iuris Petri Gregorij: And that you may not think that this
ceremony is only for the elder sort, and not for Children, it is manifest in
S. Marks Gospel, that not only aged people, but also Children and Infants
have been, and may be molested with evil spirits even from their Infancy,
with all considering as S. Paul says; we are all borne, and by nature are
filij irae: Ephesians. 3
The Children of wrath, and begotten in original sin, and so consequently
subject to Satan. Therefore worthily the Church of God has ordained this
precedent Ceremony of Exorcismes before Baptism, to debilitate the power of
the enemy, that he may no way hinder the effects of this Sacrament. In the
first general Council of Constantinople held under Damasus Pope in S. Ieromes
time the use of Exorcismes before Baptism was enacted, 1. Conc. Co^sta^t. can.
7.
commanded, and the order set down: We (says the Council) make them
Cathecumines, we exorcise and adjure; Ter simul in faciem eorum insufflando:
Breathing three times one after an other in their faces, and so we Catechize,
Celestin. de Consec. did. 4. c. Sieve paruuli.
and then we do Baptize. Celestinus Pope the first of that name about the
year of our Lord 423. above a thousand years ago, writing to the Bishops of
France, advised that young or old, Infant or aged before they come to the font
of regeneration should have the unclean spirit cast out of them by the
Exorcismes, and exufflations of the Priest or Clergy. The sentence and
opinion of S. Augustine is pregnant and manifest in many places of his works.
First in his book De Symbolo, speakeing to the Cathecumines: Aug. li. 1. de
Symb. ca. 10.
You know (most dear brethren) that not only aged, but also Infants and
Children are exufflated and exorcised, that this adverse power of the Devil
may be driven from them. Non ergo creatura Dei in Infantibus exorcizatur, aut
exufflatur: sed ille sub quo omnes, qui sub peccato nascuntur: Let therefore no
man say, that the Creature of God in the Infants are exorcised or exufflated,
but the enemy of man, who deceived man, that he might possess man, and under
whose power we all are, who are borne under sin. Thus S. Augustine. Aug. li.
2. de Nupt. and Co^cup. ca. 29.
And the same holy Doctor in an other place, writing against the Pelagian
Heretics, who contemned then, as now our Protestants do, the Ceremonies of
Exorcismes and Exufflations, proved first plainly that Infants are infected
with Original sin, and for remedy and removing thereof are to be Baptized
with Exorcismes and Exufflations, which Ceremonies the Church does practice as
delivered unto her by ancient Tradition as from the Apostles. And they are
Exorcised and breathed upon before Baptism (says he) that by these means
they may be translated from the power of darkness of the devil and his
Angels, unto the kingdom of Christ. Wisely does that man order his work,
who first seeks to take away the impediments that may hinder him; and this is
the intention of the Church in the exorcismes to debilitate the power of Satan,
that he do not hinder the effect of Baptism. You know the the ploughman will
till his ground again and again, and seek to kill all weeds, and to remove
all impediments, before he will sow his good seed, according to the advice of
the Prophet Jeremy and Osee: Ierem. 4. Ose. 10.
Nouate vobis nouale, and nolite serere super spinas: Make new your fallow
fields, and do not sow upon thorns.

We read in Eusebius history that it was particularly noted in Nouatus the
Archeretike, Eus. li. 6. ca. 34
who being vexed with an unclean spirit, and having spent some time with the
Exorcists but falling desperately sick, that there was small hope of his
recovery, they were forced hastily to Baptize him lying in his bed without
the Ceremonies. And after never having them supplied, nor receiving the
Sacrament of Confirmation, was never rid of the unclean spirit, nor never
could obtain the gift of the holy Ghost. Lib. 7. cap. 48.
And Bredenbachius reports, that a number of children in the low Countries
near Delphs being christened, without the exorcismes and ceremonies of
baptism appointed by the Catholic church, were all strangly stricken sore
sick. Their parents bethought them selves for remedy and humbly entreated a
Catholic priest to supply the wants of the exorcisme and other ceremonies,
which being performed, presently they all recovered their healthes. Worthy
examples fitly declaringe the effects of exorcismes and the force of the
ceremonies, and with all a caveat and warninge that parents be careful to have
the ceremonies of baptism supplied when in necessity or otherwise they are
christened without them. Therefore not without cause does the Catholic priest
command the devil with these and the like exorcismes. Maledicte diabole, etc
Thou cursed devil call to mind with me the sentence given of thee, and give
honor unto the true an^ living God, give honor unto Jesus Christ his sonn^ and
to the holly Ghost, and depart from this servant of God, because God and our
lord Jesus Christ has vouchsafed to call him to his holy grace an^ gift of
the holy Ghost. This is the intention of the church, this ceremony has bine
practiced from the begininge unto this day: what then may be the reason that
the Protestants of this age should contemn and deride this so ancient and
profitable a ceremony? I know no reason but on, and that is, because they
have no power nor commission over devils, no other I say then that which
depends of wax and parchment, no other holy orders of priesthood then they
can derive from their letters patents of Queen Elizabeth. But how weak that
authority and power is to deal with the devils, may easily be discryed,
therefore marvel not that these ceremonies are derided and rejected by them.

CAP. 9. Whether Salt be to be blessed and given the Infant before baptism.
COncerning this ceremony of salt, the priest after he has blessed it, takes
it, and puts it in the mouth of the child saying. Accipe sal sapientiae,
etc. Take and receive the salt of wisdom, that God may be propitious and
merciful unto thee unto life eternal, And then makes this prayer followinge.
Deus patrum nostrorum, etc. God of our fathers, God the maker of all creaturs.
We humble beseech thee, that thou will vouchsafe mercifully to look back
upon this t^y servant, and having tasted this first food of salt, do not
suffer him any longer to be hungry, but that he may be filled with heavenly
sustenaunce, in so much O Lord as he may be fervent in spirit, ioyefull in
hope, and bring him unto the new lauer of regeneration, that he may deserve
to obtain with the faithful the eternal reward of thy promises. This is the
ceremony of the Catholic church, and this is the prayer. Christ has said
that his Apostles should be (Sal terrae) the salt of the earth to season the
world, Mat. 5
that is mankind with the wisdom understanding and doctrine of Christ. And
moreover Christ said to his Apostles salt is good, mar. 9. Coll. 4.
have salt with you. And S. Paul Counseled the Collossians that their mouth
and talk should be seasoned with salt. So the priest does put salt into the
mouth of the Infant, to signify that he should and ought to be seasoned with
salt, and make profession with his mouth of Christian faith Catholic religion
and trwe belief. lib. 10. instit. cleric. In Esdram. lib. 2. c. 9. Leuit. 2.
mar. 9. Habetur. de Consec. did. 4. Ca. sal calestis Hom. 6 super Ezech. can.
3.
Salt being blessed says Rabanus, is put in the mouth of the Infant that
thereby may be fygured and signified that he being seasoned with the salt of
wisdom, may be void of all fetor and stink of sin and iniquity, and
that heareafter he may not be putrified and corrupted with the maggotes of
sin, but rather being untouched may be preserved to receive greater grace.
S. Bid alludinge to that of the old law where god commanded that no sacrifice
should be offered with out salt or not seasoned with salt. And Christ also has
said that every victima shall be salted with salt. where upon I say, S. Bid
says, Sal calestis? The salt of heavenly wisdom wherewith the Cathecumens,
or those who are to be baptized were first instructed and seasoned we, are
commanded to offer in all the sacrifices of our works. And of this first taste
of salt speaks Origin. and the same has the third Counsel of Carthage.
Consideringe then that this ceremony of salt has his signification and
instruction, as you have heard, also of such antiquity in the church, what
reason have the Protesta^tes of this age to co^te^ne and neglecte it? I will
tell you the salt of their doctrine is infatuate unsavory, without smacke of
salt, and therefore not fit to be putt in the mouth of the baptized. For salt
that has lost his saltness and virtue is profitable nether for ground nor
middinge nor dunghill, Luc. 14
but it shall be cast forth says Christ, he that has ears to hear, let him
hear.

CAP. 10. Whether the use of spittle before baptism, be a superfluous
ceremony.
THe order of this ceremony is that the priest taking spittle to the ears and
nostrels (not to the mouth as some mistake it, for that salt is proper for that
part) and puttinge it first on the right ear, says Epheta, quod est
adaperire, that is be thou opened: then to the nostrels, saying, in odorem
suauitatis, and be thou opened unto the odor of sweetness: and at the leafte
ear he concludes. Tu autem effugare diabole: therefore o thou devil be thou put
to flight and driven away, for the judgment of God will draw nyghe, and
baptism now is at hand. We read in the ghospel that our savior twice used
this ceremony of spittle, first when he healed the deaf and dume man, who was
brought unto him, then he used spittle and put his fingers into his ears and
lookinge to heaven said these words Ephata, quod est adaperire, mar. 7.
which is as much to say as, be thou opened. Secondly in the Ghospel of S.
John when he cured the man who was borne blind, Ioh. 9.
he spitte on the ground and made claye of the ^pittle and laid it upon his
eyes and said, Go Wash in Siloe. The church of God to the imitation of
Christ does use these ceremonies of touching and spit^le. And first for the
ears that the deaf devil do not hinder nor stopp those senses, but that the
ears may be open to hear the word of God, Romans 10.
for faith is by hearing as says S. Paul. This ceremony def^ndeth that
worthy Doctor S. Ambrose, it has no worse a pillar to lean unto, Li 1. de
sacra 6. 1.
also this washinge of the blind borne man in the waters of Siloe was a figure
of baptism, and therefore baptism is called the sacrament of illuminatio^, for
which cause man being borne in sin and blindness, is sent thither for
illumination sight and light of faith and belief. And as Christ before he sent
the blind borne man to wash at the poole of Siloe made a plaster with spittle:
so the church does use this ceremony of spittle before baptism. To conclud
therefore we may lawfully and laudablie maintain with S. Ambrose this
ceremony, and that it is no way superstitious, seeinge it has his imitation
from Christ, is also significant and works his effect. Then with out cause
do the Caluinists and Protestants make this ceremony ridiculous or
superstitious. We know Christ could have healed the dume man and blind borne
without touching, speech, spittle, claye, washinge or any other ceremony, and
we affirm that baptism may have his effect without these ceremonies: but
dare any man say, that in Christ the use of spittle was ridiculous or
superstitious? I know no man dare who bears the face of a christian. Beware
therefore in time of such as M. Calvin who calls this ceremony ridiculous,
and M. Willet who terms it an interpretatiue toye, and all other who deride
the ceremonies of the church, which are done to the imitation of Christ, for
they may become scorners of Christ's own actions. The ears and nostrels, says
Rabanus, are touched with spittle, De instit: cleri: lib. 1 ca. 27.
and those words of the gospel which Christ used when he cured the dume man
are spoken, that through the tipicall and shaddowed spittle of the priest and
his touch, the divine wisdom and virtue may work health to the Cathecumine,
that his nostrels may be opened to the receauinge of the sweet smell of the
knowledge of God and mysteries of christian faith: and that his ears may not
be shutt to hear the commandments of God and sound Catholic doctrine. I
have heard that a parson of high estemee, whom I honor for his parson and
place, and therefore of me not to be named, should report that his parents
commanded that this ceremony in his baptism should be omitted, because the
priest should not spit in his mouth. But he was certainly misinformed, for this
ceremony does not concern the mouth but the ears and nostrels only. And the
priest does not spitt upon any part of the child, but only out of his own
hand taking spittle, and with touch thereof does effect this ceremony. What
was done God he best knows; but it appears his ears were never trwly opened
to the Catholic Roman doctrine, nor he never tasted nor smelled of the Roman
mother church, nor greatly esteemed of the rites and ceremonies of that
religion; It is our part to hope the best and to pray heartily, vt Dominus
daret scientiam and intellectum, that our lord would vouchsafe to give him
knowledge and understanding.

CHAPTER. 11. Whether it be a superstitious ceremony to take the right hand
of the child, and deliver unto him, the signet seal or sign of Christ, which
i^ the cross, that thereby he may learn to bless himself against the devil
and heresy the greatest emmies of man and to remain Constant in Catholic
says.
THe priest takes the Cathecumine, Infant or party who is to be Baptized by
the right hand and does sign him in the bale or palm of the hand with the
sign of the cross, and so deliver unto him the signet or seal of Christ
which is the cross: saying. Trado tibi signaculu^ domini nostri Jesus Christi
in manu tua dextra, vt te signs. and te de aduersa part repellas and in fide
Catholica permaneas and habeas vitam aternam and viuas in saecula saeculorum
Amen. John or Thomas I deliver and give unto thee the signet seal or sign of
our lord Jesus Christ in thy right hand that thou may sign thy self and
repel thy enemies, defend thee from the adverse part and that thou may
remain steedfast in the Catholic faith have life eternal and live for ever
amen. and withal uses this benediction Benedictio dei etc. The blessing of
god the Father omnipotent and of the son, and of the holy ghost, let it
desce^d upon thee and continewe with thee for ever. By this Ceremony the
Catholic Church would enstruct the Baptized in two points. First that he
learn to bless him self with the sign of our lord that is the cross, which
is given him in his right hand. Secondly that this sign may be a means to
protect and defend him against the devil, all his worckes, heresy or any other
misfortune. For the use of this ceremony we have the practice of the Apostles
and sayncts of the primative church: who not only blessed the^ selves with the
sign of the cross as an armor and weapon against any evil that might happen:
but also exhorted and counseled all other Christian people to do the like.
Abdias who did see Christ in flesh, lived with the Apostles, and was a disciple
of theirs, records and writes of S. Paul, lib. 2. Apost. Histo.
that when he came to the place of execution, turned himself toward the
East, lyfted up his hands and eyes to heaven Gentibus flexis Crucisque signo
se muniens ceruicem praebuit percussori, kneelinge on his knees fortifinge and
blessinge himself with the sign of the cross yielded and offered his neck to
the executioner. Lo the practice and example of the Apostle S. Paul for the
use of blessinge thy self with the sign of the cross. It is written also of
S. Andrewe who traveling up from Bizantium into Thracia; Abdias lib. 3. Hist.
Apost. no^ log^ a principio.
there met him and his company a multitud of men with drawn swords and
spears in their hands ready to ru^ne upon them, which when the Apostle
perceived, Faciens signum crucis contra eos, making the sign of the cross
against the^ said. Oro domine nelaeda^ tur sperantes in te. I pray thee o
lord, that they may not be hurt, who put their trust in thee. By the sing of
the cross and prayer of the Apostle the Angel of God appeared terrified the
enemy, and so the Apostle with his company had free and safe passage. In like
manner the same Apostle S. Andrewe being at Patras a city in Achaia, Ibidem
prope finem.
in the palace of Aegeates the proconsul with his wife Maximilla and many other
christeans there gathered together in christean exercise. Aegeates suddenly
unlooked for and unawares returned from Macedonia, so that he had like to have
taken them all together: which the Apostle perceauinge: Singulis manus imponens
and Consignatis cruce eos abire permisit, nouissime autem se signans discessit.
Layinge his hands upon every on of them, and withal signinge them with the
sign of the cross, suffered them to depart, and last of all, also he
blessinge himself and signinge himself with the sign of the cross departed,
so that no man was apprehended. It is reported of S. John the Evangelist when
he was at Ephesus, Abdia. lib. 5. Hist. Apost.
and had distroyed the temple and Idol of Diana, being therefore persecuted by
Aristodemus the chief minister of that Idol, the Apostle willinge to have him
satisfied, said unto him. Quid faciam vt tollam indignationem de animo tuo?
what shall I do to take away this rancor and malice out of thy heart? He
answered, take and drink this poison which I have prepared; which if thou
drink and dye not it will appear, that thy God is the trwe God. S. John
boldly without fear took the cup of poison in his hand, Et signaculum
crucis faciens, and making the sign of the cross over it prayed, and also
blessed his mouth and armed all his body with the cross and drunk up all
that was in the cup, and so passed without any harm at all. Thus you may
see in the practice and example of S. John the power of prayer and virtue of
the cross. And for this cause S. John the Evangelist is commonly pictured with
a chalice or cup in his hand. It is written by S. Hierome of S. Anthoine a
holly saint of the primative church goinge to visit S. Paul the first Eremite
saw by the way a monster, In vita sancti Pauli Eremitae.
in the upper part like a man, in the nether part like a horse, presently at
the sight thereof, Salutaris impressione signi armat frontem. Armed his forehead
with the sign of the cross being a sign of health and comfort. And
incontinently the monster ra^ne away and vanished out of sight. Also S.
Martine Bisshope, a worthy Prelate of the primative church a man of great
virtue and hollines, se aduersus diabolum signo crucis and orationis auxilio
protegebat, protected and defended himself against the devil with the sign
of the cross and help of prayer. S. Chrysostom sets a rule for Fathers
and mothers to teach their children to bless themselves. A primis annis,
Homil. 12. in prima^ Cor.
etc. Defend and arm your children, even from the begininge in their tender
age with spiritual armor and teach them to make the sign of the cross in
their forheades, and before they be able to do it themselves, do ye it for
them. In vita eius.
Thus S. Chrysostom, of whom it is also written that immediately before his
death after he had received the sacrament of the alter, seque crucis signo
muniens animam Deo reddidit, and blessinge himself with the sign of the
cross yealded up the Ghost. And S. Hierome exhorts Demetriades often to make
the sign of the cross, Epist. ad Demetr.
Crebro signaculo crucis munias frontem tuam ne exterminator Aegipti in te
locum reperiat: thou must often and sundry times fortify and defend thy
Forehead with the sign of the cross, least the exterminator of Aegipt find
place in thee. de custodia virginitatis.
The like instruction he geeueth to the virgin Eustochium. Ad omnem actum ad
omnem incessum manus pingat crucem: at every action, whatsoever you do, at
every time you go forth, let your hand make the sign of the cross.
Athenasi, in vita eius.
And S. Anthony exhortinge his monks and followers to take courage to fight
against the devil and shewinge with what weapons they might overcome him,
among the rest puts the sign of the cross: mihi credit fratres vnico
Sanctissmae crucis signo debilitatus aufugit: believe me brethren with one only
sign of the cross the devil being weakened is put to fligh^. Thus you may
see by the example of the Apostles by the practice of the sayncts of the
primative church, by the advice and instruction of the ancient fathers, this
ceremony to bless our selves with the sign of the cross, and to instruct
others to do the like is not superstitious Idle or un profitable, as
protestants would have it, unless they will accuse the three Apostles of
superstition and condemn the saynctes and Doctors of the primative church in
their practice doctrine and instruction thereunto: wherefore to conclud this
ceremony of taking the right hand of the Infant or party to be Baptized to
deliver and give unto him the signet seal or sign of our lord Jesus Christ
thereby to protect and defend himself from the adverse part the devil and
heresy and remain in the Catholic faith, this ceremony I say is ancient
profitable and conform to antiquity the practice of the the Apostles and
primative church. What reason then have the protestants not only to condemn
contemn and blot it out of their books, but also to forbid both young and
old to bless them selves with the sign of the cross? sure I know none but
one, and that is to take away from Christean people their armor of defense,
that they may lie open to Satan and heresy.

CAP. 15. Whether the abrenunciation of satan and his worckes and pompes be a
Ceremony approuable.
Having spoken of the precedent ceremonies such as are acted before the child
be brought to the font. Now we are to entreat of such as are done and performed
at the font. The priest taking the child by the right hand, brings him into
the church, saying, Enter thou into the temple of god that thou may have
eternal life and live for ever. And so being brought to the font, the priest
extends his hand over him, the god father or godmother holdinge the child;
then says the priest, Abrenuncias sathanae. Do thou renounce satan? the
godfather and godmother make answer Abrenuncio, I do renounce him; the priest
proceeds, and omnibus operibus eius, and all his works? I renounce them all.
and omnibus pompis eius, and all his pompes and pride? I renounce them. For the
proof of this ceremony we need not much to stand for it is manifest that it
has descended unto us from the Apostles by tradition and so continued in the
church until this day, and not contradicted by the Protestants. S. Clement
the first of that name and the third pope after S. Peter in his constitutions
speaks of this ceremony of the renunciation of satan his works and pomp.
Lib. 4. Constable. can. 41. and 42.
And S. Dionisius Areopagita converted by S. Paul in his ecclesiastical
Hierarchy in the chapter of baptism Tertullian and others.

CAP. 13. Whether multiplicitie of God Fathers and God mothers are necessary.
BY the general and ordinary constitution and custom of the church, if the
Infant be a boy, on God Father is sufficient without Godmother, if it be a
wench or girl, on Godmother without Godfather: yet according to the custom
of the country we may admit both, De Co^secr: did. 4. Ca^non plures. De
refor. ses. 24. c. 2. De eccl. Hiero. c. vlt. Lib. de baptis.
that is a God Father and a Godmother to on child, but not above. So pope Leo
decreed: let no man says he come to receive or take the Infant from the
font and baptism but one and that a man or a woman. According to this order
has the Tridentine Counsel made a reformation against multiplicitie of God
Fathers and God mothers and instituted that on was sufficient or two at the
most. S. Dionisius calls them susceptores, that is undertakers for them whom
they receive out of the font in baptism. And Tertullian calls them
sponsores, for that they do promise on the behalf of the baptized. Aug.
homil. 3. ad Neophit.
And some other call them fideiussores that is suerties for that they make
themselves pleadges for the baptized.

CAP. 14. Whether the God Father is to geue-the name unto the child.
I Make no doubt of the question but it has always bine a lawdable costome
in the church, that the God Father does impose or give the name of the child.
And the ancient christeans ever called them after some of the Apostles as
Peter, Andrewe, James; or some other of the saynctes, as Frances, Edward and so
forth. It is a profane custom of late crept into our country to name their
children after their surnames, as Hatton Dudley, Baggot, Brase, Winter Talbot
etc. Much more profane is it to call them after hethenish names, as some have
used, contrary to the custom of the ancient christeans, Can. 30
and the constitution of the Counsel of Nice.

CAP. 15. What God Fathers and God mothers are bound unto who Christen
Children.
SAyncte Augustine exhorts God Fathers and God mothers to remember that they
are Suerties and pleadges for their spiritual children; Sermo post pasc.
hodier. dies.
and says that they are to instruct them in good works and above all things
that they learn the Apostles Creed, the Pater noster, and the ten
co^mandementes: and that they hold constantly the Catholic faith and believe
the doctrine of the church. 3. p. q. 68. a. 8.
S. Thomas conclusion is, that every on is bound to execut the office they
take upon them: but the God Father at the font does take upon him to instruct
and teach the baptized: ergo he is bound to have care of their instruction,
more particularly when there is just cause, as if the baptized were to live
among Infidles, or among heretics as now at this time our country
standinge as it does, every God Father is bound to have a special care of his
spiritual children. But in christean catholic countries his charge is not so
great, because there is no danger in education, for the parents and pastors of
their churches will see the children sufficiently instructed, and for this
cause now there is no exception taken of the God Fathers and God mothers
concerning their sufficiency to instruct. But in the primative church it was
not so. For as Dionisius says. Oportet doctu^ esse in diuinis: the God Father
ought to be able to instruct in the rudiments of Christean doctrine and
belief. eccles. Hiera. c. 7.


CAP. 16. Whether the unction or annoyntinge of the breast and shoulders be
allowable.
THe priest does exequut this ceremony in this manner, he takes hollie oil
saying, I do annoint the upon thee breast with the oil of health, And
between thy shoulders in Christ Jesus our lord, that thou may have life
eternal. The reason of this ceremony, as S. Ambrose says is, lib. 1. de
Sacrament c. 2.
because he being anointed upon the breast and showelders, he is made a
champion of almighty god, that he may be able to wrastel in gods cause and
take courage and force against the enemy. And Innocentius the 3. of that name
says, that the child is anointed in the breast, lib. 1. decre. tit. 15. de
sacravnctione. can. cu^ venissent.
that by the gift of the holy ghost he may expel from his heart and cast of
error and ignorance that he may receive the trwe Faith, because the just man
does live by faith. And he is anointed between the shoulders, that by the
grace of the same heavenly spirit, he may shak of negligence and Idleness, and
take upon him the exercise of good works because faith without good works is
dead. therefore by the mystery of faith let cleanenes be in his breast, and by
the exercise of good worckes, let fortitud of labor be upon his shoulders. If
this ceremony of annoyntinge the breast and shoulders have this signification
to make us champions of Christ, to increase our faith, to give courage for the
exercise of good works. Why do the protestants exile and banishe it out of
their books? In very deed marvel not thereat, for of faith they have mad
shipwrake, and for good works they account them as not necessary to
salvation. And so they nether annoint nor are anointed as champions of Christ
to fight against devil or enemy, nor yet to make them selves nimble or fit
for the exercise of good worckes. And of this unction of holly oil speaks,
Homil. 6. c. 2. in Epist. ad Collos.
approves and allows S. Chrysostom. And S. Cirile Cataches. 2. mistagog And
to prove it to have descended by tradition from the Apostles we have an
Apostolical constitutione recorded by S. Clement And for brevity sake I
remite thee to read the 3. lib. 7. constable. Apost. c. 23.
Homily of S. Augustine to the Neophits o^ newly baptized.

CAP. 17. Weather profession of faith be necessary befo^ baptism.
Concerning this ceremony I have spoken before in the forth book and fith
chapter; That men of understanding being converted to the Christian faith are
to make profession of their faith with their own mouth at the interragotorie
of the priest before they be baptized. But children and Infants because they are
not able to make answer for them selves, no^ as yet have not understanding,
make profession of their faith by the mouth of the church, o^ by the mouth of
the godfathers and godmothers or standers by: therefore when the priest asks
them and makes these interragotories Credis in deum patrem omnipotentem etc.
lib. 2. offic. c. 24.
Does^ thou believe in god the father almighty, and does^ thou believe in
Jesus Christ his only son our lord who was borne and sufferd, and do thou
beleeu^ in the holy ghost, the holly Catholic church, the communion of
saynctes, the remission of sins, the resurrection of the flesh and the life
eternal after death. Unto which answer is made by the might of the godfather.
Credo, I do believe Therefore Isidorus says, paruuli alio profitente
baptizati sunt, quia adhuc loqui vel credere nesciunt. children therefore are
baptized a another making profession of faith for them because they know not
as yet, nether can they speak or believe. Wherefore we conclud that this
ceremony of profession of faith is necessary not only in me^ of vnderstadinge
who are converted to Christeanitie and are able in their own parsons with
heart and mouth to profess the same, but also it is required in Infants and
children, and because they can not perform it with their own mouth and heart,
the church their mother lends them her mouth and tongue to speak and profess
the faith for them. For the Antiquity of it and that it was an Apostolical
tradition, I will only note tow authers who were in the Apostles time as S.
Clement. lib. 7. constit. can. 39. 40. and 41. and S. Dionisius. de eccl.
Theologia c. 2.

CAP. 18. Weather Immersion or dippinge of the Infant be necessary.
WE must distinguish between case of necessetie and solemn celebration of the
Sacrament. For baptism being the only sole ordinary means of salvation, the
Catholic church does not stand upon solemnities rites and ceremonies; but in
case of necessetie as in danger of death, requires only the substance and
essence of baptism to be performed, that is, the matter and form to be dewly
excuted: wherefore seeinge water is the matter of this Sacrament and assumed to
the ablution and washinge of the body, whereby is signified the internal
washinge of the soul: there is no doubt but incase of necessetie, or for some
other respect, baptism may be ministered not only by Immersions or dippinges
three or one, but also by aspersion, sprinklinge effusion or pooringe of water
on the head or face of the child or party to be baptized. as for example when
there is little or small quantity of water, or urgent necessetie of baptism,
or the priest be sickly or weak, not able to bear the child, or on the other
syd the Infant be so feable that it might be danger to dippe it. In these cases
immersions or dippings are not necessary, but it shall be sufficient to poor or
lay water upon the head or face of the baptized. So that we may conclud that
immersions are not absolutely necessary; yet without case of necessetie in
solemn ordinary, or public baptization, upon wilfulnes, negligence or
contempt, to omit or neglect immersions were a grievous mortal sin: because
it is an ancient rite and ceremony commanded by the church, and also because
it is so significant a ceremony, and so co^figurat to the passion of Christ as
is pregnant and proved by Scriptur and fathers. S. Paul compares the baptized
to those who are laid in the sepulcher with Christ and rise with him to
glory. All we says he, who are baptized in Christ Jesus, in his death we are
baptized, for we are buried together with him by baptism unto death, that as
Christ is risen from the dead by the glory of his father, so we also may walk
in newnes of life. And therefore says S. Chrysostom, Homil. 24. in Joan.
we are as it were laid in a sepulcher when we are submersed and dipped in the
font and vetus homo sepelitur, and the old man is buried submersed and hidden,
then after arises and ascends the new man most lively, then does immersion
represent the figure of the sepulcher of our lord, wherefore a ceremony not ^o
be contemned. Also by immersion the who^e body is washed and dipped: who
feels not but by the effects original syne does work the whole body is
infected. What inconvenience then were it, if the whole body be dipped and
washed with the water of baptism. You will say the head is the principal part
of man's body because therein are most vigent and lively the internal and
external senses o^ man, as understanding, wit, memory, sight, hearing and
smellinge: wherefore it is sufficient that water be laid upon the head or face
of the child. Trwe it is indeed in case of necessity, or when conveniently
immersion can not be, but you must learn to distinguish, as I said before
between urgent cause, and solemn ordinary Christeninge.

CAP. XIX. Wether one or trinall immersions are to be used in baptism.
THe church of god ordinarely does use and command three immersions or
dippings of the child. Wherefore although one might suffice yet it were a great
sin to infringe and break the rite and ordinary custom of the church. By
three immersions is signified the trinity of persons in God, that is, the
Father the son, and the hollie ghost, and as the form does give so the
immersions follow. Romans 6.
Also because S. Paul says that by baptism we are said to be buried with
Christ, therefore the three immersions are done to signify the three days
Christ was in the sepulcher. sermon. 3. and 4. ad Neophitas.
wherefore S. Augustine in a sermon he made to the new baptized has these
words, recte tertio mersi estis etc. You who have received baptism in the
name of the trinity, rightfully you are three times dipped, and with reason
also be thrice dipped who have bine baptized in the name of Jesus Christ who
the third day rose from death, for that third immersion does express the type
and figure of our lords burial, by which you are consepulted and buried
together with Christ in baptism, thus much S. Augustine. And to the same
effect speaks S. Hierome, ter mergimur etc. We are three times diped that the
mystery of the trinity may be showed and appear. And we are not baptized in
the names, in the plural number but in the name in the singular number, whereby
is signified on God: wherefore although we are thrice dipped to declare the
mystery of the trinity, yet it is but one god on baptism, lib. Epist. 41.
vnus Deus vnum Baptisma, one god, on baptism. Also S. Gregory wrytinge unto
Leander bisshope in Spain does approve three immersions, and also not
disallowe if there be but one. So that for this ceremony of three immersions
we have three Doctors of the church S. Hierome S. Augustine and S. Gregory
besides these there is an Apostolical constitution, Can. 49.
as records S. Clement which does depose that priest who shall baptize
without trinall immersion: by reason of some heretic in the very begeninge
and infancy of the church, who baptized not in the name of the trinity, but
only in the death of Christ, and because Christ dyed but once, he would use but
one immersion. You may object that in the forth Counsel of Toledo, baptism
was commanded to be effected with one immersion. I answer, it is trwe it was
so commanded, and this was to avoyed the scandal of schism and the use of
heretical doctrine, wherefore S. Gregorius says baptism may be effected with
one immersion to signify one deity in three parsons. And this was at that
time done because some Arrians began to baptize with three immersions, not to
signify as the Catholics did the three parsons in one deity, but to signify
three naturs, which was to make the son and the holly ghost not to be of one
substance with the father; wherefore one immersion was permitted in Spain by S.
Gregorius and also commanded by the counsel of Toledo because these heretics
should not thinck that Catholics did use the trinall immersion to confirm
their doctrine. And therefore all Catholics of that country at that time agreed
to use but one immersion, but now that occasion of one immersion being taken
away all Catholic countries ordinarely do return to the ancient costome of
the primative church and do practice and command three immersions. an^ this
power and right the Catholic church has and ever had concerning ceremonies
and rites t^ alter as occasion by heretics was given to edification. But for
any essential part of any sacrament, she newer has nor can alter or permit
to be altered upon any occasion whatsoever: for the essential part Christ
himself instituted and leafte the rites and ceremonies to his church.

CAP. 20. Wether the unction with holy chrisme on the crown of the head after
baptism be allowable.
NOw being come to our third division of ceremonies which are to be done and
acted after baptism, you shall understand that they are three in number, which
the Catholic church does specially practice; The first is unction with holy
chrisme upon the topp or crown of the head. The second is the chrisome or
white garment which is put upon the baptized. The third is the taper or wax
candle light and burning being given and putt in the right hand of the
baptized. All which three the Protestants neglect or contemn as unprofitable,
not honorable nor significant, and have quiet blotted them out of their
books. Concerning the first. So soon as the child is taken out of the font,
the priest does annoint him not with holy oil as before on the breast and
shoulders: but with holy Chrisme and that on the crown of the head; to
signify that now he is become a Christea^ and so called of Christ, which is as
much as vnctus, anointed; and therefore an anointed Christean, and then he
uses this orison or prayer. God omnipotent father of our lord Jesus Christ,
who has regenerated thee of water and the holy ghost, and also who has given
thee remission of all thy sins, he does annoint the With the crisme of oil
of health into life everlastinge. lib. 30. de Sacramentis c. 1.
S. Ambrose after this ceremony is perfected says to every Christean man.
vnctus es quasi Athleta Christi. Now thou art anointed as the champion of
Christ unto life eternal. And Rabanus writes to this effect, after says he,
the child is taken out of the font presently he is signed in cerebro, in the
crown of the head with sacred Chrisme together with the prayer of the priest,
that he may be made partaker of the kingdom of Christ, and of Christ be called
a Christean. S. Ambrose goes farther and asks the question. Quare Caput?
lib. 3. de sacra. c. 1. and 2. Eccles. 2.
why have thou received ointment and holy Chrisme upon thy head? he makes the
answer and gives the reason quia sensus sapientis in capite eius. because the
sense and understanding, the eyes of the wise are in his head, And thus much
to show how significant this ceremony is. Now for the antiquity thereof that
it was used in the primative church, we have among the decrees and rites of
the church which were published and instituted by S. Syluester the first pope
of that name who baptized Constantine the great and first christean Emperor; vt
praesbiter baptizati Chrismate summum liniret verticem. That the priest should
annoint the crown of the head of the baptized, with chrisme. Also S. Hierome
reports that in his time, in dialogo contra luciferanos.
it waz not lawful for the priests to baptize without chrisme. What reason
then have the protestants of this age not to allow, but to neglect and
contemn so significant a ceremony I know no reason but one because they are
not vncti domini, the anointed of our lord. And as the Spayniards commonly
say Christeanos may no veros Christeanos. Christeans by name, but not trwe
Christeans in dead, but misbeleeuers of Christian mysteries, contemners of the
rites and ceremonies of the Christean Catholic church.

CAP. XXI. Whether the use of puttinge upon the baptized the white garment be
not significant.
THe use of this ceremony of clothinge the baptized with a white vesture or
garment or with a linen cloth commonly called the chrisome, as the manner and
custom of our country of England has bine, is on this form. The priest
after he has anointed the baptized upon the head, takes the chrisome or
white garment and says, Accipe vestem candidam etc. Receive and take the
bright, white holly and immaculate vesture, which thou may carry before the
tribunal of our lord Jesus Christ and that thou may have life eternal and
live for ever, this is the ceremony with the prayer. The sacred scripture does
often allude to this ceremony of white vestments and clothinge. And first in
Christ's transfiguration did not his garments turn and become white as snow?
Matthew. 17. Luc. 9. Mar. vlto. Act. 2.
And the Angelical vesture was it not white when they appeared to the holly
women the three Mary's at the sepulcher of our lord the day of his
resurrection? also when they spoke to the Apostles after the Ascension of
Christ they were all in white. And how often does S. John in the Apocalips
discribe the saints to be clothed in white garments, white stolles, Apoc. 3.
white robes. In the third chapter it is said, that there were some in the
church of Sardis, who had not after baptism defiled their garments with
deadly sin, and those are they who shall walk with god in whites, ambulabunt
mecum in albis, because they are worthy. he that shall overcome, shall thus be
vested in white garments, and I will not putt his name out of the book of life.
Also describes how he saw the four and twenty seniors about the throne
clothed in white garments also he declares that the souls who were under the
alter had white stolles given them every one had on. Apoc. 4. Apoc. 6. Apoc. 7.
And the multitud of sayncts standinge before the throne in the sight of the
lamb were all clothed in white robes. The white vesture which is given
immediately after baptism to the baptized has three or four significatio^s
deduced out of Scriptur. First it is given in the memory and sign of the
glorious resurrection, for all those who are regenerated and borne again by
baptism, are capable and may be made partakers of Christ's glorious
resurrection, and so to walk with god in whits. Secondly to signify what we
have gotten and obtained by baptism, that is innocence, awhite soul, clean
washed from all spots and staynes of sin. Thyrdly to signify and putt us
in mind, of that purity of life which every one ought to observe and keep
after baptism, Romans 6
according to that of S. Paul, that we may walk in newnes of life; Forthly
and last of all, to putt us in mind of the glory of the next life, for there
we must be standinge in the sight of the lamb clothed in white robes, For
nullum coinquinatum nothing defiled shall enter into heaven, and thus much for
the signification. Wherefore I doubt not but that I may conclud this ceremony
to be significant to have his instruction and signification. Now for the
antiquity we have the testimony of S. Dionisius in his ecclesiastical
Hierarchy. and the same confirms S. Ambrose lib. de ijs qui initian: miste
c. 7. Also of ancient time the octaue day of pascha or Easter, is and was
called dominica in albis, the sounday in whites, because after that day the
Neophits, that is to say those who were newly baptized, either upon Easter
even or upon the day, being clothed at their baptism in whits, did usually
on the soundaye after put of those white garments. Ita tamen, says S.
Augustine, vt candor qui in habitu deponitur, Sermo deocta^a paschalis.
semper in cord teneatur. But so notwithstanding, that the purity and
whitnes which the garment did signify, although laid away in the habit, yet
always to be kept and reposed in the heart and mind. The Roman church, the
mother church of this part of the world, solemnly does observe even until
this day this ceremony; And there you shall see from Easter day until the
sounday after, the Neophits, or new baptized Jews, to walk in their white
garments. And all other Catholic countries omit not this ceremony: what may
we imagine might move the protestants, to contemn neglect and deride this
ceremony, so significant and so generally practiced throughout Christendom. I
can say nothing but that they are coinquinated with schism from their mother
church, Candidi non sunt, they are not white.

CAP. XXII. Wether the giving of the wax candle light into the hand of the
baptized be a ceremony unprofitable.
THe order of this ceremony is, that the priest after the white garment given
he takes a taper or wax candle light, and puts it into the right hand of
the baptized saying. Accipe lampadem ardentem etc. Take and receive the
burninge and irreprehensible lamp, keep thy baptism, observe the
commandments, that when our lord shall come to the marriage thou may meet
him together with the sayncts in the heavenly hall, that so thou may have
eternal life and live for ever. The meaning of this ceremony is, and so the
church intends to instruct, that the baptized has given him by this
sacrament the light of faith, and the light withal of gods grace, that he may
and ought thereby to work the works of light and virtue, and not of darkness and
sin, accorge to that saying of christ, let your light shine before men;
Matthew. c. 5.
that they may see your good works and glorify your father which is in heaven.
And also that they have always their lamps ready in their hands, light and
full of oil that when the bridegroom comes they may be ready to enter in
with him: alludinge unto the parable of the five wise virgins. For the lamp
will not serve the turn without light and oil, which is as much to say, that
faith is dead without the oil of charity and good worcks to lighten it.
Matthew. 25.
And therefore the gate was shut against the foolish virgins; so that they could
not enter, nor would be knouen, because they had no oil nor light in their
lamps: wherefore I conclud that this ceremony of gevinge a taper light in the
right hand of the baptized to be profitable, comfortable and significant. What
is the reason then that the protestants forsake this ceremony, blot it out of
their books, will have no light in their churches? I fear me although they
bear the name of Christians, yet they are become darkness, they will be lamps
without oil, or light which is contrary to Scriptur and reason; let them
take heed the gate be not shut against them, and that in the latter day they
will not be known of Christ and to their confusion, they hear not that voice
Nescio vos. I know you not. I pray god lighte^ their parts and give them
unity of fayht, that we may once be all members of one Catholic and Apostolik
church, and therein to have the trwe use of the sacraments with the rits and
ceremonies thereof Amen.

EPILOGVS.
IN this treatise gentle reader, has binne briefly showed and by questions
declared unto thee, what baptism is, the effects thereof, the matter, the
form, the minister, the party baptized, and finally the reasons of the rites
and ceremonies, and with all how honorable, significant, profitable, and
comfortable they are to christian people. The lyk may be declared of the other
six sacraments, but not to be expected at my hands. For I will promise no more
then I mean to perform. The catholic church has ever mayntayned seven
sacraments, which christ himself and no other could institute. And this was
the bounty and goodness of our savior christ, thereby to assist and comfort man
to make this his passage in this vale of misery. So that christ would not
leave us without a remedy all the time of our life, even from the hour of our
birth unto the day of our death, baptism at our birth, Confession, the
Euchariste with the other sacraments all the middle of our life, and extreme
unction at our death. It is wonderful to consider, what easy way the
protestans have found out, they have cut of five of these seven sacraments,
and would seem to retain only two. But in very deed they have but bare one,
And that is baptism, which is allowed to be ministered by them and of them in
case only of necessetie. And this one which they retain, god knows they have
pilled and pouled, and the puritans issuinge from them have endouered to root
it quit up, as may appear by this precede^t treatise. As for the lords supper
as they call, it it is with them no Sacrament for they have no consecration, no
change of bread into the body of Christ, bread before and bread after, you may
make as good a Communion ar home in taking bread at break fast, in memory
that christ dyed for you. And as concerning the rites and ceremonies of the
Catholic church, daily in their pulpits they baye and bark at them; that they
are combersome, troblesome, to many in number, superstitious: what will be the
end of this? what te^deth this unto? surely to extinguish all external honor
of christ, all communication of Sacraments, de doctrina Cijristiana. lib. 3. c.
9.
and all assotiation of christean people in rits and ceremonies of religion.
But S. Augustine shall answer these kind of men and so I will end. Some few,
says he, Sacraments and ceremonies we have for many in the time of moses
law, most easy to be done, most honorable for signification and most clean
and pure to be observed and kept, and such as our lord him self has
instituted, and Apostolical discipline delivered.

LAVS DEO VNI ET TRINO
23. Iunij 1614.
A TABLE OF THE Chapters.
THE FIRST BOOK
CAp. 1. What Saacrament is and why god would use external sensible things for
the sanctification and justification of man. page 1. Cap. 2. What baptism is,
how it is defined, and what are the effects. page 2. Cap. 3. Whether if by
error or otherwise this Sacrament of baptism be not dewly administered, on be
capable of any other Sacrament. page 6. Cap. 4. Whether all punishment dew for
original sin, be remitted by baptism. page 8. Cap. 5. Whether baptism does
remitt sin ex opero operato, and give grace by the force and virtue of the
word and work done and said in the Sacrament. page 10. Cap. 6. Whether
baptism be really and in deed an isntrumental cause of justification, or only
a means to excite, stir up, or move to faith. page 12. Cap. 7. Whether be
that is once baptized, can sin, but shall be saved. page 16. Cap. 8. Whether
baptism has force to remitt sins committed after baptism. page 19. Cap. 9.
Whether baptism be necessary to salvation. page 23. Cap. 10. Whether in the
third chapter of S. John, Christ did entreat of baptism. page 25 Cap. 11. When
and at what time Christ instituted baptism. page 28. Cap. 12. Whether the
sacrament of baptism^ by martyrdom, or contrition of heart may be supplied. And
whether the distinction of the three baptismes that is of blood, Charity, and
water be i^ scripture. page 31 Cap. 13. How there can be unity of baptism^ if
there be three distinct baptismes. page 32. Cap. 14. Whether if one baptized in
his blood, should over live, were after to be baptized with water. page 34.
Cap. 15. Whether baptism of blood be more worthy, then baptism of Charity or
the Sacrame^^ page 35. Cap. 16. Whether by baptism a character or indelible
sign be imprinted in the soul of the bapzed. page 36.
The second book.
Cap. 1. Whether water be, by Christ's institution the matter of the Sacrament
of baptism. page 38. Cap. 2. What are the reasons that water above all other
things was chosen and taken for the matter of this Sacrament. page 40. Cap. 3.
What kind of water was instituted the matter of this Sacrament. page 44. Cap.
4. Whether on may be baptized with Ice, Snow or hayle. page 45, Cap. 5.
Whether on may baptize with the water of the Bath, Brimstone water, ot Allume
water or which water, whereof salt is made. page 46. Cap. 6. Whether on may
baptize in rose water ^r any other Distilled water. page 47. Cap. 7. Whether on
may baptize in wine, All, Beer, or mylk in necessetie, when water can not be
had. page 48. Cap. 8. Whether it be convenient the font should be hallowed and
the water blessed before baptism. page 49. Cap. 9. What is the form of
Baptism. page 52. Cap. 10. Whether it may not lawfully be said, that the
priest by this Sacrament does Wash and cleanse the soul of the Infant from
original sin page 55. Cap. 11. Whether it be not necessary, that, all the
words be spoken, that are of the form of baptism. page 58. Cap. 12. Whether
if one should leave out to express the party, who were to be baptized, it
were baptism. page 60. Cap. 13. Whether the form which the greek church uses
be sufficient for Baptism. page 61. Cap. 14. Whether the Arian heretics in
their form, did truly baptize. page 63. Cap. 15. Whether baptism given only
in the name of Jesus Christ be a vayable. page 64.
The third book.
Cap. 1. Whether Christ in his own parson, with his own hands did baptize.
page 67. Cap. 2. Whether it does belong to the priests only, ex officio, by
their office and function to baptize. page 71. Cap. 3. Whether a deacon may ex
officio by office and function administer this Sacrament. page 74 Cap. 4.
Whether a mere lay man who hat^ no holly orders, that is nether priest nor
Deacon may lavvfully baptize. page 75 Cap. 5. Whether baptism may lavvfully
A^ministred privately in private houses and by priua^ parsons. page 79 Cap. 6.
Whether the mid wife or any other woman, may in case of necessity Baptize.
page 83. Cap. 7. Whether an heretic, an Infidel, or a Jew may Baptize. And
if they do, whether it be auayleable. page 89. Cap. 8. Whether Catholic
parents or others, may send or permit their children, to be baptized of
heretical or scismaticall Ministers, without greueous mortal sin. page 93.
Cap. 9. Whether one may Baptize many, at one time. page 97. Cap. 10. Whether
many at one time, may together baptize one child. page 98. Cap. 11. Whether one
may Baptize him self page 99. Cap. 12. Whether the intention of the minister
be necessary, that the Sacrament take effect, page 100. Cap. 13. What kind of
intention is necessary. page 102. Cap. 14. Whether the devil ca^ baptize. page
104. Cap. 15. Whether an Angel may baptize. page 105.
The fourth book.
Cap. 1. Whether Infants do contract original sin. page 107. Cap. 2.
Whether it be of necessity, that children be baptized for the remission of
this original sin. page 109. Cap 3. Whether original sin does appertain,
or be to be imputed to children, borne of Christian parents. page 111. Cap. 4.
Whether Infants and children are to be baptized, before they come to years of
discretion. page 115. Cap. 5. What faith is required to the baptism of
children and Infants. page 118. Cap. 6. Whether Children, if they dye before
baptism, can be saved by their fathers faith. page 121. Cap. 7. What
punishment children, dying without baptism, shall have after this life page
128. Cap. 8. Whether that Infants shall after this life be here on earth and
enjoy the pleasures as men do now, or be in hell; or what place they shall
posesse. page 131. Cap. 9. Whether they shall have any excessive grief in hell
for that they are deprived of the fruition and sight of God page 136. Cap. 10.
Whether the Infant in the mothers womb, may be baptized page 139. Cap. 11.
Whether if some part of the child appear although the whole body be not
borne, it may be baptized. page 140. Cap. 12. Whether if the mother being great
with child, being baptized, the child also in her womb, be also baptized.
page 140. Cap. 13. Whether if the mother should be martyred, the infant in her
womb were also a martyr. page 141. Cap. 14. Whether the mother may be cut
and ^pened, if other wise the child can not be borne, and so taken from her
alive that it may be baptized. page 142. Cap. 15. Whether the children of
Jews or other Infidels, may lavvfullie be baptized against their parents
will. page 143. Cap. 16. Whether Jews, Turks, or Infidels, being converted,
are presently to be baptized. page 144. Cap. 17. Whether Jews and Infidels
may be compelled to baptism. page 146. Cap. 18. Whether he who comes, to this
Sacrament fainedly, not having in deed faith in Christ, be baptized. page 147.
Cap. 19. Whether he that is baptized, may be compelled to live according to
Christian Catholic laws. page 149.
The fifth book.
Cap. 1. What a Ceremony is. page 151 Cap. 2. What distinction and division
there is of the Ceremonies in baptism. page 152. Cap. 3. Whether these
Ceremonies are of necessity to this Sacrament of Baptism. page 154. Cap. 4.
Whether the child be not to be signed with the sign of the Cross, in the
forehead and breast. page 156. Cap. 5. Whether they who are of years and
understanding being converted, ought to be Cathecumins before they be baptized.
page 160. Cap. 6 Whether the solemnity of baptization were especially to be
reserved for the feasts of Easter and Penticost. page 163. Cap. 7. Whether the
impositio^ of the Priests hands, with his benediction and prayer, be a
ceremony allowable. page 168. Cap. 8. Whether Exorcismes, Adi^rations and
Exufflations, are convenient to be used before baptism. page 169. Cap. 9.
Whether Salt be to be blessed and given to the infant before baptism. page
173. Cap. 10. Whether the use of Spitle before baptism, be a superfluous
ceremony. page 175. Cap. 11. Whether it be a superstitious ceremony to take
the right hand of the child, and deliver unto him the signet, feale, or sign
of Christ, which is the Cross, that thereby he may learn to bless him self
against the devil and heresy, the greatest enemies of man, and to remain
constant in Catholic faith; page 178. Cap. 12. Whether the Abrenuntiation of
Satan and his works and pompes, be a ceremony approueable. page 183. Cap.
13. Whether multiplicitie of godfathers and godmothers are necessary. page
184. Cap. 14. Whether the godfather be to give the name to the child. page
185. Cap. 15. What godfathers and godmothers are bound unto who christen
children, page 185. Cap. 16. Whether the unction or anointing of the breast and
shoulders, be alovvable. page 188. Cap. 17. Whether profession of faith be
necessary before baptism. page 188. Cap. 18. Whether immersion, or dipping of
the infant, be necessary. page 189. Cap. 19. Whether one, or trinall
immersions are to be used in baptism. page 191. Cap. 20. Whether the unction
with holy Chrisme on the crown of the head after baptism be allowable. page
194. Cap. 21. Whether the use of putting upon the baptized the white garment,
be not significant. page 196. Cap. 22. Whether the giving of the wax candle
ligth in to the hand of the baptized, be a ceremony unprofitable page 200.
Epylogus page 201.
The errors, thus correct. page 50. lin 23. whit. with. page 51. lin 15. whit,
with. page 62. lin. 4. absoutlie, absolutely page 68. lin 32. ba, be. page 98.
lin. 1. bing, being. and ibid lin. 1. 2. it no, it, is no. page 101. lin. 12.
thee, three. page 108. lin. 7. tui, tu. ibid lin. 12. kind, king. ibid lin 28.
And were, and we were. page 110. lin 28. wiched wicked. page ^^5. lin. 31.
grawing, gnavving. page 148. lin. 8. fait, faith. page 153. lin 30. die did.
page 154. lin 32. stat^e, flat. page 167. lin. 19. yet, that, Ibid lin 23.
yet, that.

Some other faults which are of lesser importance, I dout not but thou thy
self in the reading, wilt castlie correct them.

A DOV AY, par PIERRE AVROI, au Pelican d'or. Anno 1614.


