COMPASSION TOWARD CAPTIVES CHIEFLY Toward our Brethren and Countrymen who
are in miserable bondage in BARBARY.

Urged and pressed in three Sermons On HEB. 13.3.

Preached in PLYMOVTH, in October 1636. By CHARLES FITZ-GEFFRY.

Whereunto are anexed An Epistle of St CYPRIAN concerning the Redemption of the
Brethren from the bondage of Barbarians; AND (...) concerning the benefits of
Compassion, extracted (...) St AMBROSE his second book of Offices, Cap. 28.

(...) magnum atque praeclarum justitiae munus est, quod (...) approbavit.
Atque haec benignitas (inquit) etiam ^cip. (...) a servitute captos,
locupletari te nuiores. Hanc ego consu^^udinem benign^tatis largitio^^ munerum
antepono. Lact^^^. Divi^^r. Instit^tion. l. 6. c. 12.

OXFORD.

Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, for Edward Forest, An. Dom. 1637.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL JOHN CAUSE MAYOR OF PLYMOVTH.
TOGETHER WITH THE REST OF the Brethren in that Congregation, Grace, mercy, and
peace be multiplied.
TO whose eyes should these Meditations, now made public, be first presented,
rather then unto yours, whose Ears first gave them attentive entertainment? I
made choice (not without justifiable inducements) of your Congregation for
their first breathing. But it was not mine intent that they should be buried
within the walls where they first breathed, but that they should from you
travel over the whole land where they might get admittance and acceptance. I
confess an Ambition in me of pressing forth (sometimes) into the public, but
it is only in some public pressure, that when others are silent, I may be the
Drummer, (I dare not say the silver Trumpet) to give the march unto the Lords
Armies, against his, and his peoples enemies. Therefore I come not abroad
until some incumbent or imminent calamity does drive me; not as the
sea-porpesses to prenuntiate a storm, but rather with the Halcion to procure a
calm. Heretofore I stood on mount Ebal denouncing The curse of corne-hoarders.
Printed 1631.
curses against those, whose covetousness, (in a year of no great scarsitie)
induced or increased a dearth, and so caused the calamity of their brethren at
home. Now I stand on mount Gerizim to proclaim blessings on them whose hearts
God shall touch to commiserate and relieve the miserable captivity of our
brethren abroad under a barbarous and cruel generation. The former found good
acceptance among the Godly, and (by Gods gracious blessing) produced good
effects from some whose former uncharitableness proclaimed them ungodly. God
give the like blessing to these poor labors, and prosper them in the errand
whereunto they were sent. For your parts, your monthly collections for this
pious purpose (whereof I have been credibly informed) do show the
forwardness of your minds: And I hope that I may boast of you as the Apostle
does of his charitable Corinthians, 1. Cor. 9.2.
your zeal has provoaked many. You need not my weak incentives, having two
such Sons of the Dove, your Reverend Mr Aaron Wilson Archdeacon of Exon
Pastor, and your laborious Mr Thomas Bedford B. of D.
Lecturer, who both by persuasion and performance, do give wings to your
willingness. Only let the care of the Antiochian Brethren (as you are in one
of these Sermons admonished) accompany your charity. Send your relief by some
trusty hands, as they did theirs by Barnabas and Saul. So shall the blessing
of those who are ready to perish, come upon you. Job 29.13.
So shall you have as many intercessors for you, as there are distressed Wives
and Children of your captived brethren. Many they are (too many, if it pleased
God otherwise to dispose) these many and many more shall pray for you. And the
prayers of many, especially of the poor and needy, cannot choose but be
powerful with God, who has pronounced them blessed that regard and relieve
them, Psalm. 41.1.2.
and has promised to deliver them in time of trouble, to preserve them and
keep them alive -- and that they shall not be delivered unto the will of their
enemies. The performance of which promised blessings on you, as on all
charitable Christians, he will not cease to advance by his best votes and
devotions who remains

Your Worships in all Christian Services ever ready CHARLES FITZ-GEFFRY.

TO THE COMPASSIONATE, THAT IS, TO THE TRVLY CHRISTIAN READER.
AMONG all the works of mercy there is none more comfortable to the receiver,
more acceptable to Christ, the great rewarder, and consequently none more
profitable to the doer, then the redemption of Christians from the bondage of
Infidels. If to visit them only, to afford them some comfort by presence, by
kind speeches, be a work whereof the Judge himself in the last day will take
special notice, as done unto himself, saying, I was in prison and you visited
me; how much more so to visit them as to procure their freedom? In so much
that the Redeemer himself shall say, I was in prison and you redeemed me. See
S. Cyprians Epistle at the end of the last sermon.


What better work can man perform for Christ then that which was the best
work which Christ performed for man. And what was that but Redemption. Had he
created us and not redeemed us, it had bin better that he had never created us.
Had he come from heaven to earth (as he did) to be incarnate for us, had he
wrought never so many miracles, taught never so heavenly doctrine, had he made
us never so rich, never so wise, never so great in this world, had he made us
Kings over so many Kingdoms as the Devil once showed him, what had all this
profited us if he had not redeemed us? How can that work but be most
acceptable unto him, which is the best resemblance of the best work he ever
did for us? Redemption! Redemption! The greatest benifit we receive by Christ,
the best work of mercy we can extend to Christians.

For performance of which worthy work, and consequently of ensuring unto us
the promised reward, what a fair opportunity is presented unto us in these
calamitous times? wherein it pleased God that many of our brethren should be
miserable, that we may be happy in being charitable; and that some should
groan under the intolerable burden of Turkish bondage, to try whether
Christians will be so kind unto Christians, as Turks are reported to be unto
unreasonable creatures, to whom (in this kind) they are said to be strangely
charitable. Bidduph. Travells.
If they see one who has caught a bird they will give twice the price of it
while it is alive to that which it will yield being dead only to give it
liberty and life. And some of them are said to give money to men and boys to
take and bring unto them living birds, that the birds may be beholding to them
for their freedom. With what face shall we look upon our Redeemer, if we be
not as charitable to our brethren under Turks, as Turks are to birds, to
reasonlesse creatures, who are (upon the matter) unreasonable creatures
themselves?

What heart can choose but relent, if not rend a sunder at the relation of these
intolerable pressures endured by Christians under these savage Barbarians?
their Faires and markets fuller of our men then ours are of horses and cattle:
Christians there bought, sold, cauterized, scared, as we do beasts, by those
who are bipedum nequissimi, of all too footed beasts most brutish: yoaked
together like oxen; their own oxen and horses keeping Holy Day, while our
miserable brethren do bear their burdens and plough the fields to favor
them; yet not allowed, when they have thus labored the whole day, as competent
sustenance and convenient lodging as we do our horses and oxen, but more
cruelly beaten when they have done their work, then our beasts are by us when
they work not as we would: Sometimes laid flat on their bellies, and
receiving an hundred blows or more on their backs: sometimes on their backs,
and so belly-beaten that they seem tympanous, and bladders rather then
bellies: sometimes balled with tough cudgels on the soles of their feet, until
their feet be swollen unto foot-bals, and so left to crall away, using as well
as they can, their hands instead of feet. how many upon slight suspicion and
false suggestion of a fault, have been dragged through the streets on the hard
stones by ropes or coards fastened into their bored feet? The very pictures of
which torments, what eyes, save those which stand in Turks heads can behold
without tears? I will not aggravate those grievances which are already too
great by inserting reports how they are aggravated by some of our nation, who
should rather with every true hearted Christian, endeavor to ease them, not
adding more affliction to such heavy bonds. Charity bids me to be incredulous
of that, which grief and passion causes some of ours boldly to divulge, that
there are among us who for their private gain do not a little advance the
prevailing of the common enemy against their countrymen and brethren; that
ours are surprised with our own powder and shot, and afterward laden in
Barbary with English gyves and yrons. God forbid that it should be so; but if
it be so, may it not be probably concluded (at least conjectured) that those
incestuous arrows which have dispersed the noisome Pestilence have come out of
this quiver of not compassionating our woeful brethren, but rather augmenting
their woes?

God (I hope) will raise up some happy hand to exhibit to our gracious
Sovereigns eyes and ears Danmoniorum gemitus, as our predecessors the old
Brittons pressed by the Picts, presented unto the Consul Boethius, Britannorum
gemitus; (but with better success.)

Neither will that illustrious Peer, the Oracle of Justice in our land, fail
to perform what he is said to have promised at Plymouth with tearefull eyes
(the evidences of a tender and truly religious heart) to the mournful wives
and children of these oppressed captives, that when he returned to the Court,
he would become their advocate unto the Majesty of the King. Remember him o my
God concerning this, who is so vigilant in doing justice at home, that he is
not dormant in extending mercy to those who suffer extreme misery abroad.

If any do aleadge that our own wants will not suffer us to succor them in
theirs, I say so too: I acknowledge it that our wants who are at liberty do
restrain us from releiuing our brethren, who are in barbarous captivity. But
what wants? Want of charity, want of the bowels of mercy, want of Christian
compassion, want of feeling our brethrens wants, and consequently of true
Christianity, these these are the wants that do hinder us. How much has been
lavishly expended in Pompes, in Plays, in Sibariticall-feasts, in Cameleon
suits, and Proteus-fashions, besides other vanities, and yet there is no
complaining of want? How many souls might have been ransommed from that Hell
on Earth, Barbary, with half these expenses? Yet herein do men only
complain of want. Of all others let us beware of this want of compassion
toward our lamentable captived Brethren; of whose insupportable bondage if we
have no feeling, we our selves are in a far worse thraldom, as one passage
in these ensuing meditations will show us.

Neither am I singular in this sentence: sweet Salvian doubts not to affirm
so much of the men of Carthage (while Carthage yet was Christian) who
frequented stage plays, feasted, froliked, while some of the Brethren were
slain by the enemy, others carried away into captivity. As sometimes King
Ahasuerus and Haman sat drinking in the Palace, while the City Hest. 3.15.
Shushan was in perplexity* so among them, Circumso^abant armis muros
Carthaginis populi Barbarorum, and Ecclesia Carthaginensis insaniebat in
circis, luxuriabat in theatri^. Alij foris jugulabantur, alij intu^
fornicabantur. Pars plebis erat foris captiva hostium, pars intus captiva
vitior^m: Cujus sors pejor fuerit incertum est. Illi quidem erant extrinsecus
in carne, sed isti intus mente captivi; and ex duobus letalibus malis, levius,
ut reor, captivitatem corporis Christianam, qu^m captivitatem animae sustinere.
An credimus forte quod captivus animo pop^lus iste non fuerit, qui l^tus tum in
suorum captivitatibus suit? captivus cord and sensu non fuit, qui inter suorum
supplicia vivebat, qui iugulari se in suorum jugulis non intelligebat* qui
morise in suorum mortibus non putabat? Salvian. de Guber. Dei* l. 6.
while the walls of their City were surrounded with the sound of the armor of
the barbarous beseiger, some of the Citizens (yea of the Church) were
mad-merrie at the Theater. Some were slain without, others committed
fornication within. Part of the people without the City* were made captive by
the enemy, part of them within made themselves captives unto vices. And these
of the two deadly evils underwent the worst, it being more tolerable to a true
Christian to sustain the bondage of the body, then of the soul, as our
Savior affirms the Death of the soul to be more formidable, then the Death
of the body. Can we be persuaded that such a people was not captived in mind,
who could be so merry in their brethrens captivity? Is not he a captive in
mind and understanding, who can laugh among the slaughters of his brethren,
who understands not that his own throat is cut in theirs, who thinks not that
he himself dies in their Deaths? Thus or to this purpose that elegant
author. Whose words were they engraven (as I wish they were) in the hearts of
our sin-enslaved Libertines, there were some good hope, that they would first
strive to be freed themselves from their spiritual bondage, and then they
would be more sensible of their brethrens corporal thraldom. In the midst of
their mirth they would remember their mercy, and account that they should
dearly answer for every penny lavisht out in vanity, which ought rather to
have been employed in procuring their Christian country-mens liberty. And as
the Elder Pliny said to his nephew, when he saw him walk out some hours
without studying, Plin. l. 3. ep. 5.
Poteras has horas non perdere: so would these say to themselves of their
wastfull and, commonly, sinful expenses, I might have chosen whether I would
have lost this money: I might have saved it by bestowing it either toward the
redemption of my enthralled brethren in Barbary, or on the relief of their
wreched Wives and Children at home; and so have made a more advantageous
return, then any of our Merchants do by their most thriving adventures into
any parts of Barbary.

To persuade men to this heavenly improovement of some part of their means,
are these poor meditations sent abroad by him who inlie compassionates his
brethrens importable burdens, wishing all blessings to those charitable
souls, who according to their abilities do endeavor to support them; And for
all his travells herein craveth nothing but your prayers for himself, and your
charity toward them, for whom he intercedeth, professing himself

His distressed Brethrens daily sollicitour CHARLES FITZ-GEFFRY.

COMPASSION TOWARD CAPTIVES.
HEB. 13.3. Remember those that are in bonds as bound with them.


WHether S. Paul or Barnabas or Clemens or what Apostle or Apostolical person
was the penman of this precious Epistle, Something briefly premised concerning
the Author and Authority of this Epistle.
it is not much material, though it have been much argued among the learned:
some judging it neither to be Paul's nor canonical; some to be canonical but
not Paul's; some to be both canonical and also penned by S. Paul. Titubat fides
si divinarum scripturarum vacillet authoritas. Augustine. alicubi.
True it is that Faith it self is ready to fall, if the authority of holy
Scriptures do once begin to fail. But these pillars of truth do stand on
firmer pedestalls then are the feet of flesh and blood, namely the spirit of
truth, who being the prime Author is also the surest evidencer that all holy
Scripture (and particularly this sacred Epistle) is undoubtedly the word of
God. And as in the letters of Princes it is not greatly regarded who was the
the scribe that wrote them while the seal that is on them does manifest from
whom they came; so in holy writings we stand not too much on the penman while
we find the seal of the Spirit upon them, and do perceive by the character
of the Holy Ghost that they were indicted by him.

This do we find and therefore thus do we hold concerning this divine
Epistle which although it begin not with the same style that S. Paul's other
Epistles do, yet it ends in the same manner. For as that blessed Apostle, so
the Author of this Epistle, upon the doctrine of faith laid for a foundation,
raises precepts of manners and rules for godly life as the building,

And because next unto faith whereby we are united unto the head, love is most
necessary whereby the members are knit together, therefore the holy Author
immediately after the doctrine of faith exhorts unto brotherly love: Heb. 13.1
Let brotherly love continue. And because we must not 1. Ioh. 3.18.
love in word, nor in tongue, but in deed and in truth, therefore he exhorts
to manifest our love by action, especially to such as have greatest need and
occasion.

Two sorts of people there were in those times (as still there are) who
suffered persecution for the Gospel, strangers and Captives. Strangers driven
from their own places and houses, enforced to take up Heb. 11.37.38.
deserts, dens, and caves for their habitation. Captives, (who were housed
indeed* but to their greater pain) detained in their bonds and prison for
their faith and profession. Unto both these several offices of charity are to
be extended: Unto strangers, hospitality; unto prisoners compassion and pity.
The former when they come unto us must be harbored: Heb. 13.2.
Be not forgetful to harbor strangers. But as for poor prisoners and
Captives, they (good souls) cannot come unto us (they are bound to the
contrary) therefore it is our duty to visit them, either in person, if we may
have access, or by provision, if we can send to them, or by prayers and
supplications unto God for them, and by sorrowing for them as if we suffered
with them.

Remember them that are in bonds as bound with them. The sum or substance of
the text, An exhortation to compassion toward Captives. Divided into two parts,


This is my text: whereof the scope and substance is An exhortation to pity and
compassion toward them that are in bonds and captivity, especially for Christ's
sake.

Wherein I find presented to our consideration 1. Others misery. 2. Our Duty.


Their passion, our compassion. Their misery is bondage and captivity: They are
in bonds: Others Misery.
Our duty is to extend unto them a twofold mercy; 1. Consideration; we must
remember them: 2. Compassion we must so remember them as if we our selves were
bound with them. Our Duty. The text briefly paraphrased.


Remember] Think upon their calamity and affliction. Let not your own safety
make you forgetful of others misery: let not your enjoyed liberty drive out of
your remembrance their calamitous captivity.

Them that are in bonds] All them that are in bondage, chiefly such as do
suffer for their conscience and for their Christian profession.

As bound with them] As if your selves were in the same place and case. Make
their bondage your thraldom, their suffering, your own smarting. Have a
fellow-feeling with them, as being members of the same body, which is employed
in the last part of the verse.

But my text has more need of pressing then of paraphrasing. The sense is
obvious enough to our understanding, would God the substance thereof could as
easily work upon our affections: I will (God willing) use mine endeavor,
attending his blessing without whom all man's endeavors are nothing, or to no
purpose.

And first consider we others misery, Pars prima. Others misery: Bondage.
that so we may be the better incited to our own duty. Their misery is that
they are in bonds. Remember them especially because their condition is most
hard and lamentable. For

Captivity is ^ most grievous kind of calamity. Doctr. 1.


Captivity a most grievous calamity.
Bondage is an heavy burden, imprisonment a great affliction, ask Joseph if
it be not so. Among all the miseries he endured by his brethrens malice, none
pinched him more then his imprisonment. How emphatically speaks the Psalmist
of it? Psalm. 105.18. His soul came into iron.
The iron entered into his soul. Though he were (upon the matter) at liberty in
prison, and rather a Keeper then a Prisoner ( Genesis 39.21.22.
the keeper committing all the prison^rs into his hands) yet all this could not
countervaile the loss of his liberty. All the suite he made to Pharaohs chief
butler for interpreting unto him the dream of his deliverance, was that he
would Genesis 40.14.
think on him and make mention of him unto Pharaoh, and bring him out of that
house. Act. 26.29.
Paul in his wish that both King Agrippa and all that heard him were not almost
but altogether such as he was, excepted his bonds, as if he would not wish them
to his greatest enemy, not to them who kept him unjustly in those bonds. The
greatest plague which God inflicted on the Jews for their idolatry was bondage
and captivity. Needs must that be one of his greatest rods wherewith he uses
to scourge the greatest sinners.

Liberty naturally most desired.

Bondage by some prevented or redeemed by voluntary death.


Be the imprisonment never so mild, the bonds never so easy, the bondage not
accompanied with those calamities that do usually attend it, yet want of
liberty is sufficient to make up misery. Liberty is that which all men do
desire next unto life, esteeming it no life which is deprived of liberty but
only a breathing death. Some mothers have thought themselves merciful to their
children when they have murdered the^ with their own hands, that death might
save them from bondage. Domitius Brusonius. l. 3. c. 32.
Buris and Spartis two resolute Lacedaemonians who had slain the Heralds of
king Xerxes, when their lives were offered them on condition that abandoning
their country they would attend upon the king, they refused, and rather desired
any kind of death, saying to a noble man who persuaded them to accept of the
kings royal offer, you know not how precious a thing freedom is, which no man
who is well in his wits will exchange for all the Persian monarchy. Give us
(said courageous Brutus) either life with liberty or death with glory. How
sweet a thing then is liberty, Bondage more miserable as it is considered
either in the kinds or with the concomitants thereof.
which is purchased with death, and therein preferred before life? how bitter
is bondage which is many times prevented by death, and therein death it self
preferred before it? thus even when bondage is tolerable yet it is miserable.
But this misery is aggravated as ^he bondage is more hard, either in the kinds
or with the concomitants thereof. For the kinds; there is a two fold bondage,
1. Spiritual. The kinds. Bondage twofold.
2. Corporal. Spiritual bondage is that whereby men are bound under Satan in
the chains of sin; as was Simon Magus to whom S. Peter said; Act. 8.13. This
the worst kind of bondage. Nulla major captivitas quam captivitas propriae
voluntati^ quae est insatiabilis. Remund. Sebund.
thou art in the bonds of iniquity: such bondmen are all men by nature until
Christ by grace have made them free, Spiritual whereby men are bound under
Satan in the chains of sin.
and this is the worst kind of bondage on earth, rendering men over (unless
grace prevent it) to hellish bondage, from whence there is no redemption. A
most miserable thraldom to be a bondslave to sin, to have hell for the
Iayle, the Devil for the jailer, a guilty conscience for the vnderkeeper,
concupiscence and man's natural corruption, for the gyves and fetters, and to
be excluded from the glorious liberty of the sons of God; such is spiritual
bondage from the which the Lord deliver us, and praised be God, who has in
part already delivered us.

Corporal bondage is twofold, according to the different causes thereof: for
some is just some unjust.

Just and lawful is that bondage when men are deservedly imprisoned according
to due course of law for their offenses, as Murderers, Thieves, Malefactors.
For just it is that they who do cast off the easy bonds of government,
Corporal. This again twofold.
should be cast into the heavy bonds of imprisonment; and that they who say by
godly governors, Psalm. 2.3.
let us break their bonds asunder, Just as of malefactors
should (if not be broken with a rod of iron yet) be hampered with iron chains
which they shall not be able to break asunder. Unjust, when men contrary to
^ight and justice are cast into bonds.
Unjust bondage is when men contrary to right and justice are cast into bonds,
whether for temporal pretenses, by tyrants and oppressors; or for spiritual
causes, for keeping faith and a good conscience under persecutors and infidels.

I know not whether I may refer bondage and imprisonment for debt either unto
the first or second kind, Imprisonment for debt a mixed kind, as being in some
cases just, in some unjust.
or make it a third and mixed kind between just and unjust. Just it may be and
is in regard of many, who by fraud and prodigality have abused their honest
creditors, and lavished their goods once gotten into their hands. Just it is
that they who have wilfully cast themselves into bonds out of which they never
meant to come, should be laid up in bonds, out of which they shall not be able
to come until they have paid the uttermost farthing. But unjust it is in
regard of many injurious, usurious creditors, who distinguish not between Gods
visitation and man's corruption, but will enforce men to pay that which God, for
causes best known to himself, has taken from them. These if they could, All
that are in any kind of bondage are here intended. But chiefly those who are
captived for Christ's sake.

This kind of bondage is most comfortable in regard of the inner man.


would take up Christ himself with an execution rather then loose principal
or interest. This must needs be a branch of unjust bondage. I doubt not but the
holy Author in my Text bespeaks us to commiserate generally all who are in
bondage for any cause whatsoever: But especially he intends those who suffer
unjust thraldom, and that for the best cause, for their constancy in the true
profession of Christ. This indeed is the most comfortable kind of captivity in
regard of the Inner man; the soul and conscience enjoying more freedom in
prison then the Persecutor does in the kingdom. Mat 5.10.
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven. Therefore S. Paul stands upon it, that Phil. 1.13.
his bonds were famous in the palace and in all other places: And seems to
esteem his imprisonment for Christ equal with his Apostleshippe, stiling
himself Ephesians. 3.1.4.1. Philem. v. 1.9 Cyprian. ep. 16.
Paul the prisoner of Jesus Christ, as well as Paul the Apostle of Jesus
Christ. Blessed Cyprian (afterward a glorious Martyr) does parallel the
Confessors bonds with the Martyrs crown. 4 Your confession (says he) is a
perpetual Martyrdom, you do so often suffer as you prefer the prison for
Christ, before liberty with the loss of Christ. Your praises are as many as
your days, and your Crowns do increase with your months. The Martyr once
overcomes in that he presently suffers: Semel vincit qui station patitur.
But the Confessor daily combating with pain and not subdued, is daily
crowned. The longer therefore that your combat is, the loftier is your crown,
and remaining in the prison, you do lead the life not of this present world,
but of that which is to come.

And Tertullian (whom that Martyr used to call his Master) excellently
comfort the Confessors who were in captivity for Christ, Tertullian. ad
Martyr.
stiling them Martyrs before they suffered Martyrdom. You are (says he) in
prison; but the world to a Christian is a worse prison, so that you may seem
rather to have escaped out of prison, then to have entered into it. Many are the
inconveniences of the prison but worse are the evils of the world; and what
evil can you suffer there, which is not recompensed with a greater good? The
prison has darkness but you your selves are a light unto it, who are the
light of the world. There are bonds and fetters, but you are free unto God.
There are stinking savours, but you are a sweet smelling savor unto the Lord.
There you have the company of thieves and murderers, but you have the society
also of God and his Angels. Let him be greeved with the prison, who longs
after the pleasures of the world: The Christian even without the pris^n has
renounced the world, and in the prison, the prison it self. What matter is it
where you be in the world, who are none of the world?

In these regards captivity for Christ's cause is most comfortable; But in
regard of outward condition most miserable

Such is the captivity of our brethren ^n Barbary.


but if we respect the outward estate and temporal condition, it is of all
others (spiritual bondage only excepted) most intolerable.

And of this kind (in some respects) is the captivity and bondage of our
distressed, daily afflicted brethren in Morocco, Algier, and other places of
Barbary, for whose sorrowful sakes these poor meditations are chiefly
intended* which we shall the sooner perceive if we draw out a little Map of the
world of miseries by them endured. This manifested by taking a view of some
concomitants therewith concurring.
Therein we shall find their bondage to be the more grievous by the
concomitants therewith concurring. As

First, Banishment. Bondage must needs be accompanied with misery, though a man
be imprisoned in his own country, Banishment.
where his wife and children may visit him, his friends may comfort him,
charitable persons may send relief to him: This again aggravated in regard of
yet such imprisonment is no small perplexity, for what is a man the better to
be in his own country, and not to have freedom, but to be an exile in his
own nation? But banishment concurring with bondage makes the bondage more
grievous, The place whence they are banished, England the best of nations.
in regard of the places whence and whither a man is banished, and the people
among whom he abides.

Some countries are like Caria of which one said that in Caria none lived but
dead men, the country was so cold and hungry that the inhabitants seemed Ghosts
rather then men; so uncomfortable, that a stranger would think it banishment
for the natives to be confined unto them, Quid Roma melius? Scythico quid
frigore pejus? Huc tamen ex illa barbarus urbe fugit. Ovid.

The place whither they are confined; Barbary.


and a benifit to be banished their native soil; yet such is the love
naturally of every one to his country that a Roman would hardly think it a
greater punishment to be banished into Scythia, then a Scythian would to be
confined unto Rome.

Now if it be grievous to exchange a bad coun^^^ of our own for a better land,
needs must the condition of our banished Brethren be grievous, who are enforced
to exchange England for Barbary, the pleasantest, the most civilized for the
most barbarous, brutish nation of those parts of the world. Bona terra, mala
ge^s.
I accuse not the barrennes of the soil, which is said to be more abundant in
earthly commodities then many countries inhabited by better people. So was the
land of Canaan when Giants possessed it, lumps of flesh as odious to heaven as
burthenous to the earth. Such was the situation of Sodom yet never saw the
sun more scelestious Citizens. It Is not the air nor soil that makes a
nation, but the people, as not the knots nor borders, but the herbs and
stowers do make a garden. There is in Barbary abundance of all things, save
goodness; but what is that to our miserable countrymen who in that abundance
do want all things save hunger, nakedness, and blows? There is store of
provision for food and delight; but what is that unto them, who are stinted
only to bread and water? what are they the better for the dainty dates and
pleasing pomegranates which they see dangling over their heads, but none
falling into their mouths, not so much as touching them but when they gather
them to be devoured by their devourers? Is not this but the truth of that
torment fabled to be endured by Him in Hell?

Were Barbary as it was before it turned Barbary there would be some comfort of
living in it, when it was famous for Arms, Arts, Civility, Piety. How many
renowned Martyrs, reverend Bishops, famous Fathers has Africa yielded unto the
Church. To Africa we do owe zealous S. Cyprian, learned Tertullian, fluent
Fulgentius, acute Optatus, and the greatest light of the Christian Church
(after S. Paul) divine Augustine. In so much that posterity could as hardly
have missed that country as any one nation in the Christian world. But now a
man may seek Africa in Africa and not find it. Instead of Africa we find
Barbary and Morocco; Nomina sunt ipsis barbariora Getis.
Instead of Hippo and Carthage, Algier, Sally, and Tunis; instead of Martyrs,
Marty^ makers; instead of Confessors, opposers of Christ oppressors of
Christians; instead of godly Ministers godless Mofties; instead of Temples and
Schools, cages of unclean birds, dens of thieves.

O that England may be warned by these sad examples. God can turn great
Britain into Barbary, and leave no more signs of our Cathedral Churches then
there is now to be found of S. Augustines Hippo, or S. Cyprians Carthage. Psalm.
107.34.
A fruitful land he makes barren, for the sins of them that dwell therein.
Can he not as well make a land of light to become a den of darkness, a place
of civility to become a Barbary for the unthankfulness of them that dwell
therein? wherefore stand in awe, o England, and sin not. Ioh. 12.35.36.
While ye have light believe in the light, walk in the light. The surest way
to keep the Candlestick that it be not removed from us, is to walk in the
light of it while it is among us; but I have digressed. I must return and
visit my miserable brethren in Barbary. Where I find them in a woeful bondage
under a most barbarous people, The people under whom they are in bondage. These
being
which does not a little aggravate the misery of their banishment, and bondage,
under a people 1 irreligious; 2 covetous; 3 cruel; 4 base and contemptible.

Irreligious.
Irreligious, because Mahumetans, for what is Mahumetisme, but a miscellany of
diverse religions? and what is the compounding of religions, but the confounding
of true religion? They seem to regard the name of Christ, No greater enemies
to Christians then these Renegadoes. Corruption optimi est pessima.

Res quae corrumpitur and mutatur in contrarium suae naturae devenit ad tantum
gradum malitiae quantus erat gradus bonitatis i^ quo erat vel venire poterat.
Remund. Sebund. Theol. Natural. Tit. 244.


but Christians they cannot endure. These they use worst of all their captives
that they may force them from the profession of Christ, and make them turn
Musulmans, in their language true believers, in truth misbeleevers, the
children of perdition like themselves.

And who fiercer enemies to Christ and Christians then these renegado's,
Christians turned Turks? These having renounced the faith of Christ have put
off all compassion unto Christians: And in their Circumcision have cut
themselves off, not only from Christianity, but from humanity. No marvel, for
the better any t^^ng is the worse it turns being tainted. The better the wine
was, the tarter* is the viniger. If Angels do apostate they become Devils. If
a Disciple turn thief, he stays not till he become a traitor, a murderer,
a Devil. If light become darkness, how great is that darkness? If a
Christian become Turk, he is more the child of perdition then the Turks
themselves.

Blessed brethren, be constant in your Christian profession, whatsoever becomes
of us, let us continue Christians. This only religion, truly embraced, not only
makes us Saints in heaven, but keeps us men on earth. This only does civilize
a nation and person and keeps him from barbarism. Cease once to be Christians
and yo^ become not only void of grace but monsters in nature; like those
Mahumetans who being irreligious no marvel if they be also

A people extremely Covetous. Such is their avarice that they make merchandise
of men. Covetous.
Horse-fayres are not more frequent here then Men-markets are there. A price
pitched upon every poll, too heavy for the poor captive himself or his friends
to lay down for his ransom. It is said that so many Jews were afterward sold
for a penny as they sold Christ for pence. They sold him for thirty pieces of
silver, thirty of them were sold for one of those pieces. O that Christians
were as good cheap in Barbary as Jews were when a man might have bought
thirty of them for a penny. But these miscreants do set a price on one poor
Christian thirty times higher then the Jews did on Christ; which if they
cannot get from his friends, Cruel. One (whose letter to his wife I have
lately read) relates that his office is from morning till night to sell water,
and if he bring not in six pence at least to his Patron at night he hardly
escapes an hundred stripes.
they will beat out of his flesh, using him the more cruelly in hope to get his
ransom the more speedily. For as they are extremely covetous so are they
unmercifully

Cruel. As cruel to Christians as the Egyptians were to the Israelites in their
bondage. They deny them straw yet exact of them the whole tale of brick. They
deny them relief, save of bread and water, yet if the poor captive earne them
not a day as much as they expect, he is laden at night with many heavy stripes.
From this misery, if nor he nor his friends can procure his ransom, nothing
can free him (unless he will renounce his faith) but he must remain slave
during his life unto some one of

A base and contemptible generation; which enhaunceth not a little the calamity
of his thraldom. Every bondage is the more grievous by how much the baser they
are to whom a man is in bondage. Contemptible and base.
Such is the bondage of our brethren under these Turks. They who make us slaves
what are they but slaves themselves? Their Grand-signeor holds them no better,
and so he calls his Basha's and chief commanders. Now what a miserable thing
is it for a freeborn man to become a slave to one who is but a slave
himself? In this regard the curse of Canaan lies upon the poor Christian;
Genesis 9.25.
A slave of slaves shall he be. But Canaan was to his brethren: our miserable
brethren are so to their enemies, Infidels. Among all Jobs calamities scarce
any touched him more nearely that Job. 30.1.
they despised him whose fathers he would have disdained to have set with the
basest of his flocks. What a regret must it needs be to ours, as often as they
think upon it (which they cannot choose but do daily) that those do tyrannize
over them and make beasts of them who are the worst of humane beasts? Nec
bellua tetrior ulla Qu^m servi rabies in libera colla furentis. Claudian.
For no beast more savage then a slave, insulting over the necks of those who
are freeborn.

Other evils accompanying their bondage my purpose is not now to press; I may
have an hint to touch upon some of them hereafter. Were there no more said,
this might suffice to incite us to the first duty enjoined in my text (the
least we can afford them) which is to Remember them.

Three times at least in this Chapter does the holy Author perform the office
of a remembrancer unto us, Our first duty in regard of our brethrens misery, To
remember them.
speaking to that noble faculty of the soul, the memory. In the precedent
verse, Be not forgetful to harbor strangers. In the 16 verse, To do good and
to distribute forget not. In this, remember them that are in bonds. In all
these he sueth unto our memory for some comfortable consideration of those who
are in misery. If we duly remember them, we cannot choose but commiserate them,
and do what we may to relieve them. The hardest of all is that which a man
would think to be the easiest, Doct. We are prone to forget others misery when
we our selves are in safety.
to remember them, especially when we our selves do feel no affliction.

Our selves being in safety, how prone are we to forget those who are in
misery. Had not Pharaohs chief butler reason to have remembered good Joseph,
who prophesied unto him his deliverance out of prison, and readvancement in
court. Genesis 40.23
Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgate him. Poor Joseph*
it is always thy lot to be forgotten in thine affliction by those who are soaked
in their enjoyed safety. Amos. 6.4, 5, 6.
They lie upon their beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches,
and eat the Lambs of the flock. They chaunt to the sound of the Vyal, They
drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief Ointments: What
follows! They are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. Soft pillowes,
sweet music, dainty fare, wine in bowls, pleasing perfumes, these, these
exclude the remembrance of our brethrens sufferings. The rich gluttons full
cups, fat dishes, rich purple, made his memory so pursie that it could not
walk the length of his hall to the hungry ulcerated beggar. His officious
dogs were more mindful of him then their dogged Master. How unlike are we
herein to him whose name we profess, our blessed Savior? All the joys in
Paradise made him not forget what he promised the penitent thief on the
cross. But we being in our earthly Paradise, how soon forget we our poor
brethren that are on or under the Cross? Such a bewitching nature there is in
pleasure and prosperity, which meeting with our corruption, so besotteth our
souls that we intend nothing but our present solace, and forgetting our
selves, how can we remember others.

Our memory herein is like unto glasses or vyals which having been broken are
cimented up again. Cold liquor they hold something handsomely: but power warm
water into them, or set them against rhefier they leake immediately. So we in
the cold air of affliction do retain some remembrance of our afflicted
brethren; Use. To admonish us to fear our wa^es at all times but chiefly in
p^osperity.
but being bathed and warmed with the heat of prosperity, the ciment
dissolveth and the crazed vessel soon leakes out the remembrance of others
adversity.

Which should admonish us (dear Christians) to fear our selves and our ways
always, but especially in the Halcion days of plenty and prosperity. Some of
the ancients used to have at their feasts, one dish wherein was served a dead
man's scull, the servitour uttering this speech, be merry, but withal look on
this. We, while God feasteth us with liberty and safty (as, praised be his
goodness, now he does) have need that some representation of our brethrens
bonds should be served in unto us, with the words of my Text Remember those
that are in bonds.

Remember that any captivity is a grievous calamity, but bondage under the
enemies of Christ for their constancy in the Christian faith is (in regard of
worldly comforts) most uncomfortable. Exhortation to rememb^r those who are in
any kind of bondage.
Remember all that are in any kind of bonds but these especially.

Remember those who are in Satan's bonds, the bondage of sin, These who are in
Satan's bonds.
fast tied with the cords of their own corruption, not yet freed, and (which
is worst) not caring to be freed by the son of God, Ioh. 8.36.
who makes men free indeed. Remember them who remember not themselves, remember
to pity them who pity not themselves, and therefore are the more to be
pitied. Nihil miserius misero non commiserante seipsum.
For who more miserable then a miserable man who does not commiserate himself.
Remember to pray for them that they may be delivered out of the snare of the
Devil. Remember that Ephesians. 5.8.
you your selves were once darkness, strangers from the common wealth of
Israel, the children of Death, the bondslaves of sin as they are. And as one
who has escaped a wrack, so rejoice for your own safty as that you sorrow for
those who are in danger of drowning, and cast out a cord or oar (if it be
possible) to save them. No gally-slave is in worse bondage then these
Libertines: Therefore remember them.

Remember those that are in corporal bondage, though justly and deservedly.
Those who are in corporal bondage though deservedly for their misdeeds.
They are not shut up under a single destruction. Many deaths he dies who lives
in the horror of a prison. Miserable creatures, they want the inward comfort
which others do enjoy, whom a free conscience does bail in the closest
prison, ease and release in the heaviest irons, enlighten in the darkest
dungeon. Non est unum clausis exitium. Multifari^ morte premitur qui carceris
squallore torquetur. Cassiodor. Var. l. 11. ^p. 40.
Besides the bolts on their legs they have heavier fetters on their souls
which none can strike off but only Christ. They cannot make to themselves
comfortable application of S. Peter's admonition, 1. Pet. 4.15. 1. Pet. 3.14.
Let none of you suffer as a malefactor, or a murderer, or as a thief or
wrong doer. But if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye. This
happiness they want who suffer rightly for wrong doing, and may say (if they
have so much grace) with the penitent thief on the Cross, Luke 23.41.
We indeed justly, for we suffer the due reward of our deeds. Yet let not their
demerits exclude your mercy, no more then that thief's transgression did
Christ's Compassion. While Law gives them life, let them not be denied relief.
Some of them who came in malefactors may dye Confessors; therefore remember
them.

Remember those who are in bonds for debt, Those who are in bonds for debt.
whether their own or other men's as sureties, suretieshippe has undone many.
Debt it self to an honest mind is a great bondage, even when a man is at
liberty. Himself his own prisoner, his mighty sighs, and daily sorrows are
the Sergeants, his troubled mind the Sherifs ward. Every nail or bramble that
catches him by the coat he conceives to be a catch-pole, Debere nec habere
unde solvas insepulta mors est.
and starting, he cries out at whose suit? To be buried in debt is but a death
without burial. But if vexation have added affliction to their bonds, then is
their case more lamentable, therefore remember them.

But especially remember them that are in bonds for Christ's sake and his
Gospels, But especially those who are in bonds for their Christian profession,
whether under Turkish or Popish Inquisition.
either in the Popish inquisition or in Turkish thraldom.

As for that bondage of bondage that Minotaure which devours Men, the Romanish
inquisition, it seems that the Devil devised it as the Interloper and
Interceptor of all charity. There is no coming to them that are so enclosed,
no seeing them, no sending to them, as if the Devil intended to keep Christ
close prisoner. All we can do for them is to remember them, with our tears to
condole them, with our prayers, that Christ, who cannot be excluded, will visit
them with inward comfort, and confirm them to the end. The Popish inquisition!
O it is a more barbarous bondage then any in Barbary. O Lord when thou make
inquisition for blood, remember their bloody inquisition.

Or those who are in Turkish bondage.
Remember O remember your brethren who are in Turkish bondage; those who sit
down by the waters of Tunis, Algier, Sally, and weep, or sing to an heavy
tune, Nos patriae fines and dulcia liquimus arva;


We, poor souls, have exchanged the best country for Barbary, our Christian
brethren for cursed Mahumetans, our Ministers for Mofties, our Temples for
Mosquies. Our wives are widows while their husbands are alive, and happy were
the miserable husbands if their wives were widows indeed. Our children are
Orphans while their fathers are living; and well were it for the afflicted
fathers if the children were Orphans indeed. This their very banishment is but
a breathing death: yea by the Prophets verdict more to be lamented then Death,
Ier. 22.10.
Weep not for the dead neither mourn for him, but weep for him that is
carried away. They are in the hands and bands of them who are enemies unto
Christ, and therefore the more cruel unto them because they are constant unto
him. If David cried out, Psalm. 120.5.
woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in Mezech, then may they, woe is me
that I am constrained to abide in Morocco, and to be a bondslave in Algier. He
because his soul dwelt among them who are enemies to peace; these, because
they are captiv^ to them who are enemies to him who is Ephesians. 2.14.
our peace, and do all they may to deprive them of that peace of God which
passes all understanding. Add hereto, that they are debarred the means of
spiritual comfort by the Ministry of the word. Instead of Ministers of Christ
to comfort them, they have the 2. Cor. 12.7.
Messengers of Satan to buffet them, and with Jobs wife to say unto them, not
in words, but in the more feeling language of blows, Job 2.9.
curse God and dye, or curse Christ and live, but a life more cursed then death
it self. Poor captives! they cannot say as S. Luke does of the Malteses, The
Barbarians showed us no little kindness, Act. 28.2.
but the quite contrary, the Barbarians show us no little cruelty.

Remember those your countrymen, your acquaintance, some of your own kindred,
with whom you have often eaten, drank, and made merry, those who sometimes
went up with you to the Temple of the Lord, now abandoned from the Temple, and
grievously suffering because they will not abandon the Lord, sold in markets
like beasts, by creatures more brutish then beasts, stigmatized, branded when
they are bought by circumcised monsters, miscreant Mahumetans. I want words as
well to express the persecutours wickedness, as the sufferers wretchedness.
One of them in a letter to his woeful wife concerning his own and his fellows
miseries, among other sad passages inserteth this advice, Another likewise in a
letter to his wife, professes that he was never tempted to turn Turk (for
which he greatly thanked God) but he was often tempted to kill his Pa^eroon,
that by a cruel death (whereof he should be sure) he might be freed from a
miserable life.
in any case not to suffer their Son to adventure on those costs least he
should fall into his fathers woeful case: when I read it, I remembered king
Antigonus his charge to his sons in a tempest, that neither they, nor theirs
should adventure on the Seas. But this (in my thoughts) was little to the
others charge: Therefore I could not but think on the Glutton in hell and his
suit unto Abraham, that he would send Lazarus to warn his surviving brethren
not to come into that place of torment.

Their case (praised be God) is not so desperate, but if there be an hell upon
earth, it is not in Aetna, nor in mount Ilecla, nor in any of the Indian
Vulcans, it is in Morocco or Algier for miserable captive Christians.

Remember them! Nay, how can you (if you have Christian hearts) forget them?
sooner should your right hand forget her cunning, sooner should you forget both
right hand and left; sooner should you (with Messala Corvinus) forget your own
names then your brethrens intolerable bondage, who have given their names to
Christ, and daily suffer such greevances because they will not renounce the
name of Christ. O let not your enjoyed liberty and present prosperity banish
them and their thraldom out of your memory. While you sit safe at home, and
see the smoke of your own chimnies, breath in the best, your own English
air, they sit down Psalm. 137.1.
by the waters of Babylon, and weep at the remembrance of Sion. While you feed
on the fat of Lambs, and drink wine in bowls, they eat the bread of sorrow,
and drink dry the river Marah. While you have your music at bankets of wine,
their wine is their tears, the jingling of their chains their sorry music,
broken Hearts their Harpes, sighing their singing, and some prolonged hope of
enlargement by your charitable contribution their only earthly comfort. While
you come to the Temple and to the Table of the Lord, do hear the word of the
Lord, may have the ministers of the Lord come unto you, to confer with you,
to comfort you (though too few do make us of such happiness) they (dear
souls) do see nothing but the abomination of desolation, the God Manzim, the
mock God Mahomet, circumcised Cadees, urging them in the language of Satan, If
thou will have ease or liberty, fall down and worship me.

A day will come when you shall no more remember these your earthly delights,
or remember them with more grief, because they are posting from you or you
passing from them. Then at last your carnal friends who at first flattered you
with, The worst is past (when, God knows, without repentance, the worst is to
come;) You may live many a fair year (and yet die in a foul hour) and the
like country consolations to the sick, they and their cold comforts will prove
but Job 16.2.
Jobs miserable comforters, Job 13.4.
Physicians of no value. And when they see there remains no hope of recovery,
then they will call on you, O remember God, when (alas*) you cannot remember
your selves. Iustum est ut morlens obliviscatur sui qui dum viveret oblitus est
Dei.
But if you expect that Christ shall then remember you, you must now remember
him in his distressed members: Otherwise you shall find too true that saying
of a Saint, It is a just thing that he should not remember himself at his
death who would not remember God in his life.

If you forget him now, beware of such a miserable memento as the rich glutton
had in Hell, for not remembering Lazarus on earth; Luke 16.25.
Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good, and Lazarus
evil, now therefore he is comforted, and thou art tormented. Shortly, remember
that there is a day coming wherein the Judge himself shall come, and say to
those who have been forgetful herein, Mat. 25.41.43.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, -- For etc. For I was in
prison, in captivity and you visited me not.

But God forbid that I should dismiss you with a Curse, and not rather (as our
Mother the Church does her children) with a blessing. Wherefore Remember them
that are in bonds.

And do you ask me how, or wherein you shall remember them? I tell you in few
words, Remember to pity them, remember to pray for them, remember to extend
your charity according to every man's ability toward the redeeming and reducing
them home, or the relieving of their poor wives and woeful children at home.
So remember them as if your selves were in the same bonds and bondage with
them, which is the second duty, Compassion, of which (God willing) hereafter.
Now I beseech the Almighty to grant unto you this remembrance that he may give
unto you the blessing promised unto those who do remember him in his, Psalm.
41.1.
Blessed is he who considers the poor and needy, the Lord will deliver him
in the day of trouble.

COMPASSION TOWARD CAPTIVES.
The second Sermon.
HEB. 13.3. -- as bound with them.


Follows now the second duty we owe to our brethren who are in bondage; The
second duty, A Sympathy or compassion.
A Sympathy or Compassion. We must so remember them as if we our selves were in
the same bondage with them, that so we may be the more feelingly affected
toward them: As if he had said more at large, If you be true hearted
Christians you are bound to remember them, for your selves are, in some
respects, bound with them. Conceive therefore their case to be yours. It might
have been yours if it had so pleased God; it may be yours, if it shall so
please God; yea it must be yours, if you will truly please God. Doct. 3. Our
brethrens captivity must be our calamity.
Manifest it is, that

We must so esteem of our brethrens captivity as if i^ were our own calamity.

Their bondage must be ours, as if our feet were in their fetters, There must
be in all Christians a Sympathy in all their bretherens sufferings.
and their bonds upon our hands. Generally, there must be in all Christians a
Sympathy in all their brethrens sufferings, a compassion in all their passions,
a fellow-feeling in all their afflictions.

The Apostle exhorts us as Romans 12.15.16.
to rejoice with them that rejoice, so to mourn with them that mourn, and to
be of like affection one toward another. That whereto he exhorts others, the
same he exhibiteth unto others; 2 Cor. 11.29.
Who is weak (says he) and I am not weak? Who is offended and I burn not?
This compassion he makes to be the complement and perfection of ^he Gospel,
Gal. 6.2.
Bear ye one another burdens and so fulfill the law of Christ. Whereupon one
of the ancients infers, Tanto quisque perfection est, quanto perf^ctius
sentit dolores alienos.
Every one is so far forth a perfect man as he is more perfectly sensible in
himself of another man's sorrows.

True Saints have been always thus affected toward their brethren. Hereby holy
Job evidenceth his sincerity; Job 30.25. David,
Did I not weep for him who was in trouble? True Saints have been always thus
affected as Io^*
Was not my soul grieved for the afflicted? David extended this compassion to
his very enemies: Psalm. 35.15.
They rejoiced in his affliction, he sorrowed and suffered in theirs, ver.
13.14. Jeremy,
Nevertheless when they were sick my clothing was sackcloth. Can we be men
after Gods own heart as David was, if we do not for our Brethren what he did
for his enemies? What more feelingly spoken then that of the Prophet Jeremy,
Ier. 8.21. and 9.1.
For the hurt of the Daughter of my people I am hurt, I am black, and
astonishment has taken hold of me. And what is the subject of his
Lamentations? Not so much his own as his Bretherens afflictions, which
therefore he takes to be his own because they were his Bretherens.

N^hemias.
But memorable is that of noble Nehemias, when he himself was not only at
liberty, but in eminency at Court, being the kings cup bearer, did he not yet
feel in himself his brethrens affliction at Jerusalem, as if he had been
afflicted with them. First he remembered them though far remote from them; for
Nehem. 1.2.
he enquired for them of Hanani and those that came from them how they did. And
hearing of their great affliction, he showed his compassion with them, by his
passion for them; for Ver. 4.
He sat down and wept and mourned certain days, and fasted and prayed
before the God of heaven. All his own dignity was no solace to him as long as
his brethren were in misery. For when he presented the cup to the king, and
the king, reading in his face the sorrows of his heart, demanded him, Nehem.
2.
why is thy countenance sad seeing thou art not sick? his reply showed that it
Why should not (says he) my countenance be sad, And those pious Hebrews to
whom this epistle is written, The holy Hebrews.
are commended by the divine penman because Heb. 10.34. Our Saviors example.
they had compassion on him in his bonds. Our blessed Savior presses this
duty upon us by his own example as well as by his doctrine. He being free
because bound with us; being rich, because poor with us, being God because man
with us. This he did with us and for us, that though we cannot do the same for
our brethren, yet we should do the like with them, Isay. 53.4.
Surely he has borne our griefs and carried our sorrows: Heb. 4.15.
He was in all things tempted as we are but without sin. And therefore he
cannot choose but be touched with a feeling of our infir^^^ies: Heb. 2.18. Pati
voluit ut compati sciret, miser fieri ut discere^ misereri. Bern. de grad.
humilit.
For in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted: yea therefore he would suffer and be tempted that he
might the more feelingly succor us in our temptations. And (as a devout
Author says) He would suffer for us, that he might know to suffer with us: he
himself would become miserable that he might the better commiserate us: that
as Heb. 5.8.
he learned obedience by the things which he suffered, so he might also learn
compassion. Not as if he knew not before how to be merciful ( Psalm. 139.17.
Quod natural sciebat ab aeterno temporali voluit discere experimento 10. Ibid.
whose mercy is from everlasting to everlasting) but that which he knew for
ever by nature he would learn in time by experience. If therefore he who was
not miserable would be miserable that he might learn that which he knew
before, namely to be merciful, how much more ought thou* O man, (I say not
make thy self that which thou art not, but) consider that which thou art,
namely miserable, thereby to learn that which otherwise thou know not, to
commiserate those who are miserable?

The Apostle presents us with a sound reason why there should be a Sympathy
among Christians. We are all members of one body, and we do find in our
natural body, that 1. Cor. 12.26.27. Ecce spinam calcat pes: Quid tam long ab
oculis quam pes? Long est loco, proxime est charitatis affectu. Augustine. T.
10. ho. 15.
If one member do suffer all the members do suffer with it. A thorn pricketh
the foot: what so far off from the head as the foot? but though distant in
situation they are near in affection. The heart being only in the foot, the
whole body is busied, every member officiously offers to be a Surgeon, or to
seek and send for one as if it self were wounded. The head is whole, the
back is sound, the eyes, ears, hands are all safe, the foot only is grieved,
yea the foot it self is well save in that very place where it is grieved. How
is it then that the pain of that one part extends to the whole; By the
compassion of charity which enclineth every member to succor one, as if every
one suffered in that one.

Lingua dicit, quid me calcas? Non ipsa calcata est. Calcas me charitas dicit.
id. ibid.
Observe the same in a prease of people: The toe is trodden on; the tongue cries
out, why do you tread on me? It Is not the tongue but the toe that (...). Why
then complains the tongue, thou treadest on me. The compassion of unity (says
the tongue) causes me to cry out thou treadest on me, because thou treadest on
my fellow-member. If thus in the natural body, how much more in the mystical?
Why should not the smarting of any one be the suffering of every one, seeing
that the members are not more naturally compacted in the natural body then the
members of Christ are in the mystical?

The rule of equity requir^s of us this duty.
And does not the rule of equity require this duty of us? we are ready to
rejoice with them that rejoice* Is it not right then that we should mourn with
them that mourn? We do willingly participate with our brethren in their good,
why then should we not partake with them in their evils? 1. Cor. 12.26.
If one member be honored all the members rejoice with it. The whole body
accounts it self adorned with the crown on the head, decked with the Diamond
on the finger. Is it not right then that if one member do suffer, all the
members should suffer with it. we are ready to feast with our brethren, Why
then should we refuse to fast with them? If we will not pledge them in the cup
of their sufferings why should we drink with them the pleasant wine of their
comforts? And surely without this Sympathy there cannot be in us any true tovch
of mercy and charity. Without this Sympathy there can be no true mercy or
charity.
To put our selves in our brethrens case is the only course to make us
feelingly to pity them, charitably to relieve them. Then shall the bowels of
our mercy be enlarged toward them, when we even feel our selves straightened in
the same bonds with them. So far is there mercy in us toward others, as we
find the truth of their miseries in our selves. But they who have not this
feeling can never truly conceive, Neque n^serio tangimur aliorum malis quam diu
aliena esse cogitamus. B^z. ad Text.

Nescit sanus quid sentiat aeger. Et aeger. aegro, and jejunus jejuno quanto
proprius tanto familiarius compatiuntur. Bern. ubi supr.


much less daily remember, least of all charitably releeve others in their
distresses. Well says a worthy one; We can never be seriously touched with
other men's evils as long as we conceive of them as other men's, not as our own.
The sound man knows not what aileth the sick; but the sick and the sick,
the hungry and the hungry suffering together, do best know how to pity each
other.

Polus a famous Actor among the Grecians (as is recorded of him) being to
represent on the stage Electra mourning for the death of her brother Orestes
and bearing in her hands his Vrne, instead thereof he brought forth the Vrne of
his own deceased Son, that by the apprehension of his own, he might the
more feelingly act another passion. Doubtless (dear Christians) we shall
never act to the life the Christian part of sorrowing for our perplexed
brethren, unless we look on their thraldom as on our own, as if their
lashes did fall upon our loins, as if our hands were galled with tugging their
oars, and our selves stinted to their hungry diet of bread and water.

Notwithstanding all this, some there are (who yet would seem to be Christians
(of a Stoicall disposition, Use. Reproof of some seeming Christians who are
insensible of their brethrens sufferings.
without passion, save in their own sufferings, without compassion of their
brethrens. Other men's sorrows and sighs do no more move them then the
roaring of the clifs do the Rocks and Oaks that are about them: Like unto
Galli^ Act. 18.17. Alexander Pheraeorum Tyrannus: Vid. Aelian. de Var. hist. l.
14. c. 40. Exhortation to Sympathize with our brethren in their bonds.
who cared not though the mad Greeks did beat sober Sosthenes before his face,
while the blows fell not upon his own bones. Fabulous stories, feigned
Tragedies will sooner moove them, then the true relation of their brethrens
calamities. Such was that Tyrant who could not refrain weeping when he heard a
player acting a passionate part in a Tragedy, but never relented at the many
murders committed by his command on his innocent subjects.

Learn we (dear Christians) by our Saviors both doctrine and example to be
better affected toward our afflicted brethren. Remember we them who are in
bonds while we are at liberty, those who are in danger while we are in safety,
those who are in mourning under any kind of affliction while we are in joy and
jollity. Praised be God, we sit every man under his vine, and under his
fig tree. There is no leading into captivity, no crying out in our streets: We
are at leisure to read the Gazette, the Corante, Gallobelgicus relations of
combustions in every kingdom of Europe, but find nothing of any such in
England. Non quia vexari quenquam est jucunda voluptas, sed quibus ipse malis
carens quia cernere suave est. Lucretiu^.
We stand safe on the shore while we see others tossed in the sea, not without
an unpleasing pleasing prospect, displeased to see others embroyled, but
pleased to find our selves exempted. Happy are the people that are in such a
case, but not happy if insensible of their brethrens unhappiness. God having
made all calm about us has left us only leisure to look and lament the
storms of others. How happy are we if we know and thankfully acknowledge our
own happiness, and with a Christian compassion remember our brethrens
miseries? The one cannot but make us thankful unto God for our selves, the
other charitable unto others.

Are we Christians indeed and not in title only? How can we but relent in the
midst of our mirth, when we remember our Christian brethren in France, in the
Palatinate, Bohemia, and all Germany, and especially our own ountry-men in
Barbary in most barberous slavery? Vobiscum illic in carcere quodammodo and nos
sumus; seperari delectionem spiritus non sinit: Vos illic confessio, me
affectio in^^^dit. Cyprian. ep. 16.
These thoughts should season all our mirth, and when we are most free out
selves we should feel our selves burdened with their bonds. We should say in
our hearts concerning them as that blessed Martyr did sometimes write to the
captived christians in his days: I my self am in some sort preseent with you
in the prison. The spirit will not suffer love to be separated: You are laid up
for your confession, I am shut up with you in affection. Who cannot grieve in
such grievances of his fellow members? Who will not account their sufferings
his smarting? Compassion sometimes accepted without contribution, but
contribution never without compassion.
Especially if he consider the preciousnesse of this compassion in the sight of
God. Compassion is sometimes accepted and rewarded without contribution, but
never contribution without compassion. The alms of the mind is sometimes
treasured up in Gods bag without the alms of the hand, but the alms of the
hand is not esteemed by him without the alms of the mind. If thou relievest
with thy money, but bemoanest not with thine heart, thou-maist profit the
receiver, but there accrueth neither profit nor comfort to thy self. 1. Cor.
13.3.
If I give all my goods to the poor, and have not charity it profits me
nothing. It may profit them, but it profits not me. Compassion is the purse
out of which thine alms must be drawn; if this be wanti^g thou put the
wages of thy work into an empty bag. Many will rather give to the needy, then
grieve for their need. Some will seem to grieve, but will not give. Both must
concur where ability is not wanting. But if disability do deny giving,
charity must supply it by grieving. Then does God look cheerfully on thine
alms when thou look woefully on thy brothers want. Wealth and vainglory do
sometimes make men to give, Gregor. Moral. in Job. l. 12. c. 27. Plus autem
nonnunquam ess^ dicimu^ compati ex cord, qua^ dare, quod quisquis perfect
indigenti compatitur minus aestimat omne quod dat id c. 28. Exter^^ra largieus
rem extra semetipsum praebuit. id ibid.

This affection must not be without action.


not compassion and mercy. But He gives royally who with that which he
reaches out to an another receives into himself the need and want of the
receiver, and so makes a royal exchange, taking part of the others sorrows,
and making the other partaker of his substance. It is more (says a devout
Author) to pity with the heart, then to give with the band, for he who
perfectly pittieth, little regards how much he gives. Besides he that gives
with hand gives that which is without him; but he that extends to his
brother the bowels of compassion bestows on him that which is within him his
gifts no small part of himself. Many times he gives who does not grieve but
he who truly grieveth, never withholds if he have wherewith to give. -- For
certain it is that, -- True affection (where means do concur with the
mind) will not be without action. If we inwardly suffer with them we will
strain our selves to succor our suffering brethren, either in their own
persons, or mitigating (what we may) their bondage by relieving theirs who
though at liberty do suffer by their bondage. It is a cold compassion that is
not warmed with some contribution, a sorry Sympathy that restrains the bowels
of charity. If the mouth only do bemone them, and the hand endeavor not to
relieve them, Iam. 2.15.16.
what is this but that painted compassion which S. James calls unprofitable? If
a brother or sister be naked and destitute of daily food, and one of you say
unto them. Depart in peace, be warmed and filled, not withstanding you give
them not those things that are needful to the body, what does it profit them?
It profits neither them nor you. Not them, for your warm words cannot cloth
them, nor your fat words fill them. Not your selves, for you kill your good
works in that you do not quicken them with answerable actions. Many there are
who at tables and other meetings when speech is made of their brethrens
grievous bondage in Barbary will presently flash out, Alas poor men, they are
in miserable case, twere better they were out of their lives, God help them,
God comfort them -- No doubt but God does inwardly help and comfort them,
otherwise they could not possible endure. But they who rather command God so to
do, then truly pray to him that he will do so, doing nothing themselves, they
think they have done enough in turning the work over unto God. And by such
verbal pitying without real releiving they bewray that there is no true love
in them, either of God to whom they so pray, or to their brother whom they
seem to pity. For x whosoever has this worlds good and sees his brother to
have need, and shutteh up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the
love of God in that man? And if no love of God then neither of his brother; for
no man loves and so leaves.

God help them, God comfort them! 16 Good words indeed, but only words;
whereas men in misery need not words, but deeds of charity. To wish well only
is but a livelesse carcass. 1. Ioh. 3.^7. Nemo amat and deserit. Augustine.
Tract. 49. in Joan.

Praeclara verba, sed verba, cum pauperes verbis non indigent. Bern. Tu si ex
animo forte velis cui benefactum, Add operam: sola cadaver est voluntas. Iul.
Scalig. Epidorp. lib. 4.


The fig tree which our Savior cursed for having leaves only and not fruit, is
an Emblem of those who have charitable words without answerable actions. More
pleasing unto God is the forward fig tree, to which fruit is instead of leaves:
It is not yet apparalled with leaves when it is adorned with fruit. Mat. 21.9.
Praeco quae ficui pro foliis and flor bus fructus est: nondum foliis vestitur
and fructibus exornatur.
The fig tree (says the spouse in the Canticles) puts forth her green
figs, (not her green leaves) and the vines with the tender grapes do give a
good smell. That tree is most acceptable unto God which has not only the
leaves and flowers of good words but the fruits of good works. Luke 6.44.
As every tree is known by his own fruit, (not by his leaves or blouth) so is
every Christian known by his good works, not by his good words. Mat.
2.12.8.29.30.
Of the two Sons he is commended who first told his father flatly that he
would not do what was commanded, Cantic. 2.13.
but upon better advisement went and did it, before him who smoothly said he
would do it, but departed and did it not. Of the two rather give me him, who
first denies but afterward does that which is good and helpful to his
brother, then one who speaks him fair, but does nothing for him. Let
therefore some contribution with the hand speak feelingly the inward
compassion of the heart. No sooner read we of Christians in Scripture, but we
find in them this active compassion.
This will speak us to God, Angels, and men to be true Christians. For

So inseparably cleaves this Sympathy with our brethren in their sufferings
unto true Christianity, that we no sooner find Christians to be named in
Scripture but we find in them this active compassion. In the first and truest
Ecclesiastical history we read that Act. 11.26.
The Antiochians were the first that were called Christians. Immediately after
this their profession, is recorded the ever deeming thereof by their charitable
providing for their distressed brethren. For when Ver. 27.28. Direction for the
right manner of contribution to our brethren in their necessities, particularly
to those who are in Turkish bondage.

Five rules according to the example of the Antiochians.


Aggabus prophesied of a great dearth shortly to ensue these Proto-Christians
resolved to send relief to their brethren in Iudaea, which they did by the
hands of Barnabas and Saul. Where you may observe five things concurring in
their contribution.

They did it.

1 Generally: 2 Bountifully: 3 Cheerfully: 4 Timely: 5 Trustily.

1 They did it Generally; for all the Christians in general, and every one in
particular concurred in this contribution.

2 Bountifully; for every one contributed according to his ability.

3 Cheerfully; They never pinched at it, nor demurred on it, but at first
hearing resolved to do it.

4 Timely; for they did wait till the brethren in Iudaea sought or besought
them, but as soon as they heard of a Dearth presently they sent relief, yea
by a forward supply prevented the famine.

5 They did it Trustily, for what was contributed they sent by trusty
messengers, Barnabas and Saul.

Do it generally.
Let us (dear Christians as near as we may) follow the precedent of these
prime Christians.

First, what is to be done in this kind, let it be done generally. His
Majesty's letters patent in our captived brethrens behalf were larger then any
granted heretofore for other collections. Others limited to certain Counties,
Shires, Cities. This extended over the whole land, that every one according to
his ability should advance such a pious work. As the Apostle admonishes the
Corinthians concerning the relieving of the brethren at Jerusalem, 1. Cor.
16.^.
Let every one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him: And
again, 2. Cor. 9 7.
Every one as he purposes in his heart, so let him give. Every one; For 2.
Cor. 8.13.
some must not be burdened that others may be eased; save that some who abound
ought to burden themselves, that others who are not so able, Exigenti parvum
aliquid dato: neque n. parvum est ei qui rebus omnibus caret. Gregor: Nazianz.
Orat. 27. De pauper: cura.
may be eased. They who have a little let them impart a little out of their
little. Scarce any widow but has a mite to spare. A little is much to him who
has not so much as a little. Any thing is welcome to him who has nothing, and
a little from many will be much to a few.

Do it bountifully. They who are rich in wordly goods must be rich in good
works, that they may be double rich. They who abound in ability let them also
abound in charity. Bountifully.
As God has prospered him, so let him give, said the Apostle. Has God given
bountifully unto you, and will you give niggardly unto them, that is, unto him?
Does he say by his Apostle? 2. Cor. 9.6.
He that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he that sows bountifully
shall reap bountifully. And shall he reap sparingly from you who has sowed
so bountifully on you? Do you not read that Luke 12.48.
To whom much is given of him much shall be required? And can you think that
no more is required of you then of those to whom so little, so nothing is given
in comparison of you? Shame you not that all things should abound unto you,
save the best of all, your charity? With what face can you pray unto God with
David; Psalm, 51.1.
Have mercy upon me O Lord, according to thy great mercy, when you extend so
little mercy to him in his members out of your great ability?

Cheerfully.
Do it cheerfully, as the Apostle advises: Not grudgingly or of necessity but
of a willing mind: For God loves a cheerful giver. 1. Cor. 9.7.20. Laeandum
est no^ lugendum cum beneficium damus. Affectus tuus nomen imponit operi:
qualiter a te proficiscitur, sic a Deo aestimatur. Ambros Offic. In ipso
misericordiae opere plus solet apud aeternum judicem pensari quam factum.
Gregor Moral in Job l. 19. c. 20.
He loses his good work who does it not with a good will, he doubles it that
does it with alacrity. This seed must be sown as with a full hand, so with a
free heart, and a cheerful countenance. It is thine affection that does
Christen and give the name to thine action. As it proceeds from thee so is it
esteemed by God. God who in some cases accepts the will for the deed, in this,
respects the will more then the deed. For without this willingness in
giving, the gift though never so great, is not accepted. It is otherwise here
then in the Psalm, Psalm. 126.5 6.
They who sow in tears shall reap in joy. But here, they who sow in tears as
if they wept for every penny that departs from them, must not look for a
joyful reaping.

Do it timely, least the trivial Proverb overtake your lazy charity, While
the grass grows the horse starves. Herein follow the Antiochians example,
whose relief prevented their brethrens want. Aggabus did not say that there
was a dearth already, but only foretold of a dearth that should be, and
immediately they sent away, that their speedy charity might anticipate their
brethrens indigency. Do as the Apostle wills the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 9 5.
Make up before hand your bounty that the same may be ready. Timely
-- Let us boast of you, brethren, as he does of them; 2 Cor. 9.2.
I know the forwardness of your mind, for which I boast of you to them of
Macedonia Achaia was ready a year ago, and your zeal has provoked many. Let
Solomon's counsel cause you to give a quick loose to your liberality: Pro.
3.27. Hebr. a Dominis ejus, nimirum cohibiti boni ejus Dominum illum efficit
necessit^s, and le dispensatorem Dous lunius alloc. ^tem T. C.
Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of
thine hand to do it. Observe, from them to whom it is due, that is from the
owner, from the master of it, as the Original will well bear, Know that in
this case thou art not owner of thine own, not master of thine own money. It
is not his who has it but his who wants it. He has more right to it then
thy self who has more need of it then thy self: delaying to give unto him,
thou deniest him his own. His necessity makes him the master of it; God thee
the Steward only. Prove. 3.28.
Say not to thy neighbor go, and come again, and to morrow I will give thee
when thou have it by thee. Adjourne not thy benevolence, give not thy gift a
nights lodging, let not him who needs it lie one night without it. Why
should thou turn him off till to morrow who needs it to day, who needed it
yesterday yea many days since? Mercy is a thing that brooks no delay; misery
of all things cannot endure demurrers. If Christ said unto him who should
betray him, Ioh. 13.27.
That thou do, do it quickly* Much more says he to them who should relieve
him, That which you mean to do, do it timely. Bis dat qui cito dat.
Twice your gift by timely giving it.

One thing remains, Trustily.
They did it trustily: Act. 1.30.
They sent their benevolence by the hands of trusty men, Barnabas and Saul. It
was a principal care of the Apostles to entrust men of experienced
faithfulness with the conveying of their contributions, that what was
charitably conferred might be safely conveyed. Therefore commonly they employed
not one single person, but two at least, and both these singular for their
integrity. Here they employ both Barnabas and Saul, men of whose faithfulness
there could be no suspicion. One of them, Barnabas, Act. 4.37.
Sold his land and laid it at the Apostles feet: And was it likely that he who
gave away his own would defraud the faithful of the bounty of others? The
other, Saul, was now become Paul, of a persecutor an Apostle; so industrious
and zealous in his function that he used not his lawful 1. Cor. 9.12.18.
power of living by the Gospel which he preached, but labored with his hands
because he would not be burdensome. And was it probable that with the same
hands he would intervert the charity of others to his own use, defrauding both
the brethren who contributed, and those who were to be relieved? At another
time they employ Titus, and not him alone, but they join with him 2. Cor. 8.18.
the brother whose praise is in the Gospel throughout all the Church, namely
S. Luke, say some; Barnabas, say others; certainly a man of approved industry
and honesty, knowing that in a matter of such consequence as this, two are
better then one, though one be never so good. I must not say what the country
says, Only I pray that something may be done in this kind bountifully and
timely and what is so done may be trustily conveyed and accordingly employed by
some approved Barnabas and Saul.

Thi^ should be done with the speedier expedition, least cruelty should compel
any of these miserable captives to enthrall themselves to a more miserable
captivity; and, to be freed from the bonds of Turks, to render themselves over
to the bondage of Satan, as too many have done; renouncing Christ because they
could not receive relief from Christians, who to free their bodies have made
Gallyslaves of their souls.

How we are to remember those whom Turkish cruelty has enforced to renounce
Christianity.
O let us remember them whom pain and torment have enforced to forget that ever
they gave their names to Christ. Remember to mourn for them, to pity them, to
pray that if it be possible (and with God nothing is impossible) they may be
freed from the snare of the Devil. Insult not over their fall. Peradventure
had thou been in their case thou would not have endured half the lashes
that they have done; but (as did a more valiant soldier then thy self)
before the Cock crew twice thou would have denied thy master thrice. Christ
should have had three denialls before thou would have endured half their
conflicts. Cum singulis pectus meum copulo, maeroris and funeris pondera
luctuosa participo. In prostratis fratribus and me prostravit affectus.
Cyprian. de laps.


Even in this their foul and fearful defection there is due from us a
Sympathy toward them, such as S. Cyprian extended toward them who revolted in
persecution* I join my heart (says he) with every one of them, I lay the
lamentable burdens of my sorrows on their shoulders. The same arrows of the
raging enemy that have pierced their bowels have passed through my sides.
Infirmity has foiled my brethren and affection has cast me down in them.

But why should we mourn for them who mourn not for themselves? But why
should we not so much the more mourn for them, (as 1. Sam. 15.35.
Samuel did for Saul) both because they have committed that for which they
should mourn, and do not mourn for that which they have committed? And who
knows whether they do not mourn? They may have received the abominable
circumcision in their flesh, but not in their hearts. Some of them have
professed so much in their private letters to their friends that outwardly they
are Mahumetans, but in mind they remain Christians. Excuse them I cannot. My
soul does weep in secret for their sins. No less cause have we to shed
tears for too many Renegadoes that remain among us, Roarers, Blaspeamers,
Sons of Belial, Usurious Jews, who profess Christians and live Mahumetans,
Apud intimum arbitrum commissa quisque perfect diluit propria, qui vere
plangi^ aliena. Gregor. Moral. in Job* l. 20. c. 28.
living under Baptism worse then many of them in their cursed circumcision. Be
they as bad as you can conceive them, the greater cause we have to mourn for
them. If by our mourning we profit not them, yet we advantage our selves. That
man washes away his own sins who truly weepeth for another. The tears
which do not fructify the soil for which they are shed, may be fruitful to
the soul from whence they are sent.

COMPASSION TOWARD CAPTIVES.
The third Sermon.
HEB. 13.3. -- as bound with them.


FOrcible are the Motives inciting us to this duty of fellow-suffering with our
brethren, Impediments of this compassion remooved.
in all their sorrows, chiefly in their sorrowful bondage. But it is in vain
to use Motives until the Impediments be remooved whereby Satan and man's
corruption do hinder many from this compassion.

The first is an Apathy or senceless^ stupidity that is in many men.
Sencelesnesse of our own sufferings.
They are insensible of their own sufferings. They feel not the hand of God,
when for their sins (peradventure for this of not pitying their brethren) he
lays heavy strokes upon them. Of dough-bak't Ephraim the Prophet complains
that Hos. 7.8.9.
strangers had devoured his strength yet he knew it not; gray hairs were here
and there upon him yet he perceived it not. They who are thus insensible of
their own sufferings, how can they condole others? Labor for a tender heart,
apprehensive of the least frown of our heavenly Father, deeply sensible of
every fillip of his finger in displeasure, then shall your compassion extend it
self more viscerally toward your afflicted brethren.

Imped. 2. sensuality.
A second Impediment is Epicurisme or sensuality: For when men are soaked in the
pleasures, and drowned in the delights of this present world, they have no
remorse of others distresses, yea they fear least the very thought of others
grief should drown all their mirth. You heard out of the Prophet Amos, that
this made the secure Israelites forget the affliction of Joseph; and out of the
Gospel, that it caused the pampered glutton to neglect ulcerated Lazarus at
his doors.

Pride and stateliness.
Pride and Stateliness is a third. Some are so lofty that they disdain to
look so low as to take notice of their poor brethrens distress. If mention
be made of our miserable brethrens thraldom in Barbary, What are they (say
these) but a company of base creatures, such as the world may well spare? What
shall we talk of them or trouble our selves about them? The very voice of the
blatant beast? Sure it is that without humility, we shall never have any true
tincture of this Sympathy. Therefore when the Apostle exhorts to this
compassion, Romans 12.15.16.
Weep with them that weep, and be of like affection one toward another,
immediately he enters a caveat against pride, Be not high minded; and exhorts
to humility, condescend to men of low estate. Your high minded men do scarce
think Christ good enough to be their head, because he stoopt so low as to wash
his Disciples feet. Get we once to be humble, or else we shall never learn
to be truly charitable.

Imped. 4. Covetousness.
But the very cut throat of compassion, the Antipathy to all Christian
sympathy, the Hell that devoures all pity, commiseration; compassion toward
our brethren, is Covetousness. This dries up the streams of mercy, and
exhausteth the veins of charity. This makes one to be no more moved with the
grone^ sighs, tears of Widows, Orphans, Captives, then wit^ (...) whining of
a whelp, or the peeping of a chick. The cry of the horse-leach ever ringing in
the misers ears, Give, Give, so drownes the cry and complaint of the poor
that he hears no more the Lazars bell nor the prisoners fetters, then we do
what is now said among the Antipodes. But like those who dwell at the fall of
the river Nilus the continual voice of his own covetous desires do deafen
him against all complaints of others. Athis avaru^ contrahit Manus recurvas,
and volam plicans aduncis unguidas laxare nervos non valet. Prudent. Peri
steph. Laurent. Busbeq. Tune. Ep. 3. Similia habentur apud Nazianzen. Orat. 27.
de Pauper cura.


Covetousness has taught him the Devils Logic, he is all for clutching the
fist, he cannot learn the Christian Rhetoric of extending the palm in
charitable contribution.

Our covetous Nabals have their Topics, common places, whence they fetch
arguments against giving and relieveing: They offer to defend their Baal by
Gods book which does utterly overthrow it. Busbequius a grave Author,
sometimes Ambassador to the great Turk from the German Emperor, reports how
forward the Christian Merchants were in Pera (a place adjoining to
Constantinople) for the redeeming of certain Christians there held captives.
Only there was one out of whose fingers could not be wrung one farthing
toward the advancement of this charitable design. His reasons were more
unreasonable then his refusal, What these men are (said he) I know not; this I
know, that their affliction is from God. Let them continue in that case into
which God has cast them, until it please him to free them: seeing it pleased
God thus to punish them who am I that should release the^, unles I would be
found to fight against God. O cunning Sophister Satan, who by arguments from
the will of God can impugn the will of God, and from his providence maintains
covetousness, the maine opposite unto Gods providence. Mine Author gives not
the name of this monster. Only he says that he was an Italogrecian, a mungrel
between a Greek and an Italian. Such as his lineage was such was his language.
God forbid that there should be among us such mungrels to bark out such dogged
speeches. Imped. 5. Pretended want.
This is certain, Compassion can have no admitta^^e into the heart, where the
evil spirit, covetousness, (...) possession.

A fifth impediment is, pretended want. I am poor my self, I have a great
charge of mine own, I am in the Usurers bands, as hard a thraldom as some of
them do endure in Sally or Algier. What of all this? Thou should remember
them the sooner; and by thine own affliction conceive more feelingly of
theirs. But I have not wherewith to supply them. But thou have wherewith to
pity them, wherewith to pray for them. Charitas de sacculo non er^gatur. Si
nihil habes collachrima. Magnum est infortunato remedium compassio, ac sincere
condolere calamitatem magnopere levat. Nazian. ubi supr.

Nam viscera, id est compassionem, non claudit a proxim^ indigentiam patienti,
qui si posset, vellet subvenire. Bern. de. Pass. Ser. 32.


All charity is not drawn out of the bag? Instead of a great gift give grief,
give tears, give compassion. Condolement is no small comfort to him that
suffers. A pitiful, a pitying heart is many times no small alms. He does
not shut up his bowels from his afflicted brother, who affords him compassion,
whereby he shows that he would relieve him if he were able. God, who requires
a good work of such as are able, accepts the good will of such as are unable.
2. Cor. 8.12. Si non das compassionis affectum, qui quo plus datur plus
abundat, quomodo terrenam substantiam dares quae divisa minuitur? Bern ubi
supr. We should not estrange our affections from them, because they are
strangers unto us.
If there be first a willing mind it is accepted according to that which a man
has, and not according to that which he has not. If thou will not afford thy
distressed brother a place in thy memory, thou will hardly afford him any part
of thy money. If thou will not allow him the affection of compassion, which the
more it is extended the more it is augmented: how would thou extend to him
thy earthly substance, which the more it is distributed the more it is
diminished?

But they are strangers unto me, neither kiffe nor kin* I never saw their faces
nor heard of their names. They have friends, acquaintance, kindred of their
own, let them relieve them. But they are of thine own religion, thine own
nation, thine own nature: And is not the least of these sufficient
acquaintance when they are in misery? Is it not both thine and their Makers
charge? Isai. 58.7.
When thou see the naked thou shall cover him; any naked, whether neighbor
or stranger, known or unknown, that is all one. Thou see his nakedness,
thou know his need, that is sufficient for acquaintance. Mark the motive
annexed: Thou shall not hide thy self from thine own flesh. Is there any
better known or nearer kin to thee then thine own flesh? If thou hidest thy
face from him in his need thou hidest thy self from one who is nearer kin to
thee then thy nearest cosen by blood, even from thine own flesh. Holy Job
professes that while he was in his prosperity Job. 31.19. Apud piam mentem
plus natura valet quam notio: nam and unusquisque qui indiget eo ipso quod homo
est ei jam incognitus non esi. Gregor. Moral. l. 21. c. 14.
he saw not any perish for want of clothing, nor any poor without covering.
He says not, any of my kindred, or any of my acquaintance, but not any poor.
Unto pious minds Nature is a better Orator then notion. No man who is in
need, even in this regard that he is a man, should be a stranger unto us.

Our Redeemer did not stand upon these nice points of kindred and acquaintance,
when he freed us from our most miserable bondage. But though Ephesians. 2.11.12.
We were Gentiles in the flesh, Aliens from the common wealth of Israel,
strangers from the covenant of promise; yet all this could not estrange his
compassion from us, but he did and suffered more for us, then it is possible
any man can do for his brother, his father, or best benefactour. Can then any
Christian be unknown to him to whom Christ is known? Do we say that we are
united to the Head and can we be unacquainted with any member of the body?
Their hunger, their bonds, their burdens, their blows are not these
sufficient for commiseration, though we never saw their persons?

Motives inciting us to this compassion. Motive, 1. From Nature 1. In our
selves.
But the more to move us to compassionate these our barbarously oppressed
brethren, let us (in the last place) lay to your hearts, these few among many
forcible incentives.

First, Nature it self incites us to this Sympathy. This natural instinct we
find in our own bodies. Et illud quoque mirandum est, quod uno oscitante, and
nos quoque, nisi advertimus, oscitamus, and alio edente acerbaquaedam, saliva
alteri in os profilit* Fracastor. de sympath. and Antipath. cap. 1.
Whence is it that one in a company yawning or gaping, the rest do so likewise
unless they prevent it? That one eating bitter or tart meats others teeth do
water and are set on edge? Is there such a Sympathy in our bodies? Why not much
more in our minds?

In brute beasts. Si enim tauri cum tau^um mortuum invenerint, plorant,
mug^unt and quitusdam dibitis humanitatis ^bsequiis fratris funera
prosequuntur, quid debet homo homini, quem and ratio docet and trahit affectio?
Bern. de triplic. genet. honor.
From our selves desend we to brute beasts. We find in them a kind of
compassion toward their kind. The wild bulls do bellow in the fields or woods
if they find one of their fellows slain, and by kind obsequies do
celebrate their brothers funerals.

What brute beast more brutish, more beastly then the swine? Quibus anima est
prosale. Vario.
Whose life (says one) is given them only to keep their flesh from
purrifying? Yet if one of them be tangled in some gate or hedge, you may
observe how his cry calls the whole heard that is within hearing to come to
him, if they cannot, yet they fall a crying with him as if they craved help
for their fellow.

Come we unto senseles Creatures. As in some things there is an Antipathy, so
there is a Sympathy in others. Vaisono in cithara tacto moveri and aliud uniso
number videmus. Fracastur. ubi supr.

Motive. 2. From Grace.


Touch but one string in a lute, and another sounds though not near unto it.
I omit the Sympathy between the lodestone and the iron, between Amber and
straw, jet and an hair, rare secrets in nature, common in trial. Out of the
premises I argue thus: If our own natural bodies, if brute creatures, which
are led only by sense, yea if senseless creatures by an occult quality be thus
affected one toward another, In senseles creaturus.
then what ought Christians to do who are endued with reason, enlightened with
religion, and led or rather drawn with natural affection? Now if nature do
teach us this compassion, how much more Grace, and that sundry ways. As first
by that argument that we are all members of one mystical body, and
fellow members one with another, which has been formerly urged.

Of this body the Head is Christ, who has showed this sympathy by his own
example, which also has been evidenced already. Because we are all fellow
members 2. Christ our head his own example; as formerly.
To which let this be added out of one of the ancients; Quam videlicet pietatis
formam, Mediator nobis Dei, and hominum dea^t, quicum posset nobis etiam non
moriendo concurrere, succurrere tamen moriendo hominibus volu^t, quia nos
videlicet minus amasset nisi and vulnera nostra susciperet, nec vim suae
dilectionis ostenderet, nisi hoc quod a nobis tolleret ad tempus ipse
sustiner^t. Gregor. Moral. in Job. l. 20. c. 27.
This form of piety (says he) Christ the mediator between God and man has
showed unto men, who doubtless without dying might have saved us from Death if
he would: But he rather chose to redeem man by dying for man. His love had
not been so great unto us, unless he had taken upon him our wounds; neither
had he so effectually showed the force of his charity, if he had not for a time
taken on himself that which he came to take from us. He found us mortal who
made us able to continue immortal. And he who by his word so made us, could
have restored us by the same word without his Death. But to show how powerful
his compassion was towads us, he became that for us which he would not have us
continue to be. Himself undertook death for us, that so he might for ever
free us from Death.

Let the same mind be in us Christians toward our fellow members, which was
in our head Christ toward us, otherwise we cannot be true Christians. How
can we hope for salvation by him if we be not living members of his body? If
we be living members then are we feeling members. Tam diu membrum dolet quam
diu in corpore contine^ur. Bern. de mod ben. vivend. s. 13.
As long as the member is in the body it is effected with the grief of any
part of the body. But if it be either dead or cut off from the body, let the
body be dismembered or cut into a thousand pieces, it feels not: so is every
Christian who is not affected with the affliction of another Christian. Such
do show themselves to be no better then rotten branches in the Vine, and must
exspect no better reward then the true Vine awardeth them; John 15.6. Motive.
3. From the persons suffering.
Men do gather such and do cast them into the fire and they are burned.

Besides, if we enter into a due consideration of the persons suffering, how
many things do we meet with, which may moove an obdurate heart to pity them?
They are men; should we see a man beating his horse, his dog, as our men are
beaten by these circumcised dogs, we would pity the poor beast and cry out
that the owner were a verier beast then that he beats.

They are our countrymen and unto many, Our countrymen.
near kinsemen. Were they forraigners and strangers, how could we but relent
at the relation of their miseries? Can any true Christian hear or read without
tears the relation of the Imperialists cruelty in Bohemia or in Magdenburge,
or Spanish Immanities among the West Indians? Yet these were strangers far
remote from us, and these last men of another world.

They are Christians and consequently our brethren. Were they enemies we could
not wish them worse on earth then that which they endure. Christians and
consequently our brethren.
Nay were they Turks a Christian would hardly see without grief, a Turk to
suffer that of others which Christians do of Turks. Can we then hear of
those miseries which men, The living Temples of God.

Considerandum est and hoc, Dei Te^pla esse, quae capta sunt, nec pati nos
longa cessatione and neglecto dolor debere ut Dei Templa captiva sint.
Cyprian. Ep. 60.


our own countrymen, our brethren do endure, and not consider them? Consider
and not compassionate them? Compassionate, and not strain our abilities to the
uttermost to relieve them?

They are the living Temples of God, Should we suffer Gods Temples to be
possessed by Infidels if we could free them? Were our own houses possessed by
thieves, what would we do, what would we not do to clear them? What then
should we not do to redeem the living Temples of the Holy Ghost? In my
thoughts, whenever we dine or sup in our houses that expostulation of the
Lord with the secure Jews should pluck us by the ears; Hag. 1.2. Motive. 4.
The equity of the precept Their case might have been ours, and then we would
have craved of them that which is required of us.
Is this a time, O ye, to sit in your sieled houses, and the house of the Lord
to lie wast? Is this a time for us to feast it in our houses, and to suffer the
houses and Temples of the holy one of Israel to be possessed by mischievous
Mahumetans?

Then from our sorrowful brethren reflect we our thoughts upon our selves,
and in the scales of our own estate weigh we the equity of the precept, which
will not a little incite us to the performance of it. Remember them that are in
bonds as bound with them. What more equitable. You might have been bound with
them, yea you might have been bound and they free; if God had so disposed? You
might have fallen into their bonds, and they enjoyed your freedom. And would
not you then have desired of them what now is required of you toward them?
Well then, you know what their and your Master commands, Whatsoever you would
that men should do unto you the same do unto them. Mat. 7.12.
It might have been your case, it may be your case: you know what is past,
you know not what is to come. Have we not reason to make their case our own,
if we consider that it may be our own? It may be your own! Nay, is it not in
some respects your own already? For, Are you not in the body, as in the end of
this verse? And what is the body but the prison of the soul? Does not every
man living bear about him a walking prison? Is not the soul in bonds while it
is in the body? And it may come to pass before the soul be freed out of this
prison, the body, that the body also may be in bonds and endure captivity. Why
should any man think that any thing incident to man should not befall him
seeing he is a man? That which happens unto one may happen unto any one, and
soonest perhaps unto him, who thinks it impossible that it should happen unto
him. When Manasses was on his throne he little dreamp't of a prison, and that he
should exchange the gold on his head for irons about his heels, yet so he did:
And so did King Zedechias, and the richest of heathen kings, Craesus. So did
some Emperors of Rome; many Emperors of Constantinople, one Emperor of the
Turks. Should God ever cast us into such calamities, we should be the better
able to endure them in our selves, if we had first felt them in others. Then
should we also conceive better hope that God would touch the hearts of others
to compassionate us, if he have once touched ours to commiserate others. But I
will prevent falling into the hands of Turks, Ob.
I trow; I purpose not to adventure on the Seas, or to come so nigh them as to
be caught by them. Grant it. But thou may fall foul with Turks at home, Sol
Land-pyrats, Usurers, Oppressors, or into some other misery that shall
enforce thee to crave commiseration as much as ours do who are in Barbary. And
art thou sure if thou adventurest not thy self on Sea to be safe on land?
Though thou come not near the Turks may not they come too near thee? Did
not others watch for us while we sleep, and did not he watch over us who
neither slumbereth nor sleeps, we might have been surprised by them while we
are sleeping on our beds. See we not how audacious they are grown? How their
shalops brave us at our harbors mouths? What threats have they sent us of
late that ere long they will make some of us see Algier? And who were these but
some of our own nation turned Turks, threatening to bring us unto their own
condition because we would not free them in season?

The lamentable surprising of Baltamore by the Turks.
Can we forget that Tragical transportation of our brethren from Baltamore into
that Babylon, Barbary? All of them English, most of them Cornish, suddenly
surprised in the silence of the night. They dreaded no disaster, they supposed
themselves safe, they went to bed and laid themselves down (as they hoped) to
sleep in safty. When suddenly their houses were broken up, they haled out of
their beds, the husband, wife and children every one fast bound, carried away
in three or four hours, and afterward so separated as not suffered to meet
again, but every one left to lament others misery as well as his own. It was
not with them in that night as the Judge says it shall be at his coming; Luke
17.34. Quis cladem illius noctis.
Two in one bed, the one taken and the other left; But two or three in one bed,
Father, Mother, Child, seven or more in an house all taken and not one left.
What heart at this hour bleedes not at the remembrance of that nights Tragedy?
The wife calls on her husband to help her. How can he help his Other self who
cannot help his own self? The poor child cries, O Mother keep me, O Father
keep me, when Father and Mother are kept fast enough themselves from keeping
and helping theirs. Often had the poor little ones when they were pettish being
terrified with, The bug-beare comes to carry thee away: Now not bug-beares but
Barbary bears are come to carry away Child, Mother, Father and all they can
find in the family. Some lost their lives fighting (but in vain) to save
their wives and children, herein happy that death prevented in them those
miseries which theirs, surviving to greater sorrows do endure. For of the
two, better it is to fall by the hands, then into the hands of those Tyranous
Turks, Proth saevior ense Parcendi rabies, concessaque vita dolori.
whose saving is worse then slaying, who, if they grant life, it is but to
prolong grief. May not the same or the like betide us, if God shall so appoint
it? And are our merits better then theirs that God should not so appoint it?

But what speak I of might have been, or may be? Are we not already in a
far worse bondage then they; Motive. 5. We are in worse band^ then they if we
have no feeling of theirs.
if we have no feeling, no remorse of theirs? They are in corporal bonds, we,
without this compassion, are in spiritual. They under Turks, we under the
Devil. They bought and sold by men, we sold under sin. They under the
tyranny of others, we under our own tyrannous lusts, and affections. Our
barbarous inhumanity is a worse bondage then theirs in Barbary. In such a
captive condition are they who have not this compassion toward their captived
brethren.

But had I words to express (though but in part) the excellency of the work
it would be most powerful to incite us to the performance of it. Motive. 6.
The worthiness of the work.

In redeeming them we redeem our Redeemer, who is captive in them.


Every work is the more excellent by how much the object thereof more
excels. The work is Redeeming: for therefore we are to remember them that
we do our best to redeem them. And who are those who are to be redeemed? They
are not only the Temples of the Lord (as has been showed) but the Lord of the
Temple himself is held captive in them. It is not only our brethrens case, it
might have been ours, it is ours already by the Union of charity, or, if not,
then are we our selves in a worse slavery; but (that which should more nearely
touch us then if it were our own case) it is his who should be nearer to us
then our selves, it is our Lord and Masters, our Savior and Redeemers case.
For, does not he himself complain that they who neglected his, in this very
case, neglected him? Mat. 25.43.
I was in prison and you visited me not. The head and members cannot be
separated. I was in prison because mine were. I because they were in whom I am
and they in me. As there is no good which any of mine do, but I do it in
them, so there is no evil which they suffer for my sake but I suffer it with
them. Otherwise I would not have cried out from heaven to Saul persecuting my
Church upon earth; Act. 9.4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

If then we will not redeem our brethren let us redeem our Father: if not our
fellow members, yet our head, if not men, yet God: if not Christians, yet
Christ. Let us redeem him from bonds who redeemed us from Death: Him from
corporal servitude who redeemed us from the slavery of sin: Let us redeem
him with a small portion of our perishable substance (which this way employed
shall not perish) who redeemed us, 1. Pet. 1.18 19.
not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with his precious blood,
more worth then a million of worlds.

Should we leave our native country and sail into Barbary, and there offer our
selves to bondage for our brethren, saying unto their Pateroones; Free these
men and take us, we will be* your slaves in their steeds, we could do no more
(nay, God knows, nothing near so much) for them, as he who is captive in them
has done for us. If therefore we will not remember them for their sakes, let
us remember them for his sake, let us remember them for our own sakes, that the
great redeemer, who is also the great rewarder to every good work, (especially
of this) may one day in mercy remember us; which shall be the last (but should
not be the least) incitement unto us.

Motive. 7. The excellency of the reward.
Certain it is that the more excellent the work is, the more excellent shall
be the reward. This then being so excellent a work as the redeeming of our
redeemer himself in his captived members, shall not want a most excellent
recompense.

And were there no other recompense then the acknowledgement of this kindness
(regarding the disparity between the persons) yet this were need enough to
any noble mind. If it be an honor to a subject for the King to acknowledge
with his own mouth in the presence of all his nobles that sometimes he was
beholding to him, what will it be when the King of Kings shall one day
acknowledge and publish that he was (in a manner) beholding unto man? O how
comfortable will it be in that great day of Judgment, and of Mercy (of
Judgment to Turks and Tyrants, of Mercy to charitable Christians) when the
Judge himself shall say, I was in prison (...) you came to me. Yea more; you,
by freeing me, procured tha^ I might come to you, might come unto mine own
family, to the Temple of the Lord, to the public service of God, to the Word
and Sacraments, from all which I was (because mine were) debarred. You did that
for them (and in them as far as you could for me) which I did for you. I
redeemed you, and you (in them) redeemed me: I you by taking on me your bonds,
you me by freeing them from bondage, I you from the bondage of hell, you me
from the bondage of hell-hownds; I you by my blood, you me by your benevolence.
Judas his treason was not more grievous and odious unto me, then your
compassion is acceptable. He sold me to the Jews, you have bought me from the
Turks. Your redeeming me less chargeable, more easy by infinite degrees then
my redeeming you, but no less acceptable to me, then if you had shed your
blood for me as I did mine for you.

What an honor will it be, when the King himself sitting in his Majesty shall
publish in the large Amphitheater of the whole world his former misery for your
greater glory, and make known his own sufferings to proclaim your kindness,
holding himself to have been beholding unto you when you have done but your
duties?

Though this acknowledgment be an ample recompense, yet this recompense (you
will say) is but verbal acknowledgment. But this verbal acknowledgment shall
be seconded with a real recompense that shall not be as a lease for years
determinable upon lives, but an inheritance, and that inheritance no less then
of a Kingdom, and that Kingdom not newly erected, but long prepared, so long
as from the foundation of the world, and consequently to continue after the
dissolution of the world, and prepared not by man but by God the Father, and
for none other, but for you, for you, who by your deeds of mercy have
evidenced the sincerity of your faith.

O what a joy, what a crown of rejoicing will it be, when you shall hear from
the mouth of the Judge himself that comfortable call; Mat. 25.34.
(...) ye blessed of my father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. Unto the which Kingdom he bring us, who has prepared
it for us, not for our merits, but out of his own mercy and by the merits of
his dear Son Jesus, To whom our gracius redeemer, together with him the
glorious Father, and the blessed spirit the only Comforter, three Persons in
one Godhead blessed for ever, be ascribed all Praise, Power, Might, Majesty,
Dominion, and Glory, now and always. AMEN. AMEN.

AN EPISTLE OF THAT BLSSED MARTYR St CYPRIAN SOMETIME Bp. OF CARTHAGE. D.
Cypriani. Epistol. 60. Edition. Pamelius.
TO The Bishops of Numidia concerning the Redemption of the Brethren from the
bondage of the BARBARIANS.
Wherein 1 He deploreth the Captivity of the Brethren signified unto him by the
Bishops of Numidia, The argument of the Epistle.
and shows what ought to be the duty of Christians in this regard. 2 To this
end he proposes sundry arguments. 3 The effects of them, in regard of the
Church of Carthage confirmed by other arguments. 4 The Charity and liberality
of that Church toward these Captives, and St Cyprians pious petition.
Cyprian to Ianuarius, Maximus, Proculus his [beloved] Brethren, wishes health.
WITH very great grief of mind, and not without tears, we have read your
letters (most dear brethren) which out of the tenderness of your love you
have addressed unto us concerning the captivity of our Brethren and Sisters.
For who cannot grieve in such occurrents? Or who cannot esteem his brethrens
grief to be his own? seeing the Apostle Paul does say, 1 Cor. 12.26.
If one member does suffer, the other members do suffer with it, and if one
member do rejoice, the other members do rejoice with it. And in an other
place. 2. Cor. 11.29.
Who is weak and I am not weak? We therefore must now esteem our brethrens
captivity to be our own captivity. The sorrow of those who are endangered is
to be accounted our sorrow, seeing we are all united in one body, and not love
so much as religion ought to instigate, and encourage us to redeem the members
of our brethren. For the Apostle says again, Know you not that you are the
Temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells in you. If charity did not
urge us to succor our brethren, yet we should here consider that they are the
Temples of the Lord, who are captived. and that we ought not by long delay and
neglected grief suffer the Temples of the Lord to be long detained captives,
but speedily labor and endeavor the best we may by our best services to
procure Christ, our Judge, our God to be favorable unto us. For seeing the
Apostle Paul says, Gal. 3.37.
As many of you as are Baptized into Christ have put on Christ, in our
captive-brethren we must contemplate Christ himself. And he is to be redeemed
from the danger of captivity, who has redeemed us from the danger of Death;
that he who drew us out of the jaws of the Devil, and remains and dwells
in us, should now himself be delivered out of the hands of Barbarians, and be
ransomed with some part of our money, who ransomed us with his Cross and his
Blood: who in the mean time does therefore permit these things to come to
pass for the trial of our faith, whether every one of us will do for his
brother, that which he would have to be done for himself, if he were now in
bonds under the Barbarians. For what man who is mindful of humanity and well
advised of Christian Charity, if he be a Father, does not think that his sons
are there? If he be an husband, does not with grief and blush of the
matrimonial band esteem that his wife is there held captive? But how are we
all in common greived and vexed for the danger of the Virgins who are there
detained? In whom not only the loss of liberty, but depriuement of chastity is
to be bewailed, and not so much the bonds of Barbarians, as the impurities of
baudes and brothels are to be bemoned with tears, lest the members dedicated
unto Christ should be defiled with the contagious lusts of their insulters.
All which things we here (as brethren) taking into consideration (according to
your letters) and diligently examining, have readily, willingly, and largly
sent supplies of money to our brethren, being always forward in the work of God,
every one according to the firmness of his faith, but now much more enflamed
to such saving works by the contemplation of so great sorrow. For seeing ou^
Lord says in his Gospel; Matthew. 25.35.36.
I was sick and you visited me. How much more will he say in this case (and
that for our greater reward) I was a captive and you redeemed me? And whereas
again he says, I was in prison and you came unto me, how much more will it be
when he shall begin to say (when the day of judgment shall come, wherein you
shall receive a reward from the Lord) I was closed up in prison of captivity, I
lay bound among the Barbarians, and from that prison, from that bondage you
freed me? In breife, we give you great thanks that you would make us partakers
of your carfulness, and [interest] us with you in so good and necessary an
imploiment, An elegant Metaphor, wherein the captives are compared to fruitful
fields; the alms to seed; the heavenly reward, to the harvest. Pamelius.
as to present unto us fruitful fields, in which we may sow the seeds of our
hope, expecting the harvest of those ample fruits, which do grow and proceed
from such an heavenly and helpful harvest.

Now we have sent one hundred thousand Sesterces that is, So the learned Mr
Brerewood, with the Reverend D^ Hakewell. But the late Reverend B of Hereford
calculates it 791l 13s 4d English money. By Agricolaes calculation of Sesterces,
it will a mount to 833l 6s 8d. reckoning every Sesterce at ad English.
781l 5s sterling, which sum has been raised by the contribution of the
Clergy and Laytie in the Church, over which by the providence of God we are
made overseers; which you shall distribute there and dispose of according to
your diligence. And we desire indeed that there may not be the like occasion
hereafter; but that our brethren being protected by Gods providence may be
preserved safe from such dangers. But if it shall please God, (for the trial
of our charitable mind and faithful heart) that the like shall come to pass
hereafter, delay ye not to acquaint us therewith by your letters, assuring
your selves that the Church and whole society here, as they do earnestly pray
that such things may not be again, so (if they should be) they will willingly
and largely send supplies again.

And that you may remember in your prayers our brethren and sisters, who have
so readily and willingly contributed to this so necessary a work, (that they
may work so always) and in your devotions for them return unto them a
requital of this good work, I have subscribed the names of every one of them,
as also of our Colleagues and fellow-priests who themselves likewise being
present have contributed, both in their own, and in the behalf of their
people, according to their abilities: And besides mine own portion, I have
signified and sent the sum of theirs: Of all whom (as faith and charity
requires) you ought to be mindful in your prayers. Most dear brethren, we
wish you always well to fare.

A PASSAGE CONCERNING THE GOOD AND BENEFIT OF COMPASSION, Extracted out of S.
AMBROSE his second Book of Offices, CAP. 28.
THE greatest incitement unto Mercy is, that we have a fellow-suffering with
others in their calamities, that we succor others in their necessities, as
much as we are able, and sometimes more then we are able. For it is better to
suffer envy for showing mercy, then to pretend excuse for inclemencie. As we
our selves once incurred envy, because we did break up the holy vessels for
the redeeming of captives, which deed displeased the Arians, not so much
because it was done, as that they might have something for which they might
carp at us. For who is so cruel, so yron-hearted, as to be displeased that a
man is to be redeemed from Death, a woman from the pollutions of Barbarians,
which are more grieveous then Death, young maidens, children, Infants from the
contagion of Idols wherewith (for fear of death) they are in danger to be
defiled? Which action though we performed not without sufficient reason, yet we
so defended it before the people, that we maintained it to be much more
convenient for us to preserve for God, souls rather then gold. For he who sent
his Apostles without gold, did also without gold gather the Churches unto
himself. The Church has gold, not that it should keep it, but to disburse it
and employ it for necessary releifes. What need is there to keep that which
does not help when we have need? Know you not how much gold and silver the
Assyrians carried away from the Temple of the Lord? Is it not better that the
Priest should melt up these vessels (if other supplies be wanting) for the
relief of the poor, then that the Sacrilegious enemy should carry them away
and defile them? Will not the Lord say, why did thou suffer so many poor men
to perish through hunger? Surely seeing thou had gold thou should have
offered them nourishment. Why are there so many captives carried away to be
bought and sold, and are not redeemed? Why are there so many slain by the
Enemy? Better it were that thou preservedst these living vessels, then dead
metalls. No answer can be returned to those objections. For what would thou
say? I feared lest the Temple of God should want ornaments. He will answer
thee, the Sacraments seek not gold, neither do they please the more for gold,
which are not purchased with gold. The adorning of the sacraments is the
Redemption of captives. And verily those vessels are precious which do
redeem souls from death. The true treasure of God is that which works the
same which his blood wrought. I then acknowledge it to be the vessel of the
Lords blood, when I find Redemption in both, that the Chalice redeemeth from
the enemies those whom the blood redeemed from sin. What an excellent thing
is it, when multitudes of captives are redeemed by the Church, that it may be
said Those are they whom Christ has redeemed? Behold the gold that is tried,
the profitable gold, the gold of Christ which freeth from death: Behold the
gold whereby Purity is redeemed, Chastity is preserved. I had rather present
these freed unto you then preserve gold for you. This number, this order of
captives, is a fa^re more acceptable sight, then the show of golden goblets.
Thus was the Redeemers gold to be employed, that it should redeem those who
were endangered. I acknowledge the blood of Christ powered into gold, not only
to have shined, but to have imprinted the power of divine operation by the gift
of redemption.

Such Gold did the holy Martyr Laurentius reserve for the Lord, who, when the
treasures of the Church were required of him, promised that he would produce
them. Next day he presented the poor, saying, These are the treasures of the
Church. And these truly are treasures, in whom is Christ, in whom is the faith
of Christ. -- What better treasures has Christ then those in whom he says
that he himself is? For it i^ written, I was hungry and you fed me, I was
thirsty and you gave me drink, I was a stranger and you took me in. And
afterward, That which you have done to one of those, you have done it to me.
What better treasures has Jesus then those in whom he loves to be seen?
These treasures Laurentius shew^d, and prevailed, because the Persecutor
himself could not take them from him. Therefore Iehoiachin, who in the seige
kept the gold and employed it not to provide relief, saw the gold to be
violently carried away, and himself to be led into captivity. But Laurentius
who had rather bestow the Churches gold on the poor, then keep it for the
Persecutor, according to the singular efficacy of the interpretation of his
name, received the sacred Crown of Martyrdom. Was it said to holy Laurentius,
thou ought not to have disbursed the treasures of the Church, nor to have
sold the sacred vessels? Necessary it is, that a man do discharge that office
with sincere faithfulness, and discerning providence. Surely if a man do
derive these treasures into his own advantages, it is iniquity, but if he
bestow them on the poor, and on the redemption of captives, it is mercy. For
no man can say, Why does a poor man live? No man can complain because
captives are redeemed; no man can accuse because the Temple of God is builded:
no man can be offended because the earth is opened for the burial of the
bodies of the faithful, nor grieve because the repose of deceased Christians
is procured in their Sepulchers. For these three causes, it is lawful to
break, to melt, to sell even the consecrated vessels of the Church.

FINIS.

