A GODLY SERMON preached at Paul's Cross the 31. day of October 1591.

By William Fisher, Master and Keeper of the Hospital of Ilford in Essex.

Proverbs. 22. verse. 3. A wise man foreseeth the plague, and hides him self:
But the foolish run on still, and are punished. Seen and allowed.



Imprinted at London (...) Edward Allde, for Edward Agg^ ^^92.

Malachi 3. verse 16, 17. 16 Then spoke they that feared the Lord, every one to
his Neighbor, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of Remembrance
was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his
name. 17 And they shall be to me says the Lord of Hosts, in that day that I
shall do this, for a flock, and I will spare them, as a man spares his own
son that serves him.
THis Scripture was denounced by that Prophet whom the Lord sent to give a
farewell to his people, for Malachi was the last Prophet in Israel, and after
him there was noe more, until John Baptiste came. It is thought of some, that
the Lord in his wrath, and in a just Judgment against Israel, would not
vouchsafe them any more Prophets after Malachi, either to (...) forte them in
their distresses, or to call upon them for the amendment of their lives. But
of other some, it is supposed, that there was not so great a misery meant
against them, as a misterye for their good, which was this, that they should
the more instantly and feruentlye look for and long after the King of
Prophets, Jesus Christ him self. But howsoever it was, of this I am well
assured, Malachi performed his function, so fully and so faithfully, that he
was reputed generallye to have been an Angel sent down from Heaven, rather
then a man borne and bred upon the earth. Not so much because Malachi does
signify an Angel, as that his doctrine did show an Angellike spirit, and did
woork an Angellike effect.

Gregorye 1. being Bishop of Rome, when he saw certain English children
brought thither to be sold, asked of what country they were, it was answered
Angli. English children, where upon the alluded thus, Immo Angeli qui vultu
nitent vt Angeli, Nay rather they are Angels, for that in countenaunee they
shine, and show them selves to be Angels.

So we may say of Malachi he was no question a man, and his name being Malachi,
and not Malach does importe no less by the termination thereof. And Epiphanius
by good proof, ^^es warrantise thereof: yet look we upon the perfourmance of
his office and function, and then we shall find that non solum vultu* sedctiam
spiritu nitet vt Angelus, not only in countenance, but also in spirit, he
does shine like an Angel. For therein he bewrayed an Angellike part, far
passing humane operation. otherwise he would never have wrought such a sudden
and strange conversion in such a senseles and general corruption, wherein
both Priest and Prophet were far from all signs of grace, and not near any
hope of remorse. But sicut populus sic Sacerdos, Imo sicut populus, sic
Sacerdos, as the people were, so were the priests.

For the priest, they despised the name of the Lord, and yet they said wherein
have we despised thy name. ver. 6. Chap. 1. They offered unclean bread upon
the Alter of the Lord, and yet they said, wherein have we polluted it? Verse.
7. Chapter. 1. they sacrificed the corrupt, the blind, the lame, the sick,
such as they durst not present to a mortal Prince, yet they thought the^ good
enough for the Lord of Hosts who is a great King. ver. 14. chap. 1. They were
out of the way, they caused many to fall by the law, they brake the covenant
of Leui, ver. 8. chap. 2. They defiled the holiness of the Lord, and married the
daughters of a strange God, ver. 11. chap. 2. To be short they said that
every one that does evil, is good in the sight of the Lord, and he deliteth
in them. ver. 17. chap. 2.

And now for the people, did not the Lord himself charge and accuse them,
that they were soothsayers, adulterers, false swearers, detainers of the
hirelings wages, oppressors of the widows and the fatherles, ver. 5. chap. 3.
such Atheists that they said, it is in vain to serve God. ver. 14. chap. 3.
Such Mammonistes that they would needs know what profit they should have by
keeping his Commandments ver. 14. ibi. And such rakehels, that they counted
the proud, blessed: and the tempters of God worthy to be advanced. ver. 15.
chap. 3.

In which ripenes and outragiousnes of their sins, Malachi was presentlye sent
to denounce Gods heavy Judgments, and Indignation against them, which he so
throughlye executed, that thereby he not only ripped up and ransackt their
consciences, but also persed their souls, and divided their spirits, with the
two edged sword, which came out of his mouth, in so much that they spoke etc.

Now in this scripture we have cheefelye to note two points.

1 A blessed conference, and mutual provocation of the people, for the
amendment of their lives. Then spoke they. etc.

Secondly, a threefolde comfort and encouragement which the Lord gave them,
to proceed in their Repentance. 1. Because he hearkened and heard them. 2. For
that he caused a book of Remembrance to be written etc.

3. Because he gave them the promise of his mercisull protection, And they
shall be to me in the day etc.

1. Pars.
THen spoke they which feared the Lord, etc. So mighty and effectual were
the Prophets words, in the hearts of as many as feared the Lord, that by and
by thereupon, they conferred about the reformation of their lives, and spoke
every one to his Neighbor, (as by the circumstance we gather) to this effect.
Dear Neighbors we have often and desperately provoked the Lords wrath against
us, and needs must we grant our selves guilty of all the crimes whereof
Malachi does accuse us. What shall we do then? We are now called to
repentance. both by the voice of Gods vengeance, saying, I will come now to you
in Judgment, and I will be a just witness against you. ver. 5. chap. 3. and also
by the voice of his mercy: saying, Return to me, and I will return to you.
ver. 7. chap. 3. All this notwithstanding shall we still run on with
remorse? Why then the wrath of God, must needs come upon the children of
disobedience. Therefore let us humble our selves upon the lowest pauement of
unfeigned repentance, that it may repent him of his purposed vengeance. To
this end and in this sense, they spoke every one to another.

Whereby (right Honorable, and dearelye beloved) we may s^e and observe, not
only that the fear of the Lord is a wel-spring of life, to avoid the snares
of death, for so says the wise man, Pro. 14. But also that y^ word of God is
sharper then any two edged swoorde, and pearceth, and cutteth, wheresoever it
comes, even to the hard bones and marrow, for so says the Apostle Hebrews.
4. And therefore so it prevailed with this people, that it wrought in them a
resolute conference for their conversion, and bettering of their conuersations.

And so it prevailed with Josias and his people: for at the reading of the
book of the law by Shaphan, there was renting of clothes, and melting of
hearts, and shedding of tears, in all humility, 2. King. 22.

And so it prevailed with the King of Niniuie, and his People, for at the
preaching of Jonas, there was proclaming of fastes, and putting on of
sackcloath, and sitting down in ashes, and crying mightilye unto God, from the
greatest to the least: John. 3. And so it prevailed with the Israelites, at the
preaching of Esaias, for they let not to inuit one another saying: Come ye
house of Jacob, let us walk in the light of the Lord, Esaias. 2. And so it
prevailed with the people which heard Peter's heavenly sermon: for they were
thereby even pricked in their hearts* and said, men and brethren what shall we
do? Act. 2.

But I do not see beloved in the Lord, that it has so prevailed with us, and
yet how mightilythe Lord has called upon us, both Judgelike, and Fatherlike in
punishing, and in favors, I know and you can not be ignorant.

Have not the mountains trembled, and the foundatio^s of ye earth been shaken
in your days Have not bloodthirstye conspirators swarmed like grasshoppers,
here at home in our own bosoms? Have not the furious executioners of Gods
vengeance covered our seas, with their ships, and attempted to invade us? Have
not the messengers of the Lord: like so many tru^pets sounded daily in your
ears, that tribulation and anguish, weeping and gnashing of teeth,
unquenchable fire, utter darkness, the worm y^ never dies, even the portion of
hypocrites, is prepared for all hard hearted and stifnecked sinners: surely eue^
these were the voices of Gods vengeance, and in every one of them he has
said, I will come nere to England in Judgment, and will be a swift witness
against you.

And on the otherside, wherhence is it, that we have received such gracious
government, for such bloody tyrannies: such sunshine of the Gospel, for such
darkness of Idolatry: such daily preaching for such damnable Massing: such
plenty for such scarsety, such peace for such war: such health for such
sickness, such fatherly blessings, for such Pharaolik persecutions, as is
meruellous in our eyes, and manifest to all the world: As this is the Lords
doings, and in every one of these, his good graces he has engraven the voice
of his mercy: saying Return to me, and I will return to you?

But I know not how, we make no more account thereof, then of a blast of
wind, nay as there was never that good or grace wroght to reclame these
Israelites, but the Lord has vouchsafed the like or greater to us. So what
evil was there committed by them in Malachies time, but it is doubled and
tripled by us in these days? and that in such measure, both in Priest and
People, begin where you will, that it can not but irk our hearts to think of
it, alas then why should it not vrdge our tongues to speak against it, as the
Israelites did, every man to his Neighbor?

For first, as their Priests polluted the Altar of the Lord in many a foul
abuse, so do we, I may not conceal it, cure it as I may. For some of us are
idle bellies, and do the work of the Lord negligentlye, for we labor not,
but loyter in the Lords Vineyard: and what is this, but with the Priests of
Israel to offer unclean bread, and to present our worst gifts and to
sacrifice the halt and maimed unto him who is a great King.

Some of us are men pleasers, and such placebos, that we lay pillowes under
the ears, and cushins under the elbowes of sinners, and what is this, but to
say with the Priests of ^uda, that every one that does evil, is good in the
sight of the Lord? Some of us are brainsicke and fantastical, and even like
Narcissus, are not only in love with our own shadows, but wedded to our own
pestilent conceits? so that no reason can persuade us, or aswage them: and what
is this but with the tribe of Leui, to marry with y^ daughters of a strange God.

Some of us are bitter and contentious, making ruptures in the Church, our
tender mother, like so many vipers, devouring one another, more like wolves
then sheepherdes: and dividing the vnsemed coat of Christian unity, not unlike
arrant thieves, and what is this, but the miserye whereof Basile complains,
Hoc omnium miseratione, vel maxim dignum est, cum ea pars quae sana visa est,
in se deuisa est: This is a most lamentable thing, when that part which
seems to be sound, is divided in it self. And the misery whereof Lactantius
complains, Gladium quisque habet, quo hostem feriat, sed nemo clypeum, quo
sedefendat, every one has a swoorde whereby he may strike his enemy, but no
man has a sheelde whereby he may defend him self. And the misery whereof
Barnard complains, Omnes amici, and omnes inimici: omnes necessarij, and
omnes aduersarii: omnes domestici, and nulli pacifici: All are friends* and
all are enemies: all are neighbors, and all are adversaries: all are
home-dwellers, and none are peacemakers.

Now then (beloved in the Lord) is it possible for us of the ministry to
find and know these evils in our selves, and yet to be mute and silent?
surely these outrages are able to make him speak that is not wilfully
tonguefyed. Atys, Craesus son was dumb, and never spoke in all his life (as
Herodotus reports) and yet when he saw Cyrus about to cut his fathers throat,
he burst out into these speeches, and said, O homo ne interficias patrem, O
man kill not my father. We see what we see, and I do not see, how we can say
less to them which entreat our spiritual and Ghostly Fathers as they do,
that is, even cut the throat of their honorable reputation through spiteful
slander, of their goodlye revenues through private lucre, and of their
lawful authority through proud insolency: I do not see I say how we can
say less than this: O homo ne interficias patrem, O man kill not my father.

Thus then is the Altar of the Lord at this day in the Church of England
polluted in many a foul abuse by us of the ministry, and therefore great
cause there is to lay our heads and hearts together, and to lay aside all
bitterness and cursed speaking one against another, and to speak every man
unto his neighbor, as Israel did, for repentance, and against sin.

But now let us leave the Altar of the Lord, and come Ad Atria where the people
use to stand: Alas if such iniquity dwell in the midst of the Sanctuary,
and amongst the Priests, what marvel is it, if it be far worse in the
streets, and among the people? Surely beloved in the Lord, you have not done
well, and your sin lies before the door, as well as ours: you have plowed
wickedness, and how should you but reap the reward of iniquity? For what
cursed thing is there, but you have reached your hands unto it, and delighted
your hearts in it, as well, nay ill as Israel? Is it sorcerie? Is it adultery?
Is it falseswearing? Alas if there were no other sorcerie, but the subtle
inchaunting of their circumuenting tongues, it were too much: for thereby as
with the sin of witchcraft, you abuse the wise, and defraud the simple, yea
thereby you reap as much profit as by patrimony or free-land: and the bread
of such deceit is the sweetest morsel that comes into some of your mealy
mouths. And then for Adultery, it is the disease that cleaves fast to your
bones, and lies festring in your bowels, and has rooted it self between
your breasts: insomuch that the father defloureth a woman, and to make her
amends marries her to his own son, Amos. 2. 7. And so may I say of
perjury: For affection, malice, fear, and lucre, do at will suppress and
smother all truth, and supplye and suggeste all falshoode, when you come to
speak upon your oathe. And I do not see, to what end there should be any,
either admission or tolleration of them whom you call knights of the Post, and
surely not amiss, for it is thought they have no more conscience what they
swear many times, than a very post, and I pray God that such Posts ^^ post
to pleasure men with their false oaths have not firebrands another day in
hell: for burning, is a fit end for all such rotten blasphemous Posts.

And the damnable wretchedness of our time wherein is it not suitable with the
wickedness of Israel? Never pride more disdainful, never ambition more
presumpteous, never covetousness more insatiable.

For there are some such merciles oppressors among you, that build fair
houses, with the bloody sobs and sighs of their poor neighbors, whose
liuinges they have taken over their heads, and whose liuelyhoode, they have
wringed out of their hands.

There are some such devouring Usurers among you, that purchase statelye
manners, and sell the poor for old shoes, to make up their sommes, and
eue^ strip the skins of the needy over head and ears, to fit their purposes.

There are some such pilling extorsioners, that if it were possible they could
find in their hearts with Flauius Vespasianus, vectigall ex vrina capere.

There are some such infatiable and intolerable Church leaches, or rather
sponges, that suck and soaken up, both the blood of the Mother, and the milk
of the children, yea with Achilles, they can find in their hearts, to set on
sale the dead body of Hector, ^ay rather the dear bought souls of Gods
saints. They are not ashamed with Cirus in hope of gain to dig up the very
graves of the dead* nor with Dionisius to deface the most ancient* and goodly
monumentes that are, nor with Julian to ransacke churches, colleges, hospital
and hospitals? yea hospitality, to the utter ruin, and wrack of all Religion,
learning, and christian relief.

To be short, there are some, and the most part of you al grown to such
cursed Atheism and infidelity with these Israelites, that no Religion has any
relish in your hearts, but that which sauoureth of gain to your purses.

And albeit your tongues be mute and silent for very shame, yet your deeds
speak without sound of word, and say with this People, It is in vain to
serve God* and what profit is it, that we have kept his commandment, and that
we have walked humbly before the Lord of Hosts.

O strange infidelity, the root and branches of all misery, alas how has this
hellish bramble ouergrowne and ouerspread the Lords vyneyarde here in England?
O the plague of all plagues, our unbelieving hearts, this makes you that ye
will not be warned, but do as you do, or rather that you care not what you do,
this has made you more incredulus then the diuils in hell, Qui credunt et
contremiscun^, which believe and tremble. And by reason hereof, are you not at
this point? If a mere stranger, or a common lier, or a stark Idiote, should
but bring you tidings that you and all other magistrates, you and all other
lawyers, you and al other merchants, you and al other rich men, you and all
other Artificers, you and all other Husbandme^, are what? in a flat praemunire,
you would then look about you, and lay your heads together, and speak every
one to his Neighbor, and finding it true, would never eat meat that should do
you good nor take any good nights rest, until you had found means to obtain
your pardon, and were quite out of danger,

Hereby then may you measure the misthiefe of infidelitye, for all our
preaching and teaching (as very fools and Idiotes as you account us) is to no
other end, but to tell you, and give you notice of a dangerous and a most
damnable praemunire whereinto you are fallen, all the sort of you, yea every
mothers son* through your desperate and rebellious sins against the
almighty, and yet you do not once offer to sue for your pardon, or to seek for
mercy at his hands, whose Majesty you have so highly offended.

Now then beloved in the Lord (all this considered) is it not hye time, or
rather more then time for us to grow to such a gracious conference as Israel
did, for the amendment of all that is amiss? The wise man seeing the plague
coming, hides him self: but the fool goes on forward, and is snared, Pro.
22. Let us be wise now at the length, and learn to hyde our selves in time
under the sackcloath, and in the ashes of repentance. Let us discharge that
duty which the Apostle requires Heb. 3 which is to exhort one another, and
to edify one another, whiles it is called to day. Let us be advised by Saint
Jude, even to edify our selves in our most holy faith, knowing this, for an
assured truth, that they which turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the
stars for ever. Daniel. 12. 3. And that he that conuerteth a sinner from going
astray, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.
James. 5. ver. 20. This duty therefore as we owe one to another, and every man
to his Neighbor, so the Lord make us careful to perform it, that we may be
partakers with Israel, of such grace and favor as does belong unto it.

Pars. 2.
ANd the Lord hearkened and heard it and^. Here you are to consider, of a
threefolde comfort and encouragement, which they received from the Lord.
Whereof this is the first, because he vouchsafed to hear them. A marvelous
grace, they no sooner began to repent, but the Lord gave ear and heard them:
Who would not frame him self to the like conference, and penitent conformity?
No no, dearly beloved, our God is not like to Baall, he can hear you be sure,
for as Hillary says, Qui naturam audiendi humano generi impertit, ipse extra
auditus non potest esse naturam. He that made the ear, can hear, and he can
answer you as well by fire from Heaven, as ever he did First, by sending down
the holy Ghost to comfort you. There is not the softest misereri which you
breath out of your mouths, nor the least penitent thought in your hearts, but
it is in his ears like the shirlest noise of a trumpet.

For he is non vocis, sed cordis auditor, not the hearer of the voice only,
but of the heart to. And he can hear before men speak, for he said to Moses,
quid clamas ad me? why cryest thou to me? And yet he spoke not a word, only
he sighed and groned. Exodus 14. No more did Anna, when the tears came down her
cheeks, and her lips were seen to move, her voice was not heard. 1. Sam. 1.
Loquebatur non voce, sed cord: praece occulta, sed manifest a fide, says
Ciprian.

She spoke not with her voice, but with her heart: her prayer was hid, but her
faith was manifest: hereby then ye may be bold that the Lord is near to all
them that call upon him, I mean faithfully.

There is one kind of voice which the Lord will not hear: But there are three
kind of voices, which he is most forward to hear, and I beseech you let us
consider of it, and you which are the Gods of the earth, I mean Judges, and
Maiestrats, have regard and care to season and temper your ears thereafter,
for he is the best Justicer, and you can not better his president.

That one voice, which the Lord will not hear, is theirs which contemn his
word and despise their own salvation, as al wilful and malicious sinners. And
this very Judgment is laid down expreslye against them, by the Prophet,
though they cry unto me, yet I will not hear them, Ier. 11. and the Israelites
felt the misery of it. Deuteronomy. 1. and so did David's enemies, for they cried out
for aid, and were not heard, 2. Sam. 22. and it was meant of such miscreants,
where it is said, that God hears not sinners. I0. 9. Therefore judge you what
a meruellous peuishnes it is, yea worse then madness it self, to desire to wax
oulde in sin, and to carry it to the graves, and to say you will repent at
your last end: for it is a memorandum to man, that sin will bring the Lord so
far out of conceit with you, that he will not hear you.

And now the three voices which the Lord, will hear, and that both willingly
and speedely, are these. First the voice of innocent blood, and he does so
hear it, that it is always to their cost which shed it: for still it beggeth
vengeance at Gods hands, and is therein so importunate, as that same poor
widow which followed the unrighteous Judge, and would have no nay, but still
cried Revenge me on my adversary, Luke. 18. or it is like that same sorrowful
woman of Canaan which followed our Savior Christ, craving the health of her
daughter so instantly, that the disciples said, Demitte ea^ quia clamat post
nos, Dismiss her for she cries after us, Mat. 15. Did not the Lord tell
Caine, that the voice of his brothers blood cried unto him from the earth? and
what a fearful Judgment had he? Genesis 4. And the blood of all the Priests
whom Saul slew so butcherlike for affecting David, never ceast crying out for
due vengeance, until Saul with his own hands, sheathed his own sword in his
own bowels, 1. Sam. 31. And what an outcrye made* the innocent blood of
Naboth, shed by the practice of Iezabel, and was not her reward thereafter?
when her pride had a fall, her neck was broken, and the dogs devoured her
flesh and gnawed her bones. 2. Kin. 9. The innocence of Zachary the priest
(murdered by Ioas King of Judah) cried so loud for vengeance, that the Lord
brought the Kings own blood upon his own head, and suffered his own servants
to cut him off in his neste, 2. Kings* 12.

And heere-hence it is, that you shall never lightly see a murderer prosper or
thrive upon the earth: no, albeit the parties be agreed withal, albeit the
Princes pardon be obtained, and every thing be thorowlye salued: and why?
because the Lord hears the voice and reuengeth the villanye of innocent
bloodshedding.

Beware then you desperate ympes, how ye seek by blood to revenge your drunken
quarrelles: and take heed ye cunning deep wits how with false accusation
and subtle packing, you ly in wait to ease your dogged stomachs, by shedding
your neighbors blood. And you (right Honorable) which are deputies and
substitutes to our dread Sovereign, Gods Leiuetenant here in England, be wise,
and let no intercession of friends, no corruptions of bribes, no affection of
parties, stop your ears or make you deaf, when the causes of blood are in
question before you, for the cry thereof will then be as loud against you for
accessaries, as against the very actors, for principalls: and all the water in
Pilats Basin shall not wash away Gods vengeance from you and yours.

An other voice which the Lord will hear and that very quickly, is the cry
of the poor or oppressed, be they widows or fatherles, be they freendles or
succourles: And this is apparent by his own promise. Exodus 22. If thou vex or
trouble any such, that is, widow or fatherles child, and so he call and cry
unto me, I will surely hear his cry. so says Eccle. 38. he hears the prayer
of the opressed. And mark it when you will, the tears of the widow run not
so fast down her cheeks, but they arise up as fast into Heaven: and the Lord
which hears them, in due time pittieth them.

So that our merciful God is not like those Lacedemonian Ephori, certain
retchlesse magistrates, which heard men's peticions they cared not how, belike
with their harvest ears. Nor to that careless Emperor Adrianus, who, having
received into his hands many bills of supplicacion: in the very sight of the
suitors them selves, threw them all into the water. But he is like himself, id
est, is full of compassion, and tender in affection toward the distressed, to
whom all good Magisstrats and Justices ought in this respect to be like.

You may read in Xenophon, what authority and favor, the Persian Kings
obtained, by suffering the people to have easy access unto them, when they
came with complaints for redress of their wrongs: and you may read in Samuel
how strangelye Absalon stale away the hearts of the men of Israel from David
his Father, by complaint that there was none to hear them, and by promise of
speedye dispatch, if he him self might rule the roast. I grant you Ad
penitentia^ properat, qui cito Iudicat. He hasteneth to Repentance, which
makes haste to give Judgeme^t. But it is meant of him qui preiudicat, which
gives rash Judgment. For otherwise, as nothing else brought Philippe to his
deaths wound, but because he would not hear the complaint of Pausanias. And as
nothing wrought that maine confusion upon the Lacedemonian estate, that never
could be recovered, but only their slacknes in hearing poor men's causes. So
indeed nothing more fretteth the hearts or astraungeth the minds of poor me^,
then delaying of their causes from hearing.

Which is doubtless a great fault in our Courts in England, both
ecclesiastical and civil, that it is so long before poor men's causes can come
to hearing. Indeed some times (I know) they are the longer, by means of their
careless and covetous Lawyers, careless of their cause and covetous of their
money: for they can tell, how to spin or rather to spill a cause, and to draw
it out like a threede, from term, to term, until their clyents coats be
thread bare, and their purses money bare. And therefore to be plain, I like
not this same Ad idem in proximum, which is so much used among the Ciuilians,
nor these same needeles and trifling Demurrars, which are so ordinary, among
the common Lawyers: for both these prove many times to be the very bane and
murrain of many a good man's right.

But let a man's cause run through all the delays and pikes, that the cunning
of any drawlatch can devise, yet unless he make earnest and great means to
have it heard, it shall never be heard, until doomesday. Be wise then ye
Judges of the earth, and learn to be forewarde and ready to hear of him,
which one day shall Judge you all, and suffer not good me^ to be discouraged,
or poor men to be eaten out of all they have, through your delays. If you do,
you shall find that the Grand Judge him self will make no delay, to reward
you thereafter, and to measure his vengeance accordingly.

Lastly, the Lord hears the voice of the penitent, nay, the very breath and
the least thought in his heart, tending to repentance. And therefore it is said:
If any man be a woorshipper of God and does his will, him does he hear. Ioh.
9. Now this is his will, even your holiness. 1. These. 4. And he wills not the
death of a sinner, but that he should be converted and live. And besides, this
very thing is warranted unto us in this Scripture, why, they did no sooner wish
well in there hearts but the Lord heard it. We cannot so say of any mortal
Prince, his subjects may speak and cry and call long enough, and yet if they
be not, within his hearing they are never y^ nere. And therefore this is a flat
dash to that peevish reason of the papists which tell us that as a mortal
Prince must be labored unto by means and mediators, so must the Lord our God
be solicited by Saints and Angels: Alas there is no proporcion in this
comparison: for God only is himself Scrutator Cordis the searcher of our hearts:
and we cannot do it but by means: And what injury or rather villa^y is it to
make him in his hearing of no more capasity or excellency then a mortal
creature? And so let this suffice, for our first encouragement to draw us on
to repentance, for that the Lord vouchsafes to hearken and hear all them,
which have but any motion of so happy a purpose.

Of the second Comfort.
ANd a book of remembrance was written before him. etc. Let us now in these
words consider of that which was a second comfort and encourageme^t for this
people to proceed in their repentance. That it was acceptable to the Lord, we
perceive by his attentive favor in hearing them. But now you shall understand
that it was very honorable besides. And y^ he does vouchsafe them the rarest
welcome home to his mercy and grace, that ever was heard of, for he caused a
book of remembrance. etc. And to what end? Surely that it might for ever be
remembered, how much he deliteth in all penitent sinners, which as soon as ever
they forsake sin, he will embrace and honor in his bottomless and abundant
mercy. Also that it might never be forgotten, that how great and how general
soever the corruption was, yet they were the people which became penitent, and
turned unto the Lord, at the preching of Malachi, and therefore some cause why
all posterity should be encouraged, not only to follow their example, but also
to have them in Admiration. It shall be expedient, that here we consider first,
what is meant by the book of remembrance, and then to whom it does apertaine.
For this book of remembrance it is very strange

We read of certain stones of remembrance, which being engraven with the names
of the children of Israel, and set in gold, Aron was to wear that he might
remember them to Godwards.

And we find that there was a sacrifice of Remembrance, made by fire, for a
sweet savor unto the Lord, to signify that God will not forget him that
offers it, Leuit. 2. And we understand of a Saboth of Remembrance to be
observed, and celebrated, for a memorial of the blowing of Trumpets, and of the
Jubilee. Leuit. 23.

And who can be ignorant of Absalons pillar of remembrance, which he erected,
because he had no son to keep his name in memory? But what this book of
Remembrance should importe, that we do not so easelye perceive. Surely some
learned writers are of opinion that hereby we are to understand, this book of
Malachies prophecy. Which because it was written at the Lords appointment, was
doutles written before his face: and because it can not be red openly in the
congregation, without recital of this their conferrence, therefore it may be
termed justly a book of remembrance. Even as the gospel it self, is a book
of Remembrance, in respect of that which Marie Magdalen did to our Savior
Christ: for wheresoever this gospel shall be preached, through out all the
world, there shall this also that she has done be spoaken of, for a memorial
of her, says Christ Jesus himself. Math. 26. And in this sense it does
maruelouslye approve and confirm the authority of this book of Malachies
Prophecy, as being written in his presence, and at his appointment.

But by the censure, and in the Judgment of the most learned and godly writers
that I have red; there is another meaning to be understood, by the book of
remembrance. For thereby is signified the book of life, wherein the righteous
are written, and whereof we read. Exodus 32. Psalm. 69. Apoc. 3. And it is meant,
that therein the Lord did write their names presently upon their repentance,
for a memorial thereof.

And that you may see in what steed it will stand you, to be written in the book
of the Lords Remembrance, and to be remembered in the book of life, consider
first of that which is set down Daniell. 12. ver. 1.

And thereby may you perseiue that albeit there fall out such a time of
trouble, as never was since the world began, yet every one that shall be
found written in the book of life shall be delivered, and to the same effect
it is, that this book was ordained for this people* to be as it were their
Passover, to avoid and escape the days of miserye, which the Lord did
threaten, to bring upon them. Provide that the door posts of your consciences
may be sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, or that your repentance may
be recorded in the book of life, and you are sure of an everlasting Passover
to escape Gods most dreadful vengeance.

But if you wll see that prerogative, which is, Instar omnium: in steed of all
other. Then consider again and again, of that which is written, in 20. Apoc.
ver, 12. Wherein the glorious majesty of our Savior Jesus Christ, is most
truly described, even as he shall come to Judge the quick and the dead, for it
is said, And I saw the dead both great and small stand before God: and the
books were opened, and another book was opened, which is the book of life, and
the dead were judged of those things which were written in the books, acording
to their works.

But now what are these books that shall be opened before the book of life be
opened? doubtless these three, the book of the Law, the book of the Gospel,
and the book of Conscience.

First the book of the Law shall be opened, and laid before us, that it may
appear what duetye we ought to have done toward God and man through love.
And even as Moses commanded the Levites to put this book in the side of the
Arc, that it might be for a witness against them, when they disobeyed the same.
Deu. 31. So shall all the workers of iniquity in the fearful day of the Lord,
find this book a swift witness against them. And if Josias rent his clothes
and wept for woe, when he heard the law red, and thereby saw how much duty was
required, and how little he had performed: what sorrow and heaviness shall
compass us about, and if it were possible, dissolve our tears, and turn them
into drops of blood?

When in the presence of this our severe Judge we shall both hear and see, not
only what we have left undone, in that book commanded, but also what we have
done therein forbidden. In the mean time therefore, let us not only be
hearers of the Law, but dooers also, lest then we find Gods favor
unrecoverable, and our repentance unprofitable.

Secondly the book of the Gospel shall be opened, that thereby it may appear
what mercy, what grace, what free pardon, what remission of sin, what
imputation of righteousness, and what assurance of life and Salvation, you
might have had in Christ Jesus.

If you had been so happy to have sought it by repentance, and to have laid
hold upon it by faith.

At the opening of this book, shall you see before your eyes all the sweet
promises, and tender inuitations which our Savior Christ offered unto you
through preaching of the gospel, to have drawn you to repentance, Then shall
all the benefits of his bitter passion be laid open before your eyes, and you
shall see that he was debased himself, to have brought you to honor: that he
was wounded himself to have healed your wounds of sin: and that he died
himself, to have saved his enemies from death, and to have purchased eternal
life to all penitent sinners. And as the book of the law shall show what we
ought to have done, so the book of the Gospel shall show, what we ought to
have believed: and both to one end (Christ knows) that so much more Just and
dreadful may be our Judgment.

O ye proud contemners of the word of truth, consider of this; you which
think the Gospel to base for your deep wits have regard unto it, lest the
time come that you repent it, and feel the smart of it. And as the rich man
begde of Abraham, that poor Lazarus might dip but the tippe of his finger in
water, to cool his tormented tongue, so the day may come, that you will be
glad^^ (...)e in your hearts, that the (...) rascal and ab^^ct minister among
us all (as you (...) ^^ us) might be suffered to bring y^u even the least all
drop of the water of life, ye a the least comfort of the Gospel to refresh
your (...) (...)les, but it will be to late, to late.

Thirdlye the book of Conscience shall be opened, and show what abominable
sins we have done and committed* Conscientia Codex est; in quo quotidiana
conscrib(...)r peccata* ^aith Chrisost. in Psa. 50. The conscience is a book
where in a man's daily sins are written. Therefore keep this book well and
clear from the blots and blemishes of sin, and then the reward thereof will
be so strong and substantial on thy side, y^ it is called mill testes, a
thousand witnesses: Sillogismus practicus, a conclusion of Experience: Cordis
scientia, the knoweledge of a man's own heart: It is murus Aeneus; as Horace
says a brazen wall, It is maxima consolatio rerum inco^modarum. The greatest
comfort in adversity; says Tully, nay it is* ger Benedictionis, the field of
blessing, Hort is delitiarum. The garden of pleasures. Gaudium An(...)m, The
joy of Angels. Habit (...)m Spiritus sancti, The habitation of the holy Ghost,
says Hugo de Anima* Lib. 2. Cap. 9.

But suffer this book to be (...) and ^^lluted with sin: and what is it
then? It is formidinis matter, says Chrysostom, the Mother of all fear. It is
confusionis tabula. says August. It is the table of confusion. And of all
other books in the world, you can not abide to look into the book of your
guilty consciences.

This made the Father (I mean Adam) a cr^ep^ish in Paradise, and this made him
say Abscondi me, Genesis 3. This made, the son I mean, Caine a runnagate, and
so restless that he durst abide nowhere, for fear his throat should be
cut,* Genesis 4. This made Jonas convey him self into the bottom of the ship,
thinking there to hyde him self from the book of his own Gauled conscience.

This made Judas betake himself to the halter, because he could not abide to
see the abominable treacherye he had committed against the innocent blood of
Jesus.

This made Ecebolus that turn cote heretic to cast him self down before the
Church and to detest him self, saying Calcate me in sipidum salem, Trample
upon me vnsauorye salt that I am.

Now then if it be such a fearful and horrible thing to look into the book
of a guilty conscience in this life, what shame and confusion shall ouerwhelme
us, in the life to come? when nothing shall be concealed, when all pleates and
wrinckles shall be unfolded, when al counsels and secrets shall be discovered,
when there is not an idle word of our tongues, or a wicked thought of our
herts, that shall escape our account, and when all our falts shall appear
upon record against us, even in the books which we our selves have carried in
our own bosoms: Alas, alas who shall endure it, and not desire that the deep
may swallow him up, or that the mountains may cover him, or that the hills
may fall upon him? Have a ^are then good people, and an eye to your bosom
book, I mean the conscience, the very register of all your secrets.

Now all these books being opened, the book of the Law, to show what we
ought to have done: The book of the Gospel, to show what we ought to have
believed: and the book of our own consciences, to show what abominable sins we
have committed: and that we have neither by love satisfied the Law, nor through
faith relied upon the gospel: what follows? Then shall the book of life,
which is here called the book of Remembrance be opened, wherein the Lord,
has set down upon record whatsoever good thing we have done, for the
obtaining of the crown of life, and the avoiding of the snares of death, and
namely these four things.

First, the Names of all Gods Saints and servants, and this is apparent by the
words of Moses, Exodus 32. 32. If thou will not forgive the^, I pray thee race
my name out of the book of life, which thou have written. And Daniell prays,
that the wicked may be raced out of the book of life, and that they may not be
written with the righteous. Psalm. 69. So that as Assuerus had his book of
rememberaunce, wherein the names of such, as had don him hye service at any
time, were usually written, and as he finding that Mardocheus had discovered two
traitors which sought to lay violent hands upon the King, caused him to be
honored, by putting on his own rich apparel, and by wearing his royal crown
upon his head, Ester. 6. In like manner our heavenly King, seeing the good that
we have done, for the supplanting and subuerting of the enemies of his truth
will he not record our names in his book? will he not give us the rich robes
of his innocence? and the royal crown of his everlasting glory? Read you
the 2. of the Re* and you shall see, that the Lord does profess this favor:
Very notably he told the Church of Ephesus that heknew her works, her labor
and her patience etc. And so he told the church of Smirna, the Church of
Pergamus, and the Church of Thyatyra, that he knew not only what yet they had
done, but also did remember and recite in particular their good, reckoning with
them for the one, and promissing to reward them for the other.

Secondly in this book of Remembrance we shall find written the tears of
our affliction, and therefore David says: Thou haste counted my wanderings, and
put my tears into thy bottle, are they not in thy register? Ps. 56. 8. Can
there, be a greater comfort then this when we are brought to the stake to be
burnt, or to the sword to be cut as flesh to the pot, or to the wild
horses to be torn in a thousand pieces? Let the butcherlike tirants glut
their hearts by making ashes of our bodies, or fowls meat, or dogs meat of our
flesh, what care we? They can not scrape our tears out of the book of
Remembrance, nor race our blood out of the register of life.

Thirdly, In this book of Remembrance we shall find written the works of our
compassion, for so much does the words of our Savior Christ importe, Math.
25. Who shall say to them on the right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father
inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, for
I was an hungered and ye gave me meat* etc. Then shall the righteous answer
him, and say, Lord When saw we thee anhongred, etc. Then shall he answer and
say, Verily, in as much as you have done it to one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me.

And so much does the words of Job import, Cap. 31. ver. 35. Where he says,
that the Almighty will witness his pity toward the poor, albeit his enemy
should write a book against him. And so will he do for us: If we give but a
cup of cold water for his names sake, we shall not lose our reward.

We see that Princes have their books of Subsidies, of Benevolence, of priuye
Seals, wherein they set down whatsoever good they receive at the hands of
their Subjects, by free gift or upon lone or lending. And so it is with our
heavenly potentat: I warrant you, if you relieve the poor, he sets it down in
his book for a subsidy, or a beneuole^ce don to him: and if you lend to the
poor and needy, he sets it down for a privy seal lent to him: and he will
become your debtor, and see it discharged to the uttermost.

Therefore ye rich men, out with your subsidy, extend your beneuolences, and
send abroad your priuye seal money, the Lord will not forget it, he will not
fail but set it down in his book of Remembrance.

And here, right Honorable, and beloved in the Lord, I cannot but put you in
mind of a necessary Benevolence, and a Christian subsidy, to be supplied in
respect of the Godly preachers, called, and appointed for this place: which as
you know is usually and best furnished with learned men, from both the
universities: But how hardlye, and vnwillinglye they are drawn hither, it is
but to well known. And why? because they are feign to come at their own great
cost and charge, which can not stand with their poor and small abilitye: For
I speak not for my self, and other^ my brethren, which thanks be to God are
provided for sufficiently to do any service appliable to our calling, without
being chargeable to you: But for fellows in Colleges, and other poor
students in the universities, men of rare knowledge and singular gifts, which
being enjoined to supply this place, are not more often sent for, then
commonly they refuse to come: And for my part, I cannot greatly blame them:
for why should they labor and have no hyre? Or tread out your corn with the
Ox, and have their mouths musted? No man is hound proprijs stipendiis
militare to make war at his own charge. Why should not he that preaches the
Gospel, live of the gospel? Or why should not they which sow spiritual
things, reap your temporal things?

Might it therefore please you, the right honorable the Lord Mayor* and the
read^ the right wor^^ ^^full your brethren, and Maie^^trats of the famous
city of London, ^^ impar^^ ^ou(...)berality and ye^rly contribution, in (...)
(...)* I know^ ^ ^o^e learned (...) godly Bishop, which in my hearing* has not
only promised before* (...)* but (...)ed before God to give a good portion
for^^er toward thi^ so good a purpose* (...) I am sure it will be a^ freelye
and thorowlye performed* make trial when you please*

And albeit perhaps you will not pre^ent him yet the cause being so reasonable
and important, I hope God will stir up your hearts, not to be long or much
behind him*

And in truth I ^^ ^^der that this noble City of London has not heretofore*
looked into this want, and had ^are to supply it, (...) in there is no
charitable w^^ke almost vndo^^ or at the least unprovided for.

You have sundry not able fr^e schools founded in this Cittye, where by you
give ^u^ture to the rude, and learning to the ignorant* You have many goodly
hospitals endewed, wherein yo^ ^e^e me and allow Physic to the (...)* ^^rger^
to the sore, meat to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, clothes to the naked
houseroom for the h(...)ourles* and good and godly education to Orphans and
infants. And you have store of fair and sweet Conduits, wherebye you spare
not for any cost, to convey water into every place almost of this populus
city: Yea there cannot be a fountain heard of, or a devise thought of, to
yield store of water, but like good and careful governors, your hands are in
your purses to lay out what so ever it will cost. And will you bestow nothing
upon the blessed Pypes, and sugared Conduites which bring you the water of
life? You cannot bring water a quarter of a mile, to the City, without your
own great charges. And do you think it reason that the water of life should
be brought you, 40* or 50. miles at other men's charges? Consider but of the
excellency thereof, and think but of the happiness of these our days, wherein
we may have it either for love or money.

The waters of Sylaris in Lucania* makes soft things hard as a wand laid in it
all night, will be as hard as a stone by the morning: But the water of life will
make hard things soft, as your hard stonye hearts it will turn into tender
fleshy hearts.

The water of Sinnesana in Campania, makes mad men wise and sober, and so this
water changes worldly folly into Heavenly wisdom.

The water of Clytumnus, if O^enor sheep being never so black, use to drink
of it, it will make them as white as the driven snow: So this water albeit
sin has made you as blak in soul as any Ethiopian is in body, yet it will
wash you, and purge you, and make you clean and white.

And as the water of Bethesda when it was moved by the Angel, cured them which
stepped into it, whatsoever disease they had: So this water will cure and recover
all the infirmities of your sick souls, if ye step into it, and embrace it,
when Gods ministers move it, and pour it out before you.

To be short, as Varro writes of Zame, a fountain in Africa, that it
runs with such sweet singing noise, that thereby both men and beasts are
allured to drink of it: So the waters of life, running and falling in this
publik and famous place, through such learned pipes, and gracious Conduites as
comes from the Universities* are most pleasant and of marvelous force, to
allure all men, both clean and unclean, to taste of them, and to has their
sinful souls in them.

Wherefore the virtue and excellency of this water, being so singular, and
sovereign as you have heard* I hope it will not grudge you with all speed to
provide that it may have most free and plentiful passage to this City,
through your Christian relief and lyberalitye.

I am not the first that has moved this suit, but you may be the first that
ever tendered it, or provided for it: two and fifty pounds a year, would
bountifully perform it, a good part whereof (as I have toulde you) a Reverend
and most learned Bishop means to yield: And if you would vouchafe to join
with him, and to lay out the rest, and so make up the sum, out of your
common treasurye for the city, you should not only be thankfully remembered
in this place unto the worlds end, but also this good work of your compassion
shall be recorded in the book of the Lords Remembrance, and at the last day,
you shall reap the fruit of your well doing, and find that with such sacrifice
God is highlye pleased,

Lastly in this book of Remembrance shall be written the sorrow and remorse*
of our penitent and broken hearts. And hereof what better testimony, then this
present Scripture, The Lord caused a book of Remembrance to be written, etc.
It is doubtless a great and gracious favor when the Lord says, At what time
soever a sinner shall repent, I will blot his wickedness out of my Remembrance,
Ezech. 18.

But this passes and is with out all comparison, that he will make a memorial
of it, and write a book of Remembrance of our repentance, and record it in
the book of life, So that with Israel, we shall not only escape all evil, or
the greatest evil in this life, but also at the last and most de^adfull time,
be tide what shall, come the day of the Lord never so glowmingly, sound the
trumpet never so fear fully, arrise the dead never so sinfully, approach the
devils never so fiearsly smoke the mountains melt the hills, tremble the
earth, vanishe the sea, flash and flame the whole vn^uersall world, never so
furiously, yet this shall be our comfort and refuge* that we have repented us of
our sins, and that our Repentance is of record, and written in the book of
the Judges remembrance*

And so to come to the next observation in this comfort: Seeing the Prophet in
plain terms says that this book was written for them that feared the Lord,
and thought upon his name, let all the woorkers of Iniquitye which forget God,
and put far from the^ the evil day, which says in their hearts* tush* God
has forgotten, he will not see it, which are at their leagues with death, and
at their bargains with hell, let them all stand back and know, that there is
no place for their names in this book: And why? the Lord himself yields the
reason, Whosoever sins against me, I will put his name out of my book. Ex.
32. And again. I will make their rememberance to cease from among men: No, No,
Jeremy tells them plain enough where they shall be written, even in the dust
or in the earth Ier. 17. and why? because they have forsaken the Lord, the
fountain of living waters.

Therefore let them write their names upon their own stately houses, and upon
their sumpteous tombs and Sepulchers, no man will control them. But it is
their Judgeme^t to be scattred like the chafe before the wind: Psalm. 1. To be
withered like grass before the Son. Psalm. 37. and to melt or consume like
wax before the fire. Psalm. 68. that is: to be forgotten, and to be raked up
and buried in the forlorn ashes of all obscuritye and oblivion.

And yet their punishment shall not be forgotten, I warrant you: for that is
written and set down in another kind of book then we have yet spoken off, I
mean the black book of Gods most bitter vengeance, whereof Ezechel speaks
Chap. 2. Which indeed is written within and without, and there is nothing
written in it, but lamentation, and mourning, and woe. For alas how should
they lament and mourn and bewail their cursed condition, when because they
are not found written in the book of life, therefore their own consciences
shall accuse them: all creatures shall be suffered to exclame upon them: The
Judge himself shall condemn them to be cast into the lake of fire: the
blessed Angels shall thruste them out of Gods presence: and the ugly devils
shall thereupon arrest the^, for firebrands of hell.

And so to conclude this point I can say no more but only wish with Job. cap.
19. That my words were written in a book, and Engraven with an Iron pen in
lead or in stone, for ever, id est, in the hearts and minds of you all, so many
as are here present, whether they be like unto a book, id est, learned and
wise, and well able to instruct others: or like unto lead, id est, dui through
gross ignorance, or like unto stone, id est, obdurat, and hard, even through
sin and wickedness: yet the Lord grant that the Iron pen of his ingrauing
Spirit, may imprint deep in your hearts, and souls, the sum and effect of
all that I have spoken touching the book of Remembrance, and that you may
esteem with your selves, how fearful a thing it will be to fall into the
hands of the Lord at the last day, because your Repentance is not of
Record, nor written in the book of his gracious Remembrance.

Of the third Comfort.
ANd they shall be unto me says the Lord for a flock. etc. In these words
the Israelites are mightily encouraged to proceed in their repentance, with a
merciful promise of the Lords protection, wherein most gratiouslye he gives
the^ warrantise of two things.

First that they shall be to him for a flock, etc.

Who would not repent, and be obedient to the voice of the messengers of the
Lord, that might thereby become so happy, as to be his flock* yea or a sheep
of his flock? A rare encouragement exceeding far the royaltye of all Princes,
and the Majesty of all Emperors. For as the Lord has freelye chosen to him
self of all the trees in the wood one Vine: of all the flowrs in the garden
one Lyllie: of all the depthes of the sea, one River: of all the buildinges on
the earth, one Syon: of all the fowls of the air, one Dove: of all the
cattle of the earth, one sheep: and of all the Nations of the world, one
people: So this people is his flock: and this flock is his church, and this
Church is not Synagoga, id est, qualiscunque Congregatio, any kind of
assemblye, yea common riffe r^ffe, or disordred: but it is more properly and
worthily termed E^^le(...) id est, Coetus ordinatus, a Goodly assembly.

Ab (...) euocare, for the manner of the Athenians was, when they would have
the people assembled to hear the sentence of the Senate, to send forth a
crier to call upon the^ and so to ^u^l them out from the rascal sort of the
people: And here upon the Apostle translated the word to their purpose, and
gave the Church it self that term: because it is Caetus Dei praeconio verbi
a regno sa^hanae ad gratiam and salutem in Christo Jesus e^ocatus. An assemblye
or flock of God with the voice of his word called or c^lled from the
kingdom of sath(...) to grace and Salvation in Christ Jesus. This is the way
then, beloved in the Lord* ^^ become ye sheep of Christ his flock, and so to be
reputed and taken: to do as Israel did, id* est, obey his voice, and hear his
word. My sheep know my voice, Ioh. 10. And Moses had incharge to tell the
Israelites thus much from the Lord, that if they would here his voice in deed,
and keep his covenant, then they should be his flock or chief tresure above al
people, Ex. 19. let this then stand ^or one of the most happiest prerogatives
of the flock of Christ, that it is and will be assembled at the sound of his
heavenly word, from the rascal heard of goats.

The voice of Gods word makes his people flock and throug together; like
sheep to the fold.

Another prerogative of this flock is, that as it is co^uented and assembled by
the call of the word, so it is continued and kept together through unity and
christian love, which is the bond of perfection* This is like the fold that
coopes up the sheep together, and keeps them from wandering and straggling* It
is like the band that preserues the shese or faggot from shattering Vnus
Pastor, vnum Ouile. There is one sheepehearde and one flock or sheepefolde.

And therefore in the behalf of Jesus Christ our head shepehearde, I beseech
you, and for your own saluations sake, I require you and charge you al to take
heed how by scismes and sects ye seek to scatter the flock of Christ, lest
you bring it from Ouile to Hedile, and from Hedile to Canile, from a shepefolde
to a heard of Goats, and from a heard of Goats, to a ke^nell of dogs.

Alas, alas, it was not lawful to break a bone of Christ's natural body, but
he that breaks the peace of the Church, breaks the very backebone of his
mystical body.

And it was as unlawful to part or divide so much as his unseamed cote: But
they which practice to divide the Church, what do they else, but tear his cote
off his back? and rent in sonder his tender heart? Wherefore as nature forced
the right mother to abhor the dividing of her own child. 1. King. 3. So the
Lord grant, that grace may make us all forbear to divide the sweet Spouse of
Jesus Christ, the common mother of us al: Nature I say made the mother to
abhor to divide the child, and can not grace make the child aborre to divide
the mother?

A third prerogative of the Lords flock is, that it is sustained and fostered
after the best manner that may be possible. For David says The Lord is my
shepherd, therefore I shall want nothing. Psalm. 23. And again, He shall feed
me in a green pasture, and lead me besides the waters of comfort. By the
green pasture we are to understand, the word of truth, Quod manet in
aeternum: Esaias. 40. For this always flourishes, and neither the heat of
Summer can scorch it, nor the cold of winter freese it. And by the waters of
comfort, he means the graces of the holy Ghost according to that which is
written. Io. 7. He that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
the water of life.

Fourthlye, this flock is sure to be guided, and directed by the Lords own
hand, He shall lead me in the paths of righteousness, says David. Psa, 23.
And again, Thou art with me: thy rod and thy staff comfort me.

By his rod he means such correction as it shall please him to give the
sheep of his pasture: And by his staff, he understands ^he strength and
power whereby he will drive back his enemies.

And to this very end was the ministry of the Angels ordained, to guarde the
flock of Christ in all safety. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about
them that fear him, and delyuereth them. Psalm. 34. And again, He shall give
his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: They shall bear
thee in their hands, that thou dashe not thy foot against a stone. Psalm. 91.
And have not the Patriarchs, and the Prophets, and the people of Israel, and
the Apostles, and the Saints of God found it so in their disiresses?

Was not Jacob comforted against Esau, by an host of Angels? Genesis 32. Was not
Elizeus sauegarded by an army of Angels from the Assirians? 2. King. 6. Was not
our blessed Savior Christ himself ministered unto by Angels? Math. 4.

Most wonderful is the protection, and most tender is the care which the Lord
has over his flock.

It were a great favor to allow unto his flock a guard of men, and to allow
it a band of Princes, were exceading and surpassing and incredible love: But to
make the Angels guard us, and to pitch round about us for our safetye, what an
unspeakable prerogative is it of his incomparable mercy and bottomless
compassion toward the sheep of his pasture?

And lastly, this flock shall escape and go scotfree in the day of vengeance.
In the day that I shall do this. But what is it the nere, or wherein are we
the better? when in the mean time our Savior Christ tells his disciples,
that their estate in this life shall be Tanquam Oues in medio Luporum, As sheep
in the midst of Wolves, Math. 10. Is this all the care he has of his flock?
to leave it in such a case in the mids of Wolves? Tush, take we no care, for
the Lords care over his: For as the very hear of our heads are numbered, and
not one of them shall miscary: So right dear in the sight of the Lord, is the
death of his Saints. And if they be but in danger once, he will do as that
same good shepherd did, whereof we read in the Gospel. Luke 15. Who having
but 100. sheep in all his flock, when one of them went astraye, left the rest
in the wilderness, and sought it out, and brought it home into safetye.

But what if the Lords flock be left in the mids of Wolves, id est,
Heretics, or tytantes? yet the Lord has noe such purpose rhere to leave
them, because they should be devoured of them, but a contrary drift there is,
which you would little think. That is, that this flock should overcome and
devour the Wolves themselves. And so much Chrysostom says, Plurimos morsus
ab us accipientes non solum non consumuntur, sed et illos conuertunt, receiving
many bytings of them, they are not only not devoured, but they eue^ convert
the^.

And this is surely miraculous. It were strange to see a sheep overcome or kill
a wolf But it is not strange to see one of Christ's sheep overcome or kill
one of Satan's Wolves.

It were a wonder to hear that a sheep should turn a Wolf into a sheep (I
warrant you that Ovid in all his Metamorphosis has none such) But it is not
vnlikelye nor impossible that one of the Lords sheep may of an Heretic make
a good Christian, and of a tyrant a good Magistrate, which is al one in effect.
And therefore Chrysostom says, multo mirabilius est et maius, transmutare
mentes eorum, quam interficere eos. It is a thing much more wonderful and
greater, to change the minds of Heretics and tyrants then to kill them.

Taking these Wolves for Heretics, you shall find that the sheep of the
Lords flock have converted them, and turned them into sheep.

The Apostle Andrewe reclaiming Maximilla from Idolatry to Christianity,
notwithstanding the displeasure and furye of her Husband Ageas, did he not
turn a Woulfe into a sheep?

The Apostle James by his wonderful constancy, wrought a wounderfull feate,
that is overcame and ravished the wretch that accused him before the
magistrates* into so much that he knew no better way to make him amends, but
to confess that he himself was a Christian as well as the Apostle, and asked
him forgiveness for his treatcherye, and was willing to drink of the same cup
of torments with him Now what was this but to turn a woulfe into a sheep?

But taking wolves for tyrants, you may see and consider how the Lords flock
has overcome them.

In that S. Steven prayed for them that stoned him to death.

In that ^. Andrew being fastened to the Cross, reioysed t^ereat, and told
Ageas the tyrant to his teeth Sicrucem horruissem, maiestatem et gloriam
crucis Christi nunquam predicassem. Had I feared the Cross, I would never have
preached the Majesty and glory of the Cross of Christ.

In that S. Laurence being broyled upon a gridirone took it in so good part,
that he could find in his heart to say to Decius the tyrant, Assum est satis,
versa, et manduca: One side is broyled enough, turn it and then eat part.

And in that Ignatius being cast to wild beasts to be devoured, spoke no
worse words then these to Traiane the tyrant, Frumentum Dei sum, et per dentes
bestiarum commolor* vt mundus panis inueniar, I am become Gods Wheat, and I am
to be ground in the teeth of these wild beasts, that I may prove clean bread.

In that I say in all these bloody persecutions, the patience of Gods saints
and servants was so invincible, how intolerable so ever were their torments.
Who had the victory the woolues or the sheep?

The like conquest had our English martires in Queen Mary's days over
Bonner, Gardener, and Storye, the bloudethirsty wolves of Antichriste, for they
did not let to confess that they thought the Heretykes (meaning the Martyrs)
took great pleasure in burning, they went to it so willingly: they endured it
so constantly: and they yielded themselves weary with tormenting them. The
Wolves were weary with devouring: But the Lambs were not weary with suffering,
a foil, a foil.

No marvel then if Hillary said, Hoc Ecclesiae proprium est, dum persequitur,
floret, dum opprimitur crescit; dum contemnitur, proficit: dum leditur vincit,
dum arguitur intelligit, tunc stat cum superari videtur* de Trinitat. Lib. 4.
This is the manner of the Church, when it is persecuted it florisheth: when it
is oppressed, it grows: when it is contemned, it profits: when it is hurt
it vanquisheth: when it is reproved it understands: and then it stands when
it seems to be overcome.

No marvel if Augustine said, Occidebantu^, v^ebantur, ^orquebantur,
Cruciebantur, et multiplicaban^ur, Gods Prophets were slain, burned,
tormented, crucified, and yet they were multiplied.

And no marvel if the Church it self be compared to a Palm tree, psalm. 92.
Which for all the froste of Winter, and scorching of Summer, and blustering of
winds, and pressing down of waightes, yet it will still be green, and
florishe, and rise up against and above the burtheng, and therefore was given to
Conquerors in token of victory.

If you would know the reason hereof, go no further the^to the first promise,
The sede of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head: This is done by virtue of
that seed. Or go no further then the words of Elizeus: They that are with us,
be more then they that be against us, 2. Reg. 6. And because Michaell and his
Angels have been, be, and shallbe to good for the Dragon and his Angels for
ever. Appo. 12. Therefore it suffiseth to resolve us that it shall be so.

And here as I have spoken of the estate and condition of the Lords flock as
it is in this life present: So if the time did not exclude me, I had thought to
have laid before you the blessed prerogatives thereof* which it shall have in
the life to come. As first that it shall be separated from all the noisome
goats of this world. Secondlye, that it shall be situate on the right hand of
the Judge. Thirdly that it shall be leased, and possessed of that kingdom
which was prepared for them before the foundations of the world. Math. 25.

But I come to the other thing, which is graciously warranted in this promise
of the Lords protection, which is specified in these words.

And I will spare them, etc. The like promise is made generally to all them
that fear God. Psalm. 103. Even as a Father has pity on his children: So
has the Lord compassion on them that fear him.

Indeed many Fathers have been unkind and unnatural to their children. Saul
made an odlawe, and when Ionathas his son was within the lurtch of it, he
would have cut him off, had not the people stood him in stead and rescued him.
1. Sam. 14. Herod having but only two sons, Alexander and Aristobolus,
upon a false surmise strangled them both. Whereupon Augustus said, Melius est
Herodis esse porcum, quam filium: It is better to be Herodes hog, than his
son,

Plutarch says, that in Rome rich men used to carry whelps and young apes up
and down the streets in their arms: which when Caesar saw, he would needs
know, Ecquid apud ipsos mulieres liberos non parerent? Whether women did not
bring forth children with them?

But to let these monsters go, which either praeter and contra naturam, have
thus rebelled and repined against their own bowels: do you but measure the
tender affection of parents toward their children by old Elie, who hearing of
the death of Hofni and Phinehas his sons, with very woe fell down backward and
brake his neck. 1 Samuel 4. Or by David, who at the death of that one son
which was begotten in adultery: and after the death of that other son, which
let not to commit adultery with his fathers concubines, I mean Absolon: did
so take on, that very sorrow had almost broken his very heart insunder. 2. Sa.
12. 2. Sam. 18. 33. And to read in histories, that Gordianus when he heard of
the death of his son, strangled him self. Or that Orodes king of Parthia,
hearing that his son Pacorus was slain in war, through extreme sorrow fell
mad. Or that Pythias king of Bithinia, when Xerxes had slain his son, left
his kingdom to his wife, and went to his sons grave, and there ended his
life with mourning. Or that A^geus surmising that Theseus his son had been
slain of Minotaurus, leapt into the sea and drowned himself. To read of all
these, and infinite other the like examples, how does it demonstrate the dear
and tender affection of fathers toward their sons: therefore in that the Lord
promises to fill, and to pour out his compassion after this rate and measure,
what a comfort is this?

But indeed our heavenly Father does so entirely tender his children, that
there is no end or comparison thereof to be made. And therefore as Esaias says,
he is our Father. cap. 63.

And as Jeremy says, He will be called our Father. Ier. 3. So why our Savior
Christ should forbid us to call any other by the name of Father here in earth,
saying For one is your Father in heaven, Math. 23. I know no reason but this,
for that no father on earth does so tenderlye love his own children, as our
heavenly Father does affect and like of us, being but his adopted children.

He spares us in three respects, in two of them much like a natural Father,
but in the third there is no comparison, I am sure, and so you will say.

First, as a natural Father will not Kill or destroy his child when he is
sick, and feeble, and cannot eat his meat, or aborreth such things through
infirmity, as should be a mean to recover his health: So our heavenly Father
will spare us, and not condemn us, or confound us for ever, although we be
sick in spirit, and weak in faith, and do even loath often times his
heavenly word, which is the health and salvation of our souls.

Secondly, like a natural father he spares us in respect of our wilful
prodigalities, and wastinges of his blessings and graces: not unlike that same
loving Father in the gospel who forgave his son, which had so leudlye
consumed his fathers substance, and his own portion.

Our race we have as wilfully run. Our time we have as vainly spent. His
favors we have as ilfau^^rdly bestowed, and his displeasure we have as
desperately incurred. But yet come home to his mercy by repentance, and say,
father we have sinned against thee* etc. and then you shall find that he will
spare you, and embrace you in the arms of his merciful compassion. etc.

But now to speak of that respect of the Lords gracious favor which is
without comparison. What natural Father ever did as he has done* to spare us
which were but his adopted children, he has not spared his only begotten
Son Christ Jesus. So that to us ward he was worth his promise here made,
but he has laid it upon his natural son with a witness (...) our sakes.
He was feign to resign a royal kingdom to come to an Asses cribbe: to
relinquish the sweet society of Angels, to live among malicious rakehels, the
Scribes and Pharisees: to surrender a throne of glory, for a cursed cross of
wood: to yield up a crown of bliss, for a crown of thorns: to loose the
favor of his heavenly father, to pleasure his deadly foes: and to suffer
death, that miserable wretches might be spared and saved alive. O kind and
tender Sauiuiour, to spare and to save us, thou have suffered thy self to
become a very spoil for the malice of Satan.

I grant you Fabius Maximus was very desirous to spare and save the Roman
Captives, when he sold all his patrimony to redeem them. But our Savior
Christ has suffered himself to be sold, to redeem us his very enemies in
respect.

Mithridates was wondered at for his tender affection toward Leonicus his dear
friend, because he gave all the Rhodian captives to redeem him: but yet he
gave his enemies to redeem his friend. But Christ Jesus our blessed Savior,
has given himself to redeem his enemies.

To be short, when there was in Rome a sudden gaping gulf which they could
by no means fill up, and the Oracle had signified, that except the chiefest
thing, and that which the commons loved best, were cast into it, it could not
be stopped: Curtius understanding that he himself was their only Jewel,
without any more ado threw himself into it, and so it was filled up presently.
Yet this was done for his country, that loved him so well, that they accounted
nothing better or more worthy the^ he. But when ye gaping gulf of Gods most
dreadful vengeance was to be stopped, our blessed savior cast himself into
the midst of it, and died a most bitter death, and this he did for the
people, which thought they had nothing worse or more vile than he, no not
Barrabas that arrant cutthroat.

What shall I say then of this so rare, so royal, so unspeakable, and so
incomparable love of his toward us? I can say no less than Barnard said, Opus
sine exemplo, gratia sine merito, charitas sine modo: Such a work as has no
example, a favor without desert, and love without measure.

The Lord therefore grant that such bottomless compassion in him may presently
work some thankful compunction in you. And that as the veil of the temple
rent in sunder from the top to the bottom, when these things were
performed: So the consideration of the extreme misery which he endured, that
he might spare and save our forlorn souls, may ransacke every vain in our
hearts in all due remorse. And y^ as the very earth did quake in horror of so
great violence wrongfully offered to him, and meekely suffered for you: So our
hearts and consciences may quake and tremble, considered that an innocent
person has endured the same to spare our guilty and damned souls.

To him therefore, which has so entirely oued us, that he has not spared his
only begotten Son to save us: and to him which has so dearly bought us,
that he has laid down his life to redeem us: and to him that has so
wonderfully purged and sanctified us through the Lauer of regeneration, that
he has thereby sealed us until the day of Redemption: id est, to God the
Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost three distict persons and one
everlasting God, be al praise, power and dominion, world without end.

Amen.
FINIS.

