A SERMON Preached at Paul's Cross the second Sunday in Mychaelmas term
last. 1590.

By Geruase Babington D. of Divinity.

Not printed before this 23. of August. 1591.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Este, dwelling in Aldersgate street at the
sign of the black Horse, and are there to be sold.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Thomas Cranfield Master, Henry Row, Barthelmew
Barnes, and Nicholas Staynes, wardens: and the rest of the right worshipful
Society of the Mercery of the city of London.
I Have ever accounted ingratitude (Right worshipful) to be not only the
greatest but the vgliest mo^ster in nature, according to that Ingratum si
dixeris, omnia dixeris. Wondering at the most sort of men, which in this our age
do live, that they so little regard of it, and not rather altogether shun and
abhor it. But when I perticulerly muse of some, as of my self: I find, that
either opportunity will not always serve, or hability in most does want, to
those that carry willing minds to show themselves mindeful in words, or
answerable in deeds. And concerning my self, which is now my drift and
purpose, I have often feared least of diverse hereof I should as guilty be
noted, and of many to whom I have been greatly beholden, justly condemned.
But of none more then of your worships and this right worshipful company,
which to me and mine, for these many years, have been most bountiful Patrons,
and in diverse respects as loving and careful parents. Wherefore having gotten
some fit occasion, I thought not to pretermit the same, but therein to show my
mind and poor ability, wherein I may do your worships any service. I do
here offer to your worships a small present, small I say in respect of
answering any benefit receued, but great and precious in regard of the matter
therein contained. A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, as the title shows, by
a learned, godly, and serious laborer in the Church of GOD, which being of the
best generally liked, so of many earnestly desired. Amongst whom diverse of my
friends (by reason of my ancient acquaintance with the Preacher) did request me
being thereto desirous of my self, to procure a copy of the same, affirming
that it would for ever be a comfort to them, and one Sermon instead of many
Sermons. Which I assaying to do, at the first found him very unwilling to
grant, being before requested the like by certain of great account. Yet I
presuming farther to press him, bearing my self bold upon long acquaintance
and knowledge, with the remembrance of diverse other benefits which I had often
and diverse ways received of him, presuming to argue and urge farther my suit,
aleadging that I knew his mind was not only to profit the audience the^
present, but to do good to so many as conveniently he could, according to my
experienced knowledge of him of long time. At length I obtained a Copy of him
of his own hand writing, which I have caused to be Printed, not only for the
benefit of your worships, and this right worshipful Company, to whom being
diligently read, and often meditated upon, I doubt not but it will be
fruitful, but also to so many as shall read or hear the same, which was the
authors labor and purpose, and my poor endeavor and request. This I say I am
bound to present your worships with all, hoping you will use the benefit therein
contained by due consideration, and accept of my mind and duty which I owe
your worships, to whom as to the rest of this right worshipful company, I pray
for the increase of our heavenly fathers grace, with the still continuance of
the same.

Your worships most bounden Richard Wilkinson.

Things touched in this Sermon.
COncerning the doctrine of our election The dislikers of it fol. 5 Reasons why
it ought to be taught. 6 The evidence of the doctrine. 8 The cause of election.
11 The stabilitie of it. 13 The number certain. 15 Knowledge of it in our
selves. 16 The use and comfort of it. 17 Cauills and objections against it
answered. 23 Diverse sorts of conmers to Christ. 33 Pride outward in apparel.
35 Pride inward in mind. fol. 38 Over nice humility. 41 Slippers from the
Ministry. ibid. A holow heart to the state. fol. 42 The judgment of God
upon Traitors ever. ibid. Contention and Division in the church. 43 Holow
reverence to Superiors. 50 Titles used to minist. ibid Church robbers. 53
Comfort against our unworthiness. 59 Against disdain. 61 A pattern for judges,
lawyers and governors. ibid Certainty of our salvation. 62 Yet how a child of
God may be shaken. 64 The story of master Robart Glouer, Martyr. 65 No
presumption to believe the certainty of salvation. 67 Constancy in good
affection. 69 Not esily to suspect whom we have trusted. ibid. Sectaries excom.
71
John 6. 37. All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me, and him that
comes to me, I cast not away.
IN the verse before (right Honorable and beloved in y^ Lord all) we hear our
Savior Christ affirm of the Cape^naits, that they also amongst others, had
seen him, but believed not. The reason is implied in these words, which I have
read, because they were not given of the father. For all that the Father gives
me, says our savior in this text, comes unto me and him that comes to me
I cast not away. So is this verse I say a reason of the former, and we plainly
see it. Added of our savior Christ in his most deep wisdom, to answer both
then, and whilst y^ world indureth, for the unbelief of many, which contemn
the Gospel, that it ought not, as it often is, be a stumbling block to any to
make them mislike or doubt of Gods truth, because many reject the same, and
cannot be won to regard and follow it, as they ought? For they that so do, and
continue, are not given to Christ of the Father, and being not given, they come
not, it being an effect of yt Fathers giving to come to the Son, as
witnesses our Savior both in this place and else where, when he says: He
that is of God, hears Gods word, ye therefore hear John. 8. 47
them not, because ye are not of God. Again, But ye believe not, because ye
are Iho. 10. 26.
not of my sheep. And thirdly: As many as were ordained to aeternall life,
believed, Act. 13. 48.
as many as were ordained, with diverse such places, all proouing as I say, that
to come to Christ by faith proceeds as an effect from the fathers giving of
us to Christ by election.

A doctrine, if ever necessary, now surely most necessary, when the fearful
contempt of Gods word, that rules in many, either is, or may be, a stumbling
block to weak minds, that judge not persons by faith, but faith by persons,
as Lactantius speaks. Not knowing, or else not weighing this point of Gods
sacred truth, that they only believe which are Act 13. 48
ordained, Iho^. 8. 47
which are of God, Iho. 10. 26
which are sheep, to as this text speaks, which are given to y^ Son by yt
Father. Which because many, yea the most part of men are not, therefore they
believe not, neither embrace that thing, which in it self yet is worthy all
love and following. Necessary I say to these weak ones, that they may learn
not to fall away from goodness for this cause, and necessary to these
unbelieving contemners, to awake them to look how this contempt takes any
root in them, least happily it be, by their reiection from God, because they
are not of the number of them whom the Father has given to his Son to be
saved of him, and by him, and in him, in his judging day.

Purposing then by the Lords assistance and your godly patience to say
something of this matter, let the order for me to speak, and you to hear be
the self same, which the holy ghost directs us unto in the text.

First of the Fathers giving. Secondly of their coming that are given. Thirdly
of the intertainme^t with Christ, that they find, which being given do come.
Non eijcio, I cast not away.
1 Part.
Concerning the first, to wit, the Fathers giving, contained in these words,
(all that the Father gives me) a learned writer says thus. Quos pater dedit
praedestinatione, veniunt per fidem, and tales non eijcit Christus. Whom the
Father gives by predestination, those come to Christ by faith, and he casts
not away such comers. Making this giving of the father to be nothing else, The
Fathers giueing is our election.
but his eternal election and apointment unto life of such as he will have
saved in Christ and by Christ. And in deed so it is. Dat enim Christo pater,
cum eligit in Christo tanquam in capite, in quo omnia me^bra salua erunt. The
Father gives to Christ when he electeth in Christ, as in the head in whom all
the members shall be saved. Proofs of scripture are the grounds of grounds to
direct both my speech and your faith, and of those I could remember you of
many, if it were needful. But the 17. of Ihon shall suffice us for all, where
it is said: I have declared thy name unto the men whom thou Gave me, thine
Ver. 6.
they were and thou Gave them me. I pray not for the world, but for them
whom thou Ver. 9.
have Given me. Holy Father keep them Ver. 11.
whom thou have Given me. Them whom Ver. 12.
thou Gave me, I have kept. Over and over repeating this word you see, and
ever by the same noting Gods election of his servants and children appointed to
be saved. Therefore this exposition is plain not only by testimonies of
interpreters, but by conference and witness of scriptures themselves.

So then the doctrine of Gods election is the first point that to day we are
occasioned by this text to speak and hear of, it being meant by y^ word
Giving, as I have showed.

A doctrine as you well know, that both heretofore has, and even yet still is
of ignorant minds avoided as a dangerous doctrine, judged not fit to be spoken
of, except it be in schools, and charged with many wicked inconveniences as
flowing from y^ affirmation thereof. The Epistles of Prosper. and Hilari
prefixed, before the books of Austen. De predestinatione sanctorum will
justify what I say, instead of many mo, which might be brought. What others
of later time, and especially Papists have both written and daily speak, would
be to tedious to observe.

Whatsoever they were, or are, old, or (...)* is most certain they consider
not

Either ye duty of gods ministers and children. Or the great evidence of
Scripture for this doctrine. Or ye swet use of it to mani special purposes
For all these do show, that the doctrine in no case is to be avoided, but both
spoken and heard of, as occasion shall serve, to Gods great glory and his true
servant sweet comfort.

And first for our duty, think of it I Our duty binds us to consider this
doctr.
pray you. Surely it is this. Ut arcana non inuestigare, ita reuelata non
occultare and supprimere. As not to search the secrets of God which are not
revealed: so not to suppress and hide what is revealed. For so teaches us
Moses if you remember, when he says, The secret things belong to the Lord our
God, but the things revealed belong to us Deutro. 29. 29.
and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of the law.

Again it is our duty to esteem of the Lord and his word thus, that as he
has A second reason.
omitted nothing that is needful to be known so has he laid down nothing,
but what ought to be known and is most ^^^fitable. But he has laid down this
doctrine of our election, therefore necessary to be taught and looked into of
all men.

Thirdly, it is the duty of all faithful A third reason.
ministers to preach the gospel wholly to Gods people and to deliver unto them
even all the counsel of God: But this doctrine is a part of the contents of
this book of God, therefore to be delivered to Gods people as occasion shall
serve, or else we do not our duities.

And least any man should distinguish of Gods people, and say some be learned,
some be unlearned, the one may be thus preached unto, but not the other,
consider I pray you the words of our Savior Christ, Go preach the gospel,
Omni creaturae, To all creatures, evidently giving the simpler sort as good
right to the whole doctrine of his word, as the better, and the unlearned as
the learned. Which y^ faithful Apostle well knew when he said: I am a debtor
To. 1. 14.
both to the Graecians and Barbarians, both to the wisemen and to the unwise.

If any man will say: yet a care must be had of men's capacities, and of
edification, I confess it willingly, and therefore have always added (as
occasion serves) that is, as shall be fit for y^ people, to whom we speak,
going by degrees in all our doctrine, as may most profit, and ever soberly and
carefully keeping within the limits of the word. But utterly to suppress and
always to avoid any truth reveled in the book of God, or by name this truth
of our election and predestination, I say it is not lawful, but the contrary
a parcel of our bounden duty both to God, our selves, and our brethren.

In the second place, they consider as Evidence of Scripture.
little the evidence of scripture for this doctrine as they have done before our
duties. For I may bouldly say there is no one thing more plainly and fully
testified in the word then this is, being often iterated and beaten upon in
sundry places. That a thing often spoken of might at one time or other be
duly marked and borne away. First, the doctrine, then the branches.

The doctrine it self is laid down in First for the doctr.
this sort. That as the clay lies before the potter to be used and handled,
disposed of and formed as shall please him: so were all men at the first before
the Lord in his eternal counsel, to receive an end or use according to his
will, to life or death, to honor or dishonor, to salvation or damnation, to
heaven or hell. In which good pleasure of his (ever the rule of right) he has
disposed of some, one way, of some another. It being his glory in his house
also, to have vessels of diverse sorts and not all to one use. Of many
scriptures some few shall serve. First the testimony of the Apostle who says
to the Romans. That whom he To. 8. 30.
has predestinate them also he called, and whom he called them also he
justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified. Boldly auouching
this doctrine which some make so dangerous with all the degrees and sequells of
the same. In the 9. Chapter he To. 9. 22. 23.
makes express mention of Vessels of mercy prepared to glory, and vessels of
wrath prepared to destruction. To the Ephesians Ephesians. 1.
he says, He has chosen us in him, he has predestinate us to be adopted,
etc. In the Gospel see often two sorts of men, one to Mat. 13. 11.
whom it is given to understand the secrets of the kingdom of Heaven, an
other to whom it is not given, one sort to whom it shall be said Come ye
blessed, an other Math. 25.
sort to whom it shall be said, Go ye cursed. Behold again says old Simeon:
This Luke. 2. 34
child is appointed for the fall and rising of many in Israel. Therefore two
sorts there are in this counsel of God, one must rise and the other must fall,
being so appointed. Esau and Jacob, Peter and Judas with the two thieves at the
death of Christ, and many mo, declare thus much in example to us. God has
loved, and God has hated, God has elected and God has rejected, God has
saved and God has cast away for ever. Still but in justice whatsoever he does,
without wrong to any all being his own.

Now if any man will not stay here, but will search further, and ask a reason
of this the Lords doing, why he rejects any, all being equal his workmanship
and alike by nature, to these the wise and sober Apostle answers no
otherwise, but he willed because he willed. Noting thereby To. 9.
that his will should content us, which he has revealed, without any reason
which is not revealed. And if it do not, then hear I pray you what Saint
Austine says to such curious inquirers: Tu homo expectas De verbis Apost. Ser.
20.
a me responsum, and ego quoqua homo sum. Itaquae ambo audiamus dicentem: O
homo, tu quis es qui responsas deo, melior est fidelis ignorantia, quam
temeraria scientia. Quaere merita, non inuenies nisi paena^, O altitudo. Petrus
negat, latro credit. O altitudo. Quaeris tu rationem, ego expauescam
altitudinem. Tu ratiocinare, ego mirabor. Tu disputa, ego credam. Altitudinem
video, ad profunditatem non peruenio. Paulus inscrutabilia vocat, tu vis
scrutari, ille inuestigabiles vias eius, tu vestigas. Cui responsio ista De
spir. and lit. cap. 34.
displicet, quaerat, doctiores, sed caveat, ne inueniat presumtores. Thou O man
look for an answer of me, and I my self am also a man. Therefore both thou
and I, let us harken to him that says: O man who art thou that disputest with
God? Better far is faithful ignorance, then rash knowledge. Seek for merit,
thou shall find but punishment. O depth. Peter denies, the thief believes. O
depth. Thou seek a reason of this, I will tremble at the depenes. Thou
reasonest, I will wonder. Thou disputest, I will believe. A depth I see, to the
bottom I cannot come, Paul calls them the unsearchable ways of God, and
thou will search the^. Whosoever is not satisfied with this answer, let him
seek for one better learned then I am, but let him take heed that he find not
a more presumer. Thus much may suffice for the doctrine it self that it is
evident in the scripture.

Concerning the branches of it, as evident The cause of election.
again is the word for the same, and first for the cause. It tells us
plainly that we are chosen according to his good will. His will I say and not
our will or Ephese. 1. 5. Ver. 4.
yet work any manner of way. That we should be holy, says the Apostle, not
because we were holy, making our holiness an effect flowing from election, not
election from, or for our holiness. With which Saint Austine agreed when he
said: Pradestinatio est preparatio beneficiorum Dei. Praedestination is a
preparation to all the benefits of God. I have obtained mercy 1. Cor. 7. 25.
says the Apostle to be faithful, not because I was faithful, or would be in
time. Again to the Romans, There is a remnant To. 11. 5.
according to the election of grace, of grace, I say, and mark it, he says
not of merit, or for merit, for grace excludes merit, as the Apostle
plentifully proves, To 4. And Saint Austine plainly confessed To. 4.
when he said, Gratia non est vllo modo, nisi sit gratuita omni modo. It is
not grace any way except it be free every way. And again writing upon these
words in John: Nisi pater traxerit, except the father dra^veth: Cur aijt
traxerit and non duxerit? Ne vllam Aug. in Ihon. 6.
precedere nostram voluntatem au^ meritum credamus. Why says he except the
father draw him and nor except the Father guide or lead him? Surely for fear
we should think by so speaking that some will of ours or merit went before.

3 Plain again is the scripture for the The stabilitie of our election.
firmness and stabilitie of this decree of God, as by many places might be
showed. Writing unto Timothy the Apostle says thus in plain words: The
foundation of 2. Tim. 2. 19.
God remains sure, sure I say and mark it, having this seal, the Lord
knows who be his. To the Romans he says thus, The To. 11. 25.
gifts and calling of God are without repentance, that is without change or
alteration. It may appear unto us also most evidently by this argument. If
whatsoever A reason proouing the stabilitie of Gods decree.
befalls the wicked, still befalls them to their damnation, beeting so by
their great wickedness perverted, and whatsoever befalls y^ godly still
turns to their good, then is the decree of God for the life of some, and
death of other some, most stable and firm, but this is so, if you mark
particulers, therefore the conclusion follows. For perticulers, name what you
will, be it never so good, yet to them that be reprobates still it is a fall.
The gospel of God, how sweet, how good, how profitable and yet to the wicked
it is a savor 2. Cor. 2 16.
of death unto death, and not a savor of life unto life. The long suffering of
God, how gracious, how good, how worthy praise and thanks for ever. Yet unto
the wicked To. 2. 4.
it is made an occasion to harden their hearts to presume in sinning, and to
heap up more and more wrath against the day of wrath for body and soul.
Christian liberty, what a blessed grace of God is it? Yet of the wicked Galat.
5. 13
it is turned into wantonness, and made an occasion of great offense. The
Supper of the Lord, what a sweet Sacrament is it, full of comfort to y^ godly,
to the increase of true faith in them, yet the wicked eat and drink it
unworthily to their own damnation, 1. Cor. 11.
and regard not as they ought the Lords body. What should I say? Is not
Christ himself our dear and blessed Savior good, and full of life and
salvation to all that believe? Yet even this Lamb of 1 Peter. 2. 8.
God, and son of the most high to these cursed castawaies is a stone to
stumble at and a rock of offense, they being disobedient and even ordeigned to
this thing. Finally in a Tit. 1. 15.
word: unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure, but even
their minds and consciences are destled. Contrariwise Romans 8.
to the godly which are pure, all things are pure, and even all things, all
things, I say, work to y^ best to them that love God. Yea says Austen Ipsa
etiam peceata. The very sins and falls of the godly turn unto their good
some way or other, though thereby they may not be imboldned to offend.
Therefore we see how firm this decree of God is, the wicked cannot be saved
turning all things to their woe, and the elect cannot finally be cast away,
reaping through the assisting grace of Gods spirit good from all things that
befall them.

The number of the elect and knowledge of them in God. Luc. 12. 7.
For number and knowledge of God of these his elect and chosen, the scripture
again is not silent, but tells us thus much, that the hairs of our heads
are nu^bered. Then certainly our persons. God 2 Timothy 2. 19.
knows who be his. Then certainly he knows the number, and the number is
certain. Our names are written in the Luck. 10. 20. Iho. 10. 13.
book of life. Therefore we are known and the number is certain. He calls
his by their names therefore he knows them, both who they are and how many.
With which proofs and many mo that might be named Saint Austen joins when he
says. Praedestinatorum ita certus est numerus vt eis nec addatur, nec
minuatur. The number Aug. de Cor. and
of the elect is so certain, that neither addition can be made unto them nor
diminution Gra. to. 3. cap. 12. 13.
from them.

Lastly the word instructs even us also Knowledge in us of the same.
to know and to believe this matter in perciculer of our selves. For the
Spirit shall rebuke the world of sin says Saint Ihon, because it believes
not, and what is Ihon. 16. 9.
it to believe, but in my soul and conscience to be assured, that Christ died,
not only for others, but even for me, and that by his death and passion, as
well I my self, my poor body and soul shall be saved, as any others? And what
is this I pray you, but to believe that amongst others, and with others, and as
well as others God has chosen you to be an heir of his Kingdom? Want this
faith in your self, and the place I aledged says the spirit shall rebuke you,
and as many as want it, for sin because ye do not believe this. Therefore we
are all bound you see even by the will of God to believe our particular
election and predestination, and he that doubts or waueretd must be rebuked,
and is rebuked even of Gods spirit for so doing. Why again should so much, and
so many things be spoken of the The second reason.
mercy and goodness of God as is in y^ scripture, but that you and I, and all
flesh should catch hold of it, and conclude out of y^ same, that to us
particulerly such and so ever God will be. Look we then at the light of y^ word
of God both for election, for y^ causes of the same, for the firmness and
stabilitie of it, for number and knowledge in God in our selves, and see
whether these mad men that cannot away with this doctrine of Gods election, do
not oppose themselves directly and plainly against the evidence of Gods holy
and sacred Scriptures, striving against the stream, and kicking against the
prick to their fearful confusion if they lean not. The third and last thing
which I said they oppose themselves against, is the sweet use of this holy
doctrine which it yeldeth sundry ways to as many, as rightly with
understanding meditate upon it. As first by confirming most The first use of
this doctrine.
strongly this feeble faith of ours against despair when troubles and crosses
do every way beset us, and as it were ouerwhelme us. For truly may it be said
of the afflictions often of the godly as one said of an other matter (...) one
labor beg^^ (...) ^^her, one sorrow follows an other, (...) (...) ^iue godly
in Christ (...), the troubles Luck. 12. 32.
(...). But ^eare not little flock says our Savior Christ, for it is your
Fathers will to give you a kingdom, as if he should say whatsoever befalls
you bitter in this world, despair not, but comfort your selves and souls with
this that you are of the flock, that is elect and chosen for a kingdom which
your fathers will is without all fail to give you. Rejoice that your Luck. 10.
20.
names are written in the book of life, that is, stay your selves upon your
election ever and fear not. Who shall lay any thing to the To. 8. 33.
charge of Gods chosen? it is God that justifies, who shall condemn? Who
shall separate 34.
us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or
famine, 35.
or nakedness, or peril, or sword? No I am persuaded that neither death nor
life, nor 38.
Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height 39.
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from y^ love of
God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Sed superatis omnibus pro cellis, tandem
in portu etc. But all storms and waves of woe being passed over and well broken
of, at last in y^ quiet haven of everlasting comfort I shall have my rest for
ever and ever. In a word, how can a man despair of Gods mercy in due time,
that finds his election in the mean time. Sweet therefore ever against
final fear is this doctrine.

Secondly, it cools and quenches the Another use.
proud puff of sinful flesh, telling us that be we never so mighty, never so
Honorable and high by place and calling in the world, yet we were made of the
same mass and mould that the poorest man and most wretched caitife to see to
in the world was, we have stood before the potter no better matter then he, to
receive a choice to such use and end as might please him. What difference is
in us (if any be touching election) it has come by mercy and not from merit,
therefore no pride, but thanks, no disdain of any, but humility toward all,
and ever in our selves bewtifieth and adorneth us most. He that gloryeth, let
him glory in the Lord, says this doctrine of election. For favor in God is
the fountain of our grace whatsoever it is that we rejoice in. Shall I hoyse
sail and look big upon others, when only by grace I am that I am? It may
not be.

Thirdly, it ^^reth our hearts with a feeling A third use.
of love in God toward us, that is sweeter then honey or the honey comb, and
^^^^eth our souls to love again, except we be dead, yea to love most earnest
according to the mercy that we have tasted of. Some shadowing of it we may see
in men, that stand all condemned justly for matter of trespass committed, and
expect a sentence of bitter death accordingly. Let the Prince in this case
release one, pardoning in mercy and giving life, when paritie of trespass
called for equal punishment: O how leapeth the heart of that released one, when
be knows it, crying mercy mercy, O sweetest mercy how bound am I for this
release. Can I love, can I think, can I honor ever condignly the fountain of
this favor toward me? I cannot, I cannot, and therefore I will dye with this
O mercy above merit and hope of requit all in me. So it is in our election
where only grace has made the difference and saved us. The love is great we
cannot but see it, and what is due we may not deney it If all love destre love
again, God forbid but such love Cupit omnis dilectio redamari.
should be ever thought of as the Lord inableth.

Fourthly, it provoke us to all good A fourth use.
works, we never think obediene to much yt redounneth to the good liking of him
yt thus has loved us. If men in this world shall stead us any way, how wish
we, how will we, how care we, how seek we to do the thing that may content,
and avoid the thing that may offend them? what comparison is there betwixt the
love of men, and this love of God toward us before the world was made? Can
then the knowledge and true regard of it be without fruit in our conversation?
It cannot be.

Fifthly, it stays us against offense that A fifth use.
would grow by such as fall away, if this were not. For it tells us some stand
in show, and some stand in truth, some stand for time, and some stand for ever.
If any had been of us says ye Apostle Ihon. They would 1. Ihon.
have continued with us. Fear we not therefore when men start aside, but stand
we fast whosoever shake, remembering well that all being not appointed to the end,
they neither are appointed to the means.

Lastly, most sweetly this doctrine of our The 6. use.
election profits unto patience, telling us, yt no tyranny in this cursed
world, no malice nor moods of mortal men, can, or shall ever prevail beyond
the limits and lists of his counsel, yt has decreed their pitch. And
therefore endure it, and endure it patiently, for he moderateth. This comforted
the Apostles for their Lord and master in that notable place of the Acts,
worthy reading a thousand times. O Lord say they against thy holy Son Jesus,
whom thou had anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentills and
the people of Israel gathered themselves together. But what could Act. 4. 27.
28.
they do? Surely they have done nothing, but what thy hand and thy counsel
had determined before to be done. This comfort our Savior himself pleased to
apply to himself against the cruel enemy lifting him self up, and va^ting as
though he had all power of life and death against our Savior. Thou could
have no power against me says he, except it were given thee from above. True
in the head, and true in the members, ever to our great stay and comfort. These
and such like are y^ fruits of this doctrine of our election. Which they never
tasted, nor ever knew, that so wickedly condemn it. Let it suffice that we
feel it to the praise of God and our comfort, and let them perish with their
error, that so cast away a doctrine of such heavenly use, if they will not
repent and be persuaded.

Away then with those cursed Cauils that fly up and down against this
doctrine. Cauils against
For it is holy, it is sweet, it is the Lords. Gods predestination.
It makes no man set all at six and seven as careless what he does, saying if
I be predestinate The first objection.
to be saved, I cannot be damned, and if I be appointed to death I cannot be
saved. But contrariwise it makes men rather careful to use means, as knowing
that the decree of God takes his effect by means. And therefore such as
rightly understand this doctrine and carry in themselves a care not to speak
profanely of any truth of God, howbeit they know that the decree of God
stands ever in it self unchangeable, and cannot be altered, yet look they
not at that, but at the means that God has appointed all men to use, either
for the obtaining, or avoiding of any thing wished, or feared. And those means
they use with all care and diligence, seeking the end by the way ordained, and
not any way made retchlesse in the means by the end. As for example, that I
may be plain. Rebecca knew that GOD had appointed her son Jacob to live, and
to be a greater man then Esau, because God himself had told her, that he
would make two mighty nations of her two sons, and the elder should serve
the younger, yet did she not conclude hereupon as these men do, that therefore it
skilled not what she did when Esau threatened to kill Jacob, for being appointed
to live, he could not be killed. But contrariwise she most carefully devised,
and most speedely used means to keep him from danger, by sending him away to
her brother Laban till Esau his anger should be as waged. Knowing as I say that
the decree of God did not prejudice means, but rather bind unto the same, as
being to take his effect in time by the same. And so she ran not rashly to the
counsel of GOD as these men do, but looked what her own duty was and used
that. By which means her Sons both lived, and all came to pass Act 27.
well as God had decreed. Take an other example as plain as this. In the Acts
of the Apostles we read that Paul and his company were in great danger upon yt
sea. In so much that they were feign to throw all their lading out, and in the
end the ship burst in two. Before the extremity of the peril, God, that is
ever careful to comfort his by his Angel, in yt night foretold Paul of all
yt should happen, had him not fear, for he should escape, and for his sake all
likewise that were with him which were in number 276. souls. Here was Gods
counsel known, his decree and purpose revealed, which Paul believed, and
exhorted all the^ most firmly to be persuaded of. What now? Did Paul upon
this conclude, as these men speak, why then it skills not what we do. For God
having determined to save us, we cannot be drowned. No such matter, but leaving
y^ decree of God, looks straight at the means that must be used, the
industry of y^ Mariners, who would have stolen ver. 30.
away, had not Paul prevented them and the stre^gthning of their bodies by
taking some meat. Which being don, such as could swim threw themselves first
into the Sea, yt getting to land, they might help others, and the rest on
boards and broken pieces of yt ship came all safe to shore. Thus did means
effect Gods purpose, and not Gods purpose known of Paul, hinder the careful
use of means in him or the company.

A third example, if you will, let us add to these two, as pregnant to our
purpose, as either of the^. Our Savior Christ him self in his youth was
sought for by Herod Math. 2.
to have been slain. Yet God had appointed him to live and to effect the work
of our redemption. So in respect of Gods decree it was not possible yt Herod
should hurt him, do what he could. What then? would God have this counsel of
his a cause of security or neglect of means in Joseph the reputed father of
our Savior? No. But his own self wills him in a dream by his Angel to
take Mary and the Child and to slye into Egypt, there tarying till he should
bring him word Which Joseph did, and so by use of means preserved him, whom
yet God had appointed to live from everlasting, do Herod and all the world what
they could. Did Mary hinder Joseph from using these means, saying to him,
tush, do not we know what God has aponinted this Child unto? Did not I hear
what the Angel said to me when I conceived, what the Shepherds and wise men
said when he was borne, what Simeon and Luck. 2. 51.
Anna said at my Purification (all which things Mary laid up in her heart says
the text) therefore let Herod do what he can, Gods apointme^t must take place,
and cannot be prevented by his malice, though we sit still and slye not at all.
Did, I say, Mary thus reason, or thus hinder him? Nothing less. And therefore
learn we ever by this example the true duty of Gods children, and the right
use of the doctrine of gods predestination. Surely it is this, that whatsoever
the decree of God is, we ever pitch our own eyes upon the means that God has
appointed, knowing that as he has appointed us to the end, so he has
prescribed away to come to the same by. If I will be saved I must do this, if I
will not be damned, I must avoid that. So you see did Rebecca, Paul, God
himself for his Son Christ, and all that ever feared God, and understood
this doctrine since the world began. So do we our own selves I do not doubt
at this day, carefully working our salvation with fear and trembling by
hearing the word, receiving the Sacraments, and following the course prescribed
in the word to such as will be saved. Making the determined counsel of God in
predestinating us to life, whereof in our consciences we feel a sweet
assurance, the end of this our obedience, a comfort against our imperfections
when we cannot do the good that we would, and thereupon Satan seeks to
terrify us, and in a word rather a chief cause to encourage us to the use of
means, then any way to make us negligent in the course of good living. Let
profane persons do what they will, and say what they list, as hoth works and
words be unsanctified, yet thus both do and say the godly, whom we are to
follow. If for the abusing of this doctrine by some, the doctrine it self must
be rejected, then must ye whole word it self be also prohibited, because that
unto some it is a savor of death unto death, as often as it is either read or
preached. But God forbid. Let sin be sin in them that abuse it, and truth
be free for them that will learn it. Uaine then is this obi^ction, I hope you
see against gods predestination, that it makes us careless what we do.
Surely it makes us most careful as I have showed. And let this suffite.

Why but if I did nothing yet I should be saved, being appointed to be saved,
and if I do never so well, yet I shall be damned, being appointed thereunto.

Be not deceived. Being appointed to be saved, it is not possible that you
should do nothing. For as well you are appointed to the means, as to the end,
which apointme^t is effectual ever as examples have showed, and no example can
be showed to y^ contrary. For as predestination has followed upon love in God,
so does calling follow predestination, justification follow calling, and
sanctification, which is this using of means that I speak of, follow
justification. Till at the last we come to gloryfication. You know it is the
Apostles cheyne to the Romans. To. 1. (...).
Contrariwise if a man be appointed unto death and a reprobate, it is never
possible that his deeds should be good in respect of him self but always
there will be some secret poison in them as was in Judas care for the poor when
he would have had the ointment sold, bear they never such a gloss to the eye
of the world. And therefore that again is but an error that men shall be damned
do they never so well, being appointed thereunto.

Well Sir, then may you say, this is also 2. Objection.
that which makes against this doctrine which you now handle, that it seems
to justify or excuse the wicked, who are not able to do other wise the^ they
do, being marked of God unto perdition, and therefore should not as it seems
be punished, for that which they cannot choose but commit.

Neither in this again let us be deceived. For to sin necessarely, and to
sin constraynedly are two things, far differing one from an other. The
reprobate they sin necessarely in respect of Gods decree, but yet they sin
not constreynedlie, or by force thereof at any time. For then might their
punishment seem somewhat hard. But there is in them knowledge many times when
they sin, will, delight, and anger if they be restreyned or brideled any way,
all which are testimonies against the^ of the justice of their punishment,
fully conuincing them in their consciences, and accusing the^, and clering this
doctrine of Gods decree from being any compulsion to them to transgress ever.
Let this cavil therefore also cease, and this holy doctrine stand still
undefiled in our eyes.

Thirdly, it is not so high, mystical, obscure The 3. objection. The doctrine
of predestination is not to high. etc.
and hidden, if it be soberly entreated of and within the limitts of the word,
but that it may be understood with profit and comfort of a reverent mind.
Witness hereof all that I have now said of the points and several members of
this doctrine, so evident, and plain and easy, as we cannot desire a greater
light. If any thing be obscure in it, or hard, yet may not that cause all the
rest to be rejected, as Austen truly testified when he said: Numquid negandum
quod apertum, quia comprehendi non potest quod occultum? Must we therefore deny
what is plain and manifest, because we cannot comprehend what is hidden? Thus
do we see the vanity of men's cauills against this sacred truth of God, and
whatsoever else is brought of any man against it, falls as these with the
light of truth, when they are considered and compared with it. And let thus
much suffice for the first point.

The 2. part. Venit ad me. Comes unto me.
Venire ad christum est christum fide amplecti, and locum dare veritati. To
come unto Christ, is to embrace him by faith, and to give place to the truth,
says one. Quod dedit mihi pater, (scilicet) perpraedestinationem, venit ad me
(.s.) per fidem. What the father has given me (to wit) by predestination, that
comes unto me (by faith) says an other, as we hard before in the beginning.
Quid est, qui ad me venerit, nisiqui se mihi certa fide dederit. What is this,
he that comes unto me, but he that gives himself unto me by assured faith,
says a third. By all which, and many mo, that I could aledge, we see the sense
is thus much, as if our Savior should have said, all that the father gives
me by his election to life, those come unto me by faith, that is, those lay
hold of me, and embrace me by true believing in me, and testify that faith by
fruits of the same daily, as God inableth. Which evidently confirms that
which I said before, that the cause of election is in God, not in man. For here
we see believing flows from gods giving, and not gods giving from our
believing. Therefore is true faith called Electorum fides, the faith of the
elect, because it is in none but in them, and springs ever from Tit. 1. 1.
this fountain. As many as were ordained to eternal life believed, says the
Apostle. Making ordayning first, and believing second. The like does that
golden cheyne testify Act. 13. 48. To. 8.
in the eight to the Romans, and many places mo.

See then (beloved) in these words given to us by the Lord Jesus our Savior
How to know whether we be the children of God, or no.
himself a sure token and a true way to know whether we be the children of God
or no, and stand in a comfortable estate, if God should call us herehence.
Surely if we be come unto Christ by a true faith, working to holy life, then
are we sure by Christ's own words, who is truth it self, that we are given by
the Father, that is chosen and elected to eternal life, and cannot perish. And
that the Lord would have us mark this and make a trial of our selves by it,
his very spech declares. For he could have said as easily (every one that is
elected is given unto me, as all y^ is given me comes unto me,) but that by
the former no light had broken out to us, whereas by the later we have a most
plain sign. Look we then earnestly at this mark, and see if we be comers,
and comers a right unto Christ. For Judas came, and that with both lowly
D^uers sorts of comers to Christ.
and lovely behavior out ward, but his drift was naught and no less then
treason. In the 7. of Ihon some came to Christ, but they came to entrap him. In
this present chap. they came to Christ and that by slocks, but it was for
lo^ues and not for love, as our savior tells them. The Capernaites also both
came and saw as others did, but they believed not. Many amongst us come to
Church, Sermons and Lectures as others, to the good comfort of men that see no
more then what is without, but God knows secrets, and the end of all men's
coming. Certain it is that every coming proves not a giving of God, and
therefore look we about (...). It is no small duty of a Christian man and
woman to be carefully hearted and sharply sighted, to see into themselves how
they walk and live, and are like to dye, when the tree falls, and so shall
lie, till the judging day. For the spirit often beats upon this as a
needful thing. Let us search Lamen. 3 40. 2. Cor. 13
and try our ways says y^ Prophet Jeremy. Prove your selves whether you be
in the faith or no, says y^ Apostle, with many such like. Many have thought
too well of them selves, and found it too late. Here is a direction before our
eyes. If we be Gods, we are elected and so given to Christ as men that shall
not perish but be saved in him and by him eternally. This election shall apeare
The degrees of our estate to be observed of us.
to us by coming to Christ, For all that y^ Father gives, comes to him,
says this text. This coming to Christ is by faith. What faith? By a true and
lively faith. And how is that known? Ever by fruits as fire by heat. Here then
is y^ point. Our fruits show our faith, our faith shows our coming to Christ,
and our coming to Christ in this sort shows our election by God to eternal
life. Fruits then are all, which what they are this day in many of us that
pro^esse the gospel religiously, as men (...) (...) before the majesty of
God, and the burning brightness of his pearcing eyes, let us all consider in
the secret souls and consciences of us.

May that fearful strange and monstrous Pride in aparel no proof y^ we are
come to Christ.
pride in aparell that this day apeareth and eats up this land, testify
unto the soul of any man or woman delighted with it and in it, that they are
come to Christ? did ever any in the world prove his election by this fruit? we
know ^o. We think no, even as we sit now, and yet we fear not. Herod was
royally robed, and dreadfully perished. The rich glutton with his costly purple
and fine linen was a castaway. And had not vanity of aparell says Gregory
been a grievous sin: Nunquam sermo dei tam vigilanter exprimiret quod dives
qui torquebatur Greg. ho. vlt. in ^ua^.
apud inferos bysso and purpura indutus fuisset. Never would the word of God so
carefully note, that this rich man tormented in hell was in his life time
clothed with purple and fine linen. So says he else where, if pride Hom. 6.
in aparell were not most sinful, never would Christ so have praised Ihons
meannesse and plainness in aparell, or the Apostle have exhorted women to
beware of brodered hair, etc. By the prophet Sophony the Lord says. He will
visit all those that Sopho. 1. 8
go in strange apparel: meaning the courtiers as the marginall note says,
which imitated other nations in their apparel. If the Lord threaten
punishment, judge in a feeling heart how he likes it. Saint Ierom notes an
example of his punishment Hier. epist. ad Laetam.
in a noble woman in those days, who decking and painting up a young maid that
was her Niece with Jewels in her hair and such like trimings, by and by had
both her hands withered, and shortly after dyed, concluding upon it. Sic
gemmas and pretiosissima ornamenta Christus defendit. So does Christ defend
precious stones end gaye clothes. God forbid all hands in these days, that are
busied in such dressing of hair and hanging on of ornaments above that which
is fit, should taste of such judgment, yet fear beloved, and think of this
example in the midst of your deckings. For God may show his wrath if it
please him in a moment. Cypryan says profitably. Tormenta paucorum exempla
sunt omnium. The punishment of one is an example for all. And with the wise it
is so. Apparel says the wise man shows what manner of person Eccle. 19
one is, as does also gesture, and laughter. Then vain apparel says we are
vain, Such as our apparel is such are we.
proud apparel, proud, wanton apparel, wanton etc. So that where we might
happily seem at least to be good, virtuous, and honest if our apparel were
modest, though in deed we were stark naught, by this means it comes to
pass that we cannot so much as seem to be good, or be once but imagined to be
virtuous. For thy apparel says the wise man which is subject to all men's eyes
publishes as with a trumpet that thou art as it is, prodigal as it is, proud
as it is, wa^ton and garish as it is, vain as it is, and in a word stark
naught as it is. And what a trumpet is this to bear about one? if we
considered it. Surely if it be a A vain garment is like Westminster papers.
shame to wear a paper on my hat at westminster hal to declare what I have
done, it is as reprocheful to wear a vain garment on my back, to pull all men's
eyes upon me to read in capital letters what a person I am. O that the God of
heaven would so change Back papers and hat papers.
the hearts of men and women by his holy spirit, that these back papers, (I
mean apparel in excess) might be as odious in our eyes and hearts, as those
hat papers be at Westminster, without doubt, beloved, they do tell us foul
tales of us in their kind, as those do. I could find in my heart to spend all
the time against this sin, if I knew I should profit, but other things also
being to be considered I will end this Note this well.
matter with that pretty speech of Philip of Macedon, who having appointed one
to be a Judge, and hearing after that he used to dye or color his beard and
hair, straight way displaced him, with this speech, y^ he which was not
faithful in his hair, but used forgerie and falsehood in it, to change it from
his truth, was no way to be judged as a man that would be trusty in greater
matters. A most notable hatred in a heathen man of that which Christians dote
in, and will not be persuaded of. If this argument should be urged in our
days, howsoever men escape, many women would be concluded worthy little trust.
God work with us and so I leave it.

May that inward root from whence Inward pride of mind no token of our
coming to Christ.
this outward fruit most commonly flows, to wit, an high stomach and proud
mind, prove unto any man's conscience that he is come to Christ, and so
consequently an elect. No, beloved, and therefore the Prophet David being
desirous to approve himself unto the Lord as one of his, before all things
purges himself from this, and says: Lord I am not high minded, I have no
proud looks. I do not exercise my self in matters that are to high for me
etc. Making it as we all see, a filthy blot in any man that will belong to God,
to be thus.

Oh pride of mind, what hurt have thou done and daily yet do to mem and
women ouercaried with thee? What downefals and breaknecks have thou brought to
many? Adam and Eve with all the world in them Examples of such as have fallen by
pride of mind.
overthrown most fearfully by pride of mind. Absolon a kings son by birth,
and for personage so goodly a man that y^ scripture says there was not a
blemish in him from the top of his head to the sole of his foot, yet so
ouercaried with inward conceit of himself that the earth refused any longer
to bear him, y^ heavens abhorred utterly to receive him, and so he was hanged
betwixt heaven and earth by the hair of his head, for a spectacle of Gods
wrath toward a lofty stomach, while the world endures. Corah and his company
ouercaried with pride of mind against those whom God had exalted over them
dreadfully perished, and out of the bowels of the earth, into which they
sanke, preach to all men this day to beware of pride, and of high stomachs,
disliking their own places, coveting greater, envying of them y^ have the^,
and so in spite as malcontents opposing our selves against them. Miriam, other
wise a good woman had a little spice of this inward pride, and it made her
prattle against her own brother. Which little busy brain against a superior
even in so good a woman God could not, nor would not suffer, but by no less
buffet then a loathsome leprosy bett it and chastised it in her. The great
king Nabuehad nezzar swelled in his mind, Dan. 4. 28
when he said, Is not this great Babell that I have built by the might of my
power, and for the honor of my majesty? and how did God endure it? Surely
says the text, while the word was in his mouth, a voice came from heaven and
said his kingdom was departed from him, and he should live with the beasts of
the field and eat grass with oxen till this pride were abated in him, etc.
Read the place at large. Remember Haman, how the pride of his mind brake his
neck. Read the pride of Tyrus in the prophet Ezekiel, and O London take heed
betimes. Ezekiel. 28. 2
This is an arrow that flies by day, which who so escapes is graciously
blessed. Psalm. 91. 5
Why, but are all proud y^ meddle with high matters? God forbid. For some men's
callings and gifts warrant what other men's utterly deny the^. And it is not
meddling, but busy meddling above a calling, that notes pride. Otherwise I have
ever liked well of Ammonius speech, a scholar of Origens, Episcopi funct.
fugient.
which he made to Euagrius, shunning to be a Bishop, when he was called to it.
At tu multo grauius inquit peccasti quia linguam tibi ipsi excidisti, nec
confer eam ad dei gloriam pia predicatione euangelij illustrandam audes. But
thou have sinned much more grievously in cutting out thine own tongue and not
daring to use it to the setting out of gods glory by holy preaching. Et ne tibi
arrogare videaris gratia Dei non vteris. And least thou should seem to
think well of thy self, you wilt not use the gifts given thee of God. A golden
speech, beloved, for many in these days to think of, noting a golden mean
betwixt arrogancy and negligence. Yea, rubbing their consciences that whilst
they Vt crescu^t dona sic rations donorum. Greg.
would seem to think reverently of the Ministry, defraud y^ church of their
gifts, for the earth is cursed that renders not crop according to seed
received.

May an holow heart to the present state A holow heart to the state, no proof of
our election.
saying as Esau did, The days of mourning will shortly come, for my father
Isaac, and the^ will I kill my brother Jacob, declare this coming? Nay, will
hastening this day of mourning, which the Lord knows is like to be a day of
blackness and darkness to this land in deed, and I warrant them, to
themselves Remember Rodulphe absolved by Greg.
which wish it, as heavy as to any, though now they dream of a dry summer,
through the false and subtle persuasions of hissing serpents in holes and
corners, and by a judgment of God upon their understanding, may I say y^
hastening of this day by conspiracies and treasons, treacheries and practices,
abhorred of all true Christians, prove unto any man's soul this coming that we
speak of?

Let the judgments of God answer for me, who has ever yet wounded in wrath
The judge meant of God ever upon traitors.
the hayry scalp of such cursed caitifes, and being immutable in his justice,
shall still find out such wickedness, and give them their portion of shame
and confusion in this world with endless woe in yt world to come. Which Lord we
beseech thee in mercy toward us and this land, still do, and with A prayer.
hands and hearts lifted up to heaven, we thank thy majesty for thy great
goodness in this behalf, craving in y^ precious blood of Jesus Christ, that
the Soul of our Sovereign 1. Sam. 25 29.
may still be bound in the bundell of life with thee her gracious God, and her
and our enemies for thy gospells sake be evermore cast out, as out of the
middle of a sling. Amen. Amen.

May that most fearful division, bitterness Contention and division amongst
brethren
and gaul both in word and writing y^ has now too long so spotted this famous
Church of England, and many worthy men in it, prove unto any guilty causer of
the same, his coming to Christ? Surely it does not, Surely it cannot. And y^
God of might and power persuade it to us.

What am I beloved that after so many worthy instruments in Gods Church which
both in this place and else where, have touched this grief, I should assay to
cool and delay the heat of it? Surely I am no body, and therefore better for
me to do as I have hitherto done, sit still in silence and wish that my head
were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears yt I might weep day
and night for this fault amongst us, the^ to say any thing of it. Yet since God
is strong in weakness, and has a blessing for every man's speech, seasoned
with his truth according to his pleasure, I join my heart and tongue and soul
to theirs that have herein persuaded, and with all the power of my spirit I
beseech you brethren, with them high and low whatsoever you are, as the Apostle
did yt Philippians: If there be any Philip. 2
consolation in Christ, any comfort of love, any fellowship of the Spirit, any
compassion and mercy, fulfill we the Apostles joy, being like minded having
the same love, being of one accord and of one judgment, nothing being done
through contention or vain glory, but that in meekenes, of mind we may every
man esteem others better the^ our selves, etc. Think we of the words of our
Savior Christ, never to be forgotten of a Christian man, that Hereby we are to
be discerned to be his disciples, if we love one an other. Hereby I say,
hereby, If we love one an other. Loose this badge and loose our comfort, wear
it, and show it, and as the Lord is God, we are his chosen. God is love, and he
that dwells in love, dwells 1. John. 4
in God and God in him. An unspeakable comfort to the man that has love. God
is not contention, malie (...) therefore he that dwells in these dwells not
in God, nor God in him. As unspeakable a terror where love is lacking if it
were thought of. Blessed are the peace makers for Math. 5. 9
they shall be called the children of God. Cursed then are the peace breakers,
and bate makers, for they are not the children of God. What says y^ Apostle to
the Ephesians? So say I. There is one body, one spirit, one hope Ephesians. 4. 4
of our calling, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all
which is above all, and through all, and in us all. For his Blud that dyed for
us, let all these ones, make us one, indeuoring to our dying day, to keep that
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. which there the Apostle infers.
And I beseech you mark what virtues in yt place are noted as necessary to this
virtue, if ever we wish it.

Humbleness of mind to bridle pride and contempt. Meekness moderating
anger, and desire of revenge. Long suffering, to endure infirmities in brethren.
And a supportation one of another thorough love to meet with summum eius, when
we are wronged.
These are y^ virtues that preserve concord, and are as cheynes and braceletts
of gold to y^ possessors of them. Again, what strength and power to persuade
every good mind, is in y^ similitude of members which the holy Ghost uses,
you have often heard, and therefore I spare to stand upon it. Only Why we have
two hands two eyes etc.
let me remember you what Xenophon speaks with good consideration, to wit,
that we have Oculos, manus, pedes, binos, vt coniuncti se adiuuent, non
impediant. Eyes, hands and feet, two of each, that joining and joined together
one may be an help to the other. Sic decet fratres (...). So becomes it An
emblem declaring the duty of brethren.
brethren to have hands, eyes, and feet one for an other. As the man that was
blind carried the lame man on his back, and so lent him his legs, the lame man
guided y^ blind man and so lent him his eyes. But against a brother we should
neither have hands, eyes, feet, pen, paper, yncke, tongue, heart, word,
thought, nor any thing, if all were as it should be. O fearful (...) beloved,
if it were felt with trembling heart to fall into the offense of God: Why (...)
thou Psalm. 50. 16
my words in thy mouth, etc. (...) what have thou to do with me, (...) (...) 19
thee, as long as (...) to ^uell, and with thy tongue forgest deceit, 20
as long as thou sit and speak against thy BROTHER and slandrest thy
mothers Note.
son. When brethren therefore speak one against an other they are not
reformed as they should be, and the Lord will neither allow them to speak in his
name, nor take them as beleuers in the same, if they continue, But will reprove
them as the 21
text says, and setting before them these misdemenors, will tear them in
pieces and no 22
man shall deliver them. How fearful again is that of Solomon, that six
things the Lord hates and the seventh his soul abhors. What is that
seventh? even he Pro. 6. 19
that rayseth up contention amongst brethren. This man or woman, this person
rich or poor, the Lord hates, the Lord loatheth, and the very soul of the
Lord abhors. A fearful speech.

If any man tell me I loose my labor in persuading peace, as long as men keep
the minds they have, that they must have this and that in the state altered or
they will have no (...). To this man I say as Austen said, (...) dicitur
glacialem niue^ calulam esse Aug 2. dis. Fortunatum.
(...) pacto quam diu^ nixest (...) etc. It is truly said yt the congealed
snow cannot be hat. For as long as it is snow, it cannot be hot. But that
Snow may be dissolved and then that water that before was cold snow, may be
heat, and become hot water. So men that wish some things and want, and by
reason of that want still blow the cole of this grievous discention amongst us,
though while they retain such judgment resolutely, there be small hope of
peace, yet may they by Gods gracious working, see either some fault in matter
wished, or in manner used to attain their wish, and so become otherwise
inclined to peace then erst they were. God is able, and God is good, and
therefore wishing but what God wills, and my persuasion being but the Lords
message delivered to me in his word, I will not despair what so many good
Christians join with me in begging at Gods hands. I hope that of Solomon shall
(...) deep (...), that It Pro. 20. 3
is a man's honor to cease from (...), but every fool will be meddling (...) the
holy Ghost censureth to be fools, they are like to prove no less what soever
they think of themselves. Have solt in your selves says the holy Ghostby and
by ioynes^ and Peace one with an other. For Sal (...) est Marc. 9. 50.
virtutis donum, sed damnationis argumentum. Salt without peace is not a
virtue, but an argument rather of damnation, said he truly that said it. Let
us consider one an other, Heb. 10. 24
says the Apostle, to provoke unto love and to good works, not forsaking the
fellowship that we have among our selves, as ye manner O Note it.
of some is, but let us exhort one an other, and that so much the more because
ye day draws near. I will conclude with Austen, and so trouble you no more
in this matter: Si Aug. Ser. 186.
vultis viuere de Spiritu Sancto, tenete charitatem, amate veritatem,
desiderate vnitatem, vt perueniatis ad aeterminatem. If you will live according
to the holy Spirit, then embrace love, make much of truth, and desire unity,
that you may come to aeternitie. God in his sweet mercy give us unity.

May reverence to superiors as holow as ever was Judas his to his master prove
unto our souls that we are come to Christ by the fathers giving? No, no,
neither cap nor kiss, nor crouching courtesy without faithful honor within,
can ever be testimony of true piety. And if seeming to reverence them both by
gesture and title as Judas did, cannot make me better the^ a Judas, except
there be truth within me, how much less may open, wayward and wilful
withstanding, malicious and spiteful denying both of title and gesture yield my
soul comfort in the day of feeling what all sin meriteth at the hand of God?
I read quoted out of Chrysostom, a complaint which may Annals eccles. Baronij
page 576
fitly be thought of in our days. Vt diabolus, ita inquit, etiam, quilibet
facit haereticus vehementissimus in tempore persecutionis. Loquens cum
pontifice, nec eum vocat pontificem, nec archiepiscopum, nec Religiosissimum,
nec sanctum. Sed quid? Reuerentia tua, Sapientia tua, Prudentia tua, Iustitia
tua, and nomina illi adducit communia, eius negans authoritatem. Diabolus hoc
tunc fecit in deo. As the devil, so, says he does every earnest and vehement
heretic when once he is touched or troubled for his fault. Speaking with ye
Bishop, he neither calls him Bishop, nor Archbishop, nor most religious, nor
holy. But what? Common names he gives unto him as your Reverence, your
wisdom, your Prudence, your Justice, denying his authority. This then did
the devil in God. Which whether some come very near unto in our days, or
rather be not all out so good as this, I appeal to your knowledge, and say no
more. Certainly beloved it is worthy marking, and may make us wise, seeing
Satan to run over his old lessons again to such as will learn them at his
hand. An other man says thus: Sicut rem ipsam: ita and in scribendo morem
obseruare nostrarum partiu^ ducimus esse. As we observe the matter of men's
writings, so is it our part to observe the manner also. And what has been the
manner of reuerencing men with titles in old time? Surely not sparingly, not
grudgingly, but fully, largely and heartily. Ignatius who lived in ye apost.
time writing but to a Deacon uses all these tytles, Honorato Epist. ^o ad
Hiero.
a deo, exoptatissimo, ornatissimo, Christo spirituque pleno germano filio in
fide and charitate, Diacono Christi, famulo dei. To the honored of God, to ye
most Wished, most Excellent, full of Christ and the holy ghost, his true son
in faith and love, the Deacon of Christ, the servant of God. And what was ye
custom then think we to men of higher place? I could easily show if it were my
purpose. Quod aijt Paulus, Apostolus Jesus Christi, tale mihi videtur quasi
dixisset praefectus Praetorio Augusti Caesaris, magister exercitus Tyberij
Imperatoris. That Paul intitleth himself an Ex Annalibus predict. loco
predict.
Apostle of Jesus Christ, says Hierome, it seems to me as much as if he should
have writ the chief ruler of Augustus Caesar's palace, or the master of ye host
of Tyberius the Emperor. Meaning he thought y^ one as great and honorable as
the other, and as lawful for Ministers to have titles of honor to work
reverence and submission to their places as for others. Which he insinuates
after whe^he says he entitled himself thus highly: Vt lecturos nominis
autoritate deterreret. That he might fear the readers with the authority of
his name. Wherefore beloved let us never envy any man, nor for malice deny
any man, what his place yeldeth unto him. Neither let us give it with holow
heart. For surely such heart toward men in place over us yeldeth no comfortable
testimony unto our consciences y^ we are come unto Christ if we examine it.
The Lord has said, measure unto all men good measure heaped up and pressed
down. And what we give we shall receive again in his promise. If we grudge
other men what is due to their places, some shall rise up and requite us in our
places, for God is just, and God is true, who has vowed that as we measure to
others we shall receive again good and bad.

Neither may then beloved, pride outward, or pride inward, pride of body, or
pride of mind, assure our hearts that we are come to Christ. No more can a
false faith to the state we live in, nor that lamentable division amongst us as
it is maintained this day, ne yet a holow heart to superiors by greeuing at
either gesture or title due to them, do it.

What should I say of one thing mo, and Sacrilege no proof of our coming to
Christ.
so pass away from this examination and that is a lusting, longing, coveting
mind to have the spoil of Church and Church living ordained at the first, and
to this day continued to the maintaina^ce of learning and knowledge amongst us,
may that prove unto him that has it that he is the child of God and come unto
Christ by the fathers giving. Then would not God have visited with so strange a
sight the Son of that notable church robber Belshazzar, making Dan. 5
even then and at the same hour the fingers of a man's hand write upon the wall
of the palace where the king sat, that God had numbered his kingdom and finished
it, wayed him in the balance and found him to light, divided the kingdom and
given it to the Medes and Persians, even then I say and at the same hour when
he was drinking with his Princes, wives and concubines in the vessels of gold
and silver which were taken from the house of God. Has Fear this judge me^t
you church robbers.
God no mo hands in heaven nor earth at his commandment to write wrath
against such in our days as itche to have not only the vessels of gold and
silver if any poor ones be, but land and living, stone and timber, lead and
iron and whatsoever remains at this day, a comfort to poor students that
have spent their friends many a pound, and an incourageme^t to learning that
was ever yet accounted a blessing in a kingdom? Beloved he has hands
thousands Sublatis studioru^ pretijs, etiam studia pereu^t. Corn. Tacit. Annal.
11 Mar. 6. 34
and ten thousands thousands, if once he begin. And if lack of living make
lack of learning as all wise men know, it will in time, and lack of learning
cause Gods people to wander upon the mountains as sheep without an able
shepherd: by a due consequence, surely he y^ had an aching heart to see such a
sight in the gospel, will as verily as he is God make their hearts ache one day
that are or shall be sinful causers of the same. If he smote with so dreadful
a judgment, Ananias and Saphyra his wife for withhoulding part of that church
maintenance Act. 5.
which by themselves was given, will he endure for ever them y^ take what they
never gave? No, No, and that shall they know when peradventure it will be too
late to be sorry for it. Did these men see what my self have seen, and diverse
yet living with me, that can witness the same as well as I, what twitching
torments of a wounded conscience, what hellish gripes of dispayring fear never
to see the face of God, but to perish for ever with reprobates and castawaies,
some have had for detayning or retayning but a small portion of such
maintenance as now is thought the best cheat that can be caught, happily it
would, nay assuredly it would, except hell and death had already taken
possession, abate the lust and aswage the longing that they have to devour the
incourageme^ts of learning that yet remain unspoiled in this land. But what
they have not seen in others, they may feel in the^ selves too soon and
sharp, if nothing will persuade them. Thou art dead O Shunamit that
intreatedst 2. Kings. 4 10
thy husband to build for the prophet a chamber and to furnish it, but thy
memory is blessed with God and man, and a witness shall thou be in the day of
judgment against pullers down of the houses built by men and women of
devotion and piety for the prophets, and children of the prophets, to attain
to learning in, till they were able to serve abroad. But I have else Preface to
my book upon the com.
where at large laid down this fearful sin, and therefore I will refer
any thither that pleases to consider further of it.

Since then none of these fruits amongst us this day do prove unto our
consciences Other sins amongst us.
that we are come to Christ, I trust you think, adultery and whoredom,
swearing and forswearing, drunkenness and riot, oppression and cruelty, fraud
and deceit in buying and selling, with such like, can much less do it. And
these are the works that most we show forth. How then do we stand concerning
our election, which is known by coming to Christ, and our coming to Christ,
by faith, and faith by fruits? Certainly as yet such men as these, have but
cold comfort.

What then? Shall we say all such as are spotted with these vices are by and
by Yet there is time to repentance.
reprobates? God forbid. For my text does not say, all that yt father gives
me, is come unto me, but shall come unto me, to wit, in time. ^herfore what I
have (...) without (...) unto us (...) comfort (...) of the same, as yet (...)
such (...). Which is cause enough to make us look about us and beware. For
what true comfort may all the world yield me, if I find no steps of my
election to life in me. Yet since ye text is, as it is, that they shall come,
not that they are come, see the sweetness of it and taste it and take it with
you. It shows thus much to us that there is yet mercy with God, and time to
amend. Though hither to upon such fruits as these, neither you nor I nor any
flesh living can ground any good estate like to insew us in the world to come,
but even the flat contrary, yet we may come to day all in time by true
repentance, and showing forth hereafter fruits of a true and living faith,
that faith shall show our coming to Christ, and that coming, the fathers
giving, and so hereafter we have comfort of that which as yet by yt true
sequel of this text we have not had. A fit opportunity were here the^ to
persuade amendment to all estates, if the time were not too far spent. As yet
turn and live. As yet turn and show that you were the Lords from everlasting,
though straying and starting aside for a time and not thoroughly called. As yet
brethren give diligence to 2. Peter. 1. 10.
make your calling and election sure by good fruits. Even such as the Apostle
there names. For if you do these things says he, you shall never fall. There
being by this means an entrance ministered unto you abundantly 11.
unto the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. This is
comfort, that we may yet come, and let us not neglect it. So cease I further to
move you in this matter, hoping no man to day hearing Gods voice, will harden
his heart, and persuading himself either that he is come when in deed he is
not, or presuming that he may come when he will, though he do defer it,
which in deed he cannot, before ever he do come perish and be damned.

Lastly by this manner of spech (shall come) certainty of coming is noted
first A comfort against despisers of reformation.
or last, though no time limited. A great comfort again to fathers for their
unreformed children, to Pastors for their unreformed sheep, and to all men for
their unruly friends whom they wish well unto, and yet cannot prevail by
persuasion withal. Fear not, if they be Gods, first, or last, good counsel
shall be followed, and they shall come, as this scripture says. Til which time,
endure their delay with hope. And though they offend greatly by provoking God
so long, yet yield you God honor by believing his word, and expecting their
calling according to the promise of the same in comfortable patience. And let
thus much suffice of this second part. To wit, the coming of such as are given.

The 3. part.
The intertainment that such as come to Christ shall find with him, is laid
down in these words Non eijcio, I cast not away. The words are plain, and
therefore let us but consider the use of them, and so have to an end.

1 First then they contain a singular The first use. Comfort against un
worthiness
comfort against the wringing thought of our unworthiness, being in sense as
if the Lord Jesus should say: fear not though base, though sinful, poor,
and of no account in the eye, either of thy self, or others. For if thou
come to me, thou art welcome, notwithstanding these, and I never cast away
him that comes. True, beloved, true, and most true, blessed be his majesty
for such goodness. Publicans and sinners, poor fishermen and despised Gentiles
he has entertained withal mercy and fafour as we know. Come unto me all ye
yt travel and are heavy laden, carries with it no exception of poverty or
baseness, but reaches out comfort to all comers be they never so many in the
eyes of men, ego reficiam vos. I will refresh you. At what time soever a sinner
repents himself from the botome of his heart I will put all his wickedness
out of my remembrance says the Lord. Has it any exception of unworthiness
against any true repenter? If thy sins were as redd as skarlet I will make
them as white as snow, notes it any casting away of any yt is truly
sorrowful? No, no. And therefore this speech is true, he that comes to me I
cast not away. David so dead by adultery and murder he cast not away, when
repentance cried heartily Lord Psalm. 51
forgive. Paul a most fierce Saul persecuting the saints of God was not cast
away, when he came. Peter with his perjury and sinful denial was yet received
when he came. Mary with her seven devils was not cast away. He that sorowfully
said Lord I believe (to wit as I am able) help my unbelief, found his sweet
comfort notwithstanding imperfection. In a word, he that comes unto me I cast
not away, have all true comers to Christ found since y^ world was, and shall
do till it end again. Heaven and earth passing, but not a jot of this word
of God failing in truth and sweetness promised.

2 An other sweet use of these words The second use. Comfort against disdain.
is this. Comfort against contempt in the world and disdain of proud ones.
Thou come to their houses, tables, and companies being poor and simple but
a true fearer of God and his laws, and what entertainment have thou? Surely
this, thou art cast out and contemned. For either they cannot be merry whilst
thou art in place, or ye pride of their places seem nothing suitable to so sely
a guest? Farewell they, and behold thy comfort here, Jesus Christ casts
thee not away if thou come to him, and therefore bless him, love him, and
still more and more in all thy occasions resort to him, leaving those proud
pecocks to the will of him that hates them and their sinful contempt of
their brethren, and his most dear servants.

3 A third use is this to Magistrates and The third use. A pattern for governors
rulers, judges and governors unto whom come thousands with sorrow in their
hearts, and little money peradventure in their purses. O cast them not away as
near as you can without your comfort. Their spirits are troubled, their
injuries be great, their skill but small to move your affections by any orderly
tale. But this scripture is written? and let it move you and move you greatly
that your Lord and master casts none away that come to him. He in nature and
you in office be gods of comfort to poor comers, the fewer you cast away the
liker to him, and if you cast none away then lykest of all. And what better
pattern of liked life then Christ our Lord. O happy man that follows him, and
riding on horseback Be mercicifull as your heavenly Father is merciful.
casts a comfortable eye down to him that walks afoote by his side telling
his case as panting and breathing and fear of some greater man to come and
carry you from him, will give him leave. Yea O happy man I say again. For in
earth such an one shall be blessed, praised and prayed for and in heaven no more
cast away, then he has cast others, but received and comforted as he has done
others.

4 Fourthly it most notably implies The 4. use, to prove ye certainty of our
salvation.
the certayntie and assurance of our salvation. For if the constancy of Christ's
love to all that come unto him be such, that he never casts any of them away,
judge in your own self if once you find the assurance of your coming,
whether your safety be not sealed in the word of Gods truth, that you can no
more perish, then he be untrue. Lay this text then to many scriptures mo that
most comfortably deliver this doctrine to us. To the first Psalm which says
the man that is once come to Christ by a true belief in his name and a life,
as God inableth, according to such faith, is like a tree planted by the water
side Psalm. 1
whose leaf shall never fade nor fall away, for want of moisture, never,
never. To the two and thirty of Jeremy where promise is made that the covenant
with such as are come unto him shall be everlasting, that he Iere. 32. 40
will never turn away from them to do them good, but will put his fear in
their hearts that they shall not depart from him. Which place Austen often
urges, and sets it as a wall of brass against doubt herein by any man. To
the testimony in Matthew again, where it is said, they should Math. 24.
deceive the very elect, (if it were possible) if it were possible again I
say, and ever remember it. To the tenth of Ihon where our Savior says I will
give my sheep Ihon. 10. 28.
(that is, such as our text to day calls co^mers to him) eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hands. With a
number such places mo, all proouing and preaching this truth of God unto us,
that once find in our selves a true coming to Jesus Christ by faith and
obedience, the two heads of all religion, and conclude a comfort more sweet
then tongue can tell: our salvation is sure when this life is ended, for this
text is plain with all else now named, He that comes to me I never cast
away. Shaken we may be and dangerously tempted, as God shall think good, but
perish we cannot if these scriptures be true. Peter is a pattern what may befall
us, and Peter is a proof of Gods goodness toward us. Of whom Tertullian says
thus: Fidei robur concussum fuit, sed non excussum, mota fuit fides, sed non
amota, caepit arescere, sed no^ exaruit, ore deu^ negauit, sed cord Note.
tenuit. The strength of his faith was shaken, but not shiuered in pieces,
moved it was, but not removed, it began to dry, but it withered not quite, with
his mouth he denied God, but his heart did not fully, and finally let him go.
Thus far may we fall (which yet God forlnd) and by the mercy that raised him,
rise again. (...) tentatoris, viuit tamen radix. Well may the tempter cast
down our leaves that declared us to live, and yet shall the root remain a
live though it be not seen, says Theophilact. Fowlly fell David we all know,
and felt a fearful change in his heart when he cried: O Lord Let me feel ye
comfort of thy Spirit again, yet finally forsaken he never was, Psalm. 51.
nor cast away. Notable is the story of master Robert Glouer in the Acts and
Monuments The story of master Glouer.
of our Church, to show how shrodly a child of God may be shaken and humbled,
and yet all well in time again. Master Glouer, to my remembrance having
received sentence to be burned for his faith, was in the prison after so bereft
of all sweet comfort and feeling of the Spirit in his soul and inwards, that
he seemed rather to himself as it were forsaken, then otherwise, of God and
his grace. Diverse godly brethren to whom he made great lamentation for this
his dullness, comforted him with gods promises, assuring him in the truth
thereof, y^ it would be otherwise with him in due time, though thus it pleased
God to humble him for a while happily, (as in deed it was) y^ it might be more
sweet, when it come. Say what they all could, he received no taste of
sweetness, but remained still all dull and heavy and dead in himself. The
time of his death came, he thus void of comfort, a doleful and heavy case if
we think of it. The brethren applied him still with their comfort, bad him not
fear, for as sure as the Lord lived, who never forsakes his in their most
need, the Spirit would come again yet ere he died. And because they were most
sure of it, grounding themselves upon Gods promises which never fail, therefore
they entreated him that when it came, he should give them a sign, or by some
means or other make them acquainted with it, both for their comfort present,
and instruction ever in the like trial. He promised that he would, and now see
the wonderful work of God, being taken out of the prison and upon his way to
the place where he must dye, suddenly in y^ way came such a stream of
sweetness into his heart, and such a power of the Spirit replenished his soul,
that he cried with a loud voice: He is come, he is come, he is come. To the
unspeakable comfort of the godly brethren, that had assured him thereof
before, and the great wonder of them that knew not what be meant. Never being
so heavy in the time of his hu^bling as now he was joyful after this his
lightning. Tried therefore I say Gods children may be, and seem as forsaken,
but yet in the end it is not so, my text being true, as God is true: He that
comes to me I never cast away. Stand we therefore in the truth of God with
assured comfort of our happy end when once we find we are truly come to Jesus
Christ by the Fathers giving. Eor whom the Lord Ihon 13. 1 Hebr. 13. 8
loves to the and he loves and Jesus Christ is yesterday and to day and the
same for ever.

But O presumption, presumption, cry To believe God is far from presumption.
some yt never knew or else would not have yt people of God to know what true
piety means. Papists I mean who in no case can abide this doctrine being a
cutthrote to their purgatory, masses and satisfactorie works all flowing from
a fearful uncertainty what shall become of us, and devised by the^ to
comfort this fearful thought with all. Alas beloved, is this presumption to
give credit to God when he promises, yea again and again and twenty times
promises? Make the case your own, and suppose that your selves do promise a
man, either ^aiment, or pleasure, or some thing or other, and the party
rests upon the truth of that word, assuring himself it shall never fail, but
is as sealed with a thousand seals. Does this man offend in presuming or
rather yield you the credit y^ is due unto you, you meaning with all truth the
performance of your word? So is this case, yea so much better as God exceeds
man in truth of meaning and power to perform what he promises. God says I
will not cast him away that comes, or I do never cast him away. If I believe
this ^o be true, do I presume, or perform my duty in giving credit to the
Lord? Nay, is not y^ doubting of it a fearful dishonoring of God and
detracting from his truth? Surely if a man should doubt one of your words you
will make it and take it a wrong, and shall it be no wrong to doubt of God?
Much more. Therefore let these sinful men delight in their own discomfort and
the Lords disgrace, till God open their eyes, let you and me be of Austens
judgment in this matter: Non est ista superbia elati, sed c^^fessio non
ingrati: This is not any pride of one puffed up, but a confession of one that
is not unthankful.

If any man think yet this doctrine of assurance will make men careless how
they live, I have answered before this objection and showed, that is never so
in them that are truly religious and truly taught, because they know God has
as well appointed the way, as the end, that is holy life as well as salvation in
heaven. And Pietas quae finem nouit, non est pietas: Piety that cease was
never piety.

Lastly these words teach us constancy Constancy in God teaches us to be
constant one to an other.
in love and affection one toward an other as our Lord and Savior is most
constant toward all ^^at come to him. We are to fickle and tickle many of us,
to day taking and to morrow forsaking, to day loving and to morrow lothing,
without any cause in the world, other then our own natural corruption soon
hott, soon cold. Such is not our God and Savior we here see, who never
rejects whom once he accepts, never casts away who once comes to him.
And what better pattern to frame our selves unto, then such an one? Such was
not Ruth, who answered her mother in law Ruth. 1. 16
that would have had her return, and said, Entreat me not to leave thee, nor to
depart from thee. For whither thou go I will go, where thou dwell I will
dwell, thy people shall be my people, and thy God my GOD. Where thou dyest, I
will dye, and there will I be buried. The Lord do so to me and more also, if
ought but death depart thee and me. This was steadfastness worthy praise and
an example for all to follow, that in this behalf will be worthy of praise.
Such again was not Traian the Emperor of whom it is written that when Sura
Licinius one whom he greatly trusted, was accused to him that he was not
faithful, but practiced treachery against him: Traian would not be induced to
suspect his faith ^home long he had loved and duly tried, but instead of that
frown with the appurtenances which the accusers looked for, went to Sura his
house unbidden and told him he would suppe with him, called for Sura his
barbar and caused him to shave him, every way continued his received liking of
a faithful falsely accused friend, to his great honor, Sura his great
commfort, and the accusers great grief that saw it. This again was constancy
worthy praise in a noble Emperor. A glass for all noble men and great men to
look in, y^ the like virtue may win the like praise, and their poor,
faithful, true friends and servants like comfort. The very same honor for
constancy in his affection got Alexander the great in his life, and keeps it
yet to this day in y^ monuments of learning, for giving no credit to such as
Yet said he well Tua cautio, O princeps, nostra cautio, est. Cic. pro Marcell.
accused Philip his physician yt he meant to poison him being hired so to do by
Darius. For the next physic he had need of, he caused the same Philip to
make him a p^tion and taking the same with one hand delivered Philip the letter
that accused him with the other, drinking of the potion without any stay or
doubt either then or ever afterward. But what, should I trouble you with many of
these examples, my text is in steed of ten thousands thousands of them, Jesus
Christ our Savior is constant and loves to the end whom he once loves,
casting not away for malice of man or diuill whom once he receives being come
unto him. Think therefore of this, and let this reform our wavering wills, our
tottering love, and unstable affections, together with that of Solomon, if Pro.
17. 17.
you will: Omni tempore diligit qui amicus est. He loves ever that is a true
friend. And let this suffice.

I might note a true comfort in this constancy Sectaries excommunication.
of our Savior against the blustering threats and thundering excommunications
of Pope and papists, sectaries, and ^nabaptists, who shall never be able to hurt
such as have the true comfort of their coming to Christ by a lively faith in
their consciences. But the time is past. The God of heaven give this which has
been spoken his blessing that it may be a savor of life unto life to us, and
never a savor of death unto death, to the praise of his name and our eternal
comfort through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen. Amen.

