In this book is contained the Offices of Shyriffes, Bayliffes of lybertyes,
Escheatours, Constables, and Coroners; and showed what every one of them may
do by virtue of their offices; drawn out of books of the common Law and of
the Statutes.

gabvielharuey. 1579.

The office of Shiriffes.
WHat the Office of a shyriffe is hereafter shall more plainly appear, but
in a generality, his office is righteously, and duly to return all writs and
precepts to him directed, and truly to execute the same according as he
shall be commanded in the same Wryts and prece^ts. And that be take nothing
of any person for doing his office, but the due, and accustomable fees to him
belonging. And that he duly hold and keep his Countyes, Courts, and
turns, according to the our course of the Law. Upon these three poynetes
depends the whole charge and effect of his office.

The office of the Shyriffe is to return good sufficient and reasonable
issues, and upon such persons as have sufficient goods or lands, according to
the statute of Westminster. An. ij. capitulo.xxxix. and Edwardi tertij capitulo
quinto

The Shiriffe ought to take the inditements fou^o before him in his turn by
Indenture, and so shall Bailiffs of fraunchises, one part whereof shall
remain with the Indytours. An. secundo Edwardi tertij. Capitulo.17.

The Shiriffe may arrest men ryding or going armed, and commit them to prison,
there to remain at the Kings pleasure.2. Ed. 3. cap. 5. at Northampton.

Shiriffes and under Shiriffes shall receive ^rits in every place within y^
county without taking ought, and shall make a vil, which i^ they reful^ other
that he present shall pu^ to their Seals. And if they return not the same
writs: they shall be punished and shall render damages to y^ party.2. Ed. 3.
cap. 5. at Northampton.

Shyriffes, and Iaylours shall receive Thieves indicted, or taken with the manner
without taking any thing for the receypt.4. Ed. 3. cap. 10.

Shyriffes shall lease their hundredes, and Wapentakes after the old fearme,
and not above. An. 4. Ed. 3. cap. 25. and An. 14. Ed. 3. cap. 8.

Shiriffs ought to arrest persons suspect of felony going by night, or by day,
which be of evil fame.11. Ed. 3. cap. 14.

The shiriff i^ one cou^ty shall have no more Bayliffes errant but one.14. Ed.
3. cap. 9.

Shyriffes ought to keep their turns every year within a month after
Easter, and within a month after Mychaelmas, xiii and.xxxi Edwardi tertij.
cap. xiiii.

Shyriffes that leuy issues, fines and amerciamentes in the County, ought to
have the extreates ensealed with the seal of the Eschequer, so that as much as
is paid may ^oe blotted. And if any shiriffe or Mynister do the contrary, he
shall render to the party tryple damages, and shall make (...) to the King, and
the suit hereof may be as well before Justices of peace as before other
Justices.xxiiii. Edward. ter. cap. ix.

The Shyriffes shall array the panneis of Assizes four days before the
session^ at the least upon pain of.xx. li. And Bayliffes of liberties, shall
make return to Shyriffes six days before the sessions, upon the same paine^
(...).3. cap. ix.

T^ (...) ought to examyne Loyterers (...) ^agarantes, and compel them to find
^^rety of their good behauior ^y sufficient mainpryse of such as be
distrey^able, if any defaulte be found in such vagarantes. And if they cannot
find such surety: then to command them to the next Iayle, there to remain
until the coming of the Justices of Iayle delivery, they to do with such
vagarants as they shall think best.vii. Richardi.ii. cap. vii.

The Shiriffe shall be bounden four times in the year to make Proclamation of
the Statute of Wynchester, in every hundredth of his Bayliwicke.

The Shiriffe ought to take swords, Daggers and hangers, from Servants
laborers, and Servant of crafts men, and vitaylers that wear them, unless
it be in time of War or when they labor in the country with their masters
or upon their business. And the Shiriffe shall keep y^ same weapons, which they
shall present unto the Iusticers of the peace at their sessions with the names
of them that bare them.xii. Richardi ii. cap. vi.

Shiriffes ought to receive Laborers, Servant, Beggars and Uagabonds, and
them detain in Prison without bail or mainpryse and without fee or taking any
thing at their enter or going out of Prison upon pain to forfayt a C.li. to the
King.xi. R. ii cap. ix.

Shiriffes and other ministers of the King so soon as they have knowledge of
assembles and roiots, with outragio^s number of people, ought with the power of
the shyre to go and make resistaunce against such malite with all their
strength, and shall (...) and keep them in prison until the due punishment of
the law be executed upon them. And all manner of Lords, and other the kings
true lyege me^ ought to be assistent with all their power and strength to aid
the Shiriffes and other ministers therein. 17. Ric. 2. cap. 8.

Shiriffes ought to be personally dwelling in their Bayliwickes for the time,
and they shall not let the^ to farm 4. H. 4. ca. 5.

Shiriffes ought to see and provide, that neither their under Shiriffes,
Bapliffes Clerks, nor receyuers shall be atturneis in the Kings Courts for
the time of their office.i. H. 5. cap 4.

Shiriffes ought to let to mainpryse persons ind^ted of heresy and Iollardes
which are in their keeping within x. days under good suretyes, so that they
appear before the end of the said.x. days. 2. Hen. 5. ca. 7. Shiriffes shall
cause the Statute of prirueiours to be proclaimed four times in the year,
upon pain of C-li. for every time that he fails so to do. And upon like
pain shall deliver the same to his successors to be proclaimed.^ Hen. 6. cap.
2.

Shiriffes must make due election of the Knights of the Parliament ix. H. 6.
ca. 40

Shiriffes must return such persons, Knights of the Parliament which be
chosen by the greatter number of the freeholders dwelling in the county which
may expend xl.s. yearly above all charges.

And that those Knights ^ee dwellinge within the same county. And that he
examine every freholder at such elections upon a book how much he may expend.
And if any Shiriffe return other knights: he shall forfayte an hundred li.
to the king and shall have one years imprisoment without bail or maynpryse.

Shiriffes upon a precept made unto the^ by Justices of the peace to inquire
for forcible enter, shall return upon every of the i^rours.xx.s. in fynes at
the first day.

And Justices of the peace shall hear and determine such defaultes of
Shiriffes by Bill of the suite of the party or ^y indictment.

And they shall loose xx. li. for every defaulte. And he yt will sue shall have
the one half 13. Hen. 6. cap. 9.

To anoyd robberyes and spoils upon the river of Seuerue, and by y^ coasts
of the Forrestes of Deane, and the hu^dreds of Blo^essom, and Westbury in the
county of Gloucester, the Shiriffes of Gloucester or the

Bayliffes of the town of Gloucester after notification made to any of them of
such inturyes and damages, by the parties grieved, within four days after the
notificatio^ made, shall make proclamation at the town of Gloucester that such
offenders within.15. days after such proclamation, shall restore unto y^ party
endamaged their goods so taken, or the vain with a reasonable amends. The
said Shiriffes and Bailiffes to forfayte xx. li. if they fail so to do. 9.
Hen. 6, cap 28.

The Shiriffe of Herforde, neither in his turn or in any other place after the
turn ended, shall take any inquiry or inquest of office which ought not to be
taken there.

Neither shall he take any fine or amerciament for things not appertayning to
his office or turn upon pain to forfayte x. li. x. Hen 6. cap 8.

Shiriffes ought to return in attaynt in plea of land, men of the yearly value
of xl.s or in an action of deeds concerning lands of such value, and in
actions of the sum of forty pound. And moreover, those persons dwelling
within their Bayliwicke, which may expende twenty pounds yearly above all
charges for term of life at the least, out of ancient demean Gau all kind
and the 5 ports. And at the first distress xl.s. and at the second v.li. and
the double value of every other distress against the iu^oors, upon pain of x.
pound, to the King and as much to the party. And if there be not sufficient
persons dwelling within the cou^ty which may expe^de twenty pound, yearly then
shall they impanell other persons of y^ most sufficient possessions of yearly
value of lands and tenementes, within the value of twenty pound upon pain to
forfayte ten pound to the king and to the party, as much as the form before
said, decimo quinto.H 6. cap. 5.

The Shiriffe or under shiriffe of Herford must arrest such persons of Wales,
or the Marches thereof which be outlawed of treason of felony, who^ the said
Shiriffe knows or sees to be in any place within the said county, and co
bring to the Iayle. And if any such person being indyted do dysobey of flee
away: the said Shiriffe shall leuy hue and cry, and pursue him upon pain to
make fine and ransom to the king.23. Hen. 6. cap 5.

The Shriffe shall not occupy his office above one year, and if he so do:
then to forfayt. xx ii. and every pardon for such offenses shall be void, any
words put in such Letters Patents notwithstanding. Also he that presumes to
occupy the same office above one year by force of such letters patents, shall
be disabled to be Shiriffe in any other shyre afterward.xxiii. He^ vi. cap.
viii.

No Shiriffe shall let to fearme his county, nor any of his Bayliwickes.
Hundreds Wapentakes. No Shiriffe, Bayliffe of fra^chyse, ne other officer shall
return in any panell any of his Bayliffes, officers or their Servants.

No Shiriffe nor any other to any use shall take ought of any person to be
arrested attached, nor to success of any arest or attachme^t to be made to the
body.

Nor shall take ought of any person arested or attached, for fine, see, suit of
prison, mainpryse, letting to bail, or for showing any favor or ease to any
person being so arrested, except it be as here follows, that is to wit to the
shiriff.xx.d. to the Bayliffe that read the arrest.iiii.d. and to the Iaylour
if the Prisoner be committed to ward, four pe^ce.

The Shyriffe him self, nor any to his use shall not take any thing for the
making of any return or panel, but for the copy of the panel.iiii.d. How be
it they use to take ii. shillyngs for the return of a panell but that seems
to be extortion.

Shiriffes out to let out of Prison al persons, being in their ward by force
of any wryt, byll, or warraunt, in any action personal or indytement of
Trespass upon a reasonable surety being sufficient in the County to keep
their days in the places, as the said Bills wryttes, or Warraunts require,
except such as be condempued outlawed, excommunycated or for suretye of the
peace, or by the commandment of any Justice, and vagabounds which refuse to
serve.

Also Shiriffes ought not to take any obligations for any thing above
mentioned or by color of their office. But only to them selves, nor of any
Person being in their Ward but by the name of their office as by the name of
ye shirife in the Obligation upon condition that the party shall appear at
the Days contained in the Wryttes, in such places as the Bills Wryttes or
warraunts require. And if any Obligation be taken of any Person by color of
their office in any other form, it shall be void.

Shiriffes shall not take for any obligation warrant, or precept by them to be
made any more then four pence.

Shiriffes must make their deputyes yearly in the kings courts, that is to wit
in the chauncery, the bench, and the Escheker of record before they return
any writ.

Shiriffes that do contrary to this ordinance in any point, shall loose to the
party g^ieued triple damages, and shall forfiate xl.li. foreuery time that they
shall so offend the one half to the King, and the other to him that will
sue.23. Hen. 7. cap. x.

Shiriffes when writtes be directed unto them to leauie the expenses of
Knights of the Parliament, must make proclama^ion at the next county after the
deliverance of the same writtes, that the Coroners, Co^stables, and Bayliffes
of hundreds shall be there to assesse their wages upon poyne of forty
shillinges. What time they shall assesse every hundred at a certain sum by it
self, and after they shall assesse every village within the same hundred at a
certain sum by it self, and if they be otherwise assessed, for every
default they shall forfaite twenty pou^ds, the one half whereof shall be to the
party that will sue. And the Shiriff shall leuy the same duly and shall pay it
to the Knights of the Parlyament, upon pain of xx. pound. And the party that
will sue shall have his action by Scire facias, and shall have ten pounds above
the twenty pounds with triple damages.xxiij. Henrici sexti capitulo vicesimo
secundo.

The Shiriffe after the delivery of any writ to make election for the Knights
of the Parliament, must make a sufficient precept under his Seal to every
Mayor, and Bayliffe of Cities, and Boroughes, within the County, commanding
them to elect Citizens, and Burgesses, to come unto the Parliament And the
said Mayor and Bayliffe shall truly return the same precept to the Shiriffe
by Indenture beetwene them for the election, and names of them that are chosen.
And the Shyriffe is bounden to make a good, and true return of every such writ
and of every return made to him by the Mayor, and Bayliffes.

And for every time that the Shyriffe shall do contrary to this or any other
Estatute made for the elections of Shyriffs, to come unto the Parliament, he
shall encur^e the pain of one C. pound to the king, and a years imprysonment
without bail.

And more over shall pay unto the person so being chosen Knight, Citizen or
burgess and not duly return: or to any other person which in default of such
Knight, Burgess or Citizen, will sue therefore, one hundredth pound to be
recovered by Action of debt.

And the Shiriffe ought to make such elections in the full County between the
hours of viii. and ^yne before none, and to make a good and true return of
such elections, upon pain to forfaite one hundred pound to the King, and
as much to the party that will sue therefore against the Shiriffes, their
executours or administratours.xxiiii. Henrici vii. capitulo.xv.

Shyriffes in their turns ought to inquire, hear and determine, if any
Mynister of the Wardeyne of the Court in the Marches of Scotland: or if any
other arreste any person by his Body or Attach him by his goods out of the
Counties of Northumberland, and Cumberlande, and Westmerland, and the Town of
Newecastell, to answer in any of the said courts: or else by Color or cause
of any pro^^^^ in the said courts: for in such arrestes it shall be lawful for
every man to make resistaunce. And the party grieved shall have an Action of
false imprisonment or trespass and shall recover triple damages therefore and
the defendaunt shall have two years imprysonment. And the shiriffe shall have
power to proceed thereuppon as well as upon a presentment made in his
turn.xxxi. Henrici sexti. Capit. ii.

Where as some men by dissimulation and other means feign them selves to be
lovers to Women namaryed or Maidens or Wydowes, having great possessions and
substance of goods, and get some Women into their possession, and convey them
into such places, from whence they will not suffer them to go at their
Liberty, except they will make to them Oblygations of great sums to be paid
unto them, or cause them to be bounden in a Statute Merchant, or sometime will
compel them to be married at their pleasure which if they refuse, to leuy
upon them the sums contained in the same obligations and Statutes: it is
ordained that the party grieved shall have a writ out of the Chauncery
comprysing the whole matter of their unreasonable intreatyng, directed to the
Shyriffe commaundinge him to make pro^lamation at the next county after the
receipt of the writ that the offendour shall appear at a certain day, and
place, prefixed in ^he writ before the Chaunceller or the Iuticers of assise of
the shyre where such offenses shall ^ap to be done, or before some other person
assigned by the chaunceller.

And the Shiriffe to whom such a wry^^ shall be directed, shall execute the same
according to the tenor thereof, upon pain of iii. C. li. the one half to the
king, the other to him y^ will sue therefore by writ of debt, wherein no wager
of Law, protection nor former plea (to cause the matter to be tried in another
Countye then where the writ is brought) shall be allowed.xxxi Henrici quarti,
capitulo quarto.

Upon every Inditemente, or Presentement taken before Shiriffes or other
ministers in their turns, or lawdayes. They shall deliver the same
Indytementes, and presentiments to the Iusticers of the peace at their next
Sessions upon pain of.xl.li. And the Justices of the peace shall awarde
Process upon the same as well as if they had been taken before themselves and
shall arrayue those that be so indicted of ^elony, and shall set fines upon such
as be indyted of trespass, the extreates of which fines shall be enrolled by
Indenture, and delivered unto the same Shiriffes, or mynisters.

And if any Shiriffes, or their ministers arrest or attache any person by
color of any such indictment, or presentment in their turns, or law days,
or else take any fine, or amerc^ament before they have process from the
Iustycers of the peace, or before y^ excreats out of the Indytementes shall be
delivered, they shall forfayte a C. ^. the moyty whereof shall be to the party
suing therefore by wryt of debt, in which no wager of law nor protection shall be
allowed.

Anno primo Edwardi.4. cap. vitimo.

Upon an information made to Iusticers of peace, or other Iusticers against any
person for retayning or giving of liueries, or against any that is retained or
takes lyuery, y^ Iusticers shall make process there, as upon a recovery of
debt or trespass. And if the Shiriffe in any suite granted thereupon against
any person being sufficient, return any less Issues then xx.s. at the first
day of the distress, and at the second day.xxx.s. and at the third day.xl.s.
and so at every day after more by.x.s. in issues for every such return he
shall forfayte.xx. s. ^. Edwardi.4. cap 2.

The old Shyriffe shall have power to return Writs, and execute his office
during the term of S. Michaell, and Hilary after the year of the said office
expired unless he be lawfully discharged, thereof before.15. Edwardi. 4 cap.
II.

No shiriffe nor other officer shall sease, or take the goods of any person
being arrested or emprysoned for Felony until the same person be duly co^uict
or attayneed of the same Felony by course of the common laws or except the
same goods be otherwise lawfully forfayte, upon pain to forfayte the double
value of the goods so tak^ to the party grieved suing therefore by Action of
debt, wherein no wager of law essoyne nor protection shall be allowed i.
Richard. 3. capitulo. 3.

No bailiff or other officer in any panell within any county of this realm
shall return any person to be put in or upon any Inquiry, in the turns of
shiriffes, but such as be of good name and fame having freehold to the yearly
value of.xx.s. or copyholde to the yearly value of.xxvi.s.viij.v. at the least
above al charges upon pain to lose for every person not being sufficient, at
every time that they shall so offend.xl.s. and the Shiriffe other.xl.s. whereof
y^ one moyty shall be to the party suinge therefore by^ Action of debt, in which
suite no protection or essoyne shall be allowed. But wager of law is not
expressed. And for that cause is behooves to wake information thereof to the
Eschequer. primo. Richardi.iii. cap. iiii.

Shiriffes or other, having the custody of Iayles shall certify the names of
every pris^ner being in their custody and of them committed for felony, unto
the Iusticers at the next general Iayle delivery to be kalendred, upon pain
to forfayte for every time that they make defaulte in so doing a hundred
shillinges. iii. H. 7. cap. 5.

Also the Shyriffe nor any other person in his name or by his commaundement^
shall enter no playntes into their Books in no man's name unless the
playntiffe be there in his proper person or else by sufficient attorney or
Deputy that is known of good name, and the playntiffe shall find pledges,
persons y^ be known in that County, is pursue his playnt, and the playntiffe
shall have but one playnt for one trespass or one contract. And if the
shiriffe or any other his officers cause to be entered any more playntes then
the playntiffe suppposeth that he has cause of Action against the defendau^t
then the Shiriffe or his Clarke that both cause to be entered any such playntes
contrary to this act shall forfayt for every default xl.s. the one half to
him that will sue, and prove the same matter by action of deb^ or information.

Also the Shiriffe shall make sufficient precepte after such playntes entered
against the defendant directed to the Baylife of the hundred to attach or
warn the defendante-^ appear and answer to the said playntes, and there be
any defaulte in the said Bayliffe or the hundred in warninge or executing of
their offices, then to forfayte, xl.s. shillinges, and to be convict thereof by
examinations of the Justices of the peace or any of them.

The same Shiriffes nor their deputyes, shall make none estates to leuye the
Shyriffes amercements til the two Iusticers of the peace, whereof one to be of
Quorum, have the syghte of their Books, and the estreates to be indented
between the Iusticers of peace and the Shiriffe and vndershiriffe, sealed with
their seals, the one part to remayn with the said Iusticers, and the other
part with the Shiriffe.

And those persons that shall be gatherers of the said amerciaments shall be
sworn by the said Iusticers that they take no more money then is forfayte and
contained in the estreates sealed with the seal of the Iusticers to the same,
upon the same pain of forfayture as is above rehearsed, the same gatherers to
be convict by examination of the same Justices or one of them. And the same
Iusticers of peace shall be appointed at the sessions holden at Michelmas by
him that is custos rotu^orum, or in his absence by the eldest of the quorum to
have the controlement of the said Shiriffes, under shiriffes, shyre Clerks and
other of the said officers, and of the said shirifs amerciaments And the said
Iusticers of peace upon suggestion shall make Process against the Shiriffe,
vndershiriffe, shyre Clerks, o^ other officers to appear before them to
answer to such suggestion or information as is used in action of trespass. An.
secundo. H. 6. cap. 15.

And every Shiriffe shall cause to be taken all vagabondes, idle people and
suspecte persons, and set them in the Stock there to remain at the first
taking by one day and one night, and at the second time to be in the Stocks
by 3. days and 3. nights with bread and water.

And if any Shiriffe execute not these premises of every vagabond, bermit or
beger able to labor, or Clerks, pilgrims, or shipmen, as often as any such
comes in sight, or that he has therefore any knowledge within the town or
place where he has authority, that as often as any such misdoer abides there
above the space of one day and one night and depart unexamined and unpunished:
for every misdoer so departed the Shiriffe to loose three shillinges, and four
pence, and the Shirif in his turn has authority to enquire of all yt defaults
of Majors, Bailifs, high Constables, pety Constables and all other governors
and officers of Cities, towns and villages with in their turn, and to have ^
s.4.d. for every defaulte found in his turn. Au, 15. Hen. 7. cap 12.

Also every Shirife upon a precept directed unto him by the Iusticers of peace
to return a panell to enquire of any royot or unlawful assemble committed,
shall return xxiiii. persons dwelling in the shire, every (...) viii.d. of
copyhold or of both over all charges and to return in issues every person.
xx.s at the first day, and at the second day.xl.s. and if the default be in the
Shiriffe for returning of persons not being of that sufficiency or for no
returning of Issues in form beforesayd, he to forfait.xx li. An. xvi. Henrici
vii. capitulo. xv.

Also if any royot ^r assemble of people be made in any part of this Realm
against the law, the Iusticers of the peace or two of them of the least, and
the Shiriffe or under Shiriffe may come with the power of the County (if need
be,) to arreste and bring them before the same Iusticers o^ the peace. And
the Shiriffes or under Shiriffes have power to record that, that the shall
find in their presence done contrary to the Law, and the offendour shall be
conuicte by such record. And if they v^ departed before the coming of the
said I^sticers Shiriffe or vndershiriffe, then shall the same Justices or two
of them within on^ month after such royot enquire diligently where they
assemble was made. And if the truth cannot be found, then the same Iust^cers,
or two of them and the Shiriff, or under (...) within a Month next following:
shall certifye before the K. and his counsel the whole deed with all the
circumstaunces thereof, which certificate shall be as strong to put the parties
to answer thereuppon as in an inditemente found by xi. men, 13. Hen. 4, rapi.
vltimo.

And if the said riot or unlawful assemble be not found by reason of any
imbracery or maintenance of the said Jury, then the said Iusticers of peace,
the Shiriffes over and above such Certificate, that they must make according to
the said Statute made. Anno xiii. Henrici. quarti, shall in the same
Certifycate certifye the names of the said maintainers and imbrasours in that
behalf (if any be) with their misdemeanors that they know, upon pain of
every of the said Iusticers and Shiriffes, or under shiriffes xr. li. if they
have no reasonable excuse for not certifying of the same, which certificate so
made shall be an indictment in the law and every person duly proved to be
maintayner or embrasour shall forfait, ^x. li. and to be committed to ward there
to remain by discretion of the Iusticers. An xix. Hen. vii cap xiii.

Also that no Shiriffe upon wryts and precepts directed to him do return
before Escheatours or commissioners any person to inquire of any lands or
tenementes, except every of the same Jury have lands and tenements of the
yearly value of xl.s. above all charges in the same Shyre upon pain of
forfayture for every person so returned a C.s. Anno. 3. Henric^ oc^aui,
capitulo secu^do.

Also all panels put in by the Shiriff before any Iusticers of Iayle deliuerye
or before Iusticers of peace (whereof one to be of the Quorum) in their open
Sessions to inquire, for the King shall be reformed by putting to, and taking
out of the name so impanelled die discretion of the same Iusticers

And that the same Iusticers or Iusticer shall command every Shiriffe and
their ministers in their abse^ces to put other persons in the same panell so
reformed by the Iusticers to be good. And if any Shiriffe do not return the
same panell so reformed, then every Shiriffe so offending, for every such
offense shall forfayte xx. li. half to him that will sue by actio^ of debt, bill
of complaint where such fall or be, and no wager of law essoyne, nor protection
shall be allowed.

Also upon every exigent (where writtes of proclamation are to be awarded) y^
same writ of proclamation to have the same day of return that the exigene
has, and to be deliuery^ of record, and the Shiriffe to make proclamation
three several days in his plain county, whereof one of the proclamations to
be made at the general Sessions in those parts where the party is supposed
to be dwelling, that he yield him self to the shiriffe of the forrayne Shyre
yt ye shirife may have the body at the day of ye exigent, returnable to
answer to ye plaints and that the Shiriffe of the said County that has such
wryts of proclamation: duly execute the same, and thereof make due return at
the day appointed in the writ, upon pain to forfayte such amerciament as by
the Justices shall be assessed.

Shiriffes, Bayliffes Constables and all other head officers and every of them,
findyng or knowing any person vsyng or exercising any unlawful game contrary
to the Statute, have full power to commit every such offender to Ward there to
remain without bail or maynpryse, till such time as they so offending be
bound by obligation to the kings use in such sums of money as by discretion
of the said Shiriffs or other officers shall be thought reasonable yt they
from henceforth shall not use any unlawful game.6. Hen. octa. capi secundo.

If any impotent person beg within any other place, then within such limittes,
as he shall be assygned, the Shiriffe and all other the kings officers shall
by their discretion punish such persons b^ imprisonment in the Stocks, by the
space of two Days and two Nights, geuinge them Bread and Water only, and
after that, cause the^ to be sworn to return again to the place where they
be licensed to beg. Anno. 32 He^. 8. capi. duodecimo.

The Iusticers of peace upon informatio^ or presentment made against any
township for none executyng of this act, shall make process by distress
against the inhabitau^tes of the Town, and thereby the shiriffe shall distrayne
the goods of one or two of the inhabitau^tes of the Town as he may know for
negligent in the Town, and retain the distress til they find surety to
apeare at the Sessions before the Iusticer.

And upon the return of the Shiriffe of the distress if the person appear
not, the^ every such person to loose xl.d. the first distress, and at the
second distress. vi.s.viii.d. on his defaulte, and so to be doubled at every
distress till appearaunce be had.

Shyriffes that have custody of Iayles shall make seals to be graven with the
name of the Castle that he keeps for^to geeu^ and seal Wryts to prisoners
acquitted, to beg for their fees within y^ bun^reth where he is delivered by
six weeks next after his deliuerye and then to go to the Hundredth where he
last dwelled by three year or where he was borne. The shiriff shall not suffer
any such prisoner to beg for his fees nor to depart but to doo^ service and
labor till that he deliver such Letter and the Clarke of the peace to make
the brief within one day after the Sessyons upon pain of.xii.d. to the
King. An. 22 Henri. 8. capitulo.12.

For distroyinge of Crows, Rooks, and Choughes, it is ordained that every
person having any Manours, lands, and teneme^ts, in their manurance, shall do
as much as in him is reasonable to kyl and destroy the same Crows and Choughs,
and Rookes breeding or abiding upon his Lands, or Tenementes upon pain of a
grievous amerciament to be set. And if the offense be within the limmits of
Leetes, or Court barons then to be set by the Steward with two of the
presentours by the Steward and prese^tours to be named upon the presentmente
found and presented, and to be reasonably assessed after the quality of the
offense. And the amerciament to be to the Lord of ye law day, and if any person
be Lord of such Manours, or inhabyte there (whereunto any such Laweday or Rape
is belonging) then upon a presentment had before the shyriffe in his turn with
two of the presentours to be chosen by the presentours shall cease the said
amerciament by their discretion to the use of the King, and leuyed by
distress. An. 24. H. 8. cap. 10.

And the Shyriffes in their turns shall give in charge to the tenauntes and
Inhabytaunts appearing before them that they shall duly enquire and put in
execution the effect of this Act.

Shiriffs shall hold their Courts from month to month: and where greater
time is wont to be, greater shall be. Magna Carta. cap. 33.

The King commands that Shiriffes, and their officers which receive his
debts shall acquit lawfully the debtours at the next accomptes after that they
have received the debt, and then it shall be allowed at the Eschequer, so y^ it
shall not come in the sommons after. And if the shiriff do otherwise and be
attaynted thereof, he shall render three times so much as he has received and
shall make fine at the kings will.

And if another do it for whose hand he is aunswerable at the Eschequer, he
shall render the triple thereof to the playntiffe and shall make fine in the
same. And the shiriffe shall make tails to all the^ that have paid him the
Kings debts. Westminster primo Capituli no^o.

Concerning Shyriffes and other which have leuyed the Kings debt, and make
ray^es or other acqui^taunce to the debtour, and discharge him not, it is
agreed that when the shiriff is impleaded therefore in the E^che^er by the
debtor, if he come not at ye distres, then shall another distres be awarded
returnable at a certain day wherein it shall be commanded yt proclamation be
made in the full county, y^ the defendau^t shall come in by a certain day to
acquit the debtour of the su^me, for which he made him y^ acquitau^ce or
tail, at which if he come not in, and the wryt be returned and the
proclamation certified, he shall be holden convict and the debt shall be levied
of him, in like manner as debt recovered against him in the kings court and
damages shall be awarded to the playntif according to the discreation of the
Barons. 14. Ed. 2. In the Statute of Attayntes in the last chap.

The King commands that all his Shiriffes and Baylifes which have received
his debts, of the somons of the Eschequers which acquit not the debtours upon
the next account shall be punyshed according to the estatute made. Distresses
of y^ Eschequer. Capitulo quinto.

It is ordained that execution of Wryts which come to the Shiriffe be made by
the hundreders known and sworn^ and in the full County and not by others if it
be not for great scarcity of hundreders. For then it shall be done by other
persons convenient and sworn. The statute of Lincoln ye last capi.

Shiriffes shall not be charged with the leauinge of any issues, nor shall
leuy^ any before they come out of y^ Eschequer by the extreats there to be
leuyed. And if percase any Shiriff return issues upon any recognitor pledge or
manucaptor by him assessed, and returned into our court which to the payment
of the same Issues or Amerciaments at the time of the return was insufficient,
y^ same shyriffe shall be charged there with at the Eschequer, and shall make
tails to any person of all manner things by him received, and shall not
return any where the names of Manucaptors, Iutours or other, except it be
according to the tenor of y^ Wryts to them dyrected, nor shall return the
names of pledges of freemen any where unless they have manyfestly confessed
themselves pleadges. The statute of fines. cap. 2.

No shyriff, Coroner, or other the kings mynisters shall take no reward for
doing his office, and if he do, he shall pay the double, and shall be punished at
the kings will but shall be paid of that which they take of the king. West. i.
cap. 26.

Shiriffes shall not suffer any barretour or mayntayners of matters within his
cou^ty, neither stewards of great Lords, other (which be not atturneyes to
their Lords to do their suites) nor to sit upon the judgments of the County,
nor to pronounce them, except he be thereto required of all the Suitors and
atturneys that shall be there at the same io^rney. And if he do the contrary,
the king shall take it gr^euously to the Shiriffe, and the offendour.
Westminster prime capitulo. 31.

It shall be lawful for every Shiriff, Iusticer of peace, and Escheator to sease
to y^ Kings use all such goods and cattels that such persons as come withing
this Realm (that ^e called Egyptians have) and thereof to make account to the
King in his Eschequer, and to retain and keep y^ moyty thereof to his own
use, and account for the residue, and to pay no fees for the account nor for
his discharge thereof.

In these Statutes it appears what thing the shirif ought to do by reason of
his office, and that he ought not to take any thing for doing his office, but
only that which is appointed to him by the same statute. And if he do or take
any thing otherwise: it is extor^ion, which ought to be enquired upon by the
Justices of the peace, and the Shiriffe shall be punished therefore.

And if any shiriffe do any extortion to ye people, and ^ee duly attaynted
thereof he shall straytely be punished therefore, at the pleasure of the King.
Anno primo. H. 4. captulo. 9.

Shyriffes may, and are bound to enquire of common annoysances done to all
manner of the Kings Subjects, but not of assaults made upon any private
person for that is but a particular offense, by Martin. 4. Henrici sexti.

The shiriffe must keep his turn within a month after Easter, and within a
month after the feast of S. Michael. And if be keep it at any time after the
month of the said feasts: it is void by the statute of An. 31. E. 3. cap. 19.
And all inditements and presentmentes there taken after the same time be void.

Bloodshed shall be enquired of in ye Shyriffes turn, because it is an article
that is to be inquired of in a Leete. All Leetes be derived and taken out of
the Shiriffs turns in so much that for defaulte of enquiry in leetes of things
enquirable there, the same things there omitted ought to be inquired of in the
turns of shiriffes. 8. E. 4.

And all the Iusticers said that the shyriffe in his turn has aucthority to
inquire of all things that be trespass, or felony by the common law (except
the death of a man) but of trespass, or felony made by Statute the Shiriffe in
his turn has no power to enquire of M. 28. Edwardi. 3.

And if the Shiriffe in his turn inquire of Nusances, that should be
inquired of in the Leete of an other and the same be found, yet may he not
distreyne for the amerciament of such a presentment. For if he do: he is
trespassour. But if there were a default in the Lord of y^ Leete that he would
not inquire or find ye su^me when he ought to have inquired thereof, in this
case it seems that y^ Shyriffe in his turn may enquire of it in default of
the Lord.M.xxviij.E.3. And if one have a fair or market by grant or
prescription, and keep not his fair, or market as he ought: the shiriff ought
to inquire thereof in his turn. 22 Hen. 6.

Upon presentment of Nuisance in the shiriffes turn, the party shall be
ame^^ed there by the shiryffe, which may distrayne for the amerciament. And if
propre stare be presented there the Shiriffe may abate the same, and refourme
it. P. 26. E. 3.

Also it appears by the book of Br^to^ that unto the turn of the shiryffe
ought to come all the freeholders of the hundred and other land tenaunts
(Clerks, men of Religion and Women only excepted) where at the shiriffe shall
cause.3. of the most sage and sufficient persons of the hundred to be sworn.
And then shall all the residue be sworn by dosins and by the towns, which
shall make their presentment to the first xii. Jurors, upon the article
wherewith they shall be charged. And it seems that the Shiriffe ought to hold
his turn in every hundred within the county.

What things be enquireable in the Shiriffes turn.
FIrst they shall enquire if there be any misdoer in the hundred of whom any
stands in doubt of Life or Lym, and what is his name.

Also they shall enquire of all mortal enemies to the King, y^ Queen, their
children and councillors, of counterfaytyng ye Kings seal or his money, of
ma^stears and murderers, burners of others corn or house ^ feloniously, of
Burglours of robbers, of thieves, of outlawes, of those that have abiured the
Realm and come again, of Sorcerers and witches, of miscreances, heretykes, of
traitors, and of poysoners, of ^utters of purses, of Usurers, of bittailers
buying and felling wittyngly stolen flesh, of them that wittinglye make white
the Skins of Beast^s stolen, of redubbours that witingly ^^ye stolen clothes,
and dress them into an other fashion, of treasure hyd in the ground, hues and
cries wrongfully or rightfully leuyed and not pursued, or waters stopped
straightned or turned, of bounds pulled up or wrongfullye changed, of Walls,
houses, Gates, marle pits Ditches, or other disturbaunces made or le^^d upon
any common way to the annoyance: or pety bribours that sheare sheep to have
the wolle, of such as take the boot, and of those that have made a prison of
their own house or household, of pound breach, of trespassours in park and
pondes, of takers of other men's Dooues, of the assise of bread and ale broken,
of them that buy and sell by measure against the assise, of chance medleyes,
of contectours, of bloodshed, watches unkept, of the kings high ways not
enlarged, of those yt have kept appeachers in any other prison the^ the kings
or any other felon above a day and a night, of new libertyes, customs or
jurisdictions usurped since the last turn, on water or on land, of weffes or
wreckes of the sea, found and kent away, of brydges and causies broken, and
who ought to repair them and of thos^ that claim fraunchises, or iudgemente^
real, and of all those of the age of twel^ years ^one out of the hundred
which ^e not come into their turn (except Clerks, Knights, their Children
and wives which be not in do sins) of vagabondes by the country which are of
no man's retinue, of whom there is an evil suspicion of lewd demeanor.

And when the towns have given their verdite to the first Jurors, then
immediately shall the first Jurors go and give up their presentment, such as
they will abide by. And the presentme^t of felons they shall show privily. and
the other openly. Breton. lib. ^. fol. 38.

Now must ye inquire further if Bayliffes of libertyes and frau^chises, have
duly done their office, which rests in three points, which is, that they
truly execute the precepts which be directed unto them according to the
tenours of the same; and that they make due answer and return to the Shiriffe
of the same precepts; and that he take nothing for doing his office but only
the fees to him due, and appointed by the course of the law. And what fees they
shall take, and what thing they ought to do by reason of their office shall
appear more plainly here following.

The office of Bayliffes of libertyes.
Upon a precept made by the Shiriffe to a Bailiffe of liberty upon a writ
of distress directed to y^ Shiriffe to distraine the refendant, or the Jurors
in any inquest the Bayliffe must return good and sufficient issues upon the
defendau^t, or upon the Iurous if they have sufficient goods or lands within
his Bayliweeke, and if h^e do not, the plaintiff in the action shall have an
auerment that he might have returned greatter issues, if the defendau^t make
defait or the Jurors by the statute of ^. Ed. 3. ca. 5. And the Iusticers of
the peace must inquire if the Bayliffes have done their office in that point.

Also they must inquire if Bayliffes of libertyes which be keepers of any
Iayle enforce any of their prisoners to be appealers to the intent to have a
fine of the parties appealed for daubt of imprisonment, ^. Ed. 4. cap vii.

Bayliffes of lybertyes which take inditementes in their turns, or other where
ought to take them by Indenture, whereof the one part shall remain with the
I^ditours, and the other with the Bailiffe. 2. Ed wardi 3. Cap. 17.

Non^ shall be made Bayliffe of liberties cxcept he have sufficient lands in the
place where he is minister, to make answer to the king and his people, 4. Ed.
3. cap. 9.

Bayliffes of libertyes which be Ioilours and have the kepinge of prisons
ought to receive and safely keep all the eues delivered to them by the
Co^stables of the towns being indicted, taken with the manner or appealed of
felony without taking ought. 4. Ed. 3. cap. 19.

Bayliffes of libertyes must receive such persons as be arrested in their
fraunthise by the Constables, for suspicion of felony that walk in the Country
by night or be of evil name, and shall keep them in Prison until the coming
of the Justices of Iaile delivery, and in the mean time the bailiffes must
inquire of the^. 5. E 3 cap. 14.

Bailiffes of libertyes, Constables and other officers of towns where
^oyterers and bagabonds resort, have power to examine the^ diligently, and
compel them to find surety by sufficient mainpernours being distreinable of
their good behauyour.

And if any default be founden in the same ^oyterers and bagabonds, and cannot
find suerty, they shall be sent to the next Iaile, there to remain until the
coming of the Iusticers of Iaile deliuerye, which may do with them, as they
shall think best by the course of the law. 7. R. 2. cap. 5.

No servant or labourer at the end of his term shall depart out of the
hundred or Rape where he is dwellinge to dwell any other where, unless he
bring a letter patent containing the cause of his going under the kings sea^e
thereto assigned. And if any servant labourer be found vagarant without such
letter, he shall be taken forth by the Shirifs, Majors, Bailifes, or other
officers: and put in stoekes till he find suerty of return to the town to
serve, from whence he came, until he have such a letter to depart for cause
reasonable. 12 R. 2. ca. 3. bailifs of libertyes have power to arest servants
and laborers y^ wear daggers swords and knyfes: and them to sease and keep
until the sessions of the peace and the weapons to present to ye Justices
there with the names of them that bare them, and the weapons shall be forfayte,
except they be travailing in the country with their master, or their lands
or business. 12. R. 2. cap. 6.

Shyriffes and Bayliffes o^ libertyes in their libertyes are bound to receive
servants and laborers begging and vagarant, and them to detayne in Prison
without bail, without taking any fee or other thing of them at their entering
or departing by them selves or by their deputies upon pain of a C.s. to the
king xii. R. ii. cap. 9.

Bayliffes of libertyes to whom the keeping of the assyse of bread and ale,
and the correction of the same belongs, shall take no amerciament nor fine
for no default touching the said assise for which the offendour ought by the
law to have corporal penance, but they shall judge them to the same
penance. And Baylifes of liberties and ail other that have the keepinge and
ouersyght of vittayles shall put in due execution the statute made in the 23.
year of Et the.3. which begins, quia mayor pars populi. etc. 13. R. 2. cap 8.

Butchers, Fishers, Hostelers, Bruers, Bakers, Pulters, and all other sellers
of vittayles, are bounden to sell such manner of Uittailes at a reasonable price
having regard to the price whereat such vittails are sold in other places near
so that they may have a competent gain and not excessive according as by the
distance of the places from whence the vittailes are carted they shall think
reasonably to be required. And if any sell vittailes in any other manner and
thereof be convict: he shall pay the double of that he has received to the
party indamaged, or in his default to any other that will sue therefore. And
majors and Bailiffes of towns etc. have power to enquire of all such as offend
against this ordinance in any point, and in case that the same Majors, and
Bailiffes be negligent in doing execution of the premises and thereuppon be
convicted by the Iusticers assygned by us, they shall be compelled by the same
Iusticers to restore the triple value of the thing sold to the party grieved,
or to any other that in his defalt will sue, and nevertheless shall be
grievously punished against us. 24. Ed. 3. capi 6.

No Steward, Bayliffe, nor other minister of Lords of fraunchise which have
return of writtes shall be attorney to any person in any matter within the same
fraunchise or Bayliwicke where he is officer at any manner time 4. H. 4. cap
xix.

If any heinous roiot ^e made, the Iusticers of the peace, and the Shiriffe or
vnder-Shyriffe ought to do their office according to the statute made. 13. H.
4. And if they do not, at the suite of the party grieved ^ commission shall
go forth to inquire thereof and of the default of y^ Iusticers and the
Shiriffe, and y^ Coroner shall serve the process and he must return persons
y^ have Land to the yearly value of x.li. and shall return also.xx.s. in
Issues at the first day and.xl.s. at the second, and at the third a C.
shillings, and so double it at every day after. And if default be in the
Coroner in returning the Issues or of persons of such land be shall leese.xl.
pound. And if the old Shiriff be discharged, the new shiriff shall serve the
process, and not the Coroner upon pain of xl.(...). if the default he found
in him, touching the return of other persons by him impanelled which have not
lands to the yearly value of.x.li. or to return such Issues as the Coroners
be charged with. And Bailiffs of libertyes are bound for to impaneli
sufficient persons, as above is said upon pain to leefe.xl^l. in case that
such persons may be found within his bayliwicke. 2. Hen. 5. Capitulo. 8.

Bailiffs of fraunchises ought to make their returns and au^swers unto y^
shiriffe upon his precept made unto them in a special wryt of assise.6. days
before the day of the sessions upon pain to forfayte.xl.li. for every time
that they shall do the contrary.vi. Hen. 6. cap. 2.

Where a Precept is made to the Shyriffe by Iusticers of the peace, to return
a panell to inquire of forcible enter, and he sends his precept to the
bailiff of y^ liberty to return the panell because y^ ry^^ was done within the
Liberty, now is the Baylyff bounden to make due return and execution of the
Precepts to him dyrected upon pain of.xx.l^. for every defaulte. And the
statute will that the Shyriffe shall return xx s. in issues upon every Iurour
at the first day, and that every Iurour which shall pass in y^ inquiry shall
spend.xl.^. yearly where by it seems that bailiffs of lyberties are bounden
to do likewise, if so many of the said Jurors be within his liberty for else
he is not. 8. Hen. 6. cap. 9.

Bailiffs of lyberties in attayntes upon plea of land of the yearly value
of.xi.s. or more nor in attaynts for deeds co^cerninge lands of like value,
nor in attayntes upon personal actions wherein the recovery exte^deth
unto.xl.l^. or more shall not return, or impanell any person in such inquests
but those that be dwelling within his Baylywicke, and that have Estate to their
own use in lands or teneme^ts for term of Life to the yearly value of xx.l^.
or more, within his Bailywick out of ancient deme^ne, and the five ports. And
at the first day of y^ dystresse returned shall return no less issue in such
actions of attayn^e then.xl.s. and y^ second distress.C.s. and the double of
every other distress upon the persons so impanelled and returned And if he do
the contrary he shall pay.x.li. to the King and as much to the party. 15
Henri^l. 6. capitulo quinto.

Bailiffs and other the Kings officers may arrest those Soldiers that come
from the Sea, and show not letters Testimonialls from their captayns that they
have lyce^sed them. And they shall keep the^ until they have inquired whether
that they had license, or not, and if they have no such License the^ shall they
be punished as ^e^ons. 28. H. 6. capi. 19.

No Bayliffe of a liberty upon any precepte to him directed to return the
panell of any enquest shall in the same return any bayliffes, officers or
servants to any Officer above said, nor shall take any thing by them selves,
or by other, of any person by them arrested or attached to their own use or
avail nor it any other person for any arrest or attachme^t by y^ body made by
the^ or that is arrested by virtue of their office for fine, fee, suite of
person, maynprise, letting to bail, of showing of any case or favor to any
person so being arrested for their reward or profit, but as is here lymitted,
yt is to wit, for the Shiriffe.xx.d. the Bayliffe yt makes the arrest.iiii.d.
and to the Iaylour if the prisoner be committed to him iiij.d. And no Bayliffe
of any Liberty, nor Coroner by him self nor by other, by color of his office
shall take any thing for the making of return, or panell, and for the copy of
a panell, but.4.d. And bayliffes of libertyes shall let out of prison all
prisoners by them arrested, or being in their keepinge by force of any bill,
writ, or warrant in any action personal, or by force of any indictment of
trespass, upon reasonable surety having sufficient within the Bayliwicke
where they be let to bail, to keep their days in ye same places as ye same
bill, writ, or warrant shall require, those only excepted, which be in ward
upon condemnation or be excommunycate or outlawed or arrested, upon suretye
of the peace, and vagarantes that refuse to serve. And that the said Bayliffes
shall not take any Obligation of any person nor by any person being in their
Ward by course of the Law, for any the causes above rehearsed but in the name
of their Office, and upon, the condition that the same Persons shall appear
at the days contained in the said writtes Bills, or Warrau^tes and in such
places as they require. And if any Bayliffe take any Obligation in any other
form, by color of his Office it shall be void, and that he shall take no
more for the making of any such Obligation, UUarrau^t or precept by them to be
made but.iiii d. And if they do contrary to this ordinance in any point for
so doing they shall render to the party grieved his damages treble, and shall
forfaite for every time that they does contrary.xl.li. the one half whereof
shall be to him that will sue in any of the kings courts therefore. etc. xxiii.
H. vi. cap x.

Bayliffes of liberties ought not to seal the goods of any person arrested or
imprisoned for felony before that they shall be conuice or attaynted of the
same Felony according to the law or else that the same goods be otherwise
forfaited, upon pain to forfait the double value of the goods so taken unto
the parties endamaged suing therefore by action of debt, wherein no wager of
Law, essoyne, nor protection shall in any wise be allowed to the defendaunt.i.
Richardi ii. capitulo.iii.

Bayliffes of Liberties that be Iailers and have the keeping of Iailes shall
certifye the names of every prisoner in his Iayle that is there for felony at
the next general Iayle delivery in every County or franchyse where such Iayle
is to be kalendred before the Iusticers of the same Iayle delyuery, upon pain
to forfait for every default there recorded.v.l.iii. Hen viii. cap. iii.

Al Bayliffes and other head officers and every of them findyng or knowing any
person using or exercising any unlawful games contrary to the statutes have
power to commit every such offender to ward and there to remain in prison,
without bail or mainprise, till such time as he be bound by obligation in such
sum as by discretion of him that takes the bond seems reasonable to the
kings use that he shall play no more. An. vi. H viii. cap. ii.

All statutes made against Siriffes, under Shiriffes, Baylifs or other
Ministers for making and returnyng of pannels or Iuries or for due execution of
serving of Writs or other process, or for taking of fees or for the
reformation of extortions, or for any other thing concerning their office and
all pains contained in every such Statute shall be extended to all stewards,
bayliffes and other ministers and officers of Liberties and franchises having
return of writs and execution thereof in like manner as they extend to
Shiriffes, their vndershiriffes, bayliffes, or other ministers, saving that the
bayliffes and officers of liberties may ocupy their offices for as long time
as they shall be given unto them An. xxvii. Henrici octaui capitulo.xxiii.

The office of Escheators.
YE shall inquire of Escheators, if they have duly executed their Office and
if they have taken any more for doing thereof then they ought or if they have
committed and done any extortion or oppression unto yt kings people by color
of their office.

And therefore ye shall understand that no Escheator ought to meddle or
inquyre for the King, but in case where the King of right ought to be
entitled and have the Land or thing that is found for him by the inquest, for
if one hold of the King as of his Duchy of Lancaster by knights service and
dye, his heir being within age, the King to have the ward of the heir and
the Land. And yet in case that if the Escheator find it by Office he shall
have nothing for the findyng thereof, because the Tenant held not of the
King in chief as of his Crown. And therefore the King may enter and sease the
Land and the Heir without office and may grant it. In like manner if the
Eschetor find by Office that one died seized and held of other Lords and not
of the King by Knights service and that he is dead and his heir within age,
the Escheator shall demand nothing of right for findyng of such an Office.
And so if he find an office that one dyed seized of such a manner in fee and
held of the King as of such an honor or Castle by knights service, and his
Heir within age yet ought not the Escheatour to have any fee or duty for the
findyng of that office, and if ^e take any thing therefore it is extortion
which is well proved by the writ of diem clausit extremum the words whereof
be these. Quia Georgius Per. qui de nobis tenuit in capite die quo obijt diem
clausit extremum vt accepimus, ideo tibi precepimus. and. Whereby it appears
if one hold not of the King in chief, the Escheator ought not to have the
fee of xl.s. for fynding of the Office. And if he take it in that behalf it is
extortion.

And in assise if the defendant say that the Lands are seized into the Kings
hands by the Escheator, and the Escheator being there present and examined by
the Iusticers thereuppon does confess that he has seized the Lands into the
kings hands where indeed he has not so done: in this case the escheator
does wrong to the plaintiff which may have an action upon his case against the
Escheator for his faished, and for that delay that he has sustained through
that confession by suing to the King for a Procedendo.

None shall be subescheator unless he have sufficient la^d in those places
where he is officer to answer to the king and his people in case that any
will complain against the^. Anno quarto. Edwardi tertij. cap ix. Anno. v
tiusoem. cap. iiii.

The Escheators shall be chosen every year as the Shiriffes shall be and by
the same persons that chose the Shiriffes.

And that no Escheator shall abide in his office above one year. An. xiii.
Edwardi tertij capitulo.vii.

The Escheators shall not do waste in Bishoprics and other places during the
vacation of them, neither shall sell under woods, nor chase in park or
warraunts nor fish in Pondes, or free fishings, nor may take no fines of any
tenements free nor bound, but shall cause them to be kept and saved without
doing damage or any manner of oppression. An. xxiiii. E. iii. cap. iiii.

So by this statute it appears that it appertains to the office of an
Escheator to sease the temporalities of Archbishoprickes, Byshoprickes, and
Abayes of the kings foundation, during the vacation of ye same, and take the
profits and to account for them to the King in the Escheker how be it there
is an other statute made in the same year in the effect whereof is, that if
the Deane and Chap. Prior or supprior will take temporalities to Fearme, paying
the value according to the remembrau^ces in the Eschecker, that they shall have
them before any other. And by an other statute made the same year, cap.
quinto, the Chauncelour, Treasurer of the Eschecker, taking to them such other
of the counsel as they shall think good, shall lease the vacations of
Archbishoprickes, Bishoprics, Abbeis Prioryes and other Houses of religion
the auoydance whereof belong to the king the Deane and Chap. Prior or
Supprior, Prioresse or Supprioresse, Covent at a certain rent to pay by the
year, quarter or Month during the vacations, as they shall think best,
without making fine. And neither the Escheator nor any other officer shall
seek cause or matter to enter or to meddle, or do any thing in a prejudice of
the Church. Saving to the King and his heirs, knights fees, aduousons,
Escheates, wards, Marriages, reliefes and services to the said fees belonging,
In witness whereof the king caused his letters Patentes to be made, thereof
dated at West. the viii. day of Apryll. The year above mentioned whereby it
appears that the authority aforesaid to make Leases was given to the
Chaunceller and the Treasurer by the kings letters patents. etc. Anno.xiiii. E.
iii. cap. vi.

The escheators and other the kings ministers must make account in the
Eschecker after this manner that is of Lands and teneme^ts whereof profit
arises from time to time, throughout the year as of Milles, Harbages
to^pleas, profits of cources, or such other issues and profits, they shall be
bounden to answer the king for the rate and value of the time according to
the old course of the Escheker. And touching ancient fearmes and rentes that
are to be paid at certain terms as rent seek, and rent service, whereof no
profit arises until the day of payment, such rents and fearmes shall be paid
unto them that have livery thereof out of the Kings hand at the terms of
payment of the said fearmes and rents next following such livery made, as well
for the times paste as the time to come.xxviii. Ed. iii. cap. iiii.

The King and his Progenitors have been seized at forfaitours of Wars, time
out of mind that is as well of Lands and possessions as of goods and cattels.
And by color thereof the Escheators by their office have seized many lands
and teneme^tes, as forfaytes to the King surmising treason in some persons
being dead at the time of the seaser, which never were attaynted in their
lives, the King has ordained touching such forfaytures that fell in the time
of his Grau^dfather and before that so soon as an inquest thereof shall be
returned into the Chauncery by any Escheator or other that has power to
inquire thereof the Tenant shall not he put out of possession but shall be
warned by a Scire facias, to appear at a certain day for to answer unto the
same if he will, and if no such forfaiture be sound the kings hand shall be
closed so that in all other cases of forfaitures of treason by persons deceased
nor attaynted, nor judged in their Lives their heirs nor la^d Tenauntes shall
not be challenged nor impeached of any other Forfaytures but of those only
that have been judged in time paste before the death of certain persons by
presentment in Eire in the Kings Bench, as of felons of the king and other. And
therefore it seems that if one move war against the King in his realm and
is slain in the same: then the Escheator may sease the lands and tenements as
forfaitour of War without any other inquiry to be made thereof.

Every Escheatour must take his inquestes of office of good and lawful men,
sufficient of inheritance and of good fame and of the same county where the
inquiry shall be made. And the inquestes shall be indented between the escheators
and the jurors, and if it be otherwise done: they shall be void, and they
shall be taken in good towns openly Trauerse may be taken to the escheators
office, whereby any alienation or dying seized or that the heir is within age,
and the land holden of the King in chief is found.

Lands seized into the kings Hands by reason of ward shall be kept without
waste. And the escheators shall have no fee of venison, fish, nor other thing,
but shall answer the King of the issues and yearly profits arising of the
said lands without wast. And if he do otherwise, then to make fine at the Kings
will, and to pay treble damages at the suit of the heir, as well within age,
as of full age.

And if he be within age his Friends shall have the suit for him, answeryng to
the heir of that, that shall be so recovered of him. Concerning other lands
seized into the Kings hands by inquest of office by the escheators this
foresaid ordinance, and punishment shall hold place against the escheator.
And if any make claim to lands so being seized: the Escheator shall return
an in inquest into the Chauncery with in one month after such seaser, so that
a writ he delivered to him to certify the cause of the seaser, and there shall
the party be hard to trauerse the Office, or otherwise to show his right, And
the Chancellor upon his own discretion (if he see cause may sease the
Lands to the Tenant paying to the king the value, if it belong to the king so
that he finds surety, that he shall do no wast until it be adjudged.

And the Escheators shall take their inquestes in good towns, and by honest
Men openly by Indenture to be made between the Escheator and them of the
inquest. And if he do contrary to this ordinance: then to have two years
imprysonment, and further to make fine at the Kings pleasure. Anno. xxxvi. Ed.
iii. cap. xxii.

None shall be Escheator if he have not xx. li. Land at the least or more in
fee and that they execute their office in proper person. And if he be otherwise
then to be put out, whereby it appears that the Subescheator can not inquyre
nor find office. An. xli. Edwardi iii. capitulo v.

Escheators nor Commissioners, shall not take inquest, but by those that be
impannelled and returned to the shiriffe, and if they do other wise and be
conuicte by examination or otherwise at the suit of the party or of the King
or any other person that will sue, they shall incurrethe pain of.xl.li. the
moitye to him at whose suit they shall be counict. And that no lands seized
into the kings hands shall be let to fearme by ye Chancellor, until the
inqueste and vervits be returned into the Chauncery, and by one month after
the same return except it be to the party grieved which was put out of those
lands by the inquestes and will offer to trauerse them, and show good euydence
and and find sufficient surety to sue his trauerse with effect, and to pay to
ye king the yearly value of the lands^ If it happen to be discussed for the
king. And if any Letters patentes of any lands or tenements to the contrary be
made to any other person then to him that offers to trauerse, or he let to
fearme with in a month next to the said month of return: they shall be void
and holden for none, A viii. H. vi. cap. xix.

Escheators, and Commissioners, shall return the inquestes taken before them
into the chauncery or in the Eschecker with in one month next after the taking
of the same upon pain of xx. l. the one moitye to the King, the other to him
that will sue, An. viii. Hen. vi. cap xix.

And if any Escheator take any office before him and do not return the same
into the Chauncery or the eschecker within the month next after the taking
thereof he shall incur the pain of forty pound forfait by the statute made.
Anno. viii. Heurici.vi. and further shall be bounden to pay to the King as much
as he is indamaged by the not returnyng of the same. And yt the Chau^cellour of
England calling to him the Treasurer of England may lease such Fearmes, for the
due execution of the said Statute. Nevertheless it appears that the same
statute gives but xx. pound of forfait against the Escheator or co^missioner.
Therefore search for the true record of both the statutes. An xviii. Hen. vi.
capitulo.vii.

Escheators must take their inqueste of office by virtue of the writs of diem
clausit extremum, and other Writtes within one month after the receipte of the
same. And that such inquestes be taken in good towns and open places. And that
none of them privily nor openly by him self or by other, take any thing for
the execution of such wryts in one county above the sum of vis. viii.d. or
xiii. ^. iiii.d. or under, with his labor and his costs so that the same that
he has taken altogether exceed not above xi. s. for the execution of any such
wryt, in one county. And if he do contrary to the premises the^ to forfait the
su^me of.xl.l. the moytie to him that will sue for the king and himself. An.
xxiii. Hen. vi. cap. xvii.

None shall be Escheators if he have not Lands or Tenements to the value
of.xx Pound within the Countye, for term of Life nor in the Countye where he
is Escheator. Nor no Escheator shall let his office to fearme nor make deputy
other then he will at his peril answer for, whose name he must certify by
his Letters patentes to the Treasurer and Barons of the Escheker for the time
being within.xx. days after such deputation made, And that no such deputy take
upon him to occupy in the said office unless the Escheator have Lands
tenementes or Rentes to the yearly value of xx.l. as before is said. And if
any Person do contrary to the premises or any of them then to forfayte for
every defaulte.xl.li. the one moitye to him that will sue and the other to the
use of the Kings house by action of debt, where no wager of law essoine or
protection shall lie.22. E. 4: cap ix.

No Shiriffe, Escheator nor other person shall sease or take the goods of any
person arrested or imprisoned, for felony before the same person so arrested or
imprisoned, be conuicte or attaynted of the same felony, according to the law
of England, or that the same goods shall be otherwise forfayted upon pain to
forfayte the double value of ye goods taken to the party damaged, suinge
therefore by action of debt, where no wager of law, essoyne nor protection shall
lie. An. 1. R. cap. 3

If any Escheator or commissioner put in to any of the kings courts any
inquisition or office concerning lands or tenementes, or other hereditamentes
not found nor presented by the oaths of 12. men, and inde^ted and by them
sealed, then to forfayte for every such offense returned and put unto any of
the kings courts on.C.ii. to the party grieved A. iii. Hen vii. cap. ii.

No Escheator nor other Commissioner shall sit by virtue of any commission to
inquire of lands or tenementes except he have lands or tenementes or
hereditame^ts to the yearly value of forty marks, over all charges upon pain
of xx. pound.

The Escheators, and Commissioners shall be discharged by their oaths that they
may not dispend xl. Mark over all Charges and that upon process made against
them out of the Eschecker. The Escheators, and Commissioners shall sit in open
places and shall suffer every person to give evidence openly in their presence
to the inquest taken before them upon pain of.xx.l.

The Iary shall receive the Counterpayne of the Indenture that shall be presented,
inde^te^d and sealed by the Escheator, Commissioners and to rest in the
possession of the first man that was sworn in the same Jury upon pain of
every person that shall be sworn.xx. shillings.

And every Escheator and Commissioner after the Jury is sworn, and ready to
give their verdit, and offer to present the same yt the same Escheators or
Commissioners or part of them shall receive the same verdit without further delay
upon pain of a C li. and deliver the counterpaine of the same Indenture to the
Jury in form before said upon the same pain.

And if the Clarke of the pety Bag, or his deputye will not receive such
Offices, and put it into the Fyles to remain of record within three days
after it be received or offered to be received, he to forfayte for every such
default.xl.l^. And y^ co^missiner and Escheator to be discharged of the penalty
of.xl.li. lymitted by the Statute for none returning of the same offices, or
inquisition within one month.

The like law and penalty to be against the officers in the kings Eschequer
which ought to receive such inquisition, for refusing so to receive them. And
the Commissioners, and Escheators to be discharged of the penalty for not
returninge of the same inquisition, so made by the said Escheators, or
Commissioners at any time after the month of such office, before the^ found
or before any of them within an other month then next ensuing, returned the
said office into the Chau^cery, or Eschequer, as the case shall require. And
the clark of the Pety bag to certify the transcript of every such office taken
before any commissioner, or Escheator, into the Eschequer the next term
following the receipt thereof, upon pain of ^.C.s. for every default.

And no man be compelled to occupy the office of Escheator by any patent over
one whole year, and he that is once Escheator shall not be Escheator again
within.iij. years next after yt said whole year ended.

If any Escheator exercise his office by reason of any Patent over the time of
one whole year ended, or be made Escheator within.iij. years after: then
after the said whole year ended his patent so made to be void and the party
grieved shall have his recovery of every of the said forfaytoures of one.C.li.
by action of debt, where no wager of law, essoyn nor protection be allowed.
There he diverse provisions made for diverse Escheators in Cities, and Boroughs
and in diverse counties.

And if the Lands, or tenementes of any man be seized in the kings hand by
virtue of any office found before the Escheator or Co^missioner, or by reason
of any other record found in the Chauncery or the Escheker, and be y^ is so
put out of his lands by reason of such record or office so found come and
trauerse that Record, or Office and it is found for him whereupon he has his
judgment, that the Kings hands be closed and amoued: now if so be that
there be an other record, or office found remaining amongst the Kings
records, which is not trauersed nor tried, yet shall not the Escheator sease
the lands again into the kings hands by the reason of the record b^ing
found not trauersed. And if he do; then both he wrong and exto^cion, and
the party that is put out shall have assyse against him, and shall recover
double damages against him. But in this case the king must sue a Scire facias
against him that has the lands out of his hands upon this other record or
office, that was not trauersed before. This is given by the Statute of
Lincoln, calls the statute of Escheators. Anno 20. Edwardi.2.

And if the Escheator by color of his office without warrant, or authority of
the law that belongs to his office, dissease any man of his Lands or
tenementes, the party that is disseased shall have an assyse of Nouel
disseison, and shall recover double damages against the Escheator, Westmin. 1.
capi. 26.

The Escheator has no power to amearce any man that appears before him, and
misdemeaneth him self, or if the Jurors that ^ee ^o^moned appear before do
make default, he shall record such things in his Role, and shall not amearce
the Jurors, but he shall send the same record to the Iustycers in Eire, or
to the Iustycers of assyse when they come into the country. It shall be lawful
to the Shiriffe, Iusticer of peace, and Escheators to sease to the kings use
all such Goods, and Cattels that such persons as come within this Realm, that
be called Egyptians have, and thereof to make account to ye king in his
Eschequer, and to retain and keep the moity thereof to his own use, and
account for yt residue, and to pay no fees for the account nor for his
discharge thereof.

The Office of Constables.
FOr as much as the office of a Constable was an office at the common Law of
long continuance, and was first ordained for the co^seruation of the kings
peace to be had and kept in every town among the kings Subjects there
dwelling, somewhat shall be spoken. And how far forth their power does
extend, and what penalties are provided against them, for not executing their
Offices.

Who were conseruatours of the peace at the common law.

IT is now seen for the conservation of the peace, what persons by the common
law had authority therein, before the making of the Statutes whereby the
Iusticers of the peace are ordained.

And it seems that by the common law diverse persons were conseruatours of
the peace, for at the common law there was one person which is called thief
Justice of England, to who^ the king committed his authority in ye ministratio^
of justice for things touching his crown, and for the conservation of his
peace among his subjects through out al his realm, And that is proved by the
writ which the K. se^deth to him, yt he should hold his place in the
ministratio^ of Justice to his subjects in the form above said, throughout
all his realm, whereby it does appear that the same chief Justice is high
conseruatour of the peace throughout all the countyes of England, and in every
part of the Realm where he goes. Also there be other persons conseruators of
the peace throughout the Realm, as the steward of England, the Marshall, and
the Constable of England. Also the Constable of every town were and be
keepers of the peace by the common law: likewise the high Constables of
hundreds, wapentakes, lathes, or tithinges were and be conseruatours of the
peace by the common law within the towns or hundreds, and within their
limittes. And before the making of the Statutes whereby Iusticers of the peace
are ordained, the king by his commission made conseruatours of the peace in
those cou^ties and places (where him thought best) to keep his peace, and the
authority which conseruatours of the peace, had by the common law, is the same
authority that a Constable of a town or wapentake has at this day, which I
shall partly touch.

If one make assault upon the Constable, the Constable may defend him and may
take him, and commit him to the Iaile, until he have found surety to keep the
peace, though that the assault were made upon him self. As it appears
Micha. v. Henrici. vii. in the title Bar. Much more then if a Constable see one
making assult upon a strange person, he may take him and commit him to
prison, or to the Iaile, until he have found surety to keep the peace.

And if one man threate another whereupon he that is threatened comes to the
Constable, and shows his matter, and prays him to compel him that so
threatened him to find surety: in this case the Constable and the party that is
threatened may go and compel him that so did make such threatening to find
surety to keep the peace, and if he will not: they may commit him toward until
he have found such suretye as you may see Mich. 44. Edwardi 3. in the title
of Bar.

And if one be stricken in peril of death, it is the office of the Constable
of the Town to arrest the offender, and to keep him in prison until it be
known whether the party so stricken shall live or dye until that he have
found surety to appear before the Iusticers of Iayle delivery, or at such time
as he shall be called upon to appear before y^ Iusticers at their discretion.

And if one flee for felony it is the office of the Constable of the town to
sease his goods and to keep them, and if they hap to be impaired in his
keeping, he shall answer for them to the King 2. E 3. in the Shyre of
Northampton, but by the statute ma^e. 1. R 3. capit. 3. that is changed. And
if felons or murderers he in the town, and the Constable have knowledge
thereof, it is his office and duty to assemble people for to take the^

And if one take a felon in the Town and bring him to the Constable to be
conveyed to the Iayle, the Constables office is to carry him thither, and to
cause other of the town to aid and assist him in so doing.

And note that the constables were ordained for two intentes, yt is to wit, to
keep the peace, and also to repress felons, to take surety by obligation of
such persons as they shall find making of frayes.

It apperatyneth to the office of the chief Constable of England to have
co^^sance of deeds of arms any contractes touching deeds of arms and of
war out of the realm and in like manner of things touching arms within the
realm; which cannot be determined by the common law, as it appears clearly
by the Statute made the 13. year of Ri. 2. cap. 2.

Also it appears by the Statute made. anno primo. H. 4. cap. 13. that all
appeals to to be made of things done out of y^ realm of England shall be
tried and determined before the Constable and Marshall of England for the time
being.

Also when battle is joined in a writ of right or in appeal, that shall be
de^ayned before the Constable and Marshall; how be it the Iusticers must see
the battle done because y^ they be properly Judges thereof, and not the
Constable nor the Marshall.

And the Constables have many other authorityes as well by the common law, as
by statutes made, y^ which you may see there

Anno 7. Ed. 4. It is said the gardiners of the peace at the common law may
inquire of congregations, and unlawful assemblyes, and of disseyson with
force, but not of enter with force. But now by the statute if any enter with
force, or do disseason with force, or enter peaceablye, and kept passession
with force; the Justices of peace may make restitution to the party and put him
in possession by their writ directed to the Shiriffe, Constables in the towns
where they bear office may arest men y^ go or ride armed in fayres, or
markettes, by day or by night and take their armor as forfait to the king,
imprison them at the Kings pleasure. An. 2. Ed. 3. at Northampton.

The Kings purueyours ought to make their purueyaunce for the Kings house, by
the Constable, and 4 honest men of the towns, where such purueiaunce shall be
made without threatening. And in presence of y^ Constable, tails shall be made
and sealed with the seals of the takers, between the said takers and the
parties of who^ the goods be taken, And if any taker make his prise otherwise:
it shall be done with him as with a thief. An. 12 Ed. ^ cap. ^,

Constables of towns must arrest such as pass by night, of whom suspicion is
had, and deliver them to the Shiriffe, there to remain in ward until they be
duly delivered. Also they must arrest such as be called robberdes men.
wasters, and draw la^ches (if suspicion he had of any such) be it by night or
day, and deliver them to the Shiriffe until the coming of the Iusticers of
Iaile delivery. 5 E. 3. cap. 13.

It is ordained that none shall take for threshing a quarter of wheat or corn
above 2.d. ob. and for a quarter of Barley, Beans, Peace and O^es. 1, d. ob. if
so much have been used to be given, and in the country where they use to reap
by the sheffe, and thresh by the bushel, they shall take no more or otherwise.
And that such laborers and other servants shall make an oath two times in the
year before Lords, Stewardes, Bayliffes and Constables of every town, to do
and keep this ordinance, and that none of the^ shall go out of ye town where
they dwelled in winter for to serve in summer (if he can have service in the
same Town) saving to the folk of the countyes of Stafford, Darby, Lancaster,
Crauen, and the marches of wales, their free liberty to labor in other
countries in the time of August. And they that refuse to make such oath, or to
perform the thing that they have sworn and taken upon them shall be put in
the stocks, by the said Stewardes, Bayliffes, Co^stables of towns by the
space of three days, or more, and shall be sent after to the next Iayle, and
there to remain until they will be ordered, and yt there be Stocks in every
town for the same intent. And the Stewards, bailifs, and Constables shall make
oath before the iusticers assigned to enquire diligently of al the^ that offend
against this ordinance and to certify their names before the same Justices
when they shall come into the country, to keep their sessio^s, upon which
certificate made, the same Justices shall cause them to be attached by their
bodies to appear before the same Justices to answer unto such contempts; so
that if they be attaynted: they shall make fine and ransom and further to be
commanded to prison until they have found surety to serve in manner above
said. And the Justices at every time that they shall come into the country
shall inquire of Stewardes, Bayliffes and Constables, whether they have made
good and lawful certificate, or have concealed ought for any gift,
procurement, or affinity, and shall punish them by fine and ransom if they be
found guilty. 25. Ed. 3. Capit. 2. and 8.

Constables of towns whereas faytours or vagabondes resort, have power to
examine them diligently, and co^pel them to find surety of their good
behavior, by sufficient may^pernours dist^einable in case that any default be
found in such feytures and vagabondes. And if they can find no such surety:
then to be sent unto the next Iayle, there to remain unto the coming of the
Justices of Iayles delivery, which have authority to do with such faytors and
vagabondes as they shall think best to be done by the law. Anno 1. Ri. 2.
cap. 5.

Constables of towns may arrest any Servant labourer coming to the Town from
any place vagarant, unless he have a letter containing the cause of his
going and the time of his return, under the kings seal that thereto shall be
assigned and delivered to the custody of some honest man of the hundred,
Wapentake, City, or Boroughe, according to the discretion of the Justices of
peace. And y^ Constables may put him in stocks, and keep him until he have
found surety to return to his service, or to serve in the town from whence he
came until he have a letter to depart upon cause reasonable. An. 12. Ri.
secundi. cap. 3.

Constables have power to arrest Sernau^ts, and laborers that bear about them
Hanger, Dagger, or knife, and to sease the said weapons as forfayt and them to
keep until the sessions of the Justices of peace before whom they shall
present such weapons with the names of them yt bare them, except that they
travel in the country in their masters message 14. Ri. 2. cap. 6.

Shiriffs and other the kings mynisters may take the power of the country to
repress assemblies and royots in outragions number, and to commit them to
prison. An. 17. Ri. 2. cap. 8. It seems by these words (the Kings mynisters)
that Constables of towns, have power to do so by this act as well as the
shiriffes.

Constables may at rest servants laborers, and imprison them by the space of
six days, which use not Bows, and arrows upon So^dayes and such other
festiual days, which will not leave utterly all playing at the Ba^^ as well
with hand as with Foot, and other games called coyts, dice, casting of the
stones, ke^les, and all other like importunate games.xi. Hen. 4. cap. 4.

Constables and all the kings liege people that are able to travail wtin the
county must be assisting, and aydoing to the Iusticers of peace, and the
Shiriffe to repress great riots, and unlawful assembles upon pain of
imprysonment, and to make fine and ransom. Anno secundo. Hen. 5. cap 8.

Constables shall be made in every part of y^ marches of Wales and market
towns to inquire, search and arrest such persons that carry victayle, or
armor to any part of Wales, without the kings license which Constables shall
have the 6. part of the forfayte for their travail.4. H. 4. cap. 16.

Constables of port towns (where soldiers that have been retained in Wages
to serve in war beyond Sea or upon the Sea, and depart from their Captains,
and turn back and arryue in any port of Englend without license of their
Captain under his seal, may arrest such soldiers and keep them until
inquiry be made of them: and if it may be proved by inquiry before Iustycers
of the peace, and proves yt they have mustred of record, and departed from
their captain (as before is said) without license: then they to be punished as
felons. Anno. 18 Hen. 6. cap. 19.

The Constables, Tythingmen, and chief pledges of every town, must assist and
aid the owners and sellers of any goods (where the kings purueiou^s will make
their purueyaunce, or bargayne of any goods to the value of.x^.s. or under) of
any person and will not pay pressed paime^t in hand: in which case it shall be
lawful for every one of the Kings lieges: to retain them, and to resist such
purueyours and not to suffer them to make any such purueyaunce. And if the
Constable, tythingman, or chief pledge be required to aid and assist any Man
in making such resistaunce, and he refuse it, be shall pay to the party
grieved the value of the thing so taken, by action of debt, with the damages
to the double. An. 20. Hen. 6. capitulo. 14.

Constables may arrest purueyors or buiers for any Lord or other person
(except purueyors for the King and Queen) which take any vitayle or carriage
against the will of the owners, and to commit them to the next prison of the
kings there to remain without bail or maynprise until they have delivered all the said victayles or cariages, and other things so taken. And if the
Constables do otherwise when they be required: they shall forfayte twenty
pound. The moyty to be to the party from whom the goods were taken, to be
recovered by Action of debt, wherein the defendant shall not wage his law. An.
23. Hen. 6. cap. 13.

Clothiers shall pay to carders, spinners and other Laborers lawefull Money
for their wages, and carders, fullers, and other laborers shall do the or
duty upon pain of double damages. And the Constables of the hundred or
Constable may hear and determyne the complaints of every such clothier, and
labou^er, as well for no payment of the said wages of laborers, as of the
said forfaytures and damages by due examination of the parties in that
behalf, and further for none payment of the said duties, forfaytures and
damages, to commit the trespassor to the next Iayle in the same county, until
the said duties, forfaitures, and damages, to commit the trespasso^res to the
next Iayle in the same county, until the said duties forfaytures, and damages
be duly paid ^ato the said laborers or clothiers. 4. Ed. 4. cap. 1.

Every high Constable or pety Constable shall take or cause to be taken all
va^abounds, idle people and suspect persons living suspiciously and set them in
the stocks and there to remain by one day, and one night, and to have none
other sustenaunce but bread and water, and then to avoid the town where they
were taken, into such place or hundred where they were borne, or where they
last dwelled by the space of.iij. years. And if eftsoons they be taken in
such default, then they to be set likewise in the stocks by three days and
three nightees with like diet.xix. Hen. 7. cap. 12.

Constables and other head officers, and every of them findinge, or knowinge
any person using or exercisinge any unlawful games, as Tenis play, bowls,
clashe, and all other unlawful games prohibited by many Statutes, shall have
full power to commit every such offendour to ward there to remain without
bail, or Maynepryse, till such time hie or they so offendinge be bound by
obligation to the Kings use, in such su^me as by the discretion of the same
officer shall be thought reasonable that they from thence forth shall not use any
unlawful games. 6. Hen. 8. cap. 2.

For wages for water men and for their barges or boats, or for a Barge from
London to Graves end.iij.s. or else every person and his male.ij.d. From London
to Eryth, Gr^^nwhich, Grastorock, or Parfler.xij.d. or ^ls for every person,
and his fardle. 1.d. so it pass not.vij.d. From London to Wulwich.xiij.d. for
a boat or whery that is y^ tide boat, or else for every person. ob. From
London to Greenwhich.iij. d. or else, (...). for every person and his fardle.
From London bridge, Saint Mary Oueries, or Paul's wharfe, to Westminster, iij
d. or else every person. ob. From the Black Friars, Bridewell, and the Temple,
to Westminster, or Lambeth.ij.d. with their males or else every person.ob. so
that it amount to.ij.d. From Westminster to Lambeth or stayngate. ob. for a
boat. From London to Mortlake.xij.d. or else every person.ij.d. with his male.
And from those places about named, to London for a boat or barge like su^mes
to be paid. And these articles to be kept upon pain to forfait treble the
fare; and Bailiffes Constables and other the Kings officers next adjoining to
the series upon complaynt to the^ made or to any of them, by them that be
grieved in that behalf, may arrest them, and commit them to ward for their
misdemeanour and to make fine for the same.vi. H. viii.ca.vi^.

By the statute made. An. xxii. Hen. viii. how impotente persons shall be
ordered to beg and have their living. It is ordained that if any impotente
Person auctorysed to beg do beg in any other place then within the limits to
him assigned: then the constables and all other the kings officers shall by
their discretion punish all such Persons by imprisonment in the stocks by the
space of two days and ii. Nights, geuyng them but only Bread and Water. And
after that to cause every such person to be sword to return again without
delay, to the hundredth, R^pe, City, Borough, Town parish or franchise wherein
they be auctorysed to beg in.

And if any impotente Person be vagarant, and go a begging and have no such,
letter under seal as is specified by this statute then the Constables and all
other inhabytauntes within such Cownes or parish shall cause every such Beggar
to be taken and brought to the next Iusticer of peace or high constable of
the hundred. And thereuppon the said Iusticers of peace or high constable shall,
command the said Co^stables and inhabitants of the Town or Parish, which
shall bring before him any such beggar that they shall s^ryp him naked from the
middle upward, and cause him to be whipped within the Town or where he was
taken or where the same iusticers of peace or high Constable shall appoynte.
And if not: then to command such beggar to be set in the stocks in the same
town or parysh where he was taken by the space of three days and three
Nyghtes, to have only Bread and Water and thereuppon the said Iusticers or
high Constable shall limit a place to the same Beggar to beg in. And to give
him a Letter under seal in form before limytted and to swear him to repair
thither immediately after his punishment executed.

And all other Persons being whole and mighty in Body that do beg, the
Constable of the hundred Rape, or Wapentake^ wherein such Persons shall be
taken, and ^he Iusticers of peace or high Constable before whom they shall be
brought by their discretion shall cause them to be brought to such places as
they think convenient, and there to be whipped naked through the town or
market, and then to be sworn to return to the place where he was borne or
where he last dwelled by the space of 3. years, and to have a letter under the
seal witnessing that he has been punished.

Also all persons that a biure to sainctuary within ^his realm shall be conveyed
thereunto by the Constables of every towneship that is from Town to Town till
that he come unto that same Sainctuary where unto he is abiured in like manner
and form as persons that had abiured this ^ealme should have been conveyed to
the next port of the sea from that place where they be abiured unto the same
pore by course of the common law before the making of this Statute 22 H. 8.
cap. 13.

Every farmer or owner of lands, tenemente or hereditamentes, whereof y^
yearly value or rent amounts to five poundes^ which manureth, the same shall
pay to every person, which by his diligence and labor at his own costs
takes any old^ Crows, Rookes or Choughs upon the same Lands Tenements, or
hereditamentes of the yearly value aforesaid.ii. pence for every xli. old
Crows, Rookes, or Choughes and a penye for (...), and a half penny for.iii.
old Crows, Rookes, or Choughes. And any Farmer or owner refuse to pay the
said money according as is aforesaid, then upon a complaynt and proof made
thereof to any Iusticer of peace, or high Constable the same Iusticer, or byghe
Constable shall cause the samemoney to be levied by distress of the goods and
cattels of every such Farmer or occupyer of the same lands and tenements. Anno
xiiii Henrici.vii^. cap. x.

Where it is ordained by a Statute made in the vii. year of Richard the
Second.cap ix. that he which espyeth and proves defaultes in any Clothes, put
to say contrary to the assise thereof, ordained touching Clothes and contrary
to the said statutes should have the third part of every such cloth being
defective for his Labor by the delivery of the Shiriffes if they be present
or else of the Lords of Fayres and Markets or of Stewards Bayliffes or
Constables of towns, where such defective clothes shall be found by Inde^ture
between them to be made the which shall be delivered every year in the escheker
at the feast of S. Michaell by them that shall make such delivery, to the intent
to charge the Annagours and toilours, by whom such manner of defaultes ought to
be searched and amended. An. 7. Ri. 2. cap. 9.

If any person, ship, marchaundise of Staple, be in place suspect adjoining
to the Costs of the Water, and makes no Indentures thereof between him and
the mayor or Constable of the town, they shall be forfayte, and the king shall
have the moytye. And it is lawful for every person to search in these causes.
An. ^ 4. Hen. 6 cap. 5.

It is ordained that a Horseman shall pay for passage at Dover 3. s. and a
footeman 6. d.. And the Constable of Dover to punish them that do contrary at
the suite of the party that will complain and shall do him right in that
behalf. Anno. 4. Ed. 3 cap. viii.

The office of Coroners.
FOr to declare plainly the Office of a Coroner, it appears by the Statute
of Magna carta in the xv. capi. that no Coroner ought to hold any pleas of ye
Corone. But Breton declares ye office of a Coroner in form following.

First that in every county Coroners shall be the principal conseruators of
the peace to bear record of all the pleas of the crown of abiurations,
vtlagaries, and such like, and the Coroners shall make an oath before the
Shiriffes in the full county, that they shall make their inquests,
inrollementes, and all that to the coroners office apertaineth, lawfully or
without askinge allowance. And if any felony chance, or treasure be found or
any Woman ra^yshed, or Prison broke, or any man wounded nighe unto death, the
coroner so soon as he shall know thereof shall send to the Shiriffes and
Bailiffs of ye places where such adventure shall happen to cause to come before
him, at a certain day at the place where such chance befell, four of the
next towneships, and other if need be by whom he shall inquire the verity
and shall compel the townships to swear upon the Saints to show the truth of
those articles yt he shall demand of them. Then shall the Coroner and the
Jurors view the body, the Wounds, and the strokes, and immedyately after
such view had, the Body shall be buried, And if the Coroner find the body
buried before the coming he shall record the same: nevertheless he shall
not omit to dig up the Body and make it to be viewed openly of the Towns.
And those Jurors which have been sommoned and come not to the inquyries of
coroners shall be amerced at the coming of the Iusticers at the first assizes
in those counties so that such defaultes be entered in Coroners roll: so that
the Coroner shall have no power to amerce no man for any default. And when the
inquest is sworn, the Coroner must inquyre if the person were slain by
felony were done within a House or without, and all the circumstaunce. And
after it shall be inquyred who were present at that deed and who be culpable
of the said force, commandment, consent or receipte of such felonies
wittyngly. And if the Coroner have any suspection of the first inqueste for
concealeme^t of the truth or if it be needeful to inquyre better by other,
then shall he inquyre diverse times and al such as thereof shall hap to be indicted
the shiriffe shall take in all the have if they may be found, and if not the
Coroner shall inquire who they be and who has withdrawn themselves for that
occasion and the Shiriffe shall forthwith cause their lands to be seized, and
afterward, all their goods, and cause them to be praised by lawful inquest
and the goods with the prises shall be enrolled in the Coroners roll and shall
be delivered to the township for to be answereable therefore unto the K. in
case the party so indicted flee, and will not stand to right.

And after they shall inquire if he that is indyted did ever find surety to
keep the kings peace and the names of his may^pernours, which he shall enter
into his roll.

And if the playntiffe will sue apeale within the year and the day, then shall
he find two sufficient pledges to the Shiriffe of ye county distreinable
within the same to sue his appeal according to the law of ye land. And the^
shall the Coroner cause the appeal to be entered, with the names of the pledges
and after it shall be commanded unto the sergeant of the county where such
felony is done which as me seems, is the Shiriffe or his bayliffe errant
that he has the body at the next county. And if the Sergeant return at the
second county that he cannot find them, then shall it be awarded that the
pryncipall being appealed of the deed shall be solempnely called to stand to
right touching the same felony and so shall be called from cou^ty to county until
they come or be outlawed, and if the plaintiff make default at any county
then shall the exigent pass until the coming of the Iusticers of the Kings
benche or the Iusticers in Eire in the county. And if the pryncipall be
outlawed the exigents shall go forth immediately against accessaries. And when
they shall be outlawed wythdrawen or suspected^ the Coroner shall inquyre at
whose finding such a fugitive has been and according unto the verdit he shall
inrolle it and then inquyre of the Lands and goods of y^ fugitive. And if they
appear before outlawry they shall be repleuiable, and if the felony were done
out of a House: the Coroner shall inquyre who found the body first and he shall
be taken and let go under sureties. And that no Iurour be removed by challenge
of any party. Neither shall any Coroner take any thing by him self or by
other, nor suffer to be taken by his Clarke for doing his office, And if it be
found that any is dead by misaduenture then shall it be inquired what
misaduenture as if it be found that he fell from a Mill, it shall be inquired
what things were then moving there, and how much they be worth, and so if he
fell out of a carte, and if one fall out of a ship nothing shall be judged the
cause of his death but the ship and the things that move therein, and not
the marchaundise lying therein.

And the Coroners ought to receive the confession of felons made by proouers in
in presence of y^ shiriffe who shall be his controller in all his office, and
such confession he shall cause to be enrolled; and when any person flees to a
Church so sone as the Coroner shall have knowledge thereof he shall send to the
Bailiffe of the place, that he shall cause to come before him by a certain day
the neighbors, and four of the next townships adjoining to the Church, and in
their presence shall receive the confession of the ^elon. And if the fugityue
pray to abjure the realm: the Coroner shall do that the which to his office
belongs.

Also he shall inquire of rape and all the circumstaunce, the appeals, whereof
with all other Appeals of robbery, felony and such like he shall cause to be
entered in his roll.

And they shall inquyre of treasure founde^^ of wreckes of the Sea and of
Sturgions and of Whales taken, and who were takers, whose names they shall
inroll and let them go by mainpryse. And such things as shall happen to be
founden they shall safely keep to the kings use. And the Shiriffs and Bayliffes
shall be always attendant upon them, and at their commandments.

It is ordained that throughout all the Counties of England there be chosen
sufficient Coroners of the most sage and lawful Knights that may best to the
same office intend which lawfullye shall attache and present peales of Corone
as well of appeals as of things to the same Office belongyng. And that no
Coroner demand or take any thing for doing his office, upon pain of a
griuous forfaiture to the king i. West.cap. xii. But now by the Stat^te made.
Anno. i. Hen.viii. cap. i. the Coroner shall have xiii.s.iiii.d. of the goods
of the murderer and if the murder be committed in the day time and the
murderer escape the coroner shall have xiii.s.iiii.d. for the escape upon the
towneship, also it appears by ^ Statute made in the xiii. year of E. the
first which is called the statute of Excerer, under what order inquisition
shall be made of the defaults of Coroners be they alive, or dead; where he
shall see the charge that shall be geeuen to the inquests y^ shall be charged to
inquire of Coroners, in which charge it appears further what the Coroner
ought to do by his office; which charge here insueth.

The form of the charge to inquire of the defaults of the Coroners according
to the statute of Exceter.
FIrst they shall inquire if the Coroner, go in proper person to do his office
or not, whereby it appears that he cannot make a deputy. 2. Also if he have
sent any other to do his office what he was, and how often and about what
adventures. 3. Also if he came at every time of his own good will without
delay, or that he or his Clarke have taken any thing for the more speedy
executing of their office. 4. Also if he tarry or delay to the intent to have
any reward after yt he has knowledge of the truth, and after y^ he is sent
unto, how often, and in what place, and under what manner. 5. Also if the Goods
of Felons taken by him be delivered to the towns to keep by a lawful inquest
as they ought to be and enrolled in his record or not. 6. Also if the Coroner
take any thing of any person for to take a false inquest for to destroy the
right of any or to praise y^ goods for less then they be worth. 7. Also if he
enter any thing in his rolls otherwise than it was given by the inquest and
what thing he or his clerk took therefore and how often, and for what thing
he, or his Clerk took such things. 8^ Also if he or his Clerk took of the
goods that were prysed, and prysed them at less, then they entered them in
their rolls. 9. Also if y^ prises were not assessed by the inquest. 10. Also
if y^ township were falsely charged and of what thing. 11. Also if any appeals
were falsely inrolles or imbeaseled out of ye rolls after that they were
entered. 12. Also if be refuse to take any playnt of appeals for poverty, hate
or other like cause, and what he took for that occasion and of whom and how
much. 13. Also if he or his Clerk have taken ought of the goods of the party
that is dead upon whose body he took view what thing it was and how ofter
he so did. 14. Also if he have entered all the attachments belonginge to his
office in due manner, or if he have made any attachment for to grieve any person
or to have of his own, and enter it into his roll. 15. Also if he have not
done his office at all times at his own costs, without taking ought
therefore. 16. Also if he have concealed ought in any Cou^ty or procured to be
murdered to the grieuaunce of any person and if he so did than to inquire how
often and for what reward, and for whom, and in what case he so old. 17. Also
all the attachments, hanging, and lawfully receiving be pursued by him as he
ought to do for the king or for the party, or cause to be pursued. 18. Also
if the goods of such as have fled the towns where they dwell for suspection of
felony, were attached by him, and praised by inquest, and enrolled according
thereunto and delivered unto the towns where those goods were found to keep
safely until the coming of the Iusticers in Eire. 19. Also if he suffer
appeals or other plaints to him made to be conveyed away imbeaseled, or carried
out of the roiles, and if he take ought for such falshed, of whom, how much,
and how many times. 20. And if there were any treasure found in the time of the
said Coroner in what, and what manner of treasure, and how much, and in whose
hands it rests, and by whose deliverance.
This is the whole charge that Justices in Eire must give for inquiry of
Coroners, and of their defaults. Furthermore Iusticers in Eire may impanell
other Inquestes of 24. persons of the body of the county to inquire of the
co^cealement of y^ first inquests, which did inquire of the defaultes of the
Coroners.

When Coroners have any knowledge from the Kings Bayliffes, or other honest men
of the country for to go unto such as be slain, or suddenly dead, or wounded,
or breakers of houses, or to any^ place where treasure is said to be found
they must go forthwith, and command four, five, or six, of the next
Towneships, that they be before them at such a day and place, and when they
shall come, the^ the Coroner must make inquiry thereof in form following.

First if the person were slain in house, or in the field, in bed or at the
Tavern. etc. and who be guilty thereof, either of y^ deed or co^sent^ etc.
And if any be in y^ court which were there, so y^ they can speak or have any
discretion, and they that be found guilty by inquest shall be taken and
delivered to y^ Shyriffe. And such as were present, and be not guilty shall be
attached until the coming of the Iusticers and their names shall be written
in the Coroners Roll.

If any be sodaynely flayne in fields or in Woods, it is first to be seen
whether he were slain there or not, and if he were not slain there, then as
near as they can they shall follow the steps of him that brought the body
thither with horse or carte, if it be possible in case the murderer be known:
and if he be a stranger; then shall they inquyre where he was lodged the night
before: and touching such as shall be founde^ guilty the Coroner shall go
immediately to their houses and inquire what goods and Lands they have and how
much they be worth by the year. But by the statute of King Rychard the third
it is ordained that the lands and goods of such persons shall not be seized
until they be attaynted or otherwise convict by course of the law. And these
things thus being inquired: the bodies shall be buried incontinent.

Moreover they must inquire of such as be drowned or dead sodaynely, and
whether they were drowned, stra^gled, or slain, and they must enquire who were
the fynders, and they may be attached, also they must view the length,
breadth, and deepnes of all wounds, and must inquyre with what weapons and in
what place of the body: and if the wound be mortal: the offendour shall be
kept until it be known whether the party may be whole. And if the wound be
great then he shall be let go under four, or six pleadges, and if it be but
little then. 2. pleadges shall suffyce. Also they must inquire of horses,
Carts, and other things whereby any was slain, that they may be praised, and
delivered. (...).s.

Also they shall inquire of wrecks of the Sea, and if any lay hand upon it, he
shall be attached by good pleadges, and the wreck shall be prysed and delivered
to the next towneships. Further more Hue, and Cry shall be leuyed upon all
Manslaughters, Burglaries, as when any is slain or in peril of death if it
may be. And all shall follow such hue and cry if they be able, and they that
do not, shall be attached to appear before the Iusticers. etc.

Also if any person flee unto the Church or other hallowed place, for Murder,
Felony or such like offense, the Coroner upon knowledge thereof shall come
thither and take his confession; and if he will abjure the Realm, the Coroner
shall receive his abiuration, which he shall say in this form.

The form of abiuration.
Hear you this Sir Coroner, that I A. B. am a Thief of one horse or other
like thing, or a mans^ear of one man or mo, and a felon of our Sovereign Lord
king Henry the viij. And for as much as I have committed many eu'll deeds, and
felonyes in this Realm, I here abjure his Land for ever, and shall make as
much have as I ca^ to yt Ha^en of. O. which you have assygned me and I shall
not depart out of the high way, and if I do: I will y^ I be taken as thief and
felon of the king. And further I shall diligently seek my passage at the place
above lymitted, and I shall not abide there any longer then one Eb, and one
Flood if I may have passage. And if I can have no Passage in so much space, I
shall go every day into the Sea, up to my (...), and assay if I can get over.
And if I cannot so do within xl. days continuing I shall yield my self again
to the Church as the kings thief and felon. So help me God and holydome.

Nevertheless it seems that when any person shall abjure him, it behoneth to
show the place the day and year, and in what cou^ty he did the felony or
murder; which confession shall be as an indictment in effect; notwithstanding if
he do it not, but only as before is expressed, it is good enough, because he
is attained before by his abiuration. How beit, this manner of abiuration is put
out of the statute of Henry the eight made the xii year of his raygne, whereby
it is ordained that such as will abjure, shall make their abiuration from all
their liberty unto some sanctuary within this realm, there to remain ouryng
their lives, and shall be burned in the right hand with this letter A. And if
such person afterward be taken out of Sanctuary, he shall be ordered in like
manner as one that had been abiured the Realm before the said statute. And the
same person y^ so takes ye church shall make his abiuration, and shall take his
passage from thence at such a day and time as the Coroner shall appoint, and
shall be marked upon the braune of his thumb on the right hand with a burning
Iron, and shall be ^^^ueyed to the Sainctuary, whereunto he is abiured by the
Majors, Bayliffes and Constables, in such fashion as they have been which
heretofore had abiured the realm.

And if any felo^ refuse to abjure before the Coroner he shall be taken out of
the sanctuary and shall loose the privilege thereof, and that is by the
Statute. 22. H. 8. cap 2.

Also it is ordained that none shall be chosen Coroner if he have not land
sufficient within the same county for to answer all persons. An 4. Ed. 3. cap.
2.

And it is further ordained that all Coroners shall be chosen in the full
County, by the commons of the said county of the most convenient and able
persons. Anno. 28. Ed. 3. cap 6.

The Coroner shall inquire upon the view of the body if he were slain by day,
if the murderer be taken. And if the murderer escape the township to be
amerced. And the Coroner shall inquire of that escape, when he inquireth of
the death upon view of the body. And Coroner shall have for his see 13 s.4.d.
of the goods of the murderer

And if he have no goods then to have his fee of such amerciamente as shall
be set upon the township for the escape. And after the murderer found: the
Coroner shall certify his inquisition before the Iusticers of the next general
Iayle deliuerye in tha^ same county. And if the Coroner be remiss to make his
inquisition upon the view of the body, and certify not according as is before
said: the^ the Coroner for every default to forfayt one hundred. s. An. 3. H.
7. cap. 1.

It is ordained that upon request of the Coroner, to come and inquire of any
person drowned or slain by misaduenture: the Coroner shall diligently do his
office without taking any thing therefore upon pain of every Coroner y^ will
not endeavor him to do his office, or that takes any thing for doing his
office upon any person dead by misaduenture forty shillings. An. 1. Hen. 8.
cap. 7.

In case of man's death within the vierge it shall be commanded to the Coroner of
yt country that he together with the Coroner of the kings house, do make the
inquiry and inroll it. And that which cannot be determined before the steward
because the felons be not attached or for other like cause: shall remain at
the common law so that the exigentes, vtlagaryes, and presentmentes thereof to
be made in Eire by y^ Coroner of the country, as of other felonies done out of
the vierge. Articles upon the Charters cap. 2.

No Coroner, Shiriffe, nor other officer, shall take ought for his office, and
if be do, he shall restore twyse so much. West. 1. cap 20 But the statute of H.
7. gives to the Coroner a mark for every murder.

Also it was said by the Iusticers. M 6. R. 2. that the Coroner has no power
to inquire of a man's death, but only upon view of the body, and if he do, it
is frustrate, and boyde. And if one Coroner inquire upon the view of the body,
and after another Coroner will come and inquire thereof again the second
inquiry is boyde, for the first inquiry is only of record.

If one become a proouer before the Coroner he shall not afterward be admitted
to say that he did commit the act by duresse of imprisonment: for the record
of the Coroner shall esto^ him to plead that.

If any will sue appeal of robbery of ^arcency, he must come into the full
Countye within the year and the day after the felony done, and must find two
pledges for to follow his suite, and the Coroner shall enter his impa^ell
immediately in his roll, and the names of the pleadges. And then shall it be
commanded to the Bayliffes of the place, where etc. that he have the body at
the next county. And if he return at the second cou^ty non est inuentus, then
shall the appeal be called from county to county, until he be outlawed; and
if the playntife make default at any cou^ty, then shall the exigent cease until
the Eire of the Iusticers in the same county, and the playntife shall loose his
action after appearaunce for ever; whereby it appears that after the year and
day a man shall not have appeal of felony. And to this point agrees Breton in
his first book.

The Coroner must record his view, abiuration, appeals, and accusatio^s of
thieves made before him, and so must he do of all things that belong unto his
office to be done, and the nonsuites of plaintifes in appea^es he must
record, with all things done in the County which belong unto his office.

Also ye shall note that appeals shall be made in the court of any Lord y^
has fraunchise of infangtheefe, in presence of the Coroner. etc.

A presentment was sent into the Kings bench by a Coroner comprysing how a
c^tayne person taken for felony was conveyed unto the Church by certain
Friars. etc. And because the Coroner had no power to take such an indictment a
writ was directed to the same Coroner to certify whether he had any other
presentment or not. An. 27. E. 3. libro assisarum.

An adventure of the death of a man was presented before the Justices in Eire
and because the same was not found, in the Coroners: roll: the Coroner was
awarded to prison. The Coroners fee in Eire is to have i.d. of every venue when
they shall come.

Note that a presentme^t made before Iusticers in Eire of a thing which is
contrary to that that is entered in the Coroners roll shall be taken vayd, and
the Coroners roll shall be taken for the record.

The Coroner shall inquire of the death of men slain or drowned in the arms
or creekes of the Sea, where they land may be seen of either side.

But now by the Statute made. An. 13. R. 2. cap. 5. and confyrmed. An, 2. He. 4
cap 11. the Admiral has no jurisdiction but only upon the high sea. Whereby
it appears that the Coroner has jurisdiction there to inquyre of men's death.

A Coroner may take an appeal of felony made by an approuer in any Countye of
England and so may he do of an abiuration in case that he confess the felony
to be done in any other county. And the Coroner may abjure him as well upon
that as if the felony had been done within the same County. But he cannot take
any appeal of robbery or felony, unless it be within the same county where
the robbery or felonye was committed, and where he is Coroner; for by the
confession or appeachment he is attainted, and so he is not in the other case.

One that becomes a prouer, before Iusticers, shall not have a Coroner,
except he will confess the felony before them, and pray a Coroner. An. xxvi.
Ed. iii.

And if one become a proouer, and appeal other of diverse felonies done in
other counties, in this case the Coroner shall not make process thereuppon
into any forrayne County, but he shall enter it in his roll, and shall send
the same presentment before the Iusticers of Iayle delivery and the Iusticers
of Iaile delivery shall award process to the Shiriffe of the foreign county
for, to take him that is so appealed.

Thus ^e must understand, that if any Shiriffes, Bayliffes, Escheators,
Constables, or Coroners take ought for doing their offices otherwise then to
them is limited by the statutes before declared: that then such taking is
extortion; which is punishable at the kings pleasure, as appears before, etc.
in the statute made 1. H. 4. cap. 11. Whereby it appears, that Shiriffes, and
other ministers; Bailifs and their ministers; Esche a^ors and their ministers;
Coroners and their ministers, are bound to serve all precepts to them directed
from the Justices of peace, without taking ought of^ any party And if a precept
be directed to the Shiriffe or any other the kings officer, to compel any to
appear before the Justices, to find surety of peace, if the party against
whom any such precepte is dyrected be ready to come before the said Iusticers
to find surety of peace they shall take nothing of him.

And in like manner must they serve all processes that come to them, directed
out of the Kings bench, the common place, the Escheker, or the Chau^cery,
without taking ought therefore, but only the fees expressed in the statutes
before written. And if they take any other fees it is plain extortion.

A brief declaration concerning the extortions of Ordinaries; Parsons, Vicars
and Curats.
AS concerning Ordinaries, ye shall understand that it is ordained by a
statute made in the xxi. year of king Henry y^ eight, that no Ordinary shall
take any thing for the probate of the testament of such a person, whose goods
amounte not above the su^me of a hundredth shi^lings, except to the scribe.vj.d.
only. And of goods above the value of a C.s. unto.xi. pound, iij.s.vj.d: And
the Scribe to have.xij.d. of the sum. And for the probate of a Testament of
goods above the value of.xl.l'.v.s: whereof the Scribe to have.ij.s.vj.d. or
for every line being. 10. Inches in length one penny. And such sums for
Letters of administration, where such persons die intestate, and the Testament
to be registered, and delivered to the party without delay; and letters of
administration to be granted to the wife or next of the blood of the party
deceassed or to both: And for the probate of a Testament, or letter of
administration of goods, under the sum of a hundredth.s. the Ordinary shall
take nothing. Moreover it is the office of the Ordinary to deface the seal of
the testatour wherewyth the testament was sealed and to deliver it again to
the party. And if the Ordinary take any more then before is limited, he shall
forfayte so much as he takes, and ten pound more besides that, whereof the
moyty shall be to the party grieved.

If the Ordinary cite any person to appear in the Spiritual court to depose
in any matter there, as a witness: that is extortion and wrong to the party.

If any Ordinary; Person, or Uicar take any mortuary after the death of any
person which had not goods to the value of.x. Marks, that is extortion. And
likewise it is, where they take a mortuary in such places where it has not
been accustomed to pay mortuaries. And even so it is where a Person, or Uicar
takes more then.iij.s. iiij.d. in the name of a mortuary. If y^ goods amou^t
above.x. marks, and under the value of.xxx.li. for that is extortion.

Also if he take more then.vj.s.viij.d. for a mortuary where the goods be
above the value of.xxx.li. and under the sum of.xl. pound the debts paid,
that is extortion.

And if they take of them whose goods amount to.xl.li. above the debts, paid
more then.x.s. for a mortuary: that is extortion.

And if they take any mortuary for a woman married, or one that is within age,
or for a man that keeps no house, it is extortion. And if any mortuary be
taken in Wales it is extortion, except Bishops that shall take mortuaries
thereof priests and Curates, and the Archdeacon of Chester shall take
mortuaryes of Priests within the county of Chester.

And whosoever takes for a Mortuarye more then he ought, shall forfayte
as much in value as he takes, and.rl.s. besides that^ the party grieved. Anno.
xxi. Henri^^. octaui. capitulo sexto. And thus have I thought sufficient to
declare unto you concerning extortions in Ordynaries; Parsons, Uicars, and
Curates.

FINIS.
Imprynted at London, by Thomas Marshe.


