THE BOOK OF HVSBANDRY

1534



The aucthors prologue.
SIt ista question. This is the questyon, Whereunto is every manne ordained. And
as Job says, Homo nascitur ad laborem, sicut auis ad volandum: That is to
say, a man is ordained and borne to do labor, as a bird is ordained to fly.
And the apostle says, Qui non laborat, non manducet: Debet enim in obsequio
dei laborare, qui de bonis eius vult manducare. That is to say, he that
labors not, should not eat, and he ought to labor and do gods warke,
that will eat of his goods or gifts, The which is an hard text after the
lyterall sense. For by the letter, the king, the queen, nor all other lords
spiritual and temporal should not eat, without they should labor, the which
were uncomely, and not conuenyente for such estates to labor, But who that
redeth in the book of the moralytes of the chesse, shall thereby perceive, that
every man, from the highest degree to the lowest, is set and ordained to have
labor and occupation, and that book is divided in.vi. degrees, that is to
say, the king, the queen, the bishops, the knights, the judges, and the
yomenne. In the which book is showed their degrees, their auctorytyes, their
warkes, and their occupations, and what they ought to do. And they so doing
and executynge their auctorytyes, warkes, and occupatyons, have a wonders great
study and labor, of the which auctorytyes, occupations, and warkes, were at
this time to long to write. Wherefore I remytte that book as mine auctour
thereof: The which book were necessary to be known of every degree, that they
might do and order them self according to the same. And in so much the
yomen in the said moralytyes and game of the chesse be set before to labor,
defend, and maynteyne all the other hyer estates, the which yomen represent
the common people, as husbands and laborers, therefore I purpose to speak
first of husbandrye.

Finis.
The table.
FIrst whereby husband men do live. fo i. Of diverse manner of plowes. fol. eod.
To know the names of all the parts of the ploughe. fol. ii. The temprynge of
plowes. fo. iii. The necessary things that belong to a plowe carte or wayne.
fol. iiii. Whether is better a plowe of oxen or a plowe of horses. fol. v. The
dylygence and the attendaunce that a husband should give to his warke in manner
of an other prologue, and a special ground of all this treatise. fol. vi.
How a man should plowe all manner of lands all times of the year. fo. vii.
To plowe for pees and beans. fol. viii. How to sow both pees and beans.
fol. viii. Sede of Discrecyon. fol. ix. How all manner of corn should be
sown. folio. eodem. To sow barley. fol. x. To sow otes. fol. xi. To harowe
all manner of corns. fol. xii. To falowe. fol. xiii. To carry out donge or
mucke, and to sprede it. fol. xiiii. To set out the sheep fold. fol. xv. To
carry wode and other necessaries. fol. xvi. To know diverse manner of wedes. fol.
eod. To wede corn. fo. xvii. The first sturrynge, and to mow grass. foli.
xviii. How forkes and rakes should be made. fo. xix. To tedde and make hey. fol.
eod. How rye should be shorn. fol. xx. How to shere whete. fol. xxi. To mow
or shere barley and otes. fo. eod. To repe or mow pees and beans. fol. xxii.
How all manner of corn should be tythed. folio. eodem. How all manner of
corn should be covered. fol. xxiii. To lode corn and mow it. fol. eod. The
second sturrynge. fo. xxiiii. To sow whete and rye. fol. eodem. To thresshe
and wynowe corn. fo. xxv. To sever beans, pees, and fetches. fol. eod. Of
sheep and what time of the year the rams should be put to the ewes. fol. xxvi
To make a ewe to love her lamb. fol. xxvii. What time lambs should be wayned.
fo. eod. To draw sheep and sever them in diverse parts. fo. xxviii. To belte
sheep. fol. xxix. To greece sheep. fol. eod. To meddle terre. fol eodem. To make
brom salve. fol. eod. If a sheep have mathes, fol. xxx. Blyndenes of sheep and
other dyseases, and remedies therefore. fo. eod. The worm in a shepes foot, and
help therefore. fo. xxxi. The bloudde, and remedy if he comme betyme. fol.
eodem. The pockes, and remedy therefore. fol. eod. The wode evil, and remedy
therefore. fo. 32. To wash sheep. fol. eod. To shere sheep. fol. eod. To draw
and sever the bad sheep from the good fol. eod. What thing rotteth sheep.
fol. xxxiii. To know a rotten sheep diverse manner ways, whereof some of them
will not fail. fol. xxxiiii. To by lean cattle. fol. eod. To bye fat
cattle. fo. xxxv. Diverse sickenesses of cattle, and remedies therefore, and
first of murren. fol. eod. Long sought, and remedy therefore. fo. xxxvi
Dewbolue, and the hard remedy therefore. fol. eod. Ryson upon, and the
remedy therefore. fol. xxxvii. The turn, and remedy therefore. fol. eod. The
warribred, and remedy therefore. fo. xxxviii The foul, and remedy therefore.
fol. eod. The gout without remedy. fol. eod. To rere calves. fol. eod. To
gelde calves. fol. xxxix. Horses and mares to draw. fol. xl. The loss of a
lamb, a calfe, or a fool. fol. xli. What cattle should go together in oone
pasture. fol. xlii. The properties of horses. fol. xliii. The two propertyes
that a horse has of a man. fol. eod. The. ii. propertyes of a bauson. fol.
eod. The. iiii. properties of a lion. fol. eod. The. ix. properties of an ox.
fol. xliiii. The. ix. properties of an hare. fol. eod. The. ix. properties of a
fox. fol. eod. The. ix. properties of an ass. fol. eod. The. x. properties of
a woman. fol eod. The diseases and soraunce of horses. fol. xlv. The lampas.
fol. eod. The barbes. fo. eod. Mourning on the tongue. fol. eod. Pursye. fo.
eod. Broken wynded. fol. eod. Glaunders. fo. eod. Mourning on the chynne. fol.
eod. Stranguelyon. fol. eod. The hawe. fol. eod. Blyndnesse. fol. xlvi. Vyues.
fol. eod. The cords. fol. eod. The farcyon. fol eod. A malander. fol. eod. A
salander. fol. eod. A serewe. fol. eod. A splent. fo. eod. A ryngebone. fol
xlvii. Wyndgall. fol. eod. Morfounde. fol. eod. The coltes evil. fol. eod. The
bottes. fo. eod. The worms. fol. eod. Affrayd. fo. eod. Nauylgall. fo. eod. A
spauen. fol eod. A curb. fol. eod. The string halte. fol. eod. Enterfyre. fo.
eod. Myllettes. fol. eod. The pains. fol. eod. Cratches. fol. eod. Attaynt.
fol. xlix. Grauelynge. fol. eod. Acloyd. fol. eod. The scabbe. fol. eod. Lowsy.
fol eod. Wartes. fol eod. The saying of the french man. fo eod. The
dyuersitie between a horse master, a corser, and a horse leche. fol. l. Of
swyne. fo. eod. Of bees. fol. li. How to keep beasts and other catel. fol.
lii. To get settes and set them. fol. liii. To make a dyche. fol. liiii. To
make a hedge. fol. eod. To plasshe and pleche a hedge. fol. eod. To mende a hye
way. fo. lv. To remove and set trees. fo lvi. Trees to be set without
roots and grow. fol. lvii. To fell wood for houssholde or to sell. fol.
eodem. To shrede, lop, or crop trees. fol. lviiii. How a man should shrede
loppe or croppe trees. fol. eod. To sell wood or tymbre. fol. lix. To keep
spring wood. fo. lx. Necessary things belonging to graffynge. fol. eod.
What fruit should be first graffed. fol. lxi. How to graffe. fol. eod. To
graffe between the bark and the tree. fol. lxii. To nourysshe all manner of
stone fruit and nuttes. fol. lxiii. A short information for a young gentle
man that entendeth to thryue. fol. eod. A lesson made in English verses, that
a gentylmans servant shall forget none of his gere in his inn behind him.
fo. lxv. A prologe for the wives occupation. fo. eod. A lesson for the wife.
fol. eod. What things the wife of right is bound to do. fol. lxvi. What
warkes the wife ought to do generally. fo. eod. To keep measure in spending.
fo. lxvii. To eat within thy tedure. fo. lxviii. A short lesson unto the
husband. fol lxix. How men of hye degree do keep measure. fol. eodem.
Prodygalytie in outragyous and costelye array. fol. lxx. Of delycyous meats
and drynkes. fol. eod. Of outrageous play and game. fo. lxxi. A prologue of
the third saying of the philosopher. fo. lxxii. A dyuersytie between
predycation and doctrine. fol. eodem. What is richesse. fo. lxxiii. What is the
property of a rych man fo. lxxiiii. What joys and pleasures are in heaven fo.
lxxv. What thing pleases god most. fol. lxxvi. What be gods
commandments. fo. eod. How a man should love god and please him. fol.
eodem. How a man should love his neighbor. fol. lxxvii. Of prayer that
pleases god very much. folio. lxxviii. What thing lets prayer. fol. eod.
How a man should pray. fo. lxxix. A mean to put away idle thoughts in
prayenge. fol. lxxx. A mean to avoid temptation. fol. lxxxi. Alms deeds
pleases god much. fo lxxxii. The first manner of alms deed. fo. lxxxiii. The.
ii. manner of alms deed. fo. lxxxiiii. The. iii. manner of alms deed. fol
lxxxv. What is the greattest offense that a man may do and offend god in.
fo. lxxxvi.
Thus ends the table.
HVSBANDRY.
Here begins the book of husbandry, and first where by husband men do live.
THe most general living that husbands can have, is by plowynge and sowyng
of their corns, and rerynge or bredynge of their cattle, and not the one
without the other. Than is the ploughe the most necessaryest instrumente that
an husband can occupy, wherefore it is conuenyent to be known, how a plough
should be made.

Diverse manners of plowes.
THere be plowes of diverse makynges in diverse countries, and in like wise there
be plowes of yren of diverse facyons. And that is because there be many manner of
grounds and soyles. Some white cley, some read cley, some gravel or
chylturne, some sand, some mean earth, some meddled with marle, and in many
places heeth ground, and one ploughe will not serve in all places. wherefore it
is necessary, to have diverse manners of plowes. In Sommersetshyre, about
Zelcester, the sharbeame, that in many places is called the ploughe hedde, is
four or five foot long, and it is broad and thynne. And that is because the
land is very toughe, and would soke the ploughe into the earth, if the
sharbeame were not long, broad, and thynne. In Kente they have other manner of
plowes, sum goo with wheles, as they do in many other places, and some will
turn the sheldbredth at every lands end, and plowe all one way. In
Buckyngham shyre, are plowes made of an another manner, and also other manner of
ploughe yrons, the which me seems generally good, and lykely to serve in many
places, and specially if the ploughbeame and sharbeame be four inches longer,
between the shethe, and the ploughe tail, that the sheldbrede might come more
a slope: for those plowes give out to sodeinly, and therefore they be the worse,
to draw, and for no cause else. In Leycestershyre, Lankesshyre, Yorkeshyre,
Lyncoln^, Norfolk, Cambrydge shyre, and many other countries, the plowes be
of diverse makinges, the which were to long process to declare how. etc. But
how so ever they be made if they be well tempered, and goo well, they may be
the better suffered.

To know the names of all the parts of the plowe.
MEn that be no husbands, may fortune to read this book, that know not
which is the ploughe beam, the sharebeame, the ploughe shethe, the ploughe
tail, the stilte, the rest, the sheldbrede, the fen bread, the roughe staves,
the ploughe foot, the plough ear or coke, the share the culture, and ploughe
mal. Perauenture I give them these names here, as is used in my country, and
yet in other countries they have other names: wherefore ye shall know, that
the ploughe beam, is the long tree above, the which is a little bente. The
sharbeame is the tree under neth, where upon the share is set, the ploughe sheth
is a thyn piece of dry wood, made of oak, that is set fast in a morteys in the
plough beam, and also in to the sharebeame, the which is the keye and the
chief band of all the plough. The plough tail is that the husband holds
in his hand, and the hinder end of the ploughebeame is put in a long slyt,
made in the same tail, and not set fast, but it may rise up and go dowe, and
is pynned behind, and the same ploughe tail is set fast in a morteys, in the
hinder end of the sharebeame. The plough stylte is on the right side of the
ploughe, whereupon the rest is set, the rest is a little piece of wood, pynned
fast upon the nether end of the stylt, and to the sharebeame in the ferther
end. The sheldbrede is a broad piece of wodde, fast pinned to the right side
of the shethe in the ferther end, and to the utter side of the stylte in the
hinder end. The fenbreds is a thyn board, pynned or nailed most commonly to
the lift side of the shethe in the ferther end, and to the ploughe tail in
the hinder end. And the said sheldbrede would come over the said shethe and
fenbrede an inche, and to come past the mids of the share, made with a sharp
edge, to receive and turn the earth when the culture has cut it. There be two
roughe staves in every ploughe in the hinder end, set a slope between the
ploughe tail and the stilt, to hold out and keep the plough abroad in the
hinder end, and the one longer than the other. The plough foot is a little
piece of wodde, with a crooked end set before in a morteys in the ploughe beam,
set fast with wedges, to drive up and down, and it is a stay to order, of
what depenes the ploughe shall go. The ploughe ear is made of three pieces of
yren, nailed fast unto the right side of the plough beam. And poor men have
a crooked piece of wode pynned fast to the ploughbeame. The share is a piece of
yren, sharp before and broad behind, a foot long, made with a socket to be
set on the ferther end of the share beam. The culture is a bend piece of yren
set in a morteys in the mids of the plough beam, fastened with wedges on
every side, and the back thereof is half an inche thycke and more, and three
inches broad, and made kene before to cut the earth clean, and it must be well
steeled, and that shall cause the easyer draughte, and the yrens to last much
longer. The blough mal is a piece of hard wood, with a pynne put through, set
in the plough beam, in an augurs bore.

The temprynge of plowes.
Now the plowes be made of diverse manners, it is necessary for an housbande,
to know how these plowes should be tempered, to plowe and turn clean, and to
make no rest balkes. A rest balke is where the plough byteth at the point of
the culture and share, and cutteth not the ground clean to the forowe, that
was plowed last before, but leaves a little rydge standing between, the
which does bread thistyls, and other wedes. All these manner of plowes should
have all like one manner of temperyng in the yrens. How be it a man may temper
for one thing in two or three places, as for depnes. The foot is one: the
setting of the culture of a depnes, is a another: and the third is at the
ploughe tail, where be two wedges, that be called slote wedges: the one is in
the slote above the beam, the other in the said slote, under the plough
beam, and other while he will set both above, or both underneath. but always
let him take good head, and keep one general rule, that the hinder end of the
sharebeme always touch the earth, that it may kill a word, or else it goth not
truly. The temperynge to go broad and narowe is in the setting of the culture:
and with the dryuinge of his side wedges, forewedge and helewedge, which would
be made of dry wood. and also the setting on of his share helps well, and
is a conning point of husbandry, and mendeth and payreth much plowyng: but it
is so narowe a point to know, that it is hard to make a man to understand it
by writing, without he were at the operation thereof, to teach the practyue.
for it must lean much in to the forowe, and the point may not stand to much
up nor down, nor to much in to the land, nor into the forowe. How be it,
the setting of the culture helps much. Sum plowes have a bend of iron
tryanglewise, set there as the plough ear should be, that has three nyckes
on the farther side. And if he will have his plough to go a narowe forowe, as a
sede forowe should be, than he sets his foot teame in the nycke next to the
ploughe beam. and if he will go a mean breadth, he sets it in the myddell
nycke, that is best for sturrynge. and if he would go a broad forowe, he
sets it in the vttermoste nycke, that is best for falowynge: The which is
a good way, to keep the bredthe, and soon tempered, but it serves not the
depenesse. And some men have instead of the plough foot, a piece of iron set
vpryghte in the farther end of the ploughe beam, and they call it a coke,
made with. ii. or three nyckes, and that serves for depenes. The plowes that
goo with wheles, have a streyghte beam, and may be tempred in the iron, as
the other be, for the breadth, but their most special temper is at the bolster,
where as the plough beam lies, and that serves both for depnes and for
breadth. And they be good on even ground that lies light, but me seems, they
be far more costly than the other plowes. And though these plowes be well
tempred for one manner of ground, that tempre will not serve in an other manner
of ground, but it must rest in the dyscretion of the housbande, to know
when it gothe well.

The necessary things, that belong to a ploughe, carte, and wayne.
But or he begin to plowe, he must have his ploughe and his ploughe yren, his
oxen or horses, and the gear that belongs to them, that is to say, bows,
yokes, lands, stylkynges, wrethynge temes. And or he shall lode his corn, he
must have a wayne, a copyoke, a pair of sleues, awayne rope, and a pykforke.
This wayne is made of diverse pieces, that will have a great reparation, that is
to say, the wheles, and those be made of nathes, spokes, fellyes, and dowles,
and they must be well fettred with wood or yren. And if they be yren bounden,
they are much the better, and though they be the derer at the first, yet at
length they be better cheap, for a pair of wheles yren bound, will wear.
vii. or. viii pair of other wheles, and they go round and light after oxen or
horses to draw. Howbeit on marreis ground and soft grouud, the other wheles be
better, because they be brother on the soul, and will not go so deep. They must
have an axiltre, clout with. viii. waincloutes of yren. ii. lyn pinnes of yren
in the axiltre ends. ii. axil pynnes of yren, or else of tough hard wodde. The
body of the wayne of oak, the staves, the nether rathes, the over rathes, the
cross somer, the keys and pikstaues. And if he go with a horse ploughe, than
must he have his horses or mares, or both his hombers or collers, holmes
whyted, tresses, swyngletrees, and togwith. Alsoo a carte made of asshe,
because it is light and like stuff to it as is to a wayne, and also a cart
sadel, bakbandes, and belybandes, and a carte ladder behind, when he shall
carye either corn or kyddes, or such other. And in many countries their
waynes have carte ladders both behind and before. Also an husband must have
an axe, a hachet, a hedgyngebyll, a pyn awgur, a rest awgur, a flayle, a spade,
and a shouell. And how be it that I give them these names, as is most commonly
used in my country, I know they have other names in other countries. But
hereby a man may perceive many things, that belong to husbandry, to their
great costs and charges, for the mayntenance and vpholdyng of the same. And
many moo things are belonging to husbands than these, as ye shall well
perceive, er I have made an end of this treatise. And if a young husband
should bye all these things, it would be costely for him: wherefore it is
necessary for him, to learn to make his yokes, ox bows, stools, and all
manner of plough gear.

Whether is better a plough of horses or a plough of oxen.
IT is to be known, whether is better a plough of horses, or a plough of oxen,
and therein me seems ought to be made a distinction. For in some places, an
ox ploughe is better than a horse plough, and in sum places, a horse ploughe
is better: that is to say, in every place, where as the husband has several
pastures, to put his oxen in, when they come fro their warke, there the ox
ploughe is better. For an ox may not endure his warke, to labor all day,
and than to be put to the commons, or before the herdman, and to be set in a
fold all night without meat, and go to his labor in the morning. But and
he be put in a good pasture all night, he will labor much of all the day
daily. And oxen will plowe in tough cley, and upon hylly ground, where as
horses will stand stll. And where as is no several pastures, there the horse
plowe is better, for the horses may be teddered or tied upon leys, balkes, or
hades, where as oxen may not be kept: and it is not used to tedder them, but
in few places. And horses will goo faster than oxen on even ground or light
ground, and be quicker for carriage: but they be far more costly to keep in
winter, for they must have both hey and corn to eat, and straw for lytter,
they must be well shodde on all four fete, and the gere that they shall draw
with is more costely than for the oxen, and shorter while it will last. And
oxen will eat but straw, and a little hey, the which is not half the cost
that horse is must have, and they have no shoes, as horses have. And if any
sorance come to the horse, or wax old, broysed, or blind, than he is little
worth. And if any sorance come to an ox, wax old, broysed, or blind, for.
ii. s. he may be fed, and thanne he is man's meat, and as good or better
than ever he was. And the horse, when he dyethe, is but caryen. And therefore me
seems, all things considered, the ploughe of oxen is much more profitable,
than the ploughe of horses.

The dylygence and the attendaunce that a husband should give to his warke, in
manner of an other prologue, and the special ground of all this treatise.
THou husband, that intendeste to get thy living by husbandry, take heed to
the saying of the wise philosopher, the which says, A dhibe curam,
tenemensuram, et eris dives. That is to say, Take heed to thy charge, keep
measure, and thou shall be rich. And now to speak of the first article of
these. iij. s. A dhibe curam. He that will take upon him to do any thing, and
be slouthefull, recheles, and not diligent, to execute and to perform that
thing, that he takes upon him, he shall never thryue by his occupation. And
to the same entente says our lord in his gospel, by a parable. Nemo mittens
manum suam ad aratrum respiciens retro, aptus est regno dei. The spirytuall
constructyon of this text, I remytte to the doctors of dyuynitie, and to the
great clerks, but to reduce and bring the same text to my purpose, I take
it thus, There is no man, putting his hand to the plough loking backewarde,
is worthy to have that thing, that he ought to have. For if he goo to the
ploughe, and look backewarde, he sees not, whether the plough go in rydge or
rain, make a balke, or go ouerthwarte. And if it so do, there will be lyttel
corn. And so if a man attend not his husbandrye, but goo to sport or play,
tavern or ale house, or slepynge at home, and such other idle warkes, he is
not than worthy to have any corn. And therefore, Fac quod venisti, Do that thou
come fore, and thou shalt find that thou sekest fore. etc.

How a man should plowe all manner of lands all times of the year.
Now these plowes be made and tempered, it is to be known, how a man should
plowe all times of the year. In the beginning of the year, after the feast of
the Epiphany, it is time for a husband to go to the ploughe. And if thou have
any leys, to falowe or to sow otes upon, first plowe them, that the grass
and the moss may rotte, and plowe them a deep square forowe. And in all manner
of plowynge, se that thy eye, thy hand, and thy foot do agree, and be always
ready one to serve a another, and to turn up much molde, and to lay it flat,
that it rere not on edge. For if it rere on edge, the grass and moss will not
rotte. And if thou sow it with winter corn, as whete or ry, as much corn as
touches the moss, will be drowned, the moss does keep such wete in it self.
And in some countries, if a man plowe deep, he shall pass the good ground,
and have but lyttel corn: but that country is not for men to keep husbandry
upon, but for to rere and bread catell or sheep, for else they must go beat
their lands with mattockes, as they do in many places of Cornewayle, and in
some places of Deuonshyre.

To plowe for pease and beans.
How to plowe for pees and beans, were necessary to know. First thou must
remember, which is most cley ground, and that plowe first, and let it
lie a good space, er thou sow it: because the froste, the rain, the wind,
and the son may cause it to break small, to make much molde, and to rygge
it. And to plow a square forowe, the bredthe and the depenes all one, and to
lay it close to his fellow. For the more forowes, the more corn, for a
general rule of all manner of corns. And that may be proved at the coming up
of all manner of corn. to stand at the lands end, and look toward the other
end. And than may ye se, how the corn grows.

How to sow both pease and beans.
THou shall sow thy peace upon the cley ground, and thy beans upon the barley
ground: for they would have ranker ground than pease. How be it some
husbands hold opynion, that big and styffe ground, as cley, would be sown
with big stuff, as beans: but me think the contrary. For if a dry summer
come, his beans will be short. And if the ground be good, put the more
beans to the pease, and the better shall they yield, when they be thresshed.
And if it be very rank ground, as is much at every town side, where catel
does resort, plowe not that land, till ye will sow it. for if ye do, there
will come up kedlokes and other wedes. And than sow it with beans. for if
ye sow pees, the kedlokes will hurt them. and wha^ ye se seasonable time, sow
both pees and beans, so that they be sown in the beginning of March. How
shall ye know seasonable time? go upon the land, that is plowed, and if it
sing or cry, or make any noise under thy fete, than it is to wete to sow:
and if it make no noise, and will bear thy horses, thanne sow in the name of
god, but how to sow? Put thy pees in to thy hopper, and take a broad thonge
of ledder, or of garthe web of an elle long, and fasten it to both ends of
the hopper, and put it over thy heed, like a leysshe: and stand in the mids
of the land, where the sack lyethe, the which is most conueniente for the
fyllynge of thy hopper, and set thy left foot before, and take an handefull
of pees: and when thou takeste up thy right foot, than cast thy pees fro the
all abroad, and when thy left foot ryseth, take an other handeful, and when
the right foot ryseth, tha^ cast them fro the. And so at every. ii. paces, thou
shalt an handful of pees: and so se that the foot and the hand agree, and
than ye shall sow even. And in your casting, ye must open as well your
fyngers, as your hand, and the hyer, and farther that ye cast your corn, the
better shall it sprede, except it be a greatte wind. And if the land be
very good, and will break small in the plowynge, it is better to sow after
the ploughe, thanne tarry any longer.

Sede of discretion.
THere is a sede, that is called Discretion, and if a husband have of that
sede, and myngle it among his other corns, they will grow much the better.
for that sede will tell him, how many castes of corn every land ought to
have. And a young husband, and may fortune some old husband, has not
sufficyente of that sede: and he that lackethe, let him borowe of his
neighbors that have. And his neighbors be unkind, if they will not lend
this young housbande part of this sede. For this sede of Discretion has a
wonders property: for the more that it is taken of or lent, the more it is.
And therefore me seems, it should be more spyspirituall than temporal, wherein
is a great dyuersitie. For a temporal thing, the more it is divided, the
less it is: and a spirytuall thing, the more it is divided, the more it is.
Verbi gratia. For ensaumple, I put case a wife bring a lofe of bread to the
church, to make holy bread of, when it is cut in many small pieces, and holy
bread made thereof, there may be so many men, women, and children in the
church, that by that time, the priest has delte to every one of them a
little piece, there shall never a crume be left in the hamper. And a
spiritualle thing as a Pater noster, or a prayer, that any man can say, let
him teach it to. xx. a. C. or to a. M. yet is the prayer never the less, but
much more. And so this sede of Discrecio^ is but wisdom and reason: and he
that has wisdom, reason, and discretion, may teache it, and inform other men
as he is bound to do. wherein he shall have thank of god: and he does but as
god has commanded him in his gospel, Quod gratis accepistis, gratis date:
That thing that ye took freely, give it freely again, and yet shall ye have
never the less.

How all manner corn should be sown.
But yet me thynkethe it is necessary to declare, how all manner of corn
should be sown, and how much upon an acre most commonly, and first of pease and
beans. An acre of ground, by the statute, that is to say. xvi. foot and a
half, to the perch or pole, four perches to an acre in breadth, and fortye
perches to an acre in length, may be metelye well sown with two London
busshelles of pease, the which is but two strykes in other places. And if
there be the. iiii. part beans, than will it have half a London bushelle
more: and if it be half beans, it will have three London bushels: and if it be
all beans, it will have four London busshelles fullye, and that is half a
quarter, because the beans be great, and grow up straight, and do not sprede
and go abroad as pease do. An acre of good beans is worth an acre and a half
of good pees because there will be more busshelles. And the best property,
that belongs to a good husband is, to sow all manner of corn thycke enough,
and specially beans and barley* for commonly they be sown upon rank ground,
and good ground will have the burden of corn or of wede. And as much
plowynge and harowynge has an acre of ground, and sow thervppon but oone
busshelle, as if he sowed. iiii. busshelles. And undoubtedly. i. busshell may
not give so much corn again, as the. iiii. busshels, though the. iii.
bushels, that he sowed more, be allowed and set aparte. And i. busshel and an
half of white or grene pees, will sow as much ground, as two busshels of
gray pees: and that is because they be so small, and the husband needs not to
take so great an handful. In some countries they begin to sow pees soon after
Christmasse: and in some places they sow both pees and beans vnderforowe:
and those of reason must be sown betyme. But most generally, to begin sone
after Candelmasse, is good season, so that they be sown, ere the beginning of
March, or sone upon. And specially let them be sown in the old of the moon.
For thopinion of old husbands is, that they should the better codde, and the
sooner be ripe. But I speak not of hasty pees, for they be sown before
Christmasse. etc.

To sow barley.
EVery good housbande has his barleye falowe well dounged, and lyenge rygged
all the deep and cold of winter, the which ryggynge makes the land to be
dry, and the dongynge makes it to be melowe and rank. And if a dry season
come before Candelmasse, or sone after, it would be cast down and
waterforowed between the lands, that the wete rest not in the rain: and in
the beginning of March, rydge it up again, and to sow in every acre five
London bushelles, or four at the least. and some years it may so fortune,
that there comes no seasonabe wether before March, to plowe his barley earth.
And as soon as he has sown his pees and beans, than let him cast his
barley earth, and shortly after rygge it again: so that it be sown before
Apryll. And if the year time be paste, than sow it upon the casting.

It is to be known that there be three manner of barleys, that is to say, sprot
barleye, long ear, and bear barley, that some men call big. Sprot barley
has a flat ear most commonly, three quarters of an inche broad, and three inches
long, and the corns be very great and white, and it is the best barley. Long
ear has a flat ear, half an inche broad, and four inches and more of
length: but the corn is not so great nor so white, and sooner it will turn
and grow to otes Bear barleye, or bygge, would be sown upon light and dry
ground, and has an ear three inches of length or more, set four square,
like pecke whete, small corns, and lyttel flower, and that is the worste
barley, and four London bushels are suffycient for an acre. And in some
countries, they do not sow their barley till May, and that is most
commonly upon grauel or sandy ground. But that barley generally is never so
good, as that that is sown in March. For if it be very dry wether, after it
be sown, that corn that lies above, lies dry, and has no moisture, and
that that lies underneath, comes up: and when rain comes, than sprutteth
that that lies above, and oftentimes it is grene, when the other is ripe: and
when it is thresshen, there is much light corn. etc.

To sow otes.
ANd in March is time to sow otes, and specially upon light ground and dry,
how be it they will grow on weter ground, than any corn else: for wete
ground is good for no manner of corn, and three London bushels will sow an acre.

And it is to be known, that there be. iii. manner of otes, that is to say,
read otes, black otes, and roughe otes. Red otes are the best otes, and when
they be thresshed, they be yelowe in the busshell, and very good to make
otemele of. Black otes are as great as they be, but they have not so much
flower in them, for they have a thycker husk, and also they be not so good to
make otemele. The roughe otes be the worste, and it quiteth not the cost to
sow them: they be very light, and have long tails, whereby they will hang
each one to other. All these manner of otes wear the ground very sore, and
makes it to bear quyche. A young housbande ought to take heed, how thycke
he sowethe all manner of corn, two or three years: and to se, how it comes
up, and whether it be thycke enough or not: and if it be thynne, sow thycker
the next year: and if it be well, hold his hand there other years: and if it
be to thynne, let him remember him self, whether it be for the vnseasonablenes
of the wether, or for thyn sowynge. And so his wisdom and discretion must
discern it.

To harowe all manner of corns.
Now these lands be plowed, and the corns sown, it is convenient, that they
be well harowed, or else crows, doves, and other birds will eat and bear
away the corns. It is used in many countries, the husbands to have an ox
harowe, the which is made of six small pieces of timbre, called harowe bulls,
made either of asshe or oak, they be two yardes long, and as much as the
small of a man's leg, and have shotes of wode put through them like lathes,
and in every bull are six sharp pieces of yren, called harowe tyndes, set some
what a slope forward, and the forms flote must be bygger than the other,
because the foot teame shall be fastened to the same with a shakyll, or a with
to draw by. This harrowe is good to break the greatte clottes, and to make
much molde, and than the horse harowes to come after, to make the clottes
smaller, and to lay the ground even. It is a great labor and pain to the
oxen, to goo to harowe: for they were better to goo to the plowe two days,
thanne to harowe one day. It is an old saying, The ox is never woe* till he
to the harowe goo. And it is because it goes by twytches, and not always after
one draughte. The horse harrowe is made of five bulls, and pass not an elne
of length, and not so much as the other, but they be like sloted and tinded.
And wha^ the corn is well covered, than it is harowed enough. There be horse
harowes, that have tyndes of wodde: and those be used much about Ryppon, and
such other places, where be many bulder stones. for these stones would wear
the yren to soon, and those tyndes be most commonly made of the ground end
of a young asshe, and they be more thanne a foot long in the begynnyuge, and
stand as much above the harowe as benethe. And as they wear, or break, they
drive them down lower, and they would be made long before, ere they be
occupied, that they may be dry. for than they shall endure and last much
better, and stycke the faster. The horses that shall draw these harowes, must
be well kept and shodde, or else they will soon be tired, and sore beat,
that they may not draw. They must have hombers or collers, holmes withed about
their necks, tresses to draw by, and a swyngletre to hold the tresses
abroad, and a togewith to be between the swyngletre and the harowe. And if the
barleye ground will not break with harrowes, but be clotty, it would be
beaten with malles, and not not straight down. for than they beat the corn
in to the earth. And if they beat the clot on the side, it will the better
break. And the clot will lie light, that the corn may lyghtely come up. And
they use to role their barley ground after a shoure of rain, to make the
ground even to mow. etc.

To falowe.
Now these housbandes have sown their pees, beans, barley, and otes, and
harowed them, it is the best time to falowe, in the later end of March and
Apryll, for whete, rye and barley. And let the husband do the best he can,
to plowe a broad forowe and a deep, so that he turn it clean, and lay it
flat, that it rere not on the edge: the which shall destroy all the thistils
and wedes. For the deper and the brother that he gothe, the more new molde, and
the greatter clottes shall he have, and the greatter clottes, the better
wheat. for the clottes keep the wheat warm all winter, and at March they
will melte and break, and fall in many small pieces, the which is a new
dongynge, and refresshynge of the corn.

And also there shall but little wedes grow upon the falowes, that are so
falowed. For the plough goth underneath the roots of all manner of wedes, and
tourneth the root upward, that it may not grow. And if the land be falowed
in winter time, it is far the worse, for three principal causes, One is, all
the rain that comes, shall wash the land, and drive away the dounge and
the good moulde, that the land shall be much the worse. An other cause is,
the rain shall beat the land so flat, and bake it so hard together, that if
a dry May come, it will be to hard to stere in the month of June. And the
third cause is, the wiedes shall take such root, er sterynge time comme,
that they will not be clean turned underneath, the which shall be great
hurt to the corn, when it shall be sown, and specially in the weding time of
the same. and for any other thing, make a deep holowe forowe in the rydge of
the land, and look well, thou rest balke it not, for if thou do, there will be
many thystels: and than thou shalt not make a clean rydge at the first
sterynge, and therefore it must needs be deep plowed, or else thou shall not
turn the wiedes cle ane.

To carry out donge or mucke and to sprede it.
ANd in the later end of Apryll, and the beginning of May, is time to carry
out his dounge or mucke, and to lay it upon his barley ground. And where he
has barley this year, sow it with whete or rye the next time it is falowed,
and so shall he mucke all his lands over at every second falowe. But that
husband, that can find the means to carry out his donge, and to lay it upon
his land, after it be ones sturred: it is much better, than to lay it upon
his falowe, for diverse causes. One is, if it be laid upon his fallowe, all
that fallethe in the holowe rygge, shall do little good for when it is rygged
again, it lies so deep in the earth, thut it will not be plowed up again,
except that when he has sprede it, he will with a shouell, or a spade, cast
out all that is fallen in the rygge. And if it be laid upon the sturrynge, at
every plowynge it shall meddle the donge and the earth together, the which shall
cause the corn much better to grow and encreace. And in sum places, they
lode not their donge, till harvest be done, and that is used in the farther
side of Darbyshyre, called Scaresdale, Halomshyre, and so northewarde toward
York and Ryppon: and that I call better thanne upon the falowe, and
specially for barley: but upon the first sturrynge, is best for wheat and
rye. and that his dunge be laid upon small hepes nygh together, and to sprede
it euenly, and to leave no dounge there as the mucke hepe stood, for the
moystnes of the dounge shall cause the ground to be rank enough. And if it
be meddled with earth, as sholynges and such other, it will last the longer,
and better for barley than for whete or rye, because of wedes. Horse donge is
the worste donge that is. The donge of all manner catell, that chewe their
cudde, is very good. And the dounge of douues is best, but it must be laid
upon the ground very thynne.

To set out the sheep fold.
ALso it is time to set out the shepefolde in May, and to set it vppou the
rye ground, if he have any, and to flyte it every morning or night: and in
the morning, when he comes to his fold, let not his sheep out anon, but
reyse them up, and let them stand stylle a good season, that they may donge
and pysse. And go among them, to se whether any of them have any mathes, or be
scabbed: and se them three or four times on the oone side, and as often on the
other side. And when the kelles begone beside the ground, than let them
out of the fold, and drive them to the soundeste place of the field. But he
that has a falowe field, several to him self, let him occupy no fold. For
foldynge of sheep makes them scabbed, and bredeth mathes, and when a storm
of ill wether comes in the night, they can not flee nor go away, and that
appeyreth them sore of their flesh. But let that man, that has such a
several falowe field, drive twenty, thyrty, or forty stakes, according to the
nombre of his sheep, upon his falowe, where he would set his fold, and
specially in the farthest part of the fyelde, from thense as they comme in,
for the going upon does much good. And let the sheparde bring his sheep
to the stakes, and the sheep will rub them on the stakes. And let the
sheparde goo about them, till they be set, and thus serve them two or three
nyghtes, and they will follow those stakes, as he flytteth them, and sit by
them. And if any ill wether come they will rise up, and go to the hedge. And
this manner of foldynge shall bread no mathes nor scabbe, nor appeyre them of
their flesh, and shall be a great sauegarde to the sheep for rottynge: and
in the morning put them out of their pasture, and thou shalt not need to bye
any hurdels nor sheep flekes, but how ye shall salve them or dress them, ye
shall understand in the chapyter of sheep after.

To carry wodde and other necessaryes.
ANd in May, when thou have falowed thy ground, and set out thy shepefolde,
and carried out thy dounge or mucke, if thou have any wodde, cole, or tymbre to
carry, or such other busynes, that must needs be done, with thy charte or
wayne, than is it time to do it. For than the way is like to be fair and
dry, and the days long. and that time the husband has leeste to do in
husbandry. Perauenture I set one thing to be done at one time of the year, and
if the husband should do it, it should be a greatter loss to him in an other
thing. Wherefore it is most convenient to do that thing first, that is most
profitable to him, and as soon as he can do the other labor.

To know diverse manner of wedes.
IN the later end of May, and the beginning of June, is time to wede thy
corn. There be diverse manner of wedes, as thistyls, kedlokes, dockes,
cocledrake, darnolde, gouldes, haudoddes, dogfenell, mathes, ter, and diverse
other small wedes. But these be they that grieve most: The thistyll is an ill
wede, roughe and sharp to handell, and freteth away the corns nygh it, and
causes the sherers or reapers not to shere clean Kedlokes has a leaf like
rapes, and bears a yelowe flower, and is an ill wede, and grows in all manner
corn, and has small coddes, and grows like mustard sede. Dockes have a
broad lefe, and diverse high spyres, and very small sede in the top. Cockole
has a long small lefe, and will bear five or vi. flowers of purple color, as
broad as a grote, and the sede is round and black, and may well be suffered
in bread corn, but not in sede, for therein is much flower Drake is like unto
rye, till it begin to sede, and it has many seeds like fenell seeds, and
hangs downewarde, and it may well be suffered in bread, for there is much
flower in the sede: and it is an opinion that it comes of rye. etc. Dernolde
grows up straight like an hye grass, and has long seeds on either side the
stert, and there is much flower in that sede, and growethe much among
barley: and it is said, that it comes of small barley. Golds has a short
iagged lefe, and grows half a yard high, and has a yelowe flower, as broad
as a grote and is an ill wede, and grows commonly in barleye and pees.
Hawdod has a blewe flower, and a few little leaves, and has. v. or six
branches, floured in the top: and grows commonly in rye upon lean ground,
and does lyttel hurt. Doggefenell and mathes is both one, and in the
coming up is like fenell, and bears many white flowers, with a yelowe sede:
and it is the worste wede that is, except terre, and it comes most
commonly, when great wete comes shortly after the corn is sown. Terre is
the worste wede, and it never does appear, till the month of June, and
specyallye when there is great wete in that moan, or a little before, and
grows most in rye, and it grows like fytches, but it is much smaller,
and it will grow as high as the corn, and with the weight thereof, it pulls
the corn flat to the earth, and freteth the ears away. Wherefore I have seen
housbandes mow down the corn and it together: And also with sharp hokes to
repe it, as they do pees, and made it dry, and than it will be good fodder.

There be other wedes not spoken of, as dee, nettylles, dodder, and such
other, that do much harm.

How to wede corn.
Now it would be known, how these corns should be weded. The chyefe
instrument to wede with, is a pair of tongues made of wode and in the farther
end it is nycked, to hold the wed faster, and after a shoure of rain, it is
best wedynge, for than they may be pulled up by the rotes, and than it comes
never again. And if it be dry wether, than must ye have a wedynge hoke with
a socket set upon a lyttel staff of a yard long, and this hoke would be well
steeled, and ground sharp both behind and before. And in his other hand he
has a forked stycke a yard long, and with his forked stycke he puts the
wede from him, and he puts the hoke beyond the rote of the wede, and pulls
it to him, and cutteth the wede fast by the earth, and with his hoke he takes
up the wede, and casts it in the reane, and if the reane be full of corn, it
is better it stand still, when it is cut, and wyddre: but let him beware, that
he trede not to much upon the corn, and specyallye after it is shot, and
when he cutteth the wede, that he cut not the corn: and therefore the hoke
would not pass an inche wide. And when the wede is so short, that he can
not with his forked stycke put it from him, and with the hoke pull it to him,
thanne must he set his hoke upon the wede, fast by the earth, and put it from
him, and so shall he cut it clean. And with these two instruments, he shall
never stoop to his warke. Dogfenell, goldes, mathes, and kedlokes are ill to
wede after this manner, they grow upon so many branches, hard by the earth:
and therefore they use most to pull them up with their hands, but look well,
that they pull not up the corn with all, but as for terre, there will no
wedynge serve.

The first sturrynge.
ALso in June is time to rygge up the falowe, the which is called the first
sturrynge, and to plowe it as deep as thou canste, for to turn the rotes of
the wedes upward, that the son, and the dry wether, may kill them. And an
housbande can not conuenyentelye plowe his land, and lode out his dounge both
upon a day, with one draughte of beasts: but he may well lode out his
dounge before none, and lode heye or corn at after none: or he may plowe
before none, and lode hey or corn at after none, with the same draughte, and
no hurt to the cattle: because in lodynge of hey or corn, the cattle is
always eating or beytynge, and so they can not do in lodynge of dounge and
plowynge.

To mow grass.
Also in the later end of June is time to begin to mow, if thy medowe be
well grown: but how so ever they be grown, in July, they must needs mow,
for diverse causes. One is, it is not convenient, to have hey and corn both in
occupation at one time. Another is, the younger, and the grener that the grass
is, the softer and the sweter it will be, when it is hey, but it will have the
more wyddrynge, and the elder the grass is, the harder and dryer it is, and
the worse for all manner of cattle: for the seeds be fallen, the which is in
manner of prouander, and it is the harder to eat and chowe. And an other cause
is, if dry wether come, it will dry and burn upon the ground, and waste
away. Take heed that thy mower mow clean and hold down the hinder hand of his
since, that he do not endent the grass, and to mow his swathe clean through
to that that was last mowen before, that he leave not a mane between, and
specyallye in the common medowe: for in the several medowe it makes the less
charge, and that the moldywarpe hills be spredde, and the styckes clean
pycked out of the medowe in Apryll, or in the beginnynge of May.

How forkes and rakes should be made.
A Good husband has his forkes and rakes made redye in the winter before, and
they would be got between Mighelmasse and Martylmasse, and beyked, and set
even, to lie vpryght in thy hand: and than they will be hard styffe and dry.
And when the housbande sytteth by the fire, and has nothing to do, than may
he make them redye, and tothe the rakes with dry wethy wode, and bore the
holes with his wymble, both above and under, and drive the tethe upward fast
and hard, and than wedge them above with dry wood of oak, for that is hard,
and will drive and never come out. And if he get them in sap time, all the
beykyng and drienge that can be had, shall not make them hard and styffe, but
they woll always be plyenge: for they be most commonly made of hasell and
withee, and these be the trees that blome, and specially hasell: for it
begins to blome as soon as the lefe is fallen. And if the rake be made of
grene wood, the heed will not abide upon the stele, and the tethe will fall
out, when he has most need to them, and let his warke, and lose much heye.
And se that thy rake and forke lie vpryghte in thy hand, for and the one end
of thy rake, or the side of thy forke, hang down ward, than they be not
handsome nor easy to work with.

To tedde and make hey.
When thy meadows be mowed, they would be well tedded and laid even upon the
ground: and if the grass be very thycke, it would be shaken with hands, or
with a short pykforke. for good teddynge is the chief point to make good
hey. and than shall it be wyddred all in like, orelles not: and when it is well
wyddred on the over side, and dry, than turn it clean before noone, as soon
as the dew is gone: And if thou dare trust the wether, let it lie so all
night: and on the next day, turn it again before none, and toward night
make it in wyndrowes, and than in small hey cocks and so to stand one night
at the least, and sweat: and on the next fair day, cast it abroad again,
and turn it ones or twyse, and than make it in greatter hey cocks, and to
stand so one night or more, that it may vngiue and sweat for and it sweat
not in the hey cocks, it will sweat in the mow, and than it will be dustye,
and not wholesome for horse, beasts, nor sheep. And when it stands in the
cocks, it is better to lode, and the more hey may be loded at a lode, and the
faster it will lie. Quyche hey comes of a grass called crofote, and grows
flat, after the earth, and bearethe a yelowe flower, half a yard high and
more, and has many knottes toward the root, and it is the b^ste hey for
horses and beasts, and the sweteste, if it be well got, but it will have much
more wyddrynge than other hey, for else he will be pysse him self and wax
hot, and after dustye. And for to know when it is wyddred enough, make a
little rope of the same, that ye think should be most greneste, and twyne it
as hard to gether bytwen your hands as ye can and so being hard twon,
let one take a knyfe, and cut it fast by your hand, and the knottes will be
moist, if it be not dry ynough-Shorte hey, and leye hey is good for sheep,
and all manner of catell. if it be well got. A man may speak of making of hey,
and getting of corn, but god disposes and ordreth all thing.

How rye should be shorn.
IN THE later end of July, or in the beginning of Auguste, is time to shere
Rye, the which would be shorn clean, and fast bounden. And in sum places
they mow it, the which is not so good to the housbandes prefytte, but it is
the sooner done. For when it is mowen, it will not be so fast bounden: and he
can not gather it so clean, but there will be much loss, and takes more
rowme in the barn than shorn corn does. And also it will not keep nor save
it self from rain or ill wether, when it stands in the cover, as the
shorn corn will do.

How to shere wheat.
Wheat would be shorn clean, and hard bounden in like manner, but for a
general rule, take good head, that the sherers of all manner of white corn,
cast not up their hands hastily, for thanne all the lose corn, and the
strawes, that he holds not fast in his hand, flies over his heed, and are
lost: and also it will pull of the ears, and specyallye of the corns that be
very ripe. In sum places they will shere their corns high, to the entente
to mow their stubble, either to thacke or to bren: if they so do, they have
great cause to take good head of the sherers. for if the ears of the corn
croke down to the earth, and the sherer take not good head, and put up the
ear, er he cut the straw: as many ears as be under his hoke or sicle, fall
to the earth, and be lost, and when they mow the stubble, it is great
hyndraunce to the profytte of the ground. And in Sommersetshire, about
Zelcestre and Martok, they do shere their wheat very low, and all the wheat
straw, that they purpose to make thacke of, they do not thresshe it, but
cut of the ears, and bind it in sheues, and call it read: and therewith they
thacke their houses. And if it be a new house, they thacke it under their
foot: the which is the best and the surest thacking that can be of straw,
for crows and douues shall never hurt it.

To mow or shere barley and otes.
BArley and otes be most commonly mowen, and a man or woman folowythe the
mower with a hand rake half a yard long, with. vii. or. viii. tethe, in the
lift hand, and a syckle in the right hand, and with the rake he gethereth
as much as will make a shefe. And thanne he takes the barley or otes by the
tops, and pulls out as much as will make a band, and casts the band from
him on the land, and with his rake and his syckle, takes up the barley or
otes, and lays them upon the band, and so the barley lies vnbounden. iii.
or. iiii days, if it be fair wether, and than to bind it. And when the
barley is led away, the lands must be raked, or else there will be much
corn lost, and if the barley or otes lie, they must needs be shorn.

To repe or mow pees and beans.
PEes and benes be most commonly last reped or mowen of diverse manners, some
with sickles, some with hokes, and some with staff hokes. And in sum places
they lay them on repes, and when they be dry, they lay them to gether on
heaps, like hey cocks, and never bind them. But the best way is, when the
repes be dry, to bind them, and to set them on the rydge of the lands three
sheues to gether, and look that your sherers, repers, or mowers geld not your
beans, that is to say, to cut the beans so hye, that the nethermoste codde
grow still on the stalk: and when they be bounden, they are the more redyer
to lode and unload, to make a reke, and to take fro the mow to thresshe. And
so be not the repes.

How all manner of corns should be tythed.
Now that all these corns before specy fyed, be shorn, mowed, reped, bounden
up, and laid upon the rydge of the land, let the housbande take heed of
gods commandment, and let him goo to the end of his land, and begin
and tell. ix. sheues, and let him cast out the x. shefe in the name of god,
and so to pervse from land to land, till he have trewely tythed all his
corn. And beware, and take heed of the saying of our lord by his prophet
Malachias, the which says, Quia michi non dedisti decimas et primitias, id
circo in fame et penuria maledicti estis. That is to say, Because ye have not
given to me your tithes, and your first fruytes, therefore ye be cursed, and
punysshed with honger and penury. And according to that saint Austyn says,
Da decimas, alioqui incides in decima^ partem angelorum qui de celo corruerunt
in infernum. That is to say, Give thy tithes truly, or else thou shall fall
among the tenthe part of aungelles, that fell from heaven in to hell, the
which is an hard word to every man, that ought to give tithes, and does not
give them truly. But saint Austyne says a comfortable word again, to them
that give their tithes truly, that is to say: Decimae sunt tributa egentium
animarum: Tithes are tributes or rewards to nedye souls And ferther he
says: Si decimam dederis, non solum abundantiam fructum recipies, sed etiam
sanitatem corporis et animae consequeris, That is to say, If thou have given
thy tithes truly, thou shalt not all only receive the profit, and the
abundaunce of goods, but also health of body and soul shall follow. Would to
god, that every man knew the hard word of our lord by his prophet
Malachias, and also the comfortable words of the holy saint Austyn. For than
would I trust verily, that tithes should be truly given.

How all manner of corn should be covered.
Now these corns be shorn and bounden, and the tithes cast out, it is time
to cover them, shoke them, or half throue them, but covering is the best
way of all manner of white corn. And that is, to set four sheues one one
side, and. iiii. sheues on the other side, and two sheues above, of the
greatteste, bounden hard nyghe to the nether end, the which must be set
upward, and the top downewarde spredde abroad to cover all the other sheues.
And they will stand best in wind, and save them self best in rain, and
they would be set on the rydge of the land, and the said sheues to lean
together in the tops, and wide at the ground, that the wind may go through,
to dry them. Pees and beans would be set on the rydge of the land, three
sheues together the tops upward, and wrythen together, and wide benethe,
that they may the better wyddre.

To lode corn, and mow it.
VVhanne all these corns be dry and wyddred enough, than lode them in to
the barn, and lay every corn by it self. And if it be a wete harvest, make
many mowes: and if thou have not housynge enough, thanne it is better to lay
thy pees and benes without upon a reke, than other corn, and it is better
upon a scaffolde, than upon the ground: for than it must be well hedged for
swyne and catel, and the ground will rotte the bottom, and the scaffolde
saves both hedgynge and rottynge: but they must be well covered both. And the
husband may set sheep or catel under the same scaffold and will serve him instead of an house, if it be well and surely made. etc.

The first sturrynge.
IN August, and in the beginning of September, is time to make his second
sturrynge, and most commonly it is cast down and plowed a mean forowe, not to
deep nor to ebb, so he turn it clean. And if it be cast, it would be water
forowed between the lands, there as the reane should be, and it will be the
dryer, when the land shall be sown. And if the lands lie high in the ridge,
and high at the reane, and low in the mids of the side, that the water may
not run easily in to the reane, as I se daily in many places: than let the
husband set his plough. iii. or. iiii foot from the rydge, and cast all the
rydge on both sides, and when the rydge is cast, set his plough there as he
began, and rydge up the remenant of the land, and so is the land both cast
and rydged, and all at one plowynge. And this shall cause the land to lie
round, when it is sown at the next time, and than shall it not drown the
corn.

To sow wheat and rye.
About Myghelmasse it is time to sow both wheat and rye Wheat is most
commonly sown under the forowe, that is to say, cast it upon the falowe,
and than plowe it under. And in some places they sow their wheat upon their
pees stubble, the which is never so good, as that that is sown upon the
falowe: and that is used, where they make falowe in a fyelde every fourth
year. And in Essex they use to have a child, to go in the forowe before the
horses or oxen, with a bag or a hopper full of corn, and he takes his hand
full of corn, and by lyttel and little casts it in the said forowe. Me
seems, that child ought to have much dyscretion.

How be it there is much good corn, and rye is most commonly sown above
and harrowed, and two London busshelles of wheat and rye will sow an acre.
Some ground is good for wheat, some for rye, and some is good for both: and
upon that ground sow blend corn, that is both wheat and rye, the which is
the surest corn of growyng, and good for the husbands household. And the
wheat, that shall be meddled with rye, must be such, as will soon be ripe,
and that is flaxen wheat, polerd wheat, or white wheat. And ye shall
understand, that there be diverse manners of wheates. Flaxen wheat has a
yelowe ear, and bare without anis, and is the bryghtest wheat in the
busshell, and will make the whytest breed, and it will wear the ground sore,
and is small straw, and will grow very thycke, and is but small corn.
Polerde wheat has no anis, thycke set in the ear, and will soon fall
out, and is greatter corn, and will make white breed. white wheat is like
polerde wheat in the busshell, but it has anis, and the ear is four square,
and will make white breed: and in Essex, they call flaxen wheat white wheat.
Red wheat has a flat ear, an inche broad, full of anis, and is the
greatteste corn, and the brodeste blades, and the greattest straw, and will
make white breed, and is the rudeste of color in the busshell.

English wheat has a dunne ear, few anis or none, and is the worste
wheat, save peeke wheat. Peeke wheat has a red ear, full of anis, thyn set,
and often times it is flyntered, that is to say, small corn wrynkeled and
dried, and will not make white bread, but it will grow upon cold ground.

To thresshe and wynowe corn.
THis wheat and rye, that thou shalt sow, ought to be very clean of wede,
and therefore, er thou thresshe thy corn open thy sheues, and pyke out all
manner of wedes, and than thresshe it, and wynowe it clean, and so shall thou
have good clean corn an other year. And in some countries, about London
specyallye, and in Essex and kente, they do fan their corn, the which is a
very good gise, and a great sauegarde for shedinge of the corn. And when thou
shalt sell it, if it be well wynowed or fande, it will be sold the derer, and
the light corn will serve the husband in his house.

To sever pees, beans, and fytches.
When thou haste thresshed thy pees, and beans, after they be wynowed, and er
thou shalt sow or selle them, let them be well reed with syues, and severed
in three parts, the great from the small, and thou shalt get in every
quarter a London busshell, or there about. For the small corn lies in the
holowe and void places of the great beans, and yet shall the great beans
be sold as dear, as if they were all together, or derer, as a man may prove
by a famylier ensample. Let a man bye. C. hearynges, two hearynges for a penye,
and an other. C. hearynges, three for a penny, and let him sell these. CC.
hearinges again v. herynges for. ii d. now has he lost. iiii. d. For C.
hearinges ii. for. i d. cost v. s. and. C. hearing. iii. for a penny cost.
iii. s. and. iiii. d the which is. viii. s. and. iiii. d. and when he sells.
v. herynges for. ii. d xx. heringes comes but to. viii. d. and there is but.
xii. score heringes, and that is but. xii. grotes, and. xii. grotes, and that
comes but to. viii. s. and so he has lost iiii. d. and it is because there be
not so many bargeins, for in the bienge of these. CC. heringes there be. v.
score bargeins, and in the sellinge of the same there be but. xlviii. bargeyns,
and so is there lost. x. hearinges, the which would have been. ii. bargeyns
moo, and than it had been even and mete. And therefore he that byeth gross sale,
and retayleth, must needs be a wynner. and so shall thou be a loser, if thou
sell thy pees, beans, and fytches together: for than thou sellest gross sale.
And if thou sever them in three parts, than thou do retayle, whereby thou
shalt win.

Of sheep, and what time of the year the rams should be put to the ewes.
AN housbande can not well thryue by his corn, without he have other cattle,
nor by his cattle, without corn. for else he shall be a byer, a borower, or a
beggar. And because that sheep in mine opinion is the most profytablest
cattle, that any man can have, therefore I purpose to speak first of sheep.
Than first it is to be known, what time thou shall put thy rams to thy ewes,
and therein I make a distinction, for every man may not put to their rams all
at one time: for if they do, there will be great hurt and loss. for that
man, that has the best sheep pasture for winter, and soon spryngynge in the
beginning of the year, he may suffer his rams to goo with his ewes all
times of the year, to blyssomme or ride when they will: but for the common
pasture. it is time to put to his rams at the Exaltation of the holy cross:
for than the bucke goth to the rut, and so would the ra^me. But for the common
husband, that has no pasture but the common fields, it is time enough at
the feste of saint Mychaell the archangel. And for the poor housbande of the
Peeke, or such other, that dwell in hylly and high grounds, that have no
pastures, nor common fields, but all only the common hethe, Simon and Jude
day is good time for them, and this is the reason why. An ewe goth with
lamb. xx. wekes, and shall yeane her lamb in the. xxi. weke, and if she have
not conueniente new grass to eat, she may not give her lamb milk: and for
want of milk, there be many lambs perysshed and lost: and also for
pouertye, the dammes will lack milk, and forsake their lambs, and so often
times they dye both in such hard countries.

To make an ewe to love her lamb.
IF thy ewe have milk, and will not love her lamb, put her in a narowe place
made of bordes, or of smothe trouse, a yard wide, and put the lamb to her,
and socle it, and if the ewe smite the lamb with her heed, bind her heed with
a heye rope, or a cord, to the side of the pen: and if she will not stand
side long all the ewe, than give her a little hey, and tie a dog by her,
that she may se him: and this will make her to love her lamb shortly. And if
thou have a lamb deed, whereof the damme has much milk, fley that lamb, and
tie that skin upon an other lambs back, that has a sorry damme, with
little milk, and put the good ewe and that lamb together in the pen, and
in one hour she will love that lamb, and than may thou take thy sorry weyke
ewe away, and put her in an other place: and by this means thou may
fortune to save her life, and the lambs both.

What time lambs should be wayned.
IN some places they never sever their lambs from their dammes, and that is
for two causes: One is, in the best pasture where the rams goo always with
their ewes, there it needs not, for the dammes will wax dry, and wayne their
lambs them self. An other cause is, he that has no several and sound
pasture, to put his lambs unto, when they should be wayned, he must either
sell them, or let them suck as long as the dammes will suffer them, and it
is a common saying, that the lamb shall not rotte, as long as it souketh,
except the damme want meat. But he that has several and sound pasture, it
is time to wayne their lambs, when they be xvi. wekes old, or xviii. at the
farthest, and the better shall the ewe take the ram again. And the poor man
of the peeke countreye, and such other places, where as they use to milk
their ewes, they use to wayne their lambs at xii. wekes old, and to milk
their ewes five or six wekes. etc. But those lambs be never so good as the
other that suck long, and have meat enough.

To draw sheep, and sever them in diverse places.
THan thou grasier, that have many sheep in thy pastures, it is convenient for
the, to have a shepefolde made with a good hedge or a pale, the which will
receive all thy sheep easyly that goo in one pasture, set between two of thy
pastures, in a dry place, and adioynynge to the end of the same, make an
other little fold, that will receive lxxxx. sheep or moo, and both those
foldes must have either of them a gate in to either pasture, and at the end
of that fold make an other lyttel fold, that will receive. xl. sheep or mo,
and between every fold a gate. And when the sheep are in the great fold,
let. xl. of them or there about, come into the myddle fold, and steke the
gate. And than let the shepeherde turn them, and look them on every side, and
if he se or find any sheep, that needs any helping or mendinge for any
cause, let the shepeherde take that sheep with his hoke, and put him in the
little fold. And when he has taken all that needs any mendyng, than put the
other in to whether pasture he will, and let in as many out of the great
fold, and take those, that need any handling, and put them into the little
fold. And thus peruse them all till he have done, and than let the shepeherde
go belte, grese, and handel all those that he has drawn, and than shall not
the great flock be tarried nor kept from their meat: and as he has mended
them, to put them into their pasture.

To belte sheep.
IF any sheep raye or be fyled with dounge about the tail, take a pair of
sheres, and clyppe it away, and cast dry muldes thereupon: and if it be in the
heat of the summer, it would be rubbed ever with a little terre, to keep
away the flies. It is necessary, that a shepeherde have a board, set fast to
the side of his little fold, to lay his sheep upon, when he handeleth them,
and an hole bored in the board with an augur, and therein a grayned staff of
two foot long, to be set fast, to hang his terre box upon, and than it shall
not fall. And a shepeherde should not go without his dog, his sheep hoke, a
pair of sheres, and his terre box, either with him, or redye at his sheep
fold, and he must teache his dog to bark, when he would have him, to run
when he would have him, and to leave ronning, when he would have him, or else he
is not a cunninge shepeherd. The dog must learn it, when he is a whelpe, or
else it will not be: for it is hard to make an old dog to stoop.

To grease sheep.
IF any sheep be scabbed, the shepeherde may perceive it by the bytynge,
rubbyng, or scratchynge with his horn, and most commonly the woll will rise,
and be thyn or bare in that place: than take ^hym, and shede the woll with thy
fyngers, there as the scab is, and with thy finger lay a little terre
thereupon, and stroke it a length in the bottom of the woll, that it be not
seen above. And so shede the woll by and by, and lay a little terre
thervppon, till thou pass the sore, and than it will go no farther.

To meddle terre.
LEt thy terre be meddled with oil, gose grease, or capons grease, these three
be the best, for these will make the terre to run abroad: butter and swynes
grease, when they be molten, are good, so they be not salt, for terre of him
self is to kene, and is a fretter, and no healer, without it be meddled with
some of these.

To make brom salve.
A medicyne to salve poor men's sheep, that think terre to costely: but I
doubt not, but and rich men know it, they would use the same.

TAke a shete full of brom croppes, leaves, blossoms, and all, and chop them
very small, and than sethe them in a pan of. xx. gallons with rennynge water,
till it begin to wax thycke like a gelly, than take two pound of sheep suet
molten, and a pottell of old pysse, and as much bryne made with salt, and
put all in to the said pan, and stir it about, and than streyne it
through an old clothe, and put it in to what vessel ye will, and if your
sheep be new clypped, make it luke warm, and than wash your sheep there
with, with a sponge or a piece of an old mantell, or of faldynge, or such a
soft cloth or woll, for spending to much of your salve. And at all times of
the year after, ye may relent it, and need require: and make wide sheydes in
the woll of the sheep, and anoint them with it, and it shall heal the scabbe,
and kill the sheep lyce, and it shall not hurt the woll in the sale thereof.
And those that be wasshen, will not take scabbe after (if they have sufficient
meat) for that is the best grease that is to a sheep, to grease him in the
mouth with good meat: the which is also a great sauegarde to the sheep for
rottynge, except there come myldewes, for he will chose the best, if he have
plentye. And he that has but a few sheep moderate this medicyne according.

If a sheep have mathes.
IF a sheep have mathes, ye shall perceive it by her bytynge, or fyskynge, or
shaking of her tail, and most commonly it is moist and wete: and if it be
nyghe unto the tail, it is often times grene, and fyled with his dounge: and
than the shepeherde must take a pair of sheres, and clyppe away the woll
bare to the skin, and take a handful of dry moldes, and cast the moldes
thereupon to dry up the wete, and than wype the muldes away, and lay terre
there as the mathes were, and a little farther. And thus look them every
day, and mende them, if they have need.

Blyndenes of sheep, and other dyseases, and remedies therefore.
THere be some sheep that will be blind a season, and yet mende again. And if
thou put a little terre in his eye, he will mende the rather. There be diverse
waters, and other medicyns, that would mende him, but this is most common
medicyne that shepeherdes use.

The worm in the shepes foot, and help therefore
THere be some sheep, that has a worm in his foot, that makes him halte.
Take that sheep, and look between his clese, and there is a little hole, as
much as a greatte pynnes heed, and therein grows five or six black hears,
like an inche long and more, take a sharp poynted knyfe, and slytte the skin
a quarter of an inche long above the hole and as much benethe, and put thy one
hand in the holowe of the foot, under the hinder clese, and set thy thombe
above almooste at the slytte, and thruste thy fyngers underneath forward, and
with thy other hand, take the black hears by the end, or with thy knyues
point, and pull the hears a little and a little, and thruste after thy
other hand, with thy finger and thy thombe, and there will come out a worm
like a piece of flesh, nygh as much as a lyttel finger. And when it is out,
put a lyttel tar into the hole, and it will be shortly hole.

The blood, and remedy if one come betyme.
THere is a sickness among sheep, and is called the blood, that sheep, that
has that, will dye sodeinly, and er he dye, he will stand still, and hang
down the heed, and other while quake. If the shepeherde can espy him, let him
take and rub him about the heed, and specially adout his ears, and under his
eyes, and with a knyfe cut of his ears in the mids, and also let him blood
in a vein under his eien: and if he blede well, he is like to live, and if he
blede not, than kill him, and save his flesh. for if he dye by him self, the
flesh is lost, and the skyn will be far ruddyer, like blood, more than an
other skin shall be. And it takes most commonly the fattest and best
liking.

The pockes, and remedy therefore.
THe pockes appear upon the skyn, and are like reed pymples, as broad as a
farthynge, and thereof will dye many. And the remedy therefore is, to handle all
thy sheep, and to look on every part of their bodies: and as many as ye find
taken therewith, put them in fresh new grass, and keep them fro their
fellows, and to look thy flock often, and draw them as they need. And if it
be in summer time, that there be no froste, than wash them. How be it some
shepeherdes have other medycines.

The wode evil, and remedy therefore.
THere is a sickness among sheep, and is called the wode evil, and that comes
in the spring of the year, and takethe them most commonly in the legs, or
in the neck, and makes them to halt, and to hold their neck awry. And the
most part that have that sickness, will dye shortly in a day or two. The best
remedy is, to wasshe them a little, and to change their ground, and to
bring them to low ground and fresh grass. And that sycknes is most commonly
on hylly ground, ley ground, and ferny ground. And some men use to let them
bloudde under the eye in a vain for the same cause.

To wash sheep.
IN June is time to shere sheep, and er they be shorn, they must be very
well wasshen, the which shall be to the owner great profit in the sale of his
woll, and also to the clothe maker. but yet beware, that thou put not to many
sheep in a pen at one time, neither at the washing, nor at the sheryng, for
fear of murtheryng or over pressyng of their fellows, and that none go away,
till he be clean washen. and se that they, that hold the sheep, by the heed in
the water, hold his heed hye enough for drownynge.

To shere sheep.
Take heed of the sherers, for touching the sheep with the sheres. and
specially for pryckyng with the point of the sheres, and that the shepeherde
be always ready with his tarboxe to salve them. And se that they be well marked,
both ear mark, pitche mark, and radel mark, and let the wol be well folden
or wounden with a woll wynder, that can good skyll thereof, the which shall do
much good in the sale of the same.

To draw and sever the badde sheep from the good.
When thou haste all shorn thy sheep, it is than best time to draw them, and
so sever them in diverse sorts, the sheep, that thou will feed by them
self, the ewes by them self, the share hogs and theyues by them self, the
lambs by them self, wedders and the rams by them self, if thou have so
many pastures for them: for the byggest will beat the weikeste with his heed.
And of every sort of sheep, it may fortune there be some, that like not and be
weike, those would be put in fresh grass by them self: and when they be a
lyttel mended, than sell them, and often change of grass shall mend all manner of
cattle.

What things rotteth sheep.
IT is necessary that a shepeherde should know, what thing rotteth sheep,
that he might keep them the better. There is a grass called sperewort, and
has a long narowe leaf, like a spear heed, and it will grow a foot high,
and bears a yelowe flower, as broad as a penny, and it growethe always in low
places, where the water is used to stand in winter. An other grass is called
penny grass, and grows low by the earth in a marsshe ground, and has a
leaf as broad as a penny of two pens, and never bears flower. All manner of
grass, that the land floudde renneth over, is very ylle for sheep, because
of the sand and fylthe that stycketh upon it. All marreys ground, and
marsche ground is ill for sheep. the grass that grows upon falowes is not
good for sheep: for there is much of it wede, and often times it comes up
by the rote, and that brings earth with it, and they eat both. etc. Myldewe
grass is not good for sheep, and that ye shall know two ways. One is by the
leaves on the trees in the morning, and specially of oaks, take the leaves,
and put thy tongue to them, and thou shall feel like honey upon them. And also
there will be many kelles upon the grass, and that causes the myldewe.
Wherefore they may not well be let out of the fold, till the son have
domynation to dry them away. Also hunger rotte is the worst rotte that can
be, for there is neither good flesh nor good skin, and that comes for
lack of meat, and so for hunger they eat such as they can find: and so
will not pasture sheep, for they seldom rot but with myldewes, and than will
they have much talowe and flesh, and a good skyn. Also white snailes be ill
for sheep in pastures, and in falowes There is an other rotte, which is called
pelte rotte, and that comes of greatte wete, specially in wood countries,
where they can not dry.

To know a rotten sheep diverse man^r ways, whereof some of them will not fail.
TAke both your hands, and twyrle upon his eye, and if he be ruddy. and have
reed stryndes, in the white of the eye, than he is sound, and if the eye be
white, like talowe, and the stryndes dark celoured, thanne he is rotten. And
also take the sheep, and open the wolle on the side, and if the skin be of
ruddy color and dry, than is he sound, and if it be pale colored and
watrye, thanne is he rotten. Also when ye have opened the woll on the side,
take a little of the woll between thy finger and thy thombe, and pull it a
lyttel and if it stick fast, he is sound, and if it comme lyghtely of, he is
rotten. Also when thou haste kylde a sheep, his belly will be full of water, if
he be sore rotten, and also the fat of the flesh, will be yelowe, if he be
rotten. And also if thou cut the liver, therein will be little quikens like
flokes, and also the liver will be full of knottes and white blysters, if he be
rotten. and also sethe the liver, if he be rotten it will break in pieces, and
if he be sound, it will hold together.

To bye lean cattle.
THese housbandes, if they shall well thryue, they must have both kye, oxen,
horses, mares, and young cattle, and to rere and bread every year some calves,
and fools, or else shall he be a byer. And if thou shalt by oxen for the
ploughe, se that they be young, and not gowty, nor broken of hear. neither of
tail, nor of pysell. And if thou bye kye to the payle, se that they be young
and good to milk, and feed her calves well. And if thou bye kye or oxen to
feed, the younger they be, the rather they will feed, but look well, that the
hear stare not, and that he lycke him self, and be hoole mouthed, and want no
tethe. And though he have the gout and be broken, both of tail and pysell,
yet will he feed. But the gouty ox will not be driven far and se that he
have a broad ryb, and a thycke hyde* and to be lose skinned, that it stycke not
hard nor streyte to his rybbes, for than he will not feed.

To bye fat cattle.
IF thou shalt bye fat oxen or kye, handel them, and se that they be soft on
the forecroppe, behind the shulder, and upon the hindermost rybbe, and upon
the hucbone, and the nache by the tail. And se the ox have a great codde,
and the cow great nauyll, for than it should seem, that they should be well
talowed. And take heed, where thon byeste any lean cattle or fat, and of whom,
and where it was bred. For if thou by out of a better ground than thou haste
thy self, that cattle will not like with the. And also look, that there be no
manner of sycknes among the cattle in that towneshyp or pasture that thou
byest thy catel out of. For if there be any murren or long sought, it is
great ieoperdy: for a beast may take sycknes ten or. xii. days or more, ere
it appear on him.

Diverse sycnesses of cattle, and remedies therefore, and first of murren.
ANd if it fortune to fall murren among thy beasts, as god forbede, there be
men enough can help them. And it comes of a ranknes of bloudde, and appears
most commonly first in the heed: for his heed will swell, and his eyes wax
great and run of water and frothe at the mouth, and than he is paste
remedy, and will dye shortly, and will never eat after he be sick. Than flee
him, and make a deep pytte fast by, there as he dies, and cast him in, and
cover him with earth, that no dogs may come to the caryen. For as many
beasts as feleth the smelle of that caryen, are lykely to be enfecte, and take
the skin, and have it to the tanners to sell, and bring it not home, for
peril that may fall. And it is commonly used, and comes of a great charytie,
to take the bare heed of the same beast, and put it upon a long pole, and set
it in a hedge, fast bounden to a stake, by the high way side, that every
man, that rydethe or goes that way, may se and know by that sign, that
there is sycknes of cattle in the towneshyp. And the husbands hold an
opinion, that it shall the rather cease. And when the beast is flaine, there
as the murren does appear between the flesh and the skin, it will rise
up like a ielly and frothe an inche deep or more. And this is the remedy for
the murren. Take a small curteyne cord, and bind it hard about the beasts
neck, and that will cause the bloudde to come in to the neck, and on either
side of the neck there is a vain that a man may feel with his finger: and
than take a blood yren, and set it straight upon the vain, and smite him
bloudde on both sides, and let him blede the mountenaunce of a pynte or nyghe
it, and than take away the cord, and it will staunche bleding. And thus serve
all thy cattle, that be in that close or pasture, and there shall no mo be
sick by gods love.

Long sought, and remedy therefore.
THere is an another manner of syckenesse among bestes, and it is called long
sought, and that sickness will endure log, and ye shall per ceyue it by his
hoystynge, he will stand much, and eat but a littel, and wax very holowe and
thin. And he will hoyst. xx. times in an hour, and but few of them do mende.
The best remedy is to keep thy cattle in sondrye places, and as many as were
in company with that beast, that first fell sick, to let them a lyttel
blood. And there be many men, that can sever them, and that is to cut the
dewlappe before, and there is a grass, that is called feitergrasse, take that
grass, and broyse it a little in a mortar, and thanne put thereof as much as
an hens egg in to the said dewlappe, and se it fall not out. Thus I have
seen used, and men have thought it has done good.

Dewbolue, and the hard remedy therefore.
AN other disease among beasts is called dewbolue, and that comes, when a
hungry beast is put in a good pasture full of rank grass, he will eat so
much, that his sides will stand as high as his back bone, and other while,
the one side more thanne the other, and but few of them will dye, but he may
not be driven hastily, nor labored, being so swollen, and the substance of
it is but wind: and therefore he would be softly driven, and not sytte down.
How be it I have seen a man take a knyfe, and thruste him through the skin
and the flesh two inches deep, or more, vi. inches or more from the ridge
bone, that the wind may come out. For the wind lies between the flesh and
the great paunche.

Risen upon, and the remedy therefore.
AN other disease is called risen upon and no man can tell how, nor whereof it
comes: but ye shall perceive that by swellynge in the heed, and specyallye by
the eyes, for they will run on water, and close his syghte, and will dye
shortly within an hour or two, if he be not helped. This is the cause of his
disease. There is a blyster risen under the tongue, the which blyster must be
slytte with a knyfe a cross. When ye have pulled out the tongue, rub the
blyster well with salt, and take an hens egg, and break it in the beasts
mouth shell and all, and cast salt to it, and hold up the bestes heed, that
all may be swalowed down into the body. But the breaking of the blyster is
the great help, and drive the beast a little about, and this shall save
him, by the help of Jesus.

The turn, and remedy therefore.
THere be beasts that will turn about, when they eat their meat, and will
not feed, and is great ieoperdy for falling in pyties, dyches, or waters: and
it is because that there is a bladder in the foreheed between the brain pan
and the brains, the which must be taken out, or else he shall never mende, but
dye at length, and this is the remedy and the greatest cure that can be on a
beast. Take that beast, and cast him down, and bind his four fete together,
and with thy thombe, thruste the beast in the foreheed, and where thou fyndest
the softest place, there take a knyfe, and cut the skyn* three or four inches
on both sides between the horns, and as much benethe toward the nose, and
fley it, and turn it up, and pyn it fast with a pyn, and with a knyfe cut the
brain pan. ii. inches broad, and three inches long, but se the knyfe go no
deper than the thycknes of the bone for perysshynge of the brain, and take
away the bone, and than shall thou se a bladder full of water two inches long
and more, take that out, and hurt not the brain, and thanne let down the
skin, and sow it fast there as it was before, and bind a clothe two or
three fold upon his foreheed, to keep it from cold and wete. x. or. xii.
days. And thus have I seen many mended. But if the beast be fat, and any
reasonable meat upon him, it is best to kill him, for than there is but
little loss. And if the bladder be under the horn, it is past cure. A sheep
will have the turn as well as a beast, but I have seen none mended.

The warrybrede, and the remedy therefore.
THere be beasts that will have warrybredes in diverse parts of their body and
legs, and this is the remedy. Cast him down, and bind his four fete
together, and take a culture, or a pair of tongues, or such an other yren, and
take it glowing hot: and if it be a long warrybrede, sere it of hard by the
body, and if it be in the beginning, and be but flat, than lay the hot yren
upon it, and sere it to the bare skyn, and it will be hole for ever, be it
horse or beast.

The foul, and the remedy therefore.
THere be bestes, that will have the foul and that is between the cleese,
sometime before, and some time behind, and it will swell, and cause him to
halt, and this is the remedy Cast him down and bind his four fete together,
and take a rope of hear, or a hey rope, hard wrythen together, and put it
between his cleese, and draw the rope to and fro a good season, till he blede
well, and than lay to it soft made terre, and bind a cloute about it, that
no mire nor gravel come between the clese: and put him in a pasture, or let
him stand still in the house, and he will be shortly hole.

The gout without remedy.
THere be beasts, that will have the gout, and most commonly in the hinder
fete, and it will cause them to halt, and go starkely. And I knew never manne,
that could help it, or find remedy therefore, but all only to put him in
good grass, and feed him.

To rere calves.
IT is conueniente for a housbande to rere calves, and specially those that
come between Candelmasse and May, for that season he may spare milk best,
and by that time the calfe shall be wayned, there will be grass enough to put
him unto. And at winter he will be bygge enough to save himself among other
beasts, with a little favor. And the damme of the calfe shall bull again,
and bring an other by the same time of the year: and if thou shall tarry, till
after May, the calfe would be weyke in winter, and the damme would not bull
again: but often time go barryn And if thou shalt rere a calfe, that comes
after Myghelmasse, it will be costly to keep the calfe all the winter season at
hey, and the damme at hard meat in the house, as they use in the plain
champyon country. And a cow shall give more milk with a little grass and
straw, lyenge without in a close, thanne she shall do with hey and straw,
lyenge in an house. for the hard meat dries up the milk. But he that has
no pasture, must do as he may, but yet is it better to the house band, to sell
those calves, than to rere them, because of the cost, and also for the profytte
of the milk to his house, and the rather the cow will take the bull. If the
husband go with an ox plough, it is convenient, that he rere two ox calves,
and two cow calves at the least, to uphold his stock, and if he may do moo,
it will be more profit. And it is better, to wayne thy calves at grass
before. And that man, that may have a pasture for his kye, and an other for
his calves, and water in them both, may rere and bread good beasts with
light cost. And if thou waine thy calves with hey, it will make them have
great belyes, and the rather they will rotte, when they come to grass, and in
winter they would be put in a house by them self, and given hey on the
nyghtes, and put in a good pasture on the day, and they shall be much better to
handell, when they shall be kye or oxen.

To gelde calves.
IT is time to gelde his oxen calves in the old of the moon, when they be. x.
or. xx. days old, for than it is least ieoperdye, and the ox shall be the
more hyer, and the longer of body, and the le^ger horned: and that may be well
prouyd, to take two ox calves, both of one kind, of one making, and both of
one age, gelde one of them, and let the other goo forth and be a bull, and put
them both in one pasture, till they be four or five year old: and than
shall ye se the ox calfe, far greatter every way, than the bull. there is
no cause, but the geldynge. and if thou gelde them not, till they be a year
old, there is more ieopardye, he shall be less of body, and short horned.

Horses and mares to draw.
A Husband may not be without horses and mares, or both, and specially if
he go with a horse ploughe he must have both his horses to draw, and his
mares to bring coltes, to uphold his stock, and yet at many times they may
draw well, if they be well handled. But they may not bear sackes, nor be
rydden upon no iourneys, when they be with fool, and specially when they
have gone with fool. xx. or. xxiiii. wekes, for than is the greatteste
ieopardy. For if she be rydden upon, and set up hot or turned out and
take cold; she will cast her fool, the which woll be a greatte loss to the
housbande. For she will labor, and bear when she has fooled, and draw when
she is with fool, as well as the horse. It is convenient for the husband to
know, when his mare would be horsed. It is the common saying, that she will
take the horse within. ix. or. x. days, next after that she has fooled: but
that saying I hold not with, for and she so do, she will not hold thereto, for
the horse does drive her to it. But. xx. days after, is tymely enough to
bring her to a horse for she will not hold to it, except she be kene of
horsyng, and that shall ye know by her shap, for that will twyrle open, and
close again many times in an hour: and than bring her to a horse, and let her
be with him a day or a night, and that is suffycyent. For it is better, to keep
the horse from the mares, than to go with them, for diverse causes, and
specially he shall be more lusty, and the moo horse coltes shall he get. But
he that has very many mares, may not always attend them, but let them go to
gether, and take as god sendes it. Some men hold an opinion, that if the horse
be put to the mare in the beginning of the moon, after it be prime, he shall
get a horse fool. And some men say the contrary: that if he be put to the
mare in the old of the moon, he should get horse fools. And I say, it
makes no matter, whether: for this cause I have proved. I have my self. lx.
mares and more, able to bear the horse, and from May day unto saint
Barthylmewes day. I have. v. or. vi. horses going with them both day and
night, and at the foolynge time I have upon one day a horse fool, and on the
next day, or second, a mare fool, and on the third or fourth day next after,
a horse fool again, and so every weke of both sorts, and by their opinion
or reason, I should have. xiiii. days together horse fools, and other. xiiii.
days together mare foles. And me semethe, that those men, that hold that
opinyon, speak sophystycallye, that if so be, they laid any wagers thervppon,
that they should both win in their own conceyte by this reason. Whether it
were get in the new of the moon or in the old of the moon, it is a horse
fool, because a horse gate it, though it be a felly fool and it is a mare
fool, because a mare fooled it, though it be a horse colte. And so (Diuersis
respectibus) their opynions may be true. But of one thing I am certain,
that some one horse will get more horse fools, than other horse will do and
like wise, a mare will bear moo mare fools than some other mare will do,
though they be horsed both with one horse. Me seems there is no reason why,
but the lustynes of the nature of both parts, whether of them, shall have the
domination. But and ye have mares of diverse colors, than do as I do, sever
them in diverse parcels, and put to your white mares, a gray horse, or a white
horse, that has no white rathe in the foreheed, and to your gray mares a
white horse, so that he be not al white skynned about the mouth. And to your
mares of color, that have no white upon them, a colored horse, that has much
white on him, and to your colored mares of main white, a horse of color of
mayn white. And thus shall ye have well colored coltes. It makes no matter, of
what color the horse be, so he be neither white nor gray. For if ye put a
white horse to a colored mare, she shall have most commonly a sandy colte,
like an yren gray, neither like sire nor damme. How be it I have seen and
known many mares, that will have their colte like the horse that gate it, the
which is against kind of mares, for a man may rather get one good
horse, than many good mares.

The loss of a lamb, a calfe, or a fool.
IT is less hurt to a man, to have his cow cast her calfe, thanne an ewe to
cast her lamb. For the calfe will soucke as much milk, er it be able to
kill, as it is worth, and of the ewe comes no profytte of the milk, but
the lamb. How be it they use in some places to milk their ewes, when they
have wayned their lambs: but that is great hurt to the ewes, and will cause
them, that they will not take the ram at the time of the year for pouertye,
but goo barreyne. And if a mare cast her fool, that is thryse so great a
loss, for if that fool be commen of good bread, as it is necessary every man
to provide, for as much costs and charges has a badde mare as a good, in
short space the fool, with good keeping, may be sold for as much money as
would bye many calves and lambs.

What cattle should go to gether in one pasture.
Beasts alone, nor horses aloone, nor sheep alone, except it be sheep upon a
very high ground, will not eat a pasture even, but leave many tuftes and
high grass in diverse places, except it be over laid with cattle. Wherefore
know that horses and beasts will agree well in oone pasture, for there is
some manner of grass, that or horse will eat, and the beast will not eat, as
the fytches, flasshes, and low places, and all the holowe bunnes and pypes
that grow therein. But horses and sheep will not so well agree, except it be
sheep to feed, for a sheep will go on a bare pasture, and will eat the
sweteste grass: and so will a horse, but he would have it longer. How be it
he will eat as nyghe the earth as a sheep, but he can not so sone fill his
belly. To an hundred beasts ye may put. xx. horses, if it be low ground, and
if there be grass enough, put in an hundred sheep, and so after the rate, be
the pasture more or less. And after this manner they may feed and eat the
close even, and leave but few tuftes. And if it be an high ground, put in moo
sheep, and less bestes and horses Melch kye, and draught oxen, will eat a
close much barer than as many fat kye and oxen. And a melche cow may have
to much meat: for if she wax fat, she will the rather take the bull, and
give less milk. lor the fatnes stops the poores and the veins, that should
bring the milk to the pappes And therefore mean grass is best to keep her
in a mean estate. And if a cow be fat, when she shall calue, than is there
great ieoperdy in her, and the calfe shall be the less: but ye can not give
your draught ox to much meat, except it be the aftermath, of a late mowen
meadow e. for that will cause him to have the gyrre, and than he may not well
labor. And there be to much grass in a close, the cattle shall feed the
worse, for a good bytte to the earth is suffycyente. for if it be long, the
beast will byte of the top and no more, for that is swetest, and the other
lies still upon the ground, and rotteth, and no beast will eat it but
horse in winter, but these beasts, horses and sheep, may not be fodered to
gether in winter, for thanne they would be severed: for else the beasts with
their horns, will put both the horses and the sheep, and gore them in their
bellyes. And it is necessary to make standing cratches, to cast their fodder
in, and the staves set nyghe enough together, for pulling their fodder to
hastily out, for shedynge. And if it be laid upon the earth, the fourth
part thereof will be lost: and if ye lay it upon the earth, lay it every
time in a new place, for the old will mar the new.

The properties of horses.
THou grasyer, that may fortune to be of mine opinion or condytion, to love
horses and young coltes or foles, to go among thy cattle, take heed, that thou
be not begyled, as I have been an hundred times and more. And first thou shall
know, that a good horse has. liiii. propertyes, that is to say. ii. of a man.
ii of a bauson or a badger. iiii. of a lion. ix. of an ox. ix. of a hare. ix.
of a fox. ix. of an ass, and. x. of a woman.

The two properties, that a horse has of a man.
The first is, to have a proud heart, and the second is, to be bold and
hardy.

The. ii. propertyes of a bauson.
The first is, to have a white raze or a ball in the foreheed, the second, to
have a white foot.

The. iiii. properties of a lion.
The first is, to have a broad breast, the second, to be styffe docked, the
third, to be wild in countenance, the fourth, to have four good legs.

The. ix. propertyes of an ox.
The first is, to be broad rybbed, the. ii. to be low brawned, the third, to
be short pasturned, the. iiii. to have greatte senewes, the fyfte, to be wide
between the challes, the syxte is, to have great nosethrylles, the. vii. to be
bygge on the chyn, the. viii. to be fat and well fed, the. ix. to be
vpryghte standing.

The. ix. propertyes of an hare.
The first is styffe eared, the second, to have great eyes, the third,
round eyes, the fourth, to have a lean heed, the. v. to have lean knees,
the syxte, to be wight on foot, the. vii. to turn upon a little ground, the
viii. to have short buttockes, the. ix. to have two good fyllettes

The. ix. propertyes of a fox.
The first is, to be prycke eared, the second, to be little eared, the
third, to be round syded, the fourth, to be side tayled, the fyfte, to be
short legged, the syxte, to be black legged, the. vii to be short trottynge,
the. viii. to be well colored, the. ix. to have a little heed.

The. ix. propertyes of an ass.
The first is to be small mouthed, the second, to be long rayned, the. iii.
to be thyn cressed, the fourth, to be straight backed, the fyfth, to have
small stones, the syxte, to be lathe legged, the. vii. to be round foted, the
eight, to be holowe foted, the. ix. to have a toughe houe.

The. x. properties of a woman.
The first is, to be merry of chere, the second, to be well paced, the third,
to have a broad foreheed, the fourth, to have broad buttockes, the fyfthe, to
be hard of ward, the syxte, to be easy to lepe upon, the. vii to be good at
a long iourneye. the. viii. to be well sturrynge under a man, the. ix. to be
always besye with the mouth, the tenth, ever to be chowynge on the brydell.

It might fortune I could show as many defantes of horses, as here be good
propertyes, but than I should break my promise, that I made at Grombalde
bridge, the first time I went to Ryppon for to bye coltes. But it is to
suppose, that if a horse want any of these good propertyes, that he should have
a defaute in the same place. And this is suffycient for this time.

The diseases and sorance of horses.
Now it is to be known, the soraunce and dyseases of horses, and in what
parts of their bodies they be, that a man may the rather perceive them. And
how be it, that it may be against my profyt, yet I will show you such as
comes to my mind.

The lampas.
In the mouth is the lampas, and is a thick skyn full of blood, hanging
over his tethe above, that he may not eat.

The barbes.
The barbes be little pappes in a horse mouth, and let him to byte: these
two be sone helped.

Mourning of the tongue.
Mourning of the tongue is an ill disease, and hard to be cured.

Pursy.
Pursy is a disease in an horses body, and makes him to blow short, and
appears at his nosethrilles, and comes of cold, and may be well mended.

Broken wynded.
Broken wynded is an ill disease, and comes of rennynge or riding over much,
and specially shortly after he is watered, and appears at his nosethryll, at
his flank, and also at his tuell, and will not be mended, and will much blow
and coughe, if he be sore chafed, and it will least appear, when he is at
grass.

Glaunders.
Glaunders is a disease, that may be mended, and comes of a heat, and a
sodeyne cold, and appears at his nosethrylles, and between his chall bones.

Mourning on the chyne.
Mourning on the chyne is a disease in curable, and it appears at his
nosethryll like oak water. A glaunder, when it breaks, is like matter. Broken
wynded, and pursyfnes, is but short blowynge.

Stranguellyon.
Stranguelyon is a light disease to cure, and a horse will be very sore sick
thereof, and comes of a chafynge hot, that he sweet, and after it will rise
and swell in diverse places of his body, as much as a man's fyste, and will
break by it self, if it be kept warm, or else is there ieoperdy.

The hawe.
The hawe is a sorance in a horse eye, and is like a gristell, and may well be
cut out, or else it will have out his eye, and that horse that has one, has
commonly two.

Blyndnes.
A horse will wax blind with labor, and that may be cured betyme.

Viues.
The viues is a sorance under a horse ere, between the over end of the chall
bones and the neck, and are round knottes between the skyn and the flesh
like tennes balls, and if they be not kilde, they will wax quick, and eat
the rotes of the horse ears, and kill him.

The cords.
The cords is a thing that will make a horse to stumble, and often to fall,
and appears before the forther legs of the body of the horse, and may well
be cured in ii. places, and there be but few horses, but they have part
thereof.

The farcyon.
The farcyon is an ill soraunce, and may well be cured in the beginning, and
will appear in diverse places of his body, and there will rise pymples as much
as half a walnutshell, and they will follow a vein, and will break by it
self. And as many horses as do play with him, that is sore, and gnappe of
the matter that renneth out of the sore, shall have the same sorance within a
month after, and therefore keep the sick from the hole. And if that sorance
be not cured betyme, he will dye of it.

A malander.
A malander is an ill sorance, and may well be cured for a time, but with ill
keeping it will comme again, and appears on the forther legs, in the bendynge
of the knee behind, and is like a scabbe or a skal: and some horses will have
two upon a leg, within an inche together, and they will make a horse to
stumble, and other while to fall.

A selander.
A selander is in the bendynge of the leg behind, like as the malander is in
the bendynge of the leg before, and is like a malander, and may be well cured.

A serewe.
A serewe is an ill soraunce, and is like a splent, but it is a little longer
and more, and lies up to the knee on the inner side. And some horses have a
through serewe on both sides of the leg, and that horse must needs stumble
and fall, and hard it is to be cured.

A splent.
A splent is the least soraunce that is, that always contynueth except
lampas. And many men take upon them to mende it, and do pair it.

A ryngbone.
A ryngbone is an ill soraunce, and appears before on the foot, above the
houe, as well before as behind, and will be swollen three inches broad, and a
quarter of an inche or more of heyghte, and the hear will stare and wax thyn,
and will make him to halte, and is ill to cure, if it grow long.

Wyndgalles.
Wyndgalles is a light sorance, and comes of great labor, and appears on
either side of the ioynte above the fetelockes, as well before as behind, and
is a little swollen with wind.

Morfounde.
Morfounde is an ill sorance, and comes of riding fast till he sweet, and
than set up sodeynely in a cold place, without lytte^, and take cold on his
fete, and specially before, and appears under the houe in the heart of the
foot, for it will grow down, and wax white, and cromely like a pomis. And
also will appear by process by the wryncles on the houe, and the houe before
will be thycker, and more bryckle, than and he had not benne morfounde, nor he
shall never trede so boldly upon the hard stones, as he did before, nor will
not be able to bear a man a quarter of a year or more, and with good paryng
and shoynge, as he ought to be, he will do good service.

The coltes evil.
Coltes evil is an ill disease, and comes of ranknes of nature and bloudde,
and appears in his scote, for there will he swel great, and will not be hard,
and soon cured in the beginning.

The bottes.
The bottes is an ill disease, and they lie in a horse mawe, and they be an
inche long white colored, and a reed heed, and as much as a fyngers end, and
they be quycke, and stycke fast in the mawe side, it apperethe by stampynge of
the horse, or tomblynge, and in the beginning there is remedy enough, and if
they be not cured betyme, they will eat through his mawe, and kill him.

The worms.
The worms is a light disease, and they lie in the greatte paunche, in the
belie of the horse, and they are shynynge, of color like a snake, six inches
in length, great in the mids, and sharp at both ends, and as much as a
spyndel, and will sone be kylde.

Affreyd.
Affreyd is an ill disease, and commethe of great labor and riding fast with
a contynuall sweat, and thanne suddenly to take a great cold, his legs will
be styffe, and his skyn will stycke fast to his sides, and may be well cured.

Nanylgall.
Nauylgall is a soraunce, hurt with a saddle, or with a buckle of a croper, or
such other, in the mids of the back, and may be lyghtely cured.

A spauen.
A spauen is an ill sorance, whervppon he will halte, and specially in the
beginning, and appears on the hinder legs within, and against the ioynte,
and it will be a little swolen and hard. And some horses have through
spauen, and appears both within and without, and those be ill to be cured.

A courbe.
A courbe is an ill sorance, and makes a horse to halte sore, and appears
upon the hinder legs straight behind, under the camborell place, and a
little benethe the spauen, and will be swollen, and ill to cure, if it grow
long upon him.

The stringe halte.
The stryng halte is an ill disease, and makes him to twyche up his leg
suddenly, and makes him to halte, and comes often with a cold, and does not
appear outward.

Enterfyre.
Enterfyre. is a sorance, and comes of ill shoynge, and appears often both
behind and before, between the fete against the fetelockes, there is no remedy
but good showynge.

Myllettes.
Myllettes is an ill sorance, and appears in the fetelockes behind, and
causes the hear to sheede three or four inches of length, and a quarter of an
inche in bread, like as it were bare and ill to cure, but it may be perceived,
and specially in winter time.

The peynes.
The peynes is an ill soraunce, and appears in the fetelockes, and will swel in
winter time, and oyse of water, and the hear will stare and be thyn, and ill to
cure, but it will be seen in winter.

Cratches.
Cratches is a soraunce that will cause a horse to halte, and comes of ill
keeping, and appears in the pasturnes, like as the skyn were cut ouerthwarte,
that a man may lay a white straw, and it is sone cured.

Atteynt.
Atteynt is a sorance, that comes of an over rechynge, if it be before, and
if it be behind, it is of the tredynge of an other horse, the which may be
soon cured.

Grauelynge.
Grauelynge is a hurt, that will make a horse to halte, and commethe of
gravel and lyttel stones, that goth in between the shough and the heart of the
foot, and is sone mended.

A cloyed.
A cloyed is an hurt, that comes of ill shoynge, when a smyth dryueth a
nail in to the quycke, the which will make him to halt, and is sone cured.

The scabbe.
There is a disease among horses, that is called the scabbe, and it is a
skorfe in diverse places of his body. And it comes of a poverty and ill
keeping, and is most commonly among old horses, and will dye thereupon, and
may be well cured.

Lowsy.
There be horses that will be lowsy, and it comes of poverty, cold and ill
keeping, and it is most commonly among young horses, and men take little
head unto it, and yet they will dye thervppon, and it may be soon cured.

Wartes.
There is a defaute in a horse, that is neither sorance, hurt, nor disease,
and that is if a horse want wartes behind, benethe the spauen place, for than
he is no chapmannes ware, if he be wild, but if he be tame, and have been
rydden upon, than Caveat emptor, beware the byer, for the byer has both his
eyes to se, and his hands to handell. It is a saying, that such a horse
should dye sodeynely, when he has lived as many years as the moon was days
old, at such time as he was foled.

The saying of the french man.
These be soraunce, hurtes, and dyseases, that be now comme to my mind, and
the french man says, Mort de langue, et de eschine, sount maladyes saunce
medicine. The mourning of the tongue, and of the chyne, are diseases without
remedy or medicyne. And ferther he says, Gardes bien, que il soyt cler de
vieu, Que tout travail ne soit perdue: Be well ware, that he be clear of
syghte, lest all thy travail or iourneye be lost or night. And because I am a
horse master my self, I have showed you the soraunce and dyseases of horses,
to the intent that men should beware, and take good head what horses they bye
of me or of any other. How be it I say to my customers, and those that bye
any horses of me, and ever they will trust any horse master or corser, while they
live, trust me.

The diversity between a horse master, a corser, and a horse leche.
A Horse master is he, that bieth wild horses, or coltes, and bredeth them,
and sells them again wild, or breaks part of them, and makes them
tame, and than sells them. A corser is he, that byeth all rydden horses, and
sells them again. The horse leche is he, that takethe upon him to cure and
mende all manner of diseases and soraunce that horses have. And when these three
be met, if ye had a potycarye to make the fourth, ye might have such
four, that it were hard to trust the best of them. It were also conuenyent
to show medicynes and remedies for all these diseases and sorances, but it would
be to long a process at this time, for it would be as much as half this
book. And I have not the perfyte conning, nor the experyence, to show
medycynes and remedies for them all.

And also the horse leches would not be content therewith for it might fortune
to hurt or hinder their occupation.

Of swyne.
Now thou husband, that haste both horses and mares, beasts, and sheep: It
were necessary also, that thou have both swyne and bees. for it is an old
saying: he that has both sheep, swyne, and bees sleep he, wake he, he may
thryue. And that saying is, because that they be those things, that most
profyt ^iseth of in shortest space, with least cost. Than se how many swyne
thou art able to keep, let them be bores and sowes all, and no hogs. And if
thou be able to rere vi pigges a year, than let two of them be bores, and four
of them sowes, and so to continue after the rate For a bore will have as
little keeping as a hog, and is much better than a hog, and more meat on
him and is ready at all times to eat in the winter season, and to be laid in
souse. And a sow, er she be able to kyl, shall bring forth as many pyggs or
moo, as she is worth, and her body is never the worse, and will be as good
baken as a hog, and as little keeping, but at such time as she has pigs.
And if thy sow have moo pigs than thou will rere, sell them, or eat them,
and rere those pigges, that come about lenten time specially the beginning of
somer, for they can not be rered in winter, for cold, without great cost.

Of bees.
OF bees is little charge, but good attendaunce at the time that they shall
cast the swarm, it is convenient, that the hyue be set in a garden, or an
orchyarde, where as they may be kept from the north wind, and the mouth of
the hyue toward the son And in June and July, they do most commonly cast,
and they would have some low trees nyghe unto them before the hyue that the
swarm may light upon, and when the swarm is knytte, take a hyue, and splente
it within with three or four splentes, that the bees may knytte their como^es
thereto, and annoynte the splentes, and the sides of the hyue, with a little
honye. And if thou have no honye, take sweet cream, and than set a stole or a
form nyghe unto the swarm, and lay a clean washen shete upon the stole, and
thanne hold the small end of the hyue downewarde, and shake the bees in to
the hyue, and shortly set it upon the stole, and turn up the corners of
the shete over the hyue, and to leave one place open, that the bees may come in
and out: but thou may not fight nor strive with them for no cause, and to
lay nettyls upon the bows, where as they were knytte, to drive them from
that place, and so watch them all that day, that they go not away, and at
night, when al be goone up into the hyue, take it away and set it where it
shall stand, and take away thy shete, and have claye tempered to lay about
it upon the board or stone, where it shall stand, that no wind comme in,
but the board is better and warmer. And to leave an hole open on the south
side, of three inches broad, and an inche of heyghte, for the bees to come in
and out. And than to make a covering of wheat straw or rye straw, to cover
and house the hyue about, and set the hyue two foot or more from the earth upon
stakes, so that a mouse can not come to it, and also neither beasts nor
swyne. And if a swarm be cast late in the year, they would be fed with
honnye in winter, and laid upon a thynne narowe board, or a thynne sclatte or
lead, put it into the hyue, and an other thynne board would be set before
every hyues mouth, that no wind come in, and to have four or five little
nyckes made on the nether side, that a be may comme out, or go in, and so
fastened, that the wind blow it not down, and to take it up when he will.
And that hyue, that is fed, to stop the mouth clean, that other bees come
not in, for if they do, they will fight, and kill each other. And beware,
that no waspes come in to the hyue, for they wyllkyl the bees, and eat the
honny. And also there is a be called a drone, and she is greatter than an
other be, and they will eat the honny, and gather nothing: and therefore they
would be kylde, and it is a saying, that she has lost her stynge, and than
she will not labor as the other do.

How to keep beasts and other cattle.
IF a housbande shall keep cattle well to his profytte, he must have several
closes and pastures to put his cattle in. the which would be well quickesetted,
diched, and hedged, that he may sever the byggeste cattle from the weykeste
at his pleasure, and specyallye in winter time, when they shall be fodered. And
though a man be but a farmer, and shall have his farm xx years, it is less
cost for him, and more profit to quyckeset, dyche, and hedge, than to have
his cattle goo before the herdeman For let the housbande spend in three yeees
as much money as the keeping of his beasts, swyne, and sheep, does cost him
in iii years, than always after, he shall have all manner of cattle with the
tenthe part of the cost, and the beasts shall like much better. And by this
reason. The herdeman will have for every beast. ii. d. a quarter, or there
about: And the swyneherde will have for every swyne. i. d. at the least. Than
he must have a shepeherde of his own, or else he shall never thryue. Than
reken meat, drink, and wages for his shepeherde, the herdmans hyre, and the
swyneherdes hyre, these charges will double his rent or nyghe it, except his
farm be above. xl. s. by year. Now see what his charges be, in. iii. years,
let him ware as much money in quickesettynge, dythynge, and hedgynge, and in
three years he shall be discharged for evermore, and much of this labor he and
his servants may do with their own hands, and save much money. And than
has he every fyelde in seueraltye. And by the assente of the lords and the
tenauntes, every neighbor may exchange lands with other. And than shall his
farm be twyse so good in profytte to the tenaunte as it was before, and as
much land kept in tyllage, and than shall not the rich man over eat the
poor man with his cattle, and the fourth part of heye and straw shall serve
his cattle better in a pasture, than. iiii. times so much will do in a house,
and less attendaunce, and better the cattle shall like, and the chief
sauegarde for corn both day and night that can be.

To get settes and set them.
ANd if thou have pastures, thou must needs have quyckesettynge, dychynge and
plasshynge. When it is grene, and comes to age, than get thy quyckesettes
in the wood countreye, and let them be of white thorn and crabtree, for they
be best, holy and hasell be good. And if thou dwell in the plain country,
than may thou get both asshe, oak, and elm, for those will increase much
wood in short space. And set thy oak settes and the asshe. x. or. xii. foot a
sonder, and cut them as thou do thy other settes, and cover them over with
thorns a little, that sheep and cattle eat them not. And also wede them
clean in mydsomer moan or soon after: for the wedes, if they over grow, will
kyl the settes. But get no black thorn for nothing, for that will grow
outward into the pasture, and does much hurt in the grass, and tearyng the
woll of the sheep. It is good time to se quickesettes, fro that time the leaves
be fallen, unto our lady day in lent, and thy sandye ground or gravel set
first, than clay ground, and than mean ground, and the medowe or marreys
ground last, for the sand, and gravel will dry anon, and than the
quyckeset will take no rote, except it have great weate, for the muldes will
lie lose, if it be dyched in February or march, and like wise clay ground And
make thy settes long enough, that they may be set deep enough in the earth,
for than they will grow the better. And to stand half a foot and more above
the earth, that they may spring out in many branches. And than to take a
line, and set it there as thou will have thy hedge, and to make a trenche
after thy line, and to pare away the grass there the quyckesettes shall be
set, and cast it by, where the earth of the dyche shall lie, and dygge up the
muldes a spade graffe deep, and to put in thy settes, and dygge up more molde,
and lay upon that set, and so peruse, till thou have set all thy settes, and
let them lene toward the dyche. And a soote from that make thy dyche. for if
thou make it to nyghe thy settes the water may fortune to wear the ground on
that side, and cause thy settes to fall down

To make a dyche.
If thou make thy dyche four foot broad, than would it be two foot and a
half deep. And if it be. v. foot broad, than. iii. foot deep, and so
according, and if it be five foot brod, than it would be double set, and the
rather it would fence it self, and the lower hedge will serve.

To make a hedge.
THou must get the stakes of the heart of oak, for those be best, crabtre,
black thorn, and ellore be good. Reed wethy is best in marsshe ground,
asshe, maple, hasel, and white thorn will serve for a time. And set thy stakes
within. ii. foot and a half together, except thou have very good edderynge,
and long, to bind with. And if it be double eddered, it is much the better,
and great strength to the hedge, and much longer it will last. And lay thy small
trouse or thorns, that thou hedgeste withal, over thy quickesettes, that
sheep do not eat the spring nor buddes of thy settes. Let thy stakes be well
driven, that the point take the hard earth. And when thou haste made thy hedge,
and eddered it well, than take thy mall again, and drive down thy edderinges,
and also thy stakes by and by. For with the wyndynge of the edderynges thou
do leuse thy stakes, and therefore they must needs be driven new, and
hardened again, and the better the stake will be driven, when he is well bounden.

To plasshe or pleche a hedge.
IF the hedge be of. x. or. xii years growing sithe it was first set, thanne
take a sharp hachet, or a handbyll, and cut the settes in a plain place,
nyghe unto the earth, the more halue a sonder, and bend it down toward the
earth, and wrappe and wind them together, but always se that the top lie
hyer than the rote a good quantytie, for else the sap will not run in to
the top kyndely, but in process, the top will dye, and than set a lyttel
hedge on the back side, and it shall need no more mendynge many years after.
And if the hedge be of. xx. xxiiii. or. xxx. year of age, sithe it was first
set, than wind in first all the nethermoste bows, and wind them together,
and than cut the settes in a plain place, a lyttel from the earth, the more
half a sonder, and to let it slave downewarde, and not upward, for diverse
causes: than wind the bows and branches thereof in to the hedge, and at every
two foot. or. iii. foot to leave one set growyng not plasshed, and the top to
be cut of four foot high. or there about, to stand as a stake, if there be
any such, or else to set an other, and to wynd the other that be pl^ched about
them. And if the bows, will not lie plain in the hedge, than cut it the more
half a sonder, and bynd it to the hedge, and than shall he not need for to
mende the hedge, but in few places, xx. years after or more. And if the hedge
be old, and be great stubbes or trees, and thyn in the bottom, that beasts
may go under, or between the trees: thanne take a sharp axe, and cut the
trees or stubbes, that grow a foot from the earth, or there about, in a plain
place, within an inche or two inches of the side and let them slave downward,
as I said before, and let the top of the tree lie over the rote of an other
tree, and to pleche down the bows of the same tree, to stop the holowe
places. And if all the holowe and void places will not be filled and stopped,
than scour the old dyche, and cast it up new, and to fill with earth all the
void places. And if so be these trees will not reche in every place, to make
a sufficyent defense, than double quick set it, and diche it new in every
place, that is need full, and set a hedge thereupon, and to ouerlay the settes,
for eating of sheep or other cattle.

To mende a hye way.
ME seems, it is necessary to show mine opinion, how an hye way should be
amended. And first and pryncypally, see that there be no water standing in
the hye way, but that it be always currante and rennynge, nor have none
abiding more in one place thanne in an other. And in somer, when the water is
dried up, than to get gravel, and to fill up every low place, and to make
them even, somewhat dyscendynge or currante, one way or other, and if there
be no gravel, nor stones to get, yet fill it up with earth in the
beginning of somer, that it may be well hardened with caryage and treading
upon, and it shall be well amended, if the water may pass away from it, the
which would be well considered, and specially about London, where as they
make much more cost than needs, for there they dyche their hye ways on
both sides, and fill up the holowe and low places with earth, and than they
cast and lay gravel a lofte. And when a greatte rain or water comes, and
synketh through the gravel, and comes to the earth, than the earth swells
and bolneth, and waxes soft, and with treading, and specially with caryage,
the gravel synketh, and gothe downewarde as his nature and kind requires,
and than it is in manner of a quycke sand, that hard it is for any thing to
goo over. But if they would make no dyche in sommertyme, when the warer is
dried up, that a man may se all the holowe and low places, than to carry
grauel, and fyl it up as high as the other knolles be, than would it not bolne
ne swell, nor be no quycke sand, and every man may go beside the hie way with
their carriage at their pleasure. And this me seems is less cost, and longer
will last with a little mendynge when need requires. Therefore me thinks, if
this were well looked upon, it should be both good and necessary for that
purpose: for so have I seen done in other places, where as I have been. etc.

To remove and set trees.
IF thou will remove and set trees, get as many rotes with them as thou
canste, and break them not, nor bryse them, by thy will. And if there be any
rote broken and sore bruised, cut it of hard by, there as it is bruised, with a
sharp hatchet, else that root will dye. And if it be asshe, elm, or oak,
cut of all the bows clean, and save the top hole. For if thou make him
rich of bows, thou makeste him poor of thryfte, for two causes. The bows
causes them to shake with wind, and to leuse the rotes. Also he can not be
so clean get, but some of the rotes must needs be cut, and than there will
not come so much sap and moystenes to the bows, as there did before. And
if the tree be very long, cut of the top, two or three yardes. And if it be an
apple tree, or pear tree, or such other as bears fruit, than cut away all
the water bows, and the small bows, that the pryncipall bows, may have the
more sap. And if ye make a mark, which side of the tree stands toward the
son, that he may be set so again, it is so much the better.

Trees to be set without rotes and grow.
THere be trees will be set without rotes, and grow well, and spring rotes of
them self. And those be diverse apple trees, that have knottes in the bows,
as casses, or wydes, and such other, that will grow on slauynges, and
likewise popeler and wethy: and they must be cut clean beside the tree, that
they grow on, and the top cut. clean of. viii. or. x. foot of length, and
all the bows between, and to be set a foot deep or more in the earth, in good
ground. And ye shall understand, that there be four manner of wethyes, that
is to say, white wethye, black wethy, reed wethy, and osyerde wethy. White
wethye will grow upon dry ground, if it be set in the beginning of
winter, and will not grow in marsshe ground. black wethy will grow better
on marshe ground, and read wethy in like manner: and osyerde wethy will grow
best in water and moist ground. And they be trees that will soon be
nourysshed, and they will bear much woodde, and they would be cropped every
vii or. viii year, orels they will dye, but they may not be cropped in sap
time, nor no tree else. And in many places, both the lords, freeholders, and
tenauntes at will, set such wethyes, and popelers, in marsshe ground, to
nourysshe wodde. etc.

To fell wodde for household, or to sell.
IF thou have any woddes to fell, for thy householde to brenne or to sell,
than fell the under wodde first in winter, that thy cattle or beasts may
eat and brouse the tops, and to fell no more on a day but as much as the
beasts will eat the same day, or on the morrow after. And as soon as it is
well eaten or broused, thanne kydde it, and set them on the ends, and that
will save the bands from rottynge, and they shall be the lyghter to carye, and
the better will they brenne, and lie in l^sse rowme. And when thou shall bring
them home to make a stacke of them, set the nethermoste course upon the ends,
and the second course flat upon the side, and the ends upward, and the
third couse flat on the side overthwart the other. And so to peruse them,
till thou have laid all up. And when thou shalt brenne them, take the
ouermoste first.

To shrede, lop or croppe trees.
IF thou have any trees to shrede, loppe, or croppe for the fire wodde, croppe
them in winter, that thy beasts may eat the brouse, and the moss of the
bows, and also the yues, And when they be broused and eaten, dress the
wodde, and bow it clean, and cut it at every byghte, and rere the greatte
wodde to the tree, and kydde the small bows, and set them on end. And if thou
shalt not have sufficyent wodde, except thou heed thy trees, and cut of the
tops, than heed them three or four foot above any timber: and if it be no
tymbre tree, but a shaken tree, or a hedge rote full of knottes, thanne heed
him thyrty foot high, or twenty at the least, for so far he will bear
plentye of wood and bows, and much more, thanne if he were not heeded. For a
tree has a propertye, to grow to a certain heyght, and when he comes to
that heyghte, he stands still, and grows no hyer, but in bread: and in
conclusion, the top will dye and decrease, and the body thryue. And if a tree
be heeded, and used to be lopped and cropped at every xii or. xvi. years end,
or there about, it will bear much more wood, by process of time, than if it
were not cropped, and much more profit to the owner.

How a man should shrede, loppe, or croppe trees.
IT is the common gyse, to begin at the top of the tree, when he shall be
shred or cropped, because each bough should lie upon other, when they shall
fall so that the weight of the bows shall cause them to be the rather cut
down. But that is not best, for that causes the bows to slave down the
nether part, and pulls away the bark from the body of the tree, the
which will cause the tree to be holowe in that place in time coming, and
many times it shall hinder him. And therefore let him begin at the
nethermoste boughe first, and with a light axe for an hand, to cut the
boughe on both sides, a foot or two foot from the body of the tree. And
specially cut it more on the nether side, than on the over side, so that the
boughe fall not straight down, but turn on the side, and than shall it not
slave nor break no bark. And every boughe will have a new heed, and bear
much more wood. and by thy will, without thou must needs do it, crop not thy
tree, nor specyallye heed him, when the wind stands in the north, or in the
eest. And beware, that thou croppe him not, nor heed him (specially) in sap
time, for than will he dye within few years after, if it be an oak.

To sell wood or timber.
IF thou have any wood to selle, I advise the, retayle it thy self, if thou
may attend upon it: and if not, thanne to cause thy baylye, or sum other
wise or dyscrete man, to do it for the. And if it be small wode, to kydde it,
and sell it by the hundredes, or by the thousands. And if there be ashes in
it, to sell the small ashes to cowpers for garhes, and the great ashes to
whele wryghtes, and the mean ashes to plowe wrightes, and the crabbe trees to
myllers, to make cogges, and ronges. And if there be any oaks, both great and
small, fell them, and pyl them, and sell the bark by it self, and than sort the
trees, the polles by them self, the myddel short by them self, and the
greattest by them self, and than sell them by scores, or half scores, or. C.
as thou may, and to fell it hard by the earth, for i foot next unto the earth,
is worth. ii. foot in the top, and to cut thy timber long enough, that thou
leave no timber in the top. And to sell the tops as they lie a greatte, or
else dress them and sell the great wodde by it self, and the kyd wodde by it
self, and to fall the under wode first at any time between Martilmas and
holyrode day And all the ashes, between Martylmasse and Candelmas, and all
oaks, as soon as they will pyl, until May be done, and not after. Perauenture
the greattest man has not the best prouisyon. And that is because the
servants will not enfourme him these ways, and also may fortune they would
bye such woods them self, or be partener of the same, and to auyse his
lord to sell them. It is not convenient, that the salesman, that sells the
wod, should be partener with the bier.

To keep spring wodde.
IN the winter before that thou will fell thy wodde, make a good and a sure
hedge* that no manner of cattle can get in. And as shortly as it is fallen, let
it be carried away, or the spring come up, for else the cattle, that does carry
the wodde, will eat the spring: and when the top is eaten, or broken, it is a
great let, hurt, and hynderaunce of the goodness of the spring, for than
where it is eaten, it burges out of many branches, and not so fair as the
first would have been. A park is best kept, when there is neither man, dog,
nor four foted beast therein, except dear. And so is a spryng best kept,
where there is neither manne nor four foted beasts within the hedge. But if
there be much grass, and thou were loathe to lose it, than put in calves,
newly wained and taken from their dammes, and also waynynge coltes, or horses
not paste a year of age: and let thy calves be taken away at May, the coltes
may go longer, for eating of any wodde, but there is ieoperdy both for calves,
foles, and coltes, for tyckes, or for being lowsy, the which will kyl them, if
they be not taken head unto. And vii years is the lest, that it will save it
self, but. x years is best. And than the under bows would be cut away, and
made kyddes thereof, and the other will grow much the better and faster. And
if the under bows be not cut away, they will dye, and than they be lost,
and greatte hurt to the spring, for they take away the sap, that should
cause the spring to grow better.

Necessary things belonging to graffynge.
IT is necessary, profitable, and also a pleasure, to a housbande, to have
pears, wardens, and apples of diverse sorts. And also cheryes, filberdes,
bulleys, dampsons, plummes, walnuttes, and such other. And therefore it is
conuenyent, to learn how than shalt graffe. Than it is to be known, what
things thou must have to graffe withal. Thou must have a graffynge saw, the
which would be very thynne, and thycke tothed, and because it is thynne, it
will cut the narower kyrfe, and the cleaner for brusynge of the bark. And
therefore it is set in a compass piece of yren, six inches of, to make it
styffe and bygge. thou must have also a graffynge knyfe, an inche broad, with
a thycke back, to cleue the stock with all. And also a mallet, to drive the
knyfe and thy wedge in to the tree: and a sharp knife, to pare the stocks
heed, and an other sharp knyfe, to cut the graffe clean. And also thou
must have two wedges of hard wood, or else of yren, a long small one, for a
small stock, and a brother, for a bygger stock, to open the stock, when it is
cloven and pared: and also good tough claye and moss, and also bastes or
pyllynge of wethy or elm, to bind them with. etc.

What fruit should be first graffed.
Pears and wardens would be graffed before any manner of apples, because the
sap comes sooner and rather in to the pear tree and warden tree, thanne in
to the apple treee. And after saint Valentynes day, it is time to graffe both
pears and wardens, till March be comen, and thanne to graffe appels to our
lady day. And than graffe that that is get of an old apple tree first, for
that will budde before the graffe get of a young apple tree late graffed. And a
pear or a warden would be graffed in a ^yrre stock, and if thou can get
none, than graffe it in a crabbe tree stock, and it will do well. and some men
graffe them in a white thorn, and than it will be the more harder and stonye.
And for all manner of appels, the crabtree stock is best.

How to graffe.
THou must get thy graffes of the fairest lanses, that thou canste find on
the tree, and see that it have a good knotte or ioynte, and an even. Than take
thy saw, and saw in to thy cabbetree, in a fair plain place, pare it even
with thy knyfe, and thanne cleave the stock with thy greatte knyfe and thy
mallet, and set in a wedge, and open the stock, according to the thyckenesse
of thy graffe, thanne take thy small sharp knyfe, and cut the graffe on
both sides in the ioynte, but pass not the mids thereof for nothing, and
let the inner side, that shall be set in to the stock, be a lyttel thynner
than the utter side, and the nether point of the graffe the thynner: than
prefer thy graffe in to the stock, and if it go not close, than cut the
graffe or the stock, till they close clean, that thou canste not put the edge
of thy knyfe on neither side between the stock and the graffe, and set them
so, that the tops of the graffe bend a little outewarde, and see that the
wodde of the graffe be set mete with the wodde of the stock, and the sap of
the stock may run straight and even with the sap of the graffe. for the
bark of the graffe is never so thick as the bark of the stock. And
therefore thou may not set the barks mete on the utter side, but on the
inner side: than pull away thy wedge: and it will stand much faster. Than take
toughe cleye, like marley, and ley it upon the stock heed, and with thy
finger lay it close unto the graffe, and a little under the heed, to keep it
moist, and that no wind come into the stock at the cleauynge. Than take
moss, and lay thereupon, for chynynge of the claye: than take a baste of white
wethy or elm, or half a bryer, and bynd the moss, the clay, and the graffe
together, but be well ware, that thou, break not thy graffe, neither in the
clayenge, nor in the byndynge, and thou must set some thing by the graffe,
that crows, nor birds do not light upon thy graffe. for if they do, they will
break him. etc.

To graffe between the bark and the tree.
THere is an other manner of graffinge than this and sooner done, and sooner to
grow: but it is more ieoperdy for wind when it begins to grow. Thou must
saw thy stock, and pare the heed thereof, as thou did before, but cleue it
not: than take thy graffe, and cut it in the joint to the mids, and make the
tenaunte thereof half an inche long, or a little more, all on the one side,
and pare the bark away a lyttel at the point on the other side. than thou
must have made ready a ponch of hard wood, with a stop and a tenaunte on the
one side, like to the tenaunte of the graffe. Than put the tenant of the
ponche between the bark and the wood of the stock, and pull it out again,
and put in the graffe, and se that it join close, or else mende it. And this
can not fail, for now the sap comes on every side, but it will spring so
fast, that if it stand on plain ground, the wind is lykelye to blow it
beside the heed, for it has no fastnes in the wodde. And this is best remedy
for blowynge of, to cut or clyppe away sum of the nethermooste leaves as
they grow. And this is the best way to graffe, and specially a great tree:
than claye it, and bind it as thou dyddest the other. etc.

To nourishe all manner of stone fruit, and nuttes.
AS for cheryes, dampsons, bulleys, plummes, and such other, may be set of
stones, and also of the scyences, growing about the tree of the same, for
they will sooneste bear. Fylberdes and walnuttes may be set of the nuttes in
a gardeyne, and after removed and set where he will But when they be removed,
they would be set upon as good a ground, or a better, or else they will not
like.

A short information for a young gentylman, that entendeth to thryue.
I Auyse him to get a copy of this present book, and to read it from the
beginning to the ending, whereby he may perceive the chapyters and contents
of the same, and by reason of often redyng, he may wax perfyte, what should be
done at all seasons. For I learned two verses at grammar scole, and they be
these: Gutta cauat lapidem non vi, sed saepe cadendo: Sic homo fit sapiens non
vi, sed saepe legendo: A drop of water perseth a stoone, not al only by his
own strength, but by his often falling. Right so a man shall be made wise,
not all only by him self, but by his often redynge. And so may this young
gentyllman, according to the season of the year, read to his servants what
chapyter he will. And also for any other manner of profit contained in the
same, the which is necessary for a young husband, that has not the
experyence of housbandrye, nor other things contained in this present book,
to take a good remembrance and credence thereunto, for there is an old
saying, but of what auctorytie I can not tell: Quod melior est practica
rusticoru^, q scie^tia philo sophorum, It is better the practiue or know lege
of an husband man well proved, than the science or conning of a philosopher
not proved, for there is nothing touching husbandry, and other profytes
contained in this present book, but I have had the experyence thereof, and
proved the same. And over and beside all this book, I will advise him to rise
betime in the morning, according to the verse before spoke of Sanat,
sanctificat, et ditat surgere mane: And to go about his closes, pastures,
fields, and specially by the hedges, and to have in his purse a pair of
tables, and when he sees any thing, that would be amended, to write it in his
tables: as if he find any horses, mares, beasts, sheep, swyne, or geese in
his pastures, that be not his own: And perauenture though they be his own,
he would not have them to goo there, or to find a gap, or a sherde in his
hedge, or any water standing in his pastures upon his grass, whereby he may
take double hurt, both loss of his grass, and rotting of his sheep and
calves. And also of standing water in his corn fields at the lands ends,
or sides, and how he would have his lands plowed, donged, sturred, or sown
And his corn weded or shorn or his cattle shifted out of one pasture into an
other, and to look what dychyng, quicsettyng, or plashing is necessary to be
had, and to over se his shepeherd, how he handles and ordreth his sheep, and
his servants how they plowe and do their warkes, or if any gate he broken
down, or want any staves, and go not lightly to open and tyne, and that it do
not traile, and that the winds blow it not open, with many mo necessary
things that are to be looked upon. For a man always wandering or goinge about
somewhat, fyndeth or sees that is amysse, and would be amended. And as soon
as he sees any such defautes, than let him take out his tables, and write
the defautes. And when he comes home to diner, supper, or at night, than let
him call his bailey, or his heed servant, and so show him the defautes, that
they may be shortly amended. And when it is amended, than let him put it out of
his tables. For this used I to do. x. or. xii. years and more. and thus let
him use daily, and in short space, he shall set much things in good
order, but daily it will have mendynge. And if he can not write, let him
nycke the defautes upon a stycke, and to show his bayely, as I said before.
Also take heed both erly and late, at all times, what manner of people resort
and comme to thy house, and the cause of their coming, and specially if they
bring with them pytchers, cannes, tancardes, bottelles, bags, wallettes, or
busshell pokes. For if thy servants be not true, they may do the great
hurt, and them self lyttel advantage. Wherefore they would be well looked
vopon. And he that has. ii. true servants, a man servant, and an other a
woman servant, he has a great treasure, for a true servant will do justly
him self, and if he se his fellows do amysse, he will bid them do no more so,
for if they do, he will show his master thereof: and if he do not this, he is
not a true servant.

A lesson made in English verses to teach a gentylmans servant, to say at
every time, when he takes his horse for his remembrance, that he shall not
forget his gere in his inn behind him.
PVrse, dagger, cloak, night cap, kerchef, shoyng horn, boget, and shoes.
Spear, male, hode, halter, sadelclothe, spores, hatte, with thy horse comb.
Bow, arrows, sword, bukler, horn, leisshe, gloves, stringe, and thy bracer.
Pen, paper, ink, parchemente, reedwaxe, pommes, books, thou remember.
Penknyfe, comb, thymble, nedle, threde, point, lest that thy gurthe break.
Bodkyn, knyfe, lyngel, give thy horse meat, se he be showed well. Make merry,
sing and thou can, take heed to thy gere, that thou lose none.

A prologue for the wives occupation.
Now thou husband, that haste done thy dylygence and labor, that longs to
an husband, to get thy living, thy wives, thy chyldrens, and thy servants:
yet are there other things, that must needs be done, or else thou shalt not
thryue. For there is an old common saying, that seldom does the housbande
thryue, without the leave of his wife. By this saying it should seem, that
there be other occupations and labors, that be most convenient for the wives
to do. And how be it that I have not the experyence of al their occupations
and warkes, as I have of husbandry, Yet a little will I speak, what they ought
to do, though I tell them not how they should do, and exercise their labors
and occupations.

A lesson for the wife.
But yet er I begin to show the wife, what warkes she shall do, I will
first teache her a lesson of Solomon, as I did to her husband a lesson of the
philosopher, and that is, that she should not be idle at no time: for Solomon
says, Ociosus non gaudebit cum electis in caelo: sed lugebit in aeternum cum
reprobis in inferno: That is to say, The idle folk shall not joy with the
chosen folks in heaven, but they shall sorrow with the reproved and forsaken
folks in hell. And saint Iherom says: Semper boni operis aliquid facito, vt
te diabolus inueniar occupatum: Quia sicut in aqua stante generantur vermes:
sic in homine ocioso generantur malae cogitationes: That is to say Always be
doing of some good works, that the dyuell may find the ever occupied: for as
in standing water are engendered worms, right so in an idle body are
engendered idle thoughts. Here may thou se, that of ydelnes comes
damnation, and of good warkes and labor comes salvation. Now art thou at
thy lyberty, to chose whether way thou wylt, wherein is a great diversity. And
he is an unhappy man or woman, that god has given both wit and reason, and
puts him in chose, and woll chose the worst part. Now thou wife, I trust
to show to the diverse occupations, warkes, and labors, that thou shall not
need to be idle no time of the year.

What things the wife is bounden of right to do.
FIrst and pryncypally the wife is bound of right to love her housbande,
above father and mother, and above all other men. For our lord says in his
gospel: Relinquet patrem et matrem, et abhaerebit vxori suae: A man should
leave father and mother, and draw to his wife: and the same wise a wife, should
do to her husband. And are made by the virtue of the sacrament of holy
scripture, one flesh, one blood, one body, and two souls. wherefore their
hearts, their minds, their warkes, and occupations, should be all one, never
to sever nor change, during their natural lives, by any man's act or deed,
as it is said in the same gospel. Quod deus coniunxit, homo non separet: That
thing, that god has joined to gether, no man may sever nor depart.
Wherefore it is conuenyente, that they love each other, as effectually as they
would do their own self. etc.

What warkes a wife should do in general.
FIrst in a morning when thou art waked, and purposeste to rise, lift up thy
hand, and bless the, and make a sign of the holy cross, In nomine patris,
et filii, et spiritus sancti. Amen. In the name of the father, the son, and
the holy gooste. And if thou say a Pater noster, an Aue, and a Creed, and
remember thy maker, thou shalt speed much the better. And when thou art up
and ready, than first swepe thy house, dress up thy dyssheborde, and set all
things in good order within thy house: milk thy kye, secle thy calves, sye up
thy milk, take up thy children, and array them, and provide for thy
husbands brekefaste, dynner, souper, and for thy children, and servants, and
take thy part with them. And to ordeyne corn and malte to the myll, to bake
and brue withal when need is. And meet it to the myll, and fro the myll,
and se that thou have thy measure again beside the toll, or else the myller
deals not truly with the, or else thy corn is not dry as it should be.
Thou must make butter, and chese when thou may, serve thy swyne both
morning and evening, and give thy poleyn meat in the morning, and when time
of the year comes, thou must take heed, how thy hens, duckes, and geese do
ley, and to gather up their eggs, and when they wax brodye, to set them
there as no beasts, swyne, nor other vermyn hurt them. And thou must know,
that all hole footed fowls will sytte a month, and all cloven footed fowls
will sytte but three wekes, except a peyhenne, and greatte fowls, as cranes,
bustard^s, and such other. And when they have brought forth their birds, to
see, that they be well kept from the gleyd, crows, fullymartes, and other
vermynne. And in the beginning of March, or a little before, is time for a
wife to make her garden, and to get as many good seeds and herbs, as she
can, and specially such as be good for the pot, and to eat: and as often
as need shall require, it must be weded, for else the wedes will ouergrowe the
herbs. And also in March is time to sow flax and hemp, for I have hard
old houswyues say, that better is March hurdes, than Apryll flax, the
reason appears: but how it should be sown, weded, pulled, repeyled, watered,
wasshen, dried, beaten, braked, tawed, hecheled, spon, wounden, wrapped, and
wouen, it needs not for me to show, for they be wise enough, and thereof may
they make shetes, bordclothes towels, shertes, smockes, and such other
necessaryes, and therefore let thy dystaffe be always redye for a pastyme, that
thou be not idle. And undoubted a woman can not get her living honestely with
spynnynge on the distaffe, but it stops a gap, and must needs be had. The
bolles of flax, when they be ripeled of, must be rideled from the wedes, and
made dry with the son, to get out the seeds. How be it, one manner of linsede,
called loken sede, will not open by the son: and therefore, when they be dry,
they must be sore bruised and broken, the wives know how, and than winowed
and kept dry, till year time come again. Thy female he^pe must be pulled from
the churl hemp, for that bears no sede, and thou must do by it, as thou
dydest by the flax. The churl hemp bears sede, and beware that birds eat
it not, as it grows: the he^p thereof is not so good, as the female hemp,
but yet it will do good service. May fortune sometime, that thou shall have so
many things to do, that thou shall not well know, where is best to begin.
Than take heed, which thing should be the greattest loss, if it were not done
and in what space it would be done: than think what is the greatest loss, and
there begin. But in case that thing, that is of greateste loss, will be long
in doing, and thou myghteste do three or four other things in the mean
while, thanne look well, if all these things were set together, which of
them were the greattest loss, and if all these things be of greater loss,
and may be all done in as short space, as the other, than do thy many things
first.

It is conuenyente for a housbande, to have sheep of his own for many causes,
and than may his wife have part of the woll, to make her husband and her
self some clothes. And at the least way, she may have the locks of the
sheep, either to make clothes or blankettes, and couerlettes, or both. and if
she have no woll of her own, she may take wol to spynne of clothe makers, and
by that means she may have a conuenyent living, and many times to do other
warkes. It is a wives occupation, to wynowe all manner of corns, to make malte,
to wasshe and wrynge, to make heye, shere corn, and in time of need to help
her husband to fill the mucke wayue or dounge carte, drive the ploughe, to
loode hey, corn, and such other. And to go or ride to the market, to sell
butter, chese, milk, eggs, chekyns, capons, hens, pigs, gese and all
manner of corns. And also to bye all manner of necessary things belonging to
houssholde, and to make a true reckoning and a compte to her housbande, what
she has received, and what what she has paid. And if the housbande go to the
market, to bye or sell, as they often do, he than to show his wife in like
manner. For if one of them should use to deceive the other, he deceyueth him
self, and he is not like to thryue. and therefore they must be true either to
other. I could peradventure show the housbandes diverse points, that the
wives deceive them in: and in like manner, how husbands deceive their wives:
but if I should do so, I should show mo subtle points of deceypt, than
either of them knew of before. and therefore me seems best, to hold my
peace, least I should do as the knight of the toure did, the which had many
fair daughters, and of fatherly love that he ought to them, he made a book,
to a good entente, that they might eschew and flee from vices, and follow
virtues. In the which book he showed, that if they were wowed, moved, or
styred by any man, after such a manner as he there showed, that they should
withstand it. In the which book he showed so many ways, how a man should
atteyne to his purpose, to bring a woman to vice, the which ways were so
natural, and the ways to come to their purpose, were so subtylly contryued,
and craftily showed, that hard it would be for any woman to resyste or deny
their desire. And by the said book has made both the men and the women to
know more vices, subtyltye, and craft, than ever they should have known, if
the book had not ben made: in the which book he named him self the knight of
the tower. And thus I leave the wives, to use their occupations at their own
discreation.

To keep measure in spending.
Now thou husband and huswyfe, that have done your diligence, and cure,
according to the first article of the philosopher, that is to say. Adhibe
curam. And also have well remembered the saying of wise Solomon, Quod ociosus
non gaudebit cum electis in caelo: sed lugebit in aeternum cum reprobis in
inferno: Thanne ye must remember, observe, and keep in mind, the second
article of the saying of the philosopher, that is to say. Tene mensuram, That
is to say in english, hold and keep measure. And according to that
fayenge, I learned two verses at grammar schole, and they be these, Qui plus
expendit, quam rerum copia tendit: Non admiretur, fi pauper tate grauetur: He
that does more expende, thanne his goods will extend, marvel it shall not
be, though he be grieved with pouertee, And also according to that saying
speaks sayncte Paul and says, Iuxta facultates faciendi sunt sumptus, ne
longi temporis victum, breuis hora consumat: That is to say, Ater thy faculty
or thy hauoure, make thine expenses, lest thou spend in short space, that
thing, that thou should live by long. This text touches every manne,
from the highest degree to the loweste. wherefore it is necessary to every manne
and womanne to remember and take good head there unto, for to observe keep and
follow the same, but because this text of sayncte Paul is in latin, and
husbands commonely can but little laten. I fere, least they can not
understand it. And though it were declared ones or twyse to them, that they
would forgette it: Wherefore I shall show to them a text in english, and
that they may well understand, and that is this, Eat within thy tedure

To eat within the tedure.
THou husband and huswife, that intend to follow the saying of the
philosopher, that is to say, keep measure, you must spare at the brynke, and
not at the bottom, that is to understand, in the beginning of the year,
selling of thy corns, or spending in thy house, unto the time that thou have
sown again thy winter corn, and thy lent corn, and than se what remains,
to serve thy house, and of the overplus thou may sell and bye such other
necessaryes, as thou must needs occupy. And if thou spend it in the
beginning of the year, and shall want in the hinder end, than thou doste not
eat within thy tedure, and at the last thou shalt be punyshed, as I shall
prove the by ensample. Take thy horse, and go tedure him upon thine own lees,
flytte him, as often as thou will, no man will say wrong thou doste, but
make thy horse to long a tedure, that when thou haste tied him upon thine
own lees, his tedure is so long, that it recheth to the mids of an other
man's lees or corn: Now haste thou given him to much lybertye, and that man,
whose corn or grass thy horse has eaten, will be grieved at the, and will
cause the to be amerced in the court, or else to make him amends, or both.
And if thy horse break his tedure, and go at large in every man's corn and
grass, than comes the pynder, and takes him, and puts him in the
pynfolde, and there shall he stand in prison, without any meat, unto the time
thou have paid his ransom to the pynder, and also make amends to thy
neighbors, for distroyenge of their corn. Right so, as long as thou eatest
within thy tedure, that thou nedest not to beg nor borowe of no man, so
long shalt thou increase and grow in richesse, and every man will be content
with the. And if thou make thy tedure to long, that thine own porcyon will
not serve the, but that thou shalt beg, borowe, or bye of other: that will
not long endure, but thou shalt fall in to pouertye. And if thou break thy
tedure, and ren riot at large, and know not other men's goods from thine
own, than shall the pynder, that is to say, the sheryffe and the bailey areste
the, and put the in the pynfolde, that is to say, in prison, there to abide
till the truth be known: and it is mer^ayle, if thou escape with thy life, and
therefore eat within thy tedure.

A short lesson for the husband.
ONe thing I will advise the to remember, and specially in winter time, wh^
thou sytteste by the fire, and have supped, to consider in thy mind, whether
the warkes, that thou, thy wife, and thy servants shall do, be more advantage
to the, than the fire, and candell light, meat and drink that they shall
spend, and if it be more auantage, than sit still: and if it be not, than go
to thy bed and sleep, and be up betyme, and break thy fast before day,
that thou may be all the short wynters day about thy busynes. At grammar
scole I learned a verse, that is this, Sanat, sanctificat, et ditat surgere
mane. That is to say, Erly rysyng makes a man hole in body, holer in soul,
and rycher in goods. And this me seems should be sufficient instruction for
the husband to keep measure.

How men of hye degree do keep measure.
TO me it is doubtefull, but yet me seems, they be rather to lyberall in
expenses, than to scarce, and specially in three things. The first is
prodigalytie in outrageous and costely array, fer above measure: the second
thing is costely charge of delycyous meats and drynkes: the third is
outrageous play and game, far above measure. And now to the first point.

Prodigalite in outrageous and costely array.
I Have seen books of account of the yomen of the wardropes of noble men, and
also inue^torys made after their decease of their apparel, and I doubt not,
but at this day, it is. xx. times more in value, than it was to such a man of
degree as he was an. C. year a go: and many times it is given away, er it be
half worn, to a simple man, the which causes him to wear the same: and an
other simple man, or a little better, seeing him to wear such raiment,
thinks in his mind, that he may were as good raiment as he, and so causes
him to bye such other, to his great cost and charge, above measure, and an
ill ensample to all other. and also to see men's servants so abused in their
array, their cotes be so side, that they be feign to tucke them up when they
ride, as women do their kyrtels when they go to the market or other places, the
which is an inconvenient sight. And ferthermore, they have such pleytes upon
their breasts, and ruffes upon their sleues, above their elbowes, that if
their master, or them self had never so greatte need, they could not
shoot one shote, to hurt their enemies, till they had cast of their
cotes, or cut of their sleues. This is fer above measure, or common weal of
the realm. This began first with honor, worship, and honesty, and it ends
in pride, presumption, and pouertye. Whereof speaks saint Austin, Que^cunque
superbum esse videris, diaboli filiu^ esse ne dubites: That is to say, who so
ever thou see, that is proud, dout the not, but he is the devils child.
Wherefore against pride he byddeth the remember, Quid fuisti, quid es, et qualis
post mortem eris: That is to say, what thou were, what thou art, and what thou
shalt be after thy death. And S. Bernarde says, Homo nihil aliud est, q
sperma fetidum, saccus stercorum, et esca vermium: That is to say, A man is
nothing, but stynkynge fylthe, a sack of dounge, and worms meat. The which
sayings would be remembered, and than me seems this is sufficient at this time
for the first point of the three.

Of delycyouse meats and drynkes.
How costely are the charges of delycious meats and drynkes, that be now
most commonly used, over that it has been in times paste, and how fer above
measure? For I have seen books of account of householde, and brumentes upon
the same, and I doubt not, but in delycyous meats, drinks, and spyces, there
is at this day four times so much spent, as was at these days to a like man
in degree, and yet at that time there was as much befe and mutton spent as is
now, and as many good housholdes kept, and as many yomenne wayters therein as
be now. This began with love and charytye, when a lord, gentylman, or yoman
desired or prayed an other to come to dinner or soupper, and because of his
coming he would have a dysshe or two mo than he would have had, if he had been
away. Than of very love he, remembrynge how louyngely he was bydden to dynner,
and how well he fared, he thinks of very kyndnes he must needs bid him to
dinner again, and so ordeyneth for him as many manner of such dysshes and
meats, as the other man did, and two or. iii. mo, and thus by lyttel and
litell it is commen fer above measure. And begone of love and charity, and
ends in pride and glotony, whereof saint Jerome says, Qui post carnem
ambulant, in ventrem et libidine^ pronl sunt, quasi irrationabilia iumenta
reputa^tur. That is to say, They that walk, and be ready to fulfill the lust of
the flesh and the belly, are taken as unreasonable beasts, and sayncte Gregory
says, Domina^te vicio gulae, omnes virtutes per luxuriam et vanam gloriam
obruuntur: That is to say, where the vice of glotony has domination, all
virtues by luxury and vayneglory are cast under. the which sayings would in
likewise be remembered, and this me seems sufficient for the. ii. point of the
three.

Of outrageous play and game.
IT is conueniente for every man, of what degree that he be of, to have play
and game according to his degree. For Cato says, Interpone tuis interdum
gaudia curis: Among thy charges and busynes thou must have sometime joy and
myrthe, but now adays it is done far above measure. For now a poor man
in regard will play as great game, at all manner games, as gentylmen were wont
to do, or greater, and gentilmen as lords, and lords as princes, and often
times the great estates will call gentylmen, or yomen to play with them at as
great game as they do, and they call it a disport, the which me seems a very
true name to it, for it displeases some of them er they depart, and special
god, for myspendynge of his goods and time. But if they played small games,
that the poor man that plays might bear it though he lost, and bate not
his countenance, than might it be called a good game, a good play, a good
sport, and a pastyme. But when one shall lose upon a day, or upon a night, as
much money as would find him and all his house meat and drink a month or a
quarter of a year or more, that may be well called a disporte, or a
displeasure, and often times by the means thereof, it causes them to sell they
lands, dysheryte the heirs, and may fortune to fall to theft, robbery, or
such other, to the great hurt of them self, and of their children, and to
the displeasure of god: and they so doing, lyttel do they pondre or regard
the saying of saint Paul, Iuxta facultates faciendi sunt sumptus, ne longi
temporis victum breuis hora consumat: This play begun with love and charity,
and often times it ends with covetous, wrath, and envy. And this me thinks
should be a sufficient instruction for keeping of measure.

A prologue of the third saying of the philosopher.
Now thou housbande and housewife, that have done your diligence and cure
about your husbandrye and huswyfry, according to the first saying of the
philosopher, A dhibe curam, And also have well remembered and fulfilled the
second saying of the said philosopher, Tene mensuram: I doubt not but ye be
rich according to the third saying of the said philosopher. Et eris dives.
Now I have showed you the saying of the philosopher, whereby you have gotten
much worldely possession, me seems it were necessary, to show you how ye
may get heavenly possessions, according to the saying of our lord in his
gospel, Quid prodest homini, si vniuersum mundum lucretur, anime vero suc
detrimentum paciatur: What profyteth it to a man, though he win all the
world, to the hyndraunce and losyng of his soul? How be it, it should seem
inconvenient for a temporal man, to take upon him, to show or teach any
such spirytuall matters: and yet there is a great diuersytie between
predication and doctrine.

A diversity between predication and doctrine
AS sayncte Iherome says, there is great difference or diversity, between
preachinge and doctrine. A preaching or a sermon is, where a convocation or a
gatherynge of people on holy days, or other days in churches or other
places, and times set and ordained for the same. And it belongs to them
that be ordained there unto, and have jurisdiction and auctorytie, and to none
other. But every man may lawefully inform and teach his brother, or any
other, at every time and place behouable, if it seem expedient to him, for that
is an alms deed, to the which every man is holden and bound to do, according
to the saying of saint Peter, Vnusquisque, sicut accepit gratiam in alterutrum
illam administare debet. That is to say, as every man has taken or received
grace, he ought to mynyster and show it forth to other. For as Chrysostom
says, great merit is to him, and a great reward he shall have in time to
come, the which writes or causes to be written, holy doctrine, for that
intent, that he may se in it, how he may live holylye, and that other may
have it, that they may be edyfyed or sanctyfyed by the same. for he says
surely, know thou, that how many souls be saved by the, so many rewards
thou shalt have for either. For saint Gregory says, Nullum sacrificium ita
placet deo, sicut zelus animaru^: There is no sacrifyce that pleases god so
much, as the love of souls. And also he says, Ille apud deum mayor est in
amore, qui ad eius amorem plurimos trahit: He is greateste in favor with god,
that draws most men to the love of god. Wherefore me seems, it is convenient
to inform and show them, how they may get heavenly possessions, as well as
I have showed them to get worldly possessions. Than to my purpose, and to the
point where I left, now thou art rich.

What is richesse.
IT is to be understand what is richesse, and as me seems, richesse is that
thing, that is of goodness, and can not be taken away from the owner, neither
in his temporal life, nor in the life everlasting. Than these worldly
possessions, that I have spoken of, is no richesse, for why, they be but
flowers of the world. And that may be well considered by Job, the which was
the rychest man of worldely possessions, that was living in those days, and
sodeynely he was the poorest man again that could be living, and all the
while he took pacyence, and was content, as appears by his saying, Dominus
dedit, dominus abstulit: sicut domino placuit, ita factum est, sit nomen domini
benedictum: Our lord has given it, our lord has taken it away, and as it
pleases our lord, so be it, blessed be the name of our lord. The which Job
may be an ensample to every true christen man, of his pacyence and good living
in tribulation, as appears in his storye, who that list to read therein. And
saint Austyne says: Qui terrenis inhiat, et aeterna non cogitat, vtrisque in
futuro carebit: He that gathers in worldly things, and thinks not upon
everlasting things, shall want both in time to come. For sayncte Ambrose
says. Non sunt bona hominis, quae secum far non potest: They are not the
goods of man, the which he can not bear with him And saint Bernarde says:
Si vestra sint, tollite vobiscum: If they be yours, take them with you. Than it
is to be understand, what goods a man shall take with him. And these be the
good deeds and warkes that thou doste here in this temporal life, whereof
speaks Crysostome: Fac been, et operare iustitiam, vt spem habeas apud deum,
et non desperabis in terra: Do well, and work ryghtwysly, that thou may
have trust in god, and that thou be not in despair in this world. According
to that says the prophet Dauyd, Junior fui, etenim senui, et non vidi iustum
derelictum, nec semen eius querens panem: I have been young, and I have: waxen
old, and I have not seen a ryghtwyse man forsaken, nor his children seeking
their bread.

What is the property of a rich man.
IN mine opinion the propertye of a rich manne is, to be a purchaser. and if
he will purchase, I council him to purchase heaven. For sayncte Austyne says,
Regnum caelorum nulli clauditur, nisi illi, qui se excluserit: The kyngedome of
heaven is to no man closed, but to him that will put out him self. Wherefore
this text may give the a courage to prefixe thy mind, to make there thy
purchase. And Solomon says: Quod mali carius emunt infernum, quam boni
caelum: Ill men bye hell derer, thanne the good men bie heaven. and that me
seems may well be proved by a common ensample: As if I had a. M. sheep to
sell, and diverse men come to me, and bye every manne a. C. of the sheep, all of
one price, to pay me at diverse days. I am agreed, and grant them these
days. some of the men be good, and keep their promise, and pay me at their
days, and some of them do not pay me. wherefore I sue them at the law, and
by course of the common law, I do recover my duty of them, and have their
bodies in prisone for execution, tylle they have made me payment. Now these
men, that have broken me promise, and paid not their dewetye, bye their sheep
derer thanne the good men bought theyrs. For they have imprysonment of their
bodies, and yet must they pay their duetyes never the less, or else lie and
dye there in prison: the which sheep be derer to them, then to the good men,
that kept their promise. Right so every man chepeth heaven, and god has set
on it a price, and granted it to every man, and given to them days of
payment: the price is all one, and that is to keep his commandments, during
their lives. the good men keep his commandments, and fulfill their promise,
and have heaven at their decease. The ill men break promise, and keep not his
commandments, wherefore at their decease they be put in prison, that is to
say in hell, there to abide his ryghtuousenes. And so the ill men bye hell
derer, than the good men bye heaven. And therefore it is better, to forgoo a
little pleasure, or suker a little pain in this world, than to suffer a
much greatter and a longer pain, in an other world. Now sithe hell is
derer than heaven, I advise the specially to bye heaven, wherein is everlasting
joy without end.

What joys or pleasures are in heaven.
Saint Austyn says, Ibi erunt quaecunque ab hominibus desiderantur, vita et
salus, copia glory, honor, pax, et omnia bona: That is to say, There shall be
every thing that any man desires, there is life, health, plenty of joy,
honor, peace, and all manner of goodness. What would a man have more? And saint
Paul says. Occulus non vidit, nec auris audiuit, nec in cor hominis ascendit,
quae preparauit deus diligentibus se: That is to say. The eye has not seen,
nor the ears has herd, nor the heart of a man has thought of so goodly
things, that god has ordained for them that love him. O what a noble act
that were for an husband or houswyfe, to purchase such a royal place in
heaven, to which is no comparyson. Than it is to be^ known, what thing
pleases god most, that we might do it.

What things pleases god most.
By the text of sayncte Paul, before said, love pleases god above al thing,
and that may be well proved by the saying of our lord him self, where he
says: Da mihi cor tuum, et sufficit mihi: Give me thy heart, and that is
sufficient for me, for he that has a man's heart, has all his other goods.
what is this man's heart: it is nothing else, but very true love. For there
can be no true love, but it comes meryly and immediately from the heart: and
if thou love god entyerlye with thy heart, than will thou do his
commandments. Than it would be understand and known, which be his
commandementes, that a man may observe and keep them.

What be gods commandments.
THere be in all. x. commandementes, the which were to long to declare, but
they be all concluded and comprehended in two, that is to say. Diliges dominum
deum tuum super omnia: Et proximum tuu^ sicut te ipsum: Love thy lord god
above al thing, and thy neighbor as thy self. These be light
commandments, and nature byndeth a man to fulfill, observe, and keep them,
or else he is not a natural man, remembryng what god has done for the. First
he has made the, to the symylytude and lykenes of his own image, and has
given to the in this world diverse possessions but specially he has redeemed
thy soul upon the cross, and suffered great pain and passion and bodily
death for thy sake. What love, what kyndenes was in him, to do this for the?
what could thou desire him to do more for the? And he desires nothing of
the again, but love for love. What can he desire less.

How a man should love god and please him.
SVrelye a man may love god and please him, very many ways: but first and
principally, he that wyllloue god, and please him, he must do as it is said
in Symbalo Athanasii: Quicunque vult saluus esse, ante omnia opus est, vt
teneat catholica^ fidem, Who so ever will be saved, above all thing he must
needs be steadfast in the faith of holy church. And according to that, says
sayncte Paul: Sine fide impossible est placere deo: Without faith, it is
impossible to please god. And Seneca says: Nichil retine^, qui fidem perdidit:
There abides no goodness in him, that has lost his faith. And so thou
may well perceive, that thou can not love nor please god, without perfyte
faith. And ferther more thou may not presume to study, nor to argue thy
faith by reason. For saint Gregory says: Fides non habet meritum, vbi
humana ratio prebet experimentum: Faith has no merit, where as man's
reasone proves the same. This faith is a pryncypall sign, that thou loueste
god. Also thy good deeds, and thy warkes, is a good sign, that thou loueste
god. For saint Iherome says: Vnusquisque, cuius opera facit, eius filius
appellatur: Whose warkes every man does, his son or servant he is called.
And sayncte Bernarde says, Efficatior est vox operis, q vox sermonis: The
deeds and the warkes of a man is more euydente proof, than his words. The
fulfyllynge of the. vii. works of mercy is an other special sign, that thou
love god: and many mo there be, which were to long to rehearse them all.

How a man should love his neighbor.
THou must love thy neighbor as thy self, wherein thou shall please god
specially. for if thou love thy neighbor as thy self, it follows by reason,
that thou shalt do nothing to him, but such as thou would should be done
to the. And that is to presume, that thou would not have any hurt of thy
body, nor of thy goods, done unto the, and likewise thou should none do unto
him. And also if thou would have any goodness done unto the, either in thy
body, or in thy mouable goods, like wise should thou do unto thy neighbor,
if it lie in thye power, according to the saying of saint Gregorye, Nec deus
sine proximo, nec proximus vere diligitur sine deo: Thou canste not love god,
without thou love thy neighbor, nor thou can not love thy neighbor, without
thou love god. Wherefore thou must first love god pryncypallye, and thy
neighbor secondaryly.

Of prayer that pleases god very much.
PRayer is honor and land to god, and a special thing that pleases him
much, and is a great sign, that thou love god, and that thou art perfyte
and steadfast in the faith of holy church: and that it is so, it may be well
considered by our fore fathers, that have for the love and honor of god made
churches: And a man must daily at some conuenyente times exercise and use
prayer him self, as he ought to do. For saint Ambrose says, Relicto hoc, ad
quod teneris, ingratum est spiritui sancto quicquid aliud operatis: If thou
leave that thing undone, that thou art bound to do, it is not acceptable to
god, what so ever thou dooste else. Than it is necessary, that thou do pray,
and a poor manne doing his labor trewely in the day, and thinks well,
prays well: but on the holy day, he is bound to come to the church, and
here his divine service.

What thing lets prayer.
THere be two impedimentes, that let and hinder prayer, that it may not be
herd. And of the first impedimente spekethe Ysaye the prophet: Quia manus
vestrae plenae sunt sanguine. i. peccato ideo non exaudiet vos dominus: Because
your hands be full of blood, that is to say, full of sin, therefore our
lord does not graciousely here you. And also prouerbiorum tertio. Long est
dominus ab impiis, et orationes iustorum exaudiet. Our lord is far fro
wicked men, and the prayers of ryghtewyse men he gracyously hereth. And sayncte
Bernarde says, Quia praeceptis dei auertitur, quod in oratione postulat non
meretur: He that does not gods commandments, he deserves not to have his
prayer hard. The second impediment says Anastasius is, Si non dimittis
iniuriam, que tibi facta est, non orationem pro te facis, sed maledictionem
super te inducis: If thou forgive not the wrong done unto the, thou doste not
pray for thy self, but thou enducest gods curse to fall upon the. And
Isodorus says, Sicut nullum in vulnere proficit medicamemtum, si adhuc ferrum
in eo fit: ita nihil proficiat oration illius, cuius adhuc dolor in mente vel
odium manet in pectore. Like as the plaster or medycyne can not heal a
wound, if there be any yren styckinge in the same, right so the prayer of a
man profyteth him not, as long as there is sorrow in his mind, or hate
abiding in his breast. For sayncte Austyne says, Si desit charitas, frustra
habentur cetera. If charity want, all other things be void. Wherefore thou
must se that thou stand in the state of grace, and not infecte with deedly
sin, and than pray if thou will be hard.

How a man should pray.
IT is to be understand that there be diverse manner of prayinges, Quedam
publica, et quedam priuata, That is to say, some openly, and some privately.
Prayer openly must needs be done in the church by the mynystratours of the
same people. For it is done for all the comynaltye, and therefore the people in
that ought to conferme them self to the said mynystratours, and there to be
present to pray unto god after a dew manner. Oration priuata. The prayer
pryuately done, ought to be done in secret places, for two causes. For
prayer eleuateth and lyfteth up a man's mind to god. And the mind of man is
sooner and better lift up when he is in a pryuye place, and separate from
multitude of people. An other cause is to avoid vaynglory that might lyghtely
ensue or rise thervppon, when it is done openly. and thereof speaks our
savior, where he says, Cum oratis, non eritis sicut hypocritae, qui amant in
sinagogis, et in angulis platearum stantes orare. That is to say, when ye
pray, be not you as the hypocrytes, the which love to stand in their
synagoges and corners of high ways to pray. Also some folks pray with the
lyppes or mouth, and not with the heart, of whom spekethe our lord by his
prophet, Hij labiis me honorant, cor autem eorum long est a me. They honor
me with their mouth, and their hertes be far from me. And sayncte Gregory
says, Quid prodest strepitus labiorum vbi mutum est cor? What profyteth the
labor of the mouth, where the heart is dombe? And Isodore says, Long
quippe a deo est animus, qui in oratione cogitarionibus saeculi fuerit
occupatus. His soul is far from god, that in his prayer his mind is occupied
in warkes of the world. There be other that pray both with the mouth and heart
of whom speaks sayncte John^. x. Very adoratores, adorabunt patrem in spiritu
et veritate. The true prayers will worship the father of heaven in spirit and
with truth. Isodorus says, Tunc veraciter oramus, quando aliunde non
cogitamus. Than we pray truly, when we think on nothing else. Richardus de
Hampole. Ille deuote orat, qui non habet cor vacabundum in ter renis
occupationibus, sed sublatum ad deum in caelestibus. He prays devoutly, that
has not his heart wauerynge in worldelye occupations, but always subleuate and
lift up to god in heaven. There be other that pray with the heart. vn^ Mat.
vi. Tu autem cum oraueris, intra cubiculum tuum. i. in loco secreto et clauso
hostio, ora patrem tuum. When thou shalt pray, enter into thy chamber or
oratory, and steke the door, and pray to the father of heaven. Isodorus,
Ardens oration est non labiorum sed cordium, potius enim orandum est cord q
ore. The hoter prayer is with the heart than with the lyppes, rather pray with
thy heart than with thy mouth. Regum primo. Anna loquebatur in cord. Anne
spoke with the heart.

A mean to put away idle thoughts in prayinge.
ANd to avoid wauerynge minds, in worldly occupations when thou shalt
pray, I shall show unto you the best experience that ever I could find for
the same, the which have benne much troubled therewith, and that is this. He
that can read and understand latyne, let him take his book in his hand, and
look stedfastely upon the same thing that he reads and sees, that is no
trouble to him, and remember the english of the same, wherein he shall find
greatte swetenes, and shall cause his mind to follow the same, and to leave
other worldly thoughts. And he that can not read nor understand his Pater
noster. Aue, nor Creed, he must remember the passion of Christ, what pain he
suffered for him, and all mankind, for redemynge of their souls. And also the
miracles and wonders that god has done, and first what wonders were done
the night of his natyuitie and birth. And how he turned water in to wine,
and made the blind to se, the dombe to speak, the deaf to here, the lame to
go, the sick to be hole. And how he fed five thousand with two fysshes, and
five barley loves, whereof was left. xii. coffyns or skyppes of fragmentes. And
how he reised Lazare from death to life, with many moo miracles that be
innumerable to be rehearsed. And also to remember the special points of his
passion, how he was sold and betrayed of Judas, and taken by the jews, and
brought before Pylate, than to king Herod, and to bishop Cayphas, and
than to Pylate again, that judged him to death, and how he was bound to a
pillar and how they scurged, bobbed, mocked him, spytte in his face, crowned
him with thorns, and caused him to bear the cross to the mount of Caluary,
wheryppon he was nailed both hands and fete, and wounded to the heart with a
sharp spear, and so suffered death. And how he fette out the souls of our
forefathers forth of hell. How he rose from death to life, and how often he
appeared to his discyples and other moo. And what miracles he wroughte
afterward, and specyallye what power he gave to his dyscyples, that were no
clerks, to teach and preche his faith, and work many miracles, and
specially when they preached before men of diverse nations and languages, and
every man understood them in their own language* the which is a sign that
god would have every manne saved, and to know his laws, the which was a
miracle able to convert all the infydeles, heretykes, and lollers in the
world.

A mean to avoid temptation.
IT is often times seen, that the holyer that a man is, the more he is tempted,
and he that so is, may thank god thereof. for god of his goodness and grace
has not given to the dyuell authority nor power, to attempt any man ferther
and above that, that he that is so tempted, may withstand. For sayncte
Gregory says, Non est timendum hostis, qui non potest vincere nisi volente^.
An enemy is not to be dradde, the which may not overcome, but if a man be
willing. And it is to presume, that he that is so tempted, stands in the
state of grace. For sayncte Ambrose says, Illos diabolis vexare negligit,
quos iure haereditario se possidere sentit. The dyuell despyseth to vex or
trouble those, the which he felethe him self to have in possessyon by right
inheritance. And if thou be so tempted, vexed, or troubled, I shall show unto
the two verses, that if thou do thereafter, thou shalt be eased of thy
temptacyon, and have greatte thank and laud of god and reward therefore,
these be the verses.

Hostis no^ ledit, nisi cum te^ptatus obedit.
Est leo si sedit, si stat quasi musca recedit.
That is to say, The gostly enemy hurts not, but when he that is tempted
obeys to his temptation, Than his ghostly enemy plaieth the lion, if that he
that is so tempted sit still and obey to him. And if he that is tempted, stand
styfly against him, the ghostlye enemy flies away like a fly. This me
seems may be well proved by a famylier ensaumple. As if a lord had a castle,
and delivered it to a captain to keep, if there come ennemies to the cast^ll,
and call to the capytayn, and bid him deliver them this castle. The capytayne
comes and opens them the gates, and delyuereth the keys. Now is this
castle soon won, and this capytayne is a false traitor to the lord. But
let the captain arm him self, and steke the gates, and stand styfly upon
the wall, and command them to avoid at their peril, and they will not tarry
to make any assaut. Right so every man is captain of his own soul. and if
thy gostely ennemy come and tempte the, and thou that art capytayne of thine
own soul, will open the gates, and deliver him the keys and let him in, thy
soul is soon taken prisoner, and thou a false traitor to thy soul, and
worthy to be punysshed in prison for ever. And if thou arm thy self and
stand styfly against him, and will not consent to him, he will avoid and
fle away, and thou shall have a great reward for withstanding of the said
temptation.

Alms deeds pleases god much.
Alms deeds pleseth god very much, and it is great sign that thou loueste
both god and thy neighbor. And he of whom alms is asked, ought to
consider three things, that is to say, who asks alms, what he asks, and
whereunto he asks. Now to the first, who asks alms, Deus petit. God
asks. For saint Jerome says, Quia deus adeo diligit pauperes, quod quicquid
fit eis propter amorem suum, reputat sibi factum. That is to say, because that
god loves poor men so much, what someuer thing is given unto them for the
love of him, he takes it as it were done to him self, as it is said in his
gospel, Quod vni ex minimis meis fecistis, michi fecistis. That thing that ye
give or do to the least of those that be mine, ye do it to me. Thanne to the
second, what asks god? Non nostrum, sed suum. He asks not that thing,
that is ours, but that thing that is his own. As says the prophet David,
Tua sunt domine omnia: Et quae de manu tua accepimus, tibi dedimus. Good lord,
all things be thine, and those things that we have taken of the, of those
have we given the. Thanne to the third. Where unto does god ask? He asks
not to give him, but all only to borowe, Non tamen ad triplas, silicet, immo
ad centuplas. Not all only to have thryse so much, but forsothe to have an
hundred times so much. As saint Austyn says, Miser homo quid veneraris
homini, venerare deo, et centuplum accipies, et vitam aeternam possidebis? Thou
wretched manne, why doste thou worship or dread man: worship thou god and
dread him, and thou shalt receive an hundred times so much, and have in
possessyon everlasting life, the which many fold passes all other rewards?
Prouerbiorum. xiiii. Veneratur dominus, qui miseres tur pauperibus. He
worshyppeth our lord, that has mercy and pytye on poor folks. And the
gloss thereof says, Centuplum accepturus. And thou shalt receive an. C. times
so much. And it is to be understand, that there be three manner of alms deeds,
that is to say, Egenti largire quicquid poteris: dimittere eis a quibus lesus
fueris: Errantem cotrigere, et in viam veritatis reducere, That is to say, to
give to the nedy what thou well may, to forgive them that have trespaced to
the, and to correct them that do amysse, and to bring them into the way of
right.

The first manner of alms.
EGenti largire quicquid poteris. Give to the nedye what thou well may. for
our lord says in his gospel. Date elemosinam, et omnia munda sunt vobis. Et
alibi. Date, et dabitur vobis. Give alms, and all worldly richesse is yours.
give and it shall be given to you. Alms deed is a holy thing, it increases a
man's welthe, it makes less a man's sins, it lengtheth a man's life, it
makes a man of good mind, it delayeth ill times, and closes all things, hit
delyuereth a man from death, it joins a man with aungelles, and seuereth
him from the dyuell, and is like a wall unable to be foughten against. And
saint James says. Sicut aqua extinguit ignem, ita elemosina peccatum. As
water slecketh fire, so does alms deed slake sin. Solomon says, Qui dat
pauperi, non indigebit. He that gives unto a poor man, shall never have need.
And also he says, Qui obturat aurem suam ad clamorem pauperis, et ipse
clamabit, et non exaudietur. He that stops his ear at the clamoure or cry
of a poor man (he shall cry) and he shall not be gracyousely herd. There may
no man excuse him from gyuynge of alms, though he be poor. And let him do
as the poor wydowe did, that offered a farthynge, wherefore she had more
thank and reward of god, thanne the rich men that offered gold. And if thou
may not give a farthynge, give less, or give fair words, or good
information, ensaumple and token: and god shall reward the both for thy deed
and for thy good will. And that thou dooste, do it with a good will. For saint
Paul says, Hilarem datorem diligit deus. God loves a glad gyuer, and that
it be of true begotten goods. For Solomon says, De tuis justice laboribus
ministra pauperibus. Of thy true labors mynystre and give to the poor
folks. For Isodorus says, Qui unjust tollit, just nunquam tribuit. He that
takes wrongfully, can not give trewelye. For it is written Ecclesiastici.
xxxv. Qui de rapinis, aut vsuris, aut de furto immolat: et quasi qui coram
patre victimat filium. He that offers of the goods that he gets by
extortyon, vsurye, or theft, he is like as a man slew the son in the
presence of the father. Thou may right well know, the father would not be
well content. No more would god be pleased with the gift of such begotten
goods.

The second manner of alms.
DImittere eis, a quibus lesus fueris. To forgive them that have trespaced to
the, wherein thou shalt please god much. For it is in the gospel of sayncte
Mark. xii. Si non dimiseritis aliis, nec pater vester celestis dimittet vobis
peccata vestra. If you forgive not, your father of heaven will not forgive you
your sins. Also if thou do not forgive other, thou shalt be found a liar,
as often as thou sayeste thy Pater noster, where thou sayste: Et dimitte nobis
debita nostra, sicut et nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris. And forgive to us
our dettes, as we forgive to our detters. By these dettes may be understand
the things that we ought to do to god, and do not them. And also the
trespaces and the sin that we have offended to god, in that we ask mercy
of. And if thou will not forgive, thou may not ask mercy of right. Eadem
mensura, qua mensi fueritis, remetietur vobis. The same measure that ye meat
other men by, shall be moten unto you. Dimittere autem rancorem et maliciam
omnino necessitatis est, dimittere vero actionem et emendam opus est consilij.
To forgive all rancour and malice, that a man owes to the in his heart, thou
art bounden of necessity to forgive all the hole trespace, or to leave thine
actyon or a reasonable mendes. Therefore it is but a deed of mercy if thou so
do, and no sin though thou sue the law with charytie. But and a man have
done to the a trespace, and that thou art glad that he has so done, that
thou may have a quarrel, or a matter, or an accyon against him, and now of
malice or ill will thou will sue him, rather than for the trespace, now thou
synnest dedely, because thou do rather of malice than for the trespace, and
than haste thou lost thy charity, Prouerbiorum. xxxii. Qui pronus est ad
misericordiam, benedicetur. He that is ready to forgive, shall be blessed.

The third manner of alms.
ERrantem corrigere, et in viam veritatis reducere. To correcke a misdoer, and
to bring him into the way of tyghte. It is to be understand, that there be
three manner of corrections.

The first correction is of an enemy, the second is of a frynde, and the
third correction is of a Justice. The first says Chrysostom, Corripe non
vt hostis expetens vindictam, sed vt medicus instituens medicinam Correcke not
as an enemy doing vengeance, but as a phisicyon or surgyon, mynistringe or
gyuynge a medicyne. To the second says Solomon. Plus proficit amica
correctio, quam correctio turbulenta. A frendelye correction profyteth more
than a troublous correction. For if thou speak courteysly to a man that has
offended, and with sweet words of compassion, he shall rather be converted by
them, than with hye words of great punysshement. And Isodorus says, Qui per
verba blanda castigatus non corrigetur, acrius necesse est, vt arguatur He that
will not be chastysed by fair words, it is necessary that he be more
hardlyer and straytlyer reproved or punysshed. To the third says sayncte
Jerome, Equum iudicium est, vbi non persona^sed opera considerantur. There is
an even Judgment, where the person is not regarded, but the warkes are
considered. And alsoo hit is written, Reddet vnicuique iuxta opera sua. He
shall yield unto every manne after his works. And sayncte Augustyne says,
Sicut meliores sunt, quos corrigit amor, ita plures sunt quos corrigit timor.
As those be better, that be chastysed by love, so there be many moo that be
chastysed by fear. For and they feared not the punyshement of the law, there
would be but a few chastysed by love. And saint Gregory says, Facientis
procul dubio culpam habet, qui quod potest corrigere negligit emendare, et
illicita non prohibere consensus erroris est. He that may correcke, and does
not, he takes the offense to him self of the deed, and he that does not
forbede unlawful things, consents to the same. etc.

What is the greattest offense that a man may do and offend god in.
IN mine opinion, it is to be in despair of the mercy of god. And therefore
what so ever thou have done or offended god, in word, warke, thought, or
deed, be never in despair for it, for Isodorus says, Qui veniam de peccato
desperate, plus de desperatione peccat quam de culpa cadit. He that despayreth
to have forgyuenes of his sins, he synneth more in despayrynge than he did in
the sin doing. For saint Iherome says, Magis offendebat Judas deum in hoc
quod suspendebat, quam in hoc, quod eum tradidit. Judas offended god more in
that that he hanged him self, than he did when he betrayed god. For god
says in his gospel. Nolo mortem peccatoris, sed magis vt conuertatur et
viuat. I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may be converted
and live. And also he says, Non veni vocare iustos, sed peccatores ad
penitentiam. I am not comen to call ryghtwyse men, but to call sinners to do
penance. For thou canste not so soon cry god mercy with thy heart, but he is
as redye to change his sentence, and to grant the mercy and forgynenes of
all thy sins. For saint Austyne says, Sicut scintilia ignis in medio maris,
sic omnis impie^as viri ad misericordiam dei. As a spark of fire is in
comparison able to dry up all the water in the se, no more is all the
wyckednes of man unto the mercyfulnes of god. And therefore it is conuenyent
that a man should be penytent, contryte, and ask god mercy and forgyuenesse
of his sins and offenses that he has done, whereof speaks Chrysostme, Nemo
ad deum aliquando flens accessit quod non postulaueritaccepst. No man has gone
any time weeping to god, but he has taken or had that thing that he has
asked. And sayncte Bernarde says, Plus cruciant lacrime peccatoris diabolum
quam omne genus tormentorum. The tears of a sinner tourmenteth the devil
more, than all other kinds of turmentes. And sayncte Austyne says, Acriores
dolores demonibus non inferrimus, quam cum peccata nostra penitendo et
confitendo plangimus. We can not do more sharper sorrows to the dyuell, than
when we wayle or weep in confession, and doing of penance. And that may be
well proved by Mary Magdaleyn, when she kneled down and cried god mercy,
and kyste his fete, and washed them with the tears of her eyes, and wyped
them with the hear of her heed, to whom our lord said, as in his gospel.
Dimittuntur tibi peccata tua. Thy sins are forgyuen to the, and also he said
to her. Fides te saluam fecit, vade in pace. Thy faith has saved the, goo
thou in peace. To the which mercy and peace I beseech almighty Jesus bring all
christen souls. Amen.

BE it known to all men both spirytuall and temporal, that I make
protestacion before god and man, that I entende not to write any thing that is
or may be contrary to the faith of Christ and al holy church. But I am
redye to revoke my saying, if any thing have passed my mouth for want of
learning, and to submytte my self to correction, and my book to reformatyon.
And as touching the points of husbandry, and of other artycles contained in
this present book, I whll not say that it is the best way and will serve
best in all places, but I say it is the best way that ever I could prove by
experyence, the which have been an householder this. xl. years and more. And
have assaied many and diverse ways, and done my dyligence to prove by
experyence which should be the best way.

The auctour.
Go little quere, and recommende me
To all that this treatise shall se, here, or read
Prayenge them there with content to be
And to amend it in places, where as is need
Of eloquence, they may perceive I want the sede
And rethoryke, in me does not abound
wherefore I have sowe^, such seeds as I found.
Finis.
Thus ends this right profitable book of husbandry, compyled sometime by
master Fitz herbarde, of charytie and good zele that he bare to the weal of
this most noble realm, which he did not in his youth, but after he had
exercysed husbandry, with great experyence. xl. years.
Imprynted at London in fletestrete in the house of Thomas Berthelet, nere to
the condite at the sign of Lucrece. Cum priuilegio.


