THE Devils Banquet.

Described in four Sermons.
1. The Banquet propounded; begun. 2. The second Service. 3. The breaking up
of the Feast. 4. The Shot or Reckoning. The Sinners Passing Bell. Together with
Physic from Heaven.

Published by THOMAS ADAMS, Preacher of Gods Word at Willington in Bedfordshire.

AMOS Chap. 6. Verse 7. Therefore now shall they go captive, with the first
that go captive, and the Banquet of them that stretched themselves, shall be
removed.

Chap. 8.10. I will turn your Feasts into mourning, and all your Songs into
Lamentation: and I will bring sackcloth upon all loins, and baldnes upon every
head: and I will make it as the mourning of an only Son, and the end thereof
as a bitter day.

AMBROS. de Poenit. Pascitur libido conuiuijs, nutritur delicijs,
vino accenditur, ebrietate slammatur.
LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for Ralph Mab, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Grayhound. 1614.

TO THE VERY WORTHY AND VIRTUOUS GENTLEMAN, Sir George Fitz-Ieoffery Knight,
one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace and Quorum, in the County of
Bedford; saving health.
Right Worshipful:
THis Sermon, though it be borne last, was not so conceived. But as it came to
pass in Tamars travel of her Twins; though Zarah put forth his hand first,
and had a scarlet thread tied to it, the distinguishing mark of primogeniture,
yet his brother Pharez was borne before him. I intended this Subject to a
worthy Audience, fastening my meditations on it: but soon finding, that I had
grasped more sands, then I could force through the Glass in two hours, and
loath to iniure my proposed method; I let it sleep, till fitter opportunity
might waken it. Now behold, without the common plea of this writing age, the
importunate request of friends, I willingly adventure it to the light. And
since your favor to my weak (or rather no) deserts, has been ever full of
real encouragements: since your affection to literature, (and the best of
learning the Gospel) has eue^ vouchsafed a friendly countenance to your
neighbour-Ministers: I could not make my self so liable to the censure of
ingratitude, as not to intrea^ your Name for Patronage. Which, though it
deserves better acknowledgement, and finds it from more worthy voices; yet I,
that yield to all in learning, would yield to none in love, and service to you.
The cause in question requires a worthy defender: not for the own weakness,
but for the multitude and strength of oppositions. Men brook worse, to have
their sins ransacked, then their inveterate wounds and ulcers searched. Qui
vinum venenum vocant, they that call drunkenness poisoning, speak harsh to
their ears, that ( quasi deum colunt) embrace and worship it as a God. You are
one of that surrogation, into whose hands God has trusted his sword of
Justice. Draw it in his defense against the enemies of his Grace and Gospel.
You sit at the common stern, and therefore are not so much your own, as your
Countries. O^r derided, rejected Preaching, appeals to your aids. Help us
with your hands, we will help you with our Prayers. With wisdom and courage
rule the wild days you live in. Proceed, (worthy Sir) as you have conformed
your self, to reform others. Reach forth your hand to your confined limits;
ouer-turne the Table, spoil the Banquet, chastise the Guests at this riotous
Feast. You see, how justly, this poor, weak, course-wouen labor desires the
gloss of your Patronage to be set on it. I cannot either distrust your
acceptance, knowing the generousnesse of your disposition; nor need I so much
to entreat your private use, (who are stored with better instructions;) as your
commending it to the world. If any good may, hereby, be encouraged, any evil
weakened, my reward is full. The discourse is sexduple; whereof the first
fruits are yours: whose my self am, that desire still to continue

Yours Worships in my best services, THO. ADAMS.

Ad vel in Lectorem.
REligious Reader, (for I think, few of the profane rabble read any Sermons)
let me entreat thee for this, that (cum lectoris nomen feras, ne lictoris
officium geras) thou would accept it, not except against it; and being but a
Reader, not usurp the office of a Censurer. The maine intents of all
Preachers, and the contents of all Sermons, aim to beat down sin, and to
convert sinners. Which the most absolute and vn-^rring Scriptures have shadowed
under diverse metaphores; comparing them to beasts, to blots, to sicknesses, to
sterrillities, to pollutions, to leauenings, to whoredoms, to Devils In all
which (and many other such figurative speeches) I thin^e it lawful, nay
necessary for us, Gods Ministers, to explane the Metaphore; and (still within
bounds of the simillitude) to show the fit accordance and respondencie of the
thing meant, to the thing mentioned. Indeed, to stretch the Text against the
own will, is to martyr it: and to make every metaphore run upon four fe^t,
is often violabile sacris. B^t so long as we keep the Analogy of faith, and
the sen^e of the present Theme, it is a fault, to find fault with us. Indeed
Rhe^oricall flourishes without solid matter, is like an Egiptian bondwoman in
a Queens robes; or the Courtiers Chamber, which is often a rotten room,
curiously hanged. Gods word is full of dark speec^es, dark not in themselves,
but to our thicke-sighted understandings: therefore his propositions, require
expositions. Not that we should turn plain Morals into Allegories, but
Allegories into plain Morals. The former was Origens fault, of whom it is
said, (I speak not to uncover that Fathers nakedness; but to show that all
men may err, and therefore truth of love must not prejudice love of truth)
that wherein he should not allegorize, he did; and wherein he should have
allegoriz'd, to his woe, he did not. I have presumed, not without warrant of
the best Expositors, to manifest the manifold temptations of Satan, under the
Harlots inueigling her Customers. 1. As Wisdom ver. 3. sends forth her
Maidens, her Ministers, to inuit guests to her Feast of Grace. So Vice sends
forth her temptations; nay, she sits at the door her self, ver. 14. and courts
the passengers. 2. If Wisdom call the Ignorant. ver. 4. Who so is simple, let
him turn in hither, as for him that wants understanding, she says, etc.
Vice, which is the true Folly, is her Zani, and takes the words out of her
mouth. ver. 16. Who so is simple, let him turn in hither, and as for, etc. 3.
If Wisdom promises Bread and Wine, ver. 5. Come eat of my bread, and drink
of the wine, which I have mingled. Sin will promise no less to her guests.
ver. 17. Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant. Here
is then a plain opposition of Grace and Sin, Wisdom and Folly, Chastity
and uncleanness, Christ and the Devil. He is mistaken then, that shall
judge me mistaken in this Allegory. I stand not so much on the sound, as the
sense; not so much on the literal, as spiritual meaning. In the former I have
instanced, insisted on the latter. It should be tedious, to give account for
every circumstance. The learned and good man will judge faucurably. To the
rest. Si quid tu recti^s istis Pro^ir us imperti, si non, his vtere mecum. I
pass by ^he triutall objections against Sermons in print: as the deadness of
the letter, the multitude of Books p^essing to the P^esse, etc. As if the eye
could give no help to the soul: as if the queasie stomach could not forbear
surfeiting: as if some men's sullenness, and crying push at Sermons, should be
prejudicial to ot^ers benefit: as if the Prophets had not added line to line,
as well as precept upon precept. I hear of some ^dle Drones, humming out their
dry derisions, that we will be men in print, slighting the matter for the
Authors sake. But because their inuectiues are as impotent, as themselves are
impudent, I will answer no further, then haec culpas, sed tu non meliora
facis. Or to borrow the words of the Epigrammatist. Cum tua non edas, carpis
mea carmina Leli:
Carpere vel noli nost^a, v^l ed^tua.
Sloth sits and censures, what the industrious teach.
Foxes dispraise the Grapes, they cannot reach.
One caveat, good Reader, and then God speed thee. Let me intr^^ t^ee, not to
give my Book the chopping censure. A word old enough, yet would have a
Comment. Do not open it at a ventures, and by reading the broken pieces of two
or three lines, judge it. But read it through, and then I beg no pardon, if
thou ^islikest it. Farewell.

Thine THO. ADAMS.

THE DEVILS BANQUET. The first Sermon.
PROVERB. 9.17.18. Stolen waters are sweet, and the bread of Secrecies is
pleasant: but he knows not that the dead are there, and that her guests are
in the depth of Hell.


I Have here chosen two Texts in one, intending to Preach of a couple of
Preachers; one by usurpation* the other by assignation; the Worlds Chaplen, and
the Lords Prophet. Where conceive, 1. the Preachers: 2. their Texts: 3. their
Sermons: 4. their Pulpits: 5. their Commissions.

1. The Preachers are two, the first has a double name: Literally, here, the
Harlot: Metaphorically, Sin; the minde's Harlot; for between them is all
spiritual adultry committed: Some understand it more Sinecdochically, the
Temptation to sin; but (omne mauis includit minus) their interpretation is
like that short bed, you cannot lay this Harlot at her full length in it. Others
conceive an Antithesis here, and by conferring the 4. verse with the 16.
collect an opposition of two sorts of Preachers; the sincere Prophets of
Wisdom, and the corrupted Teachers of Traditions, errors, leasings. I cannot
subscribe to this sense, as full enough: let it go for a branch, call it not
the body of the Tree. This first Preacher then* is the H^br. 11.25.
delightfulness, or if you will, the Hebr. 3.13.
dec^itf^lnesse of sin. The second is Solomon; not erring, adulterating,
idolatrising Solomon: but converted, confirmed Solomon* A King and a Preacher.

2. Their Texts: 1. Sins Text is from Hels Scriptum est: taken out of the
Devils Spell; either Lucian his old Testament, or Machiauell his new: laws
made in the court of damnation, enacted in the vault of darkness; like those
under the Parliament House; Gunpowder-lawes, fit for the Justices of Hell. 2.
Solomon's Text is the Word of eternal Truth: with a Scriptum est, caelitus
inspiratum; given from Heaven: this is Desuper, the other Desubter; this is
all, 2 Timothy 3.16.
Scripture is given by inspiratio^ from God, profitable, etc. the former is the
2 These. ^.11.
Delusion of the Devil; that 1 King. 22.2^.
lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs proph^^s, the divinity of Hell.

Verse 17.
3. The Sermons differs as well as the Texts. 1. The Harlots dixit, verse 16. is
thus amplified: Stolen waters are sweet, and the bread of Secrecies is
pleasant. Tullius, nor Tertullus, nor Hermes, the speaker in the Parliament of
the Heathen gods, never moved so eloquent a tongue: she preaches (according to
the palate of her audience) Placentia; nay, it is Placenta, a sweet Cake; whose
flower is Sugar, and the humor that tempers it, Honey, sweet, pleasant. She
cannot want auditors for such a Sermon: for as it is in Faires, the Peddler,
and the Ballat-monger have more throng, then the rich Merchant: Vanity has as
many customers as she can turn to, when Verity has but a cold market. 2.
Solomon's Sermon is opposed to it with a But: Verse 18.
But he knows not that the dead are there, and that her gh^sts are in the
depth of Hell. A cross blow, that disarmes the Devils Fencer: a flat
conviction or Nonplus, given to the arguments of sin: a little
Colliquintida, put into the swe^t-pot: that, as I have observed in some
beguiling Pictures; look on it one way, and it presents to you a beautiful
D^mosell: go on the adverse side, and behold, it is a Devil, or some misshapen
Stigmaticke. Sin shows you a fair Picture: Stolen waters are sweet, etc.
Suaue and delicio sum; Pleasure and delight. Solomon takes you on the other
side, and shows you the ugly visages of Death and Hell, the dead are there,
etc. If Sin open her Shop of delicacies, Solomon shows the Trap-dore and the
Vault: if she boast her Olives, he points to the Prickles: if she discouers
the green and gay flowers of delice, he cries to the Ingredients, Latet anguis
in herba, the Serpent lurkes there: Illa mouet, iste monet; she charms, and he
breaks her spells: as curious and proud as her House is, Solomon is bold to
write, Lord have mercy on us, on the doors, and to tell us, the plague is
there; Stolen waters are sweet, etc. But the dead are there, etc.

4 Their Pulpits have local and ceremonial difference. 1. The Harlot's is
described verse 14. She sits at the door of her house, on a seat, in the high
places of the City. 1. Sedet; she sits: she is got into that inchaunted Psalm.
1.1.
Chair, Psalm. 1. 2. at her house: she need not stray far for customers: in
se turba ruunt luxuriosa, proci: they come in troops to her: 3. at her door:
she presents her self to the common eye, and would be notable, though not
able to answer the show: 4. on a Seat: nouit suum locum: Vice knows her Seat;
the Devil is not without his Randeuous: what say you to a Tavern, a
Playhouse, a Feast, a May Game? that I say not, an Ordinary: 5. in the City.
Whoredom, scorns to live obscurely in the Suburbs: She has friends to admit
her within the walls. 6. Nay, in the high places of the City: in the largest
streets, populous and popular houses; in excelsis vrbis: one of the most
curious and ^ta^ely edifices of the City.

Thus Sin reads not a highway lecture only, as among Thieves; nor a
Chamber-lecture only, as among Courtezans; nor a Masse-lecture only, as among
Iesu^tes, nor a Vault-lecture only, as among Traitors; nor a Table-lecture
only, as among Humorists; nor a Tap-house-Lecture o^^ly, as among Drunkards;
that fetch authority from the pot, like Augustus Caesar, to tax all the
world: but a Citie-lecture, such a one as 1 Kin. 21.10
Iesabell read to Iezreell: a public Preaching, her Pulpit being excelsa
ciuitatis, top-gallant; filling eminent places, with emanant poisons. 2.
Solomon's Pulpit is yet transcendent and above it; for it is a ^hrone; a 1 King.
10.18
Throne of Iuorie, ouerlaid with gold: such a Throne, as no Verse 20.
Kingdom could follow it. The Preacher is a King, the Pulpit a Throne; nay, an
Oracle: de Solio rex oracula fundit. 1 King 4.31.
For God gave him wisdom, yea, such a wisdom, that no man but his Antitype,
God and man, did ever excel him.

5 Their Commissions. 1. The Devil gave Sin her ^rrand; gilded her tongue,
and po^soned her heart: put a cup of damnation into her hand, and the Sugar of
Temptation to sweeten it; allowed her for his Citie-Recorder, or his
Towne-^la^ke; and sealed her a commission from Hel^; as Act. 9.1.
Saul had from the High Priest* to bind with snares (Filios T^rrae) the Sons
of Men. 2. But God gave Solomon a celestial Ez^k. 2.9.
roll to eat, as to Ez^kiel; and Esa. 6..6.
touched his lips with a co^le from his own Altar, as to Esaias, putting into
his mouth (documenta vitae) the ordinances of eternal life.

God has set this day before you two diverse Pulpits, adverse Preachers,
dissonant Texts; declares, who speaks by his warrant, who besides it, against
it. Behold, as Moses said, I have set life and death before you, take your
choice.

The Dialogue of both the verses present us with a Banquet: ( conuiuium, or
conuitium rather) a Feast, but a Fast were better: a Banquet worse then Job 1.19.
Jobs childrens; or the Judge* 16.30.
Dagonals, of the Philistines; (like the Bacchanals of the Moenades) when for
the shutting up of their stomachs, the house fell down, and broke their
necks. You have offered to your considerations, Verse 17.
verse 17. (supplying but the immediately precedent word, Dixit) 1. The Inviter:
2. the Cheer. Solomon comes after, (as with Salt and Vinegar) and tells you 3.
the Guests: 4. and the Banketting-house, verse 18. Verse 18.
But the dead are there, etc.

The Inviter: It is a woman, She says to him: but that name is too good; for
she has recovered her credit: a woman, as she brought woe to man, so she
brought forth a weal for man: causa d^licti, solatium relicti: an
isntrumental cause of transgression, 1 Timothy 2.14. Gal. 4.4.
and no less of Salvation. If you say, she brought forth Sin without man, so
she brought forth a Savior without man: as the Genesis 3.4.
Devil tempted her to the one, so the Luke 1.35.
Holy Ghost ouershadowed her to the other. This not a woman then, but a Harlot,
meretricia mulier: a degenerate woman, vnwomaned (^t pudore and pudicitia) of
both, modesty and chastity.

The feast is like to be good when an Harlot is the Hostice. And sure the
Scriptures found some special parietie, if not ident^tie between these two:
Josh. 2.1.
not making their names conuertible, which had been much; but expressing by
one word both of them, which is more; as if it concluded their professions and
conditions, names and natures all one, which is most of all. Impleta in nostris
haec est Scriptura diebus. Experience has justified this circumstance. A
Harlot then, bids, and feasts, and kills: what other success can be looked for?
If Dalilah inuit Sampson, wa^e his locks; she will spoil the Nazarite of
his hayres: there are many Dalilahs in these days.

I have read of many Inviters in the holy Writ: some good, many indifferent,
most evil, this worst of all. 1. Good, Matthew. 22.1.
Matthew. 22. you have the King of Heaven a Feast-maker: Can^. 5.1.
Cant. 5. you have the Kings son a Feast-maker: Jesus Christ bids, Eat oh
friends, drink abundantly, Revel. 2^.17.
oh beloved, Revel. 22. you have the Spirit of glory a Feast-maker, and an
Inviter too: The Spirit and the Bride say, Come. To this Feast Luke 14.21.
few come, but those that do come, are welcome: well come in regard of
themselves, for there is the best cheer: Reu. 19.9.
Blessed are they that are called to the Mariage-Supper of the Lamb: welcome,
in respect of God, who does not grudge his mercies. 2. Many indifferent, and
inclining to good. Genesis 21.8.
Abraham's feast at Isaac's weaning: Judge. 14.10.
Sampsons at his marriage. The Wedding-feast in Cana, where the King of glory
was a Ghest; and honored it with a Miracle, with the Primum miracu^um
a^firmatur; quod ex primis non dubitatur.
first Miracle, that ever he Ioh. 2.11.
wrought. 3. Evil; 1 Samuel 25 36
Nabals feast at his Sheepe-shearing; a drunken feast: Dan. 5.2.
Belshazzars feast to a thousand of his Lords, surfeiting with full carouses
from the sacred Boles; a sacrilegious Feast. The Judge 16 23.
Philistines feast to the honor of Dagon; an Idolatrous feast. Mark 6.28.
Herod's birthday-feast, when John Baptists head was the last course of the
service; a bloody feast. Luke 16.19.
The rich Churles, a quotidian feast, a voluptuous surfeit, all bad. 4. This yet
worst of all, the Harlots feast, where (the Ghests at once, comedunt, and
comeduntur:) their souls feast on evils, and are a feast to Devils: for whiles
men devour sins, sins devour them, as Actaeon was eaten up of his own dogs.
This is a bloody Banquet, where no ghest escapes without a wound, if with life:
for if Sin keep the Revels, Lusts are the Iunkets, Ebrietie drinks the
Wine, Blasphemy says the Grace, and Blood is the conclusion.

But allegorically Sin is here shadowed by the Harlot; Voluptuousn^sse,
(meretricum meretrix) the Harlot of Harlots; whose Bawd is Be^lsebub, and
whose Bridewell is broad Hell. Wickedness (foeminei generis dicitur) is
compared to a Woman: and has all her senses: Lust is her eye to see: Briberie
her hands to feel: Sensuality her palate to taste: Malice her ear to hear:
Petulancy her nose to smell: and (because she is of the foeminine sex, we
will allow her the sixtsense) tittle-tattle is her tongue to talk. This is the
common Hostice of the world; Satan's housekeeper, whose doors are never shut:
noc^es atque dies patet, etc. There is no man in the world keeps such
hospitality, for he searches the air, earth, sea, nay, the Kitchen of Hell,
to fit every palate. Vitellius searched far and wide for the rarities of
nature; Birds, Beasts, Fishes of inestimable price; which yet brought in, the
bodies are scorned, and only the eye of this Bird, the tongue of that Fish is
taken: that the spoils of many might be sacrifices to one supper. The
Emperor of (the low Countries) Hell, has delicates of stranger varitie,
curiosity. Does Judas stomach stand to treason? there it is; he may feed
liberally on that dish. Does Nero thirst for homicides? the Devil drinks to
him in ^oles of blood: is 1 Kin. 12.28. 2 Samuel 15.
Jeroboam hungry of Idolatry? behold a couple of Calves are set before him:
has Absolon the Court-appetite, Ambition? lo, a whole Kingdom is presented
him for a mess, a shrewd bait: Machiau^ls position, faith-breach for
Kingdoms is no sin. The Devil thought this Dish would please CHRIST
himself, Matthew. 4 9.
and therefore offered him many kingdoms for a morsel; reserving this to the
last, as the strongest argument of his Sophistry. Does Herod affect Envy?
behold, a Banquet ^f Revenge, furnished with the murdered corpse of thousands,
Matthew. 2.16.
Infants. Does the ravening mawe of the Pope ( 1 King. 21.4
Ahab-like) forbear meat, because he cannot get the Vineyard of a Kingdom? or
has he bound himself with the spells of devilish con^estations (like those
Acts 23.14.
in Ac^es) not to eat or drink till he has killed Paul? behold, here is wine
set before him in a golden cup, ( Revel. 17.4.
Wine of Abomination) wherewith whole nations reele: Locusts and Vipers,
pestilent and serpentine poisons, whereof the world laughing dies. Is any
Courtier p^oud? here are piles of Silks: Is any Of^icer troub^ed with the itch
in his hands? here is vnguentum aureum to cure it; a mess of bribes. Has any
Gentleman the hunger-worme of Covetousness? here is cheer for his diet:
Vsuri^s, oppressions, exactions, enclosings, rackings, rakings, pleasing
gobbets of avarice. Is any Tradesman light-fingered, and lighter-conscienced?
here is whole feast of Frauds, a table furnished with Tricks, conueyances,
glossings, periuries, cheatings. Has any Papist a superstitious Appetite? he
is set down in the chair of Ignorance, and to him are served in by
Sorbonists, Jesuits, S^minaries, Loyolists; a large and lavish feast of
Crucifixes, unctions, scrapings, traditions, Re^iques, etc. And as Cheese to
digest all the rest, yet it self never digested, Treason. For your route of
Epicures, Ruffians, Roarers, Drunkards, Boone-companions, you may know the
place easily where these Kas^rils light, even at the carkase-feast. Sin has
invited them, and they scorn to be scornful; hither they come, and every man
has a dish by himself, eat whiles he blow again; except their appetites
agree in the choice. You hear the Inviter.

Let it not pass us without observation, Obseruat.
Satan is not without his Factors abroad: he has spirits enough of his own,
my name is Legion, Mark 5.9.
Mark 5. but he is not content, except he suborne man against man, till (
homo be homini demon) man a Judas to his friend, woman an Eve to her husband.
I confess, he has many Setters of this literal name and disposition;
Harlots, scattring his Stews (like the lice of Egypt) over all the world: but
I will not restrain his Kingdom to these narrow limits only, which is not
bounded but with the Earth: he that compasses it, Job 2.2.
and has such dealings in all Kingdoms, is not without his plotters, and
Intelligencers in every corner.

He has superstitious Seminaries in the Country, me^cenary periurers in the
Hall, a long Lane for Brokers and Usurers in the City, and sometimes a
dangerous brood of Jesuits in foreign Courts, croaking like Frogs, even in
their Phara^hs Chambers: whilst himself roaues on the Sea of this World, like
a Pyrate, Cardinals and Jesuits are his Mariners, Psalm. 105.30.
and the Pope sits at the Stern: Antichrist is his Steward, (strange, he who
calls himself Christ's Vicar should be the Devils Steward) and has ever been
faithful to his Kingdom. Many souls have they successively sent to people
his low world, whiles their own went also for company. The wickedness of some
Popes have been monstrous, and almost forbidding all the O^ficers of Satan to
match them. That if a score of the most prodigious reprobates should be
mustred out of Hell, it is likely enough, that nineteen of them would be
Popes; and perhaps to make up the twentieth, there would be some strife
between a Jesuit and a Cardinal.

Rome, is this Harlots local seat, her house, styled by the Scripture, the
Whore of Babylon; her Doctrine is here expressed: Stolen waters are sweet,
and the bread of Secrecies is pleasant. Waters of Heresy, stolen from the
Ier. 2.13.
Cisternes of Superstition. The bread of Deceit, molded by Error, and baked
in the Oven of Tradition. We have three commune Enemies; as we are Men, the
Devil; as Christi^ns, the Turk; as professors of the Gospel, the Pope: the
first has the two last for h^s Factours: of whom, we pray* aut conuertantur,
ne pereant: au^ confundantur, ne noceant: either for their conversion, to save
themselves; or for their confusion, not to hurt us. Amongst us, the Pope does
most present mischief: Luke 22.38.
Peter told CHRIST, Behold, here are two Swords; Matthew. 16.19
CHRIST told Peter, Behold, here are the Keys: Peter ^ayes by his Swords, and
takes the Keys: the Pope now lays by his Keys and falls to his Sword: Oh
quantum hic Petrus ab illo? What difference betwixt the true Peter, and his
false Successor? yet, as if he were Heau^ns Porter, men flock to him: whom let
me appose with that of the Poet: Ecquae tanta fuit Romam tibi causa videndi?
What foolish wind blows you to Rome?


He has infinite petrie stales, to tempt men to sin, whom he has officed
for Bidders to this Feast. Will you take a short muster of some of his
Inviters, organa iniquitatis, enginers, bidders to this Banquet of vanity: they
have all their several stands.

1. In the Court, he has set Ambition, to watch for base minds, that would
stoop to any secure villainy for preferment; and to bring them to this Feast
This attempt can tempt none but the base, the Noble spirit can not be so
wrought upon: this is a principal Bidder.

2. In Foro, at the Hall gates, he sets Inviters, that becken contention to
them, and fill the world with broiles. I mean neither the reverend Judges, nor
the worthy Counselors, nor the good Atturneys; but the Labels of the Law:
Solliciters indeed, for they are a solicitation to our peace: Petty-foggers,
Common Barr^tours.
Satan's firebrarnds, and mortal things; which he casts abroad, Prou.
to make himself sport: but they do more hurt amongst the Barley, the Commons
of this Land, Judge. 15.5.
then Sampsons Foxes with the fire at their tails: Oh, that they were shipped
out for Virginia; or (if they would trouble so good a Soil) into some desert,
where they might set Beasts together by the ears, for they can not live
without making broiles.

3. Pride is another Bidder, and she keeps a shop in the City: You shall
find a description of her Shop, and take an Inuentory of her Wares, from the
Prophet, Esa. 3. The tinckling ornaments, the Cawles, Esa. 3.18. etc.
and the Moonetires, etc. She sits upon the Stall, and courts the Passengers
with a What lack ye? Nay, besides her Person, she hangs out her Picture; a
picture unlike her self, though she not unlike her picture; all paint.
Infinite traffic to her, but with the same luck and success, that the
visitant beasts came to the sick Lion: Vestigia nulla retrorsum: or at best,
as the runners to Rome, that return with shame and beggerie.

4. Engrossing is another Inviter; and has a large walk: sometimes he
watches the landing of a Ship: sometimes he turns whole loads of Corn besides
the market. This Bidder preuailes with many a Citizen, Gentleman, Farmer, and
brings in infinite guests: the Devil gives him a letter of Mart for his
Pyracie.

5. Briberie is an officious fellow, and a special bidder to this Feast. He
inuites both forward and froward: the forward and yielding, by promises of good
cheer: secunda dies; that they shall have a fair^ day of it: the backward
honest man, by terrors and menaces, that his cause shall else go Westward:
(indeed it goes to Westminster.) Yea, with pretense of Commiseration and
Pity; as if the conscience of their right did animate them to their cause:
thus with a show of Sanctimoni^, they get a Saints money: but indeed (argentum
foecundum, argumentum facund^m) there is no persuasion more patheticall, then
the purses. Briberie stands at the staire-foot in the robes of an Officer, and
helps up Injury to the place of Audience: thus Judas his Bag is drawn with
two strings, made of Silk and Silver, Favor and Reward.

All Officers belong not to one Court: their conditions alter with their
places: there are some, that seem so good, that they lament the vices,
whereupon they yet inflict but pecuniary punishments. Some of them are like the
Israelites, with a Sword in one hand, and a Trowell in the other, with the
motto of that old Emblem, In vtrumque paratus: as the one hand dawbes up
Justice, so the other cuts breaches of division. They mourn for Truth and
Equity, as the sons of Jacob for Joseph, when themselves sold it: they
exclaim against poenall transgressions. So Caius Gracchus defends the
Treasury from others violence, whiles himself robbed it: so the Pindar chafes
and swears to see Beasts in the Corn, yet will pull up a stake, or cut a
Teather, to find supply for his pinfold: so Charles the fifth was sorry for the
Popes durance, and gave orders of public prayers for his release, yet held him
in his own hands prisoner.

6. Faction keeps the Church; and inuites some vain glorious Priests to this
Feast: Schism and Separation, like a couple of thorns, prick the Churches
side, wound our Mother, till her heart bleedes: All Seminaries of Sedition are
Satan's special (...).

7. Riot is his Inviter in a Tavern* he sits like a young Gallant at the
upper end of the Table; and drinks so many and so deep healthes to the
absent, that the present have no health left them. This is a frequented
Inviting place, that I say not, the Feast it self. Coue^ousnesse often is the
Host, Ebrietie drinks the liquor, Swearing keeps the reckoning, Lust holds
the door, and Beggary pays the shot.

8. Oppression has a large circuit, and is a general Bidder to this banquet.
This Factour has abundance of the Devils work in hand: he vntiles the houses
of the poor, that whiles the storms of Usury beat them out, he may have
peaceable entrance: he ioynes house to house, as if he was straitened of
room; tell him from me, there is room enough for him in hell.

There are infinite swarms of Inviters besides, which run like vagabonds on
the Devils errand, with Salutem's in their mouths; as Judas to Jesus, all
hail; but it proved a rattling salutation, for Deaths storm followed it: all
these declare to us the bankets praeparation. Infinite among ourselves; Rome
offers us more help: but we answer them, (as Octauian did of the Crow:
(Satis istarum a^ium habemus domi.) We have enough of these brides at home:
they are all Messengers of our wrack, Porkposes, premonishing a tempest;
Usurers, Brokers, Vagrants, Ruffians, Blasphemers, Tiplers, Churles, Wantons,
Pedlers of pernicious wares; Seminaries, Incendiaries, Apostates, Humorists,
seditious troublers of our peace: you may perceive that our Winter's busy, by
the flying abroad of these wild-geese. All are Bidders.

Use.
These Instruments of Tentation cannot hurt us, except we be enemies to our
selves. They do their worst: Romans 8.
Vertitque in meliora deus: God turns all to our best. Like wandering Planets,
they are carried with a double motion, (Suo and primo mobili:) with their own,
and a superior mouer. By their own, which though (non sine errore, tamen sine
terrore) wandering, and stalking with big looks, yet are not so feared as
they expect. 2. By the First and Great Mouers, which ouer-rules them with a
violent hand. Perhaps they exercise us with tentat^ons, Esaias. 10* 5. with Esaias.
14.25.
as Ashur did Israel; but the work done, the rod is thrown into the fire:
they are but ^ubbish to scowre the vessels of Gods house; Apothicaries to
minister us bitter drugges, not able to put in one dram more then God our
Physician prescribes; Shepherds dogs with their teeth beaten short, to hunt
us to the sheepfolds of peace. In all their works, the villainy is their own,
the virtue Gods: (as in Christ's betraying, Opus dei redemptio, opus Iudae
proditio.) If we think, Job. 21.17.30. Psalm. 73.19.
they flourish too long, let us satisfy our selves, with Job and David; that
(Subito ad Inferos) They go suddenly down into the pit. So the Poet propped
up his tottering ^aesitations, with this conclusion. Abstulit hunc tandem
Russini panatumultum,
Claudian.
Absoluitque deos.
In the end, God cleares his Justice from any imputation, by turning the
workers of wickedness into hell.

Bidders, that I mean to forestall you of the Banquet: behold, I have brought
you now to the Feast, such as it is: Stolen waters are sweet, and the bread of
secrecies is pleasant. Thus it is in gross; to cut it up, and serve it in, in
several dishes; you have. 1. A prescription. 2. A description. 3. An
ascription. 1. A prescripon of their essences. 2. A description of their
natures: 3. An ascription of their qualities. Quae, quanta, qualia. 1. The
Iunkets are prescribed, quae sint, of what kind they are: Waters, Bread. 2.
They are described quanta sint, of what property, virtue, nature; Stolen,
Secret. 3. They are ascribed to, qualia sint, of what operation, relish, or
quality; Sweet, Pleasant. Stolen waters, etc. Thus have you their quidditie,
their quantity, their quality. This is the Banquet (la^^um, l^tum) dainty and
cherishing: ch^ape, for it is stolen; delightful, for it is sweet. We will
ascend to view this Feast (not to feed on it) by the stayres and degrees of my
Text. You have. 1. waters. 2. stolen. 3. sweet. So you have. 1. Bread. 2.
eaten in secret. 3. pleasant. Of them all first literally and morally, then
doctrinally.

Waters: Not the Genesis 1.2.
waters that the spirit moved on at the creation, the first waters; nor the
waters Esaias. 44.3.
of Regeneration* moved by the same spirit, sanctifying waters: nor the Ioh.
5.4.
waters of Bethesda, stirred by an Angel, salutare and medicinal waters: nor
the Ezekiel. 47.8.
waters issuing from under the threshold of the Sanctuary; preservative
waters. But the bitter waters of Exodus 15.25.
Marah, without the sweet wood of Grace to season them. Psalm. ^44.7.
Waters of Trouble, from which David prays for delivery. Tumultuous waters:
Exodus 7.17.
Waters that turn into blood: bloody waters. 2 Samuel 22 17.
Waters of Tribulation, to them that digest it; though waters of Titillation,
to them that taste it: much like our hot waters in these days; strange
chimicall extractions, quintessences of distilled natures: Viscera, ne dicam,
mysteria Terrae: The bowels, nay the mysteries of Earth, good and happy in
their opportune and moderate use; but wretched in our misapplied lusts; to
turn the blood into fire, and to fill the bones with luxury; not to make
nature swim in a river of delights, but even to drown it.

Waters; neither Succourie nor Endive, etc. no refrigerating waters, to cool
the Souls heat, but waters of inflammation: Spaines Rosasolis, water of
Inquisition: Tyrones Vsquebah, water of Rebellion: Turkey's Aqua fortis, a
violent and bloody water: Romes aqua inferna, a superstitious water; stilled
out of Sulphur and Brimstone, through the Lymbeck of Heresy. Oh! you wrong
it: it is aquavitae, and aqua coelestis. Let the operation testify it: it is
aqua fortis, aqua mortis. Vinum Barathri: the wine of hell: no poisons are so
banefull: It tastes like honey; but if Jonathan touch it, he will endanger his
life by it. 1 Samuel 14.43.
These are wretched waters, worse then the moorish and Fennie rivers, which
(the Poets feign) run with a dull and lazy course: tranquilla alta:
streams, still at the top, but boiling like a Cauldron of moulten Lead at the
bottom: Phlegeton, and Pyriphlegeton (ignitae et ^^^mminiae vnde) were mere
fables and toys to these waters: they are truculent, virulent, obnoxious
waters, derived by some filthy guttures from the mare mortuum of Iniquity.

The Pope has waters, not much unlike these of the Devils Banquet. Holy-waters;
holy indeed, for they are con^ured with a holy exorcisme, says their
Massebooke. Of wonderfu^l effects; either sprinkled outwardly, they refresh the
receiver, as if his head was wrapped with a wet clowt in a cold morning; or
drunk down, they are powerful to cleanse the heart, and scowre out the
Devil. Oh, you wrong Romes holy water, to think it the Devils drink; when
the proverb says, the Devil loves no holy water: yes, he will run from
it, as a mendicant Friar from an alms! To speak duly of it; it is a special
river of hell, and drownes more, Exodus 14.
then ever did the red Sea, when it swallowed an whole Army of the Egyptians.
Why, but holy water is a special ransom to free souls out of Purgatory; and
dug out of the fountain of Scripture. Asperges me, Domine, Hysopo: Psalm.
51.7.
Thou shall sprinkle me, oh Lord, with Hysope: (for so their translation has
it:) the sense of which place, is, says the Romist; that the Priest must dash
the grave with a holy-water-sprinkle: for you must suppose, that David was dead
and buried when he spoke these words, and his soul in Purgatory. It is added
that Dives desired in hell, a drop of water to cool his tongue: Oh then, Luke
16.24.
how cooling and comfortable are the sprinklings of these waters on the graves
of the dead. But if they can speak no bett^r for them, they will prove some of
these waters, here served in at Sins banquet: for if Antichrist can make a man
drunk with his holy water, he will swallow all the rest of his morsels with
the less difficulty.

These then are the waters; not the water of Regeneration, wherein our Fathers
and we have been baptized: nor the waters of Consolation, which make glad the
City of God: nor the waters of Sanctification, wherein Christ once, the Spirit
of Christ, still, washes (the feet) the affections of the Saints. Not the
Hyblaean Nectar of heaven, whereof, he that drinks, shall never Ioh. 4.14.
thirst again: nor the Revel. 22.1.
waters of that pure River of life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the
Throne of God. But the lutulent, spumy, maculatorie waters of Sin; either
squeased from the spungie clouds of our corrupt natures, or surging from the
contagious (veins of hell) springs of Temptation.

I might here blab to you the Devils secrets, and tell you his riddles, his
tricks, his policies; in that he calls Sins, Waters, and would make his
guests believe, that they wondersully refresh; but I reserve it to a fitter
place: the Sweetness shall carry that note from the waters, I will contract
all to these four observations; as the Sum of that I would write of the
waters, not De aquis, non sup^r aquas.
on the waters; I have better hope of your memories. 1. The preferment of
waters at Satan's Banquet. 2. The Devils policy in calling Sins by the name
of waters. 3. The similitude of Sins to Waters. 4. The plurality and
abundance of these waters.

Obseruat. 1.
Water is here preferre^ to Bread; for lightly Sins guests are better
drinkers then eaters; they eat by the ^omer, Exodus 36.
and drink by the Epha: Indeed; a full belly is not of such dexte^itie for
the Devils employment, as a full brain. Gluttony would go sleep, and so do
neither good nor harm: Ebrietie has some villainy in hand, and is then fitted
with valor, the drunkard is an Hercules furens: he will kill and slay: how
many do that in a Tavern, which they repent at a Tiburne? you will say, it is
not wi^h drinking water: yes, the Harlots waters, (such as is served in at the
Devils Banquet;) mixed with rage and madness. Water is an Element, whence
humiditie is derived: the sap in the Vine, the juice in the Grape, the
liquiditie in the Ale or Beer, is water: Indeed sometimes Neptune dwells too
far off from Bacchus door; and the water is mastred with additions: yet it
may (alienate the property) not annihilate the nature and essence of water:
water it is still, though The four mother-elements alter one into another:
earth to water, water is ra^ified into ay^e: air r^fined, etc and so back
ag^^ne: Inde r^tr^ red^unt, idemque r^^^xitur ordo. Metam. 15.
compounded water: compounded in our drinks, but in wines, derived, (a primis
naturae per media) not extinguished in the being, not brought to a nullitie of
waters. Drink then, bibendum aliquid, though the Harlot gives it a modest and
cool name, waters, is the first dish of the Devils Banquet. The first
entertainment into this Appij forum, is with the three Tauernes; Act. 28.1^.
not so much a drunkenness to the brain, as to the conscience. There is a
Esa. 29.9.
Drunkenness, not with wine: there is a staggering not with strong drink. The
Devil begins his Feast with a health, Dan. 5*
as Belshazzar, whatsoever the vp-shot be. He propounds the water, and he
propines it; he will not give them worse then he takes himself. As Jupiter is
said, to have at his Court-gate two great Tons; whereof they that enter must
first drink; and himself begins to them.

Jupiter Ambrosiasatur est: est Nectare plenus. Pers.
Intemperance is the first dish to be tasted of: Non principalis a Princip^;
^ed principalis a prin^ipio.
it is (if not principalis, yet, si ita dicam, principialis) if not the prime
dish, yet the first dish: Satan must first intoxicate the brains, and
extinguish the eye of reason; as the Thief that would rob the house, first
puts out the Candle. Understanding is first drowned in these waters: Acrasia
praei^. Acrisia sequitur.
Riot iustles, and the Wit is turned besides the Saddle. The Sons of the
Earth would not so doat on Revel. 17.2.
the Whore of Babylon, if the wine of her Fornication had not made them drunk:
the ghes^s here Esaias. 5.11.
rise early to the wine: it is the first service; and are indeed (as the
Apostles were slandered) Act. 2.13.15.
nine-of-clocke Drunkards: Matthew. 6.34.^
The day would be without his su^ficient sorrow, active and passive mischiefs,
if the morning wine should not inflame them. They that are daily guests at the
Devils table, know the fashions of his Court; they must be drunk at the
entrance. It is one of his laws, and a Physicke-bill of hell, that they must
not wash, till they have drunk. These Waters are to be applied inwardly first,
and once taken down, they are fitted to swallow any morsel of damnation that
shall afterward be presented them.

Water was the first drink in the world, Obseru. 2.
and Water must be the first drink at the Devils Banquet. There is more in it
yet: The Devil shows a trick of his wit in this title. Water is a good
creature, and many celestial things are shadowed by it. Matthew. 3.11.
1. It is the element, wherein we were baptized. 2. And dignified to figure
the grace of the holy Spirit. Yet this very ^ame, must be given to Sin.
Indeed I know, the same things are often accepted in diverse senses, by the
lang^^ge of Heaven. Leaven is est-soones taken for hypocri^ie, as in the
Pharisees: for Athei^me, as in the S^dduces: for Prof^nenesse, as in the
H^rodians. And generally for 1 Cor 5 7.
Sin, by Paul, 1 Cor. 5. Yet by Christ, for Luke 13.21. Amos. 3.8. R^u^l. 5.5.
grace. Luke. 13. God is compared to a Lion: Amos. 3. And Christ is called the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Apocal. 5. And the Devil is called a Lion. A
roaring Lion, etc. 1. Pet. 5. 1 Pet. 5.8. Ioh. 3 14. 2 Cor. 11.3. Matthew 3.9. 1
Pet. 2.5. Psalm. 118.22.
Christ was figured by a Serpent. Ioh. 3. And to a Serpent is Satan compared. 2
Cor. 11. Stones are taken in the worst sense, Matthew. 3. God is able of these
stones to raise, etc. Stones in the best sense: 1. Pet. 2. Living stones: and
Christ himself, the headstone of the corner. Psalm. 118. Be like children,
says Paul; and not like children: be children in simplicity, not in
knowle^ge. Graces are called Waters; so here vices; but the attribute makes the
difference: Those are living Waters, these are the Waters of death. The Devil
in this plays the Machiauell; but I spare to follow this circumstance here,
because I shall meet it again, in the next branch; Bread of secrecies.

Sins may in some sense be likened to waters; yea, even to waters in the Cup,
Obseru. 3.
for to waters in the Sea, they are most like; The one drownes not more bodies,
then the other souls. They know the danger of the Sea, Psalm. 108 23.
that pro^ecute their business in great waters: they might know the hazards of
Si^ne, that sail in the Devils Barge of luxury: I may say of them both with
the Poet. -- Digitis a morte r^moti
quatuor, aut septem* si sit latissimataeda.
They are within four or seven Inches of death: how many souls are thus
shipwrackt? how many weep out a De profundis, that would not sing the songs of
Syon, in the Land of the living! they forgot Jerusalem in their mirth, and
therefore sit down and howl by the waters of (...): but these, here, are
Festival, not Marinall wate^s.

1. Water is an enemy to digestion; so is Sin, Similitudes of sins to
waters.
clogging the memory (the souls stomach) with such crudit^es of vice, that no
sober instructions can be digested in it: especially Waters hurt digestion in
these cold Countries, naturally cold, in regard of the Climate, but spiritually
more cold in devotion, Frosen up in the dregs of Iniquity. Surely many of our
Auditors drink too deep of these Waters, before they come to Jacobs Well:
John 4.
our Waters of heavenly doctrine will not down with them. The Waters of sin
so put your mouths out of taste, that you cannot relish the Waters of Life:
they are Marah to your palates. It seems, you have been at the Devils Banquet,
Matthew. 5.
and therefore thirst not after righteousness. The Cup of the old Temptation
has filled you: you scorn the Cup of the New Testament. If you had not drunk
too hard of these Waters, you would Ioh. 4.10. Josh 7.
ask Christ for his living Water: but Achan has drunk cursed Gold, when he
should come before Io^uah: Geh^^i has drunk Bribes, when he should come to
Elisha. 2 King. 5.
No marvel if you suck no Juice from the Waters of God, when you are so full
and drunken with the Waters of Satan.

2. Water duls the brain, and renders the spirits obtuse and heavy: It is an
enemy to literature, says Horace merrily: Who in a Rithme rehearses,
That w^ter drinkers never make good Vearses. Carmina non scribun^ur aquae
potoribus.

We have no skill in the himnes of the spirit, no alacrity to praise God, no
wisdom to pray to him: why? we have drunk of these stolen waters. The
chilling and killing cold of our Indeuotion, the morose and raw humors of our
uncharitableness* the foggy, dull, stupid heaviness of our invincible
ignorance, show that we have been too busy with these Waters, nothing will
pass with us, but rare and novel matters, (Ieiunus raro stomachus vulgaria
temnit) and in these, Hor. Ser* 2.
we study to admire the garb, not to admit the profit.

3. We find Grace compared to Fire, and gracelesnesse to water: the Spirit
came down on the Apostles in the likeness of fiery tongues, Acts 2.3.
at the day of Pentecost: and John Baptist testifies of CHRIST, that he should
Baptize with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. The spirit of sin falls on the
heart like a cold deaw. Matthew* 3.11.
It is implied, Revel. 3.15. that zeal is hot, wickedness cold,
neutrallitie lukewarm. Fire is hot (and dry) Water is cold (and moist)
praedominantly, and in regard of their habitual qualities: so zeal; is 1.
hot; no incendiary, no praeter-naturall, but a supernatural heat; equally
mixed with Love and Anger: such was Elias zeal for the Lord of Hosts; 2 King.
2.11.
he could not be cold in this life, that went up in Fire to Heaven. 2. Dry:
not like Ephraim, a Cake baked on the one side, but crude and raw on the other:
no, the heat of zeal has dried up the moisture of profaneness. But
wickedness is 1. cold, a gelid nature, a numnesse in the Conscience: that,
(as when the Air is hotest, the Springs are coldest, so) when the Sun of
Grace warmes the whole Church, is yet shaking of an Ague; nay, and will not
creep (like Simon Peter) to the fire. 2. Moist, not (succus and sanguinis
plenum) full of juice and sap; but sin runs like a cold rheum over the
Conscience. This metaphor follows Saint Paul, Quench not the Spirit: 1 These.
5.19.
wherein he fully iustifies this circumstance, forbidding the water, of
impiety, to quench the fire of Grace.

Here then see the impossibility of uniting the two contrary Holiness and
Wickedness.

2 Cor. 6.14.


natures in one conscience, as of reconciling Fire and Water into the same
place, time, and subject. If sin keep court in the Conscience, and sit in
the Throne of the Heart, Grace dares not peep in at the gates; or if it does,
with cold entertainment. I have heard report of a generation of men, that
carry Fire in the one hand, and Water in the other: whose conversation mingles
(Humentia siccis) Wet and Dry together, like the Syriphian Frogs in Pliny,
whose challenge was, mihi terra lacusque, I have Land and Sea for my walk: but
alas, if the water be true water of sin, believe it, the Fire is but a false
fire, the blaze of hypocrisy: but the Hermit turned his guest out of doors
for this trick, that he could warm his cold hands with the same breath
wherewith he cooled his hot pottage.

4. Water is a baser Element, and I may say, more elementary, more mixed, and as
it were Sophisticate with transfusion: Fire is in the highest Region, the
purest Element, and next to Heaven: this is the seat of grace, (non inferiora
secuta) scorning the lower things. Sin is (like water) of a ponderous,
crasse, gross, stinking, and sinking nature. They that have drunk the Esa.
51.17.
Cup of slumber, had need to be bidden Awake, and stand up, for they are
sluggish and laid: Phil 3.20.
Grace (though in the Orb of Sin, yet) has her conversation in Heaven, and
(cor repositum, vbi proemium depositum) her heart laid up, where her love and
treasure is: her motto is, non est mortale quod opto. She has a holy
aspiration, and seeks to be as near to God as the clogge of fles^ will let
her. Sin is like water, though raging with the surges and swellings, and
only bounded in with Gods non vltra, here I will stay thy proud waves, yet
deorsum ruit: Psalm. 104.9.
whiles these waters swim in the heart, the heart sinkes down like a stone,
as Nabals.

5 Physicians say, that water is a binder: you may apply it, Though no Element
is simply heavy but Earth, yet Water is co^paratiuely heavy.
that men in these days are terrible water-drinkers: for the times are very
restrictiue: you may as well wring Hercules Clubbe out of his fist, as a penny
from auarices Purse. Men's hearts are costiue, to part with any thing in pios
vsus: their hands clutch't, doors shut, purses not open: nay, the most laxatiue
prodigals, that are lavish and letting-flie to their lusts, are yet heart-bound
to the poor. It is a general disease procured be these waters, to be troubled
with the griping at the heart. Such were the Amos 4.1.
Kine of Bashan, soluble to their own lusts, bring, let us drink: bound up,
and strait-laced to the poor: not refreshing, but oppressing, not helping but
cr^shing the needy: they Amos 6.6.
grieve not for Joseph; nay, they grieve Joseph. These Kine are dead, but their
Calves are in England, abundantly multiplied. These are not the days of peace,
that turn Swords into Sickles; but the days of pride, wherein the Iron is
knocked off from the plough, and by a new kind of Alchymistrie converted into
plate. The Farmers painfulness runs into the Mercers Shop, and the toyling
Ox is a sacrifice and prey to the cunning Fox, all the racked rents in the
Country will not discharge the Books in the City.

Great men are unmerciful to their Tenants, that they may be ouer-mercifull to
their Tendents; that stretch them as fast as they retch the others. The sweat
of the laborers brows is made an ointment to supple the joints of Pride. Thus
two malignant Planets reign at once, and in one heart, costiue covetousness,
and loose lavishness: like the Serpent Amphisboena, with a head at each end of
the body, Plin.
who, whiles they strive which should be the Master-head, afflict the whole
carkase: whiles Couetise and Pride wrestle, the Estate catches the fall. They
eat Men alive in the Country, and are themselves eaten alive in the City:
what they get in the Hundredth, they loose in the Sheere: Sic proedae patet esca
sui: they make themselves plumpe for the prey; ^or there are that play the
robbe-theefe with them: Vnius compendium, alterius dispendium: if there be a
winner, Et terit, et teritur.
there must be a looser: Serpens Serpentem deuorando fit Draco: Many Landlords
are Serpents to devour the poor, but what are they that devour those
Serpents? Dragons. You see what monsters then, usurious Citizens are. Thus
whiles the Gentleman and the Citizen shuffle the Cards together, they deal
the poor Commons but a very ill game. These are the similitudes. I could also
fit you with some discrepancies.

1. Waters mundifie and cleanse, The dissimilitude of sins to waters.

Non maculati* sed maculae. Jude 12.


these soil and infect: the Conscience grows more speckled by them, till men
become not only spotted, but spots, as Lucan said of the wounded body, totum
est pro vulnere corp^^, the whole body was as one wound.

2. Add, that waters quench the thirst, and cool the heat of the body, but
these waters rather fire the heart, and inflame the affections; puff the
Spleen, which swollen, all the other parts pine and languish into a Consumption:
the heart is so blown with lusts that all the graces of the soul dwindle
like blasted Impes: these are (aquae soporiferae) waters of slumber, that cast
the soul into a dead sleep, whiles the Devil cauterizeth and seares up the
Conscience.

3. We say of water, it is a good Servant, though an ill Master: but we
cannot apply it to Sin; it is not good at all: indeed less ill, when it
serves, then when it reigns: if this false Gibeonite will needs dwell with
thee, set him to the basest Offices. So Israel kept in some Canaanites, lest
the wild Beasts should come in upon them: our infirmities and mastred sins
have their use thus, to humble us with the sense of our weakness, lest the
furious beasts of pride and security, break into our freeholds. But sin of
it self is good neither Egg nor Bird, neither in Root nor Branch, neither Hot
nor Cold, neither in the Fountain nor in the Vessel.

Obseru. 4.
The plurality of these waters prolongs and determines my speech: their nature
is not more pernicious then their number numerous: indesinita locutio, infinita
turba: an undefined word, an vnconfined number. If there were but one cup
alone, it would cloy, and satiate, and procure loathing, (as even Manna did to
Israel) therefore Satan does diuersifie his drinks, to keep the wicked man's
appetite fresh and sharp. If he be weary of one sin, behold, another stands
at his elbow: has Dives dined? he may walk up to his study, and tell his
Money, his Bags, his Idols: or call for the Key of his Wardrobe, to feed his
proud eye with his Silks: for (Diuitiae and deliciae) Riches and Pleasures
serve one another turn. If Nabal be weary of counting his Flocks, or laying
up their Fleeces, he may go and make himself drunk with his sheep-shearers.
Hence it is that (ex malis moribus oriuntur plurim leges) to meet with the
multiplicitie of sins there is required a multitude of laws; as when
Physicians grow rich, Plato.
it is an evident sign of an infected Commonwealth. Sin stood not single in
Gods view, when he threatens so fearful a punishment, as the whole Book
(again) can not match it. Hose. 4.3.
Therefore the Land shall mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall
languish, with the beasts of the Field, with the Fowls of Heaven; yea, the
Fishes of the Sea also shall be taken away: an universal vastation: V^rse. 1.
but as 1. privately, there was no Truth, yet if there had been Mercy: nay, no
Mercy: somewhat yet, if Knowledge had stood constant: no Knowledge in the
Land. So 2. positiuely, Verse. ^.
there was Swearing: can swearing be without lying? no, lying too: is the
tongue alone set on fire at the Devils Forge? no, Iam. 3.
the hand is also a firebrand of Hell; Killing, Stealing, Adultery join their
forces: and to give testimony against their singularity, Blood touches
blood. How should reprobates else fill up the measure of their sins? 1 Cor.
10.7.
Thus when the ungodly have eat and drunk, they may rise up to play.

Will you descend to personal instances? lo, Judas is new come from this
Banquet; give him a vomit, and what lies on his stomach? strange waters, and
abundance of them: behold, the Spanish waters of Pride, the Romish waters of
Treason, the Italian waters of Murder, the Jewish of Hypocrisy, the Turkish of
Theeuerie, the Grecian of all Villainy: ask Mary Magdalene what variety was
at this Banquet, she will tell you of seven Viols, seven Devils; you may hear
another tell his name, Legion. Bid Absolon give you a Tauerne-bill, or short
Inventory, of these waters, and he will read you* In primis the swelling
waters of Pride. Item, the surfeiting waters of Luxury. Item, the scalding
waters of Adultery. Item, the red waters of Bloodinesse. Item, the black
waters of Treason; and for the shot, ask him the total sum of the Bill, and
he will tell you Damnation. If sins be thus familiarly linked in one man,
how do they tune in a Consort? how agree they in Company? nothing better; not
a Broker and a Pawn, not a dear year and a Cormorant. Hence Christ calls the
way to perdition, the broad way. You can not stir a foot in the great Road to
the City of Hell, Pluto's Court, Matthew. 7.13.
but you meet sins in throngs; vanity is the largest and most beaten
thorow-fare of the world. Some double in their companies, some treble, some
troop, none go single. vae soli: Eccles. 4.10.
if one sin were alone, it would be easily vanquished. The Devil knows that
(vis vnita fortior) collected strengths are unconquerable: and therefore drives
his waters so, that (vndae super advenit vnda) one wave seconds the former. 1.
Sometimes they go like Beasts, Romans 13.13.
by couples, Romans 13. Riot and Drunkenness, Chambring and Wantonness, Strife
and Envy. Ierem. 23. Ier. 23.10.
Adultery and O^thes: and Ierem. 2. My people have committed two evils, ^er.
2.13.
etc. 2. Sometimes they dance in Triades, by threes, Phil. 3, Gluttonny,
Pride, Phil. 3.19.
Covetousness, Gallat. 5. Vaineglory, Provocation, Gal. 5.26.
Malice, Amos 1. For three transgressions and for four, Amos 1.3.6. etc
etc. If there be not rather a great number meant: 1 Ioh. 2.16.
Saint John abridgeth all the vanity of the world into a triplicitie: All that
is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lus^ of the eyes, the pride of
life. This is the Trinity the world does worship: Haec tria pro trino Numine
mundus habet. 3. Sometimes they come by whole herds and droues, like the Host
of the Aramites. Galat. 5. you may read them mustred up: Adultery, Gal. 5.19.
etc.

Thus I have showed you the multiplicitie of these waters: what remains, but
that the some fire of Gods Altar, that has enlightened your vnd^^^tandings,
do a little also warm your conscience^* should prevent the method of my
Te^^, ^f I s^oul^ yet show you the direful, dismal operation of these waters:
yet somewhat I must say to make you loath them. As Captains provoke their
Soldiers, Per verbum vocale, per semivocale, per mutum: By vocal speeches,
semi-vocall Drums and Trumpets, mute Ensigns: so God disswades you from
these waters. 1. By his word; Viua et viuifica voce; A living and enliuing
word: either in the Thunders of Sinai, or Songs of Syon, which the Word
incarnate has spoken. 2. Or by his semi-vocall writings: Chrysostom. Sermon. de
Ielunijs.
for at the beginning God talked with man by himself; but after, finding him
estranged from his Creator, he sent him his mind in writing: And this he
makes sounding by his Ministers. 3. Or by his dumb Ensigns, wonders,
terrors, Judgments upon the lovers of these waters.

Trust not too much to these waters: Use 1.
they are not so virtuall, as the described Inviters, the Devils Prophets tell
you. Satan had long since his Water-Prophets: such were the Oracles
Colophonium and Bronchidicum: wherein one by drinking of waters, Alexius. lib.
5. cap. 2.
the other by receiving the fume of waters, fore-tolde future things. Porphyrie
observes that antiquity, called them (...), Madness; but the error and
impudence of succeeding ages (...), Diuinations. These were the Priests of
Bacchus, welcome to the world, as those would have been to Israel, that
Prophecy of wine and strong drink. Men hear of strange fountains (famoused
for wondrous cures) and run strait thither. Mich. 2.11.
The Devil is a Iuggler, and would make men believe, that if they drink at
his fountain of Idolatry, they shall have good luck after it: (he blushed
not to lay this battery of Temptation to the Son of God.) As good luck as
Sampson had, when he drunk out of the Asses tooth, Matthew. 4.9.
and presently after lost his eyes: or rather, Judge. 15.
as he that to find his Horse, must, by the Mass Priests direction, drink at
Saint Bri^gets Well, accordingly found his Horse, and riding home ^hereon,
broke his neck. Yield it a Fable; the Moral shall yield us this: that we
trust nothing, which has not Gods word for warrant. Charms, Spells,
Coniurations, are all vanities, lying vanities: he tha^ trusts thereto,
forsakes his own mercy. Ion. 2.8.


Fear^ these waters, for they are dangerous: sin is not more coole^n the
t^st, Use 2.
then it is fiery in the operation. Afflic^ion is hot to the relish, Matthew.
20.22.
(you cannot drink of my Cup) but cool, easefull, peaceful in the digestion:
but these waters are (mel in ore, fell in cord) sweet in the palate, bitter in
the stomach. The Oracle gave it: Diodor. Sicul.
Ninum prius capi non posse, quam fluuius ei fiat hostis: Nineveh should not be
taken, before the waters became her enemy: she feared no inundation, the Sea
was too remote: yet in the third year of her Seige, the waters of the Clouds
broke loose, and with abundant rain overwhelmed the walls; (Muros deiecit ad
stadia viginti) to twenty furlongs. We live secure, and devour these waters
of iniquity, as Fishes the water of the Sea; but when God shall make our
sins compass us at the heels, Psalm. 49.5.
and raise up these floods against us, we shall cry, as the drowning world,
woe unto us, the waters are become our enemies: the floods of our own sins
ouerwhelme us: so the Drunkard drinks a river into his belly, that drownes his
vital spirits with a Dropsy.

Let us pumpe out these waters of Sin, which we have devoured: Use 3.
It is the only course we have left, to keep our Ship from sinking: Euomite,
quos bibistis, fluuios. Cast them out by repentance: this is a saving vomit;
or else God will give you a vomit of Sulphur, and shameful spewing shall be
for your glory: We have all drunk liberally of these waters; too prodigally at
Sins fountain, Quando voluimus, et quantum valuimus; when we would, as much
as we were able; not only to drunkenness, but even to surfeit and madness: if
we keep them in our stomachs, they will poison us: Oh, fetch them up again
with buckets of sighs, and pumpe them out in rivers of tears, for your
sins. Make your heads waters, and your eyes fountains: weep your
consciences empty and dry again of these waters: Ier. 9.1.
Repentance only can lade them out. They, that have dry eyes, have waterish
hearts: and the Proverb is too true for many; No man comes to heaven wi^h dry
eyes: let your eyes gush out tears; not only in Psalm. 119.136
compassion for others, but in Psalm. 6.6.
passion for your selves, tha^ have not kept Gods Law. Weep out your sullen
waters of discontent at Gods doings, your garish waters of pride, freezing
obduracie, burning malice, foggie intemperanc^, base couetise. Oh think,
think, how you have despised the waters of life, turned Jesus Christ out of
your Inn, into a beastly Stable; whiles Pride sits uppermost at your Tables,
Malice usurps the best Chamber in your minds, Lust possesses your eyes,
Oaths employ your tongues, Ebrietie bespeake your tastes, Theft and injury
inthrone themselves in your hands, Mammon obsesseth your affections: Sick,
sick, all over: you may cry with the Shunamites Son, 2 King. 4.19*
Caput dolet: my head, my head: and with Jerusalem, Ier. 4.19.
my bowels, my bowels. Oh let faith and repentance make way, that the blood of
our Savior may heal you.

We are not only guilty of auersion from God, but of aduersion against God; Oh
where is our reuersion to God? the waters of lusts are ( aquae (...)) the
waters of folly and madness; but our tears are ( aquae (...)) the waters of
change of mind and repentance. Poenitentia est quasi poenae tenentia:
Repentance is a taking punishment of our selves: oh take this holy punishment
on your soul^s: Weep, weep, weep for your vanities. Achan cannot drink up
his execrable gold, nor Gehazi devour his bribes, nor Ahab make but a draught
of a vineyard, mingled with blood, nor Judas swallow down his cousenage and
treason, without being called to a reckoning. Orig. ho^. 5. in L^uit.
Nos quare non credimus, quod omnes astabimus ante tribunal? Why account we
not of our future standing before a Judgment Scate? Omnium aures pulso. All
we, whom these walls compass, have been drunken with these waters: some, that
hate Swearing, with dissembling: some, that abhor Idolatry, with
profaneness: some, that avoid notoriousnesse, with hypocrisy: many, that
pretend ill will to all the rest, with those (Lares et Lemures) household-Gods,
or rather household-Goblins and Devils, which almost no house is free from,
Fraud and Covetousness. We know, or at least should know, our own diseases,
and the special dish whereon we have surfetted; oh, why break we not forth
into vlulations, mournings, and loud mournings for our sins? cease not till
you have pumped out the sins of your souls at your eyes, and emptied your
consciences of these waters.

And then, behold other, behold better, behold blessed waters: Use 4.
you taste of them in this life, and they fill your bones with Marrow, Ioh.
4.14. Matthew. 5.
and your hearts with joy; they alone satisfy your thirst: without which,
though you could with Xerxes Army, drink whole Rivers dry, your burning heat
could not be quenched. Here drink, Cant. 2.4.
Bibite et inebriamini, Drink, and be drunken in this Wine-celler: only,
having drunk hearty draughts of these waters of life, ret^ine them constantly:
be not queasie-stomached, Demas-like, to cast them up again; the token of a
cold stomach, not yet heated by the spirit: for as the loathing of repast is a
token that Nature draws toward her end; so when these holy waters prove
fastidious, it is an argument of a soul near her death. Take then and dige^^
this water. Recipitur aure, retinetur cord, perficitur op^re. The ear
receives, the heart retains, the life digests it: but alas, we retain these
waters no longer then the finger of the Holy Ghost keeps them in us; like the
^arden-pot, that holds water but whiles the thumb is upon it.

Leave then, Beloved, the Devils Wine-Celler, as Venerable Bede calls it, Vbi
nos dulcedo delectationis invitauit ad bibendum, Bed. Exhortat. 139.
Where the sweet waters of delight tempt us to drink. But David, though he
longed for it, would not drink the water of the Well of Bethlehem, 1 Chronicles.
11.19
which his three Worthies fetched, because it was the water of blood, brought
with the danger of life: and shall we drink the waters o^ the Devils Banquet,
(the venture of blood) with the hazard of our dearest souls? No, come we to
this aqua Coelestis, be we poor or rich, have we money or none, all that
come, are welcome. Esa. 55.1.
And know, that having drunk liberally at the fountain of grace, you shall
have yet a larger and pleasanter draught at the fountain of glory: that river
of life, Reu. 22.1.
clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb:
Ver. 17.
to which the Spirit and the Bride (are Inviters and) say, come. It is a
delightful banquet we enjoy here; The Kingdom of heaven is right^ousnesse,
and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost: Romans 14.17.
None know the sweetness of these joys, but they that feel them: but the
Supper of joy, 1 Cor. 2.9.
the Banquet of glory, the Waters of blessedness are such as no ^ye has seen,
etc. August.
Illic beata vita in font. There is the Springhead of happiness: they cannot
want water, that dwell by the Fountain.

Nam licet allata gra^us sit sapor in vnd^,
Dulcius ex ipso font bibantur aquae.
That which is derived to us in Pipes is pleasant, oh what is the delight at
the Wellhead? The Devil, like an ordinary Host, sets forth his best wine
first, and when the guests have well drunk, worse: but thou oh Lord, have kept
the best wine t^ll the last. Ioh. 2.10.
They are sweet we taste here, but medio de sonte leporum surgit amari
aliquid, There are some persecutions, crosses to imbitter them, the sweet meat
of the Passover is not eaten without sour herbs: but in thy presence, oh
Lord, Psalm. 16.11.
i^ the fullness os joy, at thy right hand, there are pleasures for evermore.
There is no bitterness in those waters: they are the same, that God himself
and his holy Angels drink of; so that as for Christ his sake, we have drunk
the bitter Cup of persecution, so we shall receive at Christ his hands, the Cup
of salvation, and shall bless the name of the Lord. To whom, three persons,
one only true and eternal God, be all praise, glory and obedience, now and
for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE Second Service OF THE DEVILS BANQUET.

BY THOMAS ADAMS, Preacher of Gods Word at Willington in Bedford-shire.

ZACHARIAH 5.4. I will bring forth the curse, says the Lord of Hosts, and it
shall enter into the house of the Thief, and into the house of him, that
swears falsely by my Name: and it shall remain in the midst of the house, and
shall consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof.

ROYARD. Homil. 1. in I PET. 3. Reddere bonum pro bono, Humanum: reddere malum
pro malo, Belluinum: reddere malum pro bono, Diabolicum: reddere vero bonum pro
malo, Diuinum.

To return good for good is the part of a Man. To return evil for evil is
the part of a Beast. To return evil for good is the part of a Devil. To
return good for evil is the part of a Saint.
LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for Ralph Mab, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Gray-hound. 1614.

TO THE HONORABLE AND Virtuous Lady, the Lady Jane Gostwyke, Baronettesse,
saving Health.
MADAME:
I Am bold to add one Book more to your Library, though it be but as a Mite
into your Treasury. I that have found you so ever favorable to any work of
mine, cannot but confidently hope your acceptance of this. Not for the worth of
it, but because it bears your Name (and my duty to it) in the forehead, and
offers it self to the world, through your Patronage. Somewhat you shall find
in it, to harten your love to Virtue; much to increase your detestation to
Vice. For I have, to my power, endeavored to unmask the latter, and to spoil
it of the borrowed form; that sober eyes may see the true proportion of it,
and their loathing be no longer withheld. I cannot doubt, therefore, that your
approbation of the Book will be frustrate by the Title. I am content to
furnish out Satan's Feast, with many special Dishes; and to discover the
Waters of Iniquity, which he has broached to the World. Not to persuade
their Pleasure; but lest Ignorance should surfeit on them without mistrust: Lest
the perverted Conscience should securely devour them without reprehension.
Here you shall see, in a small Abridgement, many actual breaches of Gods
sacred Law; not without liablenes to condign punishment. You heard it with
attention, spoken in your private Church: You gave it approuall: I trust, you
will as well own it written. It is not less yours, though it be made more
public. I need not advise you, to make your eye an help to your soul, as
well as your ear. They that know you, know your apprehension quick, your
Judgment sound; and (that which graceth all the rest) your affections
religiously devoted. Yet since it is no small part of our goodness, to know
that we may be better, I presume to present this Book, and (with it) my own
duty to your Ladyship, the poor testimony of my present thankfulness, and
pledge of my future service. The God of Power and Mercy continue his Favors
to you; who have still continued your favors to

Your Honors humbly devoted THOMAS ADAMS.

THE Second Service of the Devils Banquet. The second Sermon.
PROVERB. 9.17* Stolen waters are sweet, and Bread eaten in secret is pleasant.


WE have already served in the first course at the Devils Banquet; and feasted
your ears with those Waters, from which God keep your souls fasting. Some
things are proposed to our practice, some things are exposed to our contempt
and dislike. The more accurately the Scriptures describe sins, the more
absolutely they forbid them: where wickedness is the subject, all speech is
declamation. As no spectator at those horrid Tragedies, where Oedipus is beheld
the Incestuous Husband of his own Mother, Se^.
or Thyestes, drunk with the blood of his own Children, or at any of the
bleeding Bankets of the Medea's, can receive those horrors a^ the Windores of
his senses, without terror to his bowels, and trembling to his bones: so when
you hear the relation of the Devils cheer, all the flattering, petulant,
insidious, nature-tickling dishes of delight: the rarities of Impiety, the
surfets of the World, Horse-leaches to the blood, Witches to the affections,
Devils to the Consciences of men; think that they are related, that they may
be rejected: to bestow upon the Devils Cates his own names: the glory of
Pride, the satietie of Epicurisme, the gallantnesse of Ebrietie, the credit of
Murder, the greatness of Scorn, the gracefulness of Swearing, the bravery
of (the stigmaticke) Fashion, the security of Usury, the singularity of
Opinion, the content of Superstition; nunciantur, vt renuncientur: think not,
they are prescribed for you, when they are described to you. Monstrantur vt
monstra: they are set forth as monsters, that they might be loathed: they are
advanced as Traitors heads, in terrorem futuri proditoris, to the terror of
him that should be tempted to future Treason.

Gods intent in declaring this Banquet of Sin, is to make you loathe it; and
that which is written, is for our instruction, 1 Cor. 10.11.
to de^erre, not to commend, as some of the Heathen had a custom in their
solemn Feasts, to make a bondslaue drunk, and then set him forth as a
rediculou^ object to their children. This Banquet then, per^ibetur vna and
prohibetur; is at once declared and declaimed, spoken of and forbidden: lest
through ignorance you should like and eat it, you are more fully made
acquainted with the vileness of it. Hence our royal Preacher draws the
Curtain of the World, and shows you all the delicates of her Table; not to
whet your appetites to feed on them, but to cool your courage, disharten your
opinions, alienate your affections; giving you a true censure of their
worthiness; all is vanity, and vexation of soul. Eccles. 1.14.
They are detected, that ^hey might be detested. Therefore if any of Gracchus
brood, shall like a Catilmary disposition the better, because Tully has
indicted, interdicted, condemned it: if any son of Beliall, shall more
affectedly devour some morsel of damnation at this Feast, because the
Preacher has execrated it; and derive at once notice and encouragement from
our terrifying censures: testimonium sibi ferat condemnationis: let him bear
in himself the evidence of his own condemnation. They are wretched men, (qui
minime declinant, quod boni maxim declamant) that most impetuously pursue,
what all good men dissuade: running with Ahimaaz the more eagerly, because
their friend Ioab forbids them. 2 Samuel 18.22.
So blasphemously spoke the sacrilegious spoilers of Proserpines Temple in
Locris, whose ringleader was Dionisius: Videtis ne amici, quam bona nauigatio
ab ipsis Dijs sacrilegis tribuatur? Valor* max. lib. 1. cap. 2.
sailing home, and now arriving at the Haven safe; see you not my friends,
says Dionisius, how fair and fortunate a Navigations, the Gods vouchsafe to
Sacrilege? as if they therefore robbed the CHVRC^, because they were by the
Oracle expressly inhibited: so (gens humana ruit in vetitum nefas) man's nature
praecipitates it self into forbidden wickedness. Hor.
This is an horrid sin; peccatum primae impressionis, and sine nomine
adaequato: a wickedness of that nature, that there is no name significant
enough to express it.

The manners of the Heathen might justify, and exemplarily make good that
verse: Nitimur in vetitum semper, cupimusque negata.
We hunt for things unlawful with swift feet,
As if forbidden joys were only sweet.
But such a report among Christians is so strange, that (fictum, non factum
esse videatur) it would seem rather a fable then a fact, a tale then a deed.
Publish it ^ot in Gath, 2 Samuel 1.20.
nor tell it in the streets of Askelon, that any Israelite should the more
desperately cleave to Baal, because Elias has cursed it. There are none such;
neither is there Rain in the Clouds: Indeed Charity would not believe it: for
it is even the order of Nature, that (tarda sole^ magnis rebus adesse fides)
slow faith is given to great reports: but alas, we are forced to see, (what
we would not believe) such refractary Recusants to all Christianity, l^uing
and speaking, (...), according to their own lusts, that would not be so ill,
if they had not been taught to be better: Marl. in 2 P^t. 3
quibus res diuinae lusus sunt, ijs and voluptas pro vita, and libido pro
ratione est. They that play with Divinity, and make Religion a mock, giude
their Life by Pleasure, and their Reason by Lust. Time was, the Kingdom of
Heaven suffered violence, Matthew. 11.12.
and men took it by strong hand, now it offers violence, and men by strong
hand repel it: before it was so precious, that every man preassed (and
crowded) into it, Luke 16* 16.
now it press^th upon us, and we are glad to be rid of it, (as Covetousness
of poverty at his door.) And as the fountains would not be so cold, if the
Sun had not heated the air, and forced the contrary quality into such
abstruse corners; many would have been less outrageous in their filthiness,
is the Gospel of Grace, had not so universally spread his beams: Their whole
life is a continual preuarication; and it is the cordial Physic to fat
their spleenes, that they can be cross to God.

But, lex in sermon tenenda; I speak to Christians, of whom we cannot but
hope better things: if there be any here that has sold his faith for his
pleasure, as Adam did his life for an Apple, or Esau his birthright for a
mess of Pottage, and will venture himself a guest at the Devils Bank^t,
maugre all devitation; let him stay and hear the Reckoning, Justice given
cuique suum. Deo religionem, sibi munditiam, parentibus honore^, familiaribus
prouidentiam, filijs cor.. rectionem, ^ratribus amorem. Dominis subiectionem,
subiectis benig^itatem, aequitatem omnibus. Ardens.
for there is a Shot to be paid, which cannot be avoided: as Circe's Cup
turns men into beasts, so it brings them to a beastly end, it fats them
against the slaughter-day of Judgment. We leave then the prescription of the
waters, and come to the description of their natures: Stolen. It is a word of
Theft; and implies, besides the action of Stealth, some persons active and
passive in this business; some that do wrong and steal, some that suffer
wrong, and are robbed. Robberi^ is a sin, literally forbidden only in one
Commandment, but by inference, in all: What sin is committed, and some
person is not robbed? Does not Id^latrie rob God of his worship? Blasphemy of
his honor? Saboth-impietie of his reserved time? Does not Irr^ueren^e rob our
betters? Murder rob man of his life? Theft of his goods? False t^stimonie of
his good name or right? Does not the Harlot here, knit the eight precept to the
seventh, and call (adulterium, furtum?) Peccare, est quasi p^ccucare, to play
the beast: or ^ather nearer to the Scripture phrase, peccare, est quasi
pellicare, to be an Harlot, or an Harlo^-hunter: to com^it spiritual
adulterrie.
The pleasures of a forbidden bed, Stolen waters? Pro. 17.18.19
Let us solace our selves with loves* for the good man is not at home, etc.

Since then, all sins are waters of stealth, it is an inevitable consequent,
that every sin robs some: let us examine, whom. The parties robbed are. 1.
God. 2. Man. 3. Our selves: and there be diverse sins rob either of these. Of
every circumstance a little, according to the common liking; for some had
rather h are many points, then learn one: they would have every word a
sentence, and every sentence a Sermon; as he that wrot^ the Paternoster in
the compass of a Penie. Only I entreat you to observe; that this is a
theeuish Banquet, where is nothing but stolen waters: all the Cates be
robberies: the guests cannot drink a drop, but there is injury done.
Accordingly, I will jointly proceed. 1. To describe the Waters of Sin at
this Feast. 2. And withal, to prove them stolen waters, such as rob either
our God, our Brethren, or our selves. I need not clear the Feast from an
opinion of coursenesse, because the prime Service goes under the name of
waters: this alone does enforce the delicacie: Neither is all water, for the
Bread of Secrecy is one half of the Banquet. Let us not be too nice in the
letter and shadow: the substance is; The Devil inuites and tempts men to
feed on vanity, to feast on Sins: those sins I have labored to display,
so far as the Metaphor would give me leave: only, let your affections follow
me: that as I fear not to make the Iniquities hateful to your understandings,
so I may hope, they will be loathed of your hearts, eschewed of your lives: in
confidence whereof I proceed. The first course of these wae^rs, are such
sins, as more immediately rob God: And here, as it is fit, Atheism leads in
the rest: a principal Vial of these stolen waters.

1. Atheism is the highest Theft against God; because it would steal from him
not (sua, ^ed se,) his goods, but himself: proceeding further (then, Deus haec
non curat, to, Deu^ non est.) Then to say, Psalm. 10.11.13.
God will not regard it; but, Psalm. 14.1.
there is no God to regard it. These offer not only a wicked hand to their
own conscience, to scrape out the (deepe-ingrauen and) indeleble characters of
the Divinity there; but a sacrilegious hand to heaven, as if they would empty
it of a Deity, and pull Jehovah out of his Throne, and make him a nonens. All,
with them, is begun and done, either by the necessitiy of Fate, or contingencie
of Fortune. Te facim^^ Fortuna Deam. If any strange vice be committed, the
Planets shall be charged with it. Mercury told the lie, Mars did the murder,
Venus committed the whoredom. Thus by looking to the inferior causes,
(producing necessary effects) they rob God, who is (prima causa creans causas)
the causing cause, and the original mouer of all things. These are worse then
the Devil: for, if at first he doubts and tempts Christ, yet seeing, feeling
his power and miracles, he confesses: only impudent Matthew. 26.63
Caiaphas, saw and knew, yet tempts, Thus often, the Instrument excels the
Agent; and there be Machiauels, Politicians, Atheists, have tricks beyond the
Devil. The Devil Iam. 2.19.
believes and trembles, these have neither faith nor fear. The Devil quakes
at the day of Judgment Matthew. 8.29.
torment us not before the time, these deride it: 2 Pet. 3.4.
Where is the promise of his coming? Strange! even the Father of Sins comes
short of his Children; and that there should be Atheists on Earth, when there
is none in Hell.

These Monsters are in the Wilderness! No, they borough in Sion: if seldom
such, as say, there is no God, yet frequent, that call Religion a fable; or at
least, testify no less of it in their lives: for, Quorum est commune
Symbolum, facillimus est transitus: How many make that their Gospel, which
they can spell into their purses; and embrace no other Creed, then their Lord
and Masters humor? that turn articles of piety to particles of Policy: and
sophisticate old singleness into new singularity? If a Seminaries argument,
shall be more gold-weightie then the best Sermon of ours, they are for Rome the
next tide: any Religion, that can enrich their Coffers, shall have their
applauses: What differ these from Atheists? Le^ 10.
or that Pope, who hearing Cardinal Bembus speak of the Gospel, burst forth
into this blasphemy: Baleus.
Quantum nob^s ac nostro coetui profuerit ea de Christo fabula, ^atis est
omnibus seculis notae. How gainefull the fiction or tale of Christ has been
to us, and our Crew, the whole World may know and witness. All Religion is
with them a Fable, or at best, fallible. They would fit Religion to their own
humors, Met. lib. 7.
as Procustes dealt with his Ghests: for all that came he had but one bed: if
they were shorter then his bed, ^ee racked them out, to make them long enough:
if longer, he would cut them shorter, till they were fit. These are cruel
thieves, that would rob God of himself.

2 The second Vial is Heresy: a dangerous water, because it soon tickles the
brain, and makes the mind drunk. This Sin robbes God of his Truth: There
are many of these Thieves, though contrary among themselves; whose opinions are
as cross one to another, as Sampsons Foxes, but their tails meet, to scatter
the Fire of dissension in the Church: no Lawyers wrangle more in public; nor
more lovingly feast one another in private, with the gains of their
dissimulation: How bitterly the Brownists on the right hand, the Papists on the
left, rail at each other; how friendly agree they, like Herod and Pilate, to
afflict Christ? how in effect do they sing both in one tune, to build up
D^^otion with Ignorance, to wrangle with the Prince for his Supremacy?

In elder times, you had Cerinthus and Arrius robbing Christ of his Divinity:
Moniche and Marcion of his Humanity; the Nestorians, of the Unity of both
natures in one Person. They are dead: oh, bury them, bury them: let their
Heresies rot. Alas, how are the spirits of them all, by a kind of
transanimation, come into the Romists? Christ is, there, robbed of his Truth of
his garments, of his peace, of his life, as well as at Jerusalem; and that
without show of being his enemies; Spoliastis amici, You are my friends, yet
rob me. Bones rob Christ of his adoration: stones of his Prayers: the Pope of
his power. Remission of sins, validity of merits, ease of pains, the Pope
must give; who would give the world, that he had them for himself. Too much
shall be given to the name of Jesus, more then he would have; that a wicked man
shall by it cast out Devils: to whom if the Devils reply not, as they did once
to the audacious Sons of Sceua; Act. 19.15.
Jesus we know, and Paul we know, but who are ye? yet God answers them, Esa.
1.12.
Qui^ haec etc. Who has required this at your hands? Too little to the nature
of Jesus: Man's merits shall share with him in justification: Penance in
satisfaction: Angels and Saints in Intercession. These are subtle Thieves,
that have their bodies for a Communion, their consciences for a Mass, their
voices for the Prince, their hearts for the Pope, their souls for the Devil.

3. The third Vial of this Course is Sacrilege: a water, like some winding
Meander, that runs through our corn fields, and washes away the Tenth, Gods
part. This Sin robs God of his goods: Mal. 3.8. The sacrilegious, that I
specially mean amongst us, are such as with-holde those rights from the
Church, that the law of the land (rightly understood) allows her. As those
that will not present without reservation, etc
Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me: but ye say, wherein have we robbed
thee? in Tithes and offerings. Oh! that none among us durst drink of these
Stolen waters! but, alas, what law can be given to rob Altars? If Blindasinus
be a man of gifts, so justified by the sensible Presenter, what should cross
his admission? Is not a Quare impedit, his special friend? yes; and yet not
more, then a Prohibition is often a good Ministers foe. Hence now there is
little difference betwixt serving at the Altar, and steruing at the Altar.
Ministers have (multos laudatores, paucos datores,) Many praisers, few raisers;
many benedictors, few benefactors.

Plead not, that they are not stolen, because conveyed by the Ministers
consent; for the right is originally in God. Spoliastis me: You have robbed me:
me, says the Lord. The Incumbent consenting is not robbed, God is. They
zealously require a learned Ministry, when themselves imbezzell the rewards of
learning: they complain of an ignorant, not of a beggarly Clergy. They are
content, we should stand in the Pulpit, so long as they may sit in a
Tith-shocke; and seem wonderfully affected with the oraculous voice of their
Minister, but the creaking noise of a Tith-Cart into their own Barn is better
Music. Oh, the fearful cry of this Sin in the ears of God against this
Land! he has sprinkled some drops of his angry Vial for it: Droughts,
blastings, witherings, are but his Distringis: he destroys all, because we
will not pay some: Si domino decimam non dederis, ad decimam reuerteris: He
does justly take away the nine, August.
when we deny him the Tenth: Indeed I confess, that many an Eliashib
compacts with Tobiah, Nehe. 13.5.
to steal holy things: a Cnosticke Patron, a Paphian Priest: so the one have
ease, let the other take benefit. Tobiah must have the Tith-corne, the glebe
land, and perhaps the very house for a Dairy, and his Cosen Eli^sh^b shall have
the tith Geese, and the Eggs at Easter. Shall not the Lord visit for such
wi^kednesse as this? Ier. 5.9.
shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation?

Whiles the rewards of knowledge are diuerted to profane uses, God and his
heaven is robbed of thousand thousand souls: Oh, pray we, (quid enim nisi vota
supersunt?) Pray we, with that most reverend Bishop, That God would rather
convert; B. Babing. in Genesis cap. 47.
if not, confound those that rob him of his goods, the Church of her right, the
people of understanding. But if no contestation of God, nor protestation of
men, can stint their swallowing these stolen waters, let some good Nehemiah be
revived, to reinforce from their felonious hands, that Gal. 6.6.
holy Rent, which God has from every Tenant of his reserved: let the zeal of
some Phinees turn away Gods wrath from our Israel. Decimate, quibus debetis,
et diuites fietis: Pay your tithes, to whom you should pay them, and you shall
be enriched. Mal. 3.10.
Bring ye all your Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in mine
house, and prove me now here-with, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open
you the windores of Heaven, and power you out a blessing, that there shall not
be room enough to receive it. 2 Macch. 3.
Read and ponder Heliodorus deed and doom, and quake at it. You cannot
steal waters from the living God, but they will poison you.

4. The fourth Vial is Faction, a Water of Trouble to the drinker: this robs
God of his order and peace: the Waters of Schism are stolen waters: yet such
as many a Separatist loves to drink of: they think not that they rob God,
whiles they steal peace from the Church. Christi tunica must be vnica: Christ's
Coat was without seame, his truth must be without Rent: we must be all at
one, least at all none. Let us not plead so hard for paritie in the Church,
till we bring Anarchie into the Commonwealth: let our dispositions be like
Abraham's: Genesis 13.8.
I pray thee, let there be no strife between me and thee, for we are
Brethren. Let not Gods eutaxie, Order, by our frivolous scruples be brought to
ataxie, Confusion. Let Calum's rule overrule our turbulent and refractarie
spirits: Omnia indifferentia in Ecclesiae liberate posita sunt. Instit. lib.
4. cap. 17. Sect. 43.
All indifferent things are put to the disposition and ordering of the Church.
Oh you, whom Christ has made Fishers of souls, fish no longer in troubled
waters: Let us not wrangle any more about colors, as the Constantinopolitans
did once in the days of Justinian, about blew and green; till they were all
neither blew nor green, but red; the streets swimming in blood, and the
Emperor himself endangered. So the Factions of the B^anchi and Neri, about
the two colors of black and white, cost the Dukedom of Florence dear, even
the beauty and peace of the Country. What, have we all been deceived? has
God been a stranger to us all this while? Ioh. 14 9.
Have I been so long time with you, and have you not known me, says Christ
to Philip? has the Truth been hid in corners; that we must grope for it in a
Sectaries budget? or are not such men rather, sick of Donatisme? that every
Nouelist with a whirlegig in his brain, must broach new opinions, and those
made Canons, nay Sanctions; as sure as if a general Council had confirmed
them. Wretched men, that shake off the true comely habit of Religion, to
bespeake them a new-fashioned suite of profession at an Humourists Shop. Oh
that their sore eyes could, before they left us, have seen what sacrilegious
breaches they have made into Gods freehold; robbing his Church of her peace,
and waking the Spouse of Christ with their turbulent noises. Factions are
stolen waters.

5. The last vial of this first Course is Profaneness: a compounded Water,
whereout no sin is excluded: there was no poison the Devil could think on
left out, when he tempered this water. It robbes God of his glory. We are
borne to honor God: it is his due; and that he will have, either ( ate, or
dete) by thee, or upon thee: Irreligion robbes him of this honor: Solummodo
hoc ^habet, etc. only he has this to help himself, that he can make it
shine in thy ^ust confusion. So 2 King. 15.16.
Menahem destroyed Tipsah, because they would not open unto him: but these will
open to Christ knocking, if he will be content: Stramineas habitare casas, etc.
Basely to dwell in the divided part,
O^ the foul, sluttish, and polluted heart.
If CHRIST will dwell with Bel^all, and share part of the Conscience with
wickedness, let him come, and welcome: but he scorns to be an Inmate, and
let Satan be Lord of the house: he that ac^epted a stable for his
presence chamber in his humility, does justly disdain such abode now in his
glory: though the walls be but Clay, if the furniture be good, Humility and
Repentance; and the cheer answerable, Faith and Charity, Revel. 3.20.
he will enter in and Feast. But as his Womb was, wherein borne; and his
Tomb, wherein buried; so must his Temple be now glorified. He was conceived
in a womb, where none else was conceived; received into a Tomb where none
else was interred: so he will temple himself in a heart, where no affected
sin shall be his equal. The profane among the Heathen were thrust from their
sacrificiall solemnities. Innocui veniant: procul hinc, procul impius esto,
Casta placent superis; pura cum mente venite.
Pure, innocent, and spotles sprites,
Are welcome to these holy rites:
To the profane and sensual state,
Be ever shut the Temple gate.
But now, our profane save that labor; they thrust from themselves all pious
rites: they sing not with the Church, a Cant 3.4.
Tenebo te Domine, I will hold thee fast, oh Lord; but with Simeon, a Nunc
dimittis, though with another spirit: they are glad to be gone. CHRIST is as
welcome to them as C^sars Taxers to the Jews, or the Beadle to the
Brothel-house: so the Matt^. ^.34.
Gergesites tell him to his face: Sir, to be plain with you, you are no guest
for us: our secure lives, and your severe Laws will never cotton.

Men live without considering themselves: vnde, vbi, quomodo, quo. Whence they
are: where they are: how they do: whither they go: that all these mathematical
lines have Earth for their Center. Whence are we? from Earth. Where are we?
on Earth. How live we? unworthy of Earth, or any blessing upon it. Wither go
we? to Earth. Terram terra tegat: Earth to Earth. We are composed of four
Elements, and they strive in us for Masterie; but the lowest gets the better*
and there is no rest till Earth have the predominance. These men live, as if
there was neither Earth to devour their bodies, nor gulf lower then Earth to
swallow their souls.

This is profaneness: The world is rank and manured with sin: Atheism
grows up as a Tree, Error and Ignorance are the Leaves, Profaneness and
Rebellion the Fruit, and the end is the Matthew. 3.10.
Axe and the Fire. Their best is verbal Devotion, actual Abomination.
Diu^dunt opera a fide, and vtrumque perimitur. They separate works from faith:
they divide the child and kill it. Works are dead without Faith: and Faith is
not alive without Works. They take away that visible distinction betwixt
Christians and Infidels, whiles they live not as honest men. Oh, that I could
cut this point short, and yet keep my discourse but somewhat even with the
subject: but the world drinks too greedily of these profane waters, which rob
God of his glory. Most men are no longer Tenants to the Devil, and retailours
of his Wares, but proprietaries; (perverted and perverse persons) they strive
to be as deep sharers as himself. Machiauell will no longer work
Iourney-worke with the Devil, he will now cut out the garment of damnation
himself. The Vices of these men are so monstrous, that they no less benumme
in all good men the tenderness of affection, then in themselves the sense of
all humanity. Vox faucibus haeret. It is a shame to utter, an amazement to
hear, yet they blush not to commit such execrable impieties. Impudence is
only in fashion, and there is no forehead held so graceful, as that the
Prophet calls graceless, an Ier. 3.3.
Harlots forehead, that cannot blush. Swearing swaggers out admonition:
drunkenness drinks down sorrow and penitence: Usury floutes at Hell.

It was Epitaph'd on Pope Alexanders Tomb, Iacet hic and scelus and vitium.
Here lies wickedness it self: it could not be so buried up. He was vile
enough. Thais Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus. Lucrece was his Daughter, his
Whore, his Sons Wife: Horrid! that Viper went not to Hell issue-lesse. What
is this but Infidelity and Atheism, though not in Antecedente, yet in
Consequente: if not verbal, yet real: under the 2 Timothy 3.5. Guide. Carthus.
form of Godliness, an implicit renegation of the power? Multi adorant
Crucem exterius, qui crucem spiritualem per contemptam conculcant. Many
superstitiously adore the Crucifixe, that Phil. 3.18.
are enemies to the Cross of Christ, and Heb. 10.29.
tread his holy Blood under their scornful feet: Nay, they are not wanting
that brag with Pherecides, that they have as much prosperity, Aelian. Var.
hist. lib. 4.
though they never sacrifice, as they that offer whole Hecatombes. They will
be wicked, if it be for nothing else, to escape the rod of affliction. Job 21.
They make sport with the Book of GOD, as Daphias with the Delphicke Oracle;
Cic. de Fate.
who enquired of it, whither he should find the Horse he had lost, when
indeed he had none: the Oracle answered, inuenturum quidem, sed vt eo turbatus
periret; that he should find a horse, but his death withal. Home he is
coming, joyful that he had deluded the Oracle; but by the way he fell into
the hands of the wronged King Attalus, and was by his command thrown headlong
from a Rock, called the Horse, and so perished: as fabulous as you may think
i^, the Moral of it will fall heavy on the deriders of God.

These are the sins, that immediately rob God, fitly called by our whorish
Sorceresse, Stolen waters; which shall never be carried away without account.
The second sort of Stolen waters are those sins, which mediately rob God,
immediately our Brethren; depriving them of some comfort or right, which the
inviolable Law of God, has interrested them to: for what the Law of God, of
Nature, of Nations, has made ours, cannot be extorted from us, without
Stealth; and may be (even in most strict terms) called Stolen waters.

1. Here (fitly) Irreuerence is served in first: a water of Stealth, that
robbes man of that right of honor, wherewith God has invested him. Even Genesis
21.
Abimelech, a King, a Gentle King, reverenced Abraham: even stately Mark. 6.
Herod poor John Baptist. Yes, let reverence be given to Superiority, if it
be built on the bases of worthiness, and to Age, if it be Prou. 16.31.
found in the ways of righteousness: Indeed, it should be so, that Seniores
annis, should be Saniores animis, and praefectus perfectus; that eminency of
place and of virtue should concur, that Greatness and Goodness should dwell
together: but the conscience of reverence is fetch^ from Romans 13.5.
Gods precept, not man's dignity; and therefore the omission is a robbery: the
neglect of honor to whom it belongs, is a Stolen water. Prou 30.17.
The eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, (does he
think them worthy, or not) the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and
the young Eagles eat it. But, alas, these are those vnreuerent days, where
(infoelix lolium, and steriles dominantur auenae) ^nuectiues, railings,
calumnies, libels, grow up among sober and wholesome admonitions: the same
ground produces both Herbs and Weeds, and so nourishes both Sheep and
Serpents. Terra salutiferas herbas, eademque nocentes nutrit, and vrticae
proxima saepe Rosa est. Ovid. de rem. amor. lib. 1.
The Nettle grows up with the Rose, and the Lamb must graze in the Wolfes
company. These are like furious Beasts, that ranging for their pray, and being
hampered in the snares, when they cannot break loose to forage, they lie
down and roar.

From this foul neast have fluttered abroad all those clamorous Bills,
slanderous Libels, malicious Inuectiues, seditious Pamphlets; whence not only
good names have been traduced, but good things abused. Self-conceit blows
them up with ventositie; and if others think not as well of them, as they of
themselves, strait like Porcupines, they shoot their quils, or like Cuttels
vomit out Ink to trouble the waters. That impudent and insolent claim is
made ordinary in these days: Psalm. 12.4.
With our tongue we will prevail; for our lips are our own. When the Eagle in
the Air, Panther in the Desert, Dragon in the deep, Leuiathan in the Ocean,
are tamed; yet the Iam. 3.8.
Tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison. It is
fiered, Verse. 6.
and with no weaker Fire then Hels. Their hearts are Ouens, heated with malice,
and their tongues burning peeles; they are never drawn, but there is a batch
for the Devil. These are not only the Geese in the Capital, to gaggle at
Statesmen in the Commonwealth; but Foxes also about the Temple, that, if they
be seen stealing the Grapes, fall a biting their descryers by the shinnes.
Because the Church has not heretofore given some the Keys of her Treasure,
nor called for them when Bishoprics and promotions were a dealing, they will
indite her of incontinencie with Rome, (miserable sons, to slander their
Mother with adultery.) What they would and can not do themselves, they blame
in others, with Corah, Numb. 16.3.
Ye take too much upon, ye sons of Leui. Libels are stolen waters.

2. Murder usurps the second room; a red Water, that robbes man of his life:
whither they be Popish commissions to cut throats, for the Whore of Babylon
can drink nothing but blood; or the monstrous illuminations of the
Anabaptists, deriuing revelation from the spirit of horrid murder; that the
brother should cut off the brothers head, by a command from Heaven, the Father
and Mother standing by: Luther calls this a gross Devil: Est haec rudis
cacodam^nis techna. Luth.
or the sudden quarrels of our age, where evidences of pusillanimitie* or (at
best) inconsiderate fury, are produced as arguments of Valor: A cross word
is ground enough for a challenge: and what issue has streamed from these
Duells, who can think and not quake? Psalm. 106.38.
The Land is desiled with blood; not shed by an alien hand, God has been
content, (talem nobis auertere pestem) to free us from that plague: but civil,
uncivil broiles. We fall out for feathers; some lie dead in the Channel,
whiles they stood too much for the wall: others sacrifice their hearts blood
for the love of an Harlot: Not to pledge a health, is cause enough to loose
health and life too. Oh, who shall wash our Land from these aspersions of
blood? Murder is but Mans-slaughter, and Mans-slaughter no more then
dog-slaughter. Parce ciuium sanguini, should be our condition of life, as it is
a sanction of nature, (to spare the blood of Citizens, connaturall, collateral,
connationall with our selves:) but now it is not spared (sanguini vel ciuium
vel sanctorum) to spill the blood of either Citizens or Saints: yet precious in
the sight of the Lord is the blood of his Saints, when the blood of his enemies
shall not be impunely shed.

There is not a drop of blood thus spilt upon the earth, but swells like an
Ocean; and nothing can dry it up, till it be revenged. The most excellent of
Gods creatures on earth, the beauty, the extract, the Microcosmos est Homo.
abstract, or abridgement of the world, the glory of the workman, the
confluence of all honor that mortallitie can afford, and (what is above all
the rest) the Image of the almighty God, with pain borne, with expense
nurtured, must fall in a moment: and by whom? one son of Adam by another: the
proverb is exiled, homo homini Deus, man is a God to man: nay, it is rare,
says the Philosopher, to find a man to man: for want of using reason how many
are beasts; and for not using it well, how many Devils? Hear the Law, ye
lawless brood of Cain, that slay a man in your anger: Blood for blood. You
think to escape with a Pardon, but there is no pardon of Earth can ease the
bleeding conscience. Let none kill Cain, that so every day kills himself. As in
that great plague on Egypt, Exodus 7.19.
all the waters in their Rivers, Streams, Ponds, Pooles, Vessels were changed
into blood, so shall it be in the conscience of the Murderer: his eyes shall
behold no other color but red, as if the air were of a sanguine dye: his
visions in the night shall be all blood; his dreams sprinkling blood on his
face; all his thoughts shall flow with blood: If any David scapes the wounds of
man's sword to his body, or Gods to his soul, let him thank the blood of the
crucified JESUS, whose wounds must intercede for his, and procure a pardon.
This is that Blood, which does (...), Heb. 12.24.
speak better things, and stint the ceaselesse cry of the blood of Abell: but
all this to none, but those that bleed in soul for those sins.

Purge the Land of this blood, ye Magistrates: Mumb. 35.33
For the Land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the
blood of them that shed it.

They that in spilling blood such pleasure have,
Let them not go, but bleeding, to their grave.
Purge it then, lest God in revenge make his arrows dr^nke with blood. Fear
not to find them, ye Jurors, lest whiles you sau^ a Murderer, you expose,
object, hazard your own throats to his Sword. Hear this also, ye Physicians,
think it is the life of Man is questioned: the Epigram comes here to my mind:
Owen.
Furtum non facies: Iuristae scribitur haec lex,
Haec, non Occides, pertinet ad Medicum.
Thou shall not steal; the Lawyers square to right them.
Thou shall not kill; is the Physicians Item.
Sell not insufficient drugs; nor pitch so high a price on your Ignorance. Let
it not be true of you, that pessimus morbus est Medicus, the worst disease is
the Physician. Adrian.
That Emperor found it true, by a mortal experience, that Turba medicorum
interfecit Regem; Physicians killed him. Blood is precious, let it be preserved.

3. Adultery knows her place: a filthy water, yet in special account at this
Feast. It may well be called a stolen water; for it robs man of that comfort
which the sacred hand of heaven has knit to him; vnrauels the bottom of that
joy which God has wound up for him; subornes a spurious seed to inherit his
Lands; dampes his liuelihood, sets palenesse on his cheek, and impastures
grief in his heart. It is that special instance of wickedness, whereby
Solomon here expresses all the rest. The whorish woman calls the pleasures of
a forbidden bed, stolen waters. Woe is to him, that is robbed, I mean, the
bitter woe of a temporal discontent; which is an inseparable consequent of
Christian affection wronged: but more woe to the Robber; who, besides the
corporal strokes of Heavens angry hand in this life, shall feel the fearful
addition of an eternal woe in hell. Heb. 13.4. Ier. 23.10.
Whore-mongers and adulterers God will judge. If a present punishment be
suspended, the future shall never be dispended with. Our firmament hangs too
full of these falling Stars; corrupt Meteors, wandering Planets, that only
glimmer in the night, when the Sun of vigilancie is set. This cursed weed
begins to grow almost as rank in England, as in Italy: only no Authority
gives toleration to it: they are here, Aquae surreptitiae, waters of stealth;
but there, Inuitant adaperta viros male limina spurcos. The open doors inuit
their entrance, whiles the law does not only wink but warrant. There is no
hope to keep out Venus, when Drunkenness her Gentleman-usher, Alea, vina
Venus, etc.
and Dice her old company-keeper are let in. Many Nightingales have sung sad
lamentations, woe and ruin against these rapes and whoredoms; but the
unclean Sparrowes, cherping the voice of Lust on the house-tops, are suffered
to have nests in the roof, when the good Nightingale is driven to the Woods.

There are not wanting, by report, (and those no beggars) that justify this,
and clear it from sin by arguments: strong wits, and those sublimed: the
wittier, the wickeder. I will give them a double answer, which no distinction
shall euade. God has charged, Thou shall not commit Adultery: Hazard thy
self to dispute against and eneruate Gods Prohibition, and try, if the second
confute thee not; the black poison of thy own conscience; which is set 1 Cor.
7.9.
on fire by Lust here, and though it have the fire of Hell added to it shall
never be wasted. The Devil was modest when he came to Eve, with, praecepitne
Deus, etc, Has God charged you not to eat, Genesis 3.1.
etc? now bluntly, Non praecepit Deus: God has not concluded Adultery a
sin. Inaudita oracula fundit. Impudence in the highest degree, to give God
the lie; and except against the absoluteness of his precept.

I intended brevity in the broaching these stolen waters; the matter forces
me to prolixitie against my will. Lust has many friends in these days; many
Promoters, whereby she insinuates her self to the world. Among all, those in
print do most mischief. Libri Sybaritici, as the same sinne-guilty Martial
calls them; Books of Epicurisme and Sensuality. Ouids amatories have bright
and trite couers, when the book of God lies in a dustie corner. The Devil
plays with us, as Hippomenes with Atalanta, M^^a^. 10.
seeing us earnest in our race to Heaven, throws us here and there a golden
Ball, an idle Pamphlet. If Cleanthes open his Shop, he shall have Customers:
Many a Traveler there sets down his staff; though he pulls off his eyes
with Ouids dole: Cur aliquid vidi, Tri^t. 2.
cur n^xia lumina feci? Why have I so couetously beheld these vanities? Paucis
de Philosophia gust^ndum, Gell. lib. 3.
was the old charge: let few drink at the fountain of Philosophy: but we are
drunk with that, all Philosophy condemned. The Stationer dares hardly venture
such cost on a good Sermon, as for an Idle Play: it will not sell so well:
wicked days the whiles. Oh that they were all condemned to an Ephesian fire;
Act. 19.
that we might say, as Alcibiades of that Athenian heap of burning scrowles,
Nunquam vidi ignem clariorem: We never saw a clearer fire.

4. Theeuerie needs no more then the name, to prove it a Water of Stealth:
This robbes man of his goods; those temporal things, whereof God has made him
a proprietarie: A sin which Usurers and Money-mongers do bitterly rail at:
They that are of no religion, yet plead religion hard against Thieves: They can
lay the law to them, that have no conscience themselves* They rob a Country,
yet think themselves honest men; and would hang a poor petty robber for
forty pence. Let him answer them in the Satyr.

O mayor tandem parcas in sane minori. As no theft can escape condemnation, so
yet di^ferent degrees shall be punished with di^ferent torments. Extortion,
usury, fraud, injustice, are not less thefts, because less manifest.
Antiochus could make a black horse which he had stolen, seem white, and a
white black; so these Thieves have tricks to make evil good, and good evil:
especially tacente lege, Esa. 5.20.
so long as the law holds her peace. But as the other escape not the Gallows,
so one day, Dabit Deus his qu^que funem; God will give these also condign
punishment. They say, that the dung of the Blacke-bird falling on the Oak,
turns into slime; of that slime is made Birdlime; of that Birdlime is the
Bird her-selfe snared. So these graund Thieves twine a cord of three strings,
Injury, Usury, Fraud; Covetousness twists them into a rope, the Devil makes
the noose, and of this cord they are strangled: A threefold Cable is not easily
broken. Whiles they steal from others the interest, they rob themselves of the
principal, their souls. They please the world with their baits, ready money,
but there is a hook under the bait.

Munera magna quidem misit, sed misit in hamo:
Mart. Epig.
Sic piscatorem piscis amare potest.
I have read of an Athenian, such another Fisher; that he had in an apparition
a net given him, Aen. Sylu.
to catch whole Cities in; but for all that, he died a beggar: These Thieves
have such nets to catch whole Towns, Commons, Churches, Steeples and all, but
in the end the net breaks, and the Fisher topples into the deep, whence he
never comes out again: for these Swine so root into the earth, till they eat
themselves into hell.

I do not spare with conniuence the Junior Thieves, because I bring their
Fathers to the bar first. He that shall with a violent or subtle hand,
Lyon-like or Foxe-like, take away that, which God has made mine; endangers at
once his body to the worlds, his soul to heavens sword of Justice: and shall
pass from a temporal Bar, to the Tribunal Judgment of Christ. Let not
misconstruction hear me: there are more of these, dye honest men, then of
Vsu^ers: for one Usurers repentance, I will produce you ten executed Thieves.
Only here it is, the great The^ues agree one with another; Claw me, and I will
claw thee: Wink at mine, and I will not see thy faults: They tune like Bells,
and want but hanging. For these Thieves, I might indeed be silent and spare my
breath, to the conversion of more hopeful sinners: but we must free our
consciences from the guiltiness of not reproving; least they curse us on their
Deathbeds, as that Usurer made his will; wherein he bequeathed his soul to
the Devil for extorting, his Wife for inducing, his Deacon for enduring, or
not reproving. Though every Usurer makes account to walk to hell, (yet since
both hell and heaven be equally set to his choice, why should he choose the
worst way?) let not his Minister, for silence, bear him company.

Well; the Thief knows his doom, a double banishment, out of the Territories
of earth, out of the confines of heaven: Ephesians. 4.28.
therefore let him that has stolen steal no more? Repentance shall be sure
of mercy. And let not the great Thief think to escape; as he is a
Gallimaufrey of all sins, so he shall have a Rendeuous of all punishments.
His house is the Devils Tavern; the guests have sweet wine, but a sharp
reckoning. The Devils Fence-schoole, as the stabbings, woundings, hackings,
rackings which torture the Commonwealth, are there experimentally taught. The
Devils Brothell-house, where the Usurer is the Bawd, and his money's the
Harlots: (only they differ from Harlots in their pregnancie and teeming, for
they lay like Pigeons every month:) marry because the Devil is Landlord, his
rent eats out all their gains.

5. Slander is a water in great request: every guest of the Devil is
continually sipping of this Vial. It robs man of his good name, which is above
all riches* Prou. 22.1.
There be some think to escape this censure: though they speak evils of
others, yet true evils: but Genesis 9.22 25.
Cham is cursed for declaring his Fathers nakedness, though true. These are
like vultures, ad male olentia feruntur; They pass over M^^dowes and flowers
to fall upon carions: like Flies, they leap over all a man's good parts and
virtues, to light upon his sores. If Noah had not been once drunk, Cham had
lost his sport. There are many of these 1 Samuel 23.19.
Ziphims, that to currie favor with Saul, betray David: but in my opinion, 1
S^^. 22.9.
Doegs truth was worse then Josh. ^.5.
Rahabs lie. A man's good name is dear. Plerique famam, qui non conscientiam
verentur. Many stand upon their credit, that neglect their conscience. I^ro.
Vilium est hominum alios viles facere, et qui suo merito placere non possunt,
placere velle aliorum comparatione. It is the part of vile men to vilefie
others, and to climb up to immerited praise, by the stairs of another
disgrace. This is no new dish at some Nouelists table; to make a man's
discredit, as sauce to their meat: they will toss you the maligned's
reputation, with the rackets of reproach from one to another, and never bandie
it away, till they have supped. If they want matter, Jealousy is fuel
enough: it is crime enough for a Formalist, (so they term him) that he is but
suspected guilty. But the Matrone of the Cloister would never have sought the
Nun in the Vault, if she had not been there her self. It was Publius
Claudius his best policy, least Cicero should accuse him justly of
Sacrilege, to step in first and tell the Senate, that Tullie profaned all
religion in his house Thus he that has most corrupt lungs, soonest complains
of the unsavory breath of others.

The Calumniatour is a wretched Thief, and robs man of the best thing he has:
if it be a true Maxim, that the efficacy of the Agent is in the apt
disposition of the Patient; whiles thou depriuest man of his credit, thou
take from him all power to do good. The slanderer wounds three at one blow;
Vno ictu, vno nictu. 1. The receiver, in poisoning his heart with an
uncharitable conceit. 2. The reputation of the slandered: for a man's name is
like a glass, if it be once cracked, it is soon broken: every Brier is
ready to snatch at the torn garment. 3. The worst blow lights on his own
soul: for the Arrow will rebound: Maledixit sibi. The slandered scapes best:
Psalm. 37.6.
For God shall bring forth his righteousness as the light, etc.

These are those Hogs in a Garden, which root up the flowers of a man's good
parts. But if there were no receiver, there would be no Thief: men would not
so burden themselves with the coals of contumely, if they had no where to
unload them. It were well for Mephibosheth, that Ziba dwelt a good way from
Court. If Saul were deaf, or Doeg dumb; no matter which: for these are two
Whelps of that Littour, that must go to hell: one has the Devil in his
ears, the other in his tongue. It is a good general rule of Saint Bernard to
govern our tongues by. Ber.
Sint verba tua rara, vera, ponderosa: rara, contra multiloquium; vera, contra
falsiloquium; ponderosa, contra vaniloquium. Let thy words be few, true,
substantial: many words, false words, vain words, become not a Christians
lips. Inuectiues against other men are ever evil, but then worse, when they be
false* a man may sin, even in speaking the truth, when just circumstances
forbid it; but he cannot but sin in lying; and there is no circumstance can
clear him. Cor linguae foederat naturae sanctio, veluti in quodam certo
connubio: ergo cum dissonent cor et locutio, sermo concipitur in adulterio.
Nature has knit the heart and the tongue together in the bands of marriage;
that which the tongue brings forth, without (or contrary to) the heart, is the
birth of adultery. Speak then the truth from thy heart, but wrong not thy
brother with a needless truth. Thus Calumnies are stolen waters! Beware then
you Diaboli, accusers of your Brethren, Dogs with arrows in your thighs,
that are troubled with sore mouths, and Cankers in your teeth, you drink
stolen waters, and minister them to others also; both Physician and Patient
shall die for it.

6. The last Vial of this Course is Flattery, a water taken out of Narcissus
Well; whereof, when great men drink plent^fully, they grow mad in their own
admiration: and when Self-love has once befooled the brains, the Devil
himself would not wish the train of consequent sins longer. This is a
terrible enchantment, that robs men with delight: that counts simplicity a
silly thing, and will swear to a falsehood to please a Foelix. This man
out-runnes the Devil: he is the Father of lies, yet we never read, that he
swore to a lie: for he that swears, acknowledges the Being that he swears
by, greater then himself; which the Devil scorns to do. The Flatterer in
auouching a lie, and swearing to it, has a trick beyond the Devil. The
superlatiue titles of these men, cause others to ouer-value themselves. Pride
deriues her encouragement from the Flatterers artificial commendations. Thou
art far in debt, and fear arrests; he that should come and tell thee,
thou art rich, able to purchase, swimmest in a full and flowing stream, thou
give no credit to him, though he would give too much credit to thee. Thy
souls state is more beggarly, broken, bankerout of grace, and run in
arrerages with God, yet the Flatterer praises the riches of thy virtues, Reu.
3.17.
and thou beleeuest him. It is a fearful and fanaticall blindness for a man
to carry his eyes in a box, like Plutarches lamiae, and only look into
himself by the eyes of his Parasites: as if he desired to read the Catalogue
of his own good parts, through the spectacles of Flattery; which makes the
least letter of a great show, and sometimes a Cipher to be mistaken for a
figure. The Sycophants language is a false glass, and represents thy
conscience white, when thou may change beauty with the Moore; and loose not
by the bargain. Let Herod be as hollow as a kexe, and as light as Air, yet
weighed in his Parasites balance, he shall poyse with solid Virtue, nay, with
God himself.

Oh, for some golden Statute against these Aristophanes Fawners, and Herodian
Picke-thankes, that cry, (...), and Vox Dei, like the Churchwardens Bills, Omnia
been, every thing is as it should be, when all the foundations of the earth are
out of course. These Italianate Apes, and French Parrats, that can spinne
themselves silken suits (ex assentando) on the voluble wheels of their
pleasing tongues. Oh that we could think, when these beasts play and skippe
above their wont, that there is some tempest a coming. The Flatterer is a
delightful Coosenage, smooth perjury, rumors friend, Consciences adversary,
Honesties murderer. He allures to Vice vnken'd; colors Vice perpetrated: the
horriblest sin is but an error in his verdict. He can Iam. 3.
Bless and Curse with one mouth; Laugh and Cry with one look; Luk^ 22.48.
Kiss and Betray wirh one sign. Bion compares him to a Beast: Plato to a
Witch; all to a Thief; some to a Devil. August. in Psalm. 66.
Plus nocet lingua adulatoris, quam manus persecutorie. There is no Foe to the
Flatterer. The Gramarians fitly: Mobile cum fixo: like the Adjective, he varies
case and gender with his Substantive. A Cameleon! tet^git quoscunque colores,
Metam.
to all colors; except Red and White, says Pliny: Red signifying Modesty,
White Innocence. Natio comaeda est: rides? Iuuen Sat. 3.
maiore cachinno concutitur, etc. If thou say, it is hot, he wipes his
forehead: if cold, he quakes of an Ague. As in the Delphicke Oracle, Pythias
did never prophecy, but when she was set on a Treuit, and the wind blew
intelligence into her: so this Devils prophet is dumb, till you set him on the
Tripode of Ease, Credit, Gain, and stroke him on the head like a Spaniell, and
then he will lick your hand, and fill your ears with the Oracles of Hell.
He is sibi natus, multis notus, omnibus nocuus: Mundi nothus, Inferni nixus.
He is borne to himself, known to many, hurtful to all: the worlds Bastard,
Hels true-borne Child. Patitur dum potitur. He suffers much, that he may put
up somewhat, when he speaks of the absent, he knows no case but the
accusative: loves none (from his Patron) but the dative. Hi^ lauds numerat,
dum ille lauds munerat. He will multiply thy praises, if thou will divide to
him thy goods. There is a monstrous fable in the Alcoran, Alcor. lib. 4.
that the Earth is placed upon the sharp end of an Oxes horn; the weakness
whereof is the cause of Earthquakes: but he that fixes his estate on ^
Flatterers sharp tongue, will put an Earthquake into it, and soon run to
ruin. Our Chronicles report of Canutus, that when his Flatterers styled him
Ruler of Sea and Land, he commanded his chair of Estate to be brought to the
Seaside: and when the waves beat on him, he cried, I command you to return:
the sturde waters, (scornful of such a control, as the Devils were of the
sons of Sceua, Acts 19.15.
Jesus we know, but who are ye? God we know, calming floods, quieting the
winds, but who art thou?) beat on him more furiously: then, lo says Canutus,
what a goodly God I am; and behold my command* conuincing his flatterers. Oh
that some strong West-winde would rid our Land of these Exodus 10.19.
Locusts.

The last sort of Vials served in at this Course, are Stolen waters, which
immediately rob our selves. The Devil finds us cheer at our own cost, and
with cates stolen from our own possessions, he makes us a bounteous feast.
Truth is, every Cup of sin we drink of, is a water, that (at least
indirectly) robs our selves: neither can we feed on Atheism, Heresy,
Sacrilege, Murder, Adultery; but we rifle our souls of grace, our
Consciences of peace: for the Devils Banquet never makes a man the fatter for
his feeding: the guests, the more they eat, the more lean and meager they
look: their strength goes away with their repast, as if they fed on nothing
but Sauce; and all their sweet delicates in taste were but fretting in
digestion; (like Vinegar, Olives, or Pulse) neither does batten and cheerish,
because it wants a blessing unto it. Only it gets them a stomach: the more
heartily they feed on sin, the greater appetite they have to it. Though
custom of sin has brought them past feeling, ^phes. 4.19.
and they have long since made a deed of gift of themselves into the hands of
licentiousness, yet behold in them still an eager prosecution of sin, even
with greediness. Though mischief was the last thing they did when they went
to bed; Micah. 2.^.
nay the only action of their bed, yet they rise early, so soon as the
morning is light to practice it. They may be sick of sins incurable surfeit,
yet feel themselves hungry still; that the Cup of their wickedness may be
filled to the brim; and so receive a portion and proportion of torment
accordingly. Thus as the gyrouagi equi, molam trahentes, multum ambulant, parum
promouent; the Mil-turning-horse, coniured into his Circle, moves much, but
remoues little: or as the Poet of Ixion. Voluitur Ixion, qui se sequiturque
fugitque: So, the more these guests eat, the more unsatisfied they rise up: Ye
shall eat, and not be satisfied: ye shall drink, Micah. 6.14. Hagge. 1.6.
and not be ^illed; as he, that dreameth of good cheer, but awakes with an
hungry soul. All the delights of sin put not the least drop of good blood
into the veins, nor bless the heart with the smallest addition of content.
They browse like Beasts on these sweet boughs, but they look thin after
it, as if they had devoured their own bowels.

1. The first Vial of this nature is Pride: a stolen water indeed, but
derived from thine own Fountain. It may strike God, offend thy Brother, but
it does immediately rob thy self. The decoration of the body is the
deuoration of the substance: the back wears the silver, that would do better
in the Purse. Armenta vertuntur in ornamenta: the grounds are vnstocked, Genesis
3.21.
to make the back glister. Adam and Eve had Coats of Beasts skins; but now
many beasts, flesh, skins and all, will scarce furnish a prodigal younger
son of Adam with a suit. And, as many sell their tame beasts in the Country,
to enrich their wild Harlots.
beasts in the City; so you have others, that to revel at a Christmas, will
rauell out their Patrimonies. Pride and good husbandry are neither Kith nor
Kin: but Iaball and Iuball are brethren: Iaball, that dwelt in Tents, Genesis
4.20* 21.
and tended the Herds, had Iuball to his brother, who was the father of
Music: to show, that Iaball and Iuball, frugalitie and Music, good
Husbandry and Content are brothers, and dwell together. But Pride and Opulencie
may kiss in the Morning, as a married couple; but will be divorced before
Sunset. They whose Fathers could sit and tell their Michael-masse-hundreths,
have brought December on their estates, by wearing May on their backs all the
year.

This is the plague and clogge of the Fashion, that it is never vnhamperd of
Debets. Pride begins with Habeo, ends with Debeo; and sometimes makes good
every syllable gradatim. Debeo, I owe more then I am worth. Beo, I bless my
creditors; or rather, bless my self from my Creditors. Eo, I betake me to my
heels. Thus England was honored with them whiles they were Gallants, Germany
or Rome must take them, and keep them being beggars. Oh that men would break
their fasts with frugalitie, that they might never suppe with want. What folly
is it to begin with Plaudite, Who does not mark my bravery? and end with
Plangite, Good Passenger a Penny. Oh that they could from the high promontorie
of their rich estates foresee how near Pride and Riot dwell to the
Spittle-house! not that but God allows both Genesis 3 21.
garments for necessity, and Esther 6.11.
ornaments for comeliness, according to thy degree: but such must not wear
Silks, that are not able to buy Cloth. Chrysostom.
Many women are ( propter venus^atem inuenustae, says Chrysostom,) so fine,
that they are the worse again. Fashions far fetched, and dear bought, fill
the eye with content, but empty the purse. Christ's reproof to the Jews may
fitly be turned on us: Luke 11.47.
Why do ye kill the Prophets, and build up their Tombs? Why do ye kill your
souls with sins, and garnish your bodies with braueries? the Maid is finer
then the Mistress, which Saint Jerome says, Ier.
would make a man laugh, a Christian weep to see. Hagar is tricked up, and
Sara put into rags: the soul goes every day in her worky-day clothes,
vnhighted with graces, whiles the body keeps perpetual holy day in gainesse.
The house of Saul is set up, the Flesh is graced: the house of David is
persecuted and kept down, the Spirit is neglected.

I know, that Pride is never without her own pain, though she will not feel
it: be her garments what they will, yet she will never be too hot, nor too
cold. There is no time to pray, read, hear, meditate; all goes away in
trimming. There is so much rigging about the Ship, that as Ovid wittily, pars
minima est ipsa puella sui: A woman for the most part is the least part of her
self. Faemina culta nimis, faemina casta minus: Sphy.
too gawdie bravery, argues too slender chastity. Esa. 61.10.
The garment of salvation is slighted: and the Revel. 7 9.
long white robe of glory scorned: the Romans 13.14.
Lord Jesus Christ, a garment not the worse, but the better for vvearing, is
thrown by; and the ridiculous Psalm 73.6.
chain of Pride, is put on: but ornamentum est, quod ornat; ornat, quod
honestiorem facit: That alone does beautify, which does beatifie, or make the
soul happy: no ornament does so grace us, as that we are gracious. Thus the
substance is emptied for a show; and many rob themselves of all they have, to
put a good suite on their backs.

2. The next Cup of these stolen waters is Epicurisme: a water, which whiles
we sup of, we suck our selves. A sin, that vvhiles men commit it, it
commits them, either to the highway or the Hedges: and from thence either by a
Writ, or a Warrant, an Arrest, or a Mittimus, Prou 30.8.
to the prison. Solomon says, He shall not be rich. The Gut is a Gulf, that
will easily swallow all his commings in. Meat should be (as wise Agur prayed)
food convenient for thee, or as the Hebrew phrase is, the food of thy
allowance. This dish, is to feed on all dishes, that may pleas^ the appetite,
or rather may delight surfeit; for appetite dares not lodge in an Epicures
house. This Sin is instar omnium; like the Feast it self: save, that the
Glutton feeds on Gods good ^reatures corporally; but on Satan's mystical
board is set nothing but what is originally evil, and absolutely banefull. So
that here, Gluttony that feeds on all Dishes, is but a private Dish it self;
and though perhaps for the extent and largeness it takes up the greater room,
yet for the number it is but one.

Phil. 3.19.
It is most rank Idolatry, says Paul; and so near to Atheism, with a
no-God: that it makes a carnal God. Ierom.
In mea pa^ria Deus venture: as profound, and profane, as the Babilonians
sacrifice: they to their Bell, these to their Belly. Perhaps, you will say,
they are more kind to themselves: not a whit; for they vvrappe up death in
their full morsels, and swallow it as Pills in the Pappe of delicatie. They
overthrow nature, with that should preserve it, as the Earth, that is too
rank, marres the Corn. They make short work with their estates, and not
long with their lives; as if they knew that if they lived long, they must be
beggars: therefore at once they make haste to spend their livings, and end
their lives. Full Suppers, midde-night Revels, Morning Iunkets, give them no
time to blow, but add new to their indigested surfets. They are the Devils
crammed Fowls, like Aesops Hen, too fat to lay; to produce the fruits of
any goodness. They do not (dispensare, but dissipare bona Domini) wisely
dispense, but blindely scatter the gifts of GOD. They pray not so much for
daily Bread, as for dainty Bread; and think God wrongs them, if they may not
( Diues-like) fare diliciously every day. Sense is their Purueyour; Appetite
their Steward: They place Paradise in their throats, and Heaven in their guts.
Mean time, the state wastes, the soul pines, and though the flesh be puffed
and blown up, the spirits languish; they love not to live in a Fenne, but to
have a Fenne in them.

It is not plague enough that GOD withal sends leanness into their souls,
but their estates sincke, their lives fall away: they spinne a web out of
their own bowels: worse then the (...), Men-eaters, they are (...),
selfe-eaters, they put a Pleurisy into their bloods, a Tabe and Consumption
into their states, an Apoplexy into their souls, the meat that perishes not,
is fastidious to their palates; that they may feed on that, which feeds on
them; John 6.27.
and so at once devour and be devoured; drink of a cup that drinks up them.

3. The third Vial is Idleness; a filching water to: for it steals away our
means both to get goods, and to be good: It is a rust to the Conscience, a
thief to the estate. The Idle man is the Deu^ls Cushion, whereupon he sits,
and takes his ease. He refuses all works, as either thankelesse or dangerous.
Thus charactered: he had rather freeze then fetch wood; D. Hall. cha^.
he had rather steal then work, and yet rather beg then take pains to
steal; and yet in many things rather want then beg. Phil. Mel.
Ignaui sunt fures, says Melancthon: Sluggards are thieves: they rob
insensibly the Commonwealth, most sensibly themselves: Poverty comes on him
as an armed man. The Idlesbie is pouerties prisoner: Prou. 24.34.
if he live without a calling, poverty has a calling to arrest him. When the
Cisterne of his patrimony is emptied, and seems to inuit his labor to
replenish it; he flatters himself with enough still, and looks for supply
without pains. Necessity must drive him to any work, and what he can not
(auferre, he will differ) avoid, he will delay.

Every get-nothing is a thief, and laziness is a stolen water: if the Devil
can win thee, to plye hard this liquour, he knows it will whet thy stomach
to any vice. Faction, Theeuerie, Lust, Drunkenness, blood, with many Birds of
this black wing, offer themselves to the Idle mind, and strive to prefer
their service. Would you know, says the Poet, how Aegistus became an
adulterer? In promptu causa est: desidiosus erat: the cause is easy, the
answer ready: he was Idle. He that might make his estate good by labor, by
Idleness robbes it. This is a dangerous water, and full of vile effects: for
when the lazy have robbed themselves, they fall aboard and rob others. This
is the Idle-mans best end, that as he is a Thief, and lives a beast, so to
dye a beggar.

4. The fourth Cup is Envy: Water of a strange and uncouth taste. There is no
pleasure in being drunk with this stolen water: for it frets and gnawes both
in palates and entralls. There is no good relish with it, either in taste or
digestion. Only it is like that Acidula aqua, that Pliny speaks of, which
makes a man drunk sooner then wine. Envy keeps a Register of Injuries; and
graves that in Marble which Charity writes in the dust, Wrong. It cannot
endure that any should be conferred with it, preferred to it.

Nec quemquam iam far potest Caesarue priorem,
Pompeiusue parem.
Caesar can brook no Greater; Pompey no rival. John Baptist was of another
spirit: Ioh. 3.29.
when he heard that the people had left him to follow Christ, he spoke with the
voice of content, My joy is fulfilled. He must increase, and I must decrease.
Inuidus non est idoneus auditor. Ari^t.
The envious man is an incompetent hearer: his ears are not fit to his head.
If he hears good of another, he frets that it is good: if ill, he is
discontent that he may not judge him for it. If wronged, he cannot stay Gods
leisure to quit him: he is straight, either a Saul or an Esau; by secret
ambushes, or by open hostillitie, he must carue himself a satisfaction. No
plaster will heal his pricked finger, but his heart-bloud that did it: if he
might serve himself, he would take unreasonable peny-worthes. S. Augustine
would cool his heat. Vis vindicari Christian? Will thou bereuenged of thine
adversary oh Christian? tarry a while: Nondum vindicatus est Christus: Thy
Lord and Savior is not yet avenged of his enemies.

Malice is so mad, that it will not spare friend, to wreake vengeance on
foes. So Garnet told the Powder-traitours; that some innocent might be
destroyed with many nocent, if the public good could not otherwise be
perfected. His instance was, that in a Town besieged, though some friends were
there; yet no wrong nor offense, at advantage to cut all their throats. Hence,
if there had been Papists in the Parliament House, yet rather then loose so
holy a massacre, they must have flowne up with others. Call you these Saints?
Tantaene animis coelestibus irae? It was Gods reservation in the old
Testament, Genesis 18.32.
for accursed Sodom, Si december iusti, if ten righteous persons be found
there, etc. It was Christ's suspension in the new, Matthew. 13.29.
Let the tares alone till Harvest, least the Wheat be plucked up withal,
Theodosius was taxed, that in sontes vna cum sontibus trucidasset, that he had
slain the good with the guilty; and might not be suffered to enter into the
Temple. In the Primitive Church the Bishops staid process against the
Priscillian Her^tikes, ne catholici cum illis perirent, least some good
Christians should perish with them. Iehu intending due destruction to the
worshippers of Baal, 2 King. 10.23.
made a special search, that none of the Lords servants were amongst them. But
malice is ever blind, to see what sequel attends her courses. The Envious man
is content to loose one eye of his own, so he may put out both his neighbors:
nay, which is worse, he will loose both his own to put out one of his. The
least trespass shall not pass without suite. The Devil can send him on a
very slight errand to Westminster Hall. Be the case never so broken, if the
Lawyers wit can stitch it together, that it may hold to a nisi prius, it is
enough. I may (with a little inuersion) read his destiny from the Poet.

Hunc nec dira venena, nec hostius auferet ensis,
Nec laterum dolor, aut tussis, vel tarda podagra:
Garrulus hunc quando ^onsumet.
Let him not fear Domestical poison, nor foreign sword, nor a stitch in's
sides, nor a Cough in's lungs, nor the Gowte in's joints: Hunc proprius liuor
cons^m^t. He will fret himself to dust. His Praecordia are steeped in
Vinegar. A sound heart is the life of the flesh: Prou. 14.30.
but Envy is the rottenness of the bones. The Drunkard rots his flesh, the
malicious his bones: He burns up his blood in the furnace of hatred.

Insunit; cum aliena nequit, sua pectora rodit.
Mad, that his poison will not others kill,
He drinks it off himself, himself to spill.
Envy is thrown like a ball of Wildfire at another Barn; rebounds and
fires thine own. The Swallow having crossed some Lands and Seas, returns next
Summer to her old Chimney: the Arrow of malice shot far off, turns upon his
heart, that set it flying. Bless your selves; you know not whither you will be
carried, Matthew. 13.28.
if once you be horsed on the back of the Envious man. Forbear then this
water, as thou love thy health, blood, life and peace.

5. The fifth Cup is Drunkenness; a Vial of the waters of Stealth: a liquid
food literally taken. For that, which Ebrietie sins withal, is wine and
strong drink. (Vae fortibus ad potandum. Esa. 5.22.
Woe to them that are mighty to devour Drink; and strong to carry it away;
for their habillitie encourages their more frequent sins.) But Drunkenness,
as it is a Cup of this service, is a special water of it self, at the Devils
Banquet. This sin is an horrible selfe-theft: God has past his word against
him. Prou. 23.21.
The Drunkard and the Glutton shall come unto poverty, and Drowsinesse shall
cloth a man with rags. He that drinks more in a day, then he can earne in
a week, what will his gettings come to at the years end? There is no
remedy, he must shake hands with beggerie, and welcome it into his company.
How many (in the compass of our knowledge) have thus robbed themselves; and
been worse enemies to their own estates, then the most mischievous Thieves!
Thieves cannot steal Land, unless they be Westminster Hall Thieves, crafty
contenders, that eat out a true title with a false evidence: but the Drunkard
robs himself of his Lands: Now he dissolues an Acre, and then an Acre into the
Pot; till he has ground all his ground at the Malt-querne; and run all his
Patrimony through his throat. Thus he makes himself the living tomb, of
his forefathers, of his posterity: he needs not trouble his sick mind
with a Will, nor distrust the fidelity of Executours; he drownes all his
substance at the Ale-fat; and though he deuoures much, is the leaner every way.
Drunkenness is regius morbus, a costly sin. It is like Gunpowder, many a
man is blown up by it. He throws his house so long out at windows, D. Boys.
Postil.
t^ll at last his house throws him out at doors. This is the Tiplers
progress: from luxury to beggerie; from beggerie to theeuerie: from the
Tavern to Tyburne, from the Alehouse to the Gallows.

6. The last Vial of these self- stolen waters, is Covetousness: a dish of
drink at the Devils Banquet, which more come for, then for all the rest. The
covetous is a cruel Thief to himself, worse then the Devil: for the Devil
would give much for a soul; how much would he give for himself? The
Covetous man loves money better then his own soul? This mercenarie Soldier
is fit for any office in the Devils Camp. There is no sin so ugly, so
hideous, but sent to the Covetous man's door in a golden vizour, it shall have
entertainment. This Sin is like a great Beast, which violently breaking upon
Gods freehold, makes a gappe wide enough for the whole Heard to follow.
Fruitur mundo, vtitur Deo. The Covetous possesses the world, and makes use of
God: but if a man cannot serve God and Mammon, he can much less serve Mammon
and God: God scorns to be set after the world. He heavens himself on earth,
and for a little pelf cousous himself of bliss. He steals quiet from his
own bones, peace from his conscience, grace from his soul! Is not this a
Thief?

How much of fame, liberty, peace, conscience is laid out to purchase gold?
some for love of it would pluck down Heaven, and empty it of a Deity: others
to overtake it, run quick to Hell. And they, that seek it, find it: for if
a man will sell Heaven for pelf, he shall not fail of his purchase. Hence
Mammon is the God of no beggars; but Merchants and Gentles, and Cormorants, and
Usurers, and Chuffes. The Idols of the Heathen were silver and gold: It is but
inuerting the sentence. Their Idols are silver and gold, and silver and gold
are our Idols.

Many a wretched Father plays the Thief with himself, and starues his own
carcass, to leave wealth to his Babe. He lives on roots, that his prodigal
Heir may feed on Pheasants: he keeps the Chimney corner, that his Heir may
frequent Ordinaries: he drinks water, that his Heir may drink wine, and
that to drunkenness. Though he be richer then Dives, he lives like an
Alchimist. Miserable Fathers make wretched Sons: none often have more undone
them, then they that have done most for them. They make heritages, but God
makes Heirs: the children of such Churles seldom roast what their Fathers
took in hunting. Prou. 12.
Now what Thief can more spoil another, then such a man does himself? he
cannot find in his heart, to put a good morsel into his belly. He dares not
eat an Egg, least he should loose a Chicken. A poor Beggar is in better
estate then a rich Miser: he wants many things; but this wants all things.
Corpus extenuat, vt lucr^m extendat: He wrinkles and contracts his body, that
he may enlarge and replenish his purse: he pincheth his carcass, to stuff
his Capcase. No marvel, if that he hear not the moanes of the poor, when he
is deaf to the complaints of his own belly. Prou. 16.26.
Whereas, he that labors, labors for himself, for his mouth craves it
of him. It is the voice not only of Gods spirit, that so it should be, nor of
reason only, that so it must be, but even of nature, that so it is; unless in
such unreasonable beasts as the Covetous; or rather (worse then beasts, for
they serve the necessity of nature) unnatural wretches: Dressing, like Cooks,
much good meat, and not vouchsafing to lick their own fingers. There is an
evil, says Solomon, under the Sun; and such an evil, that the Sun can scarce
see a worse: Eccl^s. 6.1.2.
A man, to whom God has given riches, and that so abundantly, that he wants
nothing of all that his soul can desire, yet God gives him not the power to
eat thereof, but a stranger eats it. Thi^ is vanity and an evil disease. A
Disease it is, and fitly called the Dropsy.

Thus the Covetous man pines in plenty, like Tantalus, up to the chinne in
water, yet thirsty. He that has no power to take part of Gods blessings, which
he keeps, plays the Thief finely, and robs himself. His extortion has
erst stolen from others; and now he plays rob-thiefe, and steals from
himself. They say, the rule of charity should be fetched from home. He that is
miserable to himself, will never be liberal to others; he that pines
himself, God bless me from begging at his door. It is miserable living at
this man's finding: for like a Chimist, he turns every thing into silver, what
he should wear, and what he should eat; and so robs both back and belly of
warmth, of sustenance. All, to conjure a little money into the circle of his
Purse; which he will do, though he fetch Spells from the Devil to do it: yet
keeps it only to look on, not to use. Nemini bonus, sibi pessimus. As he is
good to none, Senec.
so (let it be his plague) he is worst to himself. He is ever in debt to his
belly: the purest metal is for his Coffer; the coursest meat is good enough
for his stomach. He does so cross the vanity of Pride, which esteems the
dearest things the best; that he thinks nothing sweet, but what is cheap. If
ever he satisfy his complaining stomach with a good morsel, it shall be from
his neighbors Trencher.

He has not so much idle time, as to sleep; but either he dreameth of his
gold, or rises to see if the doors be fast. So Claudian (amongst others)
describes the Covetous dream. Et vigil elapsas quaerit auarus opes. He seeks
that in his sleep, Lib. 3. Praef.
which he could not find waking. The Covetous give better ear to the Priests
of Ianus, then to the Apostles of Jesus: Quaerenda pecunia primum est: First
se^ke money, Hor.
has thrust out (Querite primum regnum Dei) First seek the Kingdom of God.
Matthew. 6.33.
They will hear us willingly, if our Text be Commodity, Psalm. 4.6.
and our Sermon Policy. A Bill, that contains the sale of a Lordship, or the
news of a Morgage, or the offer of good security for ten in the hundred, is
more heeded, then a book on the Stationers shop, with the way to heaven, for
the Title. Neither let us (as is said) judge him only to drink of this water,
that extorts from others; but even him that pincheth himself. So S. August.
Non solum auaru^ est qui rapit alienae, sed qui cupide seruat suae. He is not
only covetous, that raketh from others, but he also that takes from himself.
The niggards looks to his entering guests, Plin.
is like Diana's Image in Chios, which frowned with a lowering countenance on
all that came into the Temple, but looked blithe, and smiled on them that
departed. This is he that thinks there are no such Angels as his golden ones;
no such Paradise as in his Counting House. He cares not to run quick to the
Devil of an errand, so gain sends him, and pays him for his pains. He has
a short conscience, and a large damnation. He is a special guest at the Devils
board; and never misseth his Ordinary, which he affects the more, because he
pays nothing.

The more he deuoures, the hungrier he is: a full supper of profit, gives him
the more eager appetite to his morrowes breakfast. Mich. 2.1.
All he eats, is like Physic to him; he looks thinner after it. He takes
great pains to go to hell: whither since he will go, he might do it with
more ease. He has no heaven, neither present nor future; and having sold
bliss for riches, as Aesops Dog did the flesh for the shadow, behold, he
loses both. Other sinners for their damnation, have somewhat, which they call
delightful: the Covetous man buies hell with hell; eternal, with present
anguish. Thus he robs himself of all content; and when all is done, 1 Timothy
6.10.
he is a man undone, and pierced through with many sorrows.

We have now ended the service of the waters; with the 1. Praescription of
their Beings, Waters: and 2. The description of their natures* stolen. The
Vices, which under this smooth name the Devil tempts his guests to surfeit on,
are to your hearing odious: I will step no further to fetch in application,
then from the word, Stolen.

All stolen things are accountable for; the law of all Nations has provided,
that (cuique suum) every man may enjoy his own. God is a just Judge, Applic.
a retributor of every man his own. No thief can escape 1. The apprehension of
his Pursuiuant^. 2. The appearance to his Sessions. 3. The penalty of his
sentence. He has appointed a general Assizes, Acts 17.31.
a day, wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man, whom he
has ordained, etc. To which there is a necessity of appearance. 2 Cor. 5.10.
For we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the things done in his body, etc. At which time (an account is not
auoidable) Eccles. 12.14.
God shall bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing, whither
it be good or evil. What then will be the success of these stolen waters? We
carry out our robberies now without question; we invade our brethren, we
euade the Law: But behold, Esa. 17.14.
at Euening-tide trouble, and before the Morning he is not. This is the portion
of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us.

Felony is the Indictment, a rebellion against our Sovereigns Crown and
Dignity. Ambitious theefes in the Court, Simoniacall thieves in the Church,
hollow-hearted thieves in the City, oppressing and men-eating thieves in the
Country: all must be summoned, their debts summed, their doom sentenced. The
impartial conscience from the book of their lives, shall give in clear
evidence. There is no retaining of Counsel: no bribing for a partial censure:
no trick of demure: no putting off and suspending the sentence: no euading the
doom. The cursed generation of thefts are now easily borne, and borne out.
Subtlety can give them the help of a conueyance, and money purchase a
conniuence. But then alas! what shall become of them, and of many souls for
them? what shall become all the Traitors, gory Murderers, impudent Atheists,
secret Church-robbers, speckled Adulterers, rusty Sluggards, nasty drunkards,
and all the defiled wretches that have sucked damnation from the breasts of
black Iniquity. An impenetrable Judge, an impleadable Indictment, an
intolerable anguish shall ceaze upon them. Revel. 6.16.
Mountains of Sand were lighter, and millions of years shorter then their
torments.

Oh think, think of this, ye Sons of rapine, that with greediness devour
these stolen waters. You can not rob God of his glory, Ephesians. 4.
man of his comforts, your selves of your happiness, but God, Man, your own
Souls shall cry against you. What thunder can now beat into you a fear of
that, which then no power shall ease you of? why strive we not, Niniueh-like,
to make the message of our overthrow, the overthrow of the message? and so
work, that according to Sampsons Riddle, the Destroyer may save us? Wherefore
are we warned, but that we might be armed? and made acquainted with Hell in
the speculation, but that we may prevent the horror of it in passion? Let me
tell you, ye thieves, that sit at Satan's board; there is a thief shall
steal on you, steal all from you, 2 Pet. 3.13.
The day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the Night, in the which the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, etc. (...), a Thief, (...), to
take away privily, or by stealth: or, (...), of hiding or covering. Fur a
furuo, quia in obscuro venit. A thief as well for stealing on us, as for
stealing from us. He comes in the dark, when no body sees, treads on wool,
that no body hears, watches an hour that no body knows.

This Thief shall steal on you, perhaps Banketting at this Feast of Vanity:
as the Flood came on the old World, vvhiles they Luke 17.27.
ate and drank, and were merry. Matthew 24.42. Hom. 78.
Watch therefore, for you know not what hour your Lord does come. So
Chrysostom on that place, from our Saviors comparison of the good man of the
house: non laederetur ille furto, si sciret venturum: vos scitis, paratiores
esse debetis. The thief should not hurt him, if he knew of his coming: you
know he will come, prepare for his welcome. We are all householders; our bodies
are our houses; our souls our goods; our senses are the Doors and Windores,
the Locks are Faith and Prayer. The day of our doom will come as a thief;
let our Repentance watch, let it never sleep, lest we perish. Si praescirent
homines, quando morituri sint, Chrysostom.
deligentiam super came rem ostenderent. If men foreknew the time of their
death* they would show carfulness in their preparation; how much more being
ignorant? But alas! Ignorance covenants with death: and security Amos 6.3.
puts far away the evil day, and causes the seat of violence to come near.
When the Prophets of our Israel threaten Judgments, you flatter your selves
with the remoteness. Ezekiel. 12.27.
The vision that he sees, is for many days to come, and he prophecyeth of the
times that are far off. As if it concerned you not what ruin laid waste the
Land, so peace might be in your days. (But there is Esa. 57.21.
no peace, says my God, to the wicked.) our Rose-buds are not withered, our
daunces are not done: sleep Conscience, lie still Repentance. Thus with the
sentence of death instant, and in a prison of bondage to Satan present, says
S. Augustine, Maximo gaudio debacchamur: De constable. vit. and virtut.
we are drunken, we are frantic with pleasures. There may be other, there
can be no greater madness.

Lo, the success of these stolen waters. You hear their nature: time has
prevented their sweetness. God of his mercy, that has given us his Word to
inform our Judgment, vouchsafe by his Spirit to reform our consciences, that
we may conform our lives to his holy precepts. For this let us pray. etc.

What here is good, to God ascribed be,
What is infirm, belongs of right to me.
FINIS.
THE Breaking up of the Devils Banquet.

OR The Conclusion.

BY THOMAS ADAMS, Preacher of Gods Word at Willington in Bedford-shire.

ROMANS 6.21. What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof you are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death.

TERTVL. lib. ad Martyrs. Pax nostra, bellum contra Satanam.

To be at war with the Devil, is to be at peace with our own Conscience.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for Ralph Mab, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Greyhound. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS AND Worthy Sisters, the Lady Anne Gostwyke, and Mris.
DIANA BOVVLES: saving Health.
THat I have clothed this SERMON in the Livery of your Patronages, I might give
many reasons to satisfy others. But this one, to me, is in stead of all, that
you affect the Gospel: Not with the sudden flashes of some ouerhote
dispositions, but with mature Discretion, and sound Obedience. I could not
therefore suffer any thought of mine own unworthiness, to dissuade me from
presenting this poor labor to your hands; who have so favorably accepted my
weaker services. I owe you both a treble debt, of Love, of Service, of
Thankfulness. The former, the more I pay, the more still I owe. The second, I
will be ready to pay, to the uttermost of my power; though short both of your
deserts, and my own desires. Of the last, I will strive to give full payment,
and in that (if it be possible) to come out of your debts. Of all these, in
this small Volumne, I have given you the earnest. As you would therefore, do
with an ill debtor, take it till more comes. It shall be the more current, if
you will set thereon the seals of your acceptance. It is the latter end of a
Feast: yet it may, perhaps, afford you some Christian delicate, to content your
well affected spirits. It shall let you see the last service of Sins Banquet;
the harsh and unpleasant closure of vanity; the madness of this doting Age;
the formal dislike and real love of many to this World, the evil works of
some critical, others hypocritical dispositions, the ending, conclusion, and
beginning confusion of the Devils Guests. The more perfectly you shall hate
sin; the more constantly you shall hold your erst embraced virtues. And so in
happy time work out your own saluations. God give a succesfull blessing to
your Christian Endeavors: which shall ever be faithfully prayed for, by

Your Worships affectionately devoted THOMAS ADAMS.

THE Breaking up of the Devils Banquet. The third Sermon.
PROVERB. 9.17. Stolen waters are sweet, and Bread eaten in secret is pleasant.


THE custom of sin has so benumbed the sense of it; and the delighted
affections brought the conscience so fast a sleep in it; that ^ King. 18.17
he troubles Israel, who would waken Israel: and his speech is harsh
Barbarism, that speaks against the Devils Act. 19.34.
Diana; the Idol of Vice, which many worship. Our understandings think well
of Heaven, but our affections think better of Earth. Alexander after his great
Conquests, wrote to the Grecian Senate, Vt se deum facerent, that they would
accept him into the number of their Gods. With a resolute consent, they denied
it. At last a (right) Politician stood up, Aelian. Va^. hist. lib. 2. cap. 19
and told them, that (videndum est, ne dum coelum nimis custod^rent, terram
amitterent) they should look well to it; least whiles they were so religious
for heaven, they lost their part of earth. Hence they made (though but a
perfunctory and fashionable) decree. Quoniam Alexander Deus esse vult, Deus
esto. Since Alexander will be a God, let him be one. God commends to us his
^eauenly graces; Satan his Ion. 2.8.
lying vanities. Our Judgments must needs give assent to God. But because his
precepts go against the grain of our affections; and the Deu^ll tells us, that
curiosity for the uncertain ioye^ of heaven, will lose us the certain
pleasures of earth: we settle upon the Grecian resolution, (though more
seriously:) not to be so troubled for our souls, as to lose a moment of our
carnal delights. This i^ the D^^^ls a^sertion, in calling stolen waters
Sweet* t^^ truth whereof I am ^old (though a little I disquiet y^u^ lu^^^) to
examine. You have heard the prescription, Waters: the description, Stolen.

The Ascription of the quality (in it self) or effect (to others) of these
^aters, if we may beleeu^ Temptation, is Sweet. Stolen waters are Sweet. It is
the speech of the Ioh. 8.44.
Father of ^ies, and therefore to carry little credit with us. Sweet? to none
but those that are Lust-sicke; like them that are troubled with the
greene-sicknesse; that think Chalk, and Salt, and Rubbish, sauourie. It is a
strangely-affected soul, that can find Sweetness in sin. Sin is the
deprauation of goodness: the same that rottenness in the Apple, sowrenesse in
the Wine, putrefaction in the flesh, is sin in the conscience. Can that be
sweet which is the deprauing and depriving of all sweetness? Let any subtilty
of the Devil declare this riddle. The prae-existent priuations were
deformity, confusion, darkness. The position of their opposite perfections,
was the expulsion of those foul contraries. Sin comes like bleake and
squalid Winter, and drives out these fair beauties: turns the Sunshine to
blackness; calmness to tempests; ripeness to corruption; health to
sickness; sweetness to bitterness.

They desperately thrust themselves on the pikes of that threatened woe: Esa. 5.
that dare say of Esa. 5.20.
bitter, it is sweet; and consent to the Devil in the pleasantness of his
cheer; when the impartial conscience knows it is Ier. 9.15.
Gall and Wormwood. Yet such is the strong Enchantment, whereby Satan has
wrought on their affections, that bloudinesse, lust, perjury, oppression,
malice, pride, carry with these Guests an opinion of sweetness. If froathie
and reeling Drunkenness, lean and raking Covetousness, meager and
bloud-wasted Envy, keen and rankling Slander, nastie and ill-shapen
Idleness, smooth and faire-spoken Flattery, be comely? what is deformed; If
these be sweet, there is no bitterness. But though the Devil be not 2 Cor.
11.14
an Angel of light, yet he would be like one. Though he never speaks Truth,
yet he would often speak the Matthew. 4.6.
color of Truth. Therefore let us observe, what fallaces and deceitful
arguments he can produce, to make good this attribute; and put the
probability of sweetness into his stolen waters. For the Devil would not be
thought a Dunce; too weak to hold a Position, though it be never so absurd.
Stolen waters, Iniquities are sweet to the wicked in three respects. 1.
Because they are stolen. 2. Because they are cheap. 3. Because they give
delight, and persuaded content to the flesh.

1. Stolen or foubidden. Even in this consists the approbation of their
sweetness, that they come by stealth, and are compassed by dangerous and
forbidden pains. Furta placent, etiam quod furta. Theft delights, even in that
it is theft. The fruits of a wicked man's own Orchyard, are not so
pleasant-tasted as his neighbors: neither do they reserve their due
sweetness, if they be freely granted. But as the Proverb has it: Dulcia sunt
poma, cum abest custos. Apples are sweet, when they are plucked in the
Gardiners absence. Genesis 3.6.
Eve liked no Apple in the Garden so well as the forbidden. Antiochus scorns
Venison as base meat, if it be not lurched. It is an humor as genunie to our
affections, as moisture is inseparable to our bloods, that, nitimur in vetitum
semper; We run mad after restrained Objects. We tread those flowers under
our disdainefull feet, which mured from us, we would break through
stone-walls to gather. The liberty of things brings them into contempt:
neglect and Dust-heapes lie on the accessible stayres. Difficulty is a spur
to contention, and there is nothing so base, as that which is easy and cheap.
Sol spectatorem, nisi cum desicit, non habet: nemo obseruat Lunam* nisi
laborantem. The two great lights of heaven, that rule in their courses the day
and night, are beholding to no eyes, for beholding them, but when they are
ecclipsed. We admire things less wonderful, because more rare. If the Sun
should rise but once in our age, we would turn Persians, and worship it.

Wines would be less set by, if our own lands were full of Vineyards: Those
things that Nature has hedged from us, we long and languish for; when Manna
it self, because it lies at our doors, is loathed. H^ra.
Virtutem praesentem fere in nostris odimus; Sublatam ex oculis procul
quaerimus inuidi. The more spreading good things are, the more thought vile:
and (though against that old and true Bo^^^^, quo communius, (...) ^^lius.
rule) the community shall detract from the commodity. It is the
perverseness of our natures, till sanctification has put a new nature into
us, Matthew. 11.30.
that Gods yoke is too heavy for our shoulders: we cannot draw in the geeres
of obedience. We can travel a whole day after our dogs; but if authority
should charge us to measure so many miles, how often would we complain of
weariness? The Bird can sit out the day-measuring Sun, see his rise and fall
without irksomeness, whiles she is hatching her Eggs; if her nest were a
Cage, with what impatience would she lament so long a bondage! So the Usurer,
though he began his first bag with the sirst hour, and pulls not off his
hands or his eyes, till the eye of Heaven is ashamed of it, and denies further
light, he is not weary: let him sit at Church two hours, the seat is
uneasy, his bones ache, either a Cushion to fall a sleep with, or he will be
gone. That Christ may justly and fitly continue that his reproof upon such:
Can ye not watch with me one hour? Matthew. 26.40.


Thus the Command makes things burdensome, and Prohibition desirable. The
wicked would not so eagerly catch at vanities, if God had not said, nolit^
tangere, touch them not. Rapine, Lust, Ebrietie, Sacrilege would sit idle
for want of customers, if Gods interdiction had not set a ne ingrediaris, on
their doors. Prou. 4.14.
Enter not. Rome, (I know not how truly) bragges, (and let her Philip. 3.19.
boast her sin) that she has the fewer Adulterers, because she sets up the
Stews. It is reported, that Italy did never more abound with In the best
learn^ng.
Students, then when Julian had shut up the Schoole-doores, and turned Learning
into exile. He had fellows in that Empire of so contrary dispositions; that
some restrained all things, some forbad nothing; and so made their times either
tyrannous or licentious: insomuch that it was a busy question in those times;
whether of those Emperors were worse; one, that would let every man do as he
list; and the other, that would suffer no man to do as he would. It is
observed of the Jews, that whiles the Oracles of heaven were open, and
Religion leaned on the shoulders of peace, they fell frequently to Idolatry:
but with the Babilonian bridle in their mouths, they eagerly pursue it: their
persecution for it, increased their prosecution of it. So the blood of Martyrs
seeds the Church; as if from their dead ashes sprung ( Phoenix-like) many
professors.

If trodden Virtue grow so fast, like Camomill? how then does restrained Vice
thrive? sure this Hydra rather multiplies his heads, by the blows of reproof.
Sure it is, that ex malis moribus oriuntur plurimae leges. If men were not
prone to infinite sins, a more sparing number of laws would serve our
turns. And the more dangerous the law has made the passage of Injustice, the
more frequently, fervently they love to sail after it. What they quake to
suffer, they tickle to do; as if their Itch could not be cured till the Law
scratch them: so perverse is their disposition, that only coaction must force
them to good, only correction bind them from evil. Now, as it is shame, that
necessity should draw us to that, whereunto our own good should lead us: so
it is past shame to war for that, which God has charged us to ware of. Malum
est agere quod prohibetur, sed agere quia prohibetur, p^ssimum. He that does
that which is forbidden, is evil, he that does it because it is forbidden,
Devil. But as the honest man, that has somewhat to take to, is in most care
to come out of debt; so he that has neither honesty nor lands, takes care
only to come into debt, and to be trusted.

Thus we all long for restrained things, and doat on difficulties; but look
with an ouerly scorn; and winking neglect on granted faculties. Exodus 8.
Pharaoh is sick of Gods plague: the peaceable dismission of Israel will cure
him: he sees his medicine: no, he will be sicker yet; Israel shall not go.
Oh, that these, who wrestle with God; would think that the more fiercely and
firily they assault him, they are sure of the sorer fall. The harder the
earthen vessel rusheth upon the Brazen the more it is shiuered in pieces. But
nothing does give the ungodly such content, as that they dangerously pull out
of the jaws of difficulty. No Flowers have so good a smell as the Stolen: no
repast so sauoury as the cates of Theft. Quae venit ex tuto, minus est accepta
voluptas. Ovid. de am. li. 3.
Facility and liberty only takes off the edge of Lust; and what God does
restrain, man will not refrain. The Adulterer cares not for the chaste
society of a fair and loving wife; but the lusts of uncleanness, which he
steals with hazard, from another bed, are sweet in his opinion. Ahabs whole
kingdom is despised in his thoughts, whiles ^e is 1 King. 21.4.
sick of Nabaoths Vineyard. Hear Esau, Genesis 25.32.
What is my Birthright to me, when I can not taste of those red pottage? Oh
the crossenesse of our refractary dispositions, that are therefore the more
earnestly set upon the pro, because God has more clearly charged them with
the contra: as if our natural course was Crab-like to go backward; and our
delight was to be a second cross to CHRIST, whereby though we cannot crucify
his Flesh, yet we oppose and oppugn his Spirit: as if Cynically we affected
snarling, or like the Giants, would try our strengths with God.

Thus we have examined the Devils reason, and find the natures of the wicked
actually disputing for the truth of his assertion; and so, interdicta placent,
the waters of sin seem sweet, and are more greedily swallowed, because they
are stolen. The Ephesians. 2.2.
Prince of the air so rules in the hearts of the children of disobedience,
that their appetites only covet prohibited meats; and their affections
languish after discharged obiectes. But Esa. 29.16.
your turning of things vp-side down, shall be esteemed as the Potters clay.
And, Luke 19.17.
those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither, and slay them before me. GOD has a hook for Senacherib, a curb for
Saul, a bridle for these Psalm. 32.9.
Horses and Mules: the highest mouer ouerrules the swift motion of these
inferior Sphaeres, that they cannot fire the world: but as they delight to
make other men's possessions theirs by stealth; so they shall one day be glad,
if they could put off, that is theirs upon other men; and shift away the
torments that shall for ever stick on their flesh and spirits.

2 The second argument of their sweetness, is their cheapenesse. The sins of
stealth please the wicked, because they are cheap: what a man gets by
robbery, comes without cost. The ungodly would spare their purse, though
they lay out of their conscience. Parcatur sumptui. Favor their temporal
estates, though their eternal pay for it. Judas had rather lose his soul,
then his purse: and for thirty siluerlings, he sels his Master to the
Pharisees, himself to the Devil. Yet when all is done, he might put his
gains in his eye. It is but their conceit of the cheapnesse; they pay dear
for it in the vpshot. The Devil is no such frank Chapman to sell his Wares
for nothing. He would not proffer Christ the kingdoms without a price,
Matthew. 4.
he must be worshipped for them. The guests carry not a draught from his
table, but they must make courtesy to him for it. His worship must be thanked
at least: nay, thanks will not serve, affected, obayed, honored. He is
proud still, and stands upon it, beyond measure, to be worshipped. He will
part with an ounce of vanity, for a dram of worship: but the worshipper had
better part with a talent of gold.

The Devil indeed keeps open house; noctes atque dies, etc. He makes the
world believe that he sels Robin-Hoods penny worths; that he has manum
expansam, a prodigal hand, and gives all gratis: but vijs and modis, he is
paid for it; and such a price, that the whole world comes short of the value.
Only he is content to give day, and to forbear till death: but then he
claps up his debtors into everlasting prisonment, and lays an heavy execution
on them; that eue^ the Spanish Inquisition comes short of it. Thus as the King
of Sodom said to Abraham, Da mihi animas, Genesis 14.21.
Give me the souls, take the rest to thy self. The Prince of darkness is
content, that thou should have riches and pleasures cheap enough; only
give him thy soul, and he is satisfied. The Devil would have changed his
Arithmeticke with Job, and rather have given addition of wealth, then
substraction, if he could have so wrought him to blaspheme God.

Satan seems marvelous frank and kind at first: Munera magna quidem
praebet, sed praebet in hamo. They are beneficia viscata, ensnaring mercies. As
the Tree is the Birds refuge when she flies from the snare; and lo, there
she finds Bird-lime, that tears off her flesh and feathers. Conuiuia, quae
putes, insidiae sunt. They are baits, which thou take for bankets. The poor
man is going to prison for a small debt: the Usurer lends him money, and
rescues him: two or thee winters after, his fit comes again, and by how much
an Usurer is sharper then a mere Creditour, he is shaken with the worse
Ague: that kindness plungeth him into a deeper bondage: the first was but a
thredden snare, which he might break, but this is an infrangible chain of
iron. Men are in want, and necessity is (durum telum) a heavy burden: the
Devil promises supply. Behold, the drunkard shall have Wine, the thief
opportunity; the malious revenge; if they be hungry, he has a Banquet ready:
but, as I have seen Emperickes give sudden ease to a desperate and inueterate
grief, yet either with danger of life, or more violent reuocation of the
sickness; so their misery ere long is doubled: and that which was but a
stitch in the side, is now a shrewd pain in the heart. The Stagge and the
Horse (says the Fiction) were at variance: the Horse, being too vveake desires
Man to help him: Man gets on the Horses back, and chaseth the Stagge, Vsque
ad fugam, vsque ad mortem, to flight, to death. Thus the Horse gets the
victory; but is at once victor and victus, Captain and captive: for after
that he could never free his mouth from the bit, his back from the Saddle. Non
equitem dorso, non fraenum depulit ore. Man is beset with exigents: he
vvailes his weakness: the Devil steps in with promises of succor. Judas is
made rich, Gehesi gets change of suites: Nero is crowned Emperor, but vvithall
he gets possession of their affections, whence all the power of man cannot
vntenant him. Thus the Matthew. 1^.45.
last slavery is worse then the first, and the cheer is not so cheap at
sitting down, as it is dear at rising up.

This is the Devils cheapenesse: no, Iam. 1.17.
every good and perfect gift is from above. The Devil gives nothing, but 1 Timothy 6.17.
God gives to all, (...), richly, or abundantly, so that when he gives, he
takes nothing back: for Romans 11.29.
the gifts of the spirit are (...), without repentance. Esa. 55.1.
Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters of life, and he that has
no money, etc. God has waters, no stolen water, but waters of freedom; and
other blessings (if ye love liquid things) o^ an answerable nature, greater
virtue; and those, whereof he is a true proprietarie. Wine and Milk: Milk to
nourish, Lac nutriens, vinum exhilarans.
Wine to cherish the heart of man: buy them without money, let not your poverty
keep you back: here is cheapnesse, if you have a saving desire: come freely
and take your filles: Matthew. 11.5.
The Gospel is preached to the poor. Think not to buy the Act^ 8.20.
graces of God with money: lest you and your money perish. Only take your
time, and come whiles God is a giving: for there is a time when the door of
bounty is shut. Romans 10.21.
Though he stretch forth his hand of mercy all the day; yet the night comes
when he draws it back again. They that answer him, proffering grace, as
Daniel to Belshazzar, Dan. 5.17.
Keep thy rewards to thy self, and give thy gifts to another; may knock at
his gates, and be turned away empty. Now, spare to speak, and spare to speed.
Then, though you cry unto me, I will not hear: Heb. 3.7.
To day, then, harden not your hearts. Pray unto him, and Matthew. 7.11.
he will give good things to them that ask him. He does not sell, but give;
not the shadows, but the substances of goodness. Dat non vendit; and bonorum
n^n vmbras, sed substantias.
The conclusion then is clear, blessings and graces are truly cheap, Psalm.
84.11.
And no good thing will God withhold from them that walk uprightly: Romans 8.28.
All things shall work to their good, that are good. The Devil gives nothing,
but sels all for price; neither are they good things he sells; Neque dat
bona, n^que bona sunt quae vendit.
but figuras boni, the mere forms and counterfeits of goodness.

But if the cheapenesse of sin so affect men, what mean they to run to
Rome for it? where I do not say only, that sin and damnation has a shrewd
price set upon them, but even bliss and comfort: and no Pilgrim can get the
least salue-plaister to heal his wounded Conscience, but at an vnreasonnable
reckoning. But soft! it is objected, that Rome is still baited in our Sermons;
and when we seek up and down for matter, as Saul for his Asses, we light
upon the Pope still. I answer, that I can often pass by his door and not call
in: but if he meets me full in the face, and affronts me, (for good manners
sake) non praetereo insalutatum, I must change a word with him.

The Pope is a great Seller of these Stolen waters: (yet his Chapmen think
them cheap.) He thrusts his Spear into the Mountains, and sluceth out whole
floods: as it is fabled of Aeolus. He usurps that of God, that he can spanne
the waters in his fist: that he has all the graces of God in his own power;
and no water can pass besides his Mill: as if he could Amos 5.8.
call for the waters of the Sea, and power them out upon the face of the Earth:
or as Job speaks of Behemoth: Job 40.23.
Behold, he drinks up a River and hastes not: and trusts that he can draw
up Jordan into his mouth. As if all the graces of God were packed up in a
bundle, or shut into a box, and the Pope only was put in trust to keep the
Key; and had authority to give and deny them. Homer.
So Aeolus the God of Winds (says the Poet) gave Ulysses a Maile, wherein all
the Winds were bound and wrapped up together; except the Western wind,
which he must needs occupy to carry himself home. The Pope brags, that all
waters are banked up into his fountain, and none can drink but by his leave;
except the Supremacy and perfect Sanctity: which is the Wind and the Water,
he must use himself, thereby to sail to Heaven: (a Haven that few Popes
arrive at:) but otherwise there is no grace to be had, but from the mother-
Church of Rome, whose uncontrollable head is the Pope. A miserable Ingrosser,
that would shut up all goodness into his own Warehouse. Yet when he lists,
he will undertake to Esa. 44.3.
power floods on the solid ground; and Psalm. 105.41.
make Rivers run in dry places.

He has a huge Pond of Purgatory, whereout whole millions drink, and are
pleased. But as Darius pursued, drunk puddle-water, and said, it was the best
drink that ever he tasted. So it is the menaced terror, and the false
alarmes, that the Jesuits ring in Ignorances ear, that makes men drink so
greedily at the Popes Puddle-wharfe. He is a great Landlord of these stolen
waters. Revel. 17.1.
He sits upon many waters. Some he steals from the Jews, some from the
Turks, some from the Pagans, much from Idolatry, all from Heresy. That (as
John de Rupe scissa in a popular Sermon) if every Bird should fetch her own
feathers, you should have a naked Pope. Let every River challenge her own
waters, you will have a dry Rome: But now Expatiata ruunt per apertos flumina
campos. M^tam.
his waters spread over the face of the Earth: neither are they cheap, believe
but a Bird of their own Cage.

Temples and Priests are Marchandiz'd for pelf, Vaenalia nobis Templa, etc.

Altars, Prayers, Crowns; nay, Heaven and God himself.
Vendit Alexander Cruces, Altaria, Christum,
Vendere iure potest: emerat ille prius.
Romes Sea is sold, to quench the Popes mad thirst.
Well might he sell it: for he bought it first.
But is the Shop never opened, but to the mart of so good Commodities? yes, if
their Penance-Parlour wa^ opened, you might find a rate for Stolen waters:
Pardon for offenses committed: nay, Indulgences for future sins, which but
for an impregnable toleration might not be done. And let the traffiquers
speak from their own feeling how cheap they are. They have a pecuniary
patronage, and are warranted from the Popes Exchequour, rather then his
Chancerie. Even that corrupt Justice gives such sins no conniuence, but when
the dusts of briberie have shut his eyelids. It is their carfulness, Quod
huiusmodi dispensationes non concedantur pauperibus. Taxa et Cellar.
That such dispensations be not granted to the poor.

If this doctrine were true, it was time to raze Christ's speech out of the
Scriptures: It is hard for a rich man to enter into Heaven: Matthew. 19.23.
for it is easy for the rich, that can open the gate with a golden Key, and
the poor are only in danger of exclusion. And, that which would be most
strange, Hell should be peopled with none but Beggars: Not an Usurer, not an
Epicure, not a Cormorant, not a vicious Potentate should grace the Court of
Satan. For the Pope will for Money seal them a Pasport for Heaven. Nay, how
does this disgrace Purgatory! when none but beggarly vvretches shall be in
danger of drowning in that whirlepoole. Whence all their friends (being equally
poor) have not money enough for their redemption. These are the rotten post^
whereon the Fabric of Rome stands. Think not their sto^len waters cheap.
Your purses must pay for them. Yet happy were you, if no higher price was set
on them. All is not discharged with your ready many; there is another
reckoning: your souls mus^ pay for the^. The Devil ties his Customers in the
bond of Debets; and vvoe to them, that are too far in his books: for if
Christ cancel not his handwriting against them, Coloss. 2.
he will sue them to an eternal Outlawrie; and make them pay their souls,
for that they boasted they had so good cheap.

3. The third argument of these waters sweetness, is derived from our corrupt
affections. Sin pleases the Flesh? Omne simile nutrit simile. Corruption
inherent is nourished by the accession of corrupt actions. Judas Covetousness
is sweetened with unjust gain. 1 King. 2.5.
Ioab is hartned, and hardened with blood. Theft is fitted to, and fatted in the
theeuish heart with obuious booties. Pri^e is fed with the officious
complements of obseruant Grooms. Extortion battens in the Usurers affections
by the trolling in of his moneys. Sacrilege thriues in the Church-robber, by
the pleasing distinctions of those Sycophant-Priests; and helped with their
(^ot laborious) profit. Nature is led, is fed with Sense. And when the Citadell
of the heart is once won, the Turret of the understanding will not long hold
out. As the suffumigations of the oppressed stomach, surge up and cause the
headache: or as the thick spumy mists, which vapor up from the danke and
foggy earth, do often suffocate the brighter air, and to us (more then
eclipse) the Sun. The black and corrupt affections, which ascend out of the
nether part of the soul, do no less darken and choke the understanding.
Neither can the fire of grace be kept alive at Gods Altar, (man's heart,) when
the clouds of Lust shall rain down such showers of Impiety on it. Perit
omne Iudicium, cum res transit ad affectum. Farewell the perspicuitie of
Judgment, when the matter is put to the partiality of affection.

Let then the taste be Judge at this Feast, and not the stomach, Lust and not
Conscience; and the Cates have unquestionable sweetness. He is easily
credited, that speaks what we would have him. 1 King. 22.12
Go up to Ramoth Gilead and prosper, was pleasing Music in Ahabs ear. Genesis
3.4.
Ye shall not die, though you eat, delighted Eve. The Sirens Song is more
esteemed, then the Oracle of Pallas; because it is sung to lustful, not wise
Auditors. The strange distinctions, which they give in these days, that (claw
the Devil) flatter an Usurer for gain, are believed, before the Sermons, of
the Sons of the Prophets, of the Son of God. Let a factious Nouelist
maintain the justness of Impropriations at the Church-wrongers Table for a
meal; his talk is held arguments, when the Scripture-arguments are held but
talk. Mic. 2.11.
As Micah speaks of the Prophets, that would preach for Drunkenness. So these
sell their conscience for countenance; and feed men's humors, whiles they have
an humor to feed them. S^n.
Quod nimis miseri volunt, hoc facile credunt. Though they be Prophets for
profits, yet they are readily believed. So easily the brain drinks the
poison, which the affection ministers. It is not then strange, if these Cates
be sweet, when concupiscence tastes them. Pascitur libido conuiuijs, nutritur
delicijs, vino accenditur, ebrietate slammatur. Ambr. de Poen^t.
Lust is fed with Bankets, nourished with delights, kindled with Wine, set on
fire and flame with Drunkenness.

What could make the Religion of Rome so sweet and welcome to many, but the
congruence and pleasingnesse to their nature? Whiles Nature finds ascribed to
her self freedom of will, validity of merits, the Latitude of an ignorant
and cursorie faith, she runs mad of conceit. That Indulgences for all sins
may be derived from that open Exchequour; that if a man wants not money, he
needs not loose heaven; that the bare Act of the Sacrament conferres grace
without faith; and the mere transient sign of the Cross, who ever makes it,
can keep off the Devil. Oh Religion sweet to Nature. Nay (to speak nearer to
our district instance.) Lust not only affectuall, but actual, is dispensed
with. Priests are licensed their Concubines, though inhibited Wives. Adultery
is reckoned among their petty sins. I have read it quoted out of Pope
Innocentius the third, of their Priests. Mane filium virginis offerunt in
choro: Nocte filium veneris agitant in thoro. The Priests do not engrosse all
the Market of venerie to themselves, (yet they do prettily well, for their
allowance. One Benefice with one Wife is unlawful, Corn. Agrip.
but two Benefices and three Whores are tolerable.) But the Stews, like the
common Bath, is afforded to the Laity; and if their States will maintain it,
a private supply besides. Vrbs est iam tota Lupanar. The whole City is become
a mere Stews. As the Prophet Esaias said once of Jerusalem; so we may say of
Rome: The holy City is become an Harlot. Esa. 1.21.
Full of Harlots they will not stick to yield, and so Ier. 5.7.
full of Adulterers. Nay, the City it self is an Harlot, and Reu. 2.4.
has left her first love. She committes Idolatry, (which is the vilest
Adultery) with Stocks and Stones.

Thus Nature drinks pleasant waters, but they are stolen. Lust encroacheth
upon the Law: and Concupiscencies gain is Gods loss. Some of them, says
Bishop Jewel, have written in defense of filthiness. What black Vice shall
want some Patronage? But causa patrocinio non bona, peior erit. Powerful
arguments, no doubt: yet powerful enough to overcome the yielding spirit.
Strong affection gives credit to weak reasons. A small temptation serves to
his peruersion, that tempts himself; and would be glad of a cloak to hide
his leprosy, though he steal it. How can it then be denied, that sins are
sweet, whiles Lust does take, taste, censure them?

The Devils Banquet is not yet done; there is more cheer a coming. The
Water-seruice is ended: now begin Cates of another nature; or, if you will, of
another form, but the nature is all one. Norma et forma manet. The same
Method of Service, the same manner of Iunkets. It may be distinguished (as
the former.)

Into a prescription, de quo. Bread, Into a description, de quanto. Bread of
Secrecies. Into an ascription. de quali. Bread of ple^sure.
Bread has a large extent in the Scriptures. Vult sufficientiam vitae et
praesentis et futurae. Panis est doctrinalis, Sacramentalis, v^ctualis. Ludolph.
Under it, is contained a sufficiency of food and nourishment. 1. For the
body. 2. For the soul. Therefore some would derive the Latin word, Panem,
from the Greek word, (...), and so make it a general and comprehensiue word;
to signify, omne quod nobis necessarium* all things needful, whither to
corporal or animal sustenance.

1. Corporal: the fourth petition in that absolute Prayer, lessoned to us by
our Master, implies so much: Give us this day our daily Bread. Where says S.
Augustine: Augus^.
Omnem necessariam corporis exhibitionem petimus: We beg all necessary
sustentation to our temporal life. So, Genesis 3.19.
in sudore vultus vesceris pane tuo: All thy repast shall be derived from thy
travel. 2 King. 6.22.
Set Bread before them, says Elisha to the King of Israel: And Ver. 23.
he made great provision for them. Jobs kindred did Job. 42.11.
eat Bread, that is, feasted with him? Psalm. 41.9.
He that ate of my Bread* says David, or did feed on the delicacies of my
Palace.

2. For the soul. Ioh. 6.51.
I am the living Bread, that came down from heaven: if any man eat of this
Bread, he shall live for ever. It is not straightened of this sense. Matthew. 15.
Matthew. 15.26
It is not meet to take the childrens Bread, and to throw it to dogs. Christ
and all his benefits are shadowed forth by Bread. The loss of the Word, is
called by the Prophet, Amos. 8.11.
a Famine, or loss of Bread.

Bread then implies multitudinem salutum, magnitudinem solaminum, plenitudinem
omnium bonorum: Much health, great comforts, fullness of all requisite good
things. And what? Will Satan brag that he can give all these? and that his
Bread, intensiue, is so virtuall in it own nature: and extensiue, that it
shall afford so much strength of comfort, validity of nutriment; and never
fail the collation of health to his guests? This is in him an hyperbolicall,
and almost an hyperdiabolicall impudence; to make the bread of sin, equal
with the Bread of life: and to ascribe unto it potentiam virtutis, and virtutem
dulcedinis; that it is Bread, and sweet bread, nourishing and well-tasted. As
Ceres must be taken and worshipped for the Goddess of Corn, and Bacchus for
the God of Wine; when they were (at the utmost) but the first Inuenters of
grinding the one, and pressing the other: for God is the God of both fields and
Vineyards. So the Devil would seem owner of Bread and Water, when God only
is Lord of Sea and Land; that made and blesses the Corn and the Rivers. His
Power contains all, and his Providence continues all that is good unto us.

Observe, how the Devil is Gods Ape, Obseru. 1.
and strives to match and parallel him, both in his words and wonders. He
follows him, but (not passibus aequis) with unequal steps. If Christ have his
waters of life at the Lambs wedding Feast; the Devil will have his waters too
at Lusts Banquet. If Psalm. 18.13.
the highest give his thunder, hailestones, and coals of sire, (as to Elias
sacrifice:) the red Dragon does the like: Reu. 13.13.
He makes fire to come down from heaven, in the sight of men. If Moses turn
his rod to a Serpent, the Sorcerers do the like: but yet they fall short, for
Exodus 7.12.
Moses rod devoured all theirs. Must Abraham Genesis 22.2.
sacrifice his Son to the God of Heaven? Agamemnon must sacrifice his
daughter to the Prince of Darkness. Metam. 12.
A Ram redeeemes Ishaac, a Hind Iphigenia. For Iehouah's Temple at
Jerusalem, there is Act. 9.27.
great Diana's at Ephesus. It is said of the Son of God, that he shall Esa
42.7.
give sight to the blind; and heal the sicknesses of the people; The Son of
Jupiter, Aesculapius shall have the like report. Ovid and Hesiod have their
Chaos, in imitation of sacred Moses: Noah's deluge shall be quitted with
Deucalions. For our Noah, they have a Ianus; for our Sampson, a Hercules; for
our Babel-builders, they that lay Pelion upon Ossa, Giants. If Lots Wife be
turned to a Pillar; lo, Niohe is metamorphosed to a stone. Let God historifie
his Jonas, Herodotus will say more of Arion. Of which S. Augustine well: We may
suspect, the Greek tale of the one, means the Hebrew truth of the other. De
ciuit. Dei. lib. 1.
Thus, if Christ at his Table offer to his Saints, his own body for bread,
blood for wine, in a mystical sort: The Devil will proffer some such thing to
his guests, Bread and Waters; Waters of Stealth, Bread of Secrecy. He is loath
to give God the better: he would not do it in heaven, and therefore turned
out: and do you think, he will yet yield it? no, Reu. 22.
in spite of Gods water of Crystal, peace and glory; he will have his waters
of Acheron, guilt and vanity. But by Satan's leave, there is a Bread, Esa. 55.2.
that nourishes not. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not Bread?
and your labor for that, which satisfies not? It (seems but) is not bread:
and (if it be, yet) it satisfies not. Say it could, yet Matthew. 4.4.
man lives not by bread only; but by the word and blessing of God. (...), all
the delicates, that Sin can afford us, are but (...), the bane of the soul.
Pabula peccati, pocula lethi. Erasmus says that (...) signifies that victual,
whereby Soldiers were allured to fight. The Captain of the black^ Guard gives
his Soldiers this Diet.
(...) properly signifies ((...):) All meat prepared with fire. There is no
cheer at this Banquet dressed without fire; either present of Lust, or future of
torment.

Now since the Devil will put the form of Bread upon his tempting
wickedness; let us examine what kind of bread it is.

1. The seed is corruption; Leuit. 11.38.
an unclean seed. No other then the tares, which the Matthew. 13.28.
Enemy sew: God sew good Corn, but whence are the tares? Obseru. 2.
The seed whereof this bread is made, is not Wheat or good Corn; but Cockle,
Darnell, Tares; Dissension, Rebellion, Lies, Vanities. The Devil is herein a
Seedes-man, but he sowes corrupt seed; that infects and poisons the heart,
which receives it.

2. The heat of the Sun, influence of the Air, sap and moisture of the
Ground, that ripens this seed, are Temptations: The seed once sown in the
apt ground of our carnal affections, is by the heat of Satan's motion soon
wrought to ripeness. So that it is matured suggerendo, imprimendo, tentando:
suggestion, impression, tentation hasten the seed (to grass, to a blade, to
spindling, to a perfect ear:) to growth in the heart: and all suddenly, for an
ill weed grows apace. Rather then it shall dwindle and be stunted, he will
crush the clouds of hell, and rain the showers of his malediction upon it.
Before he sowes, here he waters.

3. The seed thus ripend is soon cut down, by the Sickle of his subtilty;
whose policy to preserve his state Florentine, is beyond Machiauels. His
speed is no less; else he could not so soon put a Girdle about the loins of
the earth. Job. 2.2.
But what policy can there be in shortning the growth of sin? this trick
rather eneruates his power, weakens his Kingdom. The Devil does not ever
practice this cunning; but then alone, when he is put to his shifts. Saepe
facit opus, quod non est suum, vt ita fa^iat opus quod est suum. Cyprian.
For, some are so vile, that the Devil himself, would scarce wish them worse.
Such are Atheists, Rob-altars, Usurers, Traitors, etc. But some living in the
circun ference of the Gospel, are by man's awe and law restrained from
professed abominations! what would you have him now do? Sure Satan is full of
the Politiques. Lactant. Instit. Lib. 2. cap. 15.
Daemonas grammatici dictos volunt, quasi (...), id est, peritos ac rerum
scios. He is a Devil for his craft. I call therefore the reaping, his
Subtlety: for he might seem therein to dissolve his Kingdom, and spoil the
height of sin, by cutting it down. But the sequel and success proves, he
does it rather to corroborate the power thereof, by making it fitter for
application. Thus he 2 Cor 11.14.
transformes himself to an Angel of light; and is content to top the proud
risings of palpable and outward Impieties, that he may more strongly possess
the soul by hypocrisy. Thus there may be an expulsion of Satan from the house
of the heart, quoad veter^m eruptionem, when his repossession is made stronger,
quoad nouam corruptionem. Common grace throws him out, but he finds the house
empty, swept, and garnished, that is, trimmed by hypocrisy, and therefore
enters and fortifies with Matthew. 12.43.
seven other spirits more wicked then the first. What he cannot do by
notorious rebellion, he ^erformes by dissimulation. So that as Sorcerers and
Witches converse with evil spirits in plausible and familiar forms, which in
ugly shapes they would abhor. So many would not endure him, vt rude
cacodaemon, as a rough and gross Devil, in manifest outrageous enormities;
who yet as a smooth, sleeke, fine, and transformed Devil, give him
entertainment. This then is his Harvest.

4. Being thus reaped and housed, he soon thresheth it out, with the Flaile of
his strength. He is called Luke 11.22.
the strong man; where he takes possession, he pleads prescription; he will
not out. His power in the captiued conscience scorns limitation: He is not
content to have the seed lie idle in the heart, he must thresh it out, cause
thee to produce some cursed effects. He does not (to speak for your capacity
in the Country) hoord up his Grain; but with all his might, and the help of
all his infernal flailes, he thresheth it out, and makes it ready for the
Market. If any Cain, or Judas be so hasty, that he will not stay till it be
made Bread, tarry for tentation, but tempt himself; the Devil is glad that
they save him a labor: howsoever, he will have his Grain ready; his
suggestion shall not be to seek when he should use it. He would be loath that
the lustful eye should want a Harlot, the corrupt Officer a bribe, the Papist
an Image, the Usurer a Morgage, the thief a booty. He knows not what
guests will come, he will thrash it ready.

5. Being thrashed out, it must (you know) be ground. Satan has a Water-mill
of his own: though founded on mare mortuum, a dead Sea, (for all sins Hebr.
9.14.
are dead works) yet the current and stream that drives it, runs with
swifter violence, then the straites of Giberaltare. The flood of concupiscence
drives it. The Mill consistes of two stones, Deliciae and diuitiae: Pleasure
and Profit. There is no seed of sin, which these two can not grind to
powder, and make fit for Bread, when Concupiscence turns the Mill. Rapine,
Sacrilege, Murder, Treason, have bin prepared to a wicked man's use, by these
Instruments. Quid non mortaliae pectora cogunt? Covetousness and carnal
delight bid any sin welcome. Only pleasure is the nether stone; Idleness
would lie still, but Covetousness is content to trudge about, and glad when
any sackes come to the Mill. These two grind all the Devils grist, and supply
him with tentations for all the World. All the ugly births of sins, that have
ever showed their monstrous and stigmaticke forms to the light, have been
derived from these Parents; Carnal pleasure and Covetousness. You see how the
Devil grindes.

6. It is ground, you hear: It wants leauening. The Leaven is the colorable
and fallacious arguments, that persuade the sweetness of this Bread. This is,
1. either the Leaven of the Pharisees. 2. Or, the leaven of the Sadduces. 3. Or,
the Leaven of the Herodians. The Leaven Pharisaicall, is described by CHRIST
himself to be Luke 12.1.
Hypocrisy: a tradition to Matthew. 23.25.
make clean the out side of the Cup, but no devotion to keep the inside pure,
from extortion and excess. The Leaven of the Sadduces is the Matthew. 16.12.
doctrine of the Sadduces: as the mistaken Apostles (about Bread) corrected
their own errors. This Doctrine was a denial of Act. 23.^.
Resurrection, of Angel, of Spirit. The Mark. 8.15.
Herodian Leaven, was dissolute profaneness; derived from the observation of
Foxe-like Herod. These pleadings for Sin, by the Devils mercenarie Advocates,
put (like Leaven) a better taste into his Bread. Thus it is leauened.

7. It lackes now nothing but baking. Sure, the Oven, that bakes this corrupt
Bread, is our own evil affections; which the Devil heates by his
temptations; and with supply of Fuel, to their humors. Thus by sin he
makes way for sin, and prepares one iniquity out of another. He strikes
fire at the covetous heart of Judas, and so bakes both Treason and Murder. He
has made Absolons affections so hot by Ambition, that Incest and Parricide is
easily baked in them. The Prophet Hosea speaks the sins of Israel in this
Allegory, Hos. 7.4.
They are all Adulterers, as an Oven heated by the Baker: who cease from
raising, after he has kneaded the Dough, until it be leauened. Verse. 6.
They have made ready their heart, like an Oven, whiles they lie in wait:
their Baker sleeps all the night; in the morning it burns as a flaming
fire. They are all hot as an Oven, etc. Yea, Verse. 8.
Ephraim it self is a Cake half baked. Thus, when our affections are made a
fiery Oven, through the greediness of sin, there is soon drawn out a batch
of wickedness.

Thus the Devil runs through many occupations, before his Bread be baked,
his Banquet prepared for his guests. He is a Seedesman, a Waterer, a Reaper, a
Thrasher, a Miller, a Moulder, a Baker. A Baker here for his Bread, as before a
Brewer for his Waters. And to conclude, an Host, that makes the wake, inuites
the guests, and Bankets them with their own damnation.

You have heard how this Service may be called Bread; and therein the subtlety
of the Devils prescription. Let us as justly poise his description in the
balance, and see how it holds weight. Secret bread, or, the bread of secrecy;
nay, of Secrecies: for sin is not like the Rail, that sits alone; but like
the Partridges, which fly by Coueys. Secret. This will be found a fraudulent
dimension: for Mark. 4.22.
there is nothing so secret, that shall not be made manifest. The speeches of
whispering, the acts of the Closet shall Luke 12.2.
not escape publishing. The Allegory of Adultery is prosecuted. Forbidden
lusts, stolen by snatches, and inioyed in secret, are sweet and pleasant. It
is instanced in this particular, what has a general extent to all the
paralells; every sister of that cursed stock. I will hold with it thus far;
that sin loves secrecy; and I will testify against it a degree further, that
no sin is so secret, as the Tempter here affirms it; or the committers imagine
it. And from these two roots, I will produce you a double fruit of Instruction.

1. Unjust things love priuacie: the Adulterer says Job, loves the dark.
Thais draws Paphnutius into the secret, and more removed chambers. The two
wicked Elders thus tempt that Emblem of chastity; Ostia pomerij clausa sunt:
the gates of the Orchyard are shut; and no body sees us. Hence the generation
of sins are called Rom 13.12.
the works of darkness. And reformation of life is compared to our Verse. 13.
decent walking in the day. Though Ioh. 3.19.
the light of grace shines, says the Sun of brightness, yet men love
darkness better, because their deeds are evil. Ignorance and the Night have
a fit similitude.

1. Both seasons are still and hush't: no noise to waken the Sybarites; unless
the Cocks, the Ministers: Nuncij Dei et diei: and their noise is not held
worth the hearing. Few will believe Christ's Cock, though he crows to them
that the day is broken.

2. Both seasons procure stumbling. The ways of our pilgrimage is not so even
but that we need both light to show the rubbes, and eyes to disce^ne them. The
Gospel is the day, Christ is the light, Faith is the eye that apprehends it.
Light without eyes, eyes without light, are defective to our good. If either be
wanting, the stumbling feet endanger the body. In the spiritual privation of
either Gospel or Faith, the affections are not able to keep upright the
Conscience.

3. Both are uncomfortable seasons. Nox and erroris and terroris plenissima.
The night is full of wondering, of wandering. Imagine the Egyptians case in that
gross and palpable darkness: Exodus 10.23.
the longest natural night, that the Book of God specifies. A silent,
solitary, melancholy, inextricable season. In which, (...); no murmr
disquiets the Air; no man hears his name; no Birds sing; except the Owl and
the Night-rauen, which croake only dismal things.

4. Both are fit seasons for foul spirits to range in. It has been fabled of
night-walking sprights. Let it be false, yet this is true: the Devil is the
Ephe. 6.12.
Prince of darkness; his kingdom is a kingdom of darkness; and his walks
are the walks of d^rkenesse. In the calignious night of Superstition and
Ignorance, he plays Rex, and captiuates many a soul to his obedience. His
children (as it is fit) have the same disposition with their father. They are
Tenebrio's, and love nocturnos conuentus, meetings in the dark: as the
^owder-Tra^tours met in the Vault. But the eyes of Jehovah see not only things
^one in the tops of the Mountains, but could sp^e the Trea^on of the Vaul^.

2. And this is the consequent I^struction, which I would the Devils blinded
guests should know! God sees. There is nothing secret to his eye. 1. He sees
our sins in the Book of eternity, (...). Orph.
before our own hearts conceived them. 2. He sees them in our hearts, when our
inventions have given them form, and our intentions birth. 3. He sees their
action on the Theater of this Earth, quite through the scene of our lives. 4.
He sees them, when his wrathful eye takes notice of them, and his hand is
lift up to punish them. There is nothing so secret, and abstracted from the
senses of men; Vt creatoris aut lateat cogitationem, August Ciuitat. 22. cap.
20.
aut effugiat potestatem; that it may either lurk from the eye, or escape from
the hand of God. No Master of a family is so well acquainted with every corner
of his house; or can so readily fetch any Casket or Box he pleases: as the
Master Ephesians. 3.15.
of the whole family in Heaven and Earth, knows all the Angles and Vaults of
the World.

Jupiter est, quodcunque vides, quocunque moueris.
Act. 17.28.
In him we live, move, and have our being.
The villan^es of the Cloistures were not unseen to his revenging eye. Perhaps
they took a recluse life, that they might practice experimental wickedness,
without suspicion: pro^^sing to the world contemplation, premising their own
thoughts to contamination. They thought themselves secure, shadowed from the
eye of notice, and fenced from the hand of Justice. So they were in doctrine,
out of the world; but in proof the world was in them: they were not more
(politi) strict in profession, then (polluti) loose in conversation. But as
dark as their Vaults were, the all-seeing GOD descried their whoredoms, and
destroyed their habitations; or at least emptied them of so filthy Tenants. The
obscurity of their Cells and Dorters, thickenesse of Walls, closeness of
Windores, with the cloak of a strict profession thrown over all the rest,
could not make their sins dark to the eye of Heaven.

Bern. de c^nuers. ad Cler. cap. 16.
Our impieties are not without witness. To videt Angelus malus, videt te bonus,
videt et bonis et malis mayor Angelis Deus. The good Angel, and the bad, and
he that is Heb. 1.4.
better then the Angels, far above all principalities and powers, sees thee.
The just man sets forth his actions to be justified. Lucem and aethera petit,
and test so^e viuit: S^n.
He loves the light, and walks with the witness of the Sun. It is recorded
of Jacob, Genesis 25.27.
He was a plain man, dwe^ling in Tents. John 1.47.
Nathaniel (by the testimony of the best witness) was an Israelite indeed, in
whom was no guile. It was the Rabbis council to his Scholar: Remember, there
is 1. a seeing Eye: 2. a hearing Ear. 3. a Book written. Sic viue cum
hominibus, Sen. Epist. 11.
quasi Deus videat: sic loqu^re Deo, quas^ homines a^diant. So converse with
men, as if GOD saw thee: so speak to God, as if men heard thee. For, non
discessit Deus: quando recessit. God is not absent, though thou do not feel
him present. Corporeal substances are in one place locally and
circumscriptiuely: incorporeall created substances, neither locally nor
circumscriptiuely, but definitiuely. GOD the creating substance is every whit
in every place: not circumscriptiuely as bodies; nor definitiuely as Angels;
but repletiuely, (Io^is omnia plena) filling every place by his essence. He is
hypostatically in CHRIST: graciously in his Saints: gloriously in Heaven:
powerfully in Hell. You see then the falsehood of the Devils assertion: Sins
would be secret, but they are not.

The Bread of secrecy being described, I should come in the third and last
place, to the Ascription: It is pleasant. But because the former adiunct of
sweetness, does but little diuersifie from this of Pleasure; and I shall have
just occasion to convince the Devils fained delicacie, from Solomon's proved
misery: I will therefore silence it. And for conclusiue application, give me
the leave of your patience, to examine the truth of the (former) secrecy.

It is the Devils policy, though he can not blind his eyes that made the
light in Heaven, Application.
and the sight in man; yet he would darken our sins with the veil of
secrecies from the view of the world. And are they so? no, (the suffering eye
sees them, and can point them out, nay) sensible demonstration speaks them to
the ea^es, and objects them to the sight of man. The iniquities of these days
are not ashamed to show their faces; but walk the streets without fear of a
Ser^eant. The sins of the City are as pert and apert as the sons of the
City. I would Iniquity was not bolder then Honesty; or that Innocence might
speed no worse then Nocence. Absit vt sic, August.
sed vtinam vt vel sic, says Saint Augustine, in the like case: God forbid it
should be so bad; yet I would it were no worse. For the times are so wheeled
about to their old byas, that vix licet esse bonum, it is scarce safe to be an
honest man. Suspicion makes the good evil, and flattery makes the evil good,
the first in the opinion of others; the last in the opinion of themselves. Our
faith is small, and led ^^th reason; our life evil, and led without reason.
Corruption morum to^lit scientiam ethicam. Our evil manners shut up Philosophy
and Divinity too into the cave of Ignorance. Arist.


This Forest of Man and Beast, the world, grows from evil to worse; like
Nabuch^dnezzars dreamed Image, whose Dan. 2.32.
Head was Golden, Silver arms, Brazen thighs, but his feet were of Iron and
Clay. What Ovid did but Poet^ze, experience does moralize, our manners actually
perform. This last is (as it must be) the worst. Our Couetise says, It is
terrae aetas, an Earthen Age. Our Oppression, ferrea aetas, an Iron Age. Our
Impudence, ah^nea aetas* a Brazen Age. Neither aurea, nor argentea, says
Necessity. For the poor may say as the Priest, Act. 3.6.
Silver and Gold have I none. Let me say; our sins have made it worthy to be
called, inferna aetas, a hellish Age.

Sin is called by Paul, Eph^s. 4.
The old man; but he is stronger now* then he was in his I^fancie; diebus
Adam^, in the days of Adam. Most men's repentance is in the knee or tongue, but
their wickedness in the heart and hand. Money marres all: for this, and the
pleasures this may procure, Heb. 12.16.
Esau sels his Birthright, Mat^h. 26.15
Judas sels his Master, 1 King. 21.^5
Ahab sels himself to work wickedness. Sin was wont to love priuacie, as
if she walked in fear. The Tippler kept his private Ale-bench, not the Market
place: the Adulterer his Chamber, not (with 2 Samuel 16.22
Absolon) the housetop: the Thief was for the night or sequestrate ways: the
corrupt Lawyer took bribes in his Study, not in the open Hall; but now
(peccata nullas petitura te^^bras) our sins scorn the dark. Men are so
far from being Romans 6.21.
ashamed of their fruitless lives, that mala comittunt, commissa iactant,
iactata defendunt: they commit evil, ^oast that they committed, and defend
that they boasted. Psalm. 73.6.
Pride is worn as a chain, and cruelty as a garment; conspectu omnium, as
proud of the fashion. They talk of a Conscience, that seeks couers, like
Adams Fig leaves: but these Phil. 3.19.
glory in their shame; whose end is damnation, says Saint Paul. The very
Harlot comes short of them: she wipes her lips, and says, she h^th not
sinned. B^tter fare those, that yet would be accounted honest.

We may justly parallel these times and our complaints to the Prophet Esay's,
Esa. 3.9.
The show of their countenance does witness against them: they declare their
sin at Sodom, they hide it not: But woe be to their souls, for they have
rewarded evil to themselves. So the Jews answered GOD, pleading hard to them,
Ier. 3.25.
There is no hope: no, for I have loved strangers, and after them I will go.
Nay, resolutely they discharged GOD of further pains: Verse 31.
We are Lords, we will no more come unto thee. Therefore Ezekiel denounces
their destruction: For this cause Ezekiel. 21.24.
ye shall be taken with the hand of Judgment, because your sins are
discovered: and in all your doings your transgressions do appear. So the same
people to the Son, as they had erst to the Servants: We will not come unto
thee. How often would I have gathered you, but you would not? Ioh 5.40.
Ye will not come at me, that you might have life. 1. The way is easy. 2.
You shall have life for coming: it is worth your labor. 3. You can have it no
where else; then Come to me. No, you will not come at me: as Daniel answered
Dan. 5.17.
Bels^azzar, Keep thy rewards to thy self, and give thy gifts to another.

These are sins with lifting up the hand and he^le against God: the hand in
opposition, the heel in contempt. There are two Ladders, whereby men climb
into HEAVEN; the godly by their Prayers, the wicked by their sins. By this
latter Ladder did Sodom and Nineveh climb. GOD grant our sins be not such
climbers; that press into the presence Chamber of HEAVEN, and will be
acquainted with GOD, though to our confusion. Are our wickednesses done in
this R^^^on and Sphaere of sin, the Earth; and must they come to Heaven
first? Must the news be at the Court, of what is done in the Co^ntrie, before
the Country it self know of it? Our consciences take no notice of our own
iniquities; but they complain in the audience-Court of HEAVEN, and few out an
Outlawry against us. So impudent and vn-blushing is our wickedness, that with
the Prophet we may complain: Ier. 6.15. and 8.12. both places in the same
words.
Were they ashamed, when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at
all ash^med, neither could they blush. Our sins keep not low water, the tide
of them is ever swelling: they are objects to the general eye; and proud that
they may be observed. And let me tell you; many of the sins I have taxed, as
secret and silent as you take them and as hoarcely as they are pleaded to
speak; are no less then Thunder to Heaven, and Lightning to men. They do
votally and vocally ascend, that would actually, if they could.

Iam. 5.4.
The laborers hyre cries in the gripulous Landlords hand. Job 31.38.
The furrows of the Incloser cry, complain, nay, weep against him: for so is
the Hebrew word. The vainglorious builder has Haba. 2.11.
the stone crying out of the Wall against him, and the beam out of the Timber
answering it. The 2 King. 19.28.
Blasphemers tumult cries, and is come up into the ears of God. The Ier. 6.7.
Oppressors rage and violence reaches up to Heaven, and is continually before
me, says the Lord. These are crying sins, and have shrill voices in Heaven,
neither are they submisse and whispering on the Earth.

To be short; most men are either Publicanes or Pharisees: either they will do
no good, or loose that they do by ostentation. Many act the part of a
religious man, and play Devotion on the worlds Theater, that are nothing beside
the Stage; all for sight. Angels in the Highway, Devils in the by-way: so
monstrous out of the CHVRCH, that they shame Religion. It was prouerb'd on
Nero, It must needs be good that Nero persecutes: Blasphemandi ansam.
their wicked lives give occasion to the world, to inuert it on them. It must
needs be evil, that such wretches profess. Others are like Publicanes: Only
they were Christened when they were Babes, and could not help it; but as angry
at that indignity, they oppose Christ all their lives.

Take heed, Beloved; Hell was not made for nothing. The Devil scorns to have
his Court emptie^: you will not bend, you shall break: you will not serve God,
God will serve himself of you. Put not these vices from you, by your impudent
cloakings! How many stand here guilty of some of these sins? How many may
say with Aeneas, Et quorum pars magna sui, whereof I have a great share. Many
cry out, the days are evil, whiles they help to make them worse. All
censure, none amend. If every one would pluck a brand from this fire, the
flame would go out of it self. But whiles we cast in our iniquities as
Fuel, and blow it with the Bellows of disobedience; we make it strong
enough to consume us; yea, and all we have. For God will not spare ever; he is
just, and must strike.

Shall we loosen our hands to impiety, and tie God from vengeance? I have
often read and seen that Psalm. 85.10.
Mercy and (...) meet together; that Righteousness and Peace kiss one
another. But Mercy and sinnefulnesse keep not the sa^e ho^s^, Esa. 57.21.
Peace and wickedness are mere stra^^ers. To reconcile these, is harder then
to make the W^lfe and L^mbe live together in quiet. Think not that God can not
strike. Mars vl^or galeam quoque perdidit, Inuen. Sa^. 4.
and res non potuit seruare suas. The H^^then Gods could not avenge their own
quarrels: But our God ca^ punish a thousand ways: Fire, Plague, War, Famine,
etc. Milla nocendi arts. Our sins may thrive a while, and batten, beca^se
they live in a friendl^ Air, and apt Soil; but in the end they will overthrow
both themselves and us. August.
Ciuitatis euersio est, morum non murorum casus. A Cities overthrow is sooner
wrought by lewd lives, then weak walls. Were the walls of our Cities as
strong-Turreted and inexpugnable, as the wall that Phocas built about his
Palace; yet it may be really performed on them, as the voice in the night
told him: Did they reach the Clouds, they may be scaled: the sin within will
mar all. Gra^iores sunt mimici mores praui, Ambr.
quam hosts infesti. Our worst enemies are our own sins. And thoug^ these
punishments fall not suddenly, yet certainly, if repentance step not between.
Adam did not dye presently on his sin; yet Gods Word was true upon him: for he
became instantly mortal, sure to die, and fell (as it were) into a
Consumption, that never left him, till it brought him to the grave. GOD has
leaden Feet, but Iron hands; take heed ye feasting Robbers: when God struck
that secret thief Judas, he struck home: he took away the world from him,
or rather him from the world, and sent him to his own place. Feast, Revel,
Riot, Covet, Ingrosse, Extort, Hoord, whiles you will; Acts 1.25.
Earth is not your House, but your Bridge: you must pass over it, either to
Canaan or Egypt, Heaven or Hell; every man to his own place.

Grant, oh dear Father, that we may so run our short Pilgrimage on Earth,
that our dwel^ing-place may be with thy Majesty in Heaven, through the merits
and mercies of our Savior Jesus Christ. AMEN.

In conviuium Diabolicum.
They, that to glut on sins such pleasure have,
Descend with sickly Conscience to their grave;
Unless Repentance and true Faith make sure
The physic of Christ's blood, their wounds to cure.
Forbear thou Christened soul the Devils Feast,
And to Heavens Supper be a welcome Guest.
FINIS.
THE SHOT: OR The woeful price which the wicked pay for the feast of Vanity.

BY THOMAS ADAMS, Preacher of Gods Word at Willington in Bedford-shire.

LVKE 16.25. But Abraham said; Son, remember that thou in thy life time
receiuedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is
comforted, and thou art tormented.

AUGUST. de Ciuitate Dei. Lib. 22. Cap. 3. Prima mors animam dolentem pellit de
corpore:
Secunda mors animam nolentem tenet in corpore.
The soul by the first death is unwillingly driven from the body: the soul by
the second death is unwillingly held in the body.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for Ralph Mab, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Greyhound. 1614.

TO THE VERY WORTHY GENTLEMAN, Mr. FRANCIS CRAVVLEY: saving Health.
SIR:
There are four sorts of Bankets, which I may thus distinguish: Laetum,
letiferum; bellum, belluinum. The first is a joyful Feast: Such was the
Breake-fast of the World, in the Law, or the Dinner, in the Gospel, or (yet
the future more fully, the Lambs Supper of Glory: this is a delicate Feast.
Yet not more, then the next is deadly; the black Banquet, which is prepared for
the wicked in Hell. Which consists of two Dishes, says the School: Poena
damni, and poena sensus; or as the Philosopher distinguishes all misery, into
copiam and inopiam: copia tribulationis, inopia consolationis. Or after some,
of three: amissio coeli, priuatio terrae, positio inferni: the missing of that
they might have had, the privation of that they had, the position of that they
have, and would not have, torment: or according to others, of four: Merciless
misery, extremity, vniuersallity, eternity of anguish. Our Savior abridgeth
all into two, or rather one, (for they are homogenea) weeping and gnashing of
teeth. This is a bloody Banquet, where (cross to the festival proverb, the
more the merrier) the multitude of guests shall add to the horror of miseries;
so afflicting one another with their ecchoing and reciprocal groans, that it
shall be no ease socios habuisse doloris. This is a lamentable, but the third a
laudeable Feast. It is that the Christian makes, either to man (which is a
Feast of Charity) or to God, (which is a Feast of Grace.) Whereunto God has
promised to be a Guest, Revel. 3 20.
and to suppe with him. The last is a beastiall Banke^* wherein either man is
the Symposiast, and the Devil the discumbent; or Satan the Feastmaker, and
man the Guest. Sin is the food in both. The dye^ is not varied, but the Host.
Satan feasts the wicked, whiles they feed on his temptations to surfeit. The
wicked feast Satan, whiles their accustomed sins nourish his power in their
hearts. S^ S^. Hierome, Daemonum cibus ebrietas, luxuria, fornicatio and
vniuersa vitia. Our iniquities are the very diet and dainties of the Devils.
With this last only have I meddled, endeavoring to declare it, to dissuade it;
(according to the dichotomiz'd carriage of all our Sermons,) by explication, by
application. Sin is the white (or rather the black mark) my arrow flies at. I
trust, he that gave aim to my tongue, will also direct, level, and keep my
Pen from swaruing. But since reproves are as Goads, and Beasts will kick
when they are touched to the quick; and he that speaks in Thunder, shall be
answered with Lightning; by which consequence, I may suspect storms, that have
menaced storms: therefore, behold, it runs to you for shelter; not to
instruct your knowledge, who can give so exquisite counsel to others in the
Law, to your self in the Gospel; being qualified, as that perfect Rhetorician
should be, vir bonus, dicendi peritus: but that through your Name, I might
offer (and add) this poor Mite into the treasury of the Church: ascribing
the Patronage to your self, the use to the world, the success to God. Accept
then this poor testimony of my gratitude, who have vowed my self

Your Worships in all faithful service THOMAS ADAMS.

THE SHOT, OR The woeful price which the wicked pay for the Feast of Vanity.
The fourth Sermon.
PROVERB. 9.18. But he knows no^ that the dead are there, and that her
guests a^e in the depth of Hell.


Satan's guests are unhappily come from the end of a Feast, to the beginning of
a fray. As the Sodomites eat and drunk, till the fire was about their ears:
so these are iouiall, and sing care away; but it seems by the sequel, that
the Devil will not be pleased with a Song; as the Host in the Fable, with the
singing guest. He cries out, as the Usurer at his spawning hour, Give me my
money: Arguments are held complements; persuasions, entreaties, promises of
speedy satisfaction will do no good on him that has no good in him: he is
like the Cuckoe, always in one tune, Give me my money. The Debtor may
entreat, this Creditour will not retreat; he will to war, (you know the
Usurers war) except he may have his money. So the great Usurer, the Devil,
(I hope Usurers do not scorn the comparison) when the Feast is done, looks
for a reckoning. The Usurer, perhaps, will take security; so will the Devil:
Security and deadness of heart, will a great while please him. But when Dives
has dined, the Devil takes away: Death is his knife, and Hell his voyder. He
takes away one Dish more then he set down; in stead of the reuersion, the
Feasters themselves, nay the Feast-maker too: for Dives is the founder, and
Satan is the confounder: the one prouides meat for the belly, the other, by
Gods sufferance, 1 Cor. 6.13.
destroys them both. Satan according to the tricks of some shifting Hosts,
bids many friends to a Feast, and then beats them with the Spit. Dainty
cheer, Eccles. 1. Phil. 3.19.
but a saucy reckoning. The Feast is vanity, the Shot vexation. Thus they
that worship their belly as God, temple themselves in Hell: and as their end is
damnation, Amos. 6.7.
so their damnation is without end. Therefore shall they go captive with the
first, that go captive: and the banquet of them that stretched themselves shall
be removed.

I would willingly lead you through some Suburbs, before I bring you to the
maine City of Desolation; and show you the wretched conclusion of this Banquet,
and confusion of these Guests. All which arise from the conterminate
situation, or (if I may so speak) from the respondent opposition of these two
Sermons, Wisdoms and Follies, that is, Gods and Satan's. For this sad sequel
is (if not a relative, yet) a redditiue demonstration of their misery; for
after the infection of sin, follows the infliction of punishment. The
turrets I would lead you by, are built, and consist of Farewels and Welcomes;
of some things deposed, and some things imposed; positive and privative
circumstances; valedictions and maledictions: they take their leaves of
temporal and affected joys, and turn upon eternal and cursed sorrows. I
will limit these general observations into four.

All sinful joys are dammed (if not damned) up with a But. They are troubled
with a But-plague; Obser. 1.
like a Be with a sting in the tail. They have a worm that crops them, nay
gnawes asunder their very root; though they shoot up more hastily, and spread
more spatiously then Jonas gourd. There is great preparation of this Banquet,
properation to it, participation of it; all is carried with joy and Iouisance:
there is a correctiue But, a veruntamen, spoils all in the vp-shot. A little
Colliquintida, that embitters the Broth. A perilous, a pernicious, rock,
that splits the Ship in the Haven. When all the prophecies of ill success have
been held as Cassandra's riddles; when all the contrary winds of
afflictions, all the threatened storms of Gods wrath, could not disharten the
Sinners voyage to these Netherlands; here is a But that shipwrackes all: the
very mouth of a bottomless pit, not shallower then Hell it self.

It is obseruable that Salomons prouerbiall says, are so many select
Aphorisms; containing, for the most part, a pair of cross and thwart
sentences; handled rather by collation then relation; whose conjunction is
disjunctive. The Proverbs are not joined with an Et, but an At: with a But,
rather then with an And. Stolen waters are sweet, etc. But he knows not,
etc. It stands in the midst, like a Rudder or Oar, to turn the Boat another
way. Eccles. 11.9.
Rejoice oh young man, etc. But know that for all these things, God will bring
thee to Judgment, etc. All runs smooth, and enclines to the byace of our
own affections, till it lights upon this rub. The Babell of Iniquity is built
up apace, till confusion steps in with a But. It is like the sudden clap of a
Serieant on a Gallants shoulder. He is following his lusts, full sent and full
cry; the arrest strikes him with a But, and all is at a loss.

As in a fair Summers morning, when the Lark has called up the Sun, and
the S^^ne the Husbandman: when the earth had opened her Shop of perfumes, and a
pleasant wind fannes coolness through the heated air: when every creature
is rejoiced at the heart. On a sudden the furious winds burst from their
prisons, the thunder rends the clouds, and makes way for the lightning, and the
spowtes of heaven stream down showers; a hideous tempest sooner dampes all
the former delight, then a man's tongue can well express it. With no less
content do these guests of sin pass their life, they eat to eat, and
drink to drink, often to sleep, always to surfeit: they caroll, dance,
spend their present joys, and promise themselves infallible supply. On a
sudden, this But comes like an unlooked for storm, and turns all into
mourning; and such mourning (as Rahell had for her Children) that will not be
comforted, because their joys are not.

A wicked man runs headlong in the night of his vnwaked security, after his
wonted sports; and because he keeps his old path, which never interrupted him
with any obstacle, he nothing doubts, but to speed as he had wont: but his
enemy has dug a pit in his way, and in he topples, even to the depth of
Hell. Thus wicked joys have wretched sorrows: and as man has his Sic, so God
has his Sed. If we will have our will in sin, it is fit, he should have his
will in punishing. To this sense, Solomon frequently in his Proverbs. They will
pursue wickedness, But they shall be plagued. I have forbidden usury,
adultery, swearing, malice, as unclean meats; you will feed on them: But
you shall be punished. There is a reckoning behind, a But they never shot at:
but they shot besides the But, the whiles. God has prepared them as the
miserable Job. 7.20.
marks, that shall receive the arrows of his vengeance, till they are drunk
with blood. They shall suffer that in passion, which Job spoke in apprehension.
Job. 6.4.
The arrows of the Almighty shall be within them, the poison whereof shall
drink up their spirits, and the terrors of God shall set themselves in array
against them. So Moses sung in the person of God against the wicked. Deuteronomy.
32.42.
I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall eat flesh,
etc. They forget, that when God shall rebuke them in his wrath, and Psalm.
38.1.2.
chasten them in his hot displeasure, his arrows shall stick fast in them,
and his hand shall press them sore. This is their sad Epilogue, or rather the
breaking off their Scaene in the midst; The Banquet of stolen waters and secret
bread is pleasant: But the dead are there, and the guests be in the depth of
Hell.

The Devil does but cozen the wicked with his cates; as before in the promise
of Delicacie, Obseru. 2.
so here of perpetuity. He sets the countenance of continuance on them, which
indeed are more fallible in their certainty, then flourishable in their
bravery. Their banketting-house is very Psalm. 73.18.
slipperie; and the feast it self, a mere 20.
dream. Let the Guest preserve but reason, and he shall easily make the
collection: that if for the present, Ga^dia plus aloes, quam sua mellis habent;
To the compound of his joys, there go more bitter then sweet simples; what
will then the end be? even such a one, as at once ( consumit delicias,
consummat miserias) makes an end of their short pleasures, and begins their
lasting pains. This my Text salutes them, as the Mason was wont to salute the
Emperor at his Coronation, with a lappe-full of stones: Elige ab his saxis, ex
quo, Augustissime Caesar,
Ipse tibi tumulum, me fabricare velis.


Choose great Emperor, out of this whole heap, what stone thou best likest for
thine own Sepulcher. You that crown your days with Rose-buds, and flatter
your hearts with a kingdom over pleasures, think of a low grave for your
bodies, and a lower room for your souls. It is the subtlety of our common
enemy, to conceal this woe from us so long, that we might see it and feel
it at once. For if we could but foresee it, we would fear it; if we truly
feared it, we would make means not to feel it.

Our most fortified delights are like the child's castle, done down with a
fillop: (...), nay (...) a shadow, the very dream of a shadow, a rotten post,
slightly painted, a paper-tower, which the least puff ouerturnes.

Cuncta trahit secum, vertitque volubile tempus. Time whirles about the world,
and makes all inferior things to travel and spend themselves together with
him. Sinful and earthly delight is well called, amiabile, fragile, flebile, a
thing soon loved, sooner ended, but long, very long lamented: a rotten nut,
fair but hollow. Though Philosophy says, there is no vacuitie in rerum
natura, yet Divinity says, there is nothing but vacuitie in naturae rebu^.
Nature, as it is not only corrupt of it self, but made more foul in the
evil man's use, has nothing in it, but vanity: and vanity is nothing: a
mere emptiness, a vacuitie. Hence, if Aristotle commends the nature of
things, the better Philosopher Solomon, discommends the things of nature;
especially in their base and bad usage. Only the Devils Feast-house has a
fair bush at the door, (yet if the wine were good, what needs the Iuie?) and
Psalm. 73.10.
therefore his people turn in thither, and waters of a full cup are wrung out
to them. But when they are once in, they find themselves deceived, for the
dead are there, etc.

Then put no trust in so weak comforts, that will be unto you, as Egypt to
Israel, a Reed; which when you lean upon, it will not only fail you, but the
splinters shall run into your hand. Esa. 30.5.6.
You shall be ashamed of your weak confidence. The Burden of the beasts of the
South. Into the land of trouble etc. I am no Prognosticator. Yet if
Cosmographie affirm that we live in a Southern Climate, and experience
testify that we have many beasts among us; methinkes, these words lie as fit
for us, as if they were purposely made. How many in our land, by loss of
Conscience are become Atheists, and by loss of Reason beasts? who run so fast
to this Egiptian feast of wickedness, that he speaks easiest against them
that speaks but of a Burden? These having found Satan's temptations true for
the daintiness, judging by their own lusts, dare also take his word for the
continuance. But if the great Table of this Earth shall be overthrown, what
shall become of the dainties that the hand of nature has set on it? To which
purpose says Jerome. Hier. lib. 2. Epist. ad Heliod.
Oh si possemus in talem ascendere speculam, de qua vniuersam terram sub
nostris pedibus cerneremus, iam ti^i ostenderem totius orbis ruinas, etc. If it
could be granted us to stand on some lofty Pinnacle, from which we might behold
the whole earth under our feet; how easily persuasion would make these earthly
pleasures seem vile in thy opinion? You sa^, your pleasures are, for number
manifold, for truth manifest, for dimension great: grant all, though all be
false: yet they are for time short, for end sour. Breue est, quod delectat:
aeternum, quod cruciat. It is short, that pleases them; everlasting, that
plagueth them. Pleasure is a channel, and, Death the sea, whereinto it runs.
Mellif^uus ingressus, f^llifluus regressus, yield your joys sweet at the
Porch, so you grant them bitter at the Posterne. Securus et Securis must meet.
Wickedness and wretchedness must be made acquainted. The lewd man's dinner,
shall have that rich man's Supper: Luke 12 ^0.
Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee. The Devil then
you see, is a crafty and cheating host, whose performance falls as short of
his promise, as time does of eternity. Let then the Apostles caveat, be the
use of this observation. Ephesians. 5.6.
Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things* comes
the wrath of God on the children of disobedience.

The punishments of the wick^d are most usually in the like; Oser^. 3.
proper and proportionable to their offenses. 1. Solomon here opposes the
house of mourning to the house of feasting; as in express terms. Eccle^. 7.
for as it is fit in the body, Eccles* ^.2.
that surfeit should be followed with death: so these that greedily make
themselves sick with sin, become justly dead in soul. 2. They have affected
the works of hell, therefore it is just that hell should affect them, and that
every one should be granted their Acts. 1.25.
^wne place. 3. As they would not know what they did, till they had done it; so
they fitly know not the place whither they shall go, till they are in it.
Nescit: he knows not, etc. 4. For the high places, which their ambition
climbed to, Ver. 14. They are cast down, like L^cifer, to the lowest place,
the depth of Hell. As Simon Magus would fly with arrogance, so he came dow^e
with a vengeance, and broke his neck. See how fitly they are qu^ted. Prou.
4.17.
They eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence: now they
are scanted of both, except they will eat the bread of gall, and drink their
own tears.

Thus Pharaoh drownes the Hebrew males in a River. Exodus 1.22. Exodus 14.28.
Exodus 1. therefore is drowned himself with his army in a sea. Exodus 14. He
had laid insupportable burdens on Israel; God returns them with full weight,
number, measure. When Israel had cut off the thumbs and great toes of Judge.
1.7.
Adoni-bezek, hear the maimed King confess the equity of this Judgment.
Threescore and ten Kings, having their thumbs and great toes cut off, gathered
their meat under my table: as I have done, so God has requited me. As proud
Baiazeth threatened to serve Tamberlaine, being conquered; to imprison him in a
cage of iron, and carry him about the world in triumph: so the Scithian having
took that bragging Turk, put him to the punishment which himself had
lesson'd; carrying and carting him through Asia, to be scorned of his own
people. Thus ^s^h. 7.10.
Haman is hanged on his own gallows. Perillus tries the trick of his own
torment.

The Papists, that would have fired us in a house, were themselves fired out of
a house. Gunpowder spoiled some of their eyes, Musket Shot killed others, the
Engines of their own conspiracy: and the rest were advanced higher by the
head, then the Parliament House, that would have lifted us higher, of purpose
to give us the more mortal ^all. God has ^etaliated their works into their
own bosoms. Psalm 7.14.
They traveled with iniquity, conceived mischief: and lo the birth is their
own sorrow. 15.
They have dug a pit for us, and that low, unto Hell; and are fallen into it
themselves.

-- Nec enim lex aequior vlla est
Quam necis artifices, art^ perire sua.
No iuster Law can be devised or made,
Then, that sins agents fall by their own trade.
The order of Hell proceeds with the same degrees; though it give a greater
portion, yet the same proportion of torment. These wretched guests were too
busy with the waters of sin; behold now they are in the depth of a pit,
where no water is. Dives, that wasted so many Tons of Wine, cannot now
procure water, not a Pot of water, not a handful of water, not a drop of
water, to cool his tongue. A^g. hom. 7.
Desiderauit guttam, qui non dedit micam. A just recompense. He would not give
a crumme; he shall not have a drop. Bread has no smaller fragment, then a
crumme; water no less fraction then a drop. As he denied the least comfort to
Lazarus living, so Lazarus shall not bring him the least comfort dead. Thus the
pain for sin, answers the pleasure of sin. Where, now, are those delicate
moisels, deep carowses, loose laughters, proud po^t, midnight revels, wanton
songs? Why begins not his fellow-guest with a new health? or the Music of
some rauishing note? or, if all fail, has his foole-knauish Parasite no
obscene jest, that may give him delight? Alas! Hell is too melancholy a place
for mirth. All the Music is round-ecchoing groans: all the water is muddie
with stench: all the food anguish.

Thus damnable sins shall have semblable punishments: and as Augustine of the
tongue, so we may say of any member. Si non reddet Deo faciendo quae debet,
redd^t ei patiendo quae debet. If it will not serve God in action, it shall
serve him in passion. Where voluntary obedience is denied, involuntarie
anguish shall be suffered. Know this thou swearer, that as thy tongue spets
abroad the flames of Hell, so the flames of Hell shall be powered on thy tongue.
As the Drunkard will not now keep the Cup of satietie from his mouth, so God
shall one day hold the Cup of vengeance to it, and he shall drink the dregs
thereof. As the Usurers are tormentors to the Commonwealth, on earth, so they
shall meet with tormentors in Hell; that shall transcend them both in malice
and subtlety: and load them with bonds and executions; and (which is strangely
possible) heavier then those, they have so long traded in. The Church-robber,
incloser, ingrosser, shall find worse prolling and pilling in Hell, then
themselves used on earth; and as they have been the worst Devils to their
Countries wealth, so the worst of Devils shall attend them. The unclean
adulterer shall have fire added to his fire. And the covetous wretch, that
never spoke but in the Horse-leaches language, and carried a mouth more
yawning, then the graves, is now quitted with his nunquam satis, and finds
enough of fire in the depth of Hell.

The Devil has feasted the wicked, and now the wicked feast the Devil:
Obser^. 4.
and that with a very chargeable Banquet. For the Devil is a dainty Prince,
and more curious in his diet, then Vitellius. He feeds, like the Caniball, on
no flesh, but man's flesh. He loves no Venison but the Heart, no foul but the
Breast, no fish but the Soul. As the Psalm. 14.4.
ungodly have eaten up Gods people as bread; so themselves shall be eaten as
bread: ^t is just, that they be devoured by others, that have devoured others.
As they have been Lions to crash the bones of the poor; so a Lion shall crash
their bones: they are Satan's Feast, 1 Pe^. 5.8.
he shall devour them. Thus they that were the guests, are now the Banquet: as
they have been feasted with evils, so they feast the D^uils.

Make a little room in your hea^ts, ye fearelesse and desperate wretches, for
this meditation. Behold, now, as in aspeculatiue glass, the Devils
hospitality. Once be wise: believe without trial, without feeling. Yield but
to be Rom 6.^1.
ashamed of your sins, and then I (can with comfort) ask you, that fruit
they ever brought you? Let me but appeal from Philip of Macedon, when he is
drunk, to Philip of Macedon, when he is sober; from your bewitched lusts, to
your waked consciences; and you must needs say, that breuis haec, non vera
voluptas. All Ephesians 5.11.
the works of darkness are unfruitful, except in producing and procuring
Matthew. 8.12.
utter darkness. Sin is the Devils earnest-peny on earth, in Hell he gives
the Inheritance. Temptation is his presse-money: by rebellion, oppression,
usury, blasphemy, the wicked like faithful Soldiers fight his battles:
When the field is won, or rather lost (for if he conquers, they are the
spoil) in the dep^h of he^l he gives them pay. Who then would march under his
colors; who, though he promise Matthew. 4.9.
Kingdoms, cannot perform a Matthew. 8.31.
Hog? Alas poor beggar! he has nothing of his own but sin, and death,
and hell, and torment. Nihil ad effectum, ad defectum satis. No posit^ue good,
enough privative evil.

Even those, that pass their souls to him by a real Covenant, he cannot
enrich: they live and dye most penurious beggars, as pernicious villains. And
they, upon whom God suffers him to throw the riches of this world (as a s^are
over their hearts) which he cannot do, but at second hand; have not enough to
keep either their heads from aching, or their consciences from despairing.
Thus, though God permit him, ^o help the Luke 1^.
rich man to sill his Barnes, the Usurer to swell his Coffers, the Luxurious to
poison his blood, the malicious to gnaw his bowels, the s^crilegious to
amplify his revenues, the ambitious with credit, yet ther^ is neither will in
God, nor willingness in the Devil, that any of these should be a blessing
unto them. All is but borrowed ware, and the Customers shall pay for day: the
longer they abuse them, the larger arrerages they must return. Only here, I
may say, that bona sunt, quae dona sunt; they are goods, that are gifts. God
gives his graces freely, the Devil his Iunkets falsely: for the guests must
pay; and that dearly; when the least Item in the bill, for pains, is beyond
the greatest dish of the Feast, for pleasures.

Solomon's Sermon spends it self upon Two Circumstances, the Persons.
Tempting. Sh^^. ^ right Harlot: as appears by her Prostitution. Prodition.
Perdition.
Tempted. The Dead. All death is from sin, whether Corporal. Spiritual.
Eternal.
Attempted. He knows not. Whose ignorance is either Natural. Invincible.
Affected. Arrogan^.

Place. Where their misery is amplified, in part personally, in part locally.
Per infirmitatem. By their ^eaknes to resist* soon in. Per Inf^rnitatem In
hell. Per profunditatem. In the depth of Hell.



The person tempting, or the Harlot, is Vice; ugly and deformed Vice; that with
glazed eyes, surph^ld cheeks, pyed garments, and a Sirens tongue, winnes easy
respect and admiration. When the heat of tentation shall glow upon
concupiscence, the heart quickly melts. The wisest Solomon was taken and snared
by a woman: which foul adultery bred as foul an issue, or rather progeniem
vitiosiorem, a worse, Idolatry. Satan therefore shapes his Temptation in the
lineaments of an Harlot: as most fit and powerful, to work upon man's
affections. Certain it is, that all delighted vice is a spiritual adultery.

The covetous man couples his heart to his gold. The Gallant is incontinent
with his pride. The corrupt Officer fornicates with briberie. The Usurer sets
continual kisses on the cheek of his security. The heart is set, where the
hate should be. And every such sinner spends his spirits, to breed and see the
issue of his desires. Sin, then, is the Devils Harlot, which being tricked up
in tempting colors, draws in visitants* praemittendo sua^ia, promittendo
perpetua, giving the kisses of pleasure, and promising them perpetual. We may
observe in this Strumpet.

1. Prostitution. Pro. 7.13. Pro. 7.13.
So she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him,
etc. Shame, now-a-dayes, begins to grow so stale, that many vices shall vie
impudent speeches and gestures with the Harlot. Ver. 18.
Come, let us take our fill of love: as Putiphars wife to Joseph, without any
ambagious or ambiguous circumlocutions or insinuations, come lie with me. Sin
never stands to vnty the knot of Gods interdiction, but bluntly breaks it; as
the Devil at first to the roots of mankind, ye shall not die. The Usurer
never loses so much time, Genesis 3.
as to satisfy his conscience: it is enough to satisfy his concupiscence. A
good Morgage lies sick of a forfet, and at the Usurers mercy. It is as surely
damned, as the Usurer himself will be, when he lies at the mercy of the
Devil. These are so far from that old Quare of Christians, quid faciemus,
what shall we do? That they will not admit the novel question of these
toyte-headed times, What shall we think? They will not give the conscience
leave, after a tedious and importunate solicitation, to study of the matter.
But are more injurious and impenetrable to their own souls, then that unjust
Judge to the Widow.

A cheat is offered to a Tradesman, an Enclosure to a Landlord, an underhand
Fee clapped in the left hand of a Magistrate, if they be evil, and corruption
has first Marshalled the way, the field is won. They never treat with sin
for truce, or pawse on an answer, but presently yield the fort of their
conscience. No wonder then, if the Devils Harlot be so bold, when she is so
sure of welcome. It is our weakness, that prompts the Devil with
encouragement: whom if we did resist, he would desist. Our weak repulses
harten and provoke his fiercer assaults. He would not show the Worldling his
apparent horns, if he did not presume of his covetous desire to be horsed on
the back of Mammon, and hurried to Hell. Hence sin is so bold as to say in
the wicked heart, Non est Deus, Psalm. 14.1.
there is no God: and so peremptorily to conclude to it self, Psalm. 10.6.
I shall not be moved; for I shall never be in adue^sitie. Hence even Psalm 49,
11.
their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, etc. This
is presumptuous and whorish prostitution, to set out Iniquity barefaced,
without the Mask of pretexts, to hide her ugly visage. An impetuous, an
imperious Impudence, that not with a feminine rapture* but rather with a
masculine rape, captives the conscience. You see Follies prostitution.

2. Prodition is the ranckling tooth that follows her rauishing kisses. Judas
kissed his Master with the same heart. Iniqu^tie has an infectious breath, if
a fair countenance. All her delights are like fair and sweet flowers, but
full of Serpents. The tempted may give a concluding groan, Sic violor, violis,
oh violenta, tuis.

Thy soft flowers have stung me to death. For indeed it is most true,
Augustine.
Nemo ipsum peccatum amat, sed male amando illud quod amat, illaqueatur
peccato. No man loves sin for it own sake, but by an irregular and sinister
love, to that he does love, he is snared with sin. The Devil knows, that
his Ephesian Harlot, Vice, would want worshippers, if treason and death were
written up on the Temple-dore: therefore health and content are proclaimed, and
as on the Theater pr^sented; but there is Hell under the Stage, there is
treason in the vault.

Thus Temptation misleades the Nauigatours with a Pirates light: deceiues the
living fowls with a dead bird: a Siren, a Judas, a Iebusite, a Jesuit. For
were the Jesuit to play the Devil, or the Devil the I^suite on the stage of
this world; it would be hard to judge which was the Jesuit, which the Devil;
or which played the part most naturally. As Iniqu^ties are Satan's Harlots to
corrupt the affections; so Jesuits are his E^gines to pervert the brains: for
if the new guest here be heart-sicke, so their Pro^elite is braine-sicke. Both
are made so dissolute, till they become desolate, robbed and destitute of all
comfort.

Sin deals with her guests, as that bloody Germane Prince, that having
invited many great States to a solemn Feast, flattered and singled them out
one by one, and cut off all their heads. As fatal a success attends on the
flatteries of sin. Oh then, fuge peccatum exulceratricem hanc: Fly this
Harlot, that carries death about her. Go aloof from her door, as they say,
the Devil does by the Cross: but (let that savor of supposition, nay of
superstition) do thou in sincere devotion fly from sin, quasi a facie
colubri, as from a Serpent. She has a Sirens voice, a Mermaides face, a
Helens beauty to tempt thee: but a Leapers touch, a Serpents sting, a
traiterous hand to wound thee. The best way to conquer Sin, is by the
Parthian war, to run away. So the Poet.

Sed fuge: tutus adhuc Parthus ab host fuga est. R^m. Am. lib. 1.
Tunc peccata fugantur, cum fugiantur. We then put sin to a forced flight,
when it puts us to a voluntary flight. That Poetical amoris artifex et
medicus, so counsels. Fuge conscia vestriconcubitus, etc. But beyond all
exception, the holy Apostle gives the charge, fly Fornication. Shun the
place, suspect the appar^nce of evil. You see her Prodition.

Her perdition follows. She undoes a man; not so much in the estate of his
carcass, as of his conscience. The guest is not so much damnified in respect
of his goods, as damned in respect of his grace. Every man is not undone, that
is beggered: many like Job, Minime pereunt, cum maxim perire videntur, are
indeed least undone, when they seem most undone. Nay, some may say with the
Philosopher, perieram, nisi peri^ssem, if I had not sustained loss, I had
been lost. So David's great trouble made him a good man. Naamans leaprous
flesh, brought him a white and clean spirit. But the perdition that vice
brings, is not so visible, as it is miserable. The sequel of the Text will
amplify this: only now I apply it to the Harlot. The Harlot destroys a man
many ways.

1. In his goods. It is a costly sin. Thamar would not yield to Judah without
a hire. The hire makes the Whore.

Stat meretrix certo quouis mercabilis aere:
Et miseras iusso corpore quaerit opes.
Compared with Harlots, the worst beast is good:
No beasts, but they, will sell their flesh and blood.
The old Proverb conioynes venery and beggerie. The Prodigal returned not
from his Harlot without an empty Purse. Sin does no less undo a man's
estate. It is a Purgatory to his Patrimony. It is objected: It rather helps
him to riches, and swells his purse. Does not a bribed hand, asycophant-tong^e,
a covetous and griping palm make men wealthy? Yield wealthy, not rich. He is
rich, that possesses what he got justly, and vs^th what he possesses
conscionably, other wealthy, are not unlike either the Capuchines, or the
Seculars. Some, like the former, profess beggerie, though they possess the
Indies: these had rather fill their eye then their belly, and will not break a
Sum, though they endanger their healths. The other sort, are like the
Seculars, that will fare well, though with a hard farewell. P^o. 6.26.
But (as the Harlot, so) often Vice brings a man to a morsel of bread. Prou.
6. Thus Tibi fit damn, vitio lucrosa voluptas: Pleasure is no less, then a
loss to thee, then a gain to Sin. It is not amiss, to answer Satan's
Inuiters to this Feast, as the vicious Poet his Cockatrice.

Cur si^ mutatus quaeris? quia munera pos^is.
Haec te non patitur causa placere mihi.
It is even one reason, to dissuade us from sin, that it is costly.

2. In his good name. No worldly undoing is like this shipwreck. Goods may be
redeemed, but this (semel amissa, postea nullus eris) once utterly lost, thou
art nobody. It is hard to recover the Set, when a man is put to the after-game
for his credit. Though many a ma^s reputation be but (hypemeni^m ^vum) a rotten
Egg; whiles he is a great dealer with other men's goods, and of himself no
better then a beggar. And though the most famous are but Astmatici,
short-breathed men, and their reputation no better then Ephraims
righteousness, but a morning dew: yet actum est de homine, cum actum est de
nomine, when a man's good name is done, himself is undone.

A man, indeed, may loose his good name without cause; and be at once accused
and abused; when slanders against him are maliciously excepted, and easily
accepted. But Psalm. 37.6.
God shall bring forth his righteousness as the light, and his Judgment as the
noone day. Contrarily, another man hides the ulcers of his sore conscience with
the playsters of sound repute! But to be puffed up with the wrongful
estimation of our selves, by the flattering breath of others blown praises, is
a ridiculous pride. Saepe flagellatur in cord proprio, qui laudatur in or^
alieno. Many, that are commended in other mouths, are secretly and justly
snibbed in their own conscience. Such a one couzens his neighbors, they one
another, and all himself. And as originally the deceit came from him, so
euentually the shame will end in him. Hence they, whose fames have been
carried furthest on the wings of report, have been after (by the manifestation
of their hidden wickednesses) more deaded in men's thoughts, then in their own
carcass. For Pro. 10.7.
the name of the wicked shall rot.

This is the mischief, which sin in general, as whoredom in particular,
works to the name; a rotten reputation, an infamous farne, a reproach for a
report: that their silent memories are never coniured up from the grave of
oblivion, but as the Son of Neba^'s; for their own disgrace; and for an
intimation of terror, to the imitation of their wickedness. It were well for
them, if Time, which unnaturally deuoures his own brood, could as well still
their mention, as it has staid their motion: or that their memorial might not
survive their funeral. Now, though it be no evident demonstration, yet it is a
very ominous and suspicious thing, to have an ill name. The Proverb says, he
is half hanged. A thief before the Judge speeds the worse for his notorious
name. Is this all? no; but as he, whose breath is stifled with a cord, is
wholly hanged: so he that has strangled his own reputation, which is the
breath of his breath, with a lewd life, is at least half suspended. His Infamy
hangs on the Gybbet of popular contempt, till it be recovered. He is half
alive, half a corpse. It was the plain meaning of the Proverb.

Now, that a bad name is a broad shame, it appears; because no Stewes-haunter
would be called a Whore-monger. No Papist an Idolater, no Usurer an Usurer. All
sinners are ashamed to be accounted, what they have assumed to be. But it is
certain that he that is ashamed of his name, his name may be ashamed of him.
As thou love thy reputation with men, seek the testimony of thine own
conscience. It is the best fame, that carries credit with God. Let men say,
what they list, Oh Lord thou know mine innocence. Yet, because it is hard to
do good, unless a man be reputed good, therefore dare not to darken the light
of thy name, by the gross clouds of thy Impieties. This is the second
destruction that continued Vice brings her Lovers. Pro. 6.33.
A wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away.
When he has done it, he is undone by it. Perdit honorem, perdendo honestatem.
The dishonestie in him, shall bring dishonor to him* he builds, Haman-like a
gallows for his own credit.

3. In his health. The precepts of Wisdom, practiced with obedience, Prou.
4.22.
bring health to the flesh, and are life to those that find them. But sin is
rottonnesse to the bones. 1 Cor. 6.18.
He that commits fornication, says Saint Paul, sins against his own
body. Let it be ineuitably true in this sin, it is (at least accidentally) true
in all sins. For though God suffers some reprobates to keep Psalm. 73.4.5.7.
Job. 21.12. vere. 7
s^r^e health and to escape common Plagues: that they have fat eyes and clear
lungs: merry hearts, and nimble loins: and can stroke their gray hairs: yet
often he either puts them on the rack of some terrible disease, or quite puts
out their candle. Psalm. 55.23.
Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. All sickness
orignally proceeds from sin, all weakness from wickedness. As Mephibosheth
caught his lamenesse by falling from his Nur^e; so all men their diseasednes by
falling from their Christ. The evil disposition of the soul, marres the good
composition of the body. There is no disaster to the members, but for disorder
in the manners. All diseases are Gods real sermons from heaven, whereby he
accuses and punishes man for his sins.

The Harlot is a plague to the flesh: she is worse then a fever; more
infectious then the pistilence. Every Nation has his several disease. Irish
the Ague, Spaniards the Pip, Dutchmen the dropsy, French their fatal and
merited misery; neither do the English go scot-free. All have their special
plagues somewhat proper to themselves, except whoredom and sin communicate
them. But the Harlot is an universal plague, whereof no Nation is free. she
makes the strong man glad of po^^on, brings health acquainted with the
Physician: and he that stoutly denied the knowledge of his gate, now stands
trembling at his study door, with a bare head, a bending knee, and an humble
phrase. She is the common sink of all corruptions, both natural and
preternaturall, incident to the conscience or corpse: and has more diseases
attending on her then the Hospital.

The Madianit^sh Harlot, Sin, leads in a train of no fewer nor weaker
plagues, Deuteronomy. 28.
Consumptions, Feauers, Inflammations, Botches, Emerods, Pestilences, are
(peccati qedisehuae) the obseruant hand-maides of iniquity. As it is, then,
wicked to 1 Cor. 5.16.
take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot; so it is
wretched to divorce the affections of the mind from God, and wed them to any
impiety. Thus do these pair of Harlots impair the health.

4. They both concur to spoil a man's soul: whiles the Soul of the soul,
Gods Spirit, (quo agitante calescimus) is by this bereaved us. Act. 17.28.
In him we live, move, and have our being. In illo viuimus: viuimus, per
naturam, been viuimus per gratiam. In illo mouemus, vel mouemur potius, ad
humana, ad diuina opera suscipienda. (...); essentiam habemus, quoad esse, et
quoad been esse. In him all live naturally, some graciously. In him we move,
or rather are moved, to the performance, all of humane works, some of divine.
In him we have our being; both that we are at all, and that we are well. This
better life is the soul spoiled of, when sin has taken it captive. Prou.
6.26.
The Adultresse will hunt for the precious life. She is ambitious and would
usurp Gods due and claim the heart, the soul. ver. 32.
He that does love her destroys his own soul. Which she loves not for it
self, but for the destruction of it: that all the blossoms of grace may
dwindle and shrink away, as bloomes in a nipping Frost: and all our comforts
run from us, as flatterers from a falling Greatness, or as Vermin from an
house on fire. Nay, even both thy lives are endangered. The wicked man Prou.
7.23.
go^^h after her, as a fool to the correction of the st^ckes; till a (...)
strike through his liver, as a bird hastes to the snare, and knows not that
it is for his life. It is as ineuitably true of the spiritual Harlots
mischief. For Prou. 1.32.
the turning away of the simple shall slay them. Save my life and take my
goods, says the prostrate and yielding Traveler to the thief. But there is
no mercy with this enemy: the life must pay for it. She is worse then that
invincible Navy, that threatened to cut the throats of all (Men, Women,
Infants:) but I would to God, she might go hence again without her errand,
as they did; and have as little cause to brag of her conquests.

Thus have we discribed the Temptresse. The Tempted follows, who are here
called the Dead. There be three kinds of death, corporal, spiritual,
eternal. Corporal, when the body leaves this life. Spiritual, when the soul
forsakes, and is forsaken of grace. Eternal, when both shall be thrown into
hell. 1. is the separation of the soul from the body. 2. is the separation of
body and soul from grace. 3. the separation of them both from everlasting
happiness. Man has two parts, by which he lives; and two places, wherein he
might live, if he obayed God: Earth for a time, Heaven for ever. This Harlot
Sin, depriues either part of man in either place of true life; and subjects
him, both to the first and second death. Let us therefore examine in these
particulars, first, what this death is, and secondly, how Satan's guests, the
wicked, may be said liable thereunto.

1. Corporal death is the departure of the soul from the body, whereby the
body is left dead, without action, motion, sense. For the life of the body, is
the union of the soul with it. For which essential dependence, the soul is
often called and taken for the life. Ioh. 13.37^
Peter said unto him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my
soul for thy sake. (...), his soul, meaning as it i^ translated, his life.
And Math. 10.39.
He that finds his soul, shall loose it: but he that loses his soul for
my sake, shall find it. Here the Soul is taken for the Life. So that in this
death there is the separation of the soul and body, the dissolution of the
person, the privation of life, the continuance of death: for there is no
possible regresse from the privation to the habit, except by the supernatural
and miraculous hand of God. This is the first but not the worst death, which
sinn^ procures. And though the special dea^nesse of the guests here be
spiritual: yet this, which we call natural, may be implied, may be applied:
for when God threatened death to Adams sin, in illo die m^ri^ris: in the day
that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die; yet Adam lived nine hundred and
thirty years after. There was, notwithstanding, no delay, no delusion of Gods
decree: for in ipso die, in that very day death took hold on him; and so is
the Hebrew phrase, Ge^. 2.17.
dying, thou shall dye; fall into a languishing, and incurable consumption,
that shall never leave thee, till it bring thee to thy grave. So that he
instantly dyed, not by present separation of soul and body, but by
mortallitie, mutabillitie, misery, yea by sorrow and pain, as the instruments
and agents of Death. Thus said that Father. Aug ci^it. d^^. Lib. 13. cap. 10.
After a man begins to be in this body, (by reason of his sin) he is even
in death.

The wicked then, are not only called Dead, because the conscience is dead;
but also in respect of Gods decree, whose inviolable substitution of Death to
Sin cannot be euaded, avoided. It is the Satute-law decreed in the great
Parliament of Heaven. Heb^. 9.27.
Statutum omnibus se^el mori. It is appointed unto men once to die. T^is is one
special kindness that sin does us; one kiss of her lips. She gives her
lovers three mortal kisses. The first kills the conscience: the second the
carkase: the third body and soul for ever. Romans 5.12.
Death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. So Paul schools his
Corinths. 1 Cor. 11.30.
For this cause many are wea^e and sick among you, and many sleep. And
conclusiuely, peccati stipendium mors. Romans 6.23.
The wages of sin is Death. This Death is to the wicked, death indeed, even
as it is in it own full nature, the curse of God; the suburbs of Hell.
Neither is this unjust dealing with God, that man should incur the death of
his body, that had rejected the life of his soul. Fulgent.
nisi praecessisset in peccato mors animae, numquam corporis mors in supplicio
sequer^tur. If sin had not first wounded the body, death could not have
killed the soul. Hence says Augustine. De Trin. lib. 4^ cap. 12
Men shun the death of the flesh rather then the death of the spirit: that
is, the punishment, rather then the cause of the punishment,

Indeed Death considered in Christ, and joined with a good life, is to Gods
elect Phil. 1.21.
an advantage: nothing else, but a bridge over this tempestuous sea to
Paradise. Gods mercy made it so, says S. Augustine, De ciuit. lib* 13 chap. 4.
Non qui^ mors bonum aliquod sacta est, quam vi^ae constat esse contra^ium; ^ed
vt instrumentum fieret, per quod transiretur in vitam.
Not by making death in it self good, but an instrument of good to his. This
he demonstrates by an instance. chap. 5.
As the Law is not evil, when it increases the lust of sinners, s^ death is
not good, though it augm^nt the glory of su^ferers. The wicked use the law ill,
though the law be good. The good die well, though death be evil. Hence says
Solomon. Ecles. 7.1.
The day of death is better then the day of ones birth. For our death is (not
obitus, sed abitus) not a perishing but a parting. Non amittitur anima,
praemittitur tantum. The soul is not lost to the body, but only sent before
it to joy. Si durius seponitur, melius reponitur. If the soul be painfully
laid off, it is joyfully laid up. Though every man that has his Genesis, must
have his Exodus; and they that are borne must dye. Yet says Tertullian of the
Saints: Profectio est, quam putas mo^tem. Our dying on earth, is but the taking
our journey to Heaven. Simeon departs, and that in peace. In pace, in pacem.
Death cannot be euentually hurtful to the good; for it no sooner takes away
the temporal life, but Christ gives eternal in the room of it.

Alas! (...): Corpora, cadauera. Our graves shall as surely be Coffins to our
bodies, as our bodies have been Coffins to our souls. The mind is but in
bondage, whiles the body holds it on earth. (...), Ficin* in vitae Pla^onis.
quasi (...), as Plato affirms. Of whom says an Anthony; that when he saw
one too indulgent to his flesh in high Diet, he asked him; What do you mean
to make your prison so strong? Thus, qui gloriatur in viribus corporis,
gloriatur in viribus carceris: He that boasts the strength of his body, does
but brag, how strong the Prison is, wherein he is ^ayled.

(...). The body is the disease, Ho^.
the grave, the destiny, the necessity and burden of the soul.

Hinc cupiunt, metuuntque, dolent, gaudentque; nec auras
Recipient clausae tenebris et carcere caeco.
Fears, joys, griefs, and desires man's life do share:
It wants no ills, that in a Prison are.
Epictet. qui tolerand as esse iniuria^, et abstinendum a voluptate d^cuit.
It was a good observation, that fell from that Stoicke. Homo calamitatis
fabula, infaelicitatis tabula. Man is a Story of woe, and a map of misery. So
Mantuan.

Nam quid longa dies nobis, nisi longa dolorum
Colluvies? Longi patientia carceris, aetas?
It appears then, that Death is, to the good, a procurer of good. Lactant.
lib. 4.48.
Mors intermittit vitam, non eripit. Venit iterum, qui nos in lucem r^ponat
dies. Their Death is but like the taking in sunder of a Clock, which is
pulled a pieces by the makers hand, that it may be scowred, and repolished,
and made go more perfectly. But Death to the wicked is the second step to that
infernal Vault, that shall breed either an innovation of their joys, or an
addition to their sorrows. Dives for his momentanie pleasures, has
insufferable pains. Judas goes from the Gallows to the Pit. Esau from his
dissolution in earth, to his desolation in Hell. The dead are there. Though the
dead in soul be meant literally, yet it fetches in the body also. For as
original sin is the original cause of Death, so actual sins hasten it.
Men speed out a Commission of Iniquities against their own lives. So the
envious man rots his own bones. The Glutton strangles, the Drunkard drownes
himself* The malcontent dryes up his blood in fretting. The covetous, whiles
he Italionates his conscience, and would Romanize his estate, starues himself
in plain English: and would hang himself, when the Market falls, but that he
is loath to be at the charges of a Halter. Thus it is a Feast of Death, both
for the present sense, and future certainty of it. The dead are there.

2. Spiritual death is called the death of the soul: which consists not in
the loss of her understanding and will (these she can never loose, no not in
Hell) but of the truth and grace of God; wanting both the light of faith to
direct her, and the strength of Love to incite her to goodness. Romans ^.6.
For to be carnally minded is death: but to be spiritually minded, is life and
peace. The soul is the life of the body, God of the soul. The spirit gone
utterly from us, we are dead. And so especially, are the guests of Satan,
dead. ^
You has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins. And (...) 5.6.
the Widow that lives in plea^ure, is dead whiles she lives. This
diuorcement and separation made betwixt God and the soul by sin, is (mors
animae) the death of the soul. Esa. 59.2.
But your Iniquities have separated between you and your God. Heb 10 38.
But we live by faith: and that Ga^. 2.2^.
in the Son of God. Ephesians. 2* 5.
His spirit quickens us, as the soul does a lump of flesh, when God infuseth
it.

Now because these terms of spiritual death are communicated both to the
elect and reprobates, it is not amiss to conceive, that there is a double
kind of spiritual death. 1. In regard of the Subject that dies. 2. In regard
of the Object whereunto it dies. Spiritual death in the faithful is
threefold.

1. They are dead to Sin. Romans 6.^.
How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? A dead nature
cannot work. He that is dead to sin, cannot, as he is dead, sin. We
sin indeed, not because we are dead to sin, but because not dead enough.
Would to God you were yet more dead, that you might yet more live. This is
called Mortification. What are mortified? Lusts. The wicked have mortification
too; but it is of grace. Matthew. 8. They are both jointly expressed. Let the
dead bury the dead. Matthew. 8.22.
Which Saint A^gustine expounds. De ciuit. lib. 20. cap. 6.
Let the spiritually dead, bury those that are corporally dead. The faithful
are dead to sin: the faithless are dead in sin. It is true life to be
thus dead. Mortificatio concupiscentiae, vi^ificatio animae: so far is the
spirit quickened, as the flesh is mortified. So true is this Paradoxe; that a
Christian so far lives, as he is dead: so far^e he is a Conqueror, as he is
conquered. Vincendo se, vincitur a se. By ouercomming himself, he is overcome
of himself. Whiles he ouer-rules his lusts, his soul rules him. When the
outward cold rages with greatest violence, the inward heat is more and more
effectual. When Death has killed and stilled concupiscence, the heart begins
to live. This war makes our peace.

This life and death is wrought in us by Christ: who at one blow slew our
sins, and saved our souls. Vna eademque manus vulnus opemque tulit. One and
the same hand gave the wound and the cure. Vulneratur concupiscentia, sanatur
conscientia. The deadly blow to the concupiscence, has revived the conscience.
For Christ takes away as well ( dominandi vim, as damnandi vim) the dominion of
sin, as the damnation of sin. He died, that Romans 6.12.
sin might not reign in our mortal body, he came to 1 Ioh. 3.8.
destroy, not only the Devil, but the works of the Devil. Hence if you
would, with the spectacles of the Scriptures, read your own estates to God,
Romans 6.11.
Reckon your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. This trial consists not in being free from lusts, but
in brideling them: not in scaping tentation, but in vanquishing it. It is
enough, that Romans 8.37.
in all these things, we are more then Conquerours, through him that loved us.

2. They are dead to the Law. Gal. 2.19.
For I through the Law, am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God. Wherein
he opposes the Law against the Law, the new against the old, the Law of
Christ, against that of Moses. Luth. in Gal.
This accuses the accusing, condemns the condemning Law. The Papists
understand this of the ceremonial Law: but Paul plainly expresses, that the
Law moral, which would have been to us a Law mor^all, is put under: we are
dead unto it. As Christ at once came over death, and overcame death, et super
it, e^ superat. So we, in him, are exempted from the condemning power and
killing letter of the Law; and by being dead unto it, are alive over it.
Indeed the Law still abides: as Christ when he rose from the grave, the grave
remained still. Pe^er freed from the Prison, the Palsy from his Bed, the young
man from his Coffin, the Prison, Bed, Coffin remain still; the persons are
delivered. So the Law abides to mortify our lusts still more and more, but
our conscience is freed from the bondage of it. We are dead unto it.

3. They are dead to the world. This Death is double, Active and Passive.

1. Active. The world is dead unto us. The vanity of carnal joys, the
variety of vanities, are as bitter to us, as pleasant to the Cosmopolite or
worldling. And since we must give our voices either to God or Mammon: when God
asks as Iehu, Who is on my side, who? We stand out for our God. Angustum est
stratum pectoris humani, et vtrumque operire non potest. Man's heart is too
narrow a bed, to lodge both God and the world in at once. Qui vtrumque ambit,
in vtroque deficiet. The Hound that follows two Hares, will catch neither.
Nemo potest duobus Dominis, neque dominijs, inseruire. No man can serve two
Masters, with true service; especially when they command contrary things. Matthew
6.
Thus is the world dead to us: For since the world is not so precious as the
soul; we leave the world to keep our soul: since both cannot well be
affected at once. Therefore Philip. 3.8.
we account all things dross and loss for the excellent knowledge of Christ.

2. Passive. We are dead to the world. As we esteem it dross, it esteems
us filth. 1 Cor. 4.13.
We are made as the filth of the world, and as the off-scowring of all things
unto this day. As we, in a holy contempt, tread it under in our works, and
vilefie it in our words, so it looks upon us betwixt scorn and anger, and
offers to set his foot on our necks. But vicimus, we have conquered. 1 Ioh.
5.4.
Whosoever is borne of God, overcomes the world: and this is the victory
that overcomes the world, even our faith. Let us rejoice, therefore, Gal.
6.14.
in our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified to us, and we to the
world.

These are good deaths! blessed souls, that are thus dead. Their death is
Mortification, and like the Phoenix, they are no sooner dead, but they are newborn. Their old man's Autumn is their new man's Springtide. There are none
thus dead at this Feast.

The dead, here, have seared consciences, poisoned affections, warped,
withered, rott^n souls. Twice dead, faith Saint Jude, and some without hope of
growing, plucked up by the roots. Though the Pythegorean error, the
transanimation or the departure of the soul from man to man, was brought to
the Basilideon heresy: Nay, (which was more gross) though the Poets fained,
that the souls of men departed into beasts. Orpheus into the Swanne, Ajax into
the Lion, Agamemnon into the Eagle, Politicians into Bees and Ants, the
luxurious into Hogs, tyrants into Wolves: which were positions for
Machiauell, and Articles of Lucians faith. Yet they might rather, (and that
more favorably to their own credites, speaking according to men's lives) have
affirmed that the spirits of beasts might rather seem to have entered men: if
at leas^ the beasts do not preserve their nature better then men. They live
whiles they live; men are dead even living. Impie viuere est diu mori. A wicked
life is a continual death. And we may say of an old wicked man, not that he
has lived, but that he has been long. Non diu vixit, sed diu suit.
Deus vita, a qua qui distinguitur perit. God is the true life, without whom we
cannot live.

The heart of a wicked man thus becomes dead. The Devil works by
suggesting, man by consenting, God by forsaking. He forsakes thus. 1. By
suffering a hard heart to grow harder. 2. By giving success to ill purposes,
which he could have disappointed. 3. By not imparting the assistance of his
spirit. Thus he leaves them in darkness, that would not choose the light; and
finding their hearts undisposed to believe, delivers them up to Infidelity.
Dei noc^e em^llir^, obdurar^ est: nolle illuminare, etc.
His not willing to soften, is enough to harden: his not willing to enlighten,
is to darken. Dei claudare est clausis non aperire. God is then said to shut
up, when he does not open to them that are shut up. God is able to soften the
hard heart, open the blind eye, pierce the deaf ear: when he does, it is
mercy; when not, it is Justice. Only our falling is from our selves. Hos.
13.9.
Oh Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help. For God is
ever foremost in love, Deu^ ^rior in amore, posteri^r in odio.
but last in hate. He loved us, before we loved him: but we hate him, before
he hates us. Multi ne laberentur detenti, nulli vt laberentur impulsi. God
preserues many from falling, Ab illo est quod statur: a nobu quod r^^tur.
but he thrusts none down. By his strength we stand, by our own weakness
we fall.

As in the sickness of the body, so of the soul, there are critical days,
secret to our selves, but well known to God; whereby he sees our recovery
unlikely, and therefore turns us over to the danger of our sickness. That now
too late Jerusalem knows, what was offered her in the day of her visitation.
God blindes the soul blinded before by Satan; and hardens again Pharaohs
selfe-hardned heart: Et quia non faciunt bona quae cognoscunt, non cognoscent
mala quae faciunt. Because they would not do the good they knew, they shall
do the evil they knew not. Thus is the souls death degreed up. Sin gathers
strength by custom, and creepes like some contagious disease in the body from
joint to joint; and because not timely spied and medicined, it threatens
universal hazard to the whole. It swells like the Sea: Vnda leuis, maiora
volumina, sluctus ad coelum. An Egg, a Cockatrice, a Serpent, a fiery flying
Serpent. Custom indeed kills the soul. The Curse that the Cretians used
against their enemies, was not fire on their houses, nor rottenness on their
beasts, nor a sword at their hearts; but that, which would in time trebble to
them all these mischiefs, Vt mala consuetudine ^el^ctentur.
that they might be delighted with an evil custom. Temptation assaults the
heart: consent wounds it: it lies sick of action: it dies by delight in sin:
it is buried by custom. The Bell has tolled for it, Gods word has mourned:
the Church has prayed for it: but (quid valiant signa precesi^e?) What good
can signs and prayers do, when we voluntarily yield our heart to him that
violently kills it? Thus God leaves the heart, and Satan cease on it, whose
gripes are not gentler then Death.

Thus the habit of sin takes away the sense of sin; and the conscience
that was at first raw and bleeding, as newly wounded, is now 1 Timothy 4.2.
seared up with an hot iron. The conscience of a wicked man first speaks to
him, as Peter t^ Christ, Matthew. 16.22.
Master look to thy self. But he stops her mouth with a violent hand. Yet
she would feign speak with him, like the importunate Widow, to do her
justice. He cannot well be rid of her, therefore he sets her a day of hearing,
and when it is come, fails her. She cries yet louder for audience; and when
all his corrupt and bribed affections cannot charm her silence, he drownes her
complaints at a Tavern, or laughes her out of countenance at a Theater. But if
the pulse beats not, the body is most dangerously sick, if the conscience
prick not, there is a dying soul. It is a lawless School, where there is an
awlesse Monitor. The City is easily surprised, where the watch cannot ring the
alarmes. No marvel, if numnesse be in the heart; when there is drunkenness in
the conscience.

These are the dead guests. Dead to all goodness. Deaf ears, lame feet,
blind eyes, maimed hands, when there is any employment for them in Gods
service. Eyes full of lust, void of compassion. Ears deaf to the word, open
to vanity. Feet, swift to shed blood, slow to the Temple. Hands open to
extortion, shut to charity. To all religion the heart is a piece of dead
flesh. No love, no fear, no care, no pain can penetrate their senseless and
remorselesse hearts. I know, that according to the speech of the Philosopher,
Nemo fit repent miser: This is no sudden evil: they were borne sick, they
have made themselves dead. Custom has inveterated the ulcer, rankled the
conscience, and now sin flowtes the Physicians cure, knowing the soul dead.
Through many wounds they come to this death. At first they sin and care not,
now they sin and know not: The often taken Potion never works. Even the
Physic of reproof turns now to their hardening. Oh that our times were not
full of this deadness! How many never take the mask of Religion but to serve
their own turns! And when piety becomes their advantage, yet they at once
counterfeit and contemn it. If a wished success answer the intention of their
minds, and contention of their hands, God is not worthy of the praise; either
the^r fortune or their wit has the glory of the deed, and thanks for it. But
if they be crossed, God shall be blasphemed under the name of destiny; and he
shall be blamed for their ill, to whom they will not be beholding for their
good.

God is not thought of but in extremity, not spoken of but in blasphemy. Oh
dead hearts! whose funeral we may lament, whose reviuing we may, almost, not
hope. But what? will this deadness never be a little wak^ned? True it is, that
God must miraculously raise up the soul thus dead, and put the life of his
grace into it, or it is d^sperate. The conscience, I confess, will not ever
lie quiet in these dead guests: but as they have iayled up that for a while in
the darkness of Security; so when God loses it, it will rage as fast
against them, and dog them to their graves. For as there is a Heaven on
earth, so a Hell on earth. The dead to sin are heauen'd in this world: the
dead in sin are hell'd here, by the tormenting anguish of an unappeasable
conscience. As Bishop Latimer, in a Sermon, told these guests of a Feast in
Hell; which will afford them little mirth: where weeping is served in for the
first course, gnashing of teeth for the second. So, after their Feast on Earth,
which was no better then Numa's, where the Table swomme with delicate dishes,
but they were swimming dishes, spectand^ non gustandae dapes; Let them prepare
for another Banquet, where groans shall be their bread, and tears their
drink, sighs and sorrows all their Iunkets; which the Erynnis of conscience,
and the Megaera of desperation shall serve in, and no euerlastingnesse of time
shall take away.

But these spiritually dead guests do not evermore escape so long: sometimes
God gives them in this life a draught of that vial of his wrath which they
shall after sup off to the bottom. The wicked man, that had no fear, now
shall have too much fear. He that begun with the wanton Comedy of
presumption and profaneness, ends with the Tragedy of horror and despair.
Before he was so a-sleepe, that nothing could waken him: now he is so waking,
that nothing can bring him a-sleepe. Neither disport abroad, nor quiet at home
can possess him: he cannot possess himself. Sin is not so smooth at
setting forth, as turbulent at the iourneyes end. The wicked have their day*
wherein they run from pleasure to pleasure, as Jobs children from banquet to
banquet: their joys have changes of variety, little intermission, no
cessation; neither come they faster, then their lusts call for them. So God
has his day: And Amo^ 5.18.
woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord: to what end is it for you? the
day of the Lord is darkness and not light. 19.
As if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him; or went into the house,
and leaned his hand on the Wall, and a Serpent bit him. Such is the unrest of a
conscience brought to fret for his sins. So August. Aug. in Psalm. 45.
Fugit ab agro in ciuitatem, a publico ad domum, a domo in cubiculum. He runs
from the field into the City, from the City to his house, and in his house to
the priuatest Chamber: but he cannot fly his enemy* that cannot fly himself.

At first the Devils guest pursues pleasure so eagerly, that he would break
down the bars that shut it from him, and quarrel, with venture of his
blood, for his delights, nay for the conditions of his own sorrow and
damnation. Now pleasure is offered him: no, it will not down. Music stands
at his Windore: it makes him as mad with discontent, as it did once with joy.
No ^est can stir his laughter, no company can waken his unreasonable and
unseasonable melancholy. Now he that was madder then N^ro in his delights,
fear^ compasses him on every side. He starts at his own shadow, and would
change firmness with an Aspen leaf. He thinks, like the Burgundians, every
Thistle a Lance, every Tree a man, every man a Devil. They fear, where no
fear was, says the Psalmist. They think, they see, what they do not see.
This is the wicked man's alteration: time is, he will not be warned; time comes,
he will not be comforted. Then he is satisfied with lusts, that thought
satisfaction impossible. Riches weary him now to keep them more then they
wearied him once to get them; and that was enough. So I have read the
oppressers will. Lego omnia bona mea domino Regi, corpus sepulturae, animam
diabolo. I bequeath all my goods to the King, my body to the grave, my soul to
the Devil. He that did wrong to all, would now seem to do right to some; in
giving his coin to the Prince, whom he had deceived; his soul to the Devil,
whom he had se^ued. Wherein, as he had formerly injured man, now he in^ures
both God and himself too.

3. I have dwelt the longer on this spiritual deadness, because the guests at
this banquet have this death in present: the precedent and subsequent are both
future; the one naturally incurred by sin, the other justly inflicted for
unrepented sin. For all shall dye the corporal death, Eceles. 9.2.
He that fears an oath, as well as he that swears, the ^eligious as the
profane. But this last, which is Eternal death, shall only cease on them,
that have before hand with a spiritual death slain themselves. This therefore
is called the second death. Revel. 20.6.
Blessed and holy is he, that has part in the first resurrection, (which is
the spiritual life by grace:) On such the second death has no power. He that
is by Christ raised from the first death, shall by Christ also escape the
second. But he that is dead spiritually, after he has died corporally, shall
also dye eternally. This is that everlasting separation of body and soul from
God, and consequently from all comfort. Matthew. 10.28
Fear him, says our Savior, that is able to destroy both body and soul in
Hell. Dan. 12.2.
And many of them, that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. This is that
death, that Ezekiel. 33.11.
God delights not in. His goodness has no pleasure in it, though his justice
must inflict it.

Man by sin has offended God an infinite Majesty, and therefore deserves an
infinite misery. Now because he is a nature finite, he cannot suffer a
punishment infinite in greatness, simul et semel, together and at once: he
must therefore endure it ( successiue sine fine) successively without end. The
punishment must be proportioned to the sin; because not in present
greatness, therefore in eternal continuance. Christ for his elect suffered in
short time sufficient punishment for their sins: for it is all one, for one
that is eternal to dye, and for one to dye eternally. But he for whom Christ
suffered not in that short time, must suffer for himself beyond all times,
even for ever.

This is the last Death: a living death, or a dying life, what shall I term
it? If it be life, how does it kill? If death, how does it live? There is
neither life nor death but has some good in it. In life there is some ease: in
death an end. But in this death neither ease nor end. Aust. de ciuit. (...).
lib. 21. cap. 3.
Prima ^ors animam d^lentem pellet de c^rpore: secunda mors animam nolentem
tenet in corpore. The first death drives the soul unwillingly from the body;
the second death holds the soul unwillingly in the body. Reu. 9.6.
In those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire
to dye, and death shall fly from them. Esaias. 66.12.
Their worm shall not dye. Thus says the Scripture, morientur mortem, they
shall dye the death. Yet their death has much too much life in it. For there
is a perfection given to the body and soul after this life; as in heaven to
the stronger participation of comfort, so in hell to the more sensible receiving
of torment. The eye shall see more perspicuously, and the ear hear more
quickly, and the sense feel more sharply, though all the objects of these be
sorrow and anguish. Vermis conscientiam corrodet, Aug.
ignis carnem comburet, quia et cord et corpore deliquerunt. The worm shall
gnaw the conscience, the fire burn the flesh, because both fle^h and
conscience have offended. This is the fearful death, which these guests
incur: this is the Sho^ at the Devils Banquet. God in his Justice suffers him
to reward his guests, as he is rewarded himself, and (since they loved his
work) to give them the stipend due to his service. These are the tempted
guests: dead.

The vlgar Latin translation, I know not upon what ground, has interpreted
here, for mortui, Gigantes: thus: he knows not that the Giants are there.
Monstrous men, that would dart thunder at God himself; and raise up mountains
of impiety against Heaven. As if they were only great men that feasted at
Satan's Banquet, whose riches were able to minister matter to their pleasures.
And surely such are in these days: of whose sins when we have cast an
inventory account, we might thus with the Poet sum up themselves.

Vi^ dicam quid sis? magnus es Ardelio.
Thou have great lands, great power, great sins: and than
D^st ask me what thou art? thou art a great man.
The Giants, in the Scripture, Genesis 6.4.
were men of a huge stature, of a fierce nature. The Poets fained their Giants
to be begotten and bred of the Sun and the Earth, and to offer violence to
the Gods: some of them having an hundred hands, as Briareiu was called
centimanus: meaning, they were of great command; as Helen wrote to Paris of her
husband Menelaus. An nescis longas regibus esse manus? This word Giants, if the
original did afford it, must be referred, either to the guests; signifiing
that monstrous men resorted to the Harlots table, and that it was Gigantoum
conviuium, a tyrannous feast: or else (and that rather) to the tormentors;
which are laid in ambush, to surprise all the comers in, and carry them as a
pray to Hell. But because the best translations give no such word, and it is
far fetched, I let it fall, as I took it up.

The third person here inserted, is the Attempted: the new guest whom she
strives to bring in to the rest. He is discribed by his ignorance, Nescit: He
knows not what company is in the house, that the dead are there. It is the
Devils policy, when he would ransacke and rob the horse of our conscience,
like a thief to put out the candle of our knowledge. That we might neither
discern his purposes, nor decline his mischeefes. He has had his instruments
in all ages, to darken the light of knowledge. Domitian turns Philosophy into
banishment. Julian shuts up the Schoole-doores. The barbarous soldiers under
Clement the seventh, burned that excellent Vatican library. Their reasons
concurred with Iulians prohibition to the Christans. (...): least they kill us
with our own weapons. For it is said even of Gentile learning. Hic est Goliae
gladius, quo ipse Goliath ingulandus est. Hic Herculis claua, qua rabidi inter
Ethnicos canes percutiendi sunt. This is that Goliahs sword, whereby the
Philistine himself is wounded. This is that Hercules clubbe, to smite the
mad dogs amongst the heathen. Habadallus, Mahomets scholar, that Syrian
Tyrant, forbad all Christian children in his dominions, to go to school; that
by ignorance he might draw them to superstition. For (...). To be destitute of
learning is to dance in the dark. These were all Satan's instruments; yet they
come short of the Pope; whose policy to advance his Hierarchy, is to
oppress men's consciences with ignorance: teaching that the fullness of zeal,
does arise from the emptiness of knowledge: even as fast as fire flasheth out
of a fish pond.

There are degrees in sin, so in ignorance. It is a sin to be ignorant of that
we should know: but a greater sin to be ignorant of that we have m^anes to
know. Ignorance may ^e distinguished into five kinds. Ignorantia humana,
naturali^, affectata, inuincibilis, sup^rba.
Humane, natural, affected, invincible, proud and puffed up.

1 The first is humane. This is not sinful, as in Adam, not to know his
nakedness, nor Satan's subtlety. So in the Angels, yea even in the head of
Angels Christ himself, as man, not to know Mark. 13.32.
the latter day. Cyril.
Proprium est naturae humanae futura ignorare. It is a thing simply proper to
the nature of man, to be ignorant of future things. No legal iniunction binds
us to it: no censure shall pass against us for the want of it. This is called
ignorantia iusta, an vnfaulty ignorance.

2 The second is natural: called ignorantia in^irmitatis vel imperitiae: the
ignorance of infirmity, incident to man's nature since his fall. For desiring
to know more, he knew less. This is the effect of sin, sin in it self,
and the ca^se of sin. It was bred by transgression, it does breed
transgression, and is no less then transgression of it own nature: for Gods
law binds us to the knowledge of his law. The blind swallows many a fly: the
ignorant cannot be innocent. This is ignorantia simplex, inuoluntaria,
priuatiuae, as the School calls it. A sin which the Papists generally, and I
fear, many Protestants particularly, never repent of. David does. It is this,
that makes us aliants from God. Ephesians. 4 1^.
Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, and through the blindness of their
heart. Saint Paull calls his ignorance, the cause of his sins. Et nescius
seru^s poenas luit, says Christ: 1 Timothy 1.13.
even the ignorant servant shall be beaten with some stripes. Esa. 5.13.
Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge.
A Prophecy mistically fulfilled in these days, in respect of our spiritual
bondage to Satan; 2 Cor. 4.4.
The God of this world having blinded the minds of unbelievers. This ignorance
cannot excuse, for we are bound to know. The breach of our National statutes
cannot go impune by the plea of Ignorance. It may ( a tanto not a toto) a
little quallifie and allay our punishments, not annihilate them. This is (...),
Folly; and he that drinks of ^ollies cup, shall have little cause to lick
his lips after it. Nature is a common schoolmasters; and the Gentiles sinning
against that monitor, justly perish. Romans 1*20.
For the in^^sible things of God may be understood by the things that are made:
so that they are without excuse. Even the errors of the Jews had their
sacrifices, and shall not the ignora^ces of the Christians cry God mercy? This
ignorance is sinful, yea even in those that cannot have ^he means of
knowledge.

3. The third is an a^fected ignorance. Io^ 3.19.
This is the conedmnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil. These shut their
ears when God calls; and being housed in their secu^itie, will not step to
the door, to see if the Sun shines. This ignorance, if I may say so, does
reside rather in their affections then understanding part. 2 Pet. 3.5.
They wil^ully know not, says S. Peter. They know, but will not know, and
run with broad eyes to destruction. Tell them that Christ is at Jerusalem:
no, it is too ^arre off. Nay, venit ad limina virtus, the ki^gdome of Heaven is
among you: then if they must needs go to Church, they will go hooded.
P^eiudice of affections shall muffle the eyes of knowledge. Thus the Devil
carries them quietly to Hell; as the Falconer his hooded Hawke, which
barefaced would bayte, and be too wild to sit on his ^ist. These sometimes
have gray hairs, and green affections. Like a man that being borne near a
great City, yet never traveled to it: He can direct others the way, he never
went. These to avoid that ^ault, which the Traveler found in England,
horologia non been ordinata, that our clockes were not well kept (he meant, our
hours were ill spent) will have no clock at all in their house, to tell them
how their time passes; no informer of their erring ways. And as if a candle
would set their house on fire, they live perpetually in the dark. Micah was
glad, he had got a Priest; these are glad they are got far from a Priest:
and had as liefe go to Hell darkling, as with a torch.

4. There is an Invincible Ignorance; when God has naturally darkened the
understanding, by a sore punishment of original sin. Idioticum hoc. No art
nor eloquence can put knowledge into that heart which nature has not opened to
receive it: as no mind can be opened, which God has locked up. Reu. 3.7.
He keeps the keys: he opens and no man shuts, he shuts and no man
opens. The door of this mind is so fast barred up, that no help of man can
open it. Neither can there be, in this, a complaint against Gods Justice: since
that our first sin has deserved a greater punishment.

5. The last, is a proud Ignorance; whereof there is no hope, says Solomon.
The other is invincible, but indeed this more invincible, Prou. 2^.
a fool is sooner taught. So Christ foiled the Pharisees with their own
weapons; and proved their weakness by their arguments for their own strength.
Ioh. 9.41.
If you were blind, you should have no sin; but now you say, w^e see;
therefore your sin remains. The Pharisees, though blind, will be Seers:
Nicodemus a Ioh. 3.10.
Master in Israel, and yet knew nothing of regeneration. Cl^m.
Nihil grauius, quam si id, quod ignorant quis, scire se credat. There is
nothing more grievous then that a man should be persuaded he knows that
soundly whereof he is totally ignorant. Therefore says Chrysostom. Chry^. in
math. ho^. 76.
Praestat proba ignoration^ detineri, quam falsa opinione mancipari, It is
better to be held in with an honest ignorance, then to run out upon a false
opinion. It is hard plowing in the ground not stocked: ill writing in a paper
full of lines. These fly from instruction as the Tiger from the trumpet.
Others are comprehended of the light; Tenabrae, a ^^nendo.
these think they comprehend the light, when, as the Apostle says, they are
held of darkness.

Let us now see which of these ignorances is here meant? I answer; exempting
the first, Satan's Harlot, Vice has guests of all these sorts. Many that Prou.
7.22.
go after her, as an Ox to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of
the stocks. Some ^unne to the Banquet, and know not: some know and run: all
are fools, and destitute (if not of natural, yet) of spiritual
understanding. To this purpose she apteth her speech here. ver. 16.
Who so is simple, let him turn in hither; and as for him that wants
understanding, she says, etc. Knowledge is good, yet if disioyned from grace,
1 Cor. 13.2.
(...), it is nothing. Nihil in esse gratiae, quamuis aliquid in esse naturae.
Nothing in grace, though something in nature: knowledge humane is a good stirrup
to get up by to preferment: Divine a a good gale of wind to wast us to Heaven.
But charity is better. 1 Cor. 8.1.
Knowledge often blows up, but charity builds up. Aristotle calls
knowledge the Souls eye: but then says our Savior, if the light be
darkness, how great is that darkness?

True it is, that knowledge without honesty does more hurt. The Unicorns
horn, that in a wise man's hand is helpful, is in the beasts head hurtful. If
a man be a beast in his affections, in his manners; the more skilful, the more
illfull. Knowledge has two pillars, Learning and Discreation. The greatest
Scholar without his two eyes, of Discreation and Honesty, is like blind
Sampson, apt to no good, able to much mischief. Prudence is a virtue of the
soul, nay the very ^oule of virtue. The Mistress to guide the life in
goodness. All moral virtues are beholding to wisdom. She directs Bounty what
to give, when to give, where to give. And Fortitude, with whom, for what, and
how to sight. Knowledge is excellent, to prevent dangers imminent; and to keep
us from the snares of this strange woman. But if the Devil in our days should
have no guests, but those that are merely ignorant, his rooms would be more
empty then they are; and his Ordinary break forwant of Customers. But now
a-dayes (alas, when was it much better? and yet how can it be much worse?) we
know sin, yet affect it, act it. Time was, we were ignorant and blind, now
we have eyes and abuse them. Tire and Sidon burn in Hell, and their smoke
ascends for evermore, that had no preaching in their Cities: but our Country is
sown with mercies, and our ^elues fatted with the doctrine of life, who shall
excuse our lame, lean, and ill-fauoured lives? Let us beware Bethsaida's woe.
If the Heathen shall wring their hands for their Ignorance, then many
Christians shall rend their hearts for their disobedience. Heb. 10.28.
He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy, under two or three witnesses.
He that despises, not he that transgresses; for so do all. He that rejected
and departed from the Law and Church of Israel, died without mercy, eternally,
for other transgressors died without mercy temporally. Ver. 29.
Of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, etc. that treads under
his foot, not Moses but Christ; and counts not the blood of Goats, but of Gods
Son vnhely; and despiteth, which is more then despises, the spirit not of
fear and bondage, but of grace? Lactant.
All the learning of the Philosophers was without an head, because they were
ignorant of God. Seeing, they were blind, speaking, they were dumb; hearing,
they were deaf, like the Idol-Gods in the Psalm. We want not an head, but an
heart: not the sense of knowledge, but the love of obedience; we hear, and
see, and say, and know, but do not.

If you know that Gods cheer is so infinitely better; why do you enter
commons at Satan's Feast? The School calls one kind of knowledge, Scientia
contristans, a sorrowful knowledge. Though they intend it in another sense, it
may be true in this: for it is a woeful knowledge, when men with open eyes
run to Hell. This is Vriahs letter containing his own death. These tell
Christ, Luke 13.26.
we knew thee: Christ tells them, Math. 7.23.
I know not you. These times are sick of Adams disease, that had rather eat
of the tree of knowledge, then of the tree of life: speculatiue Christians, not
active and obedient Saints. You cannot plead, that you know not the dead are
there; behold, we have told you. Quit your selves. But many men's Ignorance is
disobedience: they will not know that the dead are there, and that her guests
are in the depth of Hell. Which now presses upon us to be considered.

Solomon has described the persons feasting and feasted. The place remains,
the depth of Hell. This is the Banketing house. It amplifies the misery of the
guests in three circumstances. 1. their weakness, they are soon in, 2. the
place, Hell. 3. the vnrecouerablenesse of it. The depth of Hell.

1. Per infirmitatem. In regard of their weakness. No sooner come to the
Banquet, but presently in the Pit: they are in: they are soon in. They would
not resist the tentation, when it was offered: they cannot resist the
tribulation, when it is to be suffered: They are in. No wrestling, no
contending can keep them from falling in. Into the pit they run against
their will, that ran so volently, so violently to the brinkes of it. As a man
that has taken his careere, and runs full fling to a place, cannot recoile
himself, or recall his strength on the sudden. He might have refused to
enter the race, or recollected himself in time, but at the last step he cannot
stop, nor reuocare gradum, rescue himself from falling. The guests, that
hasten themselves all their life to the feast of vanity, and neither in the
first step of their youth, nor in the middle race of their discreetest age,
return to God, do at last (without Christ's help) precipitate themselves into
the depth of Hell. Think, oh think, ye gr^edie Dogs, that can never fast
enough devour your sinful pleasures, if in the pride of your strength, the
May of your blood, the marrow and virtue of your life, when you are seconded
with the gifts of nature, nay blessed with the helps of heaven, you cannot resist
the allurements of Satan; how unable will you be to deal with him, when
custom in sin has weakened your spirits, and God has withdrawn his erst
afforded comforts? They that run so fiercely to the pit, are quickly in the
pit. The guests are in the depth of Hell.

2. Per infernitatem. In regard of the place, it is Hell. The Prophet Esaias thus
describes it. Esa. 30.33.
Topheth is ordained of old: he has made it deep and large: the pile thereof
is fire and much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a stream of Brimstone does
kindle it. Topheth was a place which the children of Israel built in the
valley of 2 King. 23.10
Hinnon, to burn their sons and daughters in the fire to Moloch. Which
valley was near to Iebusi, afterward Jerusalem, as appears Iosuah. 18. Iosu.
18.16.
The Council of Jerusalem, whiles their power lasted, used to punish certain
offenders in that valley, being near their City: By this is Hell resembled.
And that (in Peter Martyrs opinion) for three reasons. 1. Being a bottom, a
low valley, it resembles Hell, that is believed to be under the earth. 2. By
reason of the fire, wherewith the wicked are tormented in Hell, as the children
were in that valley burnt with fire. 3. Because the place was unclean and
detestable, Ier. 7.31.32. For they shall bury in Tophet, till there be no
place. And the carka^ses, etc. Leg^.
whither all vile and loathsome things were cast out of the City Jerusalem. So
Hell is the place, where defiled and wicked souls are cast, as unworthy of
the holy and heavenly City.

This place shall begin to open her cursed jaws, when the Judge of all men and
Angels shall have given his last sentence. At that day, when, Quaesitor
scelerum veniet, vindexque reorum, the searcher of all, and punisher of wicked
hearts, shall give his double voice of dread and joy; when having spoken peace
to his Saints, he shall thunder out condemnation to the wicked, Go ye into
everlasting fire.

-- dent ocyus omnes,
Quas meruere pati, sic stat sententia, poenas.
And if here on earth, Seiudice, nemo nocens absoluitur, a man's own conscience
condemn him for his sins, 1 Ioh. 3.20.
how much greater shall be the just condemnation of God? Then all murdering
Cains, scoffing Chams, persecuting Saul's, theeuish and sacrilegious Achans,
oppressing Ahabs, covetous Nabals, drunken H^lofernesses, cruel Herod's,
blasphemous Rabshaceh's, unjust Pilates, shall reap the seed in their eternal
deaths, which they have sown in their temporal lives. There shall be
scorching heat, and freezing cold: Ex vehementissimo calore ad vehementissimum
frigus. Without either act of refreshing, or hope of releasing. Every day has
been their Holy Day on earth: every day shall be their workie-day in Hell. The
Poets fained three furies. -- Scindet latus vna slagello.
Altera tartareis sectos dabit anguibus artus:
Tertia fumantes incoquet igne genas.
One brings a Scorpion, which the Conscience eats:
Another with iron whips the black flesh beats:
Whiles the third boyles the soul in scalding heates.
Nemo ad id sero venit, vnde nunquam, cum semel venit, Sen.
poterit reuerti. No man can come too late to those sufferings, from whence,
being once come, he can never return.

This is Hell: where darkness shall be their prison, euerlastingnes their
fetters, flames their torments, angry Angels their tormenters. Vbi nec tortores
deficiant, Aug.
nec torti miserimoriantur. Where the scourgers shall never be weary of
afflicting, nor the scourged fail their suffering. But there shall be always
torments for the body, and a body for torments. Fire shall be the consummation
of their plagues, not the consumption of their persons. Aug.
Vbi per millia millia annorum cruciandi, nec in secula seculorum liberandi.
Myriades of years shall not accomplish, nor determine their punishments.
Isidod.
It shall be their misery, (Semper velle quod nunquam erit, semper nolle quod
nunquam non erit) to have a will never satisfied, a nill never gratified.

3. Per profunditatem. The depth of Hell: The Scripture is frequent to testify
Hell a deep place, and beneath us. Luke. 10.15.
Capernaum shall be cast down to Hell. Solomon so speaks. Prou. 15.24.
The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from Hell beneath.
And of this Harlot. chap. 7.27.
Her house is the way to Hell, going down to the chambers of death. chap. 5.5.
Her feet go down to death, her steps take hold on Hell. Down and beneath
do witness the depth of Hell. There are three places: Earth, Heaven, Hell.
Earth we all enjoy, good and bad, promiscuously. Heaven is prepared for the
good; and it is upwards. Col. 3.1.
If ye be risen with Christ, seek the things that are above. Hell is ordained
for the wicked; and it is downward; called here, profundum, a depth. To define
the local place of Hell, it is too deep for me: I leave it to deeper
judgments. I do not give D^monax answer, being asked where Hell was. Era.
aphor. lib. 8.
Expecta simul ac illuc venero, et tibi per literas significabo. Tarry till I
come thither, and I will send thee word by letters. No, I only say this. There
is one, we are sure of it; let us by a good life be as sure to escape it.

But to confine my speech to the bounds of my Text, I take it, that by Hell and
the depth of it here, is meant the deep bondage of the wicked souls; that they
are in the depth of the power of Hell. Satan having by sin a full dominion
over their consciences. For Hell is often allegorically taken in the
Scriptures, So Jonas Ion. 2.2.
cries unto God out of the belly of Hell. David sung Psalm. 130.1
de profundis: Out of the depth have I cried unto thee oh Lord. So Christ
speaks of the unbeliever, that he is Ioh. 3.18.
already damned. And the reprobate are here affirmed in the depth of Hell. This
exposition I esteem more natural to the words. For as the godly have a
Heaven, so the wicked a Hell, even upon Earth: though both in a spiritual, not
a literal sense. The reprobates Hell on earth is double; or of two sorts.

1. In that the power of Hell rules in his conscience. Ephesians. 2.2.
He walks according to the course of this world, and according to the Prince
of the power of the Air, the spirit, that now works in the children of
disobedience. He is taken and led captive of the Deuil^; as hereafter in the
chains of damnation, so here in the bands of dominion: which Solomon calls
funes peccatorum: as he has Esa. 5.18.
drawn iniquity with the cords of vanity, so he Prou. 5.22.
shall be holden with the cords of his sins.

2. There is a Hell in his conscience. So Saint Augustine; De verb. Dom. sec.
Ioh. Sermon. 42.
Sunt duo tortores anime, Timor et Dolor. The soul has two tormentors even in
this life, grief for evil felt, fear of evil to be felt. Whereof the Poet.

Sic mea perpetuos curarum pectora morsus, fine quibus nullo consiciantur,
habent. These are the fearful terrors whereof the guilty heart cannot be
quitted, cannot be quieted; though pleasure it self were his physician, and
the whole world his minstrell. Cyril.
Domino priuante suo gaudio, quid esse potest in gaudium? when God withholds
his music and peace, what can make the heart merry? Polidore Virgill thus
writes of Richard the third's dream the night before Bosworth-field. That he
thought all the Devils in Hell pulled and haled him in most hideous and ugly
shapes. And concludes of it at last. Id credo, non fuit somnium, sed
conscientia scelerum. I do not think it was so much his dream, as his wicked
conscience that brought those terrors. When this evil spirit comes on a
wicked Saul, let him go to his merriest good fellows, beguile at once the
time and himself with plays, and sports, feast away his cares at his own
table, or bury them together with his wits, at a Tavern: alas these are
pitteous shifts, weaker then walls of paper.

Sleep cannot make his conscience sleep: perhaps the very dreams are
fearful. It will not leave thee, till it has showed thee thy Hell, no nor
when it has showed thee it, will it leave thee quiet. The more thou offerest
to damme up this current, the more ragingly it swells, and gusheth over the
resisting banckes. This wounded Conscience runs like the stricken Dear, with
the arrow of death in the ribs, from thicket to thicket, from shelter to
shelter, but cannot change her pain with her place. The wound ranckles in the
soul, and the longer it goes on, the worse still it festers. Thus sin that
spoke thee so fair at her inuiting to the Banquet, now presents to thy waked
soul her true form; and plays the makebate betwixt God and thee, betwixt
thee and thy self. So long as security has kept thee sleeping in thy
delighted impieties, this quarrel is not commenced. The mortallest enemies are
not always in pitched fields one against another.

This truce holds some till their deathbeds; neither do they ever complain,
till their complaints can do them no good. For then at once, the sick
carkase, after many tossings and turnings to find the easiest side, moanes his
vnabated anguish: and the sicker conscience, after trial of many shifts, too
late feels and confesses her unappeased torment. So Cain, Judas, Nero, in
vain seek for foreign helps, when their executioner is within them. The
wicked man cannot want furies, so long as he has himself. Indeed the soul
may fly from the body, not sin from the soul. An impatient Judas may leap
out of the private hell in himself, into the common pit below; as the boiling
fishes out of the Caldron into the flame. But the gain has been, the
addition of a new hell without them, not the loss of the old hell within them.
The worm of Conscience does not then cease her office of gnawing, when the
f^ends begin their office of torturing. Both join their forces to make the
dissolutely wicked, desolately wretched. If this man be not in the depth of
Hell, deeply miserable, there is none.

Lo now the Shot at the Devils Banquet. A reckoning must be paid, and this is
double. 1. the earnest in this life. 2. the full payment in the life to come.
The earnest is, whiles Hell is cast into the wicked: the full satisfaction is,
when the wicked shall be cast into Hell. Revel. 20.15.
Whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was cast into the Lake
of fire. I will take leave to amplify both these a little further.

1. The earnest is the horror of an evil conscience; which sparkles with the
beginnings of future torments. I know that some feel not this in the pride of
their vanities; or at least will not seem to feel it. Some Ier. 3.3.
whorish for-heads can outface their sins, and laugh them out of
countenance. Wide gorges, that can swallow periuries, bloodynesse, adulteries,
vsuries, extortions without trouble. But it may be, 2 Cor. 5.12.
the heart does not laugh with the look. He dares be an hypocrite, that durst
be a villain. If he would speak truth of himself he would testify, that
his thoughts will not afford him sleep, nor his sleep afford him rest: but
whiles his senses are bound, his sin is loose. No command of reason can quiet
the tempest in his heart. No son of Sceua, no help of the world, can cast
out this Devil. The blood of the body, often being stopped in the issue at the
nostrils, bursts out at the mouth, or finds way into the stomach. The
conscience thus wounded, will bleed to death, if the blood of Jesus Christ do
not stanch it.

Think of this, Psalm. 50.22:
ye that forget God, and are only indulgent to your selves: the time shall
come, you shall remember God, neither to your thanks, nor ease; and would
forget your selves. Happy were it for you, if you, having lost your God, could
also loose your selves. But you cannot hide your selves from your selves.
Conscience will neither be blinded in seeking, nor bribed in speaking. You
shall say unto it as that wicked Ahab to Elias, 1 King. 21.20.
have thou found me, oh thou mine enemy? yet alas, all this is but the
earnest. A hell, I may call it* and a deep hell; and, as I ^ay say, a little
smoke re^king out of that fiery pit: whereby the af^licted may give a guess
at Hell, as Pythagoras guessed at the stature of Hercules by the length of his
foot. But else, per nulla figura geh^nnae: nothing can truly resemble Hell.

2. The earnest is infinitely short of the total sum. Math. 18.34.
And his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormenters, till he should
pay all that was due unto him. The guest must endure a death not dying, live a
life not living: no torment ends without the beginning of a worse. The sight
afflicted with darkness and ugly Devils: the hearing with shrikes and
horrible cries: the smelling with noisome stenches: the taste with ravenous
hunger and bitter gall: the feeling with intolerable, yet unquenchable fire.
Thousands poynting at, not one among thousands pitying the distressed wre^ch. I
know this Earth is a dungeon in regard of Heaven, yet a Heaven in respect of
Hell, we have misery enough here: it is mercy to what is there. Think of a
gloomy, hideous, and deep Lake, full of pestilent dampes and rotten vapors,
as thick as clouds of pitch, more palpable then the fogs of Egypt; that the
eye of the Sun is too dull to pierce them, and his heat too weak to
dissolve them. Add hereunto a fire flashing in the reprobates face; which
shall yield no more light then with a glimpse to show him the torments of
others, and others the torments of himself; yet withal, of so violent a
burning that should it glow on mountains of steel, it would melt them like
mountains of Snow.

This is the guests reckoning: a sore, a sour payment, for a short and scarce
sweet Banquet. All his senses have been pleased, now they are all plagued. In
stead of perfumes and fragrant odors, a sulphurous stench shall strike up into
his nosthrils: In stead of his lascivious Dalila's, that fadomed him in the
arms of lust, behold Adders, Toades, Serpents, crawling on his bosom: In
stead of the Dorian music charming his ears; Man-drakes and Night-rauens
still shriking to them the reuerberating groans of ever and never dying
companions, tolling their funeral (not final) knels and yels round about him.
In stead of wanton kisses, snakes ever sucking at his breath and galling his
flesh with their never blunted stings.

Think of this feast, you riotous feasters in sin. There is a place called
Hell, whither after the general and last assizes, the condemned shall be sent,
through a black way, (death is but a shadow to it) with many a sigh and sobbe,
and groans, to those cursed fiends, that must be their tormentors, as they have
been their tempters. Behold now a new feast, a fatal, a final one. To suppe
in the vault of darkness, with the princes and subjects of horror, at the
table of vengance, in the chair of desperation. Where the difference on earth
betwixt Master and Servant, drudge and commander, shall be quite abolished:
Except some Atheistical Machiauell, or traiterous Seminary, or some bloody
delegate of the Inquisition, be admitted the vpper-end of the table: But
otherwise there is no regard of age, beauty, riches, valor, learning, birth.
The usurer has not a cushion more then his broker. There is not the breadth of
a bench between Herod and his Parasites. The Pope himself has no easier a
bed, then the poorest Mass Priest. Corinthian Lais speeds no better then her
chambermaid. The Cardinal has not the upper hand of his Pander. There is no
prioritie between the plotter and the intelligencer; between the vestall and
the Nun; between the proud Prodigal, and his unconscionable Creditor.

Indeed the greatest sinner shall have the greatest punishment. And he that
has been a principal guest to the Devil on earth; shall (and that on earth
were a strange privilege) hold his place in Hell. Reu. 18.6.7.
Reward her, even as she rewarded you: and double unto her double, according to
her works: in the cup which she has filled, fill to her double. How much
she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment and
sorrow give her. Dives that fed so heartily on this bread of Iniquity, and
drunk so deep draughts of the waters of sin, reserues his superiority in
torment, that he had in pleasure. Behold, Luke 16.25.
he craves with more floods of scalding tears, then ever Esau shed for the
blessing, but one drop of water to cool his tongue, and could not be allowed
it. But what if all the rivers in the South, all the waters in the Ocean had
been granted him, his tongue would still have withered and smarted with heat,
himself still crying in the language of Hell, a non sufficit, It is not
enough. Or what if his tongue had been eased, yet his heart, liver, lungs,
bowels, arms, legs should still have fried.

Thus he that eat and drank with superfluity, the purest flower of the
Wheat, the reddest blood of the Grape; his body kept as well from diseas^^, as
soft linen and fine raiment could preserve it: here finds a fearful
alteration. From the table of surfeit, to the table of torment, from feeding on
Iunkets, to gnaw his own flesh: from bowls of wine to the want of cold water;
from the soft foldes of fine silks, to the winding lashes of furies: from
chains of gold for ornament, to chains of iron for torment: from a bed of
down, to a bed of flames: from laughing among his companions, to howling with
Devils: from having the poor begging at his gates, to beg himself; and that
as that Rich-man, for one drop of water. Who can express the horror and
misery of this guest?

Non mihi si centum linguae sint, oraque centum,
Ferrea vox, omnes scelerum comprendere formas,
Omnia poenarum percurrere nomina possim.
No heart of man can think, no tongue can tell
The direful pains, ordained and felt in hell.
Now sorrows meet at the Guests heart, as at a feast; all the furies of hell
leap on the Table of his Conscience. Thought calls to Fear, Fear to Horror,
Horror to Despair, Despair to Torment, Torment to Extremity, all to
Eternity; Come and help to afflict this wretch. All the parts of his body and
soul leave their natural and woonted uses, and spend their times in
wretchedness and confusion. He runs through a thousand deaths and cannot
dye. Heavy irons are locked on him: all his lights and delights are put out at
once. He has no soul capable of comfort. And though his eyes distill like
fountains, yet God is now inexorable: His Mittimus is without Bail, and the
Prison can never be broken. God will not hear now, that might not he heard
before.

That you may conceive things more spiritual and remote, by passions nearer to
sense. Suppose that a man being gloriously roabed, deliciously feasted.
Prince-like served, attended, honored, and set on the proudest height of
pleasure that ever mortallitie boasted; should in one (unsuspected) moment be
tumbled down to a bottom, more full of true miseries, then his promontory was
of false delights: and there be ringed about with all the gory Mutherers,
black Atheists, sacrilegious Church-robbers, and incestuous Rauishers, that
have ever disgorged their poison on earth, to reassume it in Hell: Nay add
further to this supposition, that this depth he is thrown into, was no better
then a vast Charnell-house, hung round with lamps burning blew and dim, set
in hollow corners; whose glimmering serves to discover the hideous torments:
all the ground in stead of green rushes, strewed with fun^rall rosemary and
dead men's bones: some corpses standing upright in their knotted
winding-sheetes; others rotted in their Coffins, which yawne wide to vent their
stench: there the bare ribs of a Father that begat him, here the hollow skull
of a Mother that bare him. How direful and amazing are these things to sense!

Or if Imagination can give being to a more fearful place, that, or rather
worse then that is Hell. If a poor man suddenly starting out of a golden
slumber, should see his house flaming about him, his loving Wife and loved
Infants brea^hing their spirits to heaven through the merciless fire, himself
inringed with it, calling for despaired succor; the miserable Churl his next
neighbor, not vouchsafeing ^o answer, when the putting forth of an arm might
^aue him: such shall be their miseries in Hell, and nor an Angel nor a Saint
shall refresh them with any comfort. These are all but shadows, nay not
shadows of the infernal depth here expressed. You hear it; fear it, fly it,
escape it. Fear it by Repentance, fly it by your Faith, and you shall escape it
by Gods mercy.

This is their (Po^na sensus) positive punishmen^* There is also (Poena damni)
to be considered, their privative punishment. They have lost a place on earth,
whose joy was temporal; they have missed a place in Heaven, whose joy is
eternal. Now they find that Prou. 15.^7.
a dinner of green herbs with Gods love, is better then a stalled Ox, and
his hatred withal. A feast of sallets, or Daniels pulse, is more cheris^ing
with mercy, then Belshazzars Banquet without it. Now they find Solomon^ Se^mon
true; that though Prou. 20.17.
the bread of deceit ^e swe^t to a man, yet the time is come; that the mouth is
filled with gravel. No, no: ^he Prou. 18.25.
blessing of God only makes fat, and he adds no sorrow unto it. Waters,
the wicked desired, and Bread, they lusted after; behold after their secure
sleep, and dreamed joys on earth, with what hungry souls do they awake in
Hell?

But what are the Bread and the Waters, they might have enjoyed with the Sain^s
in Heaven? Esa. 58.11.
Such as shall never be dried up. Psalm. 1^.11.
Ie^ thy presence is the fullness of joy: and at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. Happy is the undefiled soul, who is innocent from the
great offense; all whose sins are washed as white as Snow, in that blood,
which alone is able Hebr. 9.14.
to purge the conscience from dead works. Esa. 33.15.16.
He that walks righteously, etc. he shall dwell on high: his place of defense
shall be the munitions of rocks: Bread shall be given him; his Waters shall be
sure. His joys are certain and stable; no alteration, no alternation shall
empaire them. The wicked for the slight breakfast of this world, loose the Reu.
19* 9.
Lambs supper of glory. Where these four things concur, that make a perfect
feast: Dies lectus, locus electus, coetus been collectus, apparatus non
neglectus. A good time, eternity. A good place, Heaven. A good company, the
Saints. Good cheer, Glory.

1. God himself is the feast-maker: he is Landlord of the world, and ^illeth
every living thing with goodness. The Eagles and Lions seek their meat at
God. But though all the sons of Jacob have good cheer from Joseph yet
Beniamins mess exceeds. Esau shall have the prosperity of the earth, but
Jacob goes away with the blessing. Ismaell may have outward favors, but the
inheritance belongs to Izhak* The King favors all his subjects, but they of
his Court stand in his presence, and partake of his Princely graces. Gods
bounty extends to the wicked also, but the Saints shall only sit at his table
in Heaven. This is that feaster, Aug.
qui est super omnia, et sine quo nulla sunt omnia. Romans 11.36.
Of him, and through him, and to him are all things: to whom be glory for ever.

2. The cheer is beyond all sense, all science. 1 Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nether have entered into the heart of man,
the things God has prepared for them that love him. The eye sees much, the
ear hears more, the heart conceaues most, yet all short of apprehension, much
more of comprehension of these pleasures. Therefore enter thou into thy Masters
joy, for it is too great to enter into thee.

3. The company is excellent: the glorious presence of the blessed Trinity,
the Father that made us, the Son that bought us, the Holy Ghost that brought
us to this place. The holy and unspotted Angels, that rejoiced at our
conversion on earth, much more at our consolation in Heaven. All the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Saints; before the Law, in the Law, in the Gospel: the
full Communion of Saints. Here, the more the mirrier, yea, and the better
cheer to. Oh the sweet melody of Halleluiahs, which so many glorified voices
shall sing to God in Heaven, the hoarcenesse of sin, and the harshnesse of
punishment being separated from us with a bill of everlasting divorce.

4. Admirable is the Banketing place; the high Court of Heaven, where our
apparel shall be such as beseems the attendants on the King of Kings; even
Phil. 3.
the fashion of the glorious body of Christ. The purest things are placed
highermost. The earth as grossest is put in the lowest room: the water above
the earth: the air above the water: the fire above the air: the sphaeres of
Heaven above any of them: and yet the place where this feast is kept, is above
them all; the Heaven of Heavens. Take here a slight relish of the cheer in
Gods kingdom, where your welcome shall be answerable to all the rest. Can. 5.1.
Eat oh my friends, and make you merry, oh well-beloued. And then (as those
that have tasted some delicate dish, find other plain meats but unpleasant,
so) you that have tasted of heavenly things, cannot but contemn the best
worldly pleasures. As therefore some dainty guest, knowing there is so pleasant
fare to come, let us reserve our appetites for that; and not suffer our selves
to be cloyed with the course diet of the world. Thus as we fast on the Eues,
that we may feast on the Holy Days; let us be sure, that after our abstinence
from the surfets of sin, we shall be everlastingly fed and fatted with the
mercies of God. Which resolution the Lord grant us here; which Banquet, the Lord
give us hereafter. Amen.

FINIS.
THE Sinners Passing Bell.

OR A complaint from Heaven for Man's Sins.

Published by THOMAS ADAMS, Preacher of Gods Word at Willington in
Bedford-shire.

1 CORINTHIANS. 11.30. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many
sleep.

AUGUST. EPIST. 188. Ipse sibi denegat curam, qui Medico non publicat causam.

He has no care of his own cure, that declares not to the Physician his
grief.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for John Budge, and are to be sold at the
great South-dore of Paul's, and at Brittaines-Bursse. 1614.

TO THE TRVLY-NOBLE KNIGHT Sr. Anthony Sainct-Iohn saving health.
Right Worshipful:
THe sickness of this World is grown so lethargicall, that his recovery is
almost despaired: and therefore his Physicians, finding by infallible symptoms
that his consumption is not curable, leave him to the malignancie of his
disease. For the eye of his faith is blind, the ear of his attention deaf,
the foot of his obedience lame, the hand of his charity numm'd, and shut up
with a griping covetousness. All his vital parts, whereby he should live to
goodness, are in a swoune: he lies bedridden in his security, and has little
less then given up the (Holy) Ghost. It cannot be denied, but that he lies at
the mercy of God. It is therefore too late to toll his Passing Bell, that
has no breath of obedience left in him: I might rather ring out his knell. Yet
because there are many in this world, that are not of this world: many sick of
the general disease of Sin, whose recovery is not hopeless, though their
present state be happelesse; and some, that if they knew but themselves sick,
would resort to the Poole of Bethesda, the waters of life, to be cured. I have
therefore presumed to take them apart, and tell them impartially their own
illness. Oh that to perform the cure were no more difficult then to describe
the Malady, or prescribe the remedy. I have endeavored the latter: the other
to God; who can both kill and give life: who is yet pleased, by his word, to
work our recovery; and to make me one (unworthy) instrument, to administer his
Physic. Now as the most accurate Physicians, ancient or modern, though they
delivered precepts in their faculty, worthy of the worlds acceptance and use;
yet they set them forth under some Noble Patronage: so I have presumed, under
the countenance of your protection, to publish this (physical or rather)
metaphysicall Treatise: for as the Sickness is spiritual, so the cure must be
supernatural. Assuring my self, that if you shall use any observation here,
and give it your good word of Probatum est, many others will be induced the more
redily to embrace it. My intent is to do good: and if I had any better
Receite, I would not (like some Physicians, I know not whither more envious or
covetous, with an excellent Medicine) let it live and die with my self. God
conserve your (either) health; and give you, with a sound body, a sounder
faith; whereby you may live the life of Grace here, of Glory hereafter.

Your Worships humbly devoted THOMAS ADAMS.

THE Sinners Passing Bell. OR A Complaint from Heaven for Man's Sins. The fifth
Sermon.
IEREM. 8.22. Is there no Balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? why
then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?


THis is a world to make Physicians rich; if men loved not their purse, better
then their health. For the world waxes old, and old age is weak and sickly.
As when death begins to ceaze upon a man, his brain by little and little
grows out of order; his mind becomes cloudy and troubled with fantasies; the
channels of his blood, and the radical moisture (the oil that fe^ds the lamp
of his life) begin to dry up: all his limbs loose their former agillitie. As
the little world thus decaies in the great, so the great decaies in it self:
that Nature is feign to lean on the staff of Art, and to be held up by man's
industry. The signs, which Christ has given to fore-run the worlds ruin,
are called by a Father, Ambros.
aegritudines Mundi: the diseases or sicknesses of the world, as sickness
naturally goes before death. Wars dying the earth into a sanguine hew: dead
carkases infecting the aires; and the infected aires breathing about plagues
and pestilences, and sore contagions. Whereof, says the same Father, null^
magis quam nos testes sumus, quos mundi finis inuenit, none can be more
certain witnesses then we upon whom 1 Cor. 11.10
the ends of the world are come. That sometimes the influences of Heaven spoil
the fruits of the earth; and the fogs of earth soil the virtues of the
Heavenly bodies: that neither Plannets above, nor plants below, yield us
expected comforts. So God, for our sins, brings the heaven, the earth, the
air, and whatsoever was created for man's use, to be his enemy, and to war
against him. And all because, Gregor.
omnia quae ad vsum vitae accipimus, ad vsum vitij conuertimus: we turn all
things to vices corruption, which were given for natures protection. Therefore,
what we have ^iuerted to wickedness, God has reuerted to our revenge. We are
sick of sin, and therefore the world is sick of us.

Our lives shorten, as if the book of our days were by Gods knife of
Judgment, cut less; and brought from Folio, as in the Patriarchs, before the
flood, to Quarto in the Fathers after the flood; nay to Octauo, as with the
Prophets of the Law, nay even to Decimosexto, as with us in the days of the
Gospel. The Elements are more mixed, drossie, and confused: the airs are
infected: neither wants our intemperance to second all the rest. We hasten that
we would not have, Death; and run so to riot in the April of our early
vanities, that our May shall not escape the fall of our l^afe. Our great
Landlord has let us a fair house, and we suffer it quickly to run to ruin.
That whereas the Soul might dwell in the body, as a Palace of delight, she
finds it a crazy, sickish, rotten cabinet, in danger, every gust, of dropping
down.

How few shall thou meet, if their tongues would be true to their griefs,
without some disturbance or affliction? There lies one groaning of a sick
heart; another shakes his aching head: a third roares for the torments of his
reins: a fourth for the racking of his gowty joints: a fifth grouels with the
Falling Sickness: a last lies half dead of a Palsy. Here is work for the
Physicians. They ruffle in the roabes of preferment, and ride in the
Foote-clothes of reverence. Early and devout suppliants stand at their study
doors, quaking, with ready money in their hands, and glad it will be accepted.
The body, if it be sick, is content sometimes to buy (vnguentum areum, with
vnguentum aureum) leaden trash, with golden cash. But it is sick, and needs
Physic; let it have it.

There is another Physician, that thriues well too, if not best; and that is the
Lawyer. For men go not to the Physician till their bodies be sick; but to the
Lawyer when they be well, to make them sick. Thus whil^s they fear an Ague,
they fall into a Consumption. He that scapes his disease, and falls into the
hands of his Physician; or from his trouble of suites, lights into the fingers
of his Lawyer, fulfils the old verse, Incidit in Scyllam, dum vult vitare
Charibdim. Or is in the poor Birds case, that flying in fear from the
Cuckooe, lighted into the tallon^ of the Hawke. These are a couple of thriuing
Physicians: Alter tuetur a^gros, alter tuetur agros: One looks to the state of
the person; the other of the purse* so the old verse testifies. Dat Galenus
opes, dat Iustinianus honores. Physic gives wealth, and Law Honor. I speak
not against due reward, for just deserts in both these faculties.

These Physicians are both in request: but the third, the Physician of the
soul (of whom, I am now occasioned to show, there is most need) may stand at
the door with Homer; and did he speak with the voice of Angels, not to be
admitted. The sick Rich man lies patiently under his Physicians hands; he
gives him golden words, real thanks, nay (and often) flattering observance:
If the state lie sick of a Consumption; or if some contentious Emperick, by
new suits, would lance the impostum'd swellings of it: or if (perhaps) it lie
sullen-sicke of Naboths Vineyard: the Lawyer is (perchance) not sent for, but
gone to; and his help implo^ed, not without a Royal sacrifice at least. But
for the Minister of his Parish, if he may not have his head under his girdle,
and his attendance as servile as his Liuerie-groomes; he thinks himself
indignified, and rages, like the Pope, that any Priest durst eat of his
Peacocke. How short does this Physicians respect fall of both the others! John
21.10.
Let him feed his Sheep, if he will, 1 P^t. 2.2.
with the Milk of the Word; his Sheep will not feed him with the Milk of
reward. He shall hardly get from his Patron the Milk of the Vicaredge: but if
he looks for the fleeces of the Parsonage, he shall have (after the Proverb)
Lanam caprinam, Contempt and scorn.

Ester 3 5.
Haman was not more mad for Mordecais Cap, then the great one is, that as
much observance arises not to him, from the black coat, as from his own
blew coat. The Church is beholden to him, that he will turn one of his cast
Seruitours, out of his own into her service: out of his Chamber into the
Chancell; from the Buttry-hatch to the Pulpit. He that was not worthy enough to
wait on his Worship, is good enough for God. Yield this sore almost healed;
yet the honor of the Ministry thriues like Trees in Autumn. Even their best
estimate is but a shadow, and that a preposterous one: for it goes back faster
then the shadow in the Esa. 38.8.
Dyall of Ahaz. If a Rich man have four Sons, the youngest or contemnedst
must be the Priest. Perhaps the Eldest shall be committed to his Lands; for if
his Lands should be committed to him, his Father fears, he would carry them
all up to London: he dares not venture it, without binding it sure. For which
purpose he makes his second Son a Lawyer: a good ^ising profession; for a man
may by that (which I neither envy nor tax) run up, like Jonas gourd, to
preferment: and for wealth, a Clustre of Law is worth a whole Vintage of
Gospel. If he study means for his third, lo Physic smells well. That as
the other may keep the estate from running, so this the body from ruining. For
his youngest Son, he cares not, if he puts him into Gods service; and make
him capable of the Church-goods, though not pliable to the Churches good. Thus
having provided for the estate of his Inheritance, of his Advancement, of his
Carcass, he comes last to think of his Conscience.

I would to God, this were not too frequently the worlds fashion. Whereas
heretofore, Primogeniti eo iure Sacerdotes, the firstborn had the right of
Priesthood: now the younger Son, if he fit for nothing else, lights upon that
privilege. That as a reverend Divine says. Younger Brothers are made Priests,
and Priests are made younger Brothers. Yet, alas; for all diseases Nature
provides, Art prepares Medicines. He is fed in this Country, whom that
refuses: An estate lost by Shipwreck on Sea, may be recovered by good-speede
on Land. And in ill health, for every sore of the body, there is a salve; for
every malady, a remedy: but for the Conscience, Nature has no cure, as Lust
no care. Hei mihi, quod nullis anima est medicabilis herbis! There is no
herb, to heal the wounds of the soul, though you take the whole world for
the Garden. All these professions are necessary; that men's Ignorance might not
prejudice them, either in wealth, health, or grace. God has made men fit with
qualities, and famous in their faculties, to preserve all these sound in us.
The Lawyer for thy wealth: the Physician for thy health: the Divine for thy
soul. Physicians cure the body; Ministers the Conscience.

The Church of Israel is now exceeding sick; and therefore the more
dangerously, because she knows it not. No Physic is affected, therefore no
health effected. She lies in a Lethargy, and therefore speechless. She is so
past sense of her weakness, that God himself is feign to ring her
Passing Bell. Aarons bells cannot ring loud enough to waken her: God toles from
Heaven a sad knell of complaint for her.

It is, I ^hinke, a custom not unworthy of approbation; when a languishing
Christian draws near his end, to tole a heavy Bell for him. Set aside the
prejudice of Superstition, and the ridiculous conceits of some old Wives,
whose wits are more decrepit then their bodies; and I see not why, reasons may
not be given to prove it, though not a necessary, yet an allowed Ceremony.

1. It puts into the sick man a sense of mortallitie; and though many other
objects should do no less; yet this seasonably performs it. If any particular
flatterer, or other carnal friends, should use to him the susurration, that
Peter did once to Christ; Master, Matthew. 16.22.
favor thy self: this shall not be unto thee: though sickness lies on your
bed, Death shall not enter your Chamber; the evil day is far off; fear
nothing: you shall live many years: or as the Devil to our Grandmother, you
shall not dye. Genesis 3.
Or if the May of his years shall persuade himself to the remoteness of his
Autumn; or if the love of earthly pleasure, shall deny him voluntary leisure
to think of Death: As Ep^minondas, General of the Thebans, Eras* de lingua.
understanding a Captain of his Army to be dead, exceedingly wondered, how in
a Camp, any should have so much leisure as to be sick. In a word, whatsoever
may flatter him with hope of life; the Bell, like an impartial friend, without
either the too broad eyes of pity, or too narrow of partiallitie, sounds in
his own ears, his own weakness: and seems to tell him, that in the
opinion of the world, he is no man of the world. Thus with a kind of
Divinity, it gives him ghostly counsel; to remit the care of his Carcass,
and to admit the cure of his Conscience. It toles all in: it shall tole thee in
to thy grave.

2. It excites the hearers to pray for the sick: and when can Prayers be more
acceptable, more comfortable? The faithful devotions of so many
Christian-neighbours sent up as Incense to Heaven for thee, are very available
to pacify an offended Justice. This is S. James his Physic for the sick:
nay, Iam. 5.14.15.
this is the Lords comfort to the sick. The prayer of faith shall save the
sick; and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he have committed sins, they
shall be forgiven him. Now (though we be all servants of one family of God,
Ephesians. 3.15.
yet) because of particular families on earth; and those so removed, that one
member cannot condole another grief, that it feels not: non dolet cor, quod
non nouit. The Bell, like a speedy Messenger, runs from house to house, from
ear to ear, on thy souls errand, and begges the assistance of their Prayers.
Thy heart is thus incited to pray for thy self, others excited to pray for
thee. He is a Pharisee, that desires not the Prayers of the Church: he is a
Publican that will not beseech Gods mercy for the afflicted. Thy time and
turn will come to stand in need of the same succor, if a more sudden blast
of Judgment do not blow out thy Candle. Make thy sick Brothers case thine
now, that the Congregation may make thine theirs hereafter. Be in this exigent
even a friend to thine enemy; least thou become like Babell, to be served of
others, as thou have served others; or at least, at best, in falling Nero's
case, that cried, I have neither friend nor enemy.

3. As the Bell has often rung thee into the Temple on earth, so now it rings
thee unto the Church in Heaven: from the militant to the triumphant place: from
thy pilgrimage to thy home: from thy peregrination, to the standing Court of
God. To omit many other significant helps, enough to justify it a laudable
ceremony; it does, as it were, mourn for thy sins, and has compassion on
thy passion. Though in it self a dumb nature, yet as God has made it a
creature, the Church an instrument, and Art given it a tongue, it speaks to
thee to speak to God for thy self; it speaks to others, that they would not
be wanting.

Israel is sick; no Bell stirs, no Balm is thought of, no Prophet
consulted, not God himself solicited. Hence, behold, a complaint from Heaven,
a knell from above the Clouds: for though the words sound through the Prophets
lips, who toles like a Passing Bell, for Israel, yet they come from the mouth
of the Lord of Hoasts. The Prophet Ezekiell uses like words; Ezekiel. 18.
and adds with them, the Lord of Hoasts says it. There is no doubt of his
spiritual inspiration: all the question is of his personal appropriation. It
is certain, that the Prophet Jeremy speaks here many things in his own
person, and some in the person of God. Now by comparing it, with other like
speeches in the Prophets, these words sound, as from a merciful and
compassionate Maker. Why is not the health of my People recovered? Mei populi,
says God, who indeed might alone speak possessiuely: Mine; for he had
chosen and culled them out of the whole world to be his people. Why are not My
people recovered? There is Balm, and there are Physicians, as in Esaias* Esaias. 5.
What could I have done more for my Vineyard?

The words are divided to our hands by the rule of three. A tripartite
Metaphore, that willingly spreads it self into an Allegory. 1. Gods word is
the Balm. 2. The Prophets are the Physicians. 3. The People are the Patients,
who are very sick. Balm without a Physician, a Physician without Balm, a
Patient without both, is in fausta separatio, an unhappy disjunction. If a man
be ill, there is need of Physic; when he has Physic, he needs a
Physician to apply it. So that, here is misery in being sick, mercy in the
Physic.

Not to disioyne or disioynt the Prophets order, let us observe, that the words
are spoken. 1. In the person of God. 2. In the form of a question. 3. By a
conclusiue inference. Only two things, I would first generally observe to you,
as necessary inductions to the subsequent Doctrines. Both which may naturally
be inferred, not tyrannously enforced from the words. That which first objects
it self to our consideration, is the Wisdom of God in working on men's
affections; which leads us here from natural wants subject to sense, to
supernatural, invisible, and more secret defects: from miseries to mysteries.
That, as if any man admired Solomon's House, they would be ravished in desire to
see Gods House; which transcended the former, so much as the former transcended
their expectation. So here, we might be led from man's work to Gods work,
from things material to things mystical; and by the happiness of cure to our
sick bodies, be induced to seek and get recovery of our dying souls. The
second is, the fit collation and respondent relation of Divinity and Physic;
the one undertaking to preserve and restore the health of the body, the other
performing much more to the soul.

1. God leads us by sensible to the sight of insensible wants; Obseru.
by calamities that vex our living bodies, to perils that endanger our dying
Consciences. That we might infer upon his premises, what would be an
eternal loss, by the sight of a temporal cross, that is so hardly brooked.
If a Amos. ^.11.
famine of bread be so heavy, how unsupportable is the dearth of the Word,
says the Prophet. Matthew. 4.4. Matthew. 11.28.
Man may live without bread, not without the word. If a weary Traveler be so
unable to bear a burden on his shoulders, how ponderous is sin in the
Conscience? which Zachary calls a Zach. 5.7.
talent of Lead. If blindness be such a misery, what is ^gnorance? lf the
night be so uncomfortable, what does the darkness of Superstition afford? If
bodily Disease so afflict our sense, how intolerable will a spiritual
sickness prove? Thus all earthly and inferior Objects to a Christian soul,
are like Marginall hands, directing his reading to a better and heavenly
reference. I intend to urge this point the more, as it is more necessary; both
for the profit of it being well observed, and for the general neglect of it;
because they are few in these days, that reduce Christianity to Meditation,
but fewer that produce Meditation to practice and obedience.

Diseases destined toward Death as their end, that can by Nature, neither be
violently endured, nor violently repelled, perplexe the flesh with much pain:
but if Diseases, which be Deaths capital Chirurgions, his preceding Heralds
to proclaim his neerenesse; his Ledgers that usurp his place, till himself
comes, be so vexing and full of anguish, what is Death it self, which kills the
Diseases, that killed us? For the perfection of sickness is Death. But alas,
if the sickness and Death of the body be such, what are Sin (the sickness)
and Impenitencie (the death) of the soul? What is the dimmed eye to the
darkened understanding? the infected members, to the poisoned affections? the
torment of the reins, to the stitches, girds, and gripes of an aching
Conscienc^? what is the Childs (caput dolet) my head aches, to Ierusalems, (cor
dolet) my heart aches? The soul to leave the body with her offices of life, is
not so grievous, as Gods spirit to relinquish the soul with the comforts of
grace. In a word, it is far less miserable to give up the ghost, then to
give up the holy Ghost. The soul, that enters the body without any (sensible)
pleasure, departs not from it without extreme pain. He that is animans
animas, the soul of our souls, forsakes not our spirits, but our pain is
more, though our sense be less. As in the Wars, the cut of a sword crossing
the Fibers, carries more smart with it, though less mortallitie; then the
fatal charge of a Death-thundring Cannon. The soul has two places, an
Inferior which it rules, the body; a Superior, wherein it rests, God! Man's
greatest sorrow is, when he dies vpwardly, that GOD forsakes his God-forsaking
soul. His greatest sense, when he di^s downwards, and sickness disperseth
and dispatcheth his vital powers. Let then the inferior suffering vvaken us,
to see the Superior that does weaken us.

Thus God draws our eyes from one object to another; nay, by one to another;
by that which we love on earth, to that which we should love in Heaven: by
the providence for our bodies, to the provision for our souls. So our Savior
having discoursed of carfulness for terrene wants, draws his speech to the
persuasion of celestial benefits: giving the coherence with a But. Matthew. 6.33.
But first seek ye the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
inferior things shall be added unto you. Hilar.
Vt ad excellen^iam diuinarum rerum per corporalia homines attollat. That at
once he might lesson us to holy duties, and lessen our care for earthly
things. Thus, quios homini sublime dedit, cor subli^ius eleuare voluit: He
that gave man a countenance lifted high, meant to erect his thoughts to a
higher contemplation. For many have such groueling and earth-creeping
affections, that if their bodies curuitie was answerable to their souls,
incederent quadr^pides, they would become foure-footed beasts. It is a course
preposterous to Gods creation, disproportionable to man's fabric, that he
should fix his eyes, and thoughts, and desires, on the base earth, made for
his feet to stand on: and turn his feet against Heaven in contempt, lifting
up his heel against God. He, whose ill-ballancing Judgment thinks Heaven
light, and Earth only weighty and worthy, does (as it were) walk on his
head, with his heels upward. I have heard Travelers speak of monstrous and
praeternaturall men, but never any so contranaturall as these.

Christ knew in the days of his flesh, what easy apprehension worldly things
would find in us; what hard impression heavenly would find on us: therefore
so often, by plain comparisons taught secret Doctrines; by Histories,
Mysteries. How, to the life, does he explain the mercy of God, to the misery
of man, in the lost Sheep; in the lost Groat; in the lost Son? Luke 15.
Math. 13.
How sweetly does he describe the different hearers of Gods Oracles, in the
Parable of the Seed; which (howsoever it seemed a Riddle to the selfe-blinding
Jews, yet) was a familiar demonstration to the believing Saints? So the
Prophets found that actual applications pierced more then verbal
explications. Nathan by an instance of supposition, wrought David's heart to an
humble confession. He drew the Proposition from his own lips, 2 Samuel 12.7.
The man that has done this, is worthy of death; and then stroke while the
iron was hot, by an inferred Conclusion, Thou art the man. The Prophet 1 Kin.
11.30.
Ahijah rent the new garment of Jeroboam in twelve pieces, and bad him reserve
ten to himself; in sign, That God had rent the Kingdom out of the hand of
Solomon, and given ten Tribes to him. Esaias by going Esa. 30 3.
naked and bare-foote, as by a visible sign, lessons Eg^pt and Ethiopia, that
after this manner they should go captive to Assiria. Jeremy Ier. 27.3.
by wearing bands and yokes, and sending them to the Kings of Edom, Moab,
Ammon, Tire, Sidon, Judah, gives them an actual representation, a visible
Sacrament of their Babilonish captivity. Ezekiel. 4.1.
Ezekiells pourtraying upon a Tile the City Jerusalem, and the siege against
it, is called by God, a sign against them. Act. 21.11.
Agabus took Paul's girdle, and bound his own hands and feet; a sign, and
that from the holy Ghost, that he who ought the girdle, should be so bound at
Jerusalem, and delivered into the hands of the Gentiles. God schooled Jonas in
the Gourd, by a lively Apothegme, and real subjection to his own eyes, of his
unjust impatience against God and Nineveh. Ion. 4.


It was Gods usual dealing with Israel; by the afflictions wherewith he
grieved them, to put into their minds how they had grieved him by their sins.
So Paul, as our Prophet here: For this cause ye are weak, 1. Cor. 11.30.
sickely, and many dye: drawing them by these sensible cords of their plagues,
to the feeling of their sins; which made their souls faint in Grace, sick
in Sin, dead in Apostasy. For this cause, etc. This Doctrine affords a
double use; particular and general: particular to Ministers; general to all
Christians.

Use.
1. To the dispensers of Gods secrets: It allows them in borrowed forms to
express the meditations of their hearts. God has given us this liberty in the
performance of our callings, not only nakedly to lay down the truth; but with
the helps of Invention, Wit, Art, to remove loathing of his Manna. If we had
none to hear us, but Cornelius or Lidia, or such sanctified ears, a mere
affirmation, were a sufficient confirmation. But our Auditors are like the
Belgicke armies, (that consist of French, English, Scotch, German, Spanish,
Italian, etc.) so many hearers, so many humors: the same diversity of men and
minds. That as guests at a strange dish; every man has a relish by himself:
that all our helps can scarce help one soul to heaven. But of all kinds,
there is none that creepes with better insinuation, or leaves behind it a
deeper impression in the Conscience, then a fit comparison. This extorted from
David, what would hardly have been granted: that as David slew Goliath with his
own sword; so Nathan slew David's sin with his own word. Judge. 9.8.
Iotham convinced the Shechemites folly in their approved reign of Abimelech
over them, by the tale of the Bramble. Even temporal occasions are often the
Mines, to dig out spiritual instructions. The people flock to Christ for
his bread: Ioh. 6.27.
Christ preaches to them another bread; whereof he that eats, shall never
dye. Ioh. 4.
The Samaritane woman speaks to him of Jacobs Well: he tells her of Jesus
Well: whose bottom or foundation was in Heaven; whose mouth and spring
downwards to the earth: cross to all earthly fountains: containing waters of
life; to be drawn and carried away in the Buckets of faith. She thought it a
new Well; she found it a true Well: whereof drinking, her souls thirst was for
ever satisfied. The Creeple begges for an Alms, the Apostle has no money: but
answers his small request, with a great bequest, health in the name of Jesus.
Acts. 3.6.
Nihil additur marsupio, multum saluti. His Purse is nothing the fuller, his
body is much the happier. This course, you see, both Christ and his Apostles
gave us in practice and precept.

In practice. Luke 11.27.
When the woman blessed the womb that bare Christ, and the pappes which gau^
him suck: he deriue^ hence occasion to bless them, which conceive him in
their faith, and receive him in their obedience. Blessed are they that hear
the word of God and keep it. Even as Mary her self was rather blessed,
percipiendo fidem, quam concipiendo carnem Christi; in receiving the faith,
then conceauing the flesh of Christ. So the news of his kindred in the flesh
standing at the door, taught him to teach, who are his true kindred in the
Spirit.

In precept to his Apostles. If they will not receive and believe you, Wipe off
the dust of their City, Luke 10.11.
that cleaves to your feet, against them. If they will not be moved with your
words, amaze them with your wonders: Matthew. 10.8.
Heal the sick, cleanse the leapers, raise the dead, cast out Devils. We
cannot now work miracles, yet we can speak of miracles. Even we must also, as
obey his Documents, so observe his doings: and follow him in due measure, both
in his words and works, though (non passibus aequis) not with equal steps. Our
imitation must be with limitation; aptly d^stinguishing, what we must only
admire in our minds, what admit in our manners.

Use.
2. To all Christians; that we climb up by the stairs of these inferior
creatures, to contemplate the glorious power of the Creator. A good Christian,
that like the Be, works honey from every flower, suffers no action,
demonstration, event, to slip by him without a question. All Objects to a
meditating Solomon, are like wings to rear and mount up his thoughts to
Heaven. As the old Rom^nes, when they saw the blew stones, thought of Olympus;
so let every Object, though low in it self, eleuate our minds to Mount Syon.
A mean scaffold may serve to raise up a goodly building. Courtiers
weather-driuen into a poor Cottage, (etiam, in caula, de Aula loquuntur)
gather hence opportunity to praise the Court. We may no less (even ex hara,
Ioh. 14.2.
de ara dicendi ansam sumere) from our Tabernacles on earth be induced to
praise our standing house in Heaven. So, as the Philosopher aimed at the pitch
and stature of Hercules, by viewing the length of the print of his foot: We
may by the base and dwarfi^h pleasures on our earth, guess at the high and
noble joys in Heaven. How can we cast up our eyes to that they were made to
behold, and not suffer our minds to transcend it; passing through the lower
Heaven, which God made for Fowls, Vapors, Meteors, to the Firmament wherein
he fixed his Stars, and thence meditating of the Empyreall Heaven, which he
created for himself, his Angels, his Saints: a place no less glorious above
the visible, then the visible is above the earth. Read in every Star, and let
the Moon be your Candle to do it, the provident disposition of God, the
eternity of your afterlife.

But if earth be at once nearer to your standing and understanding; and like
dissembling Lovers, that (to avoid suspicion) divert their eyes from that
cheek, whereon they have fixed their hearts; so you loooke one way, and love
another; Heaven having your countenance, Earth your confidence: then for Earth;
read this instruction in all things, the destruction of all things. For if the
ra^ified and azure body of this lower Heaven shall be folded up like a Scrole
of Parchment; then much more this drossie, feculent, and sedimentall Earth
shall be burnt.

Vret cum terris, vret cum gurgite ponti.
Communis mundo superest rogus, etc.
The Heavens shall pass away with a ^oyse, 2 Pet. 3.10.
and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also and the works
that are therein shall be burnt up. At least quoad ^iguram, though not quoad
naturam. The form shall be changed, though not the nature abollished. Every
creature on earth may teach us the fallibillitie of it. It is an Hieroglyphicke
of vanity and mutabillitie. There is nothing on it, that is of it, that is not
rather vitiall, then vital. In all the corrupted parts of this decrepit and
doting world, men's best lesson of morallitie, is a lesson of mortality. As it
was once said. Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas: so now better; Foelix
qui poterit rerum cognoscere casus. It is good to know the casual beginnings
of things* it is better to know their casual ends. It is good to be a natural
Philosopher, but better to be a supernatural, a Christian Philosopher. That
whiles we intentiuely observe the creature, we may attentively serve the
Creator.

That which is said of pregnant wits, is more true of Christian hearts, that
they can make use of any thing. As Travelers in foreign Countries, make every
slight object a lesson: so let us thrive in grace by every (presented) work of
Nature. As the eye must see, and the foot walk, and the hand work, so the
heart must consider. What? Gods doings: which are marvelous in our
(understandings) eyes. Psalm. 118.23.
God looked upon his own works, saw they were good, and delighted in them:
sure it is his pleasure also, that we should look upon them* to admire his
wisdom, power, providence, mercy, appearing both in their nature and their
disposition. The least of Gods works is worthy the observation of the greatest
Angel. Now what Trewants are we, that having so many Tutours reading to us,
learn nothing of them. The Heathen were condemned, for not learning the
invisible things of God, Romans 1.20.
from his visible works. For shall we still plod on the great volume of Gods
works, and never learn to spell one word, of use, of instruction, of comfort
to our selves? Can we behold nothing through the Spectacles of contemplation?
Or shall we be ever reading the great Book of Nature, and never translate it
to the Book of Grace? The Saints did thus. So have I read, that worthy Esaias
sitting among other Divines, and hearing a sweet consort of Music, as if his
soul had been borne up to Heaven, took occasion to think and speak thus;
What Music may we think there is in Heaven? A friend of mine viewing
attentively the great pomp and state of the Court, on a solemn day, spoke not
without some admiration: What shall we think of the glory in the Court of God?
Happy object, and well observed, that betters the soul in grace. But I have
been prolixe in this point; let the brevity of the next succor it.

2. Physic and Divinity are Professions of a near affinity: both intending
the cure and recovery, Obseru.
one of our bodies, the other and better of our souls. Not that I would have
them conjoined in one person: (as one spoke merrily of him, that was both a
Physician and a Minister: that whom he took money to kill by his Physic, he
had also money again to bury by his Priesthood.) Neither, if God has powered
both these gifts into one man, do I censure their Union, or persuade their
separation. Only let the Hound, that runs after two Hares at once, take
heed least he catch neither. Ad duo qui tendit, non vnum nec duo prendit.
Romans 12.
And let him that is called into Gods Vineyard, hoc agere, attend on his
office. And beware, least to keep his Parish on sound legs, he let them
walk with sickly consciences. Whiles Gal^^ and Auicen take the wall of Paul
and Peter. I do not here tax, but rather praise the works of mercy in those
Ministers, that give all possible com^orts to the distressed bodies of their
brethren.

Let the professions be heterogen^a, different in their kinds; only
respondentia, semblable in their proceedings. The Lord Eceles. 38.1.
created the Physician, so has he Ephesians* 4.11.
ordained the Minister. The Lord has put into him the knowledge of Nature,
into this the knowledge of grace. All knowledge is derived from the Fountain
of Gods wisdom. The Lord Eccles. 38.4.
has created Medicines out of the earth. The Lord has 2 Pet. 1.21.
inspired his holy word from heaven. The good Physician acts the part of the
Divine. Eccles. 38.14.
They shall pray unto the Lord, that he would prosper that which they give, for
ease and remedy to prolong life. The good Minister, after a sort is a
Physician. Only it is enough for the Son of God to give both natural and
spiritual Physic. But as Plato spoke of Philosophy, that it couets the
imitation of God, within the limits of possibillitie and sobriety: so we may
say of Physic, it is conterminate to Divinity; so far as a Handmaid may
follow her Mistress. The Institutions of both preserve the constitutions of
men. The one would prevent the obstructions of our bodies, the other the
destructions of our souls. Both purge our feculent corruptions: both would
restore us to our primarie and original health: though by reason of our
impotencie and indisposition, neither is able. Both oppose themselves against
our death, either our corporal or spiritual perishing.

When the spirit of God moved on the waters, and from that indigested and
confused mixture; did by a kind of Alchimicall extraction, separation,
sublimation, conjunction, put all things into a sweet consort, and harmonious
beauty, he did act a Physicians part. God is in many places a Physician.
Exodus 15. I am the Lord that heals thee. Exodus 15.26. Deuteronomy. 32, 39. Ier.
17.14.
Deuteronomy. 32. I kill, I make alive: I wound, and I heal. Ier. 17. Heal me, O
Lord, and I shall be healed: save me, and I shall be saved. Sometimes he is as
a Surgion, to bind up the sores of the brokenhearted; and to stanch the
bleeding wounds of the Conscience. Nay, David entreats him to put his bones in
course again. So Christ has sent his Ministers, Ephesians. 4.12.16.
(...), ad coagmentationem, as Beza reads it, to put in joint the luxate
members of the Church; that are compacted by joints. And in the period or full
stop of time, God will minister to the world the physic of Fire, to purge
the sick body of it; as he^ once gave it a Potion of Water to cleanse it.

Quas olim intulerant terris contagia sordes, Beza.

vos olim vltrices ablueratis aquae.
At nunc, cum terras, cum totas aequoris vndas
polluerit manus, quam fuit ante, scelus:
Quia superest, caelo nisi missus vt ignis ab alto,
Ipsas cum terris deuoret vlter aquas?
Once in Gods sight the World so filthy stood,
That he did wash and soake it in a flood.
But now, it is grown so foul and full of mire,
Nothing remains to purge it but a fire.
Which Strabus, writing on the worlds destruction by fire, would seem to
gather from those two colors in the Rainebow, caeruleo et igno, blew and red.
The first cataclysme of water is past, the second deluge of fire is to come. So
says the Apostle. The heavens being on fire shall be dissolved; 2 Pet. 3.12.
the Elements shall melt with fervent heat: Nouam qualitatem induent manente
substantia: All earthly things shall wax old and dye. Calvin in loc. praeced.
Mors etiam saxis nominibusque venit; but the substance shall remain. It is
but the fashion of this world that passes away: (...), figura, non natura.
When all the putrified f^ces, drossie and combustible matter shall be refined
in the fire, all things shall be reduced to a christaline clearenesse. Thus
(though the heathen profanely made the Physician a God, yet) the Christian may
say truly, Our God is become our Physician. And his Ministers are his deputies
under him, bringing in their lips the saving Medicines, that God has given
them.

You see the willing similitude of these professions. Indeed the Physician
cannot so aptly and ably challenge or make bold with the Ministers office, as
the Minister may with his. The Clergie-man may minister medicines: the
Physician may not administer the Sacraments. It is true thus far. Every
Christian is a Priest, to offer up prayers for himself and the whole Church;
although not publicly and ministerially: and none but a Cain will deny
himself to be his Brothers keeper. Though exhortation be the Ministers duty,
Heb. 3.13.
yet exhort one another daily. And if we serve one another in love, we must
carry, every one, a converting Ministry, though God alone have the converting
power. Ezekiel. 18.32.
Turn one another and live. Now as this converting work, is a conuertible
work, I mean, reciprocal and mutual from one to another, the Physician may
apportion to himself a great share in it. Who may better speak to the soul,
then he that is trusted with the body? or when can the stamp of grace take so
easy impression in man's heart, as when the heat of Gods affliction has melted
it? What breast is vnvulnerable to the strokes of death? The miserable carkase
has then or never, a penetrable conscience.

This conscience is so deafed in the days of our iollitie, with the loud noise
of Music, Oaths, Carowsings, Clamours, Quarrels, Sports, that it cannot
hear the Prophets cry, All flesh is grass. When sickness has thrown him on
the bed of anguish, and made his stomach too queasie for quaffes, too fine and
dainty for even Iunkets; naked him of his silks, paled his cheeks, sunk his
eyes, chilled his blood, and stunted all his vigorous spirits; the Physician is
sent for, and must scarce be let out, when the Minister may not be let in. His
presence is too dull, and full of melancholy; no messenger shall come for him,
till his coming be too late. How justly then should the Physician be a Divine,
when the Divine may not be a Physician? How well may he mingle Recip^ and
Resipisce, penitential exhortations, with his medicinal applications, and
praescripts.

Thus, memorable and worthy to be our precedent, was that Italian Physicians
course: that when dissol^te Ludouicus lay desolate in his sickness, and
desired his help; he answered him in his own tune: If you shall live, you
shall live, though no Physic be given you: If you shall dye, you shall dye;
Physic cannot help you. According to the sick man's libertine and heretical
opinion concerning Praedestination. If I shall be saved, I shall be saved,
howsoever I love or live. If I shall be damned, I shall be damned, howsoever I
do or dye. The Physicians answer gave him demonstratiue conviction, taught
him the use of means, as well for his souls as bodies health, and so cured
recanting Ludouicus of both his diseases at once. A godly practice, worthy our
Physicians imitation.

But, with us, Grace waits at the heels of Nature; and they diue so deep
into the secrets of Philosophy, that they never look up to the mysteries of
Divinity. As some Mathematicians deal so much in Jacobs Staff, that they
forget Jacobs Ladder: so some Physicians (God decrease the number) are so deep
Naturalists, that they are very shallow Christians. The best cure depends upon
Gods care. It is poor and eneruate help, to which Gods blessing has not added
strength. If God does not hear the heavens for virtue, and heaven hear the
earth for influence, Hos. 2.11.
and earth the Physician for ingredients, all their receipts are but deceits,
and the paper of their Bills will do as much good as the praescripts in it.
Simples are but simple things, and all compounds idle, when they want the
(best) ingredient of Gods blessing. Let Plato then, hold the candle to Moses,
and all Physicians drink at the well of the sons of the Prophets. As their
purpose aims at our healths, so let them entreat God to level their hands:
their direction and success stands in the name of the Lord of Hosts.

Obseru. 3.
The form of the words is Interrogatorie. Is there no Balm at Giliad? are
there no Physicians there? It is most true: Balm is not scarce, nor are the
Physicians few, yet Israel is sick. God does convince that by a question,
which might be without question affirmed, but would not be (without question)
granted. The best insinuation or piercing assertion is ex interrogando, by way
of question; not only for explication, but for application of truth. God does
as it were appeal to man's conscience; and fetch evidence from the impartial
testimony of his heart. That here, what is true in Gods reprehension, may
appear true in man's apprehension. The first word that ever God spoke to man
after his fall, was a question. ADAM, vbi es? where art thou? Genesis 3 9.
He continues the same (formam loquendi, normam arguendi) form and method of
speech. Who told thee that thou was naked? Verse 11.
Have thou eaten of the Tree, Verse 13.
whereof? etc. And to the woman. What is this that thou have done? Before man
fell to sin, God fell not to questioning. All his speeches were to him,
either commendatory or commandatory: approbationis non exprobationis verba;
words of approuall, not of exception. He creates, orders, blesses man, and
all things to him: but when man fell to sliding, God fell to chiding. Because
man turned his heart to another object, God turned his voice to another accent.

Gods questions are not of the nature of man's, the effects and helps of
dubitation: according to the saying (...): Doubting is the Mother of
questioning. He that doubts not, will not ask* no; Gods demands are not to
satisfy himself, but us: Illations upon our actions. That from the
proposition of our sins, and the assumption of his questions, we may conclude
against our selves; as David, I have sinned. Neither can we give sollution to
his interrogatories. Who dares, who can answer God? Job. 9.2.14.
he is not as a man, says Job, that I should answer him. The intent is then,
to justify himself; to put into our conscience, a sense, a Science of our
own iniquities. God so apposed Jonas: Do thou well to be angry? And again;
Do thou well to be angry for a Gourd? Art thou discontent for so
contemptible a thing, a poor vegetative creature; and do thou grudge my
mercy to so many rational creatures, brethren of thine own flesh? Gods
question was a manifest conviction, as strong as a thousand proofs. Jonas sees
his face in this little Spring, as if he had stood by a full River.

Christ, that had the best method of teaching, and could make hearts of flint
penetrable, moved his Disciples minds, removed his adversaries doubts,
frequently by questions. He starts Peter, that was (numinis Dei, et nominis sui
immemor) forgetful of his God, of himself, with a quid, dormis? what,
sleep thou? He rectified the mistaking judgments of his Apostles, that
turned his spiritual dehortation from the Pharisees leaven, to the litterall
sense of forgotten bread; with a double demand. Obliti ne estis? etc. Matthew.
16.9.10
Do ye not yet understand, nor remember the five loaves of the five thousand?
etc. Could so miraculous a Banquet, as quickly slip from your minds, as it did
from your mouths? So he informed their understandings concerning himself,
which so much concerned them to know; Whom do men say that I am? Ver. 13.
All which impli^d not his own ignorance, but impelled their knowledge. He
knew all the former questions so well as the latter; whereof he could no less
be ignorant, then of himself. Only he spoke in a catechizing form, as the
Ministers question succors the Nouices initiall understanding. His reproves
to his enemies were often clothed in these interrogatorie roabes. How say they
that Christ is David's Son? When David himself calls him Lord? Luke 20.41.
confuting that false opinion, that the Jews had of their Messiah, whose
temporal Monarchy they only gaped for. If he was, only to be the Son of
David in the flesh, how does he call him Lord, and equal him with the Father?
A question, that did enforce a conclusion, himself desired, and a confusion of
his enemies conceits. The like, ver. 4. He cramped their critical and
hypocritical exceptions with a question. The baptism of John, was it from
heaven, or of men? which confuted their arrogance, Ver. 4.
though they would have salued it with ignorance, ver. 7. We cannot tell. This
manner of discussing is not more usual with God, then effectual. It
conuerteth the Elect; it conuinceth the Reprobate. Wheresoever it is directed,
it pierces like a goad, and is a sharp stroke to the conscience: and howsoever
the smart is neglected, it leaves a print behind it.

If we take the words spoken in the Person of God, they manifest his complaint
against Israel. Obseru. 4.
When God complains, sin is grievous. We never read God breaking forth into
this compassionate form of speech, but Iniquity is grown proud of her
height. She nestles among the Cedars, and Towers like Babell: when he that can
thunder it down with fire, does (as it were) rain showers of complaint for
it. It argues no less goodness in the Father, then wickedness in the
Children, when he does plain, that can plague; and breath out the air of
pity, before he send the storm of Judgment. So you may see a long provoked
Father, that after many chidings lost to his deaf Son; after some gentle
chastisements inflicted, and intended to his calling home; he finds his
errors growing wilder, his affections madder, his heart more senseless, his
courses more sensual; he stands even deploring his wretchedness, that could
not amend his wickedness: and whiles Justice and Mercy strive for the
masterie, as loath that his lenity should wrong his Integrity, or yet that he
should be as an executioner to him, whom he had begotten to be an executour to
himself; he breaks out into complaint. With no less pity, nay, with far
greater mercy, does God proceed to execute his Judgments; unwilling to
strike home for his mercy; yet willing not to double his blow (but to lay it
on sure at once) for our sins, and his own Justice- Or as some compassionate
Judge, that must censure (by the law of his Country) an Heretic, strives
first with arguments of reason to convert him, that arguments of iron and
steel may not be used against him: and finding his refractarie disposition,
culpable of his own doom, by wilfully not being capable of good counsel,
proceeds not without plaints and tears to his sentence: So does the most just
God of Heaven, with the most unjust Sons of men; pleading by reasons of
gentle and gracious forbearance, and offering the sweet conditions of happy
peace, and (as it were) wailing our refusal, before he shoot his arrows and
consume us, or make his sword drunk with our bloods.

God has Armies of Stars in the sky, Meteors in the air, beasts on the
earth, yea of Angels in Heaven; greater Hoasts and less: and whither he sends
a great Army of his little ones, or a little of his great ones, he can easily
and quickly dispatch us: Lo, he stays till he has spoken with us; and that
rather by postulation, then expostulation. He is not contumelious against us,
that have been contumacious against him. If his words can work us to his will,
he will spare his blows. He has as little delight in smiting, as we in
suffering: nay, he suffers with us, condoling our estate, as if it were (which
cannot be) his own. For we have not an high Priest, Heb. 4.15:
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities. He feels the
griefs of his Church: the head ak^s, when the members suffer. Persecutors
strike Christ through Christians sides. Saul strikes at Damascus, Christ Jesus
suffers in Heaven. Mediately he is smitten, whiles the blows immediately light
on us. He could not in the days of his ^lesh, forbear bitter tears at
Ierusalems present sin and future judgment. How grievous is our iniquity,
how gracious his longanimity? He that weeps for our auersion passionately,
desires our conversion unfeignedly. How pathetically he persuades his Churches
reformation? Cant. 6.12.
Return, return, oh Shulamite, return, return: How lamentingly deplores he
Ierusalems deuastation? Luke 19.42*
If thou had known, at least in this thy day, the things that belong to thy
peace. Let us not think him like either of those Mimicks, the Player, or the
Hypocrite, (who truly act the part one of another, but hardly either of an
honest man) that can command tears in sport. When Christ laments the state
either of our sins or our selves, he shows that one is at the height of
rising, the other near casting down. Christ's double sigh over Jerusalem, is
(as I may say) fetched and derived from those double woes of her: Matthew. 23 37.
the unmeasurable sin, that killest the Prophets: the unavoidable Judgment,
thy house is left unto thee desolate. Ingentia benesicia, ingentia peccata,
ingentes poenae. Great benefits abused occasion great sins, and great sins
are the forerunners of great plagues. So that Sin is an ill conjunction
copulative, that unites two as contrary natures, as nature it self ever
produced, great mercy and great misery. God is pleased in giving the former,
but he sighs at the latter. Gaudet in misericordia sua, dolet in miseria
nostra. He rejoices in his own goodness, he greeueth at our wretchedness.

Horrid and to be trembled at are the sins, that bring heaviness into the
Courts of happiness; and send grieuance to the very thresholds of joy. That
whereas Angels and Cherubins, the celestial Choristers, make music before
the Throne of God, for the conversion of one sinner: (of one? what would they
do at the effectual success of such a Sermon, Luke 15.10.
as Peter preached.) They do (if I may speak) grieve and mourn at the
auersion of our souls, (so hopeful and likely to be brought to Heaven) and at
the aspiration of our climbing sins.

But it may be questioned, how God can be said to grieve, to complain, to be
sorrowful for us. True it is, that there is no passion in God. He that sits
in Heaven, has all pleasure and content in himself. What is here spoken, is
for our sakes spoken. He dwells in such brightness of glory, as never
mortal foot could approach unto: the sight of his face is to us on earth
insufferable: the knowledge of the invisible things in the Deity impossible.
Therefore to give some aim and conjecture to us, what he is, he appears (as
it were) transfigured into the likeness of our nature, and in our own
familiar terms speaks to our shallow understandings. Hominem alloquens
humano more loquitur. As an old man speaking to a Child, frames his voice in a
childish phrase. Before a great vessel that is full, can power liquour from it
self into a little empty Pot, that stands under it, it must stoop and decline
it self. Thus he descends to our capacities; and that man may know him in some
measure, he will be known as man. Sometimes by bodily members, Eyes, Ears,
Hands, Feet. Sometimes by spiritual affections, Anger, Sorrow, Jealousy,
Repentance. By which he signifies, not what he is indeed, but what is needful
for us to know of him. For being well acquainted with the use, office, and
effect of these natural things in our selves, we may the better guess at the
knowledge of that God, ^o whom we hear them ascribed by translation. All
which he has per siguram* non naturam. Angers effect in us is revenge.
Nothing pleases a furious man's nature, but wreaking himself on his prouoker.
The passion is Anger, the effect Revenge. Whiles God gives the second, we
ascribe to him the first; and call that in him Wrath, which properly is his
striking Justice.

Complaints are the witness of a grieved soul: both are sufferings. God is here
said to complain. Why? he is grieved at our sins. Can he be grieved indeed?
No nor need he complain, that has such power to right himself. Yet he is
often said to be grieved; Grieve not the Spirit of God, by whom you are sealed
up to the day of Redemption: Ephesians. 4.30.
And here to complain. To speak properly, God cannot complain because he
cannot be grieved: He cannot be grieved, because he cannot suffer. Every blow
of ours, though we were as strong and high as the sons of Anak lights short
of him. If some could have reached him, it had gone ill with him long ere this.
All is spoken per (...). He is sine ira irascens, sine poenit^ntia poenitens,
sine dolor dolens: angry without anger, grieuing without sorrow. These
passions are ascribed to him, quoad effectum, non quoad affectum: They are
perfections in him, what are affections in us. The complaint that once God made
against a whole world, as he does here against Israel, is expressed in more
patent and significant terms. It repented the Lord that he had made man on
the earth, Genesis 6.6.
and it grieved him at his heart. God so complains against man's sin, that
he is sorry that he made him. This, says Augustine, non est perturbatio, sed
iudicium, De ciuit. Dei. lib. 15. cap. 25.
quo irrogatur poena: It is no disturbance in God, but only his Judgment,
whereby he inflicts punishment. And further; Poenitudo Dei est mutandorum
immutabilis ratio: Gods repentance is his unchangeable disposition, in things
of a changeable condition. It is mutatio rei, non Dei: the change of the thing,
not of God. Cum ij quos curat mutantur, mutat ipse res, Just. Mar.
prout ijs expedit, quos curat: He wills an expedient alteration of things,
according to the alteration of them for whom he prouides. So God is said to
repent that he made Saul King, or that he threatened evil to Nineveh. In all
which he changed (non affectum, sed effectum) the external work, not his
internal counsel. For as the School speaks, immutabiliter ignoscit, he
unchangeably pardons whom he means to save, though they feel it not till
conversion: so immutabiliter non ignoscit, he unchangeably retains their
sins in his Iudgement-booke, which amend not, as Saul*

The nature of Repentance is Sorrow: the effect of repentance is the abrogation
of something determined, or undoing (if it be possible) of some thing done.
Repentance is not in God, in regard of the original nature of it; he cannot
sorrow: but is in respect of the euentuall fruit; when he destroys that world
of people, he had made. Not that his heart was grieved, but his hands: his
justice and power undid it. Aliud est mutare voluntatem, aliud velle
mutationem: It is one thing to change the will, another thing to will a change.
There may be a change in the matter and substance willed, though not in the
will that disposes it. Our will desires in the Summer a lighter and cooler
garment, in Winter a thicker and warmer: yet is not our will changed, whereby
we decree in our selves this change according to the season. Psalm 135.6.
Thus (Quicquid superi voluere, peractum) Whatsoever God would, that did he in
heaven and earth, in the sea and all deep places. God is (immutabilis naturae,
voluntatis, consilij.) Unchangeable in his nature, will, and decrees. Only
these are, verba nostrae paruitati accommodata, Chrysostom.
words fitted to our weak capacities.

Well; in the mean time they are grievous sins, that make our gracious God
thus seemingly passionate. There is great cause sure, if so patient and
forbearing a God, be angry, sorry, penitent, grieved, that he has made such
rebellious creatures. It is long before his wrath be incensed; but if it be
thoroughly kindled, all the Rivers in the South are not able to quench it. Daily
man sins, and yet God repents not, that he made him. Woe to that man, for
whose creation God is sorry. Woe to Jerusalem, when Christ shall so complain
against her. Stay the Bells, ye Sons of wickedness, that ring so loud peales
of tumultuous blasphemies in the ears of God? Turn again, ye wheeling
Planets, that move only as the sphere of this world turns your affections;
and despise the directed and direct motion of Gods Stars. Recall your selves,
ye lost wretches, and stray not too far from your Fathers house, that your
seekers come again with a non est inuentus: least God complains against you,
as here against Israel; or with as passionate a voice, as once against the
world; It repents me that I made them.

If we take the words spoken in the person of the Prophet, Obseru. 5.
let us observe, that he is no good Preacher, that complains not in these
sinful days. Esaias had not more cause for Israel, then we for England, to
cry, We have labored in vain, Esa. 49.
and spent our strength for naught. For if we equal Israel in Gods blessings,
we transcend them in our sins. The bloud-red Sea of war and slaughter,
wherein other Nations are drowned, as were the Egiptians, is become dry to our
feet of peace. The Bread of Heaven, that true Manna, satisfies our hunger, and
our thirst is quenched with the waters of life. The better Law of the Gospel
is given us; and our saving health is not like a curious piece of Arras folded
up, but spread to our believing eyes, without any shadow cast over the beauty
of it. We have a better high Priest, to make intercession for us in heaven, for
whom he has once sacrificed and satisfied on earth: (actu semel, virtute
semper: with one act, with everlasting virtue.) We want nothing, that heaven
can help us to, but that which we voluntarily will want, and without which
we had better have wanted all the rest, thankfulness and obedience. We
return God not one for a thousand, not a dram of service for so many talents
of goodness. We give God the worst of all things, that has given us the best
of all things. We cull out the least sheafe for his Tyth; the sleepiest hour
for his prayers: the chippings of our wealth for his poor: a corner of the
heart for his Arc, when Dagon sits uppermost in our Temple. He has bowels of
brass and an heart of iron, that cannot mourn at this our requital. We give
God measure for measure, but not manner for manner. For his blessings heapen,
and shaken, and thrust together, iniquities pressed down and yet running over.
Like Hogs we slauer his pearls, Quis talia fando, temperet a Lachrimis? etc.
turn his graces into wantonness, and turn again to rend in pieces the
bringers.

Who versing in his mind this thought, can keep his cheeks dry? Ier. 9.1.
Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep night and day, etc. No marvel, if animus meminisse horret. The good
soul tremble to think it: especially when all this wickedness arises (not
from Sodom, and Sidon, and Edom, but (from the midst of) the daughter of Sion.
Hinc illae Lachrimae. He that can see this and not sigh, is not a witness,
but an agent; and sin has obstructed his lungs, he cannot sorrow. Forbear
then, you captious sons of Belial, to complain against us, for complaining
against you. Whiles this Hydra of Iniquity puts forth her still-growing-heads,
and the sword of reproof cannot cut them off, what should we do but mourn?
Quid enim nisi threna supersunt? Whither can we turn our eyes, but we behold
and lament at once; some rouing with lewdness, some rauing with madness,
others reeling with ebrietie, and yet others railing with blasphemy. If we be
not sad, we must be guilty. Condemn not our passions, but your own
rebellions, that excite them. The zeal of our God, whom we serve in our
spirits, makes us with Moses to forget our selves. We also are men of like
passion with you. Acts. 14.15.
It is the common plea of us all: If you ask us, why we show our selves thus
weak and naked, we return with Paul: Why do you these things? Our God has
charged us, not to see the funerals of your souls, without sighs and tears.
Thus says the Lord: Ezekiel. 6.11.
Smite with thy hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas, for all the
evil abominations of the house of Israel: for they shall fall by the sword,
by the famine, and by the pestilence.

Shall all complain of lost labors, and we brook the greatest loss with
silence? Merchants wail the shipwreck of their goods, and complain of
Pirates. Shepherds of their devoured Flocks by savage Wolves. Husbandmen of
the tired earth, that quites their hope with weeds. And shall Ministers see
and not sorrow the greatest ruin (the loss of the world were less) of men's
souls. They that have written, to the life, the downfall of famous Cities,
either vastate by the immediate hand of God, as Sodom; or mediately by man, as
Jerusalem: as if they had written with tears in stead of Ink, have
pathetically lamented the ruins. Aeneas Syluius reporting the fall of
Constantinople, historifies at once her passion, his own compassion for it.
The murdering of Children before the Parents faces, the slaughtering of Nobles
like beasts, the Priests torn in pieces, the Religious flayed, the holy
Virgins and sober Matrones first ravished and then massacred; and even the
Relics of the Soldiers spoil, given to the merciless fire. Oh miseram
vrbis faciem! Oh wretched show of a miserable City! Consider Jerusalem, the
City of God, the Queen of the Provinces, tell her Turrets, and mark well her
Bulwarks, carry in your mind the Idaea of her glories: and then, on a
sudden, behold her Temple and houses burning, the smoke of the fire wauing in
the air, and hiding the light of the Sun, the flames springing up to Heaven,
as if they would ascend as high as their sins had erst done; her Old, Young,
Matrons, Virgins, Mothers, Infants, Princes, and Priests, Prophets and
Nazarites, famished, fettered, scattered, consumed: if ever you read or hear
it without commisseration, your hearts are harder then the Romans that
destroyed it. The ruin of great things wring out our pity; and it is only a
Nero, that can sit and sing whiles Rome burns. But what are a world of Cities,
nay the whole world it self burning, as it must one day, to the loss of men's
souls, the rarest pieces, of Gods fabric on earth? to see them manacled with
the chains of Iniquity, and led up and down by the Devil, as Baiazeth by
that cruel Scithian, stabbed and massacred, lost and ruined by rebellious
obstinacies and impenitencies; bleeding to death like Babell, and will not be
cured, till past cure they weep like Rahell, and will not be comforted: to see
this and not pity it, is impossible for any but a Faulx, but a Devil.

1. To make some further use hereof to our selves; Let us avoid sin, Use.
as much as we may. And, though we cannot stay our selves from going in, let us
stay our selves from going on: least our God complain against us. If we make
him sorrowful for a time, he can make us sorrowful for ever. If we anger
him, he can anger all the veins of our hearts. If in stead of serving GOD by
our obedience, we make him Esa. 43.24.
serve with our sins, he will make us serve with his plagues. If we drive
God to call a Convocation of heaven and earth: Esa 1.2.
Hear oh heaven, harken oh earth: I have nourished children, and they have
rebelled against me: If he call on the Mic 6.2.
mountains to hear his controversy, he will make us Reu. 6.16.
call on the mountains to help and hide our misery. And they said to the
mountains and rocks, Fall on us, etc. If we put God to his querelam, Hos. 4.1.
controversy, and make him a Plaintiff, to enter his suit against us; he will
put us to a complaint indeed. Ver. 3.
Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwells therein, shall
languish. He will force us to repent the time and deeds, that ever made him to
Genesis 6.7.
repent, that he made us. He will strike us with such a blow, that there
needs no doubling of it. Nahum 1.9.
He will make an utter end; destruction shall not rise up the second time. As
Abishai would have stricken Saul 1 Samuel 26.8.
, at once, and I will not smite him the second time.

We cannot so wrong God, that he is deprived of power to right himself. His
first complaint is (as I may say) in tears; his second in blood. I have read
of Tamberlaine, that the first day of his siege was honored with his white
Colors, the second with fatal red, but the third with final black. God is
not so quick and speedy in punishment; nor come his judgments with such
precipitation. Nineveh after so many forties of years, shall have yet forty
days. He that at last came, with his Fan in his hand, and fanned but eight
grains of good corn, out of a whole Barne-full of Chafe, a whole world of
people; gave them the space of one hundred and twenty years repentance. If
Jerusalem will not hear Christ's words, they shall feel his wounds. They that
are deaf to his voice, shall not be insensible to his hands. He that may not
be heard, will be felt.

2. If God complains against sin, Use.
let us not make our selves merry with it. The mad humors, idle speeches,
outrageous oaths of drunken Athiests, are but ill mirth for a Christian
spirit. Wickedness in others abroad, should not be our Tabret to play upon at
home. It is a wretched thing to laugh at that, which feasts Satan with mirth,
laughing both at our sins, and at us for our sins. Rather lament. Make
little weeping for the dead, for he is at rest: Eccles. 22.11.
but the life of the fool is worse then death. Weep for that. When Israel
now in Moses absence had turned beast, and Calued an Idolatrous Image; Moses
did not dance after their Pipe, and laugh at their superstitious merriment with
Tabrets and Harpes; but mourned to the Lord for them, and pleaded as hard for
their sparing, as he would have done for himself; nay more, Ezekiel. 9.
Spare thy own people, though thou race my name out of the Book of Life. They
are only marked for Gods, with his own privy Seal, that mourned for the
abominations of Israel: and their mournings were earnest, as the waylings of
Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo.

Where are you, ye Sons of the Highest, ye Magistrates, put in power not
only to lament our sins, but to take away the cause of our lamenting; cease
to beak your selves, like Iehoiakim, before the fire of ease and rest: rend
your clothes with Josiah, and wrap your selves in sackcloath, like Niniueh's
King, as a corpse laid out for burial. Do not, Foelix-like, grope for a bribe
at criminal offenses: sell not your conniuence (and withal your conscience)
where you should give your punishment. Let not gold weigh heavier then Naboths
wrongs in the scoles of Justice. Weep ye Ministers, between the Porch and the
Altar. Lament your own sins, ye Inhabitants of the world. England, be not
behind other Nations in mourning, that art not short of them in offending.
Religion is made but Policies stirrup, to get up and ride on the back of
pleasure. Nimrod and Achitophell lay their heads and hands together; and whiles
the one forrageth the Park of the Church, the other pleads it from his Book,
with a Statutum est. The Gibeonites are suffered in our Camp, though we never
clapped them the hand of covenant; and are not set to draw water and choppe
wood, do us any service, except to cut our throats. The Receate (I ^ad almost
said the Deceate) of Custom s^ands open, making the Laws tolleration a
warrant: that many now sell their Lands, and live on the use of their Monyes?
which none would do, if Usury was not an easier, securer and more gainefull
Trade.

How should this make us mourn like Doves, and groan like Turtles? The wild
Swallows, our unbridled Youngsters sing in the warm Chimneyes: the lustful
Sparrowes, noctiuagant Adulterers, sit ch^rping about our houses: the filching
Iayes, secret thieves, rob our Orchards: the Kite and the Cormorant, devour
and hoord our fruits: and shall not among all these, the voice of the Turtle be
heard in our Land, mourning for these sinful rapines? H^s. 4.11.
Have whoredom and wine so taken away our hearts, and hidden them in a maze of
vanities, that repentance cannot find them out? Can these enormities pass
without our tears? Good men have not spent all their time at home, in mourning
for their own sins; sometimes they have judged it their work to lament,
what was others work to do. That Kingly Prophet, that wept so Psalm. 6.6.
plentifully for his own offenses, had yet Psalm. 119.136
floods of tears left, to bewail his peoples. Jeremy did not only Ier. 13.17.
weep in secret, for Isreal's pride, but wrote a whole Book of Lamentations:
and was not less exact in his method of mourning, then others have been in
their Songs of joy. It was Gods behest to Ezekiell, Ezekiel. 21.6.
Sigh thou Son of man with the breaking of thy loins, and with bitterness
sigh before their eyes. He mourned not alone at Isreal's w^e. She had a solemn
Funeral, and every Prophet sighed for her. Esa. 22.4.
Look away from me, says Esaias; I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort
me; because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people: Ier. 4.19.
I am payned at my very heart, says Jeremy, because thou have heard, oh my
soul, the sound of the Trumpet, the Alarm of war. Our sins are more, why
should our sorrows be less?

Who sees not, and says not, that Ephesians. 5.16.
the days are evil! There is one laying secret Mines to blow up another, that
himself may succeed: there is another buying uncertain hopes with ready
money: there is another rising hardly to eminence of place, and menaging it as
madly. There goes a fourth poring on the ground, as if he had lost his soul
in a Muck-heape, and must scrape for it: yet I think, he would hardly take so
much pains for his soul, as he does for his gold, were it there to be found
and saved. He that comes to this Market of Vanity, but as a looker on, cannot
lack trouble. Every evil we see, does either vex us, or infect us. The sight
and inevitable society of evils, is not more a pleasure to the Sodomites, then
a vexation to the righteous soul of Lot. One breaks jests upon Heaven, and
makes himself merry with God. Another knows no more Scripture, then he
applies to the Theater; and does as readily and desperately play with Gods
word, as with the Poets. You cannot walk the street, but you shall meet with
a quarrelling Dog, or a drunken Hog, or a blaspheming Devil. One speaks
villainy, another swears it, a third defends it, and all the rest laugh at it.
That we may take cresset-light, and search with Jeremy, the str^etes and
broad places of our Country, and not find a man, Ier. 5.1.
or at least not a man of truth. Who can say, it can be worse? Cease
complaints, and fall to amendment. Ye Deputies of Moses, and Sons of Leui,
sharpen both your swords. Consecrate and courage your hands and voices to the
vastation of Iericho-walls. Be not unmerciful to your Country, whiles you are
ouer-mercifull to offenders. An easy cost repaires the beginning ruins of a
house: when it is once dropped down, with danger about our ears, it is hardly
reedified. Seasonable castigation may work reasonable reforming. The rents and
breaches of our Syon are manifold, and manifest. Repair them by the word of
Mercy, and sword of Justice. If Ierusalems roof be cast down, as low as her
pauement, who shall build her up? It is yet time, (and not more then) enough.
If you cannot turn the violent stream of our wickedness, yet swim against
it your selves; and provoke others; by your precepts, by your patterns. The
success to God.

3. The all-wise GOD complains. Use.
He does no more, what could he do less? He does not bitterly inueigh, but
passionately mourn for us. He speaks not with gall, but as it were with
tears. There is sweet mercy even in his chidings. He teaches us a happy
composure of our reprehensions. We are of too violent a spirit, if at least we
know what spirit we are of, when nothing can content us, but fire from Heaven.
He that holds the fires of Heaven in his commanding hand, and can power them
in floods on rebellious Sodom, holds back his arm, and does but gently
loosen his voice to his people. I know, there is a time, when the still voice,
that came to Elias, or the whisperings of that voice behind, this is the way,
walk in it, can do little good: Esa. 30.21.
and then God is content we should derive from his Throne, Reu. 4.5.
Thundrings and Lightnings, and louder sounds. The Hammer of the Law must
eft-soones break the stony heart of rebellion: and often the sweet Balm of
the Gospel must supple the broken conscience. Let us not transpose or inuert
the method and direction of our Office; killing the dying with the killing
letter, and preaching Judgment without mercy, least we reap Judgment
without mercy to our selves. Some men's hearts are like Nettles; if you touch
them (but) gently, they will sting: but rough-handling is without prejudice:
whiles others are like Briars, that wound the hard grasping-hand of reproof,
but yield willingly to them, that softly touch them with exhortation. One must
be washed with gentle Bathes, whiles another must have his ulcers cut with
Launcers. Only do all, medentis animo, non s^nientis, not with an Oblique and
sinister purpose, but with a direct intention to save. An odious, tedious,
endless inculcation of things, does often tire those with whom a soft and
short reproof would find good impression. Such, while^ they would in intent
edify, do in event tedifie. Indeed there is no true zeal, without some
spice of anger: only subsit iracundia, non praesit; give thy anger due place,
Greg.
that it may follow as a servant, not go before as a Master.

It is objected, that the thoughts of God are peace. He that is covered with
Thunder, and clothed with Lightning, speaks, and the Earth trembles, touches
the Mountains, Psalm. 18.
and they smoke for it; sharpens not his tongue like a Rasor, but speaks by
mournful complaint. What then mean our Preachers, to lift up their voices as
Trumpets, and to speak in the tune of Thunder against us? We cannot wear a
garment in the fashion, nor take use for our Money, nor drink with a good
fellow, nor strengthen our words with the credit of an Oath; but bitter
inuectiues must be shot, like Porcupines Quils, at these slight scapes. I
answer^, God knows when to chide, and when to mourn; when to say, Get thee
behind me Satan, as to Peter, Matthew 16.23. Ion. 4.4.
and when coolely to tax Jonas, do thou well to be angry? But he that here
mournes for Israel degenerate, does at another time protest against Israel
Apostate; and swears, they shall never enter into his rest. We would feign do
so to, Psalm. 95.
I mean, speak nothing but grace and peace to you: but if ever we be Thorns,
it is because we live amongst Briars: if we lift up our voices, it is because
your hearts are so sleepy, that you would not else hear us.

4. God did thus complain against Israel: where are his complaints, you will
say, against us? Sure, our sins are not grown to so proud a height* as to
threaten Heaven, and provoke GOD to quarrel. Oh ill-grounded flattery of our
selves: an imagination that adds to the measure of our sins. Whiles we
conceive our wickedness less, even this conceit makes it somewhat more. If
we say, that we have no sin, 1 Ioh. 1.8.
there is no truth in us. Nothing makes our guilt more palpable, then the
pleading our selves not culpable. Every drop of this presumptuous Holy Water,
sprinkled on us, brings now aspersions of filthiness. It is nothing else, but
to vvash our spots in mudde. Yet speak freely. Does not God complain?
Examine. 1. The words of his mouth. 2. The works of his hand.

1. The voice of his Ministers is his voice. He that hears you, hears me.
Do not the Ieremies of these days mourn like Turtles, as well as sing like
Larkes? Do they not mingle with the tunes of Joy, the tones of Sorrow? When
did they rejoice ever without trembling? Psalm. 2.11.
Or lead you so currantly to dance in Gods Sunshine, that they forgot to
speak of his Thunder? It is good to be merry and wise. What Sermon ever so
flattered you with the fair weather of Gods mercies, that it told you not with
all, when the wind and the Sun meets there would be rain; when Gods
Sun-like Justice, and our raging and boisterous iniquities shall come in
opposition, the storm of Judgment will ensue. Nay, have not your iniquities
made the Pulpit (the Gospels mercy-seat) a Tribunal of Judgment?

2. Will not these mournings, menaces, querulations, stir your hearts;
because they are derived from GOD, through us (his Organ-pipes) as if they had
lost their vigor by the way? Then open your eyes, you that have dea^'d your
ears, and see him actually complaining against us. Observe at least, if not
the thunders of his voice, yet the wonders of his hand. I could easily loose
my self in this Commonplace of Judgments. I will therefore limit my speech
to narrow bounds; and only call that to our memories, the print whereof
sticks in our sides: God having taught Nature, even by her good to hurt, (as
some wash gold to deprave the weight of it) even to drayne away our fruits by
floods. But alas, we say of these strokes, as the Philosopher in one sense, and
Solomon's Drunkard in another, non memini me percussum, we remember not that
we were stricken: or as the Prophet, of the Jews. Thou have smitten them, but
they have not grieved: thou have consumed them, but they have refused to
receive correction: Ier. 5.3.
even whiles their wounds were yet raw, and their ruins not made up. Many are
like the Stoickes in Equuleo; though the punishment lie on their flesh, it
shall not come near their heart. God would school our heauie-spirited and
coldly devoted worldlings, Haba. 1.16.
that sacri^ice to their Nets, attribute all their thriuing to their own
industry: and never enter that thought on the point of their hearts, how they
are beholding to God* Here, alas, we find, that we are beholding to the Corn
and other fruits of the earth, Hos. 2.21.
they to the ground, the ground to the influences of Heaven, all to God.

When man has done all in plowing, tilling, sowing; if either the clouds of
Heaven deny their rain, or give too much, how soon is all lost? The
Husbandman, that was wont to wait for the early and latter showers, Iam. 5.7.
now casts up trembling eyes to the clouds for a ne noceant. For, your Barnes
full of weeds, rather then grain, This wet Sum^mer. Ann. 1613.
testify, that this blow did not only spoil the glory and benefit of your
Meadows, but even by rebound your Corne-fields also. Be not Athiests, look
higher then the clouds: It was no less, then the angry hand of God. Thus can
God every way punish us. It was for a time the speech of all tongues, amazement
of all eyes, wonder of all hearts, to see the showers of wrath so fast pouring
on us; as if the course of nature were inuerted, our Summer coming out in the
robes of Winter. But as a Father writes of such a year: Chris.
Our devotions begun and ended with the shower. Nocte pluit tota, redeunt
spectacula mane. Virg.
It raines, and we lament. But the Sun did not sooner break out through the
clouds, then we broke out into our former licentiousnes. We were humbled, but
not humble: dressed of God, not cured. Though God withold plenty, we
withold not gluttony. Pride leaves off none of her vanities. Usury bates not
a cross of his Interest. The ^ioter is still as drunken with Wine, as the
earth was with Water. And the Covetous had still rather eat up the poor as
bread, then they should eat of his bread: keeping his barnes full, though
their mawes be empty: as if he would not let the vermin fast, though the
poor starve. No marvel, if heaven it self turns into languishment for
these impieties.

Dic, rogo, cur toties descendit ab aethere nimbus,
Grandoque de coelis sic sine fine cadit?
Mortales quoniam nolunt sua crimina fl^re,
Coelum pro nobis soluitur in lachrym^s.
What mean those aerie spowtes and spungy clouds
To spill themselves on earth with frequent floods?
Because man swelling sins and dry eyes bears,
They weep for us, and rain down showers of tears.
God has done, for his part, enough for Israel. Obseru. 6.
He has stored their Vials with Balm, their Cities wiih Physicians. It was
then their own fault, that their health was not recovered. Hos. 13.9.
Oh Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help. Let even
the inhabitants of Jerusalem and Judah themselves be vmpires, And what could I
have done more to my Vineyard, Esa. 5.4. and Math. 21.33.
that I have not done in it? God is not sparing in the commemoration of his
mercies to us: as knowing, that of all the faculties of the Soul, the memory
first waxes old; and of all objects of the memory, a benefit is soonest
forgotten. We write man's injuries to us in Marble, but Gods mercies in dust or
waters. We had need of remembrances. God has done so much for us, that he
may say to us, Hos. 6.4.
as once to Ephraim. Oh Ephraim, what shall I do (more) unto thee? What could
Israel want, which God supplied not? If they want a guide, God goes before
them in fire. If they lack Bread, Flesh, or Drink, Mercy and Miracle shall
concur to satisfy them. Heaven shall give them Bread, the Wind Quails, the
Rock Waters. Does the Wilderness deny them new clothes? their old shall not
wax old on their backs. A Law from heaven shall direct their Consciences; and
Gods Oracles from between the Cherubins shall resolve their doubts. If they be
too weak for their Enemies, Fire from heaven, vapors from the clouds,
Frogs and Catterpillers, Sun, Air, Waters, shall take their parts. Nay,
God himself shall fight for them. What could God do more for their reserving,
for their preserving?

If I should set the mercies of our land to run along with Israells, we
should gain cope of them, and out-runne them. And though in Gods actual and
outward mercies they might outstrip us; yet in his spiritual and saving health
they come short of us. They had the shadow, we the substance: they
candlelight, we noonday: they the breakefast of the Law, fit for the morning
of the world; we the dinner of the Gospel, fit for the high-noone thereof.
They had a glimpse of the Sun, we have him in the full strength: they saw per
fe^estram, we sine medio. They had the Paschall-Lambe, to expiate sins
ceremonially; we the Lamb of God to satisfy for us really. Ioh. 1.29.
Not a typical sacrifice for the sins of the Jews only; but an
evangelical, taking away the sins of the world. For this is that secret
opposition, Est tacita antithesis inhoc verbo (...). The world. Ioh. 1.29.
which that voice of a Crier intimates. Now what could God do more for us?
Israel is stung with fiery Serpents, behold the erection of a (strangely
medicinal) Serpent of brass. So, (besides the spiritual application of it)
the plague has stricken us, that have stricken God by our sins; his mercy
has healed us. Rumors of War has hummed in our ears the murmures of
terror; behold he could not set his bloody foot in our coasts. The rod of
Famine has been shaken over us; we have not smarted with the deadly lashes
of it. Even that we have not been thus miserable, God has done much for us.

Look round about you, and whiles you quake at the plagues so natural to our
neighbors, bless your own safety, and our God for it. Behold the Confines
of Christendom, Hungary and Bohemia, infested and wasted with the Turks.
Italy groaning under the slavery of Antichrist; which infects the soul, worse
then the Turk infests the body. Behold the pride of Sp^ine, curbed with a
bloody Inquisition. France, a fair and flourishing Kingdom, made wretched by
her Civil uncivil wars. Germany knew not of long time, what Peace meant:
neither is their war ended, but suspended. Ireland has felt the perpetual
plague of her Rebellions. And Scotland has not wanted her fatal disasters.
Only England has line, like Gedeons fleece, dry and secure, when the rain of
Judgments have wetted the whole earth. When God has tossed the Nations, and
made them like a wheel, and as the stubble before the wind, Psalm. 83.13.
only England has stood like Mount Syon, with unmoved firmness. Time was,
she petitioned to Rome: now she neither fears her Bulls, nor desires her
Bulwarks. The destitute Britains thus mourned to their conquering Romans.
Aetio ter Consul^ gemitus Britannorum. Repell^nt nos Barbari ad mare: Repellit
nos mare ad Barbaros. Hinc oriuntur duo funerum genera; quia aut iugulamur aut
submergimur. To the Roman Consul the Britains send groaning, in stead of
greeting. The Barbarous drive us upon the Sea. The Sea beats us back upon the
Barbarous. Hence we are endangered to a double kind of death: either to be
drowned, or to have our throats cut. The Barbarous are now vnfeared enemies;
and the Sea is rather our Fort, then our Sepulcher. A peaceful Prince leads
us, and the Prince of peace leads him. And besides our peace, we are so happy
for Balm and Physicians; that if I should sing of the blessings of God to us,
this should still be the burden of my Song: What could the Lord do more for us?

There is B^lme at Gilead, there are Physicians there: Will there be ever so?
Obseru. 7.
Is there not a time to loose, as well as to get? Is whiles the S^nctuarie is
full of this holy Balm, Gods word* if whiles there is plenty of Physicians,
and in them plenty of skill, the health of Israel is not restored: how
dangerous will her sickness be in the privation of both these restoratiues?
They that grow not rich in peace, what will they do in war? He that cannot
live well in Summer, will hardly escape staruing in Winter. Israel, that once
had her Cities sown with Prophets, could after say, We see not our signs,
there is not one Prophet among us. They that whilome loathed Manna, would have
been glad, if after many a weary mile, they could have tasted the crummes of
it. He, whose prodigallity scorned the bread in his Fathers house, would
afterward have thought himself refreshed with the husks of Swi^e.

The S^nne does not ever shine; there is a time of setting. No day of iollitie
is without his evening of conclusion, if no cloud of disturbance prevent it,
with an ouer-casting. First, God complains, men sing, dance, are Iouiall and
neglectfull; at last man shall complain, and God shall laugh at their
destructions. Why should God be coniure^ to receive his Spirit dying, that
would not receive Gods spirit living? All things are whirled about in their
circular courses; and who knows whither the next spoake of their wheel will
not be a blanke? Prou. 14.13.
Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
heaviness. If the black stones of our miseries should be counted with the
white of our joys, we should find our calamities exceeding in number, as well
as they do in nature. Often have we read our Savior weeping, but never
laughing. We cannot choose but lament so long as we walk on the banks of
Babylon. It is enough to reassume our Harpes, when we come to the high
Jerusalem. In Heaven are pure joys, in Hell mere miseries, on Earth both,
(though neither so perfect) mixed one with another. We cannot but acknowledge,
that we begin and end with sorrow; our first voice being a cry, our last a
groan. If any joys step in the midst, they do but present themselves on the
Stage, play their parts, and put off their glories. Successively they thrust
upon us; striving, either who shall come in first, or abide with us longest. If
any be more dainty of our acquaintance, it is joy. It is a frequent speech,
fuimus Troes, we have been happy: Cum miserum quenquam videris, scias cum esse
hommem: cum vero gloriosum, sci^s cum nondum esse Herculem. If thou see one
miserable, that is a man: but if thou see another glorying, yet that is no God.
There is no prescription of perpetuity.

It is enough for the Songs of Heaven, where Saints and Seraphins are the
Choristers, to have no burden, as no end belonging to them. Let that be the
standing house, Ioh. 14. ^.
where the Princes of GOD shall keep their Court, without grief or treason:
our Progress can plead no such privilege. We must glad our selves here with
the intermission of woes, or interposition of joys: let that place above
challenge and possess that immunitie from disturbance, where eternity is the
ground of the Music. Here, every day is sure of his night, if not of clouds
at noone. Therefore mutet vi^am, qui vult accipere vitam; let him change his
life on earth, that looks for life in heaven.

Hor. ad Ballat. lib. 1. ^p. 11.
Tu quamcunque Deus tibi fortunauerit horam,
Grata sum manu, nec dulcia differ in annum.
Take the opportunity, which Gods mercy has offered thee. It is fit that God
should have his day, when thine is past. Your salvation is now nearer then you
believe it: but if you put away this acceptable time, your damnation is nearer,
then you fear it. Mourn now for your sins, whiles your mourning may help
you. Ezekiel 9.
Tha^, is the Mourners mark, yet the last letter of the Alphabet, for an
vltimum vale to sin. Every soul shall mourn, either here with repentance,
or hereafter in vengeance. They shall be oppressed with desperation, that have
not expressed contrition. Herodot.
Herodotus has a tale of the Pipe^, that coming to the River side, began to
play to the fishes, to see if they would dance: when they were little affected
with his music, he took his Net, and throwing it among them, caught some:
which were no sooner cast on the dry ground, but they fell a leaping: to whom
the Piper merrily replied, that since they had erst scorned his Music, they
should now dance without a Pipe. Let it go for a fable. Christ says to us,
as once to the Jews; We have piped unto you, the sweet tunes of the Gospel,
but ye would not dance in obedience: time will come, you shall run after us,
as the Hind on the barren Mountains: but then you may dance without a Pipe,
and leap Leuolto's in Hell, that have daunced the Devils Measures on Earth.
This is the time, you shall har^ly lay the spirit of ruin, which your sins
have rais^d. This World is a Witch, Sin her circle, Temptation her charm,
Satan the spirit coniured up: Who comes not in more plausible forms at his
first appa^ance, then shows ugly and terrible, when you would have him depart.
Have nothing to do with the Spells of Sin, least you pull in Satan with one
hand, whom with both you cannot cast out. The door is now open, Grace k^ockes
at thy sleepy Conscience: Time runs by thee as a Lackie, the Agents of Nature
prof^er their help. If all these concurrences do no good to purge thy soul,
thou will at last dwell at the sign of the labor in vain, and at once be
washed white with the Moore. For, if any will be unjust, let him be unjust: if
he will be filthy, let him be filthy still. Reu. 22.11.
If any man will go into captivity, let him go. As he in the Comedy, abeat,
pereat, profundat, perdat: let him sink, or swim, or escape as he can. God
will renounce, whom he could not reclaim.

Lastly observe: there is Balm and Physicians; Obseru. 8.
what is the reason, says God, that my Peoples health is not recovered? or as
the Hebrew phrase is, gone up? The like is used in the second of the
Chronicles, 2 Chro. 24.13.
24. where the healing of the breaches of Syon is specified. So the worke-men
wrought, and the work was perfected by them. Hebr. The healing went up upon
the work. When a man is sick, he is in our usual phrase said to be cast
down: His recovery is the raising him up again. Israel is cast down with a
voluntary sickness; God sends her Physicians of his own, and Drugges from
the Shop of Heaven; why is she not then revived, and her health gone up? Would
you know, why Israel is not recovered by these helps? Run along with me,
both with your understandings and selfe-applications, and I will show you the
reasons, why Gods Physic works not on her.

1. She knew not her own sickness. We say, the first step to health, is
to know that we are sick. The disease being known, it is half cured. This is
the difference betwixt a Fever and a Lethargy: the one angers the sense, but
does keep it quick, tender and sensible: the other obstupefies it. The
Lethargiz'd is not less sick, because he complai^es not so loud as the
Aguish. He is so much the nearer his own end, as he knows not that his
disease is begun. Israel was sick and knew it not; or as Christ said of the
Pharases, would not know it. There is no surer course for the devil to work
his pleasure on men, then to keep them in ignorance. How easily does that
Thief rob and spoil the house of our souls, when he has first put out the
candle of knowledge? That tyrannical Nebuchadnezzer caries many a Zedechias to
his infernal Babell, when he has put out his eyes. No meruaill, if the
Gospel be hid to them that are hid to it: 2 Cor. 4.3.
Whose minds the God of this world has blinded, least the light of the
glorious Gospel of God should shine to them. Who wonders, if the blind man
cannot see the shining Sun? 1 Macc. 1.21.
When Antiochus entered to the spoil of the Sanctuary, the first things he
took away, were the golden Altar, and the Candle-sticke of light. When the
Devil comes to rifle Gods spiritual temple, Man's soul, the first boot^e that
he lays his sacrilegious hands on, are Sacrifice and Knowledge, the Alter and
the Lamp. That subtle Falconer knows, that he could not so quietly carry us
on his fist, without baiting and striving against him, if we were not hooded.

Thus wretched is it for a man not to see his wretchedness. Such a one spends
his days in a dream; and goes from earth to hell, as Jonas from Israel
toward Tarshish, fast asleep. This Paul calls the cauterized Conscience; which
when the Devil, an ill Surgion, would do, he first casts his Patient into a
mort^ferous sleep: And that all the noise which God makes, by his Ministers,
by his menaces, by his judgments, might not waken him, Satan gives him some
Opium, an ounce of Security, able to cast Sampson himself into a slumber:
especially, when he may lay his voluptuous head on the lap of Dalilah.
Israel is, then, sick in sin, and yet thinks her self righteous. Every
sin is not this sickness, but only wickedness; an habit and delight^ull
custom in it. For as to a healthful man, every ach, or gripe or pang is felt
grievous; whiles the sickly entertain them with no great notice, as being
daily guests. So the good man finds his repentant heart griped with the least
offense, whiles great sins to the wicked are no less portable then familiar.
Neither does their strength in sin grow weaker with their strength in age: but
preposterously to nature, the older, the stronger. Gellius. lib. 15.
And as it is storied of Roman Milo, that being accustomed a Boy to bear a
Calfe, was able himself grown a man, to bear the same, being grown a Bull:
So those, that in youth have wonted themselves to the load of less sins,
want not increase of strength, according to the increase of their burdens.
Every sin then may be a stitch or fit to the godly; but that which is mere
sickness, is mere wickedness.

2. As Israel did not judge from the cause to the effects, so nor from the
effects to the cause. For though she was now grievously pained and pined with
misery, she ^orgot to go down by the boughs to the root, and dig out the
ground of her calamity. Ill she was, and that at heart. Gods sword from heaven
had stroke their very flesh and sinews in several judgments: which came on
them by short incursions, before God joined the maine battle of his wrath.
Israel cries out of her bow^ls, she is payned at the very heart. Ier. 4.19.
Her children went with clean teeth, lanke cheeks, hollow and sunk eyes:
Could she not guess at the cause of this bodily languishment? So Paul schooled
his Corinths: For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, 1 Cor. 11.30.
and many sleep. There is no weakness, but originally proceeds from
wickedness. As Mephibosh^th caught his l^m^nesse by falling from his Nurse, so
every one takes his illness by falling from his Christ. Though sickness may
be euentually a token of love, yet it is properly and originally a stroke of
Justice. For every Disease God inflicts on us, is a Sermon from Heaven; whereby
God preaches to us, the vileness of our sins, and his wrathful displeasure
for them. That those, whom Gods vocal Sermons cannot move, his actual and
real may pierce. Indeed, Romans 8.28.
all things shall work to their good, that are good. And the rough Rocks of
afflictions shall bring them (as Jonathan to the Garrison of the Philistines)
by fit stayres to glory. Miseries do often help a man to mercies. Matthew. 8.2.
So the Leapers incurable Disease brought him to the Physician of his soul;
where he had both cured by one plaster, the saving word of Christ. A weak
body is a kind of occasion to a strong faith. It was good for me, says the
Psalmist, that I was in trouble. 2 King. 5.
It was good for Naaman, that he was a Leaper: this brought him to Elisha, and
Elisha to GOD. It was good for Paul that he was buffeted by Satan. It is
prouerbially spoken of a grave Divine, that (as pride makes sores of Salues,
so) Faith makes Salues of sores; and like a cunning Apothecarie makes a
Medicinal composition of some hurtful simples. Of all herbs in the Garden,
only Rue is the herb of grace. And in what Garden, the rue of affliction is
not, all the flowers of grace will be soon overrun with the weeds of
impiety. David was a sinner in prosperity, a Saint in Purgatory. The
afflicted soul drives vanity from his door. Prosperity is the Playhouse,
Adversity the Temple. Rarae fumant foelicibus arae: The healthie and wealthy
man brings seldom Sacrifices to Gods Altar. Isreal's misery had been enough
to help her recovery; if she had gathered and understood her vexation to
God, by Gods visitation on her; and guessed the souls state by the bodies.
She did not: therefore her sickness abides. As Christ to the Pharisees: You
say, you see: therefore be blind still.

3. As she did neither directly feel it, nor circumstantially collect it, so
she never confessed it. Prima pars sanitatis est, velle sanari. Sen.
The first entrance to our healing, is our own will to be healed. How shall
Christ, either search our sins by the Law, or salve them by the Gospel, when
we not acknowledge them? Ipse sibi denegat curam, Aug. Epist. 188.
^ui Medico non publicat causam. He has no care of his own Cure, that will
not tell the Physician his grief. What spiritual Physician shall recover our
persons, when we will not discover our sores? Stultorum incurata pudor malus
vlcera celat: Lay the guilt on your selves, if you ranckle to death. It is
heavy in thy friends ears, to hear thy groans, and sighs, and plaints
forced by thy sick passion; but then sorrow pierces deepest into their hearts
through their eyes, when they see thee grown speechless.

The tongue then least of all the loss does moan,
When the life's soul is going out, or gone.
So, there is some hope of the sinner, whiles he can groan for his
wickedness, and complain against it, and himself for it: but when his voice
is hoar^'d, I mean, his acknowledgement gone, his case is almost desperate.
Confession of sins and sores is a notable help to their Curing. As Pride in
all her Wardrobe has not a better garment then humility (many clad with that
was respected in the eyes of God.) So, nor humillity in all her storehouse,
Luke 1.48.
has better food then Confession. Dum agnoscit reus, ignoscit Deus. Whiles the
unjust sinner repents and confesses, the just God relents and forgiueth. The
confident Pharise goes from Gods door without an Alms: what need the full be
bidden to a Feast? toll vulnera, toll opus medici. It is fearful for a man
to bind two sins together, when he is not able to bear the load of one. To
act wickedness, and then to cloak it, is for a man to wound himself, and
then go to the Devil for a plaster. What man does conceal, God will not
cancel. Iniquities strangled in silence, will strangle the soul in heaviness.

There are three degrees of felicity. 1. non of^endere. 2. noscere. 3.
agnoscere peccata. The first is, not sin: the second, to know: the third, to
acknowledge our offenses. Let us then honor him by Confession, whom we have
dishonored by presumption. Though we have failed in the first part of
Religion, an upright life, let us not fail in the second, a repentant
acknowledgement. Though we cannot show GOD, with the Pharise, an Inuentory of
our holy works: Item for praying: Item for fasting: Item for paying Tithes,
etc. Yet (as dumb as we are and fearful to speak) we can write (with
Zachaay. His name is John.) Grace, grace, and only grace. Aug.
Meritum meum misericordia tua Domine. My merit, oh Lord, is only thy mercy.
Or as another sung well.

It Is vere pius, ego reus:
Miserere mei Deus.
Thou, Lord, art only God, and only good.
I sinful: let thy mercy be my food.
Peccatum argumentum soporis, confessio animae suscitatae. Sinfulness is a
sleep, Confession a sign that we are waked. Men dream in their sleeps, but
tell their dreams waking. In our sleep of security, we lead a dreaming
life, full of vile imaginations. But if we confess and speak our sins to
Gods glory, and our own shame, it is a token that Gods spirit has wakened us.
Si non confessus lates, inconfessus damnaberis. The way to hide our iniquities
at the last, Greg.
is to lay them open here. He that covers his sins shall not prosper: Pro.
28.13.
but he that confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy. Thi^ is true,
though to some a Paradoxe. The way to cover our sins, is to uncover them.
Quae aperiuntur in praesenti, operiu^tur in vltimo die. If we now freely lay
open our iniquities to our God, he will conceal them at the latter day. Else
(cruci^nt plus vulnera cla^sa) Sins that are smothered, will in the end
^ester to death. The mouth of Hell is made open to devour us by our sins;
when we open our own mouths to confess, we shut that. Israel is not then
restored, because her sickness is not declared.

4. The last defect to Isreal's Cure, is the want of application. What should a
sick man do with Physic, when he lets it fust in a vessel, or spils it on
the ground. It is ill for a man to mispose that to loss, which God has
disposed to his good. Beloved? Application is the sweet use to be made of all
Sermons. In vain to you are our Ministeries of Gods mysteries, when you open
not the doors of your hearts to let them in. In vain we smite your rocky
hearts, when you power out no floods of tears. In vain we thunder against
your sins, covetous oppres^ions of men, treasonable Rebellions against God;
when no man says, Master is it I? Quod omnibus dicitur, nemini dicitur? Is
that spoken to no man, which is spoken to all men? Whiles Covetousness is
taxed, not one of twenty Churles lays his finger on his own sore. Whiles Lust
is condemned, what Adulterer feels the pulse of his own conscience? Whiles
Malice is enquired of in the Pulpit, there is not a N^b^^ish neighbor in the
Church will own it. It is our common armor against the sword of the spirit;
It is not to me he s^eakes. For which, God at last gives them an answerable
plague: they shall as desperat^ly put from them all the comforts of the
Gospel, as they have presumptuously rejected all the precepts of the Law. They
that would particularise no admonition to themselves, nor take one grain out
of the whole heap of Doctrines for their own use: shall at last with as
invincible forwardness, bespeake themselves every curse in the sacred volume.

Thus easy and ordinary is it for men, to be others Physicians, rather then
their own: Statesmen in foreign Commonwealths, not looking into their own
doors: sometimes putting on Aarons Robes, and teaching him to teach: and often
scalding their lips in their Neighbors Pottage. They can weed other Gardens,
whiles their own is overrun with Nettles. Like that too obsequious Roman
Soldier, that dug a fountain for Caesar, and perished himself in a
voluntary thirst. But Charity begins at home, and he that loves not his own
soul, I will hardly trust him with mine. The Usurer blames his Son^es pride,
sees not his own extortion. And whiles the hypocrite is helping the dissolute
out of the mire, he sticks in deeper himself. The Pharisees are on the
Disciples Iacket, for eating with unwashed hands, whiles themselves are not
blameworthy, that eat with unwashed hearts. No marvel, if when we fix both
our eyes on others wants, we lack a third to see our own. If two blind men
rush one upon another in the way, either complains of others blindness,
neither of his own. Thus, like mannerly guests, when a good morsel is carved
to us, we lay it liberally on another trencher, and fast our selves. How much
better were it for us, to feed on our own portion?

Go back, go back, thou foolish sinner: turn in to thine own house, and
stray not with Dina, till thou be ravished. Consider your ways in your hearts.
Hag. 1.5.
If thou find not work enough to do at home, in cleansing thy own heart,
come forth then and help thy Neighbors. Whosoever you are, sit not like
lookers on at Gods Mart; but having good vvares profferd you, and that so
cheap, grace, peace, and remission of sins for nothing, take it, and bless
his name that gives it. Receive with no less thankfulness the Physic of
admonition, he sends you: apply it carefully: if it do not work on your
souls effectually, there is nothing left, that may do you good. The word of
God is powerful as his own Majesty: and shall never return back to
himself again, without speeding the Commission it went for. Apply it then to
your souls in faith and repentance, least God apply it in fear and vengeance.
Lord, open our hearts with the key of Grace, that thy holy word may enter in,
to reign in us in this world, and to save us in the world to come. Amen.

FINIS.
THE Sinners Passing Bell.

OR Physic from Heaven.

THE Second Sermon.

Published by THOMAS ADAMS, Preacher of Gods Word at Willington in
Bedford-shire.

HOSEA 13.9. Oh Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help.

AUGUST. Sermon. de Temp. 145. Quid de te, tu ipse tam male meruisti, vt inter
bona tua nolis aliquod esse malum, nisi teipsum?

How did thou, oh wicked man, deserve so ill of thy self, that among all thy
goods, thou would have nothing bad but thy self?

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for Ralph Mab, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Grayhound. 1614.

TO THE VERY WORTHY GENTLEman, Mr. John Alleyne, saving health.
SIR,
I have endeavored in this short Sermon, to prescribe to these sick times some
spiritual Physic. The ground I have received from the direction of God: the
method I submit to the correction of man. In this I might err, in the other I
could not. The maine and material objects I have leuelled at, are. 1. to beget
in us a sense of the sins we have done, of the miseries whereby we are
undone. 2. To rebuke our forgetfulness of Gods long-since ordained remedy,
the true intrinsique Balm of his Gospel. In the saving use whereof, we are
(like some Countries blessed with the medicinal benefits of Nature, yet)
through nescience or negligence, defective to our selves in the application.
Inward diseases are as frequent as outward; those by disquiet of mind, as
these by disdiet of body. It was a rare age, that had no spiritual plague
ranging and raging in it. Ours has manifold and manifest, vile and vi^ible
ones: the World growing at once old and decayed in nature, lusty and active
in producing sins. Wickedness is an aged Harlot, yet as pregnant and
teeming as ever. It cannot be denied, but that our Iniquities are so palpable,
that it is as easy to prove them, as to reprove them. Were our bodies but
half so diseased, (and yet this year has not favored them) as our souls
are, a strange and unheard of mortallitie would ensue. Man is naturally very
indulgent to himself, but misplaceth his bounty. He gives the body so much
liberty, that it becomes licentious: but his soul is so prisoned up in the
bonds of corrupt affections, that she cries of him, as that troubled Princess
of her strict keeper, from such a Iaylour good Lord deliver me. The Flesh is
made a Gentleman, the Mind a Beggar. Sick we are, yet consult not the
Oracles of Heaven for our welfare, nor solicit the help of our great
Physician Christ. He is our Savior, and bare our sicknesses, says the
Prophet: yea, Esa. 53.
took on him our infirmities. Infirmitates speciei, non indiuidui: Aquin.
Infirmities commune to the nature of mankind, not particularly incident to
every singular person. Those he took on himself, that he might know the
better to succor us in our weakness. Heb. 2.1^. and 4.15.
As the Queen sung of her self in the Poet. Non ignara mali miseris
succurrere disco. It is most perfectly true of our Jesus, that he learned by
his own sorrows to pity ours; though all his sufferance was for our sakes.
But how should he help us, if we make not our moan to him? How should we be
restored, when Gods saving Physic is unsought, unbought, vnapplied? To
convince our neglect, and persuade our better use of the Gospel, tends this
weak labor. To your protection it willingly flies; and would rest it self
under your shadow. The God of Peace give you the peace of God, which passes
all understanding; and afford you many joys in this life to the end, and in
the next his joy without end.

Yours in the services of love, THO. ADAMS.

THE Sinners Passing Bell. OR Physic from Heaven. The sixth Sermon.
IEREM. 8.22. Is there no Balm at Gilead? Is there no Physician there? why
then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?


THe Allegory is Tripartite, and propounds to our considerations 1. What is
the Balm, 2. Who are the Physicians, 3. Who are the sick. The Balm is the
Word The Physicians are the Ministers. The Sick are the Sinners. For the first.

The Balsame-Tree is a little shrubbe, never growing past the height of two
Cubits, and spreading like a Vine. The Tree is of an Ash Color, the boughs
small and tender, the leaves are like to Rue.

Isidore thus distinguishes it. The Tree is called Basamum, the Root
orilo-Balsamum, the Branches Xylo-Balsamum, the Seed carpo-Balsamum, the Juice
opo-Bal^amum.

Pliny says, the Tree is all medicinable: the chief and prime virtue is in
the Juice: the second in the Seed: the third in the Rind: the last and
weakest in the Stock. It comforts both by tasting and smelling. It is most
commonly distinguished by Physicians into Lignum, Semen, L^quorem, the Wood,
the Seed, and the Juice. This is the nature of the Balsamum.

This holy Word is here called Balm: and (si fas sit magnis componere parua)
if we may compare heavenly with earthly, spiritual with natural things, they
agree in many resemblances. The vn-erring Wisdom of Heaven has given this
comparison. There is no fear to build on Gods ground: whiles the Analogy of
Faith limits us. It is the Builders first and principal care to choose a sure
foundation. The rotten, moorish, quicke-sandy grounds, that some have ^et their
edifices on, have failed their hopes, and destituted their intents. How many
worthy wits have spent their times and studies, to dawbe up the ^ilthy walls
of Rome with untempered mortar! Ezekiel. 13.15.
How well had they hunted, if they had not mistaken their game! How rich
apparel have they wouen for a Babilonish Harlot! How well had they sailed, if
Rome had not guided their Compass! But 1 Cor. 3.13.
every man's work shall be made manifest. For the day shall declare it, because
it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of what
sort it is. Happy is he, that has a Math. 7.24.
rock for his ground, that no gusts, storms, winds, waves may ouer-turne his
house. Though 1 Cor. 3.11.
other foundation none can lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ; yet
blessed is he, that (...), has builded safely upon this ground.

God has here laid my ground; I will be hold to build my speech on that,
whereon I build my faith. Only sobriety shall be my bounds. We may call Gods
word, that Balm tree, whereon the fruit of life grows. A tree that heales, a
tree that helps. A tree of both medicament, and nutriment. Like the Reu. 22.2.
Tree of life, which bears twelve manner of fruits, and yields her fruit
every month. Neither is the fruit only nourishing, but even the leaves of the
tree were for the healing of the Nations. Now though the Balm here, whereunto
the Word is compared, is more generally taken for the juice, now fitted and
ready for application; yet without pinching the Metaphore, or restraining the
liberty of it, I see not why, it may not so be likened, both for general and
particular properties. It is not enough to say this, but to show it. Let me say
it now, show it anon. For the Balm, you have the Tree, the Seed, the Juice.
Gods Word will (not unfitly) parallel it in resemblances, transcend it in
effectual properties.

The Tree it self is the Word. We find the eternal Word so compared. Ioh.
15.1.
I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman. He is a Tree, but arbor
inuersa: the root of this tree is in Heaven. It was once Ioh. 1.14.
made ^lesh, and dwelt amongst us (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of
the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth. Now he is in
Heaven. Only this Word still speaks unto us by his word: the word incarnate
by the word written; made sounding in the mouth of his Ministers. This word of
His, is compared and expressed by many Metaphores: to leaven for seasoning: to
honey for sweetning: to the hammer for breaking the stony heart Ier. 23.29.
Is not my Word like as a fire, says the Lord? and like a hammer that breaks
the rock in pieces? To a sword, that cuts both ways. Heb. 4.12.
The word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then a two-edged sword,
etc. Another sword can but enter the flesh and pierce the bones, or at most
divide the soul and the body; but this the soul and the spirit, where no
other sword can come, no not the Cherubins sierie sword, that kept the passage
of Gen^ 2.24.
Paradise.

It is here a Tree, a Balme-tree, a saluing, a saving tree. Albumasar says,
that the more medicinable a plant is, the less it nourishes. But this Tree
(reddit aegrotum sanum, sanum vero santorem) makes a sick soul sound, and a
whole one sounder. It is not only Physic when men be sick, but meat when
they be whole. Triacle to expel, preservatives to prevent poison. It is not
only a sword to beat back our common enemy, but a Bulwark to hinder his
approach.

It carries a seed with it, Carpo-bal^amum; an 1 Pet. 1.23.
immortal and incorruptible seed, which concurres to the begetting of a new
man, the old rotting and dying away: for it has power of both, to mortif^e and
dead the ^lesh, to revive and quicken the spirit. That Matthew. 13.3.
seed, which the sower went out to sow. Happy is the good ground of the heart
that receives it. That little Ver. 31.
Mustard Seed, which spr^ads up into branches, able to give the fowls of
heaven harbor. Dis^rim^n hoc inter op^ra Dei et Mundi. This difference is
betwixt the works of God and of the World. Parturiunt m^ntes, etc.
The works of the world have great and swelling Entrances, but, malo sine
clauduntur, they halt in the conclusion. The works of God, from a most
slender beginning have a most glorious issue. The word is at first a little
seed; how powerful, how plentiful are the effects? how manifold, how manifest
are the operations of it; 2 Cor. 10.5.
casting down the highest things, that exalt themselves against the knowledge
of God; and captiuating every thought to the obedience of Christ.

The juice is no less powerful to mollify the stony heart, and make it
tender and soft, as a heart of flesh. The seed conuinceth the understanding:
the Juice mollifieth the affections. All is excellent; but still conspicuum
minus, quod maxim est praeclarum, the root that yields this seed, this juice,
is the power of God. A tree has manifest to the eye, leaves, and flowers, and
fruits, but the root (most precious) lies hidden. In man the body is seen,
not the purer and better part of him, his soul. Psalm. 45.1^.
The Kings daughter, though her clothing be of wrought gold, is most glorious
within. In all things we see the accidents, not the form, not the substance.
There are but few, that rightly taste the seed, and the juice; but who has
comprehended the root of this Balm?

The Balsame is a little tree, but it spreads beyond a Vine. The virtue of it,
in all respects, is full of dilatation. It spreads 1. largely for shadow. 2.
pregnantly for fruit. 3. all this from a small beginning. So that we may say of
it, as the Church of her Savior. Cant. 2.3.
As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my Beloved among the
Sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was
sweet to my taste.

It spreads. No sharp frosts, nor nipping blasts, nor chilling aires, nor
drisling sleete, can mar the beauty or eneruate the virtue of this
spiritual Tree. The more it is stopped, the further it grows. Many
interdictions rung peales of menaces in the Apostles ears, that Act. 4.17.18.
they should speak no more in the name and word of Christ: they did all rather
like Bells toll them into the Church, to preach it more fervently. The Princes
of the Nations would have hedged it in with their prohibitions: but the Word of
Heaven, and edict of Gods spiritual Court of glory, scorned the Prohibitions
given by their temporal or temporary Laws. They might easier have hedged in
the vvinde, or pounded the Eagle.

The Jews would have cut down this Tree at the root: the Gentiles would have
lopped off the branches. They stroke at Christ, these at his Ministers: both
struck short. If they killed the Messenger, they could not reach the message.
The blood of the Martyrs, spilt at the root of this tree, did (as it were)
make it spread more patently. There never died Preacher for Christ his cause,
but almost every ash of his burned flesh, bred a Christian. The old Foxes of
Rome, that had caliditatis paululum, calliditatis plurimum, little warmth in
their bloods, great subtilty in their pates, studied, plotted, acted, by cares,
stratagem^, engines, to give a fatal, final subversion to the Gospel: yet
they lived to see it flourish, and because it flourished, died, fretting
themselves to dust. So, Judge. 5.31.
let thine enemies perish, oh Lord, and burst their malicious bowels, that have
evil will at Syon, and despite this Balm.

It grew maugre all the adverse blasts and floods, which the billows of earth,
or bellows of Hell could blow or power out against it. Let them loose a
Barrabas from prison, whiles they shut a Barnabas in prison: let them give
Demetrius liberty, whiles they shackle Paul; and at once, burn the
professors, and reward the persecutours of the Word: behold (for all this)
this Balm flourishes, and sends forth his saving odours. The Judge. 16.2.
Philistines shut up Sampson in the City Gaza: they bar the gates, watch and
guard the passages, and are ready to study for the manner of his death. The
Jews shut up Christ in the grave, they bar it, they seal it, they guard it;
sure enough thinks the Jew, hopes the Devil, to keep him fast. The Gentiles
shut the Apostles in prison, chain them, beat them, threat them with worse,
that had felt already their bad usage: now they clap their hands at the
presumed fall of the Gospel. Behold, Sampson carries away the gates of Gaza;
Christ the bands of death; the Word the bars of the prison.

What shall I say? still this Balm flourishes. Viuit, viget, liber est, supra
hominem est. As Joseph (incipit a vinculis ferreis, finit ad torquem aureum)
begins at iron, ends at golden chains: so this Balsame, the more it is struck
at with the cudgels of reproach and persecution, the faster, the fuller, the
further it grows. It is like the Vine for this virtue; only the Vine (but
only) nourishes: the Balm both nourishes the good, and expels the evil,
that is in man. These two are Gods trees. When every God, says the Poet, chose
his several tree; Jupiter the long-liued Oak; Neptune the tall Cedar, Apollo
the green Laurel, Venus the white Poplar; Pallas (whom the Poets feign, to be
borne of Jupiters brain, and Mythologists interpret Wisdom) chose the Vine.
Our true and only God, that owes all, has more especially chosen the Vine
and the Balm, one for preservation, the other for restoration of our health.
Only the Balm has both elementall Physic, and alimentall virtue in it.

As it gives boughs spaciously, so fruit pregnantly, plentifully. The graces
of God hang upon this tree in clusters. Cant. 1.14.
My beloved is unto me as a cluster of Camphire in the Vineyards of Engedi. No
hungry soul shall go away from this tree unsatisfied.

It is an effectual word, never failing of intended success. What Gods word
affirms, his truth performs, whither it be judgment or mercy. Bern.
Nec verbum ab intention quia veritas, nec factum a verbo quia virtus. His
word differs not from his intent, because he is truth: nor his deed from his
word, because he is virtue. What he intends he declares, or rather what he
declares he intends, he is just: and what he declares and intends, he
performs; he is powerful. This is that Delphian sword, that universal
instrument, whereby he made, Heb. 1.3.
whereby he supports the world. It is not a fruitless and ineffectuall word,
as man's. Propter nostrum dicere et velle, nihil in re mutatur, says the
Philosopher. Our speaking or willing puts no change into any subject. A man is
starued with cold, famished with hunger; we advise him to the fire, to
repast: is he ever the fuller or fatter for our word? Not, unless like a
Camelion, he can live by air. But Gods word is fruitful, it feeds. Matthew.
4.4.
Man lives not by bread only, but by Gods word. Our word and will is like an
Idols power: Gods volo is sufficient. ^mbr.
Voluntas eius, potestas eius. His will is his power. One fiat of his was able
to make that was not, but had else line in everlasting informitie; to
constitute nature when it is not, to confirm or change nature when it is.
When GOD was in the flesh, and went about doing good, a faithful Centurion,
for his servant so desperately sick, desired not the travel of his feet, nor
a dram of his Physic, nor so much as the imposition of his hands, but dic
verbum tantum: Matthew. 8 8.
Lord say the word only, and my servant shall be healed. This word is so
effectual, that it shall never fail of the purpose it first was sped for. The
Sun and Moon shall fail in their motions, day and night in their courses,
the earth totter on her props, Nature it self shall apostate to confusion,
before Gods word fall away unaccomplished; whither he d^spenseth it to affect
man's heart, or disposes it to effect his will. Of so powerful efficacy is
that word, which the world despises.

As this Balm spreads patently for shadow, potently for fruit, so all this
ar^seth from a little seed. Gods smallest springs prove at length maine Oceans.
His least beginnings grow into great works, great wonders. How stately the
world begins, how lame it is at last? The Tower of Babe^l is begun, as if it
scorned Heaven, and scared Earth; how easy a stratagem from God overthrows
it, though he never laid finger to it! Nebuchadnezzar begins with, who is God?
and anon scarce reserues to himself the visible difference from a beast.
Another Nebuchadnezzar exterminates all Gods from the earth, that himself
might reign (solus Deus in solio, who was rather Demon in folio) only God:
behold a silly woman overthrows him in his great Holophernes. With such proud
entrances does the world begin his Scaenes; with such ridiculous shame do
they lagge off. Our God from small beginnings, raises mountains of meruailes
to us, of praises to himself. Even Joseph, that is in prison, shall ride in
the second Chariot of Egypt. Drowning Moses shall come to countermaund a
Monarch. Christ, that was buried in a grave, shall Psalm. 2.9.
bruise the nations, and break them with a rod of iron. Peter a Fisher shall
catch whole Countries. A little Balm heal a world of people.

Well, it spreads; let us get under the shadow of the branches. Happy and cool
refreshing shall the soul scorched with sins and sorrows find there. Never
was shade more welcome to the sweltred Traveler, then this word is to the
afflicted conscience.

It is fructuall: let it be so to us in operation. It gives us the fruits of
life, let us return it the fruits of obedience. Gods word is significatiue to
all, operative to his.

It is a powerful voice, whither it give life, or kill. Man and Music have
(virtutem vocis) the power of voice: God only reserues to himself (vocem
virtutis) the voice of power. Psalm. 68.33.34.
Lo he does send out his voice, and that a mighty voice. Ascribe ye strength
unto God. I might speak of his thunders in Sinai; but I turn to the Songs of
Syon, the sweet voice of his Gospel, whereof I am an (unworthy) Minister: t^^
voice that speaks Christ and his death, Christ and his life, Christ and his
salvation. He that was anointed pro consortibus, and pr^ consortibus, for his
fellows, and above his fellows. Who is Ioh. 14.6.
the way, the truth, and the life. Via sine deuio, veritas sine nubilo, vita
sine termino. The way without error, the truth without darkness, the life
without end. Via in exilio, veritas in consilio, vita in praemio. The way in
exile, the truth in counsel, the life in reward. Ioh. 6.68.
Oh whi^her shall we go from thee? Lord, thou have the words of eternal life.
Post me, quia veritas sum: ^er me quia via sum: ad me, quia vita* sum. August.
All the word calls us to Christ. Post me, per me, ad me. Aster me, by me, to
me. After me, because I am truth: by me, because I am the way: to me, because I
am life. Qua vis ire? Ego sum via. Quo vis ire? Ego sum veritas. Vbi vis
perman^re? Ego sum vita, How will thou go? I am the way. Whither will thou
go? I am the truth. Where will thou abide? I am the life.

Now, there is no action without motion, no motion without will, Romans 10.
no will without knowledge, no knowledge without hearing. Ignoti nulla cupido.
There is no affection to unknown objects. God must then by this word call us
to himself. Let us come when and whiles he calls us; leaving our former evil
loves and evil lives: (for ^pist. 52.
mali amor^s make malos mores, says Saint Augustine. Bad affects produce bad
effects.) And let us show the power of this Balm in our confirmed healths.
Solummodo been conuersus est, qui been conversatus est: A good conversion is
proved by a good conversation. Perhaps these effects in all, may not be alike
in quantity, let them be in quallitie. God has a liberal, not an equal
hand: and gives geometrically, by proportion, not arithmetically, to all alike.
Only magis and minus non tollit substantiam: the dimensions of greater or
less do not annihilate the substance. Our Faith may be precious, nay 2 Pet.
1.1.
like precious, though less and weaker. Sanctification admits degrees,
Justification no latitude. Luther says, we are as holy as Mary the Virgin,
not in life, which, is active holiness, but in grace of adoption, which is
passive holiness. Come we then faithfully to this Balm; so shall we b^ safe
under the shadow, and filled with the fruits thereof. Thus in general: let us
now search for some more special concurrences of the Simillitude.

1. The leaves of the Balsame are white: the word of God is 1 Pet. 2.2.
pure and spotless. Peter says, there is sincerity in it. Perfection it
self was the finger that wrote it: neither could the isntrumental pens blot
it with any corruption: the Spirit of Grace giving inspiration, instruction,
limitation: that they might say with Paul, Quod accepi a Domino, tradidi vobis:
1 Cor. 11.23
I received of the Lord, that which I delivered to you; neither more nor less,
but just weight. It is pure as Gold fined in a Psalm. 12.6.
seauen-fold furnace. Prou. 30.5.
Every word of God is pure, says Solomon. There is no breath or steame of
sin to infect it. The Sun is darkness to it: the very Angels are short of
it. It is white, immaculate, and so vnblemishable, that the very mouth of the
Devil could not sully it. Even the known Father of lies thought to disparage
the credit of the Scriptures, by taking them into his mouth; he could not do
it. They are too unchangeably white, to receive the aspersion of any spot.

2. The Balsame, say the Physicians, is gustu mordax and acr^, sharp and
biting in the taste, but wholesome in digestion. The holy word is no otherwise
to the v^regenerate palate, but to the sanctified soul it is sweeter then the
hony-combe. The Church says Cant. 2.3.
his fruit is sweet unto my taste. It is Folly to the Jews, and a stumbling
block to the Gentiles: but to the 1 Cor. 1.24.
called both of Jews and Gentiles, the power of God, and the wisdom of God.
Saluberrimararo ^ucundissima: Relish and goodness are not ever of the same
congruence. The Gospel is like leaven, sour to the natural spirit, yet makes
him fit for (holy) bread. It is said of the Leaven, to which Christ compares
the Word, that ^assam acrore grato excitat, it puts into the lump a sauoury
sowrenesse. It is acror, but gratus, sharp, but acceptable. The Word may
relish bitter to many, but is wholesome. There cannot be sharper pills given to
the Usurer, then to cast up his unjust g^ines. The Potion that must scowre the
Adulterers reins, makes him very sick. He that will let the proud man's
Plurisie blood, must needs prick him. To bridle the voluptuous beast, will
make him stamp and fret. All correction to our corruption r^nnes against the
grain of our affections. He that would bring Mammon to the bar, and
arraigne him, shall have Judge, Jury, sitters and standers, a whole Court and
Sessions against him. These s^nnes are as hardly parted with of the owners, as
the Eye, Hand, or Foot, necessary and ill-spared members. Forbid the Courtly
Herod of his Herodias: the Noble Naaman of his Rimmon: the gallant Sampson of
his Delilah: the City- Dives of his quotidian feast: the Country- Naball of
his churlishness: the rusticall Gergesites of their hoggishnesse: the Popish
Laban of his little Gods: the Ahabish Landlord of his enclosings: and you give
them bitter Almonds, that will not digest with them; like the queasie
Mass Priest, whose God would not stay in his stomach. But let God work the
heart with the preparatiues of his preventing Grace, and then this Balm will
have a sweet and pleasing savor.

There are too many, that will not open their lips to taste of this Balm; not
their ears to hear the Word. But as one mockes the Popish-Priest celebrating
the Mass, (who uses one trick amongst other histrionical gestures, of
stopping his ears) that he does it least he should hear the crackling of his
Saviors bones.

Digitis tunc obserat aures,
N^ collisa crepent Christi, quem conterit, ossa.
So these become voluntarily deaf Adders, and will not hear Christ crucified,
Phil. 3.18. and Gal. 3.1.
the preaching of the cross of Christ, as Paul calls it; which is able to kill
our sins, and quicken our souls. I have read it reported, that the Adders in
the East and those hot Countries, did so subtly euade the Charmers, thus.
When she hears the Pipe, she will couch one ear close to the ground, and
cover the other with her tail. So do worldlings: they fill one ear with
earth, as much cou^tous dirt as they can cramme into it: the other ear they
close up with their lewd l^sts, as the Adder with her winding tail: that they
have none left for their God, for their good. And being thus deaf to holy and
heavenly incantations, they are easily by Satan oue^-reached, ouer-rul'd,
ouer-throwne.

So unwieldy is Christ's yoke to the raging Mule: so heavy his burden to the
reluctant horse: Psalm. 32.
so hard his Law to the carnal Capernaite: so sour his Balm to the wicked
palate. (Though to the godly his Matthew. 11. vlt.
yoke is easy, and his burden light.) Esaias 5.20.
Woe unto them, for they call sweet sour, Gods Balm distasteful; and sour
sweet, the worlds Boleno sauoury. They are not more propitious to vice, then
malicious to goodness. For others, they love a Barrabas better then a
Barnabas. For themselves, every one had rather be a Dives, then a Diuus: a rich
sinner, then a poor Saint. No marvel, if the blind man cannot judge of
colors, nor the deaf distinguish sounds, nor the sick relish meats. Gods
word is sweet, how ever they judge it: and their hearts are sour, how ever
they will not think it. Ezekiel. 18.25.29.
My ways are equal, but your ways are unequal, says the Lord of hoasts.

3. They write of the Balsamum, that the manner of getting out the juice, is by
wounding the tree. Sanciata arbor praebet opobalsamum. Provided, that they cut
no further then the ^^nde: for if the wound extends to the body of the tree, it
bleedes to death. I have read no less of Vines, that unjustly pruin'd, they
bleed away their lives with their sappes. The issuing Balm is called
opobalsamum; as some from the Greek opo, which signifies a Den; or rather of
(...), Juice. A trebble lesson here inuites our observation.

Obseru.
1. The Balsame tree weeps out a kind of gum, like tears: the word of God
does compassionately bemoan^ our sins. Christ wept not only tears for
Jerusalem, but blood for the world. His wounds gush out like fountains, and
every drop is blood. Ecce in lachrimis, in sanguine locutus est mundo. His
whole life was a continual mourning for our sins. Nunquam ridere dictus,
flere saepissime. He may adjure us to repentance and obedience, by more
forcible arguments, then ever Dido used to Aeneas: Ego vos per has lachrymas,
per hos gemitus, per haec vulnera, per corpus sanguine mersum. I entreat you
by tears, by groans, by wounds, by a body (as it were) drowned in it own
blood: by all Romans 12.1.
these mercies of Christ, whereby we do not only persuade you of our selves,
but 2 Cor. 5.20.
God does beseech you through us. If those tears, sighs, wounds, blood, move
not our consciences, we have impenetrable souls. If the heart-blood of Christ
cannot make thy heart to relent, and thy feet to tremble, when thy
concupiscence sends them on some wicked errand; thy hands, tongue, and all
parts and powers of thee to forget their office, when thou would sin
obstinately; thou art in a desperate case. These were the tears of this Balm
tree. The word does in many places, as it were, weep for our sins, panting
out the grieuance of a compassionate God. Ezekiel. 18.31.
Why will ye dye, oh you house of Israel? What Prophet has written without
sorrow? One of them Threnos suspirat, sighs out a book of Lamentations; which
Greg. Nazianzene says, (Nunquam a se siccis oculis lectos esse) that he could
never read with dry eyes. The other Prophets also, like Quails, curas hominum
gesserunt, took on them the burden of many men's sorrows. Cyprian had so
compassionate a sympathy of others evil deeds, evil sufferings, that (cum
singulis pectus meum copulo, cum plangentibus plango, says he) I join my
breast with others, and challenge a partnership in their griefs. A Minister,
says Chrysostom, Homil. 10. in Matthew. 5.
debet esse lugens sua et aliena delicta; should be still lamenting his own
sins, and the sins of his people. Ierom. ep. 21.
Monachus est plangentis officium. The office of a Minister, is the office of a
Mourner. All these are but as Canes, to derive to our observation the tears of
this Balm.

2. The way to get out the juice of Balm from Gods word, is by cutting it:
skillful division of it, Obseru.
which S. Paul calls (...), 2 Timothy ^^15.
rightly dividing the word of truth. It is true that Gods word is, panis vitae,
the bread of life: but whiles it is in the whole loaf, many cannot help
themselves: it is needful for children to have it cut to them in pieces.
Though the Spice unbroken be sweet and excellent, yet does it then trebble the
savor in delicacie, when it is pounded in a Mortar. All the Balme-tree is
medicinal, yet the effectual working is better helped, by cutting the stock,
by taking out the juice, and by distributing to every man a portion, according
to the proportion of his wants. With no less heedfulnesse must the word be
divided; that some may receive it gentle and mollifying, and others as a
sharper ingredient. As there is a double composition in men, pride and
humillitie: so there must be a double disposition in preaching the word, of
meekness, of terror. Aarons Bells must be wisely rung: sometimes the Trebble
of Mercy; sometimes the Tenor of Judgment; sometimes the Counter-tenour of
Reproose; and often the Mean of Exhortation. There is no less discretion
required to application, then to explication. As Physicians prescribe their
Medicines by drammes or ounces, according to the Patients strength or
weakness. So Divines must feed some with milk, others with stronger meat.
The learned should have deeper points, the simple plainer principles. How easy
is it for many a weak stomach to surfeit even on the food of life! (though the
fault lies not in any superfluity of the word, but in the deficiencie of his
understanding.) The absence of sobriety in the speaker is more intolerable
then in the hearer. The people must take such meat as their Cooks dress to
them. Let none of Eli's Sons slubber up the Lords Sacrifice or Service. Let
not good Balm be marred by a fustie vessel. Seasonable discretion must attend
upon sound knowledge. Wisdom without Wit is meat without salt: W^t without
W^sedome is salt without meat. Some Wells are so deep, that a man can draw no
water out of them; these bury their gifts in the grave of sullen silence. Some
are shallow pits, that run so long open mouth, till their Springs are quite
dry: whiles they w^l be prius Doctores, quam discipuli, Masters that never were
Scholars; and leap into Paul's Chair, when they never sat at the feet of
Gamaliel. There must be therefore Wisdom both in the Dispensers and hearers
of Gods mysteries; in the former to distribute, in the other to apportion their
due and fit share of this Balm.

3. The Balsame tree being vvounded too deep dies: the word of G0D cannot be
marred, Obseru.
it may be martyred, and forced to suffer injurious interpretations. The
Papists have made, and called, the Scriptures a ^ose of wax; and they wring
this Nose so hard, that as Prou. 39.33.
Solomon says, they force out blood. As Christ once, so his word often is
crucified between two Thieves; the Papist on the left hand, the Schismaticke
on the right. These would ravish the virgin-purenesse of the Gospel, and
adulterate the beauty of it. They cannot cut, except they cut a pieces; nor
distinguish, but they must extinguish. They divide fair, but they leave the
Quotient empty. They subdiuide, till they bring all to nothing but fractions,
but factions. We may observe, that among these, there are as few vnifici in
the Church, as Munisici in the Commonwealth. They are commonly most miserable
men of their purses, most prodigal of their opinions. They divide the Word too
plentifully to their turbulent Auditors: they divide their goods too sparingly
to poor Christians. There are too many of such ill Logicians, that divide all
things, define nothing. As a modern Poet well: Definit Logicus res, non modo
diuidit; Owen. Epigr.
at nos
Nil definimus, omnia diuidimus.
These pierce the Balm too deep; not to strain out Juice, but blood; and, in
what they are able, to kill it.

4. When the Balsame is cut, they use to set Vialls in the Dens, to receive
the Juice or sap. When the word is divided by preaching, the people should
bring Vialls with them, to gather this saving Balm. These Vials are our ears,
which should couch close to the Pulpit, that this intrinsique Balm may not be
spilt besides. How many Sermons are lost, whiles you bring not with you the
vessels of attention We cut and divide, and sluice out Rivers of saving health
from this Tree, but all runs besides, and so your health is not recovered.
You come frequently to the Wells of Life, but you bring no Pitchers with you.
You cry on us for store of Preaching, and call us idle Drones, if we go not
double journey every Sabbath, but still you go home with Hos. 10.12.
vnfallowed, with unhallowed hearts. Our Gilead affords you Balm enough, yet
you have sickly souls. You hear to hear, and to feed either your humors,
or your opinions, or your hypocrisies. You shall hear a puffed Ananias cry,
Alas, for his non-preaching Minister; if, at least, he forbeares his snarling
and currish inuectiues of dumb dog, etc. When, alas, let many Apostles come,
with the holy coniuration of Prayer and Preaching, yet they cannot cast out the
deaf Devil in many of them. They blame our dumb Dogs, not their own deaf
Devils. They would seem to cure us, that are sent to cure them, if at least
they would be cured. We would have cured Babell; nay we would have cured
Bethell, but she would not be cured.

It will be said, that most hearers bring with them the Vials of attention:
yield it; yet for the most part, they are either without mouths, or without
bottoms. Without mouths to let in one drop of this Balm of Grace: or
without bottomes, that when we have put it in, and look to see it again in
your lives, behold it is run through you, as water through a sieue, and
scarce leaves any wet behind it. And (to speak impartially) many of you, that
have Vials with bottomes, ears of attention with hearts of retention, and the
ground of remembrance, yet they are so narrow at the top, that they are not
capable but of drop by drop. Think not your selves so able to receive at the
ear, and conceive at the heart, innumerable things at once. You are not broad
glasses, but narrow-necked Vials; and then best receive this Balm of life,
when it is stilled from the Lymbecke of Preaching with a soft fire, and a
gentle pouring in. So says the Prophet, Line must be added to line, precept
upon precept, here a little and there a little. When a great vessel powers
liquour into a straite-mouth'd Vial, the sourse must be small and sparing, fit
to the capacity of the receiver: that in time it may be filled. It is often
seen, that when this juice comes with too full and frequent a stream, almost
all runs besides. I do not speak this (vel prohibendi, vel cohibendi animo)
to curb the forwardness of godly Ministers, or persuade the raritie of
Sermons. God still of his mercy, multiply laborers into (and labors in) his
harvest. But to correct your obstreperous clamours against us: no^ to chill the
heat of your zealous hearing, but to inkindle the fire of your conscionable
obeying. Do not stand so much upon Sacrifice, that you forget Mercy. Be not
so angry for want of two or three Sermons in a week, when you will not obey
the least Doctrine of one in a month. You bless your Samuels in the name of
the Lord, 1 Samuel 15.13.14.
with protestation of your obedience to the will of the Lord: we reply; what
means then the bleating of the Sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen in our
ears? the loud noise of your Oaths, Injuries, Oppressions, Frauds,
Circumventions? You come with books in your hands, but with no book for Gods
Spirit to write obedience in. A Bible under the arm, with many, is but like a
Rule at ones back, whiles all his actions are out of square. The History of
the Bible is carried away easier then the mystery.

Philosophy says, that there is no vacuit^e: no vessel is empty; if of water,
or other such liquid and material substances, yet not of air. So perhaps you
bring hither Vialls to receive this B^lme of Grace, and carry them away full,
but only full of wind, a vast, incircumscrib'd, and swimming knowledge is in
some a motion, a notion, a mere implicit and confused tenencie of many
things; which lie like Corn, loose on the floor of their brains. How rar^ is
it to see a Vial carried from the Church full of Balm, a Conscience of Grace*
I know there are many names in our Sard^: I speak not to disharten any, but to
encourage all. Only would to God, we would show less, and do more, of
goodness. Yet show freely, if you do godly. I reprehend not showing, but not
doing. We preach not to your flesh, but to your spirits: neither is this Balm
for the ear, but for the soul. Therefore I sum up this observation with a
Father. Cy^ri. apud Gr^nat. Conc. 1.
Quantum vas fidei capacis afferimus, tantum gratiae inundantis haurimus:
Look, how capacious a vessel of Faith we bring with us to the Temple, so
much of this gracious and flowing Balm of life we receive. Consider that this
Balm is I^rom.
animae languentis medicina, the Physic for a sick soul. Come to it, like
Patients, that desire to be cured. Hug. in introd. sacr. scrip cap. 13
Quidam veniunt vt noua per quirant, and haec curiositas est, quidam vt
sciantur, and haec vanitas est: They abuse this word, that search it only for
news, and this is curiosity; or to get themselves a name, and this is
vanity: or to sell the truth, and this is Simonie: or to jest on it, and this
is Epicurisme: or to confute it, and this is Atheism.

You do well condemn, first, them that prefer Machiauell to Moses; Ismaels
scoffs to Ieremies tears; Jericho to Jerusalem, the tower of Babell to the
gates of Bethell: or secondly, those that put away the Ministry as a
superfluous Office; and think they know enough to save themselves.

Dux ero, miles ero, duce me, ^e milite solus
Bella geram.
They will be their own captains and their own soldiers, and without
calling the assistance of man or Angel, Prophet or Apostle, they will band^
with the Devil and all his army, hand to hand: or thirdly, those that, like
the Collier, dance in a circular measure, and hang all their Faith on the
hooks of others belief: exercising all their religion by an exorcising Mass:
whiles they count the Old and New Testaments books of controversy, and that
it is peremptory sacrilege to meddle with the scriptures. You do well to
abhor these dotages: but still look, that all be well at home. Love the
Word; and that with an appetite. Beati esurientes: Mat. 5.6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall
be satisfied. But as you have love to it, so live by it. Sen. lib. 1. ep. 3.
Non scholae, sed vitae discendum: We learn, not only to know good, but to
live well, Sermon. in Cant.
Audiatis vt sciatis (says Saint Bernard) sciatis vt aedi^icemini, et hoc
integritas est: vt aedisicetis, et hoc Charitas est. Hear to know, know to
edify your selves; this is integrity: to edify others; this is Charity.
Bring then to this Balm, vialls of sincerity, not of hypocrisy; least God
fill them with the vialls of his indignation. It is not enough to have ears,
but ears to hear. Idle Auditors are like Idol Gods, which have members not
for use but show: like glass w^ndowes upon stone-walls, to give ornament, not
to receive light.

5. The Balsame tree was granted sometimes to one only people, Judea; as Lib.
12. cap. 17
Pliny testifies. It was thence derived to other Nations. Who, that is a
Christian, does not know and confess the appropriation of this spiritual
Balm, once to that only Nation? Psalm. 147.19.2^.
He shows his word unto Jacob; his statutes and his judgments unto Israel.
He has not dealt so with any Nation: and as for his Judgments, they have not
known them. Now, as their earthly Balm was by their civil Merchants
transported to other Nations: so when this heavenly Balm was given to any
Gentile, a Merchant of their own, a Prophet of Israel, carried it. Nineveh
could not have it without a Jonas. Nor Babylon without some Daniels. And though
Paul and the Apostles had a Commission from Christ, to preach the Gospel to
all Nations, yet observe how they take their leave of the Jews. Act. 13.46.
It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you*
but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles. Other Lands might brag of their natural
and national benefits: only Jury of both the Balmes. Non omnis fert omnia
tellus. Horat.
Nihil est ex omni part beatum.

Virgil.
India mittit ebur: molles dant thura Sabai:
Totaque thuriferis Panchaia dives arenis.
Hiram had store of Timber, Moab of Sheep, Ophir was famous for gold, Chittim
for Iuorie, Basan for Oaks, Lebanon for Cedars; Flascon had the best Wines,
Athens the best Honey, Persia the best Oil, Babylon the best Corn, Tyr^ the
best Purple, Tharsis the best Ships: the West Indies for Gold, the East for
Spices: but of all, Jury bore the Palm, for bearing the Balm. Such grace had
Israel for the temporal, much more for the spiritual Balm: that all Nations
might make low courtesy to her, as the Queen of the Provinces, and be
beholding to her, for the crummes that fell from her Table; as the
Syrophaenician desired of Christ. Yet she, that transcended all in her
blessings, de^cended lower then all in her disobedience. And as she lift up her
head, and gloried in her special privileges; so she might hang down her head
for shame at her special wickednesses.

For it is observed, that there are sins adherent to Nations, proper,
peculiar, genuine, as their flesh cleaves to their bones. That as for the
climate of Heaven, their bodies differ; so for the custom of their lives,
their dispositions vary from others. So that many Countries are more dangerous,
either for sins or calamities. For of necessity, Necesse est, au^ imiteris,
aut oderis.
they that live among them must either imitate them and do ill, or hate them
and suffer ill: since amicitae pares aut quarunt aut faciunt; cohabitation of
place seeks or makes coaptation of manners. S. Paul notes the Tit. 1.12.
Cretians for Liars: S. Luke the Athenians for Act. 17.21.
news inquirers and bearers. The Graecians were noted for light: the Parthians
for fearful: the Sodomites for Gluttons; like as England (God save the
sample) has now suppled, lythed, and stretched their throats. If we should
gather Sins to their particular Centers, we would appoint Pride to Spain,
Lust to France, Poisoning to Italy, Drunkenness to Germany, Epicurisme to
England. Now it was Isreal's wickedness and wretchedness, that they fell to
Idolatry. Not that other Nations were not Idolaters, but Isreal's vilest,
because they alone were taught the true worship of God.

Josephus holds, that the Jews were the best Soldiers of the world, both for
abillitie of body, and agillitie of mind, in strength, in stratagem. Diverse
people are now excellent fighters one special and singular way. The Romans
fight well in their Councels, I had almost said Fence-schooles: the Italians in
their Shops: the Spaniards in their Ships: the Frenchmen in a hold: the Scot
with his Lance: the Irishman on foot, with his Dart. But the Jews were
(says Josephus) every way expert. Alas; their victory came not from their
own strength: the Lord fought for them. So one of them cha^eth ten of his
enemies, a hundredth chase a thousand. They had the shield of Gods protection,
the sword of his spirit, the word of God: defense and offense against their
carnal and spiritual enemies: And if ever they received wound to their flesh
or spirits, they had here both the sovereign Balmes to cure them. But alas!
they that were so euery-way-blessed, lost all by loosing their Balm, and
treading it under feet. For this cause their Balm is given to us: their
auersion, their euersion is our conversion. They were Gods Esa. 5.4.
V^ne, but they lost their sweetness. They were Gods Romans 11.20.
Olives, but they lost their fatness. Therefore God took away his Balm.

6. Pliny affirms, that even when the Bal^ame tree grew only in Jury, yet it
was not growing commonly in the Land, as other trees either for Timber, Fruit,
or Medicine; but only in the Kings Garden. The prepared Juice, or Opobal^amum,
was communicated to their wants; but the Trees stood not in a Subjects
Orchard. He says further, that it grew in two Orchyards of the Kings; whereof
the greater was of twenty days aring. I force no greater credit to this,
then you will willingly give it; (which yet is not improbable) but this I build
on, and propound for truth: that this spiritual Balm grows only in the
Garden of the King of Heaven. R^u. 2.7.
To him that overcomes, will I give to ^ate of the tree of life, which is in
the midst of the Paradise of God. It grows in the Paradise or heavenly Orchard
of God. The root of it is in Heaven: there sits that holy tree, Colos. 3.1.
at the right hand of his Father. His fruit, his seed, his Balm he sends down
to us, written by his Prophets and Apostles, read and preached by his Ministers.

Mahomet would challenge this Balm to grow in his Garden, and bids us search
for it in his Alchoran. The Apostate Jews affirm it to grow in their
Sinagogue, and point us to the Talmud. The Russian or Muscouitish turn us over
to their Nicol^itan Font; and bid us diue for it there. The Pope pluckes us by
the sleeue, (as a Tradesman that would feign take our money) and tells us,
that he only has the Balm, and shows us his Masse-booke. If we suspect it
there, he warrants the virtue from a general Council. If it does not yet
smell well, he affirms, (not without menacing damnation to our mistrust, that
it is even (in scrinio pectoris sui) in the closet of his own breast; who
cannot err. Tut, says he, as it grows in Gods Garden simply, it may poison
you. As if it were dangerous to be meddled withal, till he had played the
Apothecarie, and adulterated it with his own sophistication. Indeed, he makes
it sweet, by his fayning it; and therefore his Shop wants not Customers. But it
is dear, when Gods is cheap, says the Prophet. Esaias. 55.1.
Buy it without money, without price. Wherefore do you spend money? etc.

Well: it can grow in one only Garden, and that is Gods. There is but one
truth. Ephesians. 4.5.
On^ Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, etc. Even they that have held the greatest
falsehoods, hold that there is but one truth. Nay, most will confess, that this
Balsame tree is only in Gods Garden; but they presume to temper the Balm at
their own pleasure, and will not minister it to the world, except their own
fancy has compounded it, confounded it, with their impure mixtures. No false
Religion, no fundamental Heresy, but give God the appropriation of the Balm;
but they take to themselves the ministration, the adulteration of it. So in
effect, they either arrogate the Balm to themselves; or take it out of Gods
Garden (as it were, whither he will or no) to plant it in their own. So they
brag every one of this Balm. But who will not suspect the Wares out of a
known Couseners Shop? It is unlawful and wicked, to offer to Gods Church,
Balsamum v^l alterum, velidem alteratum, either another Balm, or after another
fashion, then he appoints.

But as Clusius writes of new Balmes, Peruvianum et Balsamum de Tolu, from Peru
and Tolu; so demonstration is made us of new Balmes; some rather Logical, then
Theological. Germany knows my meaning. Others produce us Balmes of Piety,
made up with Policy: the coat of Religion put upon the back of State. Where
there may be some Balm, but it is so mixed, that it is marred. For to a
scruple of that, they put in whole ounces of other ingredients: an ounce of
Oleum vulpinu^, Foxe-like subtlety, as much oleum viperis, poysonable opinion,
and no less oleum tartari, etc. A whole pound of policy, an arme-full of
stinking weeds, frivolous and superstitious Relics: all these are put to a
poor dram or scruple of Balm. Nay, and all these shall be dashed and
slubberd together by a Mass Priest, an idle and unskillful Apothecarie. And
when any conscience is known sore, by auricular Confession, it shall have a
plaster of this stuff.

Perhaps this is that they call their Holy-oyle, which is said to heal the
sick body, if it recouers; or at least to cure the soul of her sins; at
least, of so many, as may keep a man from Hell, and put him into Purgatory:
where he shall have house-roome and firewood free; till the Pope with
soule-Masses and merits can get him a plat of ground in Heaven, to build a
house on. How shameful is it to match their oil with Gods Balm? to kneel to
it as God, to ascribe events to it, which God works, (and to help the glory
of it) to call those works miracles; whereas they might find fitter use for
it, about their boots. Though it be newly invented, and every day more
sophisticate then other, yet they make their Patients believe, that it is
ancient, and derived from holy Scriptures: and enter the lists with the
Champions of Gods truth, to maintain the purity and antiquity of it.

A great while they kept (Gods Balm) the word wholly from the people: now,
because the cursings of the people have a little pierced their souls, for
engrossing this Balm, and denying i^ to their sores; they have stopped their
mouths with the Rhemish Testament. But as they erst did curse them for
hoording Gods grain; so now their just anger is as sharp against them, for the
musty, mill-dew'd, blasted stuff, they buy of them. Their wickedness is no
less now in poisoning them, then it was before in staruing them. Before no
Balm, now new Balm. Before no plaster to their wounds, now that which makes
them ranckle worse. So they have mended the matter, as that Physician did his
Patients health; to whom, because he was urged to minister somewhat, he gave
him a potion, that dispatched his disease and life at once. Thus the Popish
Balm is, as Renodaeus calls one vulgar Balsamum, exoletum, inodorum, vietum,
rancidum: stale, unsavory, rammish, lanke, vile.

Such is the sophisticate doctrine of superstitious heretics; speaking for
Gods precepts, their own prescripts: preaching themselves, and in their own
names, for ostentation, like the Scribes: delivering falsehoods, and fathering
them on the Lord, He has said it: abusing men's ears with old wives tales,
and old men's dreams, traditions of Elders, constitutions of Popes, precepts of
men, unwritten truths, untrue writings, either withholding the truth in
unrighteousness, ^ Cor. 2.17.
or se^^ing the word of God for gain, or corrupting it, and dealing with it,
as Adulterers do in their filthiness: as these respect not issue, but lust,
so the other, not Gods glory, but their own wantonness: ministering Medicines,
which God never prescribed to them. How can their Romans 10.15.
feet seem beautiful, when like monsters, they have too many toes on them,
as the 2 Samuel 21.20.
Giants son; or too few, as Judge. 1.7.
Adonibezeck and those whom he maimed: offending either in excess or defect?
But it is gods fearful protestation in the end of the Book, summing and
sealing up all the curses, that went before it. R^u. 22.18.
If they add, he that has power to add plagues with an everlasting
concatenation, will multiply their miseries without number or end. If they
diminish, he that can abate his blessings so low, that not the least scruple
shall remain, will return them their own measure. And for you, my Brethren,
hear the Apostle, Colos. 2.8.
Let no man beguile you with Philosophy, and vain deceit, or please you with
false Balm. You may say of their natural learning, as Albumazer of Boleno,
Henbane; whiles it grows, says he, in Persia, it is venomous; but if
transplanted and growing in Jerusalem, it is not only good medicine, but good
meat. Well, if it were possible, that an Gal. 1.8.
Angel from heaven should preach another Gospel, then that which God has
delivered, and his Apostles preached, anathema sit, let him be accursed: the
true Balm comes only from the garden of the King of heaven.

7. They write of the Balsame tree, that though it spread spaciously, as a
Vine, yet the boughs bear up themselves: and as you heard before, that they
must not be pruined, so now here that they need not be supported. Gods word
needs no vndersetting. It is firmly rooted in heaven; and all the cold
storms of humane reluctancie and opposition cannot shake it. Nay, the more it
is shaken, the faster it grows. The refractary contentions of worldlings to
pluck it down, have added no less strength, then glory to it. Nor can the
ministerial office of the dispensers of it, be called an aid or underpropping
to it. It is not the Balm, but you that stand in need of our function. He
that owes it, is powerful enough to protect it. You cannot apply it to your
selves without the Physicians help. If you could, or did not more want us, then
that does, you should see it flourish and spread without us. He that Heb. 1.3.
supports all by his mighty word, asks no supporter for it self.

The Church of Rome challenges more, then the Church of God; that she bears
up the word: and because she assumes to carry the keys, she presumes that the
door of Heaven hangs upon her hindges. They say, the Church is a Pilar: we may
join issue with them, and yield it, as a reverend Divine said. For a Pillar
as it vpholds something, so is vpholden of something. If then the Church be a
Pillar, Christ is the Rock, whereon it stands: now, take away the Rock, down
comes the Pillar. The Rock is well enough without the Pillar, not the Pillar
without the Rock. Yet how fondly? They that would build all on their Church,
yet build their Church on Peter: and not only on Peter, that was weak, but on
his fained Successor, who is weaker. Now this Hei^e built on Peter, and this
Church built on this heir, must uphold the word, as they say, Atlas did the
world. But, alas, if the word do not bea^e them, they will fall, like water
spilt on the ground, not to be saved or gathered up. These are miserable,
arrogant, impudent wretches, that think, Gods word could not hold up the
hands, (like Moses, unless Aaron and Hur h^lped him) if the Pope and his
Councels were not: forcing all our ^redite to the Gospel for this, because
their Church allows it. Gods word must then stand or fall at man's approbation
or dislike. Oh indignity to the stable ordinance of an eternal Majesty. It
is enough for the laws of a temporal Prince, to have some dependence on his
Officers promulgation. He that took no man nor Angel to his Council, when
he made it, demands the succor of none to preserve it. He is content to
propagate the sound thereof through us his Trumpets: if it had never been
preached by man, it should not have lost the effect. Heaven and Earth shall
sooner run, like scorched skins, to heaps; then any jot, (as small a
Character as the Alphabet affords) shall ineffectually perish. If man could
deny this Office, God could speak it by Angels, by Thunder, by Lightning,
Confusion, Terror; by Frogs, Lyce, Caterpillars, Blasting, Plague,
Leaprosie, Consumption; as he has sometimes (holding his peace) preached
actually to the World* It is his own Balm, and shall spread to his pleasure,
and has no weakness in it, to need man's supportance. Blessed are we under
the shadow of the Branches, and wise if we build our saluations on it.

8. Physicians write of Balsamum, that it is paratu facile et optimum, easy
and excellent to be prepared. This spiritual Balm is prepared to our hands:
it is but the administration that is required of us, and the application of
you. Not that we should slubber it over, as the Sons of Eli; in preaching:
nor that you should clap it negligently to your selves in hearing. A mortal
wound is not to beiested withal, though the Physician has in his hand, the
Balm that can cure it. Your diseases are as different in your consciences, as
in your carcasses. Your constitutions of body are not more various, and often
variable, then your affections in foul. There must be some wisdom in us, to
hit the right box, and to take out that Physic, which God has made fit for
your griefs. We are sure, the shaft that shall kill the Devil in you, is in
Gods Quiver; indiscretion may easily mistake it, misapply it. This Balm is
ready, soon had, and cheaply: let not this make you disesteeme it. Gallant
humors vil^pend all things that are cheap. But if in Gods Mart, you refuse
his Wares, because their price is no greater, you may perhaps one day, when
they are gone, curse your withstanding your Markets. And being past obtaining,
prize it the higher, because in the days of your sacietie you did undervalue
it. The guests, in the Gospel, bidden to a Supper gratis, make light of it:
when the Feast-maker had protested against them, that they Luke 14.24.
should never taste of his Supper, they doubtless would have been glad, if
their money could have purchased it: though it cost one his Farm, and the
other his Oxen.

9. Balm is, vtilis ad omnium morborum expugnationem, good against all
diseases. The Receipt, that Linus, Hercules his Schoolmaster gave him, when he
taught him wrestling, was only a Balm. Darius, says Renodaeus, so esteemed
it, that non modo inter pretiosissimam supellectilem reponeret, sed cunctis
opibus praeponeret; he did not only lay it up amongst his richest treasures,
but even prefer it before them all. This spiritual Balm is far more
precious in it self, and fructuous to all men; if they apprehend it in
knowledge, apply themselves to it in obedience: possessing it in science, in
conscience. Philosophers, Poets, Physicians, Historians have reported some one
extraordinary thing, exceeding all the rest in their observations. They talk
of Cornucopia, that it supplied men with all necessary food. They hammer at
the Philosophers stone, which, they affirm, can turn baser metals into gold.
Vulcans Armor, says the Poet, was of proof against all blows. Physicians
tell us, that the herb Panaces is good for all diseases: and the drugge
Catholicon in stead of all Purges; as both their names would seem to testify.
They come all short of this spiritual Balm. It has in deed and perfection,
what they attribute to those in fiction. Herba est, c^ius succus morbis omnibus
med^tur, vt voc^bulum ipsum indicat.
Panace is an herb, whereof Pliny thus testifies. Panace, ipso nomine,
om^i^m morborum remedia promitt^t. The very name of it, promises remedy to
all sicknesses. It is but a weed to our Balsame; which is a tree, a tree of
life, a complete Paradise of trees of life, flourishing and bearing every
month, the fruit being delectable, the leaves medicinable. It is a true
purging virtue, to cleanse us from all corruption of spirit, of flesh. Ioh.
15.3.
Now are ye clean, through the word, which I have spoken unto you. Catholicon
is a drugge, a drudge to it. It purifieth our hearts, from all defilings and
obstructions in them. A better Cornucopia, then ever Nature (had she been
true to their desires and wants) could have produced: the bread of Heaven, by
which a man lives for ever. A very supernatural stone, more precious then the
Indies, if they were consolidate into one Quarrey; that turns all into purer
gold, then ever the land of Hau^lab boasted. A ^tronger Armor then was
V^l^^n's, to shield us from a more strange and savage enemy, then ever Anak
begot, the Devil. It is a Panary of wholesome food, Ephesians. 6.11.
against fenowed traditions. A Physicians Shop of Antidotes, against the
poisons of heresies, and the plague of iniquities. A pandect of profitable
Laws, against rebellious spirits. A treasury of costly jewels, against
beggarly rudiments.

The Aromaticall tree, has sometimes good savor in the rind, sometimes in
the flower, sometimes in the fruit. So it fares in the Cinnamon, that is a
ri^de; the Mace is the flower, and the Nutmegge the fruit. According as the dry
and earthie part, mingled with the subtle watery matter, has the Masterie in
any part' more or less, that part smells best. As in common flowers, which
savor in the flower, when from the stalk or root arises nothing. Only the
Balm smells well in every part. So the word is in every respect the sweet
savor of life; though to some, through their own corruption, it becomes the
savor of death. We may say of the word, as one of the Lamb; it is all good:
the fleece to cloth, the flesh to eat, the blood for medicine. Thus, 2 Timothy
3.16.17.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproo^e, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: That the man
of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Aug. Ser. 139.
de temp.
His salubriter, et corriguntur pra^a, et nutriuntur par^a, et magna
oblectantur ingenia. Evil wits are corrected, simple are illightned, strong
are delighted by the word. And In his quotidie proficerem, si ^as solas ab
ineunte pueritia, vsque ad de^repitam s^^^ctutem, maximo oti^, summo studio,
meliore ingenio conarer addiscere. In these I should continually profit, if
from the first day of my understanding, to the last of my old age, I should be
conversant with them.

Other things may have in them (salubritatem quandam) a certain wholesomnesse*
but from this Balm (sanitas ^t ipsavita petitur) health and life it self is
derived. Humane writings may, like the Aliptae, put blood in our cheeks; but
this is the true Physic to cherish our spark, to maintain our life. Other
herbs, and plants, and roots may be toxica, and poison the broth; this is
Elisha's salt, that only sweetens it. Lignum crucis, is lignum vitae, like
Moses wood, to put a healthful taste into the bitter waters of humane
knowledge. These are the two Testaments of God (which no man shall interline
without certain judgment) like the two pillars of smoke and fire, one dark
like the old, the other bright as the new, only able to conduct us from Egypt
to Canaan: and to furnish us with all necessaries by the way, if we depend
thereon. The two Cherubins, that look directly toward the Mercie-seate, both
pointing to Jesus Christ. The Math. 13.52.
Treasure, that has both old and new in it, sufficiently able to instruct the
Scribe to the Kingdom of Heaven. This is that medicamentum medicamentorum, as
Petrus Apponensis says of the Balm, vbi nihil deficit, quod in salutem
sufficit, where, there is no want of any thing requisite to salvation. Tertul.
Cuius plenitudinem adoro, whose fullness I reverence and admire.

This is that light, which can justly guide our steps: this is that measure of
the Sanctuary, that must weigh all things: this is that great Seal, that must
warrant all our actions. This gives at one Sermon, Balm sufficient to heal
diverse diseases. Peter had Auditors of diverse Nations: Act 2.9.
Parthians, Medes, Elamites, etc. Jews and Prosel^^es, Cretes and Arabians:
and no question but their affections were as naturally, as nationally
different: yet were Ver 41.
three thousand won at one Sermon. So the Luke 3.10.
Multitude, the Publicans, the Soldiers had all their lessons at one time: so
many in number, and such manner of men in nature, had their remedies together,
and their several diseases healed, (as it were) with one plaster. The people
had a doctrine of Ver. 11.
charity: the Publicans of Ver. 13.
equity: the Soldiers Ver. 14.
of innocence. This was prophesied by Esa. 11.6.
Esaias, fulfilled here, and often in Christ's Kingdom. The Wolf is turned to
the Lamb, when the Soldiers are made harmless: the Leopard into a Calfe,
when the Publicans are made just: the Lion and Bear into a Cow, when the
Multitude is made charitable.

Water searches, and wind shakes, and thunder terrifieth even Lions, but the
word only is strong to convert the heart of man. Some indeed, both in sense
and censure, judge it weak; but they, alas, shall find it, (if weak to save
them, yet) strong to condemn them. If it cannot plant thee, it will supplant
thee. This then is that sovereign Balm, medicinable to all maladies.
Physicians ascribe many healing virtues to their Balsame: many, and almost what
not? This Metaphysicall does more properly challenge that attribution.

1. They say, that Balm taken fasting, Asthmaticis valde confert, is very good
against short-windednesse. Truly, Gods word lengthens and strengthens the
breath of grace; which otherwise would be short, the conscience (as the lungs)
being soon obstructed with iniquities. For goodness soon faints, where the
word is not without the Gospel, the health of obedience loses, and the
disease of sin gathers strength.

2. They say, that Balm taken inwardly, dissolues, and breaks the stone in
the reins. But Jeremy, in Gods Phisicke-booke, says, that our Balm is as a
Hammer to break Ier. 23.29.
the stone in the heart. The stone in the reins is dangerous, in the bladder
painful, but none so deadly as the stone in the heart. This Balm supples the
stony heart, and turns it into a heart of flesh.

3. They commend their Balm for a special ease to the anger of a venomous
biting. But our Balm is more excellent in aculeum Draconis, imo mortis,
against the sting of that great red Dragon, nay of Death it self. 1 Cor. 15.55
Oh Death, where is thy sting? Three Serpents give us v^nomous wounds. Sin
first stings us, the Devil next, and Death last. This Balm of Christ fetches
out all their poisons.

4. Others say of this Balm, that it is the best solution to the obstructions
of the Liver. I have heard the Liver in the body, compared with zeal in the
soul. The Liver (according to Physicians) is the third principal member,
wherein rest the animal spirits. In the soul two graces precede Zeal, Faith
and Repentance. I say not this in thesi but in hypothesi, not simply, but in
respect; and that rather of order, then of time. For a man is begotten of
immortal seed, by the Spirit at once. Now as the Liver calefies the stomach,
(like fire under the Pot) and thence succors digestion: so does zeal heat a
man's works, with an holy fervor; which are without that, a cold sacrifice to
God. A soul without zeal does as hardly live, as a body without a Liver. Haly
calls the Liver the Well of Moisture: we may say of zeal; it is the very
Cisterne, whence all other graces, as living there do issue forth into our
lives. The Liver is called Hepar and Iecur, because it draws juice to it
self, turns it into blood, and by veins serves the body, as the
water-house does a City by pipes. Nay, it ministers a surging heat to the
brain, to the eyes, to the wits, sait^ Isidore. The Pagan Nigromancers,
sacrificed only Livers on the al^ar of their God Phoebus, before his oraculous
answers were given. In the soul other graces, as Faith, Hope, Charity,
Repentance, did first rather breed zeal; but zeal being once inkindled does
minister nutrimentall heat to all these; and is indeed the best sacrifice
that we can offer to God. Without zeal all are like the oblation of Caine.

Now if any obstructions of sin seem to oppress this Zeal in us, this
Balm of Gods word is the only sovereign remedy to cleanse it. For the zeal
is dangerous, as the Liver, either by too much heat, or too much cold to be
distempered. To ouerheate the Liver of zeal many have found the cause of a
perilous surfetin the Conscience: whiles like the two Disciples, nothing could
content them but fire from heaven against sinners. If ever Bishop was in the
time of Popery, away with the office now. If ever Mass was said in Church,
pull it down. Though some depopulatours have now done it, in extreme
coldness, nay frozen dregs of heart, making them either no Churches, or
polluted ones; whiles those which were once Temples for Gods shepherds, are now
coats for their own. Yet they in unmeasurable heat wished, what these with
unreasonable cold Livers affected. Such miserable thieves have crucified the
Church, one by a new religion in will, the other by a no religion in deed. They
would not only take away the abuse, but the thing it self; not only the
Ceremony, but the substance. Acts and Mon.
As the Painter did by the picture of King Henry the eight, whom he had drawn
fairly with a Bible in his hand, and set it to open view against Queen Mary's
coming in triumph through the City: for which being reproved by a great man,
that ^aw it, and charged to wipe out the book; he, to make sure work wiped
out the Bible and the hand too; and so in mending the fault, he maimed the
picture.

This is the effect of praeter-naturall heat, to make of a remedy, a disease.
Thus whiles they dream, that Babylon stands upon Ceremonies, they offer to
race the foundations of Jerusalem it self. Well this Balm of Gods word, if
their sick souls would apply it, might cool this ungentle heat of their
livers. For it serves not only to inkindle heat of z^ale in the ouer-cold
heart, but to refrigerate the preposterous fervor in the fiery-hote. This is
the saving Balm, that scoures away the obstructions in the Liver, and preuents
the dropsy. For the dropsy is nothing else, says the Philosopher, but the
error of the digesti^e virtue in the hollownesse of the Liver. Some have such
hollownes in their zeal, whiles they pr^tend holiness of zeal; (as was in
the iron horns of that false prophet Zedekiah) that for want of applying this
Balm, 1 King 22.11.
they are sick of the dropsy of hypocrisy.

Innumerable are the uses of Balm, if we give credit to Physicians, vel
potum, vel inunctum. It strengthens the nerves, it excites and cherishes the
native heat in any part, it succoureth the paraliticke, and delayeth the fury
of convulsions, etc. And last of all, is the most soueragine help, either to
green wounds, or to inueterate ulcers. These, all these, and more then ever
was untruly fained, or truly performed by the Balsame to the body; is
spiritually fulfilled in this happy, heavenly, and true intrinsique Balm, Gods
word. It heales the sores of the conscience, which either original or actual
sin have made in it. It keeps the green wound, (which sorrow for sin cuts
in the heart) from ranckling the soul to death. This is that Balsame tree, that
has fructum vberrimum, vsum saluberrimum, plenteous fruit, profitable use: and
is, in a word, both a preservative against, and a restoratiue from all dangers
to a believing Christian. It is not only Physic, but health it self; and
has more virtue, saving virtue, validity of saving virtue, then the tongues
of men and Angels can ever sufficiently describe.

You have here the similitudes. Hear one or two discrepancies of this
natural and supernatural Balmes. For as no Metaphore should of necessity
run like a Coach on four wheels, when to go, like a man, on two sound
legs is sufficient; so eart^ly things compared with heavenly, must look to
fall more short, then Linus of Hercules, the shrub of the Cedar, or the lowest
Mole-banke of the highest Pyramides.

1. This earthly Balm cannot preserve the body of it self, but by the
accession of the spiritual Balm. Even Angels food (so called, not because
they made it, but because they ministered it) cannot nourish without Gods word
of blessing. 1 Timothy 4.4.5.
For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving: for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.
If the mercy of God be not on our sustenance, we may dye with meat in our
mouths, like the Israelites. If his prouidentiall goodness withold the
virtue, were our garments as costly as the Ephod of Aaron, there is no benefit
in them. When many are sick, they trust to the Physicians, as 2 Chro. 1^.12
Asa, or to this Balm, fastening their eyes and hopes on that: whereas Balm,
with the destitution of Gods blessing, does as much good, as a branch of
hearbe-Iohn in our Pottage. Nature it self declines her ordinary working, when
Gods reuocation has chidden it. The word without Balm can cure; not the best
Balm without the word.

2. So this natural Balm, when the blessing of the word is even added to it,
can (at utmost) but keep the body living, till the life^ taper be burnt out:
or after death, give a short and insensible preservation to it, in the
sarcophagall grave. But this Balm gives life after death; life against death,
life without death. Ioh. 6.68.
To whom shall we go? Lord, thou have the words of eternal life. The Apostle
does so sound it, the Saints in Heaven have so found it, and we, if we believe
it, if we receive it, shall perceive it, to be the word of life. Lib. 1. de
Doct. Channa. cap. 31.
And as Augustine of God, Omne bonum nostrum vel ipse, vel ab ipso: All our
good is either God, or from God: so all our ordinary means of good from God is
vel verbum, vel de verbo, either the word, or by the word.

The Prophet deriues the Balm from the Mount Gilead; demanding, if Gilead be
without Balm. Obseru.
It seems, that Gilead was an aromaticall place, and is reckoned by some among
the Mountains of spice. It is called in some places of Scripture Galaad; and
by an easy varying of the points in the Hebrew writing, Gilead. Genesis 31.
This Mountain was at first so called by Jacob, by reason of that solemn
Covenant, which he there made with his Father in law, pursuing Laban. Though
it be called Mount Gilead, before in the chapter. ver. 21.23.25. He set his
face toward Mount Gilead, etc. Yet it is by anticipation; spoken rather as the
hill was called when the History was written by Moses, then as it was saluted
and ascended by Jacob: who abode in it, till Laban ouer-tooke him; where the
pacified Father and the departing Son made their Covenant. Ver. 47.
Laban called it I^gar-Sahadutha: but Jacob called it Galeed. It signifies a
heap of witness, a name imposed by occasion of the heap of stones, pitched
for the league between them. Ver. 48.
La^an said, this heap^ is a witness between me and thee this day. Therefore
was the name of it called Galeed. There was one Gilead, son of Machir, son
of Manasseh; of whom, because it is said, that Numb. 26.29
Machir begat Gilead: and of Gilead ^^me the family of the Gileadites; some
ascribe the attribution of this name to Mount Gilead. This appears. Number. 32.39
40 read it.
But this Mount had the name, long before the son of Machir was borne. We
read of it, that it was. 1. a great mountain. 2. fruitful. 3. full of Cities.
4. abounding with Spices.

1. It was a great Mountain; the greatest of all beyond Jordan, in length
fifty miles. But as it ran along by other Coasts, it received diverse names.
From Arnon to the City Cedar, it is called Gilead. From thence to Bozra, it is
named Seir; and after, Hermon: so reaching to Damascus, it is joined to
Libanus. So Hierome conceiteth on those words of God unto the Kings house of
Judah. Ier. 22.6.
Thou art Gilead unto me, and the head of Lebanon: that therefore Lebanon is
the beginning of Gilead.

2. Fruitful, abounding with great varieti^ of necessarie^ and delights;
yielding both pleasure and profit. This every part and corner thereof afforded,
even as far as Mount S^ir, which the Edomites, the generation of Esau, chose
for a voluptuous habitation. This the children of Reuben, and the children of
Gad, and half the Tribe of Manasseh, when they saw Numb. 32.1.
the land of Gilead, that the place was a place for cat^ell, desired of Moses,
and of the Princes of the Congregation, that they might possess it: for it is
a land for cattle, and thy servants have cattle. The condition, that Moses
required, being by them granted, that they should go armed with their
brethren, till the expulsion of their enemies had given them a quiet seat in
Canaan. V^r. 26. Josh. 1.12.13.
Thy seruan^s will do as my Lord commands. Only our little ones, our wi^es,
our flocks, and all our cattle shall be in tho Cities of Gilead. The
fertillitie of Gilead contented them, though with the separation of Jordan from
their brethren. Our Savior describing the beauty of his Spouse Cant. 4 1.2.
Behold, thou art fair, my Love, behold thou art fair (inwardly fair with
the gifts of his spirit, and outwardly fair in her comely administration and
government:) Thou have Doves eyes within thy locks, (thy eyes of understanding
being full of purity, chastity, simplicity) he adds withal, that her
hair (her gracious profession, and appendances of expedient ornaments* are as
comely to behold) as a Flock of well-fed Goats, grasing and appearing on the
fruitful hills of Gilead. Which made them so pregnant, that like a Flock of
sheep, every one brings out Twins, and none is barren among them. The same
pra^se is redoubled by Christ, chap. 6. etc. Cant. 4.5 6.


3. It was full of Cities; a place so fertile, that it was full of Inhabitants.
^lair the Gileaedit^, who judged Israel, had thirty sons, that rode on thirty
Asse-Colts, and they had thirty Cities, Judge. 10.4.
which are called Hau^th-^ai^ unto this day, which are in the land of Gilead.
It was as populous as fructuous; and at once blessed with pregnancie both of
fruits for the people, and of people for the fruits. It was before Israel
conqu^red it, in the dominion of the Numb. 32.39
Amorit^s; and more specially, of Og king of Deuteronomy. 3.10.
Bashan, that remained of the remnant of the Giants: whose bedsted was a
bedsted of iron; nine cubits long, and four cubits broad, after the cubite
of a man. It was not only full of strength in it self, but guarded with
Cities in the plain. Deuteronomy. 3.10.
All the Cities of the plain, and all Gilead, and all Bashan, etc. So the
Inheritance of Gad is reckoned by Iosuah. Ioshu. 13.25.
Their coast was lazer, and all the Cities of Gil^ad. It appears then that
Gilead was full of Cities. So blessed, as if the Heavens had made a Covenant of
good unto it, as Jacob did erst with Laban upon it. A hill of witness indeed,
for it really testified Gods mercy to Israel. God calls it his own. Psalm.
108.8.
Gilead is mine, Manasseh i^ mine. The principal or first name of Kingdom,
that usurping I^^bosheth was by Abner crowned over, was Gilead. 1 Samuel 2.9.
And he made him King over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, etc.

4. It was (lastly) a Mountain of Spices; and many Strangers resorted thither
for that Merchandise. Even when the malicious brethren, having thrown innocent
Joseph into the pit, sat down (in a secure neglectfulnesse) to eat bread:
Genesis 37.25.
Behold (surely the Lord sent and directed) a company of Ishmaelites came from
Gilead, with their Camels, bearing Spicery, and Balm, and Myrrh. By which it
appears to be mons aromatum, a hill of Sp^ces. Therefore God here; Is there no
Balm at Gilead?

Obseru.
The Iew^s were neer^ to Gilead; it was but on the other side of Jordan. The
fetching over their Merchandise was no long nor dangerous voyage. Yet was this
spiritual Balm nearer to them: it lay like Manna at their doors. Venit ad
limina virtus. The Kingdom of Heaven is among you, says Christ. There needed
no great journey for natural Physic, but less for spiritual comfort.
Behold, God himself gives his vocal answers between the Cherubins. Yet
alas! as it was once justly prouerb'd on the Monks, and such spiritual, or
rather carnal Couents, in that night of Popery: that the nearer they were to
the Church, the further from God. So it was even verefied of the Jews; that by
how much they were of all next to the Sanctuary, by so much of all remotest
from sanctity. And therefore, he that once said, Psalm 60.7.
Gilead is mine, and of the Temple in Judah, Ier. 7.10.
this is my house, called by my name; afterward left both the hill of Gilead,
and the Mount Syon, and the holy Sanctuary, a pray to the Romans; who left not
a stone upon a stone, to testify the ruins of it, or for succeeding ages to
say, This was the Temple of God. Thus says the Prophet Hosea: Hos. 6.8.
Gilead is a City of them that work iniquity, and is polluted with blood.
Therefore God turned that Psalm. 107.34.
fruitful Land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwelt
therein. For not content with the fertillitie of their soil, they manured it
with blood, says the Prophet. Hence no marvel, if it became at last, like the
cu^sed 2 Samuel 1.21.
Mountains of Gilboah, that drunk the blood of Saul and Jonathan.

You have heard the Balm: the next subject that offers it self to our speech,
is the Physicians. Is there no Balm at Gilead? is there no Physicians there?
The Prophets are allegorically called Physicians, as the word is Balm. So are
the Ministers of the Gospel, in due measure, in their place. To speak
properly and fully, Christ is our only Physician, and we are but his
Ministers, bound to apply his saving Physic to the sickly souls of his
people. It is he only, that cures the carcass, the conscience.

1. No Physician can heal the body without him The Mark. 5 26.
Woman with the bloody issue was not bettered (by her Physicians, though she
had emptied all her substance into their purses) till Christ undertook her
cure. The Math 8.3.
Leper, in the 8. of Matthew, was as hopeless, as hapless, till he met with
this Physician; and then the least touch of his ^inger healed him. Physicians
deal often, not by extracting, but protracting the disease: making rather
diseases for their cure, then cures for diseases: prolonging our sicknesses by
Art, which Nature, or rather natures defect has not made so tedious. Therefore
as one says wittily, the best Physic is to take no Physic: or as another
boldly; our new Physic is worse then our old sickness. But when our diseases
be committed to this heavenly Doctor, and he is pleased to take them in hand,
our venture is without all peradventure, we shall be healed. The least touch
of his finger, the least breath of his mouth, can cast out the evil in us,
that can cast out the devil in us, he can, he will cure us.

2. No Minister, can heal the Conscience, where Christ has not given a
blessing to it. Otherwise he may lament with the Prophet. Esa. 49 4.
I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught. Or as the
Apostle* I have fished all night, and caught nothing: yet at thy command, etc.
Cor. 3.5.6.
Who then is Paul? or who is Apollo? but Ministers, by whom ^ee believed, ^uen
as the Lord gave to every man. I have planted, Apollo watered, but GOD gave the
increase. If any be blind, He is the Oculist: if any be lame, He sets the
Bon^s: if any be wounded, He is the Surgeon: if any be sick, He is the
Physician.

They write of the Indian Physicians, that they cure the wound by sucking the
poison. Christ heales after a manner (I know not whither more) loving and
strange; by taking the disease upon himself. 1 Pet. 2.24.
Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree. Esa. 53.5.6.
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities* and
with his stripes we are healed. And the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of
us all. As the Leu. 16.22.
scape-goa^e was said to bear upon him the sins of Israel: so says the
Prophet of his antytipe Christ; morbos portauit nostros, Esaias. 53.4.
he has borne our griefs: too unsupportable a burden for our shoulders;
able to sincke us down to hell, as they did Caine and Judas, if they had been
imposed. Tulit Jesus. Christ carried our sorrows. Never was such a Physician,
that changed healths with his sick Patient. But H^e was humbled for us. Man's
maker is made man, the worlds succourer takes suck, the Bread is hungry, the
Fountain thirsty, the Light sleepy, the Way weary, the Truth accused, the
Judge condemned. Health it self is become sick, nay dead, for our salvation.
For man's sake (such was our weakness) Christ descended, (such was his
kindness) took one him to cure us (such was his goodness) and performed it,
(such was his greatness.) It was not Abanah nor Pharphar, nor all the rivers
of Damascus, not the water of Jordan, though bathing in it 70. times, not Jobs
^now-water, nor David's water of Isope, not the poole of Bethesda, though
stirred with a thousand Angels, that was able to wash us clean. Only fusus
sanguis Medici, factum medicamentum phrenetici: the blood of the Physician is
spilt, that it may become a medicine of salvation to all believers. This is the
Pelican, that preserues her young with her own blood. This is the Goat, that
with his warm gore breaks the adamants of our hearts. This is Ioh. 1.29.
that lamb of God, that with his own blood, takes away the sins of the
world. When the Oracle had told the king of Athens, that himself must dye in
the battle, or his whole army perish; Codrus (then King) never stuck at it,
but obtruded his own life into the ^awes of inevitable death, that he might
save his peoples. The King of heaven wa^ more freely willing to lay down his,
for the ^edemption of his Saints, when the eternal decree of God had
propounded him the choice. Is there no means to recover the sick world, but I
must dye, that it may live? then take my life, quoth Life it self. Thus August.
pro me doluit, qui non habuit, quod pro se doleret: He was made sick for me,
that I might be made sound in him.

This then is our Physician in whom alone is saving health. As Sybilla sung of
him. (...).
Virginij partus, magnoque aequaeua Parenti
Progenies, superas coeli quae missa per auras,
Antiquam generis labem mortalibus aegris
Abluit, obstructique viam patefecit Olympi.
He wrought all things with his word, and healed every disease with his power.
To Him let us resort, confessing our sores, our sorrows. Math 9.12.
They that be whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick. Psalm.
107.17.18.19.
Foolish m^n, because of their iniquities, are afflicted: that their soul
abhors all manner of meat, and they draw near to the ^ates of death. Yet
they cry unto this Physician, and he delivers them from their d^stresse. So
he has promised in the Testament both of his Law, and of his Gospel. 50.15.
Call on me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. Math. 11.28.
Come to me all that are l^den, and I will give you rest. There never went
sorrowful Beggar from his door without a^ Alms. No marvel, if he be not
cured, that is op^nionated of his own health. They say, that the Te^ch is the
Physician of Fishes; and they being hurt come to him for cure. All the Fishes
that are caught in the Net of the Gospel come to Christ, who is the King of
Physicians, and the Physician of Kings. Come then to Him, beloved, not as to a
Master in name only, as the Lawyer. Matthew. 22.36.
Matthew. 22. but as to a Savior indeed, as the Leaper. Matthew. 8. Lord, Matthew.
8.2.
if thou will, thou can make me clean. Non ta^quam ad Dominum titularem, sed
tanquam ad Dominum tutelarem: as one ellegantly.

Ministers are Physicians under Christ; sent only with his Physic in their
hands, and taught to appl^ it to our necessities. Neither the Physician of the
body, nor of the soul can heal, by any virtue inherent in, or derived from
themselves. We must take all out of Gods warehouse. God has a double Box of
Nature, of Grace: as man has a double sickness, of ^lesh, of spirit.

1. The first box is mentioned. Ecclus. 38. Ecclus 38.4.
The Lord has created medicines out of the earth, and he that is wise will
not abhor them. God has not scanted earth of drugges and mineralls, the
simples of Physic for such as tread on it. And howsoever our vanity in
health transport our thoughts, earth has no more precious thing in it, then
(as sustenance to preserve, so) medicine to restore us. You that have dug
into the entralls of the dead earth, and not spared the bowels of the living
earth, the poor, for riches: You that have set that at your heart, which was
cast down at the Act. 4.35.
Apostles feet, Money; as fit only for sanctified men to tread upon in
contempt: You that have neglected heaven, which God has made your more
glorious feeling, and richly stuck it, like a bright Canopy, with burning
lights; and doted on your pauement, made only for your feet to tread upon;
fixing your eyes and thoughts on that, which God has indisposed to be your
object: for man's countenance is erect, lessoning his soul to a just and holy
aspiration: You that have put so fair for the Philosophers stone, that you
have endeavored to sublimate it out of poor men's bones, ground to powder by
your oppressions: You that have buried your Gods, so soon as you had found
them out, as Rah^l did Labans in the Litter, and sit down with rest on them,
saying to the Wedge, Job. 31.24.
Thou ar^ my con^^dence. When your heads ache, dissolve your gold, and ^rinke
it; wallow your crasie carcass in your silver; wrap it in perfumes and silks,
and try what ease it will a^ford you. Will not a silly and contemptible weed,
prepared by a skillful Physician give you more comfort? Does not the common
air, which you receive in, and breath out again, refresh you better? How
eager are our desires of superfluities, how neglectfull of necessaries? This
box of treasures has God given us, and endued some with knowledge to minister
them; least our ignorance might not rather prejudice, the^ succor our healths.
No Physician then cures of himself; no more then the hand feeds the mouth.
The meat does the one, the medicine does the other; though the Physician and
the hand be vnspared instruments to their several purposes. Thus God relieues
our health from the Box of Nature.

2. The other Box is Grace; whence the Divine draws out sundry remedies for
our d^seases of soul. This is not so common, as that of Nature. Once one
Nation had it of all the world, now all the world rather then that Nation. But
it is certain, they have it only, to whom the Gospel is preached. It is
indeed denied to none, that do not deny their faith to it. Ioh. 1.29.
Christ is that Lamb, that takes away (...): the sin of the world. But many
want the Physicians to teach and apply this. Romans 10.15.
And how shall they preach, except they be sent? Now, where these Physicians
are, is the people healed by any virtue de^^ued from them? Is it the Perfumer
that gives such sweet odours, or his perfumes? Act. 3.12.
Why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness w^
had made this man to walk? Chap. 4.10.
Be it known to you all, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth does
this man stand whole before you. Therefore, says S. Paul, concluding this
Doctrine so thoroughly handled, 1 Cor. 3.21. etc.
Let no man glory in men, for all things are yours, whither Paul etc. all are
yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. It is the tidings we bring, that
saues you, not our persons. Moses, that gave the Law, could not frame his own
heart to the obedience of it. It lies not in our power to beget faith in our
own souls. The heart of the King is in the hands of God, as are the waters in
the South. The souls of all, Prince and people, Prophets and Nazarites,
Preachers and hearers, learned and ignorant, are converted by God, by whom they
were created. It was the voice even of a Prophet: Turn us, oh Lord, and so
shall we be turned.

This consideration may serve to humble our hearts, Use.
whom God has trusted with the dispensation of his Oracles. It is a
sacrilegious sin, for any spiritual Physician, to ascribe Gods doing to his
own saying; and to make H^s glory cleave to earthen fingers. As Menecrates, a
natural one, wrote in a certain Epistle to Philip of Macedon. Thou art King
of Macedon, I of Physic. It lies in thy power to take health and life from
men, in mine to give it. So monstrous was his pride, yet so applauded by the
besotted Citizens, that he marched with a train of Gods after him. One in the
habit of Hercules, another of Mercury, a third in the form of Apollo: whilst
himself, like Jupiter, walked with a purple robe, a Crown of gold, and a
Scepter; boasting, that by his Art, he could breath life into men. Foolish
clay! he could not preserve himself from mouldring to dust. Ostentation in a
spiritual Physician is worse, by how much our profession teaches us to be
more humble. It is a high climbing pride in any Pharise, and injurious to the
Throne of God, to arrogate to himself a converting power. As in the fable, the
Fly sitting on the Coach-wheele at the games of Olympus, gave out, that it was
she, which made so great a dust. Or as that malecontent in a deep melancholy,
who hearing the wi^des blow furiously, thought it was only his breath, which
made all that blustering. It is God only, that can turn the heart, and tune
the tongue, heal the body, and help the soul. Let the Instruments have just
respect, God alone the praise. Ecclus. 38.1.
Honor the Physician with the honor due unto him: for the Lord has created
him. And 1 Timothy 5.17.
count the well-ruling Elders worthy of double honor. But let God be
glorified, as the Author of all, above all, for all.

It has pleased God to call his Ministers by this title, Physicians: many
duties hence accrue to our instruction. I cannot, I need not, dwell much on
them. For every one can lesson us, that will not be lesson'd by us. Not that
we refuse knowledge from any lips; since nothing can be said well, but by Gods
spirit: who sometimes reproues a Jonas by a Mariner; a Peter by a silly
Damsel, a Balaam by an Ass. But because they, whose lips God has seasoned,
sealed to preserve knowledge, are held contemptible; and their feet foul,
that bring the fairest message. So the frantic Patient beats the Medicine
about his ears that brings it. The Prophets would have cured Jerusalem, behold
Jerusalem killet^ them. You kill us still; though not in our natural, yet in
our civil life, our reputation. We feel not your murtherings, but your
murmurings. Ishmaels tongue made him a Persecutor, as well as Esau's hands.
Only our God comforts us, as he did Samuel: They have not cast thee away, but
they have cast me away, says the Lord. A word or two therefore concerning
their care of your cure.

1. The Physician must apply himself to the nature of his Patient: so the
Minister to the disposition of his hearer: leading the gentle, and drawing the
refractarie; winning some with love, and pulling others out of the fire, Jude.
22.23.
having compassion on some, and saving others with fear. Medicamenti dosis pro
coeli et soli natura mutanda. The prescription of the Medicine must be
diuersified, according to the nature of the soil and the air. He shall never
cure men's consciences, that looks not to their affections; making a
difference. Paul testifies of himself. 1 Cor. 9.20.22.
I became to the Jews as a Jew, etc. to the weak, as weak; that I might save
the weak: I am made all things to all men, that by all means I might save
some. We must vary our speech to their weak understandings, Judgment to whom
judgment, mercy to whom mercy belongs.

And you, Beloved, must also apply your selves to us; not scorning your own
Preacher, and running with itching ears to others; delighting rather in the
variety of Teachers, then in the verity of Doctrines. It fares with Ministers
as with Fish, none so welcome, as the new come. S^t aside prejudice. The
meanest Preacher, whom God has sent you, can show you that, which if you
obediently follow, shall effectually save your soul^s. The word is powerful,
what instrument so ever brings it: and Gods strength is made manifest in our
wea^^nesse. Hear all, despise none. And as we are bound to Act. 20.28.
^eede that Flo^ke, whereof the holy Ghost has m^de v^ ouer-^eers: so do you
content your selves with that Pastor, whom God has sent to feed you.
Factions have thus been ^^ndled, (and how hardly are they exti^guished?)
whiles one is for Pa^l, another for Apol^os, a third for Ceph^s: or rather (for
these preserved one A^alogie of truth in their Doctrine, and only differed in
plainness and eloquence of speech) when some are for Cephas, and others for
Caiaphas; some for Apostles, and other for Apostates; some for sincere
Preachers, others for Schismatic Sectaries. Thus o^seruing rather the
diversity of Instructours, then the unity of Truth* there arise, in the end,
as many minds as men, as many Sects as Cities, as many Gospels as Gossips.

2. The Physician must not commit his Patients health to the Apothecarie. God
has trusted thee with his peoples welfare, whom he has purchased with his
own blood; thou must not be at thy man, and impose all on him. It was the
reason, that the Romans Horse was so ill tended, himself so well. Ego curo
meipsum, Statius vero equum. I look to my self, but my man looks to my
Horse. The like reason, sometimes, makes fat Shepherds, and lean Flocks. God
has placed us, as Mothers to G^l. 4.19.
bear children unto him: now as we must not be barren, and bring forth none;
so we must not, when we have them, put them forth to nurse. It is not more
unkind in a natural, then unnatural in a spiritual M^ther. There is a
necessary use of the Apothecarie, s^ of the Reader. He that digges the ground
is not to be de^p^sed, though a more exquisite Gardener draws the knot. But it
is dangerous to trust all on him, and do Gods business by an Attorney. God
has given thee the milk, that thou should feed his Sheep, and not put
them over to an hireling: who suffers the Ioh. 10.12.
Wol^e to enter, and tear the Lambs, never breaking his sleep for the matter.
Not but that preaching may yield to a more weighty dispensation. When the
vaunts of some heretical Goliath shall draw us forth to encounter him with our
Pens, against whom we cannot draw the sword of our tongues: when the greater
business of Gods Church shall warrant our non-residence to the inferior: when
one is called from being a Mariner, and running about, to the office of a
Pilot, to sit still at the helm: then and upon these grounds, we may be
tolerated, by another Physician to serve our Cures; (for so I find our Cures.
charges, not without allusion to this metaphor, called:) a Physician, I say,
that is a skillful Divine; not an illiterate Apothecarie, an insufficient
Reader. That mere reading of the Scriptures has, and may save souls, who
ever doubted? But that Preaching with Reading is more effectual, can it be
denied? Oh then* that any of the Sons of the Prophets, whom God has blessed
with knowledge of his heavenly Physic, should sit down on the chair of
security, or shut themselves in the cells of obscurity, or chamber themselves
perpetually in a College, or grase on the private commons of one man's
benevolence (as Micah had his Leuite to himself) whiles their gifts are not
communicated to the Church of God.

Every spiritual Physician must keep his right vbi. It is well observed by
Aretius, Aret* in Math. 4.18.
upon the occasional calling of Peter and Andrew, when they were fishing: that
God is wont to bless men especially, when they are busied in their proper
element: working, as the Father charged his Son, in his Vineyard. Math. 21.28.
Not in the wilderness of the world, nor in the Labyrinth of Lusts, nor in the
field of Covetousness, nor in the house of security, much less in the
chamber of Wantonness, or in the Tavern of drunkenness, or theater of lewdnes,
but in Gods Vineyard, their general or particular calling. Our vocations must
be kept and followed; not making our selves Magistrates in foreign
commonwealths, Bishops in others diocesses, scalding our lips in our
neighbors pottage. When those Shepherds heard the first glad tidings of
Christ, they were Luke 2.8.
attending their flocks by night in the field. Saul going honestly about his
Fathers business, met with a Kingdom. And David was at the folds, when
Samuel came with the holy oil. We say Pluribus intentus, minus est ad singula
sensus. and
H^rat.
Miles ^quis, Piscator aquis, etc. Quod medicorum est
Promittunt m^dici, tractant fabrilia fabri.
Let none prescribe Physic, but practitioners in that faculty: none plead at
the bar, but Lawyers Let the Shoemaker look to his boot, the Fisher to his
boat, the Scholar to his book. The Husbandman in foro, the Minister in choro,
Omnia cum facias miraris ^ur facias nil?
Marul. Epig. Lib. 3.
Pos^hume, remsolam qui facit, ille facit.
He that would comprehend all things, apprehends nothing. As he that comes to
a Corne-heape, the more he opens his hand to take, the less he graspeth, the
less he holds. Who would in omnibus aliquid, shall in toto nihil scire.
When a man couets to be a Doctor in all Arts, he lightly proves a dunce in
many. Let the natural Physician apply his ministering, the spiritual his
Ministry. August.
Quid enim in Theatro renunciator turpium, etc. The idle sports of the Theater,
the wicked crafts in the Market, the gallant braueries of the Court, must not
hinder us, either to say Service in the Temple, or to do service for the
Temple. Clericus in opido, piscis in arido, as I have read. Rather, from the
words of that Father, if it be Gods will that when Christ comes to judgment,
inveniat me vel precantem vel praedicantem, he may find me either praying, or
preaching his holy word.

Well, we have every one our own cures; let us attend them. Let us not take
and keep livings of an hundred, or two hundred pound a year, and allow a
poor Curate (to supply the voluntary negligence of our non-residence) eight,
or (perhaps somewhat bountifully) ten pounds yearly: scarce enough to
maintain his body, not a doyt for his study. He spoke sharply, (not untruly)
that called this usury, and terrible usury. Others take but tenn^ in the
hundred, these take a hundred for ten. What say you to those, that undertake
two, three, or four great Cures, and Physic them all by Atturneyes! These
Physicians love not their Patients, nor Christ himself; as he taught Peter:
which S. Bernard thus comments on. Unless thy conscience bear thee witness,
Sermon 76. in Can^. Nisi per^i^ente conscientia, quo^ me ames, et valde ames,
nequaquam suscipias curam han^.
that thou love me exceeding much, that is, plus quam tua, plus quam tuos,
plus quam te, More then thy goods, more then thy friends, more then thy self,
thou art not worthy to undertake this Office. God has made us superintendents
of our charges, and bound us, (as Paul adjured Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.1.2.
I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
quick and dead at his appearing) to preach the word, and b^e instant, etc.
Many are content with presidence, not with residence. Bern.
Ac si victuri essent sine cura, cum peruenerint ad curam. As if they had
forgotten all care, when they have gotten a cure. This is not (dispensantis,
sed dissipantis officium gerer^) to be a Steward; but a loyterer in Gods
family. The Physician sleeps in his Study; the Apothecarie for want of
judgment takes a wrong Medicine, or no Medicine for the sick. The Pastor is
absent, the ^ireling (very often) either preaches idly, or negligently, or
not at all. And thus Gods people ar^ not recovered.

3. Physicians must not deal too much, with that they call blandum
medicamentum: which Physicians thus describe. Blandum dicitur, quod
mediocritantum quantitate sumptum, al^^um pigre et benign mouendo, pauca
deijcit. Spiritual Physicians must beware, how they give these soothing and
supple Medicines, which rather confirm the humors, then disperse the tumors,
or purge the crudities of sins in their Patients. Robustum corpus, multis
obs^ruc^ionibus imp^ditum, blanda imbecillaque medicamenta spernatur. A soul
settled, like Moab, on the Lees, or frozen in the dregs of inueterate and
obstinate sins; is not stirred by fair and flattering Documents. GOD
complains in this Chapter against those. Ver. 11.
They have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly; saying,
Peace, peace, when there is no peace. Such are described, Ezekiel 13.10.
Ezekiel. 13. They have seduced my people, saying, Peace, and there is no peace:
and one built up a wall, and lo, others dawbed it with vntemperd Mortar. God
gives a terrible and universal threatening. ver. 15.16. Ver. 15.
I will accomplish my wrath upon the wall, and upon them that have dawbed it
with vntemperd Mortar: and will say unto you. The wall is no more, neither they
that dawbed it. He proceeds to command Ezekiel, Ver. 18.
to prophecy against the women, that prophecy to Israel. Woe to the women,
that sow pillowes to all arme-holes, etc. This is shameful in a Preacher, to
wink at Idolatry in Bethel, because it is the Kings Chapel; and not to
reprove the iniquity of Gilgal, the Country of oppression, because himself
feeds at an oppresso^rs Table. Some are so weak, that (as Mulieres, quia
molliores, et pueri, quia teneri, et ex longo morbo resurgentes, blandioribus
egent medicinis) they cannot digest too strong a potion of reproof. Therefore
Kilius.
slecte quod est rigidum, foue quod est frigidum, rege quod est deuium. Bend
^he refractary, warm the cold, direct the wandering.

I have read in a Physician, that among many sophistications of this Balm,
sometimes they feign it with water, and then it runs above the water like
oil: sometimes with honey, which is thus perceived. If you put a drop thereof
into milk, it runs to curdes! When Ministers shall adulterate Gods pure and
sacred word, with the honey or oil of their own flatteries, and give it to a
sick soul; it is so far from nourishing, as the sincere milk of the
Gospel should do; that it curdleth in the stomach, and endangers the
conscience worse. It is enough for Physic, if it be wholesome. Not pleasant
taste, but secret virtue commends Medicines. The Doctrine, that is sweet to
flesh and blood, has just cause of ^^spition. It is (without question) harsh
to the appetite of either soul or body, that heales either. Not that we
should only blow a Trumpet of War, against opposers; but sometimes, yea
often also, pipe Mercy and Gospel to those, that will dance the Measures of
obedience. We must preach as well liberty to Captives, as captivity to
Libertines: and build an Arc for those that desire salvation, as power forth a
Flood of curses against them that will perish, and open the door to the
penitent knockers, as keep the gate with a flaming sword in our mouths
against the obstinate. If we harp somewhat more on the sad string of
Judgment, know that it is, because your sins are rifer and riper then your
obedient works. We must free our souls, that we have not administered soothing
Sermons, least at once we flatter and further you in your follies. You are apt
enough to derive authority for your sins, from our lives; and make our
patterns, patrons of your lewdness. As I wish that our life were not so bad,
so withal, that you would not out-goe, out-doe it, in evil. You go
dangerously far, whiles you make our weakness, a warrant to your
presumption. But if you fasten so wickedly on our vices, you shall never find
countenance from our voices. We condemn our own ills, and you for
aduenturing your souls to Satan, on so silly advantage. Stand forth, and
testify against us: Did we ever spare your vsuries, depopulations, malice,
frauds, ebrietie, pride, swearing, contempt of holy things and duties? Could
any Pharise ever tie our tongues with the strings of Judas purse; and charm
our conniuence or silence with gifts? Wretched men, if there be any such,
guilty of so palpable adulation; qui purpuram, magis quam deum colunt. Call
them your own common slaves, not Gods servants; that to gain your least
favors, are favorable to your greatest sins; and whilst they win your
credites, loose your souls.

We must follow our Master, who gave us a Commission, and gives us direction to
perform it. He came, once with Luk 24.36.
pax vobis, peace be unto you: at another time with vae vobis, Matthew. 23 13.
woe be unto you. We must be like him, (who was that good Samaritane) putting
into your wounds, as well the searching wine of reprehension to eat out the
dead flesh, as the oil of consolation, to cheer your spirits. Sometimes with
Ieremies Ier. 23.29.
Hammer, bruising your strength of wickedness; though here with Ieremies
Balm, binding up your broken hearts.

And for you, my Brethren, know that the things which cure you, do not
evermore please you. Love not your palates above your souls. Thou lie sick
of a bodily disease, and call on the Physician, not for well relished, but
healthful Potions: thou receiuest them spite of thy abhorring stomach, and
being cured, both thankest and rewardest him. Thy soul is sick: God thy b^st
Physician (unsent to) sends thee Physic, perhaps the bitter Pills of
affliction, or sharp prescripts of repentance by his word: tho^ loathest the
savor, and wilt rather hazard thy soul, then offend thy flesh; and when thou
should thank, grumblest at the Physician. So far inferior is our love of
the soul, to that of our body; that ^or the one, we had rather undergo any
pains then death; for the other, we rather choose a wilful sickness, then a
harsh remedy.

Give then your Physician leave to fit and apply his medicines: and do not you
teach him to teach you. Leave your old adiuration to your too obsequious
Chaplens (if there be any such yet remaining) Loquimini placentia. Esa.
30.10.11.
Prophecy not unto us right things: speak unto us smooth things, prophecy
deceits. Get you out of the way, etc. Threaten your Priests no longer with
suits and quereles, and expulsions, from their poor Vineyards, which you have
erst robbed, because they bring you sour grapes, sharp wine of reproves. Do
not color all your malice against them, with the imputation of ill life to
them, when you are, indeed, only fretted with their just reprehension of your
impieties. Bar not the freedom of their tongues, by tying them to
conditions, this you shall say, and this not say, on pain of my displeasure.
(You may preach against sins, but not meddle with the Pope; or you may
inueigh against Rome and Idolatry, so you touch not at my Herodias; or you may
tax Lust, so you let me alone for Nabaoths Vineyard.) As if the Gospel might
be preached with your limitations: and forsaking the holy Ghost, we must come
to fetch direction from your lips. Jonas spared not Great Nineveh, nor the
great King of Great Nineveh: why should we spare your sins, that would save
your souls! You will love us the better, when you once love your selves
better. If any gain were more valuable, then that of godliness: or any means
more auailable, then spiritual Physic, to your saluations, we would hearken
to it and you. He that is wisest, has taught us it, we are rebels, if we not
obey it. Your exulcerated sores cannot be healed with incarnatiue salues.

4. Spiritual Physicians (no less then the Secretaries of Nature) must have
knowledge and Art. Empirickes endanger not more bodies, then ideotish Priests
souls. He that cannot power healthful moisture, and juice of life into the
gasping spirit; and fill the veins, that affliction has emptied; deserves not
the name of a spiritual Physician. Arts have their use; and humane learning is
not to be despised, so long as (like an obedient Hagar) she serves Sara with
necessary help. Only let the Book of God stand highest in our estimation, as
it is in Gods elevation, and let all the sheaues do homage to it. But
Empirickes cannot brook Craterus, says the Proverb: sottish Enthusiastes
condemn all learning, all premeditation. This is to tie the holy Ghost to a
Pen and Inkhorne, etc. They must run away with their Sermons, as Horses with
an empty Cart. But now, he that will fly into Gods mysteries with such sick
feathers, shall be found to flagge low with a broken pineon: or soaring too
high, without sober direction, endanger himself. Barbarism is gross in an
Orator, Ignorance in a Physician, Dullness in an Advocate, rudeness in a
Minister. Christ chose Fishermen, but made them Fishers of men; gave them a
Calling, and virtues for it. Shall therefore any fantastical spirit think,
that Christ's singular action is our general pattern? As if men were, the more
faul^ie, the more fit; the more silly, the more sufficient. Christ so furnished
^is with knowledge and language, that the people Act. 2.6.
wondered at their wisdom, and 4.13.
knew, or rather acknowledged, that they had been with Jesus.

It is said of Emperickes, that they have but one medicine for all diseases: if
that cure not, they know not how to do it: but the Scribe instructed for
Heaven, and instructing for Heaven, draws out of his treasure both old and
new, which he has carefully laid up by his former study: high points for
forward Scholars, easier ^essons for those in a lower form. To children
milk; such things as may nourish, not oppress: aptanon alta: to the profound,
Bern.
as Demosthenes said he desired to speak, non modo scripta, sed etiam sculpta,
matters of weight and diligence. The truth is, that we must preach Christ, not
our selves: and regard the peoples benefit, more then our own credit: being
content to loose our selves, to win others to God. And to this purpose is
required learning: as a Physician is not less knowing, because he gives an
easy and common receite to a certain Patient; but rather out of his judgment
finds that fittest for him. It is no small learning to illustrate obscurities,
to clear the subtilties of the School, to open Gods mysteries to simple
understandings, to build up the weak, and pull down the confident in their
own strengths. This shall discharge a man from the imputation of illiterature,
as well as to preach Riddles and Paradoxes, which the people may admire, not
admit; and make that frivolous use of all, this was a deep Sermon. Learning is
requisite, or thou art but an Empericke. How many Paracelsian Mountebankes have
been the worst diseases to the Commonwealth they live in; whiles they purge
away the good humors, and leave the bad behind them? Your Popish Teachers
were such ill Purgers, drayning out the good blood of Religion from the veins
of the Lan^, and pouring in feculent corruptions, ridiculous fopperies,
Magical poisons in stead thereof: giving a Mass for a Communion, an Image for
the Bible, Stage-apishnesse for a sober Sermon: allowing either no Scripture,
or new Scripture; so suppressing the words, and stifling the sense, that hiding
away the gold, they throw their people the bag.

5. Good Physicians must not aim more at their own wealth, then their
Patients health. Indeed the spiritual Labourer is worthy of his hire; but if
he labor for hire only, he may make himself merry with his reward on earth,
Heaven has none for him. That good is well done, that is done of conscience.
The Pastor feeds Christ's Sheep for his own gain: the Sheep are fed; Christ
gives him no thanks for his labor. Peter made three manner of Fishings: he
caught Fish for money, Fish with money, Fish without money. The first was his
temporal trade, the second a miraculous and singular action, the last his
spiritual function. Some are of all these sorts: the worst now is, 2 Cor.
12.14.
to ^ish for the twenty pence. Pi^cantur vt adipiscantur, non homines, sed
hominum. They labor hard to take, not men, Simonem R^mae nemo fuisse negat.
Ow. Epigr.
but men's. Peter's Successors called ( Simons Successors not doubted) have so
fished this many a hundred year, not with the Draw-net of the Gospel, but
with the Purse-net of Avarice. There are too many such S^luer-fishers, that
angle only for the tributarie Fish: too many of those Physicians, that set up
their bills, and offer their service and cure, not where the people are
sickest, but where they are most liberal. Some will not practice, except they
have three or four Parishes under their Cure at once: these are Physicians,
not for Church, but Steeples. Some are wandering Empirickes, that when they
come to minister, spend all the time in a cracking ostentation of their Cures,
or demonstration of their skill in Pictures and Tables, never approving it to
their credulous Patients: These are bragging Physicians.

Some minister only opium to their people, and so lull them in their sick
security: these are dull Physicians. Some minister Medicines, not to ease
their stomachs of the burden of their sins, but to put lightness into their
brains, sca^ing Religion out of the wits: these are Schismatic Physicians.
Some minister Antichristian poisons, to breed the plague of Idolatry among
the people: these are Seminary Physicians. Others of this Sect, (living from
us by a Sea-diuision, yet) send over venomous prescripts, binding Princes
Subjects to Treasons and Homicides: these are deuillish Physicians. Some will
sell their knowledge for a meals meat: these are Table- Physicians. Some
minister in this place, in that place, in every place, in no place: these are
vbiquitary Physicians. Some minister nothing, but what they gleane from others
prescripts, wanting skill to apply it: these are like Physicians, but are none.
Some ring the Changes of opinions, and run a serpentine course, abiuring now,
what yesterday they embraced and warranted, winding from error to error, as
Dolphins in the water; turning like Fanes on the housetop, with every new
blast of Doctrine; Reeds shaken with every Gust, (contrary to that testimony
of John Baptist) these are gadding, madding Physicians. Some will minister
nothing, but what comes next into their heads and hands: these are
Enthusiasticall Physicians. Some again, I will not say many, practice only
for commodity, and to purge others wealth into their own Purses: these are
mercenarie Physicians.

Avarice, says a grave Divine, is a sin in any man, Heresy in a
Clergie-man. The Papists have an Order, that profess wilful poverty: but
some of them profess it so long, till they sweep all the riches of the Land
into their own Lappes. The Purse is still the White they level at; as I have
read them described: the Capuchines shooting from the Purse, the Franciscanes
aiming wide of it, the Jesuits hitting it patte in the midst. So with long, or
(at least) tedious Prayers, as the Pharisees, they pray upon the poor, and
devour their houses. Spiritual Physicians should abhor such covetous
desires. Sunt qui scire volunt, Bern in Cant.
vt scientiam suam vendant, ^t turpis quaestus est. They that get knowledge to
sell it, make a wretched gain. Non vitae docent, sed crumenae. Seneca
affirms, that the Commonwealth has no worse men, S^n lib. 19. Ep. 1^
quam qui Philosophi^m, v^l vt ^liquod artificium vaenale, didicerunt.
Miserable men, that look to their own good, more then the Churches; serving
God in their parts, themselves in their hearts; working, like those builders
about the Arc, rather for present gain, then future safety. But as they
desire rather nostra quam nos, so they preserve rather sua quam se: winning,
like Demas, the world, and loosing, like Iud^s, their souls. I have read in
the Fable, of a Widow, that being thicke-sighted, sent to a certain Physician
to cure her: he promises it to her, and she to him a sum of money for
satisfaction. The Physician comes, and applies Medicines, which being bound
over her eyes, still as he departs, he carries away with him some of her best
goods: so continuing her pains and his labor, till he had robbed the house
of her best substance. At last he demanded of her, being now cured, his
couenanted pay. She looking about her house, and missing her goods, told him
that he had not cured her: for whereas before she could see some furniture in
her house, now she could perceive none: she was erst thicke-sighted, but now
poore-blinde. You can apply it without help. Well, those spiritual Physicians
are only good, that propound to themselves no gain, but to heal the broken,
recover the lost, and bring home the wandering Lambs to the Sheepe-folds of
peace; ieoparding a joint to save a sick conscience; with Moses and Paul, not
respecting the loss of themselves, whiles they may replenish the Kingdom of
Christ.

These are the Physicians. It remains, that I should show who are the Sick;
for whose cause God has prepared Balm, and inspired Physicians with skill to
minister it. But the time runs away so fast, and you are as hasty to be gone
as it; and this subject is fitter for a whole Sermon, then a conclusion: and
lastly, I have evermore declined your molestation by prolixitie; therefore I
reserve it to another opportunity. If you shall judge this that has been
spoken, worthy your meditation, (laying it affectionately to your hearts, and
producing it effectually in your lives) that God, who gave me power to begin
this work, will also assist me to finish it: without whom, neither my tongue
can utter, nor your ear receive any saving benefit of instruction. A word or
two, for exhortation, and then I will leave in your bosoms, and your selves in
the bosom of God. First for us, the Physicians, then for you, the Patients,
only so far as may concern you in the former point. For us.

1. We must administer the means of your redress, which our God has taught
us: doing it in dilectione, in delectatione, with love, with alacrity. Though
it be true, that the thing which perishes shall perish, and they which are
ordained to Ioh. 17.12.
perdition, cannot by us be rescued out of the Wolves jaws. Yet spiritual
Physicians must not deny their help, lest dum alios perdant, ipsi percant,
whiles their silence damnifieth others, it also damneth themselves. Ezekiel. 3.17.
When I say unto the wicked, says the Lord, Thou shall surely dye, and thou
give him not warning to save his life; the same wicked man shall dye in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. The Physician knows,
that if the time of his patients life be now determined by God, no art can
preserve his taper from going out: yet because he knows not Gods hidden
purpose, he withholds not his endeavor. To censure who shall be saved, who
damned, is not ( Aug.
iudicium luti, sed figuli) the judgment of the clay, but of the Potter: Romans
9.21.
Who only has power, of the same lump, to make one vessel to honor,
another to dishonor. We know not this, therefore we cease not to beseech your
reconciliation. Nay we are 2. Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God does beseech you by us, and we pray you
in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. Thus having applied our Physic,
we leave the success to God, who alone can make his word the savor of death,
or of life, preserving or condemning, destructive to your sins or your
selves, as his good pleasure wills it.

2. The Physician that lives among many Patients, if he would have them
tenderly and carefully preserve their healths, must himself keep a good dye
among them. It is a strong argument to persuade the goodness of that he
administers. The Clergy man's strict diet of abstinence from enormities, of
fasting and prayer against the surfets of sin, of repentance for er^ours, is
a powerful inclination to his people, to do the like. Aug. de doctr. Chann^.

Praua vita est quaedam machina ad subruendum moenia, etc.


Habet, quantacumque granditate dictioni^, mai^^ pondus vita dicentis. The
preaching of life is made more forcible by the good life of the preacher. An
evil conversation is an evil engine to overthrow the walls of edification.
Citharisante Abbate, tripudi^nt Monachi. When the Abbot gives the music of a
good example, the Monks dance after him; as was their proverb: Plene dixit,
qui been vixit. He has spoken fully, that has lived fairly. There are four
sorts of these Physicians.

1. That neither prescribe well to others, nor live well themselves: these are
not Physicians indeed, but Italian Quacksaluers, that having drunk poison
themselves, minister it to the people; and so destroy the souls, that God has
bought with his blood. Wretched Priests, that are indeed the worst diseases;
allowing in precept, and approving in practice the riot of drunkenness, or the
heat of lustfulnesse, or the baseness of couetice, or the frenzy of
contention. These, instead of building up Christ's Church, pull it down with
both hands: not lux, but tenebrae mundi: not the light, as Ministers should
be, but the darkness of the world, as the sons of Belial are. A foolish
Shepherd is Gods punishment to the flock. Zach. 11 16.
Lo, I will raise up a Shepherd, which shall not visit those that be cut
off, nor seek the young one, nor heal that which is broken; but he shall
eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their claws in pieces.

2. That prescribe well in the Pulpit, but live disorderly out of it; so making
their patients believe, that there is no necessity of so strict a diet, as
they are enjoined; for then sure the Physician himself would keep it: since
it cannot be, but he loves his own life, and holds his soul as dear to
himself, as ours are to us. Thus like a young scribbler, what he writes fair
with his hand, his sleeue comes after, and blottes it. This Priest builds up
Gods Tabernacle with one hand, and pulls it down with the other. Though this
Physician can make very good bills, preach good directions, yet (as sick as he
is) he takes none of them himself.

3. That prescribes very ill, preaches seditiously and lewdly, yet lives
without any notorious crime, or scandalous imputation. This is an hypocritical
trick of heretical Physicians. Math. 7.15.
Beware of fals^ Prophets, that comes to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly
are ravening wolves. Thus the Popish Friars, like the false visionists in
Zacharies Prophecy, will Zach. 13.4.
will wear a rough garment to deceive withal. Their austeritie shall be
stricter then John Baptists, but not with intent to bring one soul to Christ.
This cautelous demureness in them so bewitcheth their Patients, that they
receive whatsoever these administer, though it poisons them. Thus covered over
with the mantle of sobriety and zeal, as a crafty Apothecary vents his
drugges, so they their dregs, without suspicion. To keep the metaphore; as
an natural Physician, out of honest policy, couers the bitter pill with
gold, or delays the distasteful potion with sugar, which the abhorring stomach
would not else take. So this mystical one (for he is a servant to the mystery
of iniquity) so amazeth the people with a fair show of outward sanctimony;
that whiles they gaze at his good parts with admiration, they swallow the
venime of his doctrine without suspicion.

4. That teaches well, and lives well: prescribes a good diet of obedience,
and keeps it when he is well; or a good medicine of repentance, and takes it
when he is sick: thus both by preaching and practice recovering the health of
Israel. We require in a good garment, that the cloth be good, and the shape
fitting. If we preach well, and live ill, our cloth is good, but not our
fashion. If we live well and preach ill, our fashion is good, but our cloth is
not. If we both preach well, and live well, our garment is good: let every
spiritual Physician weaue it, and wear it. This for our selves. For you, I
will contract all into these three uses; which necessarily arise from the
present or precedent consideration.

1. Despise not your Physicians. You forbear indeed, (as the Pagans at first,
and the Papists since) to kill, burn, torture us: (whether it be your good
will, or the law, you live under, that preuailes with you, God knows:) yet you
proceed to persecute us with your tongues, as Ismael smote Isaac; to martyr us
with your scorns in our ciuell life, our good names. In discountenancing our
Sermons, discouraging our zeales, discrediting our lives, you raise civil (or
rather uncivil) persecutions against us. By these you exercise our papatience,
which yet we can bear, whiles the blow given us, by a manifest rebound, does
not strike our God. But per nostra latera petitur Ecclesia, impetitur Christus:
when as through our sides you wound the Church, nay Christ himself, it is
stupiditie in us to be silent. Christ, when the glory of his Father was
interessed, and called into question by their calumniations, took on him a
just apology. Ioh. 8.49.
I have not a Devil, but I honor my Father. 18.23.
If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest
thou me?

We have comfort enough, that we can suffer this martyrdom for Christ his
sake, being blessed by the peace of our times from a worse. The Courtier cares
not so much for the estimation of his fellows, so his Prince approues and
loves him. Let God be pleased with our innocence, and your base aspersions of
scandalls against us, shall not much move our minds. The 2. Cor. 6.4.
Ministers of God must approve themselves in much patience, in afflictions,
etc. Our war is ferendo, non feriendo. The Miter is for Aaron, not the
smiter. We must encounter with 1. Cor. 15.31
Beasts in the shape of men, with Math. 7.15.
Wolves in the coats of sheep, with Devils in the habit of Angels, with 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
unreasonable and wicked men: therefore Hebr. 10.36.
we have need of patience. Indignities, that touch our private persons, may be
dissembled, or returned with Isaaks apology of patience, of silence. As
Augustine answered Petilian: Possumus esse in his pariter copiosi, nolumus esse
pariter vani. You do in event not so much wrong us, as your selves. You foame
out your own shame; and bewray your wretched, I had almost said reprobate,
malice: for such are set down in the Psalm. 1.1.
seat of the scornful, which the Prophet makes a low step to damnation. God
shall 2.4.
laugh you to scorn, for laughing his to scorn: and at last despise you, that
have despised him in us. In expuentis recidit faciem, quod in coelum puit. That
which a man spittes against heaven, shall fall back on his own face. Your
indignities done to your spiritual Physicians, shall not sleep in the dust
with your ashes, but stand up against your souls in judgment.

2. If your Physician be worthy blame, yet sport not, with cursed Cham, at your
Fathers nakedness. Our life, our life is the derision that sticks in your
jaws, till you spette it out against us. I would to God, our lives were no
less pure, then are (even these our enemies being Judges) our doctrines. Be it
freely acknowledged, that in some it is a fault. Our life should be the
Counterpaine of our doctrine. We are Vines, and should, like that in Judge.
9.13.
Iothams Parable, cheer both God and man. The Player, that misacts an
inferior and unnoted part, carries it away without censure; but if he shall
pla^ some Emperor, or part of observation unworthily, the spectators are ready
to hiss him off. The Minister represents (you say) no mean person, that might
give toleration to his absurdities; but the Prince of heaven; and therefore
should be holy, as his heavenly Father is. Be it confessed; and woe is us, we
cannot help it. But you should put difference betwixt habitual vices,
nourished by custom, prosecuted by violence, and infirm or inuoluntary
offenses.

The truth is also, that you, who will not have ears to hear Gods word, will
yet have eyes to observe our ways. How many of you have surdas aures, oculos
emissitios, Adders ears, but Eagles eyes; together with critical tongues, and
hypocritical looks! You should (and will not) know, that our words, not our
works bring you to heaven. Examples are good furtherances, but ex praeceptis
viuitur; we must live by precepts. If you have a Christian desire of our
reformation, cease your obstreperous clamours, and divulging slanders, the
infectious breathings of your corruption and malice; and reprove us with the
spirit of meekness, to our foreheads. If we neither clear our selves from
imputed guiltiness, nor amend the justly reproved faults, nor kindly embrace
your loving admonitions, proceed with your impartial censures. But still
know, that we are nothing in our selves; though we be called lux mundi, the
light of the world, yet solummodo lex est lux, Gods word is the light, that
must conduct your believing and obeying souls to the land of Promise. Did we
live like Angels, and yet had our lips sealed up from teaching you, you might
still remain in your sins. For it is not an ignorant imitation of goodness,
but a sound faith in Christ (never destitute of knowledge and obedience) that
must save you in the day of the Lord Jesus.

3. Lastly, let this teach you, to get your selves familiar acquaintance with
the Scriptures: that if you be put to it, in the absence of your Physician, you
may yet help your selves. We store our memories, and (perhaps not trusting
them) our Books, with diverse receites for ordinary diseases. Whom almost
shall you meet, (whiles you complain of an Ague, of the Toothache, of a Sore)
but he will tell you a Salve or a Medicine for it? Alas, are our souls less
precious, or their wounds, griefs, sicknesses easilier cured, that we keep
the Clossets of our consciences empty of Medicines for them? The Jews were
commanded to write the Laws of God on their walls, etc. God Heb. 8.10.
writes them on the Christians hearts. So David found it. Thy Law is within my
heart. This is true acquaintance with it. It is our Masters charge, if at least
we are his servants. Ioh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, for in them is eternal life. We plead, that our faith
is our evidence for Heaven: it is a poor evidence, that wants the seal of the
Scriptures.

It was the weapon, that the Son of God himself used, to beat back the
assaults of the Devil. Many ignorant persons defy the Devil: They will
shield themselves from Satan, as well as the best that teach them: the foul
^iend shall have no power over them: yet continue an obstinate course of life.
As if the Devil were a Babe, to be out-faced with a word of defiance. It is a
lamentable way, to brave a Lion, and yet come within his clutches. He will
bear with thy hot words, so he may get thy cold soul. The weapon, that
must encounter and conquer him, is the sword of the spirit, the word of God. No
hour is free from his temptations, that we had need to lodge with Gods Book
in our bosoms. 1. Who knows, where he shall receive his next wound, or of
what nature the sickness of his soul shall be? 2. The Minister cannot be
present with every one, and at every time. 3. Satan is never idle; it is the
trade of his delight to spill souls. Lay all these together, and then (in the
fear of God) judge, whither you can be safe, whiles you are ignorant of the
Scriptures. This is the Garden of Eden, whence run those four Rivers, of
Wisdom to direct us, of oil to soften us, of comforts to refresh us, of
promises to confirm us.

As lightly as you regard the word, and as slightly as you learn it, you shall
one day find more comfort in it, then in all the world. Lie you on your
Deathbeds, groan you with the pangs of nature-oppressing Death, or labor you
with the throbs of an anguished conscience, when neither natural nor
spiritual Physician stands by you, to give you succor; then, oh then, one
dram of your old store, taken from the treasury of the Scriptures, shall be
unto you of inestimable comfort. Then welfare a Medicine at a pinch, a drop
of this Balm ready for a sudden wound, which your memory shall reach forth,
and your faith apply to your diseased souls, afflicted hearts. Think
seriously of this, and recall Gods Book from banishment, and the Land of
forgetfulness, whither your security has sent it. Shake off the dust of
neglect from the cover, and wear out the leaves with turning: continually
imploring the assistance of Gods spirit, that you may read with understanding,
understand with memory, and remember with comfort: that your Souls Closset
may never be vnstored of those heavenly rec^ites, which may ease your griefs,
cure your wounds, expel your sicknesses, preserve your healths, and keep you
safe to the coming of Jesus Christ. Trust not all on your Ministers, no nor on
your selves, but trust on the mercies of God, and the merits of our blessed
Savior. Nothing now remains, but to show you, in what need you stand of this
Physic, by reason of your ill he^lths, and the infected air of this world
you breath in. Mean time preserve you these instructions, and God preserve you
with his mercies. For which let us pray, etc.

FINIS.

