THE Bloody book. OR, The Tragical and desperate end of Sir John Fites
(alias) Fitz.

depiction of three men outside a house, one in night clothes kneeling with his
hand over his heart, one in night clothing standing holding a sword with its
blade pushed right through his torso, and one fully dressed lying dead on the
ground with his hat beside him.

Printed at London for Francys Burton.

A Narration of the Bloody Mvrthers committed by the hands of Sir John Fites
(alias) Fitz, a Devonshire Knight, upon two several Men: and lastly, to make
up the Tragedy, upon himself also, at Twicknam, nine Miles from London, upon
the seventh day of August last, 1605.
IN Wistocke, a very ancient place in Devonshire, distant from Plimmouth some
ten miles, dwelt a worshipful Gentleman, called Master Fites, who having
long time been married without any children, had at length, for a blessing
to his expectation, a Son: whom after he had brought up in lavdable
rudimentes, as well beseemed a careful father, as if his aged years had
seen the hope of his own posterity, he performed the course of Nature,
leaving large possessions to his young heir, (being as yet in his Minority) of
whom the world hoped nothing but a fruitful ripenes, of so towardlie a
springal, his comeliness of personage increasing with his years, and his
descretion with his personage: he was in his nonage a Ward unto sir Arthur
Gorge, a worsh. knight. He took to wife the daughter of sir Will. Courtney, a
man grac'st with all perfection of an honorable mind. A man loving his
country, and for his worthy carriage, justly beloved of his country: neither
did this his fair daughter degenerate from the ancient stock of her father,
of whose praise (since virtue chiefly commends it self) I cannot
sufficiently speak, neither in setting forth of it, can I be deemed partial,
since her deserts exceed the measure of partiality: for as she was a modest
maiden, so being married she gave evident proofs of a virtuous wife. But her
young husband sir John (although not then knighted) little regarding the
happiness of so rare a bedfellow, followed such errors as youth councelled, and
folly led him into; truth it is, if his actions had been equally agreeable to
his person, or his guiftes of mind, as plentifully bestowed, as the natural
lineamentes of his body, he had been the complete mirror of an
accomplished Gentleman.

But it is commonly seen, where God indueth us with more special tokens of
favor, weby our own pronesse to vicious iniquity, deface his Image, and
evermore endeavor to pollute his benefits with our wicked tra^sgression; it was
well said;

turpibus ac prauis imitandis
dociles omnes sumus,
This was too truly verified in sir Io. Fites, who a while after fell into the
careless race of a dissolute life, and although by the often instigation of his
tender hearted wife, he was many times withdrawn from sundry temptations of
lewd retainers, yet hadd not the countenance of his better friends, and their
friendly persuasion counseled him, doubtless he had fallen into misfortune,
ere misfortune had been ready for his fall. Many friends and wel-willers he
had, whose account might of right challenge the rank of gentilitie and
reputation.

Amongst many, to (whom in the links of perfect friendship, he was engaged)
one gentleman most especially in all rightes of love and reguarde, tendered
him, (and as it seemed) was as much of him again respected, his name was
master Slanning, a worshipful Esquire and a proper Gentleman, of goodly
living, and deserved credit, of whom most men could but speak well, since of
almen he was generalie reputed wise and courteous. This Gentleman ever
inwardly affected Sir John Fites, so that the Country noted them (for firm
and mutual love) to be unfeigned friends, and so indeed they were, until mishap
(ever fatal to sir John his proceedings) crossed their affectionat association
with this mischance.

Meeting on a time at Tauestocke (near which S. John dwelt) at dinner with
many of their neighbors and friends, with great variety of merriments, and
discourse, they out stripped the noontide: Amongst other their table talk, S.
John was vanting his free Tenure in holding his land, boasting that he held
not a foot of any but the Queen in England; to whom master Slanning replied,
that although of courtesy it were neglected yet of dew and common right, he
was to pay him so much by the year for some small Land held of him, the rent
being by reason of friendship long time intermitted. Upon which words, Sir
John (grounding his occasion upon choler, and heating that choler with
disdain and pride) told him with a great oath, he lied: and withal, gave
fuel to his rage, and reins of spite, to the vniustnes of his anger,
offering to stab him.

But Master Slanning, who was known to be a man of no less courage, and more
courtesy, with a great knife that he had, warded the hazard of such
threatenings, upon which grew both multiplication of words, and increase of
hatred on both sides; until by the fair mediation of their friends the^
present, they were accorded to a fained reconciliation: so that in brief,
after a while, Master Slanning privately with his man departed homewards.

Long had he not ridden, but commanding his man to walk down his horses in
the way, himself the whiles taking the green fields for his more contented
walk, looking back, he might behold Sir John Fites with four more
galloping amain after him. Which sight, as it could not but breed doubtful
and fearful suspicion, so could it not but be a great amazement to Master
Slanning, who little thought on the desperate plot of so vicious a minded
bloodsucker.

Sir John no sooner drew near him, but Master Slanning assuring himself of
his purposed malice, and most malicious drift, asked him the occasion of his
coming: to whom Sir John (in the rude language of scorn and wrath) made
answer, he would now revenge himself for his disgrace, and so at once they
fell all upon him, who with as determinate a resolution defended himself,
being indeed a man of an undaunted spirit. And seeing before his face shame
impudent, and hope of life's security, altogether desperate, he with as bold
stomach as a wounded dying man, stood upon the guarde of his own ableness,
vvhiles Sir John being pricked on by the bloody urging of one Cross his man,
grew to be handned in his butchery: so that one coming behind Master
Slanning with a blow, (guided by the hand of a villains heart) struck him on
the head, who falling and staggering backward, was by Sir John run through the
body, leaving his liuelesse carcass a monument of terrors, to affright the
guilty consciences of unmerciful homicides: but as the one is hastening to the
grave, so is the other making preparation for flight to escape death, not shame.

Great was the lamentation that the country made for the death of so beloved a
gentleman as Master Slanning was. As for Sir John. he soon got himself
away, leaving the fulmouth'd report of infamous rumor, to rumor abroad, the
report of so infamous a deed: but as for his wife and mother, (virtuous
Gentlewomen) the torment of their sorrow, is easier to be imagined then felt:
who in the anguish of their greefes did penance for his rashness, and in the
zeal of their prayers, labored for his hearty contrition.

He for the space of a year, or near there about lived in France, of whose
carriage there, it is to be coniectured that it was no otherwise then
indifferent, yet can I not excuse him in this his exile for a penitent
conuertite, howsoever the world generally deemed the best: But in his absence,
the good Gentlewoman led a widdowed life, and by as many means as the
procurement of her worthy friends could effect, or her own industry labor,
she got some hope of a promised pardon, upon which after a twelve months
absence Sir John returned home, with a seeming likelihoode of repentant sorrow
for his former misdeede, showing outwardly evident promises of new reformation
and amendment, as seeming a mortified man for his trespass past, and assuring
far better hopes to come.

In this mean time he had procured for his more quiet content, at least a
repriuall, if not a pardon, but with this prouiso, of his good behavior ever
after. There awhile he lived welcomed of all, courteous to all, and therefore
of all well-beloved: but as it is commonly seen, a man naturally hardened in ill,
can hardly amend his deformity of wickedness, with cunning of dissembling
pretended gloss, so afterward chanced with this man, who in continuance of
time, did not only proceed in unlawful courses of abuse, but would oftentimes
glory in his former execrable fact, and being now in a manner pressed, in the
highway of all abomination, he began to root his thoughts to plot nothing
but mischief, insomuch as first, he by little and little lothed his lawful
bed, turning his pleasures to lawless desires, neither could the sweet
remembrance of his wives earnest affection, with draw him from consorting
himself with loose prodigals.

A lamentable sight it was to see a man of his rank, place, and calling, to
be so vainly carried away with following the depraved humors of light company:
neither could the entreaty of Friends, the persuasion of his allies, the
counsel of his wel-wishers, nor the common scandal of the world, make him
blush at his own follyes. Strange it was that a man being so forewarned,
should not be forearmed, for his own harms could not make him beware, neither
could the greatness of Gods favor showed to him, enforce him to consider the
foulenes of his former offenses detestation, and conform his after age to a
more serious meditation of the infinite benefits bestowed upon him, but the
longer he lived, the worse he lived.

At what time his excellent Majesty our King, (after his coronation,) was
pleased to honor our English Gentlemen with that ancient reward of true
deserts, worth Knighthoode, it likewise pleased his royal Grace amongst many
of all Shires throughout his Realm to inuest in that order this Sir John
Fites, who under this title of honor thought to mask his deeds of vice, and
with the very sound of Knight, to boulster out the community of his ryots:
insomuch as whereas before he was forward he was now both forward, and bold:
forward to attempt, bold to justify, any unjust wrong that his loose
behavior should under go. Now began he to think that the world should wink
at his impieties, his credit and knighthoode was a sufficient privilege. Now
began he to entertain into his society, (as associates) men both of dissolute
and desperate fortunes, amongst whom was one (as ringleader to the reachlesse
content of his pampered desires) named commonly Lusty Jack, one whose means
were indeed mean, whose good qualities altogether none: but for that as many
as know him, know him without description, the sequel shall testify the
honesty of his conversation.

This lusty Royster being by Sir John easily accepted, and for a more special
grace that he had in doing ill, admitted into his society, suncke so far into
his lyking, as that he was not himself without this his companion: insomuch
as that Town of Tauestocke, though otherwise orderly governed with sobriety,
and wisdom of grave Magistrates, was thereby infected, with the beastly
corruption of drunkenness. Sir John by his own inclination apt, and by his
retained copesmates urged, persueered the more, to run headlong into such
(...), as vile sensuality and pleasures inclined into, spending their time in
riotous surfeiting, surfeyting in abominable drunkenness being drunk, they
blaspheme and swear, and in this their blasphemy, they tear the divine name
of their almighty Creator into a thousand pieces, neither regarding hope of
redemption, or dreading fear of damnation, plucking men by night out of their
bedds, violently breaking windows, quarrelling with Ale-conners, fighting in
private brabbles amongst themselves: all which hazard, (either of particular
dangers, or common course of Law) could not move Sir John to break of his
disordered route, but when they had abused the townsmen, and disturbed their
neighbors, Sir John's own house was their safest sanctuary, or receptacle to
cloak their outrages: so as it seemed, they lived as in time of old the
common Outlawes of this Land did, neither worshypping God nor honoring Prince,
but wholly subject to their contents alone.

In such like intolerable courses of abuse, beyond virtue, or gentility, did
Sir John ever with his accomplices, in all his disorders spend his time, little
studying to benefit his Country, by being a profitable member of the
Commonweal, or little reckoning to be a good subject, by observing the
peaceable statutes of his Prince, but continuing daily to increase the
multitude of his riots, he said with the Poet,

Cum vino sumptus cum blandis lauta puellis,
Mensa placet, baccho prodiga iuncta Venus.
Wine and women bring most men to perdition, for one is so ineuitably awayted
by the other, that a roysting drunkard is most commonly noted for an
incontinent lecherer. This was not falsified in Sir John Fites, who so wholly
addicted himself to all detestable and vicious defamations, that it shamed him
not (after his distemperatures abroad) to bring queanes home with him, not
esteeming the precious modesty of his vviues bed, and the chaste deserts of so
virtuous a Lady, who hereafter may very well serve as a rare pattern to all
wives, (that are unblessed in having such husbands) how to carry themselves
with humility, and wink at it with patience. So did this Lady, until her
unthankful husband (glutted in his own lust) thought her very presence to be
an obstacle, and bar to upbraid his incontinence: for which cause (without
cause) he began to fall into dislike with her, and at length, would neither
vouchsafe her maintenance, or house-roome, but with words of disgrace turned
her out of his doors, not leaving her attended by any to conduct her.

In this plight of distress, the virtuous Lady (seeing, and by experience
having had too firm a proof, of the misery of such a husband) could not but
think herself unhappy, howsoever indeed she in this unhappiness was blessed;
for by these means she avoided further perrill of death, which he in his
steame of wine, had bin likely to have offered unto her. In brief, being thus
left to her misfortunes, she returned to her worthy Father, who with much joy,
received his distressed Daughter, with a young daughter of hers also: so that
herein she was most fortunate, that she was safe, where she might hear of her
Knights outrages, but not endure the^. This Lady being by him in this wise
turned away, he noweknevve himself to be the only master of himself, and
might as he thought now be imboldened to follow his own loosnes. Now was his
own house without contradiction, or controlement, open to his associates,
where now (if they please) they may erect a little Commonwealth of many
iniquities, and much imputation. His purse they abused, his goods they
consumed, and of his person they made a stale to their misdemeanors: all feared
him, few loved him, neither was his worship as much to be reverenced, as his
lewd manners to be abhorred: for continuing and insisting in his licentious,
and odious courses, not long before his coming toward London, being in the
heat of his old disorder, he, (being backed by his retainers) fell out with an
Officer of the Town, and after with many reproachful words and vpbraydings,
that he reviled him withal, forgetting both himself, the person, and the
place, he with many blows of his dagger. broke his head in such sort, as the
man being carried home, and laid in his bed, it was greatly feared, that he
could not escape death: which had it happened, questionless it had not only
been a great prejudice, but also an indangering to Sir John his own life, who
after this deed, was so far from doubtting the worst, as that he little
regarding the hatred of his act, stoutly perseuered in the accustimation of his
former breaches of all commendable carriage. But it is evermore notable, that
men over whom sin has greater predominance, are reserved for more especial
misfortunes, until at last, being ouer-ripened, they fall by their own
rottenness, which on this wise happened to Sir John Fites.

Master Slanning after his death left behind him for pledges of Gods blessing
toward him, two sons, and one daughter, his heir being inward to a Knight
of that Country of good account and credit, which heir of Master Slannings,
being come to years of discretion, upon aggreeuaunces of his Fathers death,
being, (as just reason was) loath to sell his dear Fathers blood, and bearing
a mind to revenge himself by course of right, and Law, upon the butcher of
his Fathers life: knowing that Sir John had but a conditional and no special
pardon, (as Sir John himself gave forth, and falsely blinded the world
withal) used means for his attachement, either to procure better means, or
answer the proceedings of Justice in that case provided.

This being heard of Sir John, (who amidst his ryots little dreamed on any
such encumbrance) it drove him to diverse shyfts, but being well befreended,
(if his carriage had bin such to have deserved their friendships who indeed
were his friends) he having now no hopes, but such as relay upon their credit,
for his better discharge was driven to consider better of the uneven race of
his life past, assuring himself that he was become to the world so rediculous,
in himself so faulty, and of his own ableness so insufficient to accomplish
his desires, that if he could not procure a new and absolute Pardon, the old
offense of his, being laid to his charge, and his riots since, likely to be
agrauated by the vulgar knowledge of the whole Country, it would surely put,
not only his reputation, but also his life in double ieopardy: These reasons
well cancelled, fear, not shame, made him hasten some other course to be
presently thought on, and in some measure to beware of perrils to come, though
scarce repent his misdeedes past, Oderunt peccare mali formidine penae, doubt
of trouble, not hearty co^trition, pricketh the wicked to avoid further
lapses, when as the love of virtue makes the virtuous abstain from doing
evil. So Sir John, seeing how by his inordinate disorders he had impaired his
estate, seuer'd himself from his wife, wedded himself to wilful obstinacy,
abused his neighbors, murdered his friends, co^sorted himself with
villains, and caused himself to be so odious, as his life was now in new
danger, he now thought it behooued him to make friends, and to that intent he
posted toward London, where by the way, (continual Furies tormenting his
mind) ere he came to his hopes, he ended his life. For in his iournying
toward London, an accident of great ruth and pity happened in this lamentable
sort. Sir John, (harboring even in despite of his own will a guilty
conscience in a grieved breast) even as he rode by the way, often ran over
the whole course of his former evil life: and never til now did he begin to
balance his own rashness, and to consider the reason of his intended journey,
which fears of his, now doubting least that worthy Gentleman his Father in
law, urged by the wrongs done to his daughter, would not only deny him his
befriending favor, but also be a plaintiff against his inordinate course of
life, (though grounded upon no certainty but the guiltines of his own conceit)
he began to fall into a desperate kind of lunacie, as by the sequel of his
detestable deed it plainly appeared. For hastening toward London, he appointed
his footeman to meet him by the way, who enquiring as he went for his Master,
met him by hap at Kingstone upon Thames, where he allighted into his Inn, and
having supped (as his order was) he soon betook himself to his bed: but
as a man that has committed some notorious and memorable crime, being
followed by the Country, flies into a large vast house, and hides himself,
at every creake of the wind fears the entrance of some searcher, or at every
styr of a rat doubts the attachment of some officer, even so Sir John, having
committed the crime of murder, and riot, and flying into the sanctuary of a
dispersed and molested mind, was amidst his quiet followed and affrighted, by
the officers of vengeance, guilt, and terror. In his dreams he muttered
fearful words, grievous sighs, and deep-fetcht groans: most fearful were
his visions, and so terrible unto him, that where he lay in rest he suddenly
start up, and called for his horses, intending to post presently away, for that
as he said, Sir William Courtney, with a number in his company were at hand to
apprehend him, neither could they of the house persuade him to the contrary.
Moreover, so strange and dreadful was his own mind unto him, that he would
not stay, euer-more crying, that Sir William was at hand to apprehend him,
insomuch as his gelding being brought him, in the dead time of night riding
through the Town, he met the watch in the streets, at the sight of whom he
cried alowd, they were come, they were come: but the watch being by his man
more certainly informed of this his so sudden malladie, assured him that they
were not sir William, but the neighbors of the town; adding withal, that he
need not doubt, for Sir William was neither coming, nor meante to follow him:
with whose admonitions being somewhat for the time quallified (not persuaded)
he rode over Kingston Bridge, toward London; but in the way between
Kingston and Twicknam, after he had straied upon the Heath a long while, at
last he came unto a Gentleman's house, which stood somewhat out of the way,
and there he knocked, desiring that as they were gentlemen, they would respect a
Gentleman, and help him to some lodging, and used such words to persuade
thereunto, as that those of the house (the time of the night considered)
thought him to have either had some other company, entending to rob the house,
or else to be ouerseene in drink, or some such matter, insomuch that loath
they were to trouble the house with such a guest, and so sent him away as he
came, directing him unto the next town. When as travailing up and down a long
time, sometimes in the way, sometime out of the way; at last he attained
about two of the clock after midnight, unto a little Village, called Twicknam,
some two miles from Kingston (the town from whence he last came) and there by
chance, oh cruel chance! happened to light upon the sign of the Anchor, (fear
and terror of his conscience suffering him to pass no further:) the masters
name of that house, being called Daniell Alley, where he caused his footman to
knock and beat, and knocked himself also until such time that he had awaked
the goodman of the house, who being awakened, rose unto the window and
demanded who was there? Sir John Fight answered, Here is a Gentleman, and I
want lodging; therefore I pray you open the door and let me in. The Host of the
house replied, that he was but a poor man, and kept no Inn, but only a
victualling house, and that his lodging was very slender to entertain such a
Gentleman of sort, as he took him to be. But the Gentleman sir John Fight
answered, that the worst bed that was would serve his turn at that time, and
that he could be content to lie any where. The good man of the house, in mere
comiseration of his case pittieng him, and in tender compassion of his present
estate regarding him, opened the door, let him into the house, set up his
gelding, caused his wife to arise, and lay a clean pair of sheets upon their
own bed, and a clean pilow, her self going to bed in another room, with her
maid and children. Now as soon as sir John came into the house, without any
farther ado, he sent his footeman at that time of the night (being
unacquainted with the Way) unto London, and told him that there he would
stay until his return. His footeman being weary, would-faine lodge there
also, but having no lodcing and no man being up at any other Inn, he was
constrained to depart, and so he took on his way to Brainford, where he lay
that night.

Sir John, his gelding set up, the doors shut in, himself gone to bed, his
footman departed with money in his pursse for his expense and all things (as
it seemed) well, but that the host and his wife observed a certain wild and
stearne look in his countenance, at last being in bed, called and knocked
for the Host of the house to come unto him, who being come into the chamber
(for the good man himself had no place to go to bed in) sir John said unto
him, I pray thee mine host sit by me a while: I will, said the goodman, and so
fetching his cloak to wrappe about him, returned and sat down by his bed
side. But the Gentleman's mind being troubled, he could by no means sleep, or
take any rest, but (oftentimes starting very suddenly as if he had been
scard) always he would be talking of some idle matter or other, uttering much
disiointed talk; as telling the goodman of the house, that he had lain in a
better bed than that was, whereunto the poor man replied, in the pleasingst
speeches that he could (because he noted him to look somewhat wildly) I make
no question thereof sir, but surely I have no better at this time, (the bed
being sufficient for an honest Man) If I had better your worship should have
it, I am sorry for your sake that it is no better. Thus would he oftentimes
speak unto him. At another time he said; I am in Mind troubled, I am
disquieted: Then would he turn him from one side to the other. Sometimes he
would say that sir William Courtneys men were com to aprehend him: for the
goodmans wife of the house lyeng in the next room, and another Man named
Robert Goddart, who was a day-laborer, and lodged in another room adjoining
also, heard both his talk and his unquiet rest.

Thus troubled in mind, and oppressed, (as by the sequel shall God willing,
apear) either with the remorcefull thoughts of an accusing conscience, or with
the despairing remembrance of his forepassed evil life, or with the fearful
appearance of that dread full day of judgment, when all flesh shall be called
to an account for their deeds don, every one to receive according to that he
has done, either good or evil; or with the threatninges of Satan, who
visibly (it may be) appeared unto him, menacing him with eternal damnation for
his fourmer wickedness, or with what other dreadful apparition, illusion,
apprehension, terror or temptation, he who knows all things (and none else)
certainly knows. Thus I say, being disquieted, the good man of the house
remained with him, until between four and five of the clock in the morning;
at what time, seeing that the morning was fair and he had business to go
about, he left the Gentleman alone, between sleepinge and waking (as it
were) and softly stealing away, because he would not awaken him if he could
choose, called unto good man Goddart (who lay in the Chamber close by) to
arise, and so went in to his wife and told her; Wife, I must leave you with
this Gentleman, for I must go my self forth to work. Nay, good husband do not
so, said she; will you leave me at home with him alone, and go forth your self?
I pray you do not, for I am afraid of him, methinkes he talks as if he were
frantic. Thus did her mind presage the future mischance, which present after
fell out. The good man answered his wife, if I can get another to work for me,
I will stay at home. By this time, the labourer goodman Goddart was up and
ready, being prepared to go mow some Vetches, and there fore the goodman of
the house and he went to fill a bottle of drink to take unto the field; but as
they were together filling the bottle, they heard something give a iumpe. I
think said one of them unto the other, the gentleman be either leapt, or fallen
out of his bed: which words they had no sooner uttered, but forth comes Sir
John in his shirt, with his naked rapyer in his hand, his eyes looking as if
they had sparkled forth fire; his countenance so terrible and ghastly, as
that it was of power to have scarred a mann out of his wits; and his strength
so forceable (as it seemd to them) it was bootles for on or two to withstand
him, (for needs must he go whom the devil drives) the men fear fully gave
back, and he slips out at the back door and so toward the gate which led out
of the street into the backside, and being gone forth of the gate, the men
stepped into the backside likewise, where being, said the good man softly to the
other (the present sight of his naked weapon, causing a presumption of such a
matter) God grant he have not murdered my wife and children; and some made
toward the gate, purposing to shut the gate after him, which he perceiving,
suddenly retires (for his feet were swift to shed blood) and espyeng the man
going to shut the Gate, desperately cried out: Ah villain? Art thou one of them
that should aprehend me? Art thou he that should lay hold of me? I will
surely kill thee (swearing a blodie oath, if there were no more Men living) and
therewith suddenly and violently ran at the goodman of the house with his
Rapier, but fear made the man nimble and swift, for before Sir John could
retire, the goodmanne had closed the gate, and his Rapier point hitting in a
little hole of the gate (a fatal hole it was) thrust him quite through the
body, be tweene his shoulder and his breast, so that the man fell down
presently and died, only with a woeful noise and hydeous shrieck, crying out;
I am killed. The other man who was close by him, (but that the gate was shut)
might well have been served with the same sauce likewise: wherefore being
stricken into such a terrible fear at the death of the goodman of the house as
that the scarcely knew which way he went, even as the fearful byrd, which
hearing the sound of the Havkes bells, creeps into every bush, thereby
thinking to escape death; even so, I say, he runs up and down, to seek some
place to hide himself, from so furious an Enemy. Sir John Fites, being
without the gate, runs round about by the pale on the streate side, still
raging and rauing in most terrible manner.

The good-Wife of the house (alas poor soul) hearing the pitteous outcrie and
grievous groan that her dyeng husband made, suddenly all amazed, leapes out of
her bed in her smock, to see what the matter was, and not well knowing on
which side of the house the cry was, out she ran on the streat side; where
as soon as she was stepped out, she meets sir John with his naked Rapier in
his hand, al on gore with the blood of her husband, wherefore in hope of pity,
from his pitiless hands, she fell down upon her knees in her smock, and with
hands erected, prayed, Sweet sir spare my life, and show mercy: but he, as
eager and thirsty of blood, without all compassion, twice thrust at her naked
body, twice he missed her, but still reenforcing his stroke, thrust again the
third time, and then wounded her greeuouslie in the arm, (yet not mortally) ah
happy Fortune, for her three poor infants sake, that she was not sent by his
unlucky haud after their father, and they left destitute of both. Whereupon
perceiving that it booted not to entreat for mercy any longer, she started up,
and swiftly fled back into the chamber. A man would judge that he had blood
enough now, having kiled the husband and wo^uded the wife: but yet was the
Devil so strong in him, as that not contented therewith, he pricks him on unto
further mischief: he will not be satisfied unless he shed his own blood
likewise. Wherefore most strangely (espieng a mudde Wall close by) he takes
his rapyer, and laying the hilts thereto, and the point thereof (void of al
pity) unto his own breast runs forciblie thereupon, and therewith fell; yet
rising again, and pulling the blade out of his body again he looks upon the
place to view the wound, and having with his eyes looked therevppon, and with
his fingers handled the same, as woondring at his own courage, he grumbled out
this speech, to this effect depiction of three men outside a house, one in
night clothes kneeling with his hand over his heart, one in night clothing
standing holding a sword with its blade pushed right through his torso, and one
fully dressed lying dead on the ground with his hat beside him. Proud heart,
Will thou not yeilde? Shall neither the terror of Justice affright thee? The
edge of this steel massacre thee? Nor death it self daunt thee? Split, split,
and in this only wound die: That I thy owner, may not live, to hear the
honor of my credit stained, with these my odious acts.

Thus did he expostulate with himself a while, and after this manner did he
deal with himself.

Now a man would judge that the Devil himself should be glutted with blood,
but yet, Sir John, (miserable and wretched man that he was) takes again the
point of his bloudyed Rapier, and setting it some twoe or three inches from the
same place, (what pity could be expected to be showed unto other, from one
who would show non unto himself) with all his might, ran again thereupon,
goring himself quite thorough the body: And yet again, a second time pulling
it out (for Satan's malice is boundles) (Oh worthy courage, had it been in a
good cause) he runs into the house after the Woman, but his strength failing
him, down he falls in the floor of the house, where he was anon (for as
yet fevv had the courage to hinder his attempts, were stirring) found
wallovving in his own blood, like a Pigge that had been lately sticked. Oh
heavy spectacle! Oh Tragical and rufull sight! Pity it was, if God had so
been pleased, that it had not fallen out otherways.

NOw tell me, thou that read; Did thou ever read a thing more tragical?
Did thou ever look upon a more woeful spectacle? Did thou ever hear of a
more horrible, strange, and lamentable fact? Again, if thou enter into a
further consideration of Gods Justice, is it not a sufficient warning, to make
a man give himself to prayer unto the Almighty God of heaven, to be delivered
from the like temptation? Hereby may a man perceue what the worm of a man's
conscience (of a guilty consciense and the guilt of murder depressed with
desperation) is. Hereby may al young Gentle men and Gallants, take heed and be
warned, that they give not themselves over unto to their lusts, to follow
after and lay hold on the least means that may be to do evil, and shun such
means, as might lead them unto goodness. Hereby may wild heads perceive
what it is to follow lust, drunkenness, and excessive riot, the very true
badges of a dissolute and unruly life, and lastly (if God call not to
repentance) a wicked and ungodly end. Hereby may al Ruffians and swearing
swaggerers (if any spark of grace remain in them) be warned to leave off
their wicked lives, and to turn unto the most just God, least he in his
justice suffer them to be so tempted likewise. Herby may the Stabbers, and
killers of this age, be warned to stay their hands, and not to shed the
blood of Gods saints (for it is precious in his sight) otherwise he in his
Justice will give them over to be tempted of Satan, to be the Butchers of
their own selves, as this man was. But let me now proceed to make an end of
this woeful and heavy Narration.

Neighbors being by this time gathered together about the house, came in and
found the man of the house quite dead, having yeil ded (no doubt) his soul
into the hands of his Redeemer. But Sir John Fites not altogether dead, but
fainting for want of strength, lay tumbling and wallowing in his own gore,
(having a strong heart, and myghtie courage, but yet willing (as it should
seem) to die if he could, until that company being assembled came in, and
findinge him in that woeful case, took him up, and carried him into the
chamber, and presently Surgeons were sent for to seek means to cure him: but
he (as unwilling now to hear of life as he was before eager of death) would by
no means endure to hear of any Surgeon. But notwithstanding diverse were sent
for, as namely, master Quinsie of Brainford with others: who being come tented
the wounds perforce, but he still pulled them out again, always crying out,
that he would die, and not live. Thus having done diverse times, at last he was
let blood, and diverse means used for his recovery, but all prevailed not, for
after he had lived some 48. hours after his hurts, he gave up the Ghost.

Upon the Thursday after, the Coroner sat upon the man of the house who was
already dead, and by verdict there given, sir John Fites (alias Fitz) was
found guilty both of the man's death, and his own also, if so be he died
thereupon. All which notwithstanding, because he was a Gentleman borne, and of
good kindred, so much friendship was showed unto him, in respect of the
worshipful stock from whence he descended, as that he was buried in the
Chauncell at Twicknam,

The Honorable Earl of Northumberland hearing hereof, sent a certain
Gentleman of his old acquaintance to commend him unto him, and also to put him
in mind what he had done: how greeuouslie he had offended his maker, in
committing so detestable murders, as also in laying vyolente hands upon
himself; and withal persuading him to repent, and be content to use all the
best means that might be for his recovery, and not to continue in his wicked
course: But all was one with him, he would not live, but die: only being desired
to ask mercy at Gods hand for his offenses, which humbly he did; he said that
he was sorry for the death of the poor man whom so desperately he had
murdered, and whose wife he had so greeuouslie wounded likewise, leuing 3.
wretched infants upon the mothers hands. And being asked whether he would
wilingly give any thing unto the poor woman in recompense of the loss of her
husband, he was contented to bestow upon her an hundred pounds. But whither
he had any thing in his own power to give, that know not I. For I think if
any thing be given, it must proceed from his friends goodwils (and pity but
so it should be) and not otherwise.

He would oftentimes after he was wounded, cry out upon sir William Courneyes
men (whose daughter he married) that they were come to apprehend him, and that
they would blow him up with their gunpouder: all which, questionless proceeded
from the guiltiness of his own conscience for the wrongs he had done: and
being once demanded wherefore he killed the poor man, It was not I, said he,
that did it, but one of my followers, (which thing is note-worthy) He left
behind him a daughter, whose wardship was presently obtained by an honorable
Earl.

Thus ghastly death having seized upon his corporal body, we will commit his
soul (for albeit his sins were great, yet are the mercies of God infinitely
greater) into the hands of the Almighty, (for charity judges the best, and
hops the best) in whose kingdom there is nothing but peace.

In the view of these his murders, there little needs any paraphrase, since
every man that thoroghly considers of the facts themselves, cannot but in
themselves find them to be most heinous before God, most odious before men.
This therefore is the report of his desperate courses in his life time, who as
he cannot be any blot at all unto other his virtuous and wel-deseruing friends,
so no question he is no more a grief unto other, then a fearful example unto
all his wicked associates.

Observations gathered out of the former discourse.
MAny and diverse things are in this precedent lamentable discourse worthy most
deep consideration, and may serve, (the true use of all such stories) to put
us in mind of our duties toward God, (for we should not read only to know, but
learn to know, that thereby we follow the good, and shun the evil) the Prince,
and Country, and our selves. As namely, the eager desire that Satan has to
increase his kingdom. The watchfulness and wariness that we ought to have,
that we come not within his claws. The wretched estate of a desperate mind.
The horror and trembling of a guilty Conscience, which pursues a man's own
self, when no man else does. The desperate courses of unbridled folly. The
grief of friends for so hard an hap. The astonnishment of Associates in
committing of mischief. The malice of Satan, in tempting unto evil.

The woeful estate of two Widows, the one in having a husband, that was no
more comfort unto her whiles he lived, and yielded so great cause of sorrow
being dead: the other, that so suddenly and vnexspectedlie, had her dearest
husband (the one half of her life) by such fatal means taken from her. The
pitiful estate of three Infants left upon the mothers hands, having very
small means to maintain them. The great liberty that power and might (if God
guide not the heart) gives unto the performance of evil. The blindness of our
sinful nature, that will never let us see into our riotous lives, until we
be carried away with a full stream of wickedness. The obduracie and hardness
of a man's heart, envred and acustomed unto sin. How apt to follow the worser
part, and how hardly framed to good. Drunkenes and fleshly lusts, the effects
that follow the^. Evil companions, and lewd retainers, the discommodities and
dangers thereof.

Our forwarnesse in pursuing evil, and slacknesse unto good. The many
miseries that we fall headlong into, for want of due consideration. The
temporal crosses that god sends upon his children, to try their patience.
What the friendship of man is, and how soon turned into hate. Gods judgments
upon the Wicked. His love unto the godly. And lastly (to close up this
discourse) a general warning unto all, to put them in mind to amend their
wicked lives misspent, to turn unto the Lord whiles they have time, and to
call for mercy, before the gate of mercy be shut, that repenting of the evil
past, they may lead their lives more carefully, more purely, and more holilie
hereafter: that so dying a godly death, they may make a blessed end. Which
that it may so be, the Lord of his mercy grant unto us all, a sufficient
measure of his holy spirit, Amen.

FINIS.

