A DIAMONDE most Precious, worthy to be marked: Instructing all Masters and
Servants, how they ought to lead their lives, in that Vocation which is
fruitful, and necessary, as well for the Masters, as also for the Servants,
agreeable unto the holy Scriptures.

Read me over, and then judge,
If I be not well, then grudge:
Think well of him that me made,
For Gods word shall never fade.
Romans 10. The belief of the heart ius^^^yeth, and to knowledge with the mouth,
makes a man sa^e.

Imprinted at London, in Fleetestreete, beneath the Conduite, at the Sign of
S. John Euaungegelist, by Hugh Iackson.

1577.



To the Right Worshipful, the Masters, and Wardens, of the companies of the
City of London, John Fit John, wishes long life, continual health, and
prosperous felicity.
ALthough I have been somewhat bold, and rude, to intermeddle my self with
that kind of excercyse, which I have made, and enterprise to do, it may be
answered, that I had nothing to do withal, I have to excuse my self, that
the frayltye of this world is such, that I am persuaded, duty inforceth me,
and necessitye so urges me thereto, consydering the unsteadfast stabilitye that
is used among those men which are masters, and also of yonglinges, which are
servants, or Apprentyses, (use the term of speech thereof, as it shall
please you) I thought good to gather this my simple Harueste into Barn, and
to bestow it abroad, whereby the poor, indigent and needy, might be sufficed
with the fruitefulnesse thereof, of necessitye I may call them pore and needy,
which I am sure either for lack of good instructions, otherwise for want that
they be not good hearers, are and do fall, the more is the pity, headlong
into so many dangers, and perrils that they are innumerable, and for that it
is a thing most wholesome and convenient, for all those which have and do take
upon them the charge of a stewardship, or to be a Captain of a number of
Souldyers, whereunto they ought to have care and regard. And seeing that
Agapetus was not abashed to write unto the Emperor Justinian: and diverse
others without fear has written unto Kings, Noble men, and others, I without
blame, thought good therefore, Worshipful, to dedicate this my Harvest unto
your Worships, for as much as you are in place to be instructoures, fathers,
and sheapheardes over a great Flock of sheep, and I know your careful minds
is over them, as much as the Hen is over her Chickens, your Worshippes good
wills is not withdrawn, to pluck and root out Vice, and to extol right,
equity, and Justice, and that with Conscience. In like manner do I wysh that
those Souldyors or Flock which are underneath your authority, would follow
the commandments of the Apostle: Omnis anima potestatibus superemine^tibus
subdita Romans 13.
sit. No^ enim est potestas nisi a Deo. Let every soul submit himself unto ye
authority of the higher powers. For there is no power but of God, all powers
are ordained of God, whosoever therefore resysteth power, resists the
ordinance of God. And they that resist, shall receive to themselves
damnation. S. Peeter also 1. Peter. 2.
exhorts and commands, that we ought to be subject to every humayn
creature, for the Lords sake. Sieve regi tanquam precellenti sieve presidibus.
Whether it be unto the King, as unto the chief head, either unto Rulers, as
unto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil doers: but for the
lawde and praise of them that do well. Further, the wise man Cato says, Da
locum maioribus. He wills us to give place unto the Cato.
Elders. In like manner you are aunciente and discreet, men grown in age,
being in Authority, and above all things, ought so to behave your selves,
that Math. 5.
both your works and words may so shine, that they may glorifye the father
which is in heaven. Godlynes is a thing most worthy to be embraced, and
practysed both of old and young, which brings as S. John says by knowledge,
everlasting life. Especially what is John. 17. Ecclesiast.
more comely for old age, whose departure from this world, by the course of
nature is at hand, then the consydering and meditation of heavenly things. Age
which is reverend, is not accounted by length of time, or number of years, for
ye wit of man is not the hoar heirs. What is old age.
But very age is ye life uncorrupted. How seemly is it to a white head, to
have a good judgment, and to old men to understand counsel?

There is nothing more reprochful, says Seneca, than Seneca.
an old man, which has none other argument to prove that he has lived long,
but only his years. S. Paul Titus. 2.
requires the Eldermen that they be sage, discreet, and sound in the faith,
and would have them sage and and grave. That is to say, such persons, as
neither in countenance, gestures, words, or behauyour, should show any point
of lightness, incontinencie, impudency, or whatsoever is contrary to the
dignitye of old age, but rather so behave themselves in all points, as
becomes their age, whose life ought to be unspotted, and a Myrrour of Virtue,
and a spectacle to all young folks. Also he requires those that be aged, or in
Authority, to be discreet, temperate, quiet; not rash, not uncircumspect, not
furyous in doing any thing of head, but with good aduysement and judgment,
vu^ng such temperaunce and gravity, and such discretion in all their
enterprises, as shall not be counted unworthy nor unseemly for their age. For as
much as when I had finished this mine enterprise, which I have taken in hand, I
thought good with my self that this my dedication, before recyted, would
accomplish my desire, for that your wysedomes are such to consider well thereof,
and somewhat herein I admonish al those which are in authority, exhorting
them, as it is written. Thou shalt take no gifts, for gifts blind the sight,
and pervert the words of the righteous. Job says: the fire shall consume the
houses of such as are ready to receive gyfts. For as gifts and brybes causes
the subversion of Justice. Likewise does friendship many times, and the old
Proverb herein is true. As a man is friended, so is his matter ended. He is a
just man that spares not himself. King Agesilaus being demanded, which was
Agesilaus
the better, either Justice or Fortitude. He answered if all men were just, we
needed no Fortitude. The glory of a man is to do Justice. Some that are in
authority Ecclesia.
are so rash and indiscreet, that when matters of controuersye be brought
before them, the first Tale does prevail, and the other party cannot be
hard, although his cause be never so just and good. Wherefore it is to be well
marked of Alexander the great, Alexander.
which when any man complained to him of another, being absent, he used to
stop the other ear with his hand he being demanded why he did so, he
answered, that as he left open one ear to the Accusante, so he would keep
one ear stopped and close for the Defendaunt.

Esaias says: learn to do right, apply your selves to Equitye, deliver the
oppressed, help the fatherless Esaias. 1.
to his right. The Prophet Zachary says: Execute true judgment, show mercy
and loving kyndenesse every Zacha. 7.
man to his Brother. The Apostle says: Let not the Sun go down upon your
wrath, neither give place Ephe. 4.
unto the backbyter. Let us not love in word or in tongue, but in work and
truth, for he that is sound in John. 3.
love, loves his neighbor as himself, and is the very same unto his
neighbor, that Christ is to him. Briefly have I calculated and gathered
together the flowers which are sweet and pleasant, out of the Garden of life,
which is the holy scriptures, not thinking any offense to be committed herein,
to slander any particular person, concerning Justice, but showing the estate
as the world is now adays, which is a thing not decent nor agreeable to
scripture, we English people are given to desire new toys and conceits,
thinking the newness thereof to be more of price then the old, although it be
never so fond. The scriptures are old, my travail and industry herein is but
new, and the newness thereof, is for the reformation and instructing as well
of Masters, as also of servant, have I made in a new Dyalogue the
understanding and true meaning of my mind, whereby it might the better be
perceived. And to show for whoredom, swearing, lying, theft, Drunkenness,
Idleness, Covetousness, and Correction for the offenders. How the scripture
and other Godly Authors do allow. The Apostle says: What son is he whom
the Father chastneth not? if ye endure Hebr. 12.
chastening, God offers himself unto you, as unto sons, but if ye be not
under correction, whereof all are partakers, then are ye no sons, but
Bastardes. For whom the Lord loves, him he chasteneth, Prou. 3.
yea, he scourges every son that he receives. I most humbly crave your
worshippes patience herein, if ought I have varyed, for my Eloquence is not so
fine as Cicero writes of duties, to his son, and as herein it might have
been showed, and am a young Cicero.
beginner of such excercyse, and this being the first time of mine enterprise,
I must confess as before I have declared unto you, the occasyon thereof. In
like manner Tobias the ancient father, and faithful servant of Toby.
God, taught his young son Tobias even from his tender age, to fear God, and
to refrain from al sin. His admonicious which he gave to his son, are so
Godly and profitable, so aduauncing virtue and repressing Vice, that they may
justly seem worthy to be written in letters of Gold. The Parents of Susanna
brought her up from her youth, that she was so Godly, so virtuous, Dany. 14,
and so honest, that God would not suffer ye wicked Judges to prevail against
her. Phillip the Evangelist, Act. 21.
which was one of the seven Deacons, had four Daughters Virgins, and he
brought them up so Godly and learnedly, that they were able to Prophecy and
understand the holy Scriptures. S. Paul declares that Timothy even from his
infancye, and chyldhood Tim. 12.
had learned and understood the holy scriptures, which alone are able
sufficiently, and even to the uttermost to iustructe the men of God unto
Salvation, through faith in Christ Jesus. Provoked with such like examples, I
have done mine endeavor to the uttermost of my power, to show unto your
worships, this wholesome seed of Doctrine, and my simple labor, trusting
hereby, not so to weary my self, to get naught but displeasure, for Salust
says: It is extreme peevishness, Salust.
yet do I commend this unto you, desyring your worships to accept it as a
synguler gift, profitable, and delectable to be read, and necessary for the
right and perfect instructions, according to the tenor which I have taken in
hand; whereof to be ignorant, is to much ungodliness, but also not attempt
any thing that shall either be displeasaunt to God, or to Godly and well
learned, or to your selves. Take it therefore, I beseech your Worships with
joyful hearts, as a good will toward you, for other gift have I not to give
you, and I shall most humbly beseech God to be your defendour, and to give you
his holy spirit, which may govern you all in your doings, that you may
walk blameless in his sight, and be fonnde in the number of Gods elect. The
everlasting peace of God in Jesus Christ, the contynuall aid, strength, joy,
and comfort of his most pure, holy, and mighty spirit, with the increase of
faith, be most effectually wroughte in your hearts, to your own commodities,
eternal joy and comfort.

Amen.
Your Worships,

The Speakers names of this Dialogue. Ciuis and Puer.
CIVIS. Well over taken in the name of God my good fellow: Whether art thou now
going thus al alone?


Puer. Forsooth good master, I am a Stranger hereabouts, and very willing I
am to go to London.


Ciuis. To go to London (alas) what would thou do there?


Puer. Here in the country, they say it is a goodly famous Town, and very
gladly I would see it, if I knew the way thither.


Ciuis. How dare thou go abroad now, the world is so hard, on this order?
the Constables and other Officers as thou go, will apprehende and have thee
before some Justice for a Rogue.


Puer. I trust they will not do so, for I never dwelte with Master nor Dame.


Ciuis. Notwithstanding yet, the Laws of this Realm are very straightly
looked upon now a days, concerning such matters, especially if they have not a
Pasport from whence they come.


Puer. It is even so, for in the country whereas I did dwell, they look very
straightly unto those that are suspected persons, and have them unto some
Justice, and they be not only punished with imprisonmente, but with whipping
and burning in the ear.


Ciuis. It is a thing chiefest to be looked to, for if they do not, they ought
in all places by the statute to forsee that matter. The Constables are charged
there with, and for default, incur the danger of the statute.


Puer. I am sure they will not examine me so straightly, if they do, I must
declare unto them the troth, and the effect of my matter, for I dwelte always
with my Father, and Mother, I have come a good way, and yet I have not been
examined.


Ciuis. Then I perceive that you did dwell with your father.


Puer. Yea in deed, I dwelt with my mother, but my father is dead, and lies
buried in the body of our Church, almost three years past, but my mother I
trust is alive.


Ciuis. If thy mother be alive, what did thou with her?


Puer. Marye I did go to Plough and Carte, and kept the Crows out of the
field, and fetch home the Kyne and other such like things, which appertain
unto husbandry.


Ciuis. In so doing thou did well, for Adam did work in the Garden of Eden:
Cayn Gene, 2.
was a Plough man and tilled the earth: his Gene. 3.
brother Abell was a Sheaphearde, and kept Sheep: Noye was a planter of
Vyneyardes, Genesis 4.
and can thou not live as thy father has done before thee?


Puer. No, I cannot live in that order, it is to paynefull for me, although my
Father did Hedge and diche, dig and delue, and did bring me up in the same
trade, and you have showed me those examples, I mind not to do so.


Ciuis. No, what will thou do then?


Puer. What will I do? I will tell you, I will be a Seruingman, and wayghte on
a Gentleman, and then I shall go a Hawking and Hunting and have my delight as
Gentlemen has, I shall have two new coats a year, I will have my suits of
Hose, my Hats with feathers, and be all in the brauerye, after the new
fashyon, and sometime I shall wayght upon a Gentlewoman, who would desire to
live a merryer life? or else I will to London to be a servant.


Ciuis. The old Proverb is true. A young Courtyer, an old Beggar, for they say
service is none heritage, and if thou should be used as Esop does declare in
a fable, what would thou then Esop.
say to thy bravery?


Puer. I pray you recyte the same to me.


Ciuis. He was a man by whom there is a book made, that I have read, and is
caled Esops fables, wherein he likeneth a Seruingman to a Greyhound.


Puer. He was a horeson in deed, that would liken a man to a Dog. Why there is
a great sort that be Seruingmen and does live well enough, and so I trow I
will.


Ciuis. Yea I will not despise seruingmen, for they are men necessary. But Esope
says, as long as a Greyhound is youthful, and can follow his game, he shall
be much made of, and as long as you are young and lustye, so may you be, but
when age comes on you, as did on the Greyhound, then you shall not be
steemed, but ready to be set at liberty without comfort.


Puer. Why then I pray you tell me your mind, what your aduyce is for me to
do.


Ciuis. My counsel is to have you go home again to your Mother, consydering
you say she is an old woman, and your Father dead, she is without friendship
or comfort, and you shall be a good stay and a helper unto her.


Puer. I mind not so to do, for I know a way better then to do so, she has
given me Gods blessing and hers, and is well contented withal, and has given
me Money in my Purse, I may be bold to say unto you, besides that I take you
to be an honest man, and a true man, else I would not have told you, for
there be so many men now a days of diverse sorts, I know not well whom to
trust.


Ciuis. Thou say truth in deed, the more is the pity, for one man cannot
trust another, What we ought to do to our Parents. Reverence them.
Leuiticus. 19. Eccle. 3. Here them. Epesi. 6. Honor them.
but yet Moises writes as I remember. Let every one reverence his Father and
mother. Jesus the son of Syrach writes on this manner. Hear me your Father
(O my dear Children) and do thereafter that ye may be safe, for the Lord will
have the father honored of the children. Honor thy father and Mother, this is
the first commandment that has any promise, that thou may be in good
state, and live long on the earth. And look what a Mother commands her
children to do, he will have it kept. Who so honors his Father, his sins
And why?
shall be forgeuen him, and he that honoreth his mother, is one that gathers
treasure together, who so honors his Father, shall have long life, and he
that is obedyent for the Lords sake, his mother shall have joy of him. Honor
thy father from thy whole heart, forget not the sorrowful Eccle. 7. How we
should honor our Parents. Ephe. 6. Toby. 4.
travail that thy mother had with thee. The Apostle says: Children obey your
fathers and mothers in the Lord, for so it is right. Tobias said to his
son, hold thy Mother in honor all the days of thy life, for thou ought
to remember what and how great perrill she suffered for thee in her womb.


Puer. You are very scripulous with me to honor my mother, I do not deny
it, but I confess my duetye is unto my mother, yet may I do that which I
purpose to do, for I am sure you cannot tell me of any that does practice such
obedience to Father or mother. Of my part I promise you, I know not what
obedience is, for it was never taught me.


Ciuis. Then will I teach you especially concerning our communycation. First, I
will show you that obedience is What is obedience.
a lowly and hearty submissyon of our selves to God, and afterward to our
Parents, to the Maiestrates, to our superyours, and to al those to whom GOD
has committed the rule and governance of his Flock and people in this
world, or in just causes, to all them to whom we be by any title inferyour.
Isaac showed obedience Gene. 22.
to his father Abraham. Young Tobias Toby. 5.
at his fathers commandment, went into a far country about his fathers
business, and did not deny it. Christ humbled himself, and became obedient to
the death, so was he to his parents, Joseph Phill. 2. Luke. 2.
and Mary. More will I call to remembrance out of the scripture of the duty of
Children hereafter.


Puer. I am therewith content, I perceive you have had some intelligence and
knowledge of Scriptures, that can remember such things upon a sudden, yet I
may love both father and mother, and show my duty and obedience unto them,
although I do not dwell with them: For I must seek how to behave my self,
when God calls the^ away from me, out of this vale of misery, to get my
living as they have done, for if I should do as the Proverb is, look after ded
folks shoes, I might tha^ce to go barefote.


Ciuis. And can you not live by taking pains with Husbandrye, as your father
and others have done?


Puer. No forsooth.


Ciuis. And why so I pray you tell me?


Puer. Mary sir there is such moyling and toyling, and taking of great pains,
with hard fare, that I must needs to London to be a Townseman, thereto live
more at ease.


Ciuis. If every one were of thy mind, and so permitted to have their own
wills, we might chance to fast for lack of bread, Corn, and such other
necessaryes for man's body. But the truth is, at London thou might learn
some honest and profitable occupation, wherewith thou may be able to get thy
own living in time to come, and to make provision for such as shall belong unto
thee hereafter, for if thou should be brought up ydely, thou should become
an unprofitable member in a common weal, and for lack of living, fall into many
inconveniences, for it is written. Send him to labor, Eccle. 33.
that he goes not idle, for idleness brings much evil. And again. Let no
laborious Eccle. 7.
work be tedious unto thee, neither the Husbandrye which the almightye God
has created. As the Byrds of the air are created to fly, Job. 5. Prou. 29.
so man is borne to labor. He that Tilleth his Land, shall have plentiousnesse
of bread, but he that follows idleness, shall have poverty. Thou shalt
eat the labor of thy hands, Psalm. 128.
says David: O well is thee, and happy shall thou be, wherefore be not weary
in well doing.


Puer. Although that these sentences affyrm that labor is a thing necessary, I
do not deny it, for if a man eat or drink, it is labor: if he go abroad
in the fields, it is labor: if he work at any Science it is labor: all this I
know.


Ciuis. Yea, but there is further labor then that, there is a labor first to
serve God, and remember how much bound thou art unto him for his bountious
and lyberall good gifts, which he does bestow on thee, thou must labor how
to fear him, how to obey the Prince and her Ministers, and besides I will show
you somewhat what comes of idleness.


Puer. I pray you let me here what idleness is, and the danger thereof.


Ciuis. I will mingle labor and idleness together, and as the Scripture
alleges for them both, I will show you. If the Master Eccle. 33.
do set his servant to labor, he shall find rest, but if he let him go idle,
he shall seek liberty. The yoke and the whippe boweth down the hard neck,
but let him tame the evil servant with bonds and correction. Unto the Horse
Prove. 26.
says Solomon belongs a whip, unto the Ass a bridle, and a rod to the
fools back. Like as the door turns about upon the Threshold, even so does
the slothful welter himself in bed. The sluggard and idle person thinks
himself wyser then seven men that are wise, and sit and teach. Set him to
labor, for that belongs unto him. He that will not work, shall not eat.
An idle hand makes pore, but a quick laboring Prou. 10.
hand makes rich, who so gathers in Summer is wise, but he that is
slothful and sluggish in Harvest, brings himself to confusyon. As vyneger
is to the teeth, and as smoke is unto the eyes, even so is a sluggish person to
them that send him forth. A dilligent hand shall bear rule, but the idle shall
be under Tribute. Prou. 12.
The sluggard would feign have, and cannot get his desire, but the soul of the
dilligent shall Prou. 13.
have plenty. The way of the slothful is full of Prou. 15.
Thorns, but the streat of the righteous is all cleansed. Who so is slothful
and slack in his Prou. 18.
labor, is the brother of him that is a waster. Slothfulness brings
sleep, and an idle Prou. 19.
soul shall suffer hunger. A slothful body shuts his hand in his bosom,
so that for cold he cannot put it into his mouth. Voluptuousness Prou. 21.
Tullye.
of the slothful is his own death, for by custom of labor, we shall make
the pain more easy to suffer. His hands will not labor. Antonyne Antonine
an Emperor, withdrew from diverse persons their Pencions, and Sallaries,
perceiving them idle, saying: that there was nothing more* reproachful and
cruel, then that they should knawe and devour the Weal public. Which with
their labor nothing increased it.


Puer. I confess idleness has taught much unhappiness, Ecclesi.
but I would God that we had such an Antonyne here among us, for then the
Clergy would endeavor their selves to bestow their labor and pains,
whereby Gods word might increase.


Ciuis. You say truth, Dorcas Act. 9.
was a virtuous woman, made Garments with her own hands, and gave them to
the pore. Joseph was a Carpenter, his wife Mary Mark. 6.
and the mother of Christ did spinne, and had Josephus. Gen* 4.
knowledge in the Science of Weauing. Thubalkan was a Smith, and did labor to
keep himself from idleness. The sins of Sodom Ezec. 16.
were these: Pride, fullness of meat, abundance and idleness. To labor and
to be content Eccle. 40.
with that a man has, is a sweet pleasant life, and that is to find a
treasure, above all treasures.

Treasures that are wickedly gotten, profits Prove. 10.
nothing, but righteousness delivers from death.


Puer. For all this your good exhortacions, I render unto you thanks, praying
to God that I may print them well in my mind, and although before I told you
that I would have ease, and be a Townseman, I confess every one is not borne
to be a Prince, or a Ruler, nor to be a Husbandman, nor an Artifycer, or
Merchant, but the vocation that GOD has called them unto, they must be
content with, yet I do not abhor or despise labor, but do proteste your
sayings to be good and profitable: Notwithstanding, of mine interprise which
I have taken in hand, I am not thoroughly resolved. The world is so now a days
in that order, that one man dares not disclose his mind to another, the more
it is to be lamented, and yet they brag and boast that the Gospel is
preached abroad, and it should be the better. But it does not appear so, but
as I have hard my father and mother say, I would the old learning-were up
again.


Ciuis. So it is GOD be praised therefore, for this is the old Religion, and
now the Gospel flourishes, and it is long of the hearers, that do not printe
the true and lively word of Jesus Christ, in their minds, for it goes in at
the one ear, and out at the other (the more it is to be lamented, and I am
sorye therefore.


Puer. Well, I cannot tell, but I have heard my father say often times, that the
holy and blessed Mass was a goodly thing, and then men lived more in fere.


Ciuis. A goodly thing: no, no, you are a young man, give no atte^tiue ear unto
such fond talk, it was a thing abominable, and most detestable, I am sure the
Minister does not teach you, but to the contrary.


Puer. I cannot tell, he says one thing without his book, and he says
another on his book, but what it is, I do not understand.


Ciuis. The more is the pity, have you not preaching in your Church?


Puer. Preaching say you? I know not what it is.


Ciuis. I will teach you, but will thou not be persuaded by me once again to
go back again.


Puer. No I thank you, for I am sure you speak it unto me of Friendship,
yet GOD wylling, I will see London, and be a Townseman there, for your
perswasyons has moved me not to be a Seruingman.


Ciuis. I am glad that my eruditions has so moved you, but I could declare
unto you many more stories then that of Esop, but you are young, and not passing
eyghteene years old, and when you come to London, you must be aprentise, and
bound to serve seven or eight years, and if you serve your master well and
truly, you shall be a Free man of the same City, and that is your desire.


Puer. It is even so, yet I may be bold to say unto you, I am bound already, I
know not what you mean by bynding, my father was a bondsman and bound to a
Gentleman in our country, they call him Master L. P. a very good worshipful
Gentleman, who is the Lord of all our town, and a very good Gentleman to the
pore, and now when I am at London and not known, my bondage shall not profit
the Lord.


Ciuis. Your bondage by the Laws of this realm will profit him, as Littleton
declares, and that will not serve Littleton for bondage.
your turn, when you shall be bound, that questyon will be demanded of you,
and then that being known, you cannot be bound as an apprentice, but shall
loose your labor and be constrained to go into the country again.


Puer. I can then say the contrary, for they know it not.


Ciuis. You must not do so for that is an untroth, and in so doing you shall
not do well.


Puer. Well, or not well, God willing, I will put it in trial. But tell me
now, you have hard my mind all this while, whether go you? and what
countreyman are you?


Ciuis. I was born Northwardes, and am a Citizen of London, and there is my
dwelling.


Puer. What is that Citizen? is it an occupation?


Ciuis. It is no occupation, but all the inhabitauntes within the same City,
and being Freemen thereof, are called Citizens.


Puer. I thought they had been called Townsemen. But I pray you tell me, what
do the servants there? they say here in the country, they take great
pains, and fetch water, and be cruelly whipped, and carried to a place, they
call it Brydewell.


Ciuis. I told you before what comes of ease and idleness, whereby you
might understand that pains must be taken, and the most part of them do
fetch water in a Tanckarde on their shoulders. I have done it my self, and so
have others, that are men of wealth and worship dwelling there. And as for
Brydewell, there is such a place, Brydewell for all lewd and cuill persons.
which was erected and appointed by the famous Prince King Henrye the sixte, as
by Richard Graftons Chronicle appears, at the humble suit of the Citizens
of the same City, and is ordained for all those lewd and idle Persons, as
Vacabonds and such like, and for those yt are obstinate and naughty persons,
which will not live in the fear of God, but abuse their bodies with evil and
lewd vices, as Whoredom. etc.


Puer. Is that so? then I trust in God I will not come thither, for I will not
use that evil exercise. Here in the country, the horesons that are so lusty
and play such parts, be not whipped, but stand in the Church in a Sheet.


Ciuis. That is the spiritual laws of this realm, and the abuse of the follye
is a thing worthy of punishment, for such vices are not sufferable, I could
show you Stories what the Scripture says, concerning Whoredom.


Puer. Seeing that I am young and tender of age, willing I would here some of
them, by reason that I may the better avoid my self from it.


Ciuis. GOD says, thou shall not commit adultery. What is against whoredom
Exodus Leuit. 20. Deuteronomy. 28.
The man that breaks Wedlock with his neighbors wife, let him be slain,
both the aduoulterer, and the Aduoultresse. Cursed be he that lies with his
neighbors wife, and all the people shall say. Amen.

Keep thee from the evil woman, and from Prou. 9.
the flattering tongue of the harlot, that thou lust not after her bewty in
thine heart, and least thou be taken with her fair looks. An Harlot will make
a man to beg his bread, but a married Woman will hunt for the precious life:
may a man take Fire in his bosom, and his clothes not burn? or can one go
upon hot coals, and his feet be not hurt? Even so, whosoever goes to his
neighbors wife, and touches her, cannot be unguilty, who so commits
Aduoultrye with a woman, he is a Fool, and brings his life to destructyon,
he gets himself also shame and dishonor.

The lips of an Harlot are a dropping Honey Prove. 5.
Comb, and her throat is softer then Oil, but at the last she is as bitter
as Wormwood, and as sharp as a two edged sword, her feet go down unto death,
and her steps pierce thorough unto Hell.

She regards not the path of life, so unsteadfast are her ways, that thou
can not know them, keep thy way far from her, and come not nigh the
doors of her house.


Puer. How is it possible for me to take heed of that which I know not.


Ciuis. You shall somewhat How to know a whore. Eccle. 31.
perceive a whore by her wanton eye, for have in remembrance that an evil
eye, is a Shrew.

The Whoredom of a woman may be known Eccle. 26.
in the pride of her eyes and eye liddes, by every Hedge shall she sit down.
Her delicate tooth, her fylthy talk, and her idle and vain jesting, the
setting forth of herself, yea she will seek to desire your company, despising
others, and is a disturber of quiet folks, all her delight is in banqueting and
daunsing, for she is one of the Devils darelinges. Therefore look not to
narrowly upon Eccle. 25.
the bewty of a woman, lest thou be provoked to desire toward her. Be ashamed
of whoredom, Eccle. 42.
be ashamed also to look upon an other man's wife, and to make many tryflyng
words with her maiden or to stand by her bed side. Like as the worm and
moath comes out of clothing, so does wickedness of women. But I say unto
you, whosoever looks on a Math. 5.
wife, lusting after her, has committed adultery with her already in his
heart. The Apostle Epesi. 5. Gene. 39.
exhorts us to fly from Whoredom. Joseph feared, and did run away from
Putifers wife, and would not consent to her. There shall be no Deuteronomy. 23.
Whore among the Daughters of Israel, neither Whorekeepers among the sons of
Israel. Deuteronomy. 23.
There shall no whores Child come into the congregation of the Lord. For a
Whore is a deep Grave, and a Harlot is a narrow pit.


Puer. God defend me from such vices, these are very good warnings for me, and
all others, I pray God I may remember your sayings. Yet as I remember I heard
say. Let not thine heart wander in her ways, and be not thou Prove. 7.
deceived in her paths, for many one has she wounded and cast down, yea
many a strong man has she slain, her house is the way unto Hell, where men
go down to the chamber of death.


Ciuis. That is very well remembered of you. Thou shall not lust after thy
neighbors Deuteronomy. 5.
wife, neither whoremongers, nor worshippers of Images, nor brekers of wedlock,
nor wekelinges, neither abusers of them selves with mankind, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. 1. Corin. 5.
If there be any man that is called a Brother, and is a whoremonger, with such
shall you not eat. The Prophet says, I will come and punish Mala. 2.
you, and I my self will be a swifte witness against the Adulterers. A
gracious woman mayntayneth honesty. A fair woman Prou 11.
without discreate manners, is like a Ring of gold in a swynes snowte, says
Solomon. A Prou. 12. A good woman.
steadfast woman is a Crown unto her husband, but she that behaueth her self
unhonestly, is a corruption in his bones. A wise woman vpholdeth Pro. 14.
her house, but a foolish wife plucketh it down. Who so finds an honest
faithful woman, Prouer. 3.
she is more worth then pearls, she occupyeth Wool and flax, and laboreth
gladly with her hands, she is like a Merchants ship that brings her
victuals from far. Happy Eccle. 26.
is that man that has a virtuous wife, for the number of his years shall be
double. An honest woman makes her husband a joyful man. A Eccle. 7.
good name is more worth then a precious ointment: and the day of death, is
better then the day of Birth.


Puer. You have recyted fruitful sentences unto me, as well of the good as
the evil, yet I am desirous, if you can, to know of you what other
punishments are only concerning whoredom.


Ciuis. There were slain in one day of the Nume* 25. Punishments for
whoredom. Zaleucus.
Jews twenty four thousand, for the whoredom that they committed. Zaleucus,
a Heathen and a Pagon, being a ruler in the city of Locres, which is in
Greece or Calabre, ordained a law for adultery, that who so should be taken
in aduoultery, should have both his eyes plucked out, it fortuned that his son
was the first transgressor thereof, and the Citizens pardoned him, yet his
father would not have the Law so broken, but for the performance thereof, had
one of his own eyes plucked out, and one of his sons. Among the Parthians no
fault Parthians law.
was more grievously punished then Adultery, in so much that the offenders
sometime perished by hanging, sometime by sword, sometime by fire, sometime by
drowning. The law of the Tartarians law.
Tartarians was, that Adulterers should be slain out of hand. The prodigal
son consumed the Talente which his father did give him Luke. 15.
by whoredom, and was brought to beggerye. The Metyleans strangled all such as
were taken in aduoultery, without mercy shown. The Metyleans.
Thracians law was, that who so was taken in Thracians.
whoredom, should be stripped naked, and be bound to a post, and so with
Arrows pierced and stryken to death.


Puer All these are sore and bitter punishments for Adulterers, God be
praised the laws of this realm are not so straight for that only offense.


Ciuis. No, the old ancient custom, and usage of London is, that al those
which do commit whoredom, shall ride in a cart about the city, which is to the
offe^ders great ignomy and shame. Quintus Antiotius did put away Quintus
Antiotius.
his wife, because she openly in the streat talked with an harlot and common
woman. Publius Menius, most grievously punished his servant Publius Menius.
for kissing his daughter, and charged her that she should not only bring her
body to her husband free from all uncleanness, but also from kisses. Gaius
Emperor at Rome after Peter's death reigned. iij. year and. x. mo^ths, which was
as Policronicon in his chronicles declares, vicious in living, for he abused.
ij. of his own Sisters, and by one of them he begat a Daughter, which child he
set between the knes of Jupiter in the temple, and said that Jupiter had gotten
the same child, wherefore he commanded through the country, that al me^ should
worship her as a Goddess, this Emperor also made an Image like himself, and
sent it to one Patrony president at Jerusalem under the Romans, comanding him
yt he should compel the Jews to do worship thereto, and for these inormities
Gaius was slain at Rome in his own Palace.


Puer. I have seen some that has seen a moat in their brothers eye, and has
had a great beam in his own, you talk wisly, and I mark it well, the flesh is
frail and wicked, and Adam was tempted by Eve, so cannot a woman in like manner
tempt you, you Gene. 3.
are flesh and blood as another ma^is, necessity has no law the proverb says.
You are very earnest with me, and it is for my learning, and I pray God that
both of us might follow your docume^t, but the contrary is seen of some of those
yt seem to be great professors of religion, their deeds are contrary, yet
they will teach and show others their duties, and pluck a thorn out of
another man's foot, and put it in their own.


Ciuis. Every one that says Lord, Lord, shall not enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my father, says Christ. So if they
profess Jesus Christ, and do not after his precepts, they are as evil as
Judas, (God root them out) of my self I must confess to be a sinner, and one
that am ashamed to show my self before the glory of God, my sins are so
manifold, yet will I say and excuse my self concerning whoredom, as
faithful Iobe said. If my heart hath-lusted after my neighbors wife, or if
I have laid wayght at his Iobe. 31.
door: O then let my wife be another man's harlot, and let other lie with her,
for this is a wickedness and sin that is worthy to be punished. As for
whoredom and all uncleanness, let it Ephe. 5.
not be named among you.


Puer. Why then have you made so much to do with me about it? and have named
it to me so often.


Ciuis. To give you gentle admonition thereof.


Puer. I thank you for it, this talk I assure you, it pleseth me wondrous
well, and is to me as sweet as honey, I have gone a great way to day, and am
wearye, and because I know not the way to London, and am minded to go
thither, and now having your company, makes me the ioyfuller, if it please
you, because that I am dry, I will give you in this town a Cake, and a pot of
Ale or Beer.


Ciuis. God have mercy my friend for thy gentle proffer, I will give it thee,
and be as glad of thy company, for a man trauayling by the way alone, it is
uncomfortable, wherefore I was glad I met with you.


Puer. And so was I.


Ciuis. Here is the Alehouse: Hoe are you within? I pray you give us a Cake and
a pot of Ale, for my friend and me, here at the door,


Ancilla. I pray you friends come in, you shall have the best Ale in all this
town.


Puer. She speaks well, I pray God she does as she says, lo here she
brings it.


Ancilla. Here is that you called for, if you would have come, in you might
have had a cloth for you, but you take pains here at the door.


Ciuis. God be praised for this being here, it suffices us as well and better,
for now we are standing, we are still ready to go.


Puer. You say troth, well


Ancilla, here is Money for it, I pray you sir be content, for at this time I
will pay for it, and you shall pay for the next.


Ciuis. Content with that, and I thank you hartilye, and let us go.


Puer. Farewell


Ancilla, we thank you, it was very good Ale.


Ancilla. It was of my Dames own brewing, God be with you both, and be your
good speed.


Puer. I thank thee.


Ciuis. This suffyceth me better, then if a man should have gone to the
Tavern, and sit there tippling, for one thing you must take heed, you are a
young man, peradventure when you come to London, you shall be acquaynted with
some of your Countrymen, who will advertise you to go to the Alehouse or
Tavern, and procure you to spend and consume such substance as you have, and
peradventure your masters likewise.


Puer. Is it not lawful for me to go thither with them?


Ciuis. No it is not, for during the time of the reteynder of your
apprentiship, you your self and all that you can do, is your masters.


Puer. I grant it be so, yet I may have occasyon sometime, I am sure to be
merry, and to go to the tavern, for in our country on the market days when
we went to the market, and upon Sondayes or Holidayes, now and then, we did use
to go to the Tavern, for there comes no harm of it. For wine soberly
dronken, quickneth Eccle. 31.
the life of man.


Ciuis. If he drink measurably, he shall be temperate. For Wine was made for to
make man glad at the beginning, Psalm. 104.
and not for drunkenness, wine measurablye dronken, is a rejoicing of the
soul and body.


Puer. There is none that would be so mad as to drink vnmeasurably, if there
be that you can tell of by any stories out of the scripture, teach Job. 6.
What comes of excess drinking of wine. Ephe. 5.
me, and I will hold my tongue, and if I err, show me wherein.


Ciuis. Be ye not made drunk with wine, wherein is wantones, but be ye filled
with the spirit, speaking to your selves by Psalms, Himnes, and spiritual
songs, saint Jerome says, we cannot at one time be filled Jerome. Prove, 23.
with wine and the holy ghost. Look not upon the wine when it is red, and when
it shows his color in the Cup, and goes down pleasantly. To give his heart
to wine and pleasant Eccle. 2.
things was mere vanity. Awake ye which are dronken with wine. Aaron and
his sons Joel. 1. Leuiticus. Plato.
are commanded not to drink wine, before they come to sacryfyce before the
Lord. Plato writes that Minos by his laws, prohibited ye Creteuses, that they
should not drink together to drunkenness. Seneca says, dronkenesse is
nothing Seneca. Plato.
else but a voluntary madness, ye quality of drunkenness continuing many days,
is furiousnes, and it is fylthy for a man to take more then he is able to
receive, and not to know the measure of his stomach, they which are dronken do
many things which afterward, when they are sober, they are ashamed of. For a
dronken man knows not the ground whereon he is.


Puer. It is most true that you say, yet God forbid, but that men should
sometime frequent the Tauerns, and drink wine, and be merry, and not to be
dronken with excess, all me^ are not of one condition, measure is a mean
meal, and wine Eccle. 42.
and minstrelsy rejoices ye heart.


Ciuis. If it be taken in good order it does so, the wise man says, wine Pro.
20.
is a voluptuous thing, and dronkennes causes sedition, whosoever deliteth therein,
shall never be wise.

He that has pleasure in banquets, shall be a poor man. Who so delights in
Wine and delycates, shall not be rich. Be not dronken with wine, wherein is
excess. For drunkenness is Ephe. 5.
counted to be a Lady, and a good fellow, you cannot speak with her, but by
the aid of Glotony, who is her Porter.

There wayteth upon her Apoplexia, Dropsye, Twelve servants wayteth on
dronkennes.
Palsy, Fevers, Leprosye, Scabednesse, Follye, Forgetfulness, Negligence,
Madness, and death. She is always at debate and strife with Sobriety, and she
dwells in the Garden of excess, the Devils own darling.


Puer. God keep me and all people, from coming within her Gate, and out of
the company of any of her servants, these persons that you speak of are not
sufferable, for they do not remember a saying which I have heard. Take heed
unto yourselues, that your hearts be not Luke. 21.
ouerladen with excess of eating and drunkenness, and with taking of thought
for living.


Ciuis. You have remembered it well, they take no thought for living, which
acquaynte themselves with excess. The Prophet exhorts us to walk honestly,
as in the day, not in excess Roma. 13.
of eating and drinking, but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Also he says, that neither the covetous nor 1. Cor. 6.
dronkardes, nor cursed speakers, nor extorcioners, shall inherit the kingdom
of God.


Puer. These are shrewd Thunderbolts that you shoot at me, yet is there a
saying: Drink no 1. Tim. 5.
longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomachs sake: O how well content
is that man Eccle. 31.
which drinks a little wine? so that in sleep he be not sick thereof, nor
feel any pain, it is lawful to use wine for necessity, for medicine, and
also for mirth, but yet it must be tempred I perceive with Sobryetye, neither
may it exceed a mean, yea, it must agree with time, place, degree, age, and
kind. Let men make themselves merry with wine, that afterward they may be more
cheerful to obey God, and to suffer heavy things if need be, and let men
beware they forget not themselves, that they ouerwhelme not their senses, and
choke up their strength.

Wine moderately dronken, is profitable for Eccle. 33.
the life of man. What is his life that is overcome with wine?


Ciuis. I will show you. The smoth and plain ground, is unto dronkards a Den,
for they fall, break their legs, their arms, and sometime their necks, and
are burnt when they fail into the fire. They lie wallowing like swyne, and
worse then the brute beast, which goes to her vomit. Their liver is inflamed
with to much drink, the head is payned, the members are made weak and
tremble, their senses are corrupted, the natural heat is overwhelmed with
overmuch wine, ye stomach which is ouerlargely disce^ded, is sick with crudity
or rawnes, and with intolerable pains: the whole body is in a manner inflamed,
and the thirst is augmented. Dronkardes lie groueling like blocks, and so are
bereued of their strength that neither head nor foot can do their office. Wine
and dronkenes takes away the heart. Wine and women make Osea. 4. Eccle. 19.
Plato.
wise men runagates, and put men of understanding from right institutions. A
dronkarde has a tyrannical heart, for he would rule all men as he lust, and
not by any reason or law. Drunkenness also brings oblivion of laws and
right. A laboring man that is given unto Eccle. 19. August.
dronkennes, shall not be rich. The dronken man co^foundeth nature, loses grace
and honor, and runs headlong into everlasting damnation Noy when he having
dronk morewine the^ was mete Gene. 9.
lay in the tente most fylthely naked, and his privy parts which were wont to
be covered, he left bare and uncovered, and he which was wont to be an
instructor of virtues, was a great offense unto his Children: Ham mocked him,
the other two sons, Sem and Iaphet of a better disposition, were sorry, and
ashamed of their fathers fylthinesse. Lot sought to make himself merry Gene. 19.
with wine, and he incurred perpetual heaviness. Ammon David's son, was merry
with 20. Re. 13.
wine, and Absolon commanded his youg men to slay him. Alexander of Macedonia,
the Conqueror Alexander of Macedonia
of the world, was most fylthy overcome with wine, being drunk, slew Clitus
his friend. Holefernus was merry with Judith, Judith. 13.
and drank more wine then ever he did before in his life, and after her prayer
made unto God she took asworde that hanged by, and took him by the heyry
locks, and with two strokes upon the neck, smot of his head. Antonius a Ruler,
and a va^quisher in many battails had so laden M. Antonius.
himself with wine, yt as he sat to give judgment in the Tribunal Seat in
the morning, was constrained to vomit.


Puer. These me^ did Eccle. 31.
drink wine and were dronken with excess, and it made bitterness and sorrow
unto their minds, I confess dronkenesse fills the mind of ye flesh with
shame, as it did unto Noe and Lot and Antonius, and to the rest, I have hard
say that Sisera was dronk, and was slain of Iahel, Sisera.
although his drink was milk, and not wine.


Ciuis. It was so as the story does declare. The Apostle Ephe. 5.
says, be not dronken with wine, wherein is excess. Woe be unto them that rise
up earlye to use themselves in drunkenness, and yet at Esaias. 5.
night are more superfluous with wine. Woe be unto them that are cunning men to
suppe out wine, and expert to set up drunkenness. Be not thou a wine biber,
for as I have told you, Eccle. 13.
wine has destroyed many a man. The fire proves the hard iron, even so does
wine prove the hearts of the proud, when they be dronken. A dronkarde says the
Apostle, or extorcyoner, 1. Cor. 5.
with such shall ye not eat, but put away from you him that is evil.

The Elder men be sober, not given to much Titus. 2.
wine.

Keep no company with wine bibbers, and Prou. 23.
royotous eaters of flesh, for such as be Dronkards and roioters, shall come to
poverty. Wine Boethius.
inordinately taken, doubleth man's reason: makes evil understanding:
infeebleth remembrance: sends in forgetfulness: pours in errors: and
brings forth sluggishnesse. He that is given to much sleep, shall go with a
ragged Prou. 23.
coat.


Puer. This saying is verifyed by our old priest in the Country, for ragged
and drowsye he is, and lightly is never from the Alehouse, but when he goes to
the Mattens, and Euensong, if he did perceive and printe these sayings in his
mind, he would be ashamed thereof, yet he thinks himself wyser then seven
men, that sit and teach. Prou. 26.



Ciuis. They lack good gouernmente whereas it is, and a good Pastor, or a
Sheapehearde, which is careful to suppress all manner of vice.

Solomon says: Give Kings no wine, Prove. 31.
give Kings and Princes no strong drink, lest they forget the Law, and
regard not the cause of the pore and needy, give strong drink and wine unto
such as are condemned to death, and wine unto those that mourn, that they may
drink it, and forget their miserye, and aduersitye.


Puer. The Lord GOD be merciful unto us, and give us grace one to pray for
another, that the same vice of drunkenness might be rooted out, whereby they
may become new members of our Savior Christ. For he destroys both the Job. 9.
righteous and ungodly: what a miserable estate are they in, to use their
selves in such disorder?


Ciuis. I pray God that thou do remember this another day, and be bold if
you come where any such vice is used, to say: speak every man Leuit. 19.
the truth unto his neighbor, execute Judgment truly, and peaceably within
your ports, none of you imagine evil in his heart against his neighbor.


Puer. I gather out of this saying, that which I would it were well noted and
followed, then they would neither lie, nor deal falsely one with another.


Ciuis. Then all bitterness, and fearfulness, Ephe. 4.
and wrath, and roaring, and cursed speaking, should be far from you, with all
maliciousness, but be you wheresoever you shall dwell, courteous one to
another, merciful, and forgive one another, even as GOD has forgeuen you in
Christ. Come not in the path of the ungodly, Prou. 4.
and walk not in the way of the wicked, eschew evil, and go not therein,
depart aside, and pass over.


Puer. I thank you for your counsel, but I pray you now let us passing along
by the way, Psalm. 33.
have some more of the communication, how the duty and usage of the Masters
at London, and how their Apprentises are bound.


Ciuis. I will tell you how it is, as breefely as I can. First, of the duty
of masters, and so consequently as time does serve of the Servants.


Puer. You shall do very well unto me, for you have been a good instructor to
me, I pray God that I may bear it well in memory.


Ciuis. You say well, I have read in the first Epistle of S. Paul to Titus,
the second chapter. That the elder men be sober, honest, discreet, 1. Tit. 2.
sound in the faith, in love and in patience, and the elder women like wise
that they should show themselves as it becomes holiness, that they be no
false Accusers, not given to much wine, that they teach honest things, that
they inform young women to be sober minded, to love their husbands, to love
their Children, to be discrete, chaste, huswiuely, good, obedient unto their own
husbands, and also he says in the same chapter, exhort the young men likewise
yt they be sober minded.


Puer. What does S. Paul mean by the elders.


Ciuis. That is a master and a governor over his household.


Puer. Is that his meaning: well I understand that, but yet you come not to
that I looked for.


Ciuis. I will do then as nigh as I can, but I would be loath to do contrary to
the saying of S. Paul to Timothy in the. v. Chapter.


Puer. What says Timo. 5.
he:


Ciuis. He says, if any man teach otherwise, and agrees not unto the
wholesome What if a man teach contrary to the word of God.
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine of Godliness, he is pufte
up, and knows nothing, but wastes his brain about questyons and striuinges
of words, whereof spring envy, strife, railings, evil surmising, vain
disputacions, of such men as have corrupt minds, and are robbed of the truth,
which think that lucer is Godliness.


Puer. I do not so desire you to teach or instruct me any thing contrary to the
scripture, for if I might perceue you did, I would willingly eschew it.


Ciuis. I am joyful thereof, for S. Paul says to the Colossians Coloss. 3.
the third chapter. Ye masters do to your servants that which is just and
equal, and know that ye also have a master in heaven. Also the duty of a
master is that he must dillige^tly provide that he govern the^ Godly, and
justly: Godly shall he govern the^, if while they be in his service he
exercise the^ not only in seruil and manual works: but also in deeds of
godlynes, and virtue, and to forsee yt no kind of sin be used of his servants
in his house, neither ydlenes suffered, neither swering, picking, neither
stealing, neither whoring, nor any fylthy communication, but that all
Godliness, honesty and virtue be practysed among them, when they come from the
Church upon the Saboth day or holiday, to examyne them what fruitefulnesse the
have learned there, that by this means God may the more abundantly pour
forth his blessing upon him, and all his household.


Puer. These are good exhortations which delights me very well, I pray you
as you have begone, so rehearse more to me and you can.


Ciuis. Yes I thank God, I can, for the duty of a master is, to dele What is
the duty of the Master
justly, truly, and faithfully with his servants, he must take heed, that he
do not only require of them faithful and dilligent service, due and true
work and labor, but that he also without fraud or deceyt, give them their
duties, and couenaunts, as meat, drink, lodging, linen, woollen, apparel,
their occupation, and whatsoever is agreede upon between them, that there be
found no unrighteous dealing in him, but all justice, all equity and truth.

Let him not evil entreat his servant that works truly, but let him love
a discreet servant Eccle. 7. Eccle. 33.
as his own soul, and defraude him not of his duty. If the master entreat a
good servant evil, and keep him hard, and make him to be proud and to run
away from him, he cannot tell what way to seek him.


Puer. It is most true, for as much as you told me that the duty of the
master is, to foresee that neither idleness should be suffered, you have told
me your mind, for that I pray you in like manner, let me understand what is
against swearing. What is against swering. lames. 5.



Ciuis. Saint James says, swear not, neither by heaven nor by earth, neither
by any other oath. But let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, least you fall
into ypocrisye. Thou shalt Exodus.
not take the name of thy Lord God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that takes his name in vain. Wherefore I advertise thee, let not
thy mouth be used to swearing. Eccle. 23.
The wise man says, when that men here such swearing, the heir of their
heads should arise Prou. 27.
for fear, and they should stop their ears, and not here such irreverence,
and despysing of Gods name.

Thou shall not swear at all, neither by Heaven, for it is Gods seat, nor yet
by the earth, Math. 5.
for it is his footestoole, neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the
great King, neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou can not
make one hear, white or black, Math. 23.
who so swears by the Altar, swears by the same, and by all that is
thereon, and who so swears by the Temple, swears by the same, and by him
that dwells therein, and who so swears by heaven, swears by the seat of
God, and by him that sits thereon.


Puer. Why ought not a man to swear at any time?


Ciuis. If they be called before a Judge, for the just trial of matters in
controversy, it is lawful for them to swear, and then they must take Heb. 6.
heed. For when God made promise to Abraham because he had none greater to
swear by, he swear by himself, and said: surely I will bless thee, and
multiply thee in deed. As for men, they swear by him that is greater then
their selves, and the oath is ye end of al strife. Who so swereth by any
creature, he swears by him that made August.
that creature.


Puer. Then you allow to swear before a Judge, to be agreeable to the scripture.
If they swear falsely, what is to be accounted upon them?


Ciuis. Those that swear falsely do contrary to the scripture. For it is
written, thou shall bear no false witness against thy neighbor. False Exodus.
witness procures malice, theft, mansianter, and other vices to be hidden,
it is the oryginall of vice, for a Judge sitting in judgment, cannot
indifferentlye minister justice, because that false witnesses do blind the
truth often times. Ye shall not swear falslye by my name, and so to vnhalow
the name of thy God, Leuit. 19.
for I am the Lord, says God. Better is ye pore Prou. 19.
man that lives Godly, then the blasphemer that is but a fool. The wyseman
says, a false witness shall not remain unpunished. A false witness laugheth
iudgement^^ scorn. A false witness shall perish. Prou. 21.


Who so bears false witness against his Prou. 25.
neighbor, he is a very spear and sword, and a sharp arrow. Thou shalt not
forswear thy Math. 5.
self, but shall perform thine oath to God, swear not at all, be no false
accuser. Let thy tongue Titu. 2. Hierome.
be ignorant of swearing, and love so well truth that whatsoever that thou
speak, think that thouswearest.

Herod swear to Herodias daughter what so Mark. 6.
ever she did ask of him, he would give it her, and he performed it, although
he was sorry, for his oaths sake. The Romans had a law yt as such Remeynes
law.
as were found to be perjured, should be thrown down he adlong from the top of
a high Rock called Tarpeius. The counsel of Josephus Josephus.
was, that he, which blasphemeth God, and irreverently use his name, should
be stoned unto death, and then hanged up by the space of one day, and so taken
down and buried, without all manner of honor. The Egiptians law Egiptians law.
was, that no swearing should be used among them at all, except it were for a
weighty cause, if any were found to be perjured, the same should loose his
head. Doualdus King of Scots made this act within his land, that al Doualdus.
periurers and common swearers should have their lips seared with a burning
hot Iron.


Puer. These are very sore and strayghte laws, which you have told me of, but
can you tell me if any such strayghte laws were at any time made in
England concerning the blaspheming of the name of God.


Ciuis. I remember I have heard say that King Henry the fyfte, made a statute
for swearers, in his own Palace, that if he were a Duke that did Henry the
fyfte.
swear, he should forfeite for every time fortye shillings, to the ayding and
helping of the pore: if he were a Lord or a Baron, twenty shillings: if he were
a Knight or an Esquyre, x. shillings: if he were a Yoman, twenty pence: if he
were a Page or a Lackey, or a slave, to be scourged naked, either with a rod,
or else with a whip.


Puer. If this law were in these days put in execution, there would not be so
much swearing used as is, which for lack of the fear of GOD provoke many to
offend, which God of his goodness ingrafte into their stony hearts the
increase of his love, and that they may fear him with all unfeigned reverence.
I perceive and do gather of your good lessons, that better it were that the
bodies of the blasphemers in this world should suffer a little pain, then
after this life to have both their bodies and souls cast into Hell fire.


Ciuis. You say troth, if al fathers and mothers and masters would dilligently
watch upon their children, and servants, it shall cause them not only not to
be defiled with the most grievous sin of swearing, but also that the most
holy name of God should be had in high reverence, great estimation, and
perpetual honor for ever after, so long as they live. But above al things I
would wish the Parents themselves to be an ensample in this behalf, unto
their children and servants, and show evermore such reverence unto the name
of GOD, that the yonglinges may well perceive that it is no vain thing that
they are taught. If they do the contrary, that is to say, blaspheme the holy
name of God, then shall they undoubtedly come unto dishonor, and a shameful
end.

In this world the plague and vengeance of God, shall not go away from their
houses, they shall be stricken with many grievous diseases in their bodies,
their goods and Cattle, yea and all that ever they have, shall come to naught,
their kind of living shall be despised with all good men, their death shall be
paynful, miserable and wretched, and after these so great and manifold
plagues, they may be sure Esaias. 66. Math. 23.
for their wicked swearing, to be cast into Helfyre, where the flames of it
shall never be quenched, where weeping and gnashing of teeth shall be, where the
worms shall knawe their own consciences, and shall never dye. More ensamples
might be declared at large for this matter, but you shall here further what S.
Paul writes to the Ephesians, the sixth chapter, Ephe. 6.
unto masters. Ye masters says he, do even the same unto your servants,
putting away threatenings, and Ephe. 6.
know that even your master also is in heaven, neither is there any respect
of person with him.


Puer. You have accomplished my desire. But I pray you good master Citizen,
let me some what understand your mind of the duty of the servants, and in
what order the masters do take them in London, when they come rawlye as I do
out of the country.


Ciuis. The Citizens that lack servants, and especialy those that are men of
great wealth, will seek to have some sufficient Sureties for those that they
will entertayn into their service, and good consyderation it is, for a man may
take into his house one that shall soon undo his master, before he has
warning thereof, I would GOD Citizens would take heed of master Lillyes
sayings. Happy is he whom Doctor Lillye.
other men's harms can make him to be warned.


Puer. As you say, then it is requisyte that he shall have suretyes for his
truth, and honest behavior, but every one that comes to London, is not of
that ability.


Ciuis. It is so, therefore some honest man does put it in adventure.


Puer. I trust in GOD so will some honest man do with me, I pray you do
you know any honest man that lacks a Servant, I force not of what
occupation.


Ciuis. I will say unto you as S. Jude says in his Epistle, I willingly would
wish you unto Jude. 1.
him that is able to keep you, that you fall not.


Puer. I thank you for yt, I pray you now show unto me the order and usage of
the apprentises how they be bound, and what the scripture says agreeable
thereunto.


Ciuis. I will. When you have continued a time with your master, you shall go
with him to the Hall yt he is free of, and before the master and Wardones of
that company be presented, that they may view and see you whether you be
crooked or lame, and they will give you good instructions, to show you what your
duty is, as well to God, and unto your master and mistress, and also to know
your duty as S. Peeter commands: honor all men, love brotherly fellowship,
and as the Lord has called 1. Peter. 2.
every person, so let him walk. Also you must be bound by a pair of
Indentures, for so many years as your Master and you can agree for, always
provided when you come out of your years, before you have the liberties of
London, you must be of the age of four and twenty years, and the same master
as I told you in the duty of masters, must teach you or cause you to be taught
your occupation, and he to find you meat, drink, linen, woollen, hose, shoes
and all other such necessaries. And if you have served your master truly,
then he will make you a freeman of London, whereby you may live and with the aid
of almighty God do full well as your master before you has done. You must be
careful and myndfull to carry away good exhortations when you hear them, and
willing and dilligent to please your Master and Mistress, in which doing, you
shall find great commodity and profit.


Puer. When a man is bound, shall he not go into the Country to see his
friends, during the time of his Apprentiship, nor a shooting in the fyeldes, I
love that exercise well.


Ciuis. Not without your master and Mistress give you leave, and you must
take heed you do not tarry long abroad then neither, for when you are
absent, you know not occasyon of business they shall have for you to do.


Puer. Then the servants are at a better point in the country, although they
take pains on the working days, yet they may go leap, shote, Dance, Dise,
Card, and bowl, and use what gaming they shall think good, on the Sunday and
Holiday.


Ciuis. You cannot do so in London, I remember there was a statute made in the
sixte year of the reign of King Henrye the eight, that al Unlawful games
prohibited.
Constables and other head officers fynding or knowing any person, using or
exercysing any unlawful Games, as Tenis play, bowls, Claish and al other
unlawful games, prohibited by many statutes, shall have full power to commit
every such offender to ward, there to remain without Bail or Maynprise, till
such time he or they so offending, be bound by obligation to the Kings use, in
such sum as by discretion of the same Officer, shall be thought reasonable,
that they from thenceforth shall not use any unlawful Games, and besides in
another statute, the Constables does incur the danger of a penalty, assessed
upon them, for the neglecting of their duetyes and office, and is not this put
in execution in your country?


Puer. God forbid it should, what should we do when Service is done?


Ciuis. I told you in the duty of the masters, so it is the duty of
alseruauntes to use games and honest pastymes and excercyses alowable by the
laws of this realm, that is shooting, or else adict your self if you cannot
reed, with some well disposed person that can read, to here the scriptures
read, and descant upon them, and let that be your games and pastymes.


Puer. These are very strange conceits, and do the servants in London, I
pray you, use this exercise.


Ciuis. If they do not, it is lamentable, their duty it is, and mine
likewise, although we be obliuious therein, God grant that we may be more
myndfull thereof.


Puer. I pray you now proceed, and show me some aucthours, and the duty of a
servant toward his master.


Ciuis. I thank God I can somewhat show it unto you, for I have been a
servant, and now a master, and have charge of servants, whereby I should know
both, although I must needs confess. Therighteous man offends, and so may
both masters and servants, for to be so precyse as scripture teaches us, we
cannot, yet we wish good will to follow the same.


Puer. I pray you then recyte unto me those Sentences, which you think good
for that purpose.


Ciuis. Somewhat I told you before of idleness, yet Solomon says: A
slouthful body will not go to Plough for cold, therefore Prou. 20.
shall he go a begging in winter, and have nothing. Slothfulness brings
sleep, and an idle soul shall suffer hunger. Prou. 19.



Puer. That is most true, for I remember sometime when I should keep the
Crows out of the fields, I was so slothful, that although the wether was
cold, yet was I asleep.


Ciuis. Idleness weryeth strength, as rust does Iron, Seneca.
the bro^d unstirred, burns slouly, and if he be moved, he causes ye fire
eftsoon to ki^dle. Idleness without lerning is death, and the grave of a quick
man. The wise ma^sayth, I went by the field of the slothful, and by the
vyneyard of the folish man, Prou. 17.
and lo, it was al covered with nettles, and stood full of thistles, and the
stone wall was broken down. He that spares the rod, hates ye child, Prou. 13.
but whosoever loves him, holds him ever in correction.


Puer. That is a very straight saying: how can a man love his child, when he
chasteneth him, and holds him ever in correction? I pray you what is meant by
the same word correction?


Ciuis. Correction is an ame^dment of our former evil life, taming of our
carnal will, mortifying What is correction.
of our flesh, applying of our selves to the commandment, will, and example
of Christ, to take away and banish the evil, to bring in and establish the
good, as David says: Eschew evil Psalm. 34.
and do good, for evil works always takes away the credit of good words. To
take heed Prou. 10.
unto the chastning of nurtoure, is the way of life, but he that refuses to
be reformed, goes wrong. He that thinks skorne to be Prou. 13.
reformed, comes to pouertye and shame, but who so receives correctyon,
shall come to honor. A scornful body loves not one that rebukes him,
neither will he come among Prou. 15. Prou. 23.
the wise, withholde not correction from the child, for if thou beatest him
with the rod, he shall not die.

The correction of the wise is an obedient ear, a golden chain, and a Jewel
of gold. Prou. 25.



Puer. This is a good correcting, every man to examine his own conscience, and
so to correct himself: but this is not the correction, that I mean.


Ciuis. there is another kind of corectio^ which is to be joined unto ye
sayings of the wise man, the rod and correction ministers wisdom, but if a
child be not looked to, he brings his mother to shame, therefore says he:
Nurtour thy son with correction, and he shall comfort thee, yea he shall do
thee good at thy heart. A servant will not be the the better for words, for
though he understand, yet will he not regard them. He that delicately and
familyerly brings up his servant, shall make him his master at the length.

He must not make him fellow with his master, neither at his table, nor yet in
any other place, these words signify, as the old proverb is of common people
used: a yo^g bough will bend while it is green, but when it is old, it will not
move, so is it to be accounted for youth, they must be looked unto while they
are young, they must not be wantonly brought up, but with fear, they must be
used at the first, as they shall continue, and for their faults be corrected.


Puer. I gather much of your talk, but though you speak of children, is the
meaning thereof by seruanntes likewise?


Ciuis. Yea all is one, for where there is a child or a son named, or a
servant, all is as one thing: For where the wise man says. Chasten Prou. 19.
thy son while there is hope, but let not thy soul be moved, to sley him is
not meant, but that he shall give him reasonable correction, and not in anger,
for correction is as necessary for youth, as meat, drink, and apparel.


Puer. All this I do not deny, but yet I think it is very hard, for these
are sore threatenings.


Ciuis. They are so, yet: He that byndeth a August.
frantic man, and waketh him that has the letargye, or sleeping sickness,
displeases both, loves both, and heals both: both whiles they be sick do
disdain him, and when they be whole, yet both do thank him.

In correction wrath is specially to be prohibited, Tully.
for he that will punish when he is angry, shall never keep well the mean,
which is between to much and to little. It is better to be Eccles.
of a wise man corrected, then to be with the flattery of fools deceived.

Be of thine own living a sharp correctour, Chrisost. Seneca.
and of other men's a gentle reformer. Correct thy friend secretlye, and
praise thy friend openly.


Puer. I apply unto your sayings, I remember a saying: the Servant that
knows his Luke. 13.
Lords will; and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will,
shall be beaten with many strypes. I confess these words touch servants.


Ciuis. You have said truth, but if you will, I will declare unto you many
Godly examples out of the scriptures, concerning the duty of servants
toward their masters, and yet God forbid that the servants should be so
evil in their doings, that they should have according to the threatenings and
commandments of scripture.


Puer. Are the thratninges and precepts in scripture so extreme, had I known
this by the instruction of our old Priest, I would not have gone all this
way for to be an Apprentise in London, rather had I tarryed with my mother at
Plough, and Carte, or else to have been a Seruingman, for your words pierce my
heart: Apprentises and children in London are not so used, I pray you tell me?


Ciuis. You need not to be so fearful, for there comes no harm in well
doing. For rulers Roma. 13. Rulers are to be feared.
are not to be fered for good works, but for evil. Will thou be without fear
of the power? do well then, and so shall thou be praised for the same, for he
is the Minister of God for thy wealth, but and if thou do evil, then fear. The
Apprentises are not so straightly used as some of them do deserve, for they
are used in London, as they be in other places, and are as the proverb says,
some good, some bad, but be you not dismayed, for there are worshipful men in
London, and men of great wealth, who have gone to London to serve as an
apprentise, as simple as you go.


Puer. Your friendlsnesse I pray God I might quite, for where you have given me
a choking bone, so you give me drink to qualifye the force thereof, for I am as
one dismayde, and al by your talk, but I trust in God it is all for the best,
and for my commodity.


Ciuis. It is so, be of good comfort, and have a man's heart with you, you go
to be a Souldyer, you must not retire against your enemy, but manfully fight
in your quarrel, until you have won the Castle.


Puer. You speak darkely unto me, I pray you show me the plain mening thereof.


Ciuis. I told you your duty toward God, you go to be an Apprentise, you must
seek all the ways you can to be dilligente, and actyue to learn your
occupation, for that which GOD has appointed for you, you shall have, for
there is choice of what occupation soever you can fantasye yourselfe to, you
must not run away, but so endeavor yourselfe, until such time as the years
be expyred, that you may be accoumpted a good and profitable servant.


Puer. Is that your meaning to run away, by the grace of God I will not, for
there comes no goodness thereby, ye rolling stone gathers not moss, so the
Runaway seeks his own confusyon, I trust I will remember your talk which you
have used to me.


Ciuis. In so doing doubt you not by ye grace of God, but you shall do well, you
must take heed and remember how S. Paul writes unto Titus, in exhorting
Titus to be ware: in like manner it is generally Tit. 1. 3.
to warn you to submit yourself to the Queen our souerayn Lady, and to ye
chiefest in authority, to obey officers, to be ready unto al good work^^ that
you speak evil of no man. Do thou none evil, and none shall come to thee.
Leave evil Eccles.
company, and evil will forsake thee. Come not in the path of the ungodly, and
walk not in Prouer. 4.
the way of the wicked.

Eschew it, and go not therein, depart a side and pass over by. Be no
stryuer, quarreller, Psalm. 10. Titus. 2.
sower of debate and discord, but showing all meekness unto all men. For
Solomon says: He that is of a proud stomach, stirs up Prou. 28. A proud
look. Prou. 8.
strife, and again he says: A proud look, a lying tongue, and a heart that
goes about wickedness, feet that be swifte in running to do mischief, a
false witness that brings up lies, the Lord hates.

Three kinds of things my soul has much Eccles.
hated, (says the Preacher) and I am much disconte^ted with their
disposition. A poor man proud, a great man a liar, an old man a fool and
lacking discretion. God resists them that James.
be proud, and to them that be humble, he gives his grace. Be not proud in
wisdom, in Phocilides
strength, nor in riches, it is one God that is wise, puysant, and full of
felicity. Wherefore do as S. Paul writes to Tymothie. Study Tim. 2.
to show thy self lawdable unto GOD, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, deuyding the world of truth justly.


Puer. By the grace of God oblivion shall not enter into my heart, but that when
you are far from me, I shall remember your good documente, and I gather by
your sayings, that it is not good for a man to lie.


Ciuis. I told you before twice or thryse, yet Proverb. Against lying.
Solomon says. The lying lips are to God abominable, they that do truly,
do please him. S. Paul says, put away lying, and speak every man the truth
with his neighbor.

Let thy tongue be ignorant of lying, and Ephe. 4. Jerome.
love so well truth, that whatsoever that thou speak, think that thou
swearest. Lie not in earnest nor in jest. The Apostle says, lie not Collo. 3.
one to another. For Liars not without cause, may be compared to mad dogs:
for all those that use it, hurt their conscience, and lose their credit, and
brings them to confusyon. A liar is worse then a thief, for from a thief a
a man may hyde, and from a liar he cannot. That which is bred in the bone, will
not out of the flesh.

Those that for their pleasure, were accustomed to lie in their youth, will not
fail, for their profit, to lie in their age. A Liar may well be compared to
the Devil, for it is the author The devil the author of lies.
of strife and discord between neighbor, and neighbor. I would wish yt al
parents would reform themselves of this vice, especially Merchants, and
such as are men that frequent buying and selling of wares, then they might the
better be a mean for the punishing of lying. An evil tree cannot bring forth
good Math. 7.
fruit, nor a good tree evil, even so is it hard for him that is a Master
to correct his Servant for a fault, when he himself is the author thereof.
There is a notable Story, worthy to be had in remembrance, of the dealing of a
Kings Son, who being demanded a question, did not say the truth, but did
tell a lie.


Puer. I pray yon tell me that.


Ciuis. Traian taking Traian.
his pleasure in the Gardens of Vlcan, saw the son of King Cebalus, and many
other young Children of Rome, stealyng fruit, forth of an orchard, when the
Emperor Traian, afterward demanded of him from whence he came, he answered,
from his study, hearing Rhethorick, but in deed he came from stealing of
fruits, the Emperor Traian was so angry and displesed that the child was a
liar, and told him a lie, he provided and commanded, that ye same child being
the Kings only son, should be utterly depryued and made void of all hope to
recover to enjoy ye realm of his father Cebalus. Wherefore speak every man the
truth unto his neighbor, and put away lying says the Apostle, and again,
Saint Peter says: Unto the pure, are Ephe. 4. Titus. 4.
all things pure, but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing
pure. A liar is not to be believed though he swear, for there is no truth in
him, he is changeable like the wynd, a man can not tell how believe any word
that proceeds out of his month.


Puer. This is a pretty short story, but can you declare me any more against
lying, for I gather by your sayings, it is a thing requisyte, and needful to
be well looked unto.


Ciuis. You say truth, it is so, I will show unto you many sayings out of ye
scripture for that only abuse. Thou shall eschew lying, Exodus 23. Leuit. 19.
Psalm. 6. Prou. 21.
ye shall not lie, neither shall any of you deceive his neighbor, David says:
Thou (O Lord) shall destroy all them that speak lies. He that gathers his
goods with a lying tongue shall lose al, and be in perril of his life. He that
Examples of Liars.
keeps his tongue, keeps his life from troubles. Satan brought forth the
first lie. The Gene. 3. Dany. 13.
two Judges which accused the Godly woman Susan, were most abhomynable liars.
Ananias, and Saphira dyed suddenly, because Act. 5.
they lied. So many as make or love lies, shall be cast among Murderers and
Idolaters in the Apoc. 22.
Lake of hell, burning with fire and brimstone.


Puer. GOD be merciful unto us and give us his light to shine over us, that
the truth may be known among all nations, and lying banished and corrected,
and that I may be myndfull of this your document.


Ciuis. It is not my document, but in the Bible you shall find much of these
my sayings.


Puer. Your good and comfortable sayings moves me, that back again to my
mother I can not go, for by the assistaunce of almighty GOD, I will serve seven
or eyghte years, and strive with the world, I pray God send me a good
master, and I doubt not I, but so to endeavor my self to refrayn my old
accustomed chyldish toys, which I did frequent at home.


Ciuis. So said, and so done, is a thread well spone: for have this regard
with your self, thou must commit thy works unto the Lord, Prou. 16.
and look what thou do it shall prosper. If ye be loving and obedient, says
the Prophet, ye Esaias. 1.
shall enjoy the best thing that grows in the Land, but if ye be obstynate,
and rebellyous, ye shall be devoured with the sword, for thus the Lord has
promised with his own mouth. When you are well placed with an honest man,
remember what S. Paul says to the Ephesyans.

Servants be obedyent unto your carnal The obedience of servants. Ephe. 6.
Colo. 3.
masters, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your hearts, as unto
Christ, and again in the third chapter to the Colossians. Servants be
obedyent unto your bodily masters in all things, not with eye service, as men
pleasers, but in singleness of heart. And what soever you do, do it heartily,
as though you did it to the Lord, and not to men, you shall receive the reward
of inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ.

Here you may well perceive and understand what a comfortable and a precious
reward Gods servants shall have. S. Paul writes to Timothy in the syxte
Chapter. Let 1. Tim. 6.
as many Servant as are under the yoke, count their masters worthy of all
Honor, that the name of God and his doctrine, be not evil spoken of, for the
same bread you break unto others, shall be broken unto you again.

Consider I beseech you, the things that Josephus. Fol. 178.
grow upon the earth, and all living creatures, beasts, and worms that creep
upon the ground, Fowls of the air, and Fyshes of the Sea, do you not see
how ever the stronger has the dominyon of the weaker? neither is it any rebuke
or shame for the weaker, to be obedient or give place to the stronger. For the
Ox and Goat is in awe of the Lion, the Ram and Ewe, of the Wolf: the Cow
and the Lamb, fear the Bear: the Goat, the Libbarde: the Hawke is afraid
of the Eagle: the Dove, of the Hawke: way the manner of Beasts and Birds,
amongst their own kind, you see ever the bigger and stronger, to be master
over the less and weaker. And so in all other things the stronger set
themselves before the weaker always, wherefore Josephus exhorts all mortal
men to learn here at.

Obey them that have the ouersighte of you, Heb. 13.
and submit yourselfe unto them.

The faithful man is like a tree planted by the Psalm. 1.
water side, that will bring forth his fruit in due season.


Puer. I would to God that our old priest at home would say but half so
much to the ynog men: there they would not love him, for there are some vylde
churlish Carles that care not what pains or drudgery, they put their
servants unto, but I hope it is not so in London.


Ciuis. I have told you enough of the usage and dealing of servants there,
both of their true dealing of their hands, and words, yet Saint Paul
exhorts Tytus.

That Servants should be obedient unto Titus. 2.
their own masters, and to please in all things, not aunswering him again,
neither be pickers, but that they show all faythfulnesse, that they may do
worship to the doctrine of our savior God in all things.


Puer. It is a thing which always is to be abhorred, and so I trust to do,
for I perceive there is nothing gotten with frowardness, for they say of
gentleness comes ease. And besides I never loved to be a picker, for I
learned in my Cathechisme, that I should keep my hands from picking and
stealing, and my tongne from lying and slaundering, and you have told me many
sentences for the taking heed thereof.


Ciuis. A faithful servant is greatly to be commended, A faithful servant.
but he that makes much haste to Prou. 28.
slothfulness, shall not be vnguiltye.

He that robs his master and mistress, and says it is no sin, the same
is like to a Murderer. You must therefore take heed, I have seen them in
London, that has been Apprentises, for their pilfring has been whipped, and
had good exhortations given them, and they are not the better.


Puer. It is but a folly to cast pearls amongst swyne, it is as well regardede
among them, as good instructions is to a heard of Beasts, the more is the
pity, it is for lack of grace.


Ciuis. If you pick or stele above twelve pence, Against stealing. Exodus 20.
Prou. 29. Ephe. 4.
the laws of this realm is death, and the laws of God against you, for ye
scripture says. Thou shalt not steal, and again, he that keeps company
with a thief, hates his own soul. Let him that stale, steal no more. The
Prophet Zacha. 5.
Zachary says, all thieves shall be judged after Gods book, and all swearers
shall be adjudged to the same, I will bring it forth says the Lord of Hoastes,
so that it shall come to the house of the thief, and to the house of him that
falsely swears by my name, and shall remain in his house, and consume it with
the timber and stones thereof. Saint John says: A John. 10.
thief comes not, but for to steal, kill and destroy. The Prophet
commands us, that Zacha. 4.
we should love no false thieves. Wherefore you must take heed and let this
be well noted in your mind. Ye shall not Leuit. 19.
steal.


Puer. But I pray you let me understand somewhat more, what God means in the
same saying: thou shall not steal.


Ciuis. I told you that S. Paul says, let him that stele, steal no more,
but let him rather Ephe. 4.
labor with his hands, the thing which is good, that he may give unto him
that needs.


Puer. Will not God punish al those that transgress his commandment.


Ciuis. Why should they sleep unpunished?


Puer. I pray you let me hear it proved by the word of God, that the
trangressoures of this commandment shall not escape from punishment.


Ciuis. God commanded in the law of Moses, that if any person among the
Israelytes Exodus 21. Deuteronomy. 24.
did steal a man, and sell him, the same should suffer death. Also that if a
man taking a thief Exodus 23.
in his house before day light, it should be lawful to kill him. S. Paul
writes, that thieves, extorcioners, robbers, cursed speakers, neither 1. Cor.
6.
pillars, shall inherit the Kingdom of GOD. The Prophet Esaye cries out
against the thief on this manner. Woe be unto thee that spoylest, for thou
shall be spoiled again. So Esaias. 33. Miche. 2.
likewise the Prophet Micheas saying: O woe be unto them that imagyne to do
harm, and deuyse ungraciousness upon their beds, to perform it in the clear
day, for their power is against God.

When they come to have Land, they take it by vyolence, they rob men of their
houses. Thus they oppress a man for his house, and every man for his heritage.
Therefore thus says the Lord. Behold against this household, I Hab. 2.
have devised a plague, whereout you shall not pluck your necks. Woe be unto
them, that seeks vyolently to heap up other men's goods. The Prophet Zachary
saw a flying book of Zacha. 2.
twenty cubits long, and ten cubits broad, in the which was written the curse
that shall fall upon all thieves.

In the book of Joshua we read, that Achan The examples of stealing. Joshua. 7.
the son of Zereth, stole and conuayed away a goodly Babilonish Garment, and
two hundred sickles of Silver, and a tongue of Gold of fyftye sickles weight,
and that therefore at the commandment of God, he was stoned to death, and
his stolen good, with all that ever he had besides, his sons and his
daughters, his Oxen and his Asses, his sheep and his Tent, were burnt with
fire.

King Antiochus, which when he with his Army entered into the Temple, purposing
to 2. Mac. 1.
have spoiled it, and to take out of it great soms of money, was stayne both he
and his company, and hewne in pieces. Now you understand some sentences of
scripture, according to your desire, yet whatsoever is gotten with Another
kind of thefee.
craft and subteltye, with unrighteous bargening, with false weights, and
unjust mesures, is before God plain theft, and therefore it ought to be
restored.


Puer. The^ by your sayings there is as I conceive, two kind of theftes, the
one is to steal from another man, and the other is to deceive his Neighbor
by false weyghtes, and unjust measures.


Ciuis. It is so. For a false Balaunce is an abhomynation False weights
abominable. Prou. 11.
unto the Lord, but a true weight pleases him. A true measure and a true
Ballaunce are the Lords, he makes all weyghts. Treasures that are wickedlye
gotten, profit Prou. 16. Prou. 10. Prou. 20.
nothing, but righteousness delivers from death. To use two manner of
weights, or two manner of mesures, both these are abominable unto the Lord.
The Lord abhors two manner of weightes, and a false ballaunce is Leuit. 19.
an evil thing, ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in metyard, in
weight, or in measure. True balaunces, true weights, a true Epha, and a true
Hin shall ye have, I am the Lord your God. And again. Thou shalt not have
Deuteronomy. 25.
in thy bag two manner of weights, a great and a small, neither shalt thou
have in thy house diverse measures, a great and a small. But thou shall have a
right and just weyghte, and a perfect and just measure shall thou have, that
thy days may be lengthened in the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.


Puer. These things I must needs look unto, for loath I am, that it should
happen so to me, I thank God, there was none of my kindred that ever I did
know, was found guylty concerning such crime. I have heard people say, with the
same measure you mete, withthe Luke. 6. Mat. 7.
same shall others meat to you again. And whatsoever you will that me^ should
do to you, Prou. 6. Sapience.
even so do ye to them. I will labor to get the truth, and will not sell away
wisdom, nurtour and understanding, for Wisdom is better then strength. But
now let me hear further of obedience.


Ciuis. I told you at your first meeting, of obedience, and it is a thing very
necessary to be remembered, you must please your master, and mistress, as S.
Peter commands in the second chapter of his first Epistle, servants obey 1.
Peter. 2.
your masters with all fere, not only if they be good and courteous, but also
though they be froward, for what praise is it says S. Peter, if when ye be
buffeted for your faults, you take it patiently, but if when ye suffer
wrongfully ye take it pacie^tly, then is there thank with God, for hereunto were
you caled. For Christ also suffered for us, leuing us an example yt we should
follow his steps, which did no sin, neither was there deceit found in his mouth,
which when he was reuyled, reuyled not again, when he suffered, he threatued
not, but committed the cause to him thatiudgeth righeously.


Puer. If you tread a worm on the tail, she will turn again: much more
should a man when he is buffeted to stryke again.


Ciuis. Joseph moved to quarrel against his Brethren, and did not, and you
must remember what I said unto you. Christ did forgive his death, so must you
forgive your master, and there is no man that would give correction unto his
servant undeserved.


Puer. Correction I can hold well withal, but there may be correction
deserved, and correction undeserved.


Ciuis. Your duty is, to be swifte to hear, sloe James. 2.
to speak, and slow to wrath. For the wrath of man, works not that which is
righteous before God, therefore you must not give word for word, or taunt for
taunt, nor to plead with him as it were a counseler should plead a case at
the Bar before a Judge. For I told you before, you must not be stowt and
stubborn, but lowly and obediente, which things by your talk, you have
already forgotten, and yet you said Obliuyon should not enter so soon into
you, you have two ears, the one to hear, the other to carrye away the sense
and true meaning of such things as are taught you. Saint Paul writes to
Timothy in the fyft Chapter. Timot. 5.
Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a Rebuke not an Elder.
father.


Puer. I grant I said so, and so I say still, and your former words I have
printed in my mind, yet this word to be buffeted greeueth me, I am of some
stature, I think to serve my Prince, wherefore I trust these words shall not
displease you, I can away with all things you have said to me saving that.


Ciuis. Do you not believe me? and can you not away with that I have told
you? by scripture I could recyte more to you, and one thing more I will show
you.

It is written in the. xxi. Chapter of Deutrinomium, Deuteronomy. 21.
wherein is showed and declared the great danger and perrill of those which
are disobedient children, which say as you say, and will refuse correction and
good gouernmente. That is, if any man has a son or a servant, that is
stubborn and disobedient, and will not hearken unto the voice of his father and
mother, and they have taught him nurtoure, but he will not hearken unto them,
this word father and mother, is taken here for Master and mistress, it
follows what shall be done unto him.

Then let his father and mother take him, and bring him out unto the Elders of
the City and say.

This our son is stubbern and disobedient, and will not hearken unto our
voice, he is a ryoter and a dronkarde, then let all the men of that City
stone him with stones unto death, and thou shalt put evil from thee, and all
Israel shall hear and fear: If such correction should be used in these
days, what would servants and children do. God forbid it should, but yet it
is not hurtful for me, to exhort and persuade you by scripture, to bring you
out of darkness into light, which light shall be your comfort, and I told
you before of two corrections.


Puer. You did so, and I remember your sayings well, if I should offend my
master at any time, should he not forgive me?


Ciuis. Upon an amendment, a man will do it, for Matthew says, if thy Brother
trespase against Math. 8.
thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him.


Puer. If you forgive men their faults, your Luke. 6.
heavenly father will also forgive you. Yet I confess a servant may offend,
if he do, I pray you tell me whether it is lawful for a master to give his
servant unlawful correction?


Ciuis. Due correction is alowable for servants, if a master shall take an
unreasonable thing to correct his servant, whereby he puts out one of his
eyes, break his arm or leg, or his head, it is not lawful, for he must
consider with himself, that his servant is of the same mould made, that
himself is, and that God will requyte evil for evil, an eye, for an eye.
etc. The Prophet says.

Learn to do right, apply yourselues to Esaias. 1.
equity.


Puer. You have certifyed my desire, perswacions of one friend to another, may
do much good, Lord what happy fortune was it, that we two did meet
together, for your aduertisementes I trust shall do me much good, and I shall
be bound to pray unto God for you, that it was my good fortune to have your
company, being such a friendly man as you are, if I were learned, I would make
some remembrance what you have said to me, and I would send it down into
the country to our old Duns, showing him what good exhortacions you have
showed to me, and what the duty of servant is unto their masters.

It is a thing in my judgment requisyte and necessary for Servants and
Masters, to print these words which you have recited unto me in their minds.

I remember a saying. Forgive one another, Colos. 3. Math. 18.
if thy Brother trespase against thee, go and tell him his fault between him
and thee alone, if he hear thee, thou haste won thy brother. But if he he
are thee not, then take with thee one or two, but I thank God you have so used
me, that it shall not be showed to any.


Ciuis. Remember what is written in the same place.

Better it is for thee to enter into life with one eye, then to have two eyes
and be cast into hell fire. So likewise, better it were for thee to suffer
wrong and iuiury then to revenge again. Recompense to no man evil for evil.
Let every soul be flow unto anger. Love your enemies, Roma. 12. James. 1.
Luke. 6.
do good unto them that hate you, bless them that curse you, pray for them
that wrong and trouble you. And who so smyteth thee on the one cheek, offer
him the other. And who takes thy cloak, forbid him not thy coat, and whosoever
takes that is thine, ask it not again, and as ye would that men should
do unto you, even so do ye unto them.

Likewise, and if you love them that love you what thank have you therefore.
But rather love those whom you think to be your enemies, judge not, and ye
shall not be judged. Forgive, and ye shall be forgeuen.

Thus now you hear what benefyte and commodity comes, and what a fountain
or Wellspring of life is showed unto you, concerning sufferaunce.

A good name is more worth then a precious ointment, and the day of death, is
better then Eccle. 7.
the day of birth.

Let him that has an office, wayghte on his office. Let him that rules, do
it with diligence. Romans 12.
Let love be without dissimulacion. Be kind one to another, with brotherly
love. In giving honor go one before another. Love 1. Peter. 2.
brotherly fellowship. Be not weary in well doing. Let not the Sun go down
upon your 2. The. 4.
wrath.

The Ungodly shall be so plagued, that they shall seek death, and shall not
find it, they shall Ephe. 4. Apoc. 9.
desire to dye, and death shall fly from them.

A discreet Servant shall have more rule Prou. 17.
then the sons that have no wisdom. An indiscreet son is a grief unto
his father, and heaviness unto his mother that bare him. Luke. 6.
Every tree is known by his fruit, so is a faithful and a true servant,
known by his good and honest behauyour.

He that is true and just to his master, is like unto a precious Jewel. David
says: Mine Psalm. 101.
eyes look upon such as be faithful in the land, that they may dwell with me.
Who so leads a godly life, he shall be my servant. There shall no deceitful
servant dwell in my house, he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight.
A froward heart shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked person.


Puer. Truth it is I can it not deny, for if I should, I were to blame, the
thing it self lies so plain before me, that I cannot vary, I am vpholden so
by your talk, that I cannot fall.

Hear my crying, O God, give heed unto Psalm. 60
my prayer, for I cleave unto the same staff which you have given me to leave
upon, even Jesus Christ. Notwithstanding, these words are not considered on,
now a days. For whereas my mother does dwell, if a man may find any occasyon
of extremity of Law against his brother, or neighbor, immediately he will
procure by himself or his Soliciter, to have a Writ to make him to appear at
the Term, whereby they do not follow those words you told me.

That is, if my neighbor should desire my Cloak, shall I give my Coat to
him also? peradventure I shall go naked my self, the fraylty of the flesh,
will not be so answered, for sure I believe, though it be so written in
scripture, there is another meaning therein, which if it were declared,
especially unto those that are the covetous persons of this world, I think it
would touch them somewhat, for the most part of them, are all gathering and
seeking to enrich themselves, and nothing will part from yet they have a good
example of the rich man Dives, and the pore beggar Lazarus. Luke. 16.



Ciuis That is well remembered of you, they have the more to answer, those
which are in this world in substance and living, have a great accoumpt to make
at the latter day, and the poor man that has his health, and follows his
labor Eccle. 5.
and gets his living with the sweat of his brows, is better at his hearts
case, then they which has gold and treasure, mixed with sickness and
diseases. Albeit, I pray God that thou, when thou come to be a man able to
What is against covetousness.
keep a house of thine own, yt covetousness does not enter into thy breast, as
it does into many in these days.


Puer. I thank you for your good wishing toward me for the avoiding thereof,
let me hear some of your mind.


Ciuis. God commands Exodus 20.
yt thoushalt not covet thy neighbors goods. For covetousness is the root of
al evil. 1. Tim. 6. Psalm. 119. Prou. 11.
David said: Inclyne my heart (O Lord) to thy testimonies, and not to
covetousness. He that hordeth up his corn shall be cursed among ye people, but
blessing shall light upon his head that gives food. He that trusts in his
riches, is like to a broken staff, for he shall have a fall, but the righteous
shall flourishe as the green leaf.

Better it is to have a little with the fear of Prou. 15.
God, then great and vnmeasurable-treasures otherwise. Better it is to have a
little thing Prou. 16.
with righteousness, then great rentes wrongfully gotten. He that hates
covetousness, shall Prou. 18. Eccle. 11. Eccle. 14.
live long. Nothing is more wicked and ungracious then a covetous Man. A
covetous man's eye has never enough.

He that loves riches shall not be justified. Eccle. 31. Hebr. 13.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with that you
have already. The Apostle exhorts us yt covetousness should Colo. 3.
not be once named among you, for God verily has said, I will not fail thee,
nor yet forsake Examples against covetousness. Luke. 16. Act. 5. Iosu. 7.
thee. Judas for lucre of money sold and betrayed his master Christ.

Ananyas and Saphyra were punished with soden death, because of a covetous
mind. Acham by the commandment of God was stoned to death, because he took of
the excomunicate goods.

Covetousness caused Herod to seek to persecute Christ in his swaddling
cloutes, I have hard say, that Sir Thomas Moore, which knew the truth to
forsake it again, and to conspyre with a Cardinal in England, to blind and
deceive the King of England, and to bring him out of the light into darkness.
Saul for the covetousness of praise, lost his Kingdom. 1. Reg. 13. 1. Reg.
35.
The covetousness of Achab and Iesabel was the occasyon that Naboth was stoned
unto death.

Take heed says the Euaungelist, and beware Luke 6.
of covetousness, for no man's life stands in the abundance of things,
which he possesses.

The Prophet says: woe be unto them that Esaias. 5.
give sentence with the ungodly for rewards, and condemn the just cause of
the righteous. They have excercysed their hearts in covetousness. 2. Peter. 2.


Blessed is the rich, which is found without Eccle. 31.
blemish, and has not gone after Gold, nor hoped in money and treasures, where
is there such a one, and we will commend him, and call him blessed, for great
things does he among the people.

For riches is the gift of God given to man, to maintain the degrees of this
world, and therefore not evil, yea and some must be poor and some rich, God
our father has divided riches and pouertye among his children, according to
his Godly will, pleasure and wisdom. And as riches does not exclude thee from
the blessing, so does not pouertye certifye thee, but to put thy trust in the
living God. For if thou trust in the living God, then if thou be poor, thou
couetest not to be rich, for thou art certifyed with that which GOD has
provided for thee.


Puer. I thank you heartily, I may lyken you unto a Mercers shop, for I can no
sooner ask you a question, but you resolve it unto me immediately, if men in
these days would mark the true sayings of the scripture, things might be
amended, it is pity that a man will not examine his conscience, considering
that he is but a flower in this world, but what remedy, I doubt not if it be
not amended, God will seek reuengement thereof, when he sees good.


Ciuis. For of the abundance of the heart, the Luke. 7.
mouth speaks, so does all men, for what they say with their mouths, the
heart thinks the same, yet the talk that I have had with you, moves me to
say unto you, as Christ said to his Disciples.

Blessed are the eyes which see that you see, Luke. 10.
for I say unto you, glad I am, not only of your company, but that I perceive
you reap and gather good seed at my hands, and let Cocle alone.


Puer. Duty byndeth me there unto, otherwise, although I am tender of years,
what might you think of me, if you should spend all this talk on me, in
vain. For I gather that it were better to have friendly usage of the
scriptures, then to excercyse that which should neither be profitable for us,
ne yet to the hearers commendable. For in the tenth of Luke and other places,
it is written. Ask and it shall be given you: seek, and you shall find, knock and
it shall be opened unto you, for who so asks receaueth, and he that seeks
fyndeth, and to him that knocks, shall it be opened, by these comfortable
words, which I have received of you, I trust shall make me as fresh as the
Olyue, or Hauthorne, for these your sweet flowers that you have given unto me,
grow in the Garden of life, and has brought me out of the puddle, which
peradventure I should have line wallowing in. Yet I am careful to think how I
should, behave my self at London.


Ciuis. Thou art much to blame. Christ said unto his Disciples. Take ye no
thought for your life, what Luke. 13.
ye shall eat, neither for your body, what you shall put on, the life is more
then meat, and the body more then raiment, consider the Ravens and the little
small Birds, they neither sow nor reap, they have also neither storehouse
nor Barn, and yet God feeds them, but how much better are ye then the fowls,
wherefore Luke. 13.
be of good comfort, and ask not what you shall eat, nor what you shall
drink, and clyme not up so hye, as the Proverb is, least a chip fall into
your eye, but seek the Kingdom of God, and all these shall be mynystred to
you, we draw now a pace toward London.


Puer. I pray* you how far is it thither, me thinks the journey very long, and
yet comfortable, because of your advertisement.


Ciuis. It is not above one Mile, or thereaboutes.


Puer. I am glad thereof, for I promise you Sir, I am almost weary. I have
come a great way, yet GOD be with my good old Mother, and all my Friends, I
am sure they would be glad to hear of my well doing.


Ciuis. She may very well hear thereof, I doubt it not, and she shall have
great joy of you.


Puer. I trust so, yet in all my troubles, and temptations, whatsoever shall
happen, Lord grant me that I may remember your saying, and that I may say as
the wyddow said, unto the unrightful Judge.

Deliver me from mine Aduersarye, for I Luke. 18.
know the Aduersarye the Devil, will seek all the ways he can to get me
into his Net. But still my fortitude and strength shall be in God.

My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord, Psalm. 145.
and let al flesh give thanks unto his holy name for ever and ever.

For he says, and commands me, to take Luke. 21.
heed that I be not deceived, and again, he says: When I here of wars
and insurrections, he commands me not to be afraid, for such things must
come to pass, which God of his infynite mercy grant me grace that
hereafter, I may remember, and say. Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies, for
I fly Psalm. 143.
unto thee to hyde me, and stretch forth my hands to thee.

And now Lord what is my hope, truly my Psalm. 39.
hope is even in thee, deliver me from all mine offenses, and make me not a
rebuke unto the flesh. Here my prayer, O Lord, and with thine ears consider my
calling, hold not thy peace at my tears.

For inumerable troubles are come about me. Psalm 40. Psalm. 43.
O deliver me from the deceitful and wicked man, for thou art the God of my
strength, and thou art able to wrest and confound mine enemies, they lie
lurking abroad on every side as the Fox does for his pray, they lay baytes
for me, as the Fysher does for the small fyshes. Save me O Lord, and deliver
me, for thy names sake.


Ciuis. These are very good sayings. For S. John. 3.
John says: He that comes from an high, is above all, and he can deliver
you from all troubles and temptations of the world. In the Revelation likewise
it is written. As many John. 4. Hebr. 12.
as I love, I rebuke, and chasten, be feruente therefore and repent, and bear
this well in mind.


Puer. It is my desire. But I pray you Sir, what great town is that same before
us?


Ciuis. That is London.


Puer. I am glad thereof, good master leave me not destitute, but be unto me a
comforter, and help me unto some good master.


Ciuis. I will do my good will, but now you are in London, where will you
become this night? have you no frindes nor Kinsfolks here in London?


Puer. I should have a Kinseman dwelling as it was told me, in Fleetestreate,
and that I should inquyre for him at the Belsauage.


Ciuis. I dwell in Fleetestreate my self, which is hard by the same Inn, and
I will bring you thither.


Puer. If it please you to show me the house, I will be bold to come to you
again.


Ciuis. Yonder same is it, at the Sign of the great Bell.


Puer. Now I have to render unto you many hearty thanks for your great
travail and pains, which you have had with me, and for as much as I know now
where you dwell, I will be bold to let you understand how I speed of my
Kinsman, and in the mean time I commend you unto almighty God, the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who preserve you and all yours, and give you the light
of his Psalm. 67 Deuteronomy. 4.
countenance to shine over you.


Ciuis. Take heed to thy self now, and keep well thy soul that thou forget
not the things which thine eyes have seen, and that they depart not out of
thy heart, all the days of thy life. My son Heb. 1. 12.
despise not the chastning of the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of
him, for whom the Lord loves, him he chastneth, yea, and scourges every son
that he receives.

Loath I am you should depart from me, but and your Kinseman cannot provide you
of a master, come hither to me again, and I will do what I can, but I will
either have you my self, or else provide you a master.


Puer. I thank you for your gentleness, I pray you how many servant have you.


Ciuis. I have but one, in the company that I am free of, our order is, that I
can have no more, but this that I have is almost out of his years, I would
all companyes would have a regard for the permitting of Apprentises, for the
less Apprentyses that is in a company, the better it does prosper. Fare ye
well, seeing you will needs go. Be perfect, of good comfort, be of one
mind, live 2. Cor. 13.
in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you, remember well my
sayings, seek to please your master, and your Mistress, be dilligent, be true
both in word and deed, and be not high minded.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the fruitefulnesse of the holy Ghost,
be with you, now and ever.


Puer. I thank you most heartily. Sir, God be with you.


Ciuis. And you also.


FINIS.
A general prayer for all men, to walk in their vocation and calling.
FOr as much, O heavenly Father, as both thy honor, and dishouour, after a
certain manner, depends in this world, either of our Godly or wicked life,
if we live well, thy very adversaries shall be compelled to glorifye thee, but
if our life be ungodly, so shalt thou be dishonored among the wicked and
evil spoken of, through our sinful living, and because we should not walk
inordinately and so provoke the enemies of thy truth to rail on thee, and to
blaspheme thy holy name, thou have appointed in thy blessed law, certain honest
and godly states and degrees, wherein thy people should live, and have
straightlye commanded, that so many as profess thee and thy holy word,
should continue in the same, and every one according to his vocation and
calling, and by no means lead a dissolute life, after the manner of the
Heathen, which know not God, that by well doing, the professoures of thy holy
religion, may not only stop the mouths of foolish and ignorant people, but
also provoke them to glorifye thee our Lord in the day of vysytacion. We
knowing our infyrmitie and weakness, which is great, and unable to be
redeemed of our natural strength, and free will, that we are not able to think a
good thought, much less for to fulfill thy commandments, which thou haste
strayghtly commanded to be kept, and wishing the glory of thy most glorious
name, and the accomplishment of thy heavenly will: Most humbly, and from the
very heart, beseech thee therefore, for Jesus Christ his sake, for to indue us
with thy holy spirit, which may fulfill that lacks in us, make us new
Creatures, trade us in the path of thy holy law, and give us grace to walk
according to our vocation, in fear, and in obedience of thy good will, that we
admit nothing that in any point may hinder thy glory, and thy honor, deface
thy name, and cause thee to be evil spoken of among the ungodly, and that this
may come to pass, grant O most merciful Father, that every one of us, from
the highest to the lowest, may unfeignedly answer to our calling, and frame
our lives according to thy blessed will, unto the glory of thy name, that
whatsoever we do in word or deed, we may do al things in the name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to thee, God the Father, through him. Grant that all
temporal Rulers may use their office justly and godly, seek not only to be
feared, but also to be beloved, to maintain the good, and to punish the evil,
accept no person in judgment, alone no false accusation, shed no innocent
blood. Here the small as well as the great, receive no brybes, set forth thy
glory, advance thy holy word, promote thy faithful preachers in all their
doings, seek the profit of the common weal, and so behave themselves, they
may be found worthy officers in thy sight: Grant that the subjects may show
all reverent submissyon to their Rulers, obey them in all things, be faithful
and true to them, yea, that not only for fear of punishmente, but also for
conscience sake.

Grant that the Bishops, and Preachers of thy word, and all other spiritual
Ministers may take heed to themselves, and to all the flock in that which the
holy Ghost has appointed them overseers, to feed the holy congregation, which
thy dearly beloved son purchased with his precious blood, and take the
ouersyght of the^, not as though they were compelled, but willingly, not for
the desire of fylthy lucre, but of a good mind, not as Lords over their
parishioners, but that they be an ensample unto the Flock: Grant they may lay
aside all Tyranny, and hautynesse of mind, and walk with all gentleness, and
tender compassyon toward the sheep of Christ, committed to their cure and
charge, let them be as most loving Fathers to Christ's flock, and if any of the
sheep chance to run astray, and go out of the way, let them not therefore
be vngentlye entreated, but as it is the office of a good Sheaphearde, by fair
means, call them home again unto the shepefolde, seeking rather their
salvation, then their destruction, let them remember the Hystory of the lost
Sheep, and consider how tenderly the head Sheaphearde Christ thy son and our
Lord, fetch it home again, even upon his shoulders, for the servant of the
Lord may not fight, but peaceably and gently toward all men; ready to teach,
suffering the evil with meekness, informing men that resysteth. If at any
time thou (O God) may give them repentance to know the truth, let them cast
away ungodliness and old wives fables, reaching them thy heavenly word,
purely and truly, and be unto them that believe an example in the word, in
conversation, in love, in spright, in faith, in pureness.

Let them give attendaunce unto reading, to exhortacion, to doctrine. Let them
study to show themselves in thy sight, like workmen worthy of praise, even
such as need not be ashamed, as in Preaching thy holy word, and so
likewise in mayntayning: distributing to the poor, in feding the hungry with
meat, in clothing the naked, in lodging of the harborlesse, in nourishing
Godly and learned men, that they may be pastors, and feeders both in word and
indeed, grant again that the Parishioners may reverence the Bishop and other
spiritual ministers, giving them no less honor, then the child gives to the
Father, remember that they be Angels of God: the Messengers of Christ: the
light of the world: the salt of the earth: the dispensers of the mysteries of
God: the feders of their souls: the comforters of the weak: the Physicians of
the sick: the vpholders of the whole: the exhorters unto virtue: the frayers
away from vice: which watch contynuallye for the health of their souls, work
in the hearts of al them that be instructed with thy word, such a tender love
and good will toward the Ministers that teach them, that the may give unto
them aboundauntly all good things, whereby the Preachers may be the more able
not only to nourrish their family, but also maintain Hospitality, for the
relief and comfort of the pore. For who goes a warfare at any time at his
own cost? who planteth a vineyarde and eats not of the fruit? who feeds
a flock, and eats not of the milk? if the Preachers sow unto their
parishioners, spiritual things, it is a great thing, if they repe their
eternal things. O Lord that they which preach thy Gospel, should live of the
Gospel: moreover, grant that the husbands love their wives, as their own
bodies, and not to be bitter, churlish, or unkind unto them, but give honor
to them as to the weaker vessel, which are fellow heirs unto them of life:
Likewise, grant that the wives be in subjection to their own husbands as
unto the Lord, in all things, and so behave themselves as becomes women, of
an honest life, and a godly conversation. Give them grace to array themselves
in comely apparel with shamefastness, and discreet behauyour, not with
brodered hear, or gold or pearl, or costly array, but such as it becomes
women that profess Godliness, through good works: Let the inward man of the
heart, be vncorrupt, with a meek and a quiet sprighte before thee (O God) is
much set by, for after this manner in the old time, did the holy women that
trusted in GOD, tire themselves, and were obedient to their own husbands,
even Sara obeyed Abraham, and called hun Lord, whose daughters ye are that be
married women, so long as you do well. Grant that the Fathers and Mothers
may not rate their children, least they be of a desperate mind, but bring
them up in nurtour and information of our Lord GOD: grant also the children to
obey their parents, in all things, and honor them: Grant that all masters
may do unto their servants that which is just, and equal, putting away all
threatenings: and know that they have also a master in heaven, with whom there
is no respect of persons. Grant also that the servants be obedient to their
bodily Masters, in all things, with fear and trembling, in singleness of
harr, as unto Christ, not with eye service only, in the eye sight, as men
pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing thy will (O God) even from the
heart with good will. Give them grace also to consider, that they serve the
Lord and not men, and therefore they may be sure, that whatsoever a good man
does, he shall receive again of the Lord, whether they be bond or free.
Furthermore, grant O most merciful father, that the Elder men may be
sober, honest, discreet, sound in faith, in love and patience, the elder
women like wise, grant that they be in such raiment as becomes holiness,
not false accusers, not given to much drinking, but teachers of honest
things, to make the young women sober minded, to love their husbands, to love
their Children, to be discreet, chaste, huswyuely, good and obedient to their
own husbands, that the word of God be not evil spoken of. Grant also that
the young men be sober minded, and of an honest conversation. To conclude,
grant that every one that profess thy glorious name, they may so live, and
behave themselves both in thought, word, and deed, that nothing may proceed
and come from them that should offend thy deuyne and most excellent Majesty.
Grant also O most gentle and tender Father, that our light may so shine before
men, that they seeing our good works, may gloryfye our Heavenly Father, with
thy well beloved son Jesus Christ our Savior, and the holy Ghost, that most
sweet comforter, to whom be all honor and glory for ever, and ever.

Amen.
A prayer to eschew the affections of worldly men.
O Good Lord, Father almightye, we meekly beseech thee hear our prayers, and
where thou have given express commandments, to direct every man's life to
thy pleasure, grant us grace we never look at any wicked man's doing, to
follow them, nor may consider so much, what the great number of men do, as
what we are bound by thy laws to do, O Lord we see to our great grief, many
great and wise men in the world, to maintain Idolatry, Ipocrisye, and
superstition, preferring evil customs, and wilful opinions, of the ignorant
people, before the true Catholic Faith, expressed in the holy Scripture.
Nevertheless, O Lord, we beseech thee for thy great mercy, to preserve us,
that we never follow the multitude to swerve from thy holy word, nor live
wickedly, through any man's evil example, but give us evermore grace to obey
the Queens most excellent Majesty, and all the Nobillitie, and all
Maiestrates that be in authority under her, save us good Lord from doing
wrong to any man, give us grace to pay every man his duetye: To our Queen that
which is due unto her: to our pastor that is due to him: to our Landlord and
creditors which is due to them, and that without grudging. Moreover good Lord,
we beseech thee save us from the company of al blasphemers of thy name,
unchaste lyuers, extorcioners, crafty Brybers, Backbyters, give us grace
evermore to disseuer from them in thought word and deed, and save us from all
deadlye sin, if at any time we shall happen to fall through frayltie, or in
malice to offend thy divine majesty, by transgressing of any of thy holy
commandments, we beseech thee grant us grace truly for to repent, patiently
to be rebuked of the Preachers of thy word, or pryuately told thereof by our
friends, to our amendment, that we may both live and dye in thy service, and
through the merits of thy sons passion, to obtain everlasting life for
evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer against carfulness of worldly things.
O Lord GOD who of thy most bountiful goodness, do daily feed fowls
of the Air, fyshes in the Sea, and worms of the earth without any thought
taking of their behalf, and likewise does cloth the flowers with most
bewtifull colloures, without their pensiveness, give us grace we beseech thee
that we may be content with thy prouysyon, and that we may be thankful, to
accept that thou haste sent us truly in this world, and casting away all
care for superfluities: dilligently to serve thee, laboring in our vocation,
and never to mistrust, but that thou wylt of thy goodness, provide meat,
drink, cloth, and all necessaries plentifully for us and our household. We
consider good Lord that thou commaundest all thy servants, to cast away all
pensyuenesse, thought, and care, for abundance of worldly riches, putting
their trust in thy prouisyon. And we do gladly obey thy commandments, thou
do promise to every man laboring truly in his vocation, and justly
executing his office, whereunto he is called, all things necessary for this
present life, thy promises be true, seeing no just man laboring in his degree
or vocation, that lacks either meat, drink, or cloth, O Lord we thank
thee, although not abundance of Lands and possessions, nor great plentye of
Gold and silver, as many worldly rich men have. Yet thanks to thee, O Lord,
sufficient of all things where with to live withal, and we are there with
content, reknowledging it to be more then we are able to deserve toward
thee, and if it be thy pleasure, O Lord, to plague us with sickness, fire,
water; or otherwise, after thy good will to visit us, either correcting us for
our sins, or visiting us with troubles, for our trial, so as all the goods
that we have, should either be taken from us, or wasted thereby, good Lord
give us grace to take such adversity patiently, and never to murmour or grudge
at thee, nor yet despair of thy help and succor, but meekely submitting our
selves to thy merciful correction, and evermore trusting in thee, to say
unfeignedly with Iobe, the Lord has sent us these goods, and the Lord has
taken them away from us, as it pleases the Lord, so be it, his holy name be
evermore blessed. O Lord grant us thus to do, for thy son Jesus Christ's
sake.

Amen.
A Prayer to continue in true Faith, and Godly life.
O Merciful Father, we thy Prodigal children, do myserablye lamente our
sinful life, and often transgressions of thy holy commandments, specially,
we be sorry to hear thy most holy name blasphemed, to see so much Idolatrye
and false religyon mayntayned in the world, so often swearing and much perjury
laughed at, so great oppressyon, robbery, and brybery unpunished, we see also
so much ennye and malice reigning, many being sorrye for the welfare of their
neighbors, and glad of their hurt, waxing proud of thy gifts, disdayning
them that lacks the like, other detracteth maliciouslye their neighbors,
spreading abroad false rumors of them, many live in open Aduoultery,
fornication, alowing such damnable life: the^ to live in holy and chaste
Matrymonye therefore we most hartilye beseech thee (O Lord) to extend thine
almighty power, show thy Godly wisdom and goodness, in redressing of these
inormities, as shall be seen to the expeditio^ that the blasphemers and perjured
men, and abusers of thy holy name, may repent them, to reknowledge and amend
their faults, and learn afterward to bless and glorify thy most holy name.
Give grace to al oppressors, robbers and backbyters, to make restitution of
their evil gotten goods, to abhore all their own covetousness, and to be
content to live with that which thou do truly send them in this world,
either by their honest travail or otherwise. Give to all malicious and enuyous
men, grace to rejoice with their neighbors prosperity, and to be sorry for
their adversity, as for their own, lawding thy name, for theirs and every
man's gyfts. Give grace to all backbyters, and false rumors spreaders, to
consider that God has given them their tongues, to glorifye thee, and to
comfort their neighbors, not to dishonor them, nor to hurt none, and
consydering their trespase, to reco^cyle themselves to their neighbors, whom
they have untruly slaundered. Give to al Aduoulterers, and vicious lyuers grace
to abhore their fylthy life, and whereas they have not the gift of continency,
to use the holy remedy of Matrimonye, with thanks to thee therefore, contenting
themselves therewith. Give grace to all them that are unjustly defamed for thy
truth, and righteousness sake, patiently to suffer that, without revenging
their own cause, by recompensing evil for evil, praying for their
Adversaries, that they may show themselves thy Children, to thy honor and
glory. Give grace to al men that do truly repent their evil life, to continue
in thy favor, to increase daily more and more in faith, hope and charity,
abhorring all vice, and delighting in good works, commanded by the holy
scriptures, all the days of their life, that through thy grace, they dying in
thy favor, by the merits of Jesus Christ, thy only son, hastly may possess
the everlasting joys in Heaven.

Amen.
A Prayer to be said by men of low degree.
O Lord God almighty, which by thy infynyte wisdom, disposest thy gifts best
for thy glory, and most profitable for all men, we meekely beseech thee,
grant us grace to be content with that poor estate and living whereunto thou
have called us, and to give thee as hearty thanks therefore, as if it had
pleased thee to make us rycher men, of great authority: knowing certainly that
if it were more expedient for thy glory and our salvation, to have either
higher or lower of degree, or greater riches in this world then we have, as we
thank thy goodness for that which we have, that both thou might by thine
own omnipotent power, and also by thy great goodness would have made us
great rich men, like as thou haste in old time advanced many as of low
degree as we are, to great riches and honor in the world, therefore
consydering it is neither for promotion of thy honor: nor for our profit, to
be greater and richer the^ we be, we beseech thee make us well content from
our heart, with that degree and substance which we have, and to continue in this
laboryous state, wherein we now are, neither grudging against thee for this our
pouertye, nor envying the riches and honor of other men, knowing that the
wealth of rich men is profitable to us, and to all poor men, and the prosperity
of great men, as our quietness and sauegard. Moreover, O Lord, we knowledge that
it is thy divine majesty, yt some should be set in high authority to rule
other, and some to be rycher then other, for if al me^ were in a like authority
and riches, each man would dispyse his neighbors, and the pride of men would
be so intolerable that they would never suffer no good order to be in the
world: and on the other side, if all men were a like pore, the mysery in the
world would be so great, that no man should be able to help another, so that
these diverse offices among men, and this diuersitye of riches, honors, and
poverty which thou have ordained, O Lord, in this world, is incomparable better
for us, then any order that we can in our brain deuyse to have in earth,
therefore if any man be not content with his degree, in this world, he must
needs think himself to be a wicked man, because he is sturdy, and a stryuer
against thy ordynances, and because we perceive (O Lord) that many in the
world are not content with their estates, but seek the honor and riches of
this world, some be rebellyous and obstinate, some Murderers, bribers,
thieves, and other unjust men, we mekely beseech thy divine majesty to amend al
such, and to save us, that we never consent to their wickedness, nor agree
with them in their evil doings, but evermore that we may have thy grace to
live content with that which thou have seute, and will send us by truth and
honestye, and just means, that we running the race of this short life, in
the way of thy commandments, may finally through thy grace obtain the life
everlasting, in Heaven above.

Amen.
A Prayer for them that be at the point of Death.
O Most loving Sauyor, and gentle redemer, which came into ye world to call
sinners unto repentance, and to seek up that was lost, thou see in what case
this our brother lies here vysyted, with thy merciful hand, all weak,
feeble, sick, and ready to yield up his soul into thy holy hands. O look upon
him most gentle Savior, with thy merciful eye, yea pity him, and be
favorable unto him, he is thy workema^ship, despise not the work therefore of
thine hands, thou sufferedst thy blessed body and thy precious blood to be
shead for his sins and all ours, and to bring him unto the glory of thy
heavenly Father, let it not therefore come to pass, that thou should suffer
so great pains for him in vain, he was baptized in thy name, and gave
himself wholly to be thy servant, forsaking the Devil, the world, and the
flesh, count him therefore before thy heavenly father, and his blessed Angels,
to be thy servant, his sins we count are great, for who is able to say, my
heart is clean? and I am free from my sin, but thy mercies (O Lord) are much
greater, and thou came not to call the righteous, but the sinners unto
repentance, to them that are diseased, and ouerladen with the burden of sin,
thou do promise, thou art that God which wyllest not the death of a sinner,
but rather that he should turn and live, thou art that Savior, which
wyshest al men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of thy truth, wythdraw
not therefore thy merciful hand from him, because of his sins, but rather
lay upon him thy saving health, that thou may show thy self toward him to
be a Savior, what greater praise can be to a Physician, then to heal the
sick? neither ca^ there be a greater glory to thee being a Savior of sinners:
Save him therefore O Lord for thy names sake. Again, let the law be no corisye
to his conscience, but rather give him grace in this extreme Agonye, and
conflict of death, to be fully persuaded that thou by thy death, haste taken
away all his sins, and fulfilled the law for him, and by this means
delivered him from the cares of the law, and paid his ransom, that he thus
being fully persuaded, may have a quiet heart, a free conscience, and a glad
will to forsake this world, and to go unto his Lord God. Moreover, thou have
conquered him that had rule of death, even Satan, suffer him not therefore to
excersyse his tyranny upon this our sick Brother, nor to disquyet his
conscience with the terrors of his sins, and pains of Hell, let not Satan,
nor his infernal Army tempt him further then he is able to bear, but
evermore give him grace, even unto his last breath, valyauntlye to fight
against the Devil, with strong faith in thy precious blood, that he may fight
a good fight, and fynish his course with joy, unto ye glory of thy holy name
and the health of his soul, O Lord so work in him by thy holy spirit, that
he with all his heart, may be content, and despise all worldly things, and to
set his mind wholye upon heavenly things, hoping with a strong and
undoubted faith. Again, let it not grieve him O sweet Savior, to be loosened
from this vile and wretched carcass, which is now so full of sorrow, trouble,
anguishe, sickness, and pain, but let him have a bent ready will through thy
goodness to put it of, yea, and that with this faith, that he at the last
day, shall receive it again in a much better state, then it is now, or ever
was, from the day of his birth, even a body incorruptible, immortal, and like
to thy glorious body. Let his whole heart and mind be set only upon thee, let
the remembrance of the joys of heaven, be so fervent in his breast, that he
may both patiently and thankfully take his death, and ever wyshe to be with
thee in glory, and when the time comes that he shall give over to Nature, and
depart from this miserable world, vouchsafe we most humbly beseech thee, O
Lord Jesus, to take his soul into thy hands, and place it among the glorious
company of Angels, and blessed Saints, and to keep it to the most joyful
day, of the general resurrection, that both his body and soul, through thine
almighty power being knit again together at that day, he may for ever and ever,
enjoy thy glorious kingdom, and sing perpetual praises, to thy blessed name.

Amen.
Exhortations to comfort the Sick, as long as they have life, and
understanding.
Now Brother be strong in the Faith of Christ, remember Christ crucified.
Remember Christ to be our alone Savior. Remember God the Father, to be your
merciful Father. Forget not that all your sins are washed away in Christ's
blood, and that by the virtue of his death and Passion, you are made heir of
everlasting salvation. Brother, if you can speak, answer me, and if you can
not speak, show some outward sign and token, that it may be a testimonye
unto us, of your faith, and godly departure.

If the Sick understand you, then say to him as follows.
Persuade your self, most dear Brother, that God even now calls you out of
this vale of wretchedness, unto the joyful enherytaunce of his everlasting
kingdom, where you shall not live myserably with sinful men, as you have done
in this world, but you shall gloryouslye raygne with that most mighty God, and
with his holy Angels, and blessed Saints: Now begins your joy, your solas,
your comfort: now begins your true life which shall be everlasting: now is the
end of all your sorrows, and now begins their unfeigned joys, and true
felicity: now shall you see the glorious majesty of God, face to face: now
shall you know, and perfectly behold all the godly, that have been from the
beginning of the world, and be merry, and rejoice with them: now shall you see
your Savior, and elder brother Christ, as he is: Now shall you be clothed
with the white Garments of immortality: now shall you have a crown of Gold
set upon your head: now shall you eat of the tree of life, which is in the
midst of Paradise of God, and drink of the Fountaynes of living water: now
shall you be a Pillar in the temple of your God, and sit with him on his
seat, and these be the joys that shall be everlasting, and never have end,
unto these joys shall you straight way go, and for evermore enjoy them.

And so if he depart out of the world to God, then say our Lord God be praised
for taking him out of the troubles of this world, a christyan and a godly end
made he, God give us all the grace to make the like end. Amen.

OF a godly life, comes a good death, if the departure of the Godly man may
be called a death, and not rather a passing unto a better life, well his body
now sleeps in the Lord, and his soul reigns in glory with God, God grant
him and us all, a joyful resurrection. Amen.

Neighbors, before we depart, let us knele down and give God the Father
thanks, for the Godly departure of this our brother in Christ, and I will with
Gods help, and your assistaunce, read some Godly thing, and I pray you all
for to say this Collect after me.

The Collect following.
O How can we most loving father, render unto thee sufficient thanks, for thine
inestimable godnesse toward thy faithful servant, whom thou calling out
of this wretched world, vouchsafe to place in thy heavenly kingdom, among the
glorious company of thy holy Angels, and blessed Saints. O full precious is
the death of the faithful in thy sight. Blessed are the dead that dye in thee
(O Lord) for they are at rest from their painful trauayles and labors. The
souls of the righteous are in thy hands, O God, and the payns of death shall
not touch them, in the sight of the unwise they appear to dye, but they are in
peace: they shine as ye sparks that run through the red Bush: they glyster
as the shyning of heaven: they are as the stars, world without end: they are
as the Angels of God: they are clad with white Garments, and have Golden
Crowns upon their heads: they do service day and night before the glorious
throne of thy divine Majesty: they neither hunger nor thyrst any more, neither
does the Sun or any heat fall upon them, for the Lamb which is in the
midst of the throane governs them, and leads them to the living Fountaynes
of water, they follow the Lamb whether soever he goes, they have such joys
as eye has not seen, nor ear has not heard, neither is there any heart able
to think them. Infinite and unspeakable are the Treasures (O Lord) which thou
have laid up for them, that depart in this Faith, for these thy fatherlye
benifytes, toward the souls of thy faithful, and for that it has pleased
thee to call this our christen Brother from this vale of mysery, unto thy
heavenly kingdom, we give unto thee most hearty thanks, humblye beseeching
thee, that thou will take the like care for us, and so govern us with thy
holy spirit both in sickness and in health, that we may live a good and Godly
life in this present world, and whenever it shall please thy Godly will and
pleasure to call us hence, we may with a strong faith in thee, and in thy son
Jesus Christ our Lord, commend both our bodies and souls into thy merciful
hands, and through thy goodness be placed in thy glorious Kingdom among the
faithful chosen people, and so for ever and ever, praise and magnifye thee our
heavenly Father to whom with thy dearelye beloved son Jesus Christ our Lord
and savior, and the holy Ghost, that most sweet comforter, be all glory and
honor, world without end. Amen.

Now let us rise and go to comfort the friends of this our Brother, that
they do not much sorrow and lament for the departure of this our most dear
brother, which now rests in joyful peace.

This done, give them council to bestow of the burying of him, so that you may
please God best. Then say this following.

THe very God of peace, sanctifye us throughout, and so wholly preserve us, both
spirit, and soul, and body, that we may be blamed in nothing, at the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, and GOD our Father which has loved us, and has
given us everlasting consolation, and good hope, through grace, comfort our
hearts, and stablishe us in all good sayings and doings. Amen.

PEace be unto the Brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father, and
from the Lord Jesus Christ, grace be with all them which love our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

BLessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and
might be unto our God for evermore unfeignedly.

Amen.
FINIS.

