CERTAIN ELEGIES, DONE BY SUNDRY Excellent Wits.

WITH Satyrs and Epigrames.

LONDON, Printed by B: A: for Miles Partriche, and are to be sold at his
shop near Saint Dunstons Church in Fleet-streete. 1618.

An Elegy by F. B.
SO Madam may my verses pleasing be,
So may you laugh at them, and not at me.
It Is something to you I would gladly say,
But how to do it, cannot find the way:
I would avoid the common trodden ways,
To Ladies used, which be or love or praise:
As for the first, that little wit I have,
Is not yet grown so near unto the grave,
But that I can by that dim-fading light.
Perceive of what, and unto whom I write:
Let such as in a hopeless, witless rage,
Can sigh a quire, and read it to a page,
Such as can make ten Sonets ere they rest,
When each is but a a great blot at the best,
Such (as) can backs of books, and windows fill,
With their (too furious Diamond and Quill)
Such as are well resolved to end their days,
With a loud laughter blown behind the Sea:
Such as are mortified, that they can live,
Laughed at by all the world, and yet forgive,
Write love to you, I would not willingly,
Be pointed at in every company,
As was that little Tailor, who till death
Was hot in love with Queen Elizabeth.
And for my last, in all my living days,
I never yet did living creature praise,
In verse, not prose, and when I do begin,
I Will pick some woman out, as full of sin,
As you are sull of virtue, with a soul
As black as yours is white, a face as foul,
As yours is beautiful, for it shall be
Out of the rules of Physiognomie.
So far, that I do fear, I must displace,
The art a little, to let in the face.
It shall at least four faces be below,
The Devils and her parched corpse shall show
In her loose skin, as if some spirit she were,
Kept in a bag, by some great Coniurer:
Her breath shall be as horrible and vilde,
As every word you speak is sweet and mild:
It shall be such a one, as will not be,
Covered with any art or policy.
But let her take all waters, fumes and drink,
She shall make nothing but a dearer stink.
She shall have such a face, and such a nose,
As will not stand in any thing but prose:
If I bestow my praises upon such,
It Is Charity, and I shall merit much,
My praise will come to her like a full bowl,
Bestowed at most need on a thirsty soul,
Where if I sing your praises in my ryme,
I loose my incke, my paper and my time,
Add nothing to your ever flowing store,
And tell you noughts but what you knew before,
Nor do the virtuous minded, which I swear
Madam, I think you are, delight to hear
Their own perfections into question brought,
But stop their ears at them, for if I thought
You took a pride, to have your virtues known,
(Pardon me Madam) I should think them none,
But if your brave thoughts (which I must respect
Above your glorious titles) shall accept
These harsh disordered lines, I shall ere long
Dress up your virtues new, in a new song:
Yet far from all base praise of flattery.
Although I know what ere my verses be,
They will like the most servile flattery show,
If I write truth, and make my subject you.
Fr. Beau:
An Elegy on the Lady Penelope Clifton. By M. Dr.
MVst I needs write, who is he that can refuse'
He wants a mind for her that has no Muse
The thought of her does heavenly rage inspire.
Next powerful to those cloven tongues of fire,
Since I knew ought, time never did allow,
Me stuff fit for an Elegy till now.
When France and Englands Henry's died my quill,
Why I know not, but it that while lay still,
It Is more then greatness that my spirit must raise,
To observe custom I use not to praise,
Nor the least thought of mine yet ere depended
On any one from whom she was descended,
That for their favor I this way should woo,
As some poor wretched thing perhaps may do.
I gain the end whereat I only aim,
If by my freedom I may give her fame ^
Walking then forth, being newly up from bed,
(Oh) Sir quoth one, the Lady Clifron's dead,
When but that reason my stern rage withstood,
My hand had sure been guilty of his blood.
If she be so, must thy rude tongue confess it,
And come thou too so coldly to express it.
Thou shoul'dst have given a shrike to make me fear
That might have slain what ever had bin near the
Thou should have com'n like Time with thy scalp
And in both hands thou should have brought t^
Casting upon me such a dreadful look,
As seen a spirit, or thou had been thunder stroo^
And gazing on me so a little space,
Thou should have shot thine eye balls in my fa^
Then falling at my feet thou should have said,
(Oh) she is gone, and Nature with her dead.
With this ill news amazed, by chance I past
By that near grove, whereas both first and last
I saw her, not three months before she died,
When though full summer began to veil her pride
And that I saw men lead home ripened corn,
Besides advised me well, I durst have sworn,
The lingering year the Autumn had reiourn'd,
And the fresh spring had been again returned,
Her delicacie, loveliness and grace,
With such a summer bravery decked the place,
But now alas it looked forlorn and dead,
And where she stood the fading leaves were she
Presenting so much sorrow to my sight,
(Oh) God thought I, this is her Emblem right,
sure I think it cannot but be thought,
That I to her by providence was brought:
^or that the Fates foredooming she should dye,
Showed me this wondrous masterpiece, that I
Should sing her Funeral, that the world should know it
That Heaven did think her worthy of a Poet:
My hand is fatal, nor does Fortune doubt,
For what it writes, not fire shall ere raze out.
A thousand silken puppets should have died,
And in their fulsome coffins putrifide:
Ere in my lines, you of their names should hear,
Or in the world tell such there ever were,
Whose memory shall from the earth decay,
Before those rags be worn they gave away,
Had I her godlike features never seen,
Poor slight report had told me she had been
A handsome Lady, comely, very well;
And so might I have lived an Infidel,
As many do which did her never see,
Or cannot credit what she was by me:
Nature, her self that before Art prefers,
To go beyond all our Cosmographers,
By Charts and Mappes exactly that have shown,
All of this earth that ever could be known;
For that she would above them all descrie,
What art could not by any mortal eye:
A map of heaven in her rare features drue,
And that she did so lively and so true,
That any soul but seeing it, might swear,
That all was perfect heavenly that was there:
If ever any painter were so blessed,
To draw that face which so much heaven expressed,
If in his best of skill he did her right,
I wish it never may come in my sight;
I greatly doubt my faith, weak man, left I
Should to that face commit Idolatry.
Death might have tyth'd her sex, but for this one
Nay have taken half, to have let her alone:
Such as their wrinckled temples to supply,
Cyment them up with sluttish Mercury.
Such as undressed, were able to affright,
A valiant man approaching him by night:
Death might have taken such, her end deferred,
Until the days she had been clymaterd:
When she would have been at threescore years and thr
Such as our best, at three and twenty be,
With envy then he might have overthrown her,
When age nor time had power to ceaze upon her
But when the vnpittying Fates her end decreede,
They to her end did instantly proceed,
For well they knew if she had languish'd so,
As those which hence by natural causes go:
So many prayers and tears for her had spoken,
As certainly their iron laws had broken,
And had waked heaven, who clearly would have sho
That change of kingdoms to her death she owed,
And that the world still of her end might think,
It would have let some neighboring mountain sink
Or the vaste sea, it in on us to cast,
As Seuerne did about some five years past,
Or some stern Commet his curld top to rear,
Whose length should measure half our Hemispheare
Holding this height, to say some will not stick,
That now I rave, and am grow'n lunaticke,
You of what sex so ere you be, you lie,
It Is thou thy self art lunatique, not I:
I charge you in her name that thus is gone,
That may conjure you if you be not stone,
That you no harsh nor shallow rymes decline
Upon that day wherein you shall read mine,
Such as indeed are falsely termed verse,
And will but sit like moath's upon her Hearse,)
Nor that no child, no chambermaid, nor page
Disturb the room the whilst my sacred rage,
In reading is, but whilst you hear it read,
Suppose before you, that you see her dead,
The walls about you hung with mournful black,
And nothing for her funeral does lack:
And when this period gives you leave to pause,
Cast up your eyes and sigh for my applause.
An Elegy. by N. H.
WHether those Honors, or else Love, it be
That on his windy wings does carry me:
I find thy outward favors much exchanged,
And their fair order fals'd, and disarang'd,
I seek thee in thy self, but cannot see,
A trace or shadow that resembles thee,
Those eyes, that wont the morning light out-shining,
And by reflection, our dull beams refining,
Whose motion did from earthly darkness free us,
Does with neglect regard, and slightly see us,
Those lips that wonting to depart in sunder,
Charmed the admiring hearer in his wonder:
Use not their power, as fainting in their course,
Nor does thy saving tongue display her force,
Thy heart that in free graces so abounded,
Is now with iealousies and fears surrounded,
Pale trembling, doubt, with many eyed suspicion,
Keeps solemn court in thy sad disposition,
Briefly, so desperate a change I find,
As suddenly is not to be definde,
^ these new honors or ambition,
Be arches that thy fears are founded on,
Be less ambitious, seek to comprehend
Less in thy vaste thoughts, and thy fears will end:
If it be love, that does divide thy rest,
And waken up those tumults in thy breast,
It asks more, pardon for thy beautie's such,
As for man's good thou can not love too much.
Thine age is tender. and to love inuites,
Then seek out thy required appetites,
Which when thou have encountered in some one
Of thousands, whose supreme perfection,
Will be a double soul, to love and serve,
Thine art shall be such duty to preserve,
And with dear grace nurse the concealed fire,
Till it to glorious action may aspire:
Which though but seldom, when it does arrive,
And in a well espied occasion thrive,
Shall open wonders, such as by Cupids leave,
None but the elder lovers can conceive,
Whom thou from point to point must imitate,
And from their ground new principles create,
Which thou to thy occasions must apply,
And let no minutes pass, unused by,
Be well advisde, and wary in thy choice,
And know him well, to whom thou give thy voice
So perfect notices, required are
Of him, with whom thine honor goes so far,
But having well explored, it will behoue
Thou be not nice, to show that thou do love,
Discretion, asking it should be revealed,
As clear to him, as from the world concealed,
For inundacitie, did never aid,
And has loves childhood oftentimes betrayde,
Besides, there is loss of time in Ceremony,
Ere ought be done, the world being called to eye
Thine active wit, with jealous thought fore-runne.
And let the business many times be done,
With favors numberless, which thou shall besto^
Ere thou in distance of opinion grow.
But walk in secret, and consult with night,
And shun the dangers of the treasnous light.
Sleep silent Mother ever friend to love,
Will thy proportions Secretary prove,
And in her quiet sails her forfaites hide,
Which are no faults but when they are espied,
N. H.
An Elegy on the death of the three sons of the Lord Sheffeild, drowned
near where Trent falls into Humber.
LIght Sonets hence, and to loose lovers fly,
And mournful maidens sing an Elegy,
On those three Sheffe^ds ouerwhelm'd with waves,
Whose iosse the tears of all the Muses craves,
A thing so full of pity as this was,
Me thinks (for nothing) slightly should not pass:
Treble this loss was, why should it not borrow,
Through this Isles tripple parts, a treble sorrow:
But Fate did this to let the world to know,
That sorrow which from common causes grow
Are not worth mourning for, the loss to bear,
But of one only son's not worth a tear,
Some tender hearted man as I may spend
Some tears (perhaps) for a deceased friend:
Some men perhaps their wives late death may rue,
Or wives their husbands, but such be but few:
Care that has used the hearts of men to tuch,
So often and deeply, will not now be such,
Who will care for loss of maintenance, or place,
Fame, Liberty, or of the Princes grace,
Or suits in law, by vile corruption croste,
When he shall find that this which he has lost,
(Alas) is nothing to theirs which did lose
Three sons at once so excellent as those:
May it be feared that this in time may breed
Hard hearts in men to their own natural seed,
That in respect of this great loss of theirs,
Men will scarce mourn the death of their own heir
Through all this Isle their loss so public is,
That every man does take them to be his,
And as a plague which had beginnings there,
So catching is and reigning every where,
That those the farth'st remote as much do rue.
As those then most familiarly that knew thee,
Children with this disaster are wex'd sage,
And like to men that strooken are in age,
Talk what it is, three children at one time,
Thus to have drowned, and in their very prime,
Yea, and do learn to act the same so well
That then old folks, they better can it tell.
Invention often, that passion used to feign,
In sorrow of it self, but slight and mean,
To make it seem great, that here shall not need,
For that this subject does so far exceed
All forced expression, that what Poesy shall
Happily think to grace it self withal,
Falls so below it, that it rather borrowes
Grace from their grief, then adds to their sorrow
For sad mischance thus in the loss of three,
To show it self the utmost it could be;
Also exacting by the self same Law
The utmost tears that sorrow, had to draw
All future times has utterly prevented
Of a more loss, or more to be lamented,
Whilst in fair youth they lively flourisht here,
To their kind Parents they were only dear,
But being dead, now every one does take
Them for their own, and do like sorrow make.
As for their own begot, as they pretended
Hope in the issue, which should have descended
From them again: nor here does end our sorrow,
But those of us that shall be borne to morrow,
Still shall lament them, and when times shall count,
To what vaste number passed years shall mount,
They from their death's shall duly reckon so,
As from the Deluge former used to do.
O cruel Humber, guilty of their gore,
I now believe more then I did before
The British story, that thy name begun,
Of kingly Humber, an inuading Hunne,
By thee devoured, for it is likely thou
With blood were christened, blood thirsty till now,
The Owse, the Don, and that more silver Trent,
To drown these Sheffeilds, as ye gave consent,
Shall curse the time, that ere you were infused,
Which have your waters basely thus abused:
The groueling Boore, ye hinder not to go,
And at his pleasure firrie to and fro:
The very best part of whose soul and blood,
Compared with theirs is viler then thy mud.
But wherefore paper do I idely spend
On these deaf waters to so little end.
And up to starry heaven do I not look,
In which, as in an everlasting Book:
Our ends are written, O let times rehearse,
The (...) loss in their sad anniuerse.
M. D.
The Author in praise of his own BOOK.
COmmend my Self? No! But my Book I may!
And boldly (blameless) it is Praiseworthy say.
How so? The senseless Substance well may plead,
My Self I was not, when the Book I made.
Of his dear Friend the Author, H. F.
OF what is here thou wilt not have any write
Praises: that willing, would: and justly might,
Permit me then! For I Will Praise what I see
Deficient here (thy name FITZ-IEOFFERY,)
Where English FITZ aright, and I have done
So rightly art thou called IEOFFERYES-Sonne.
Then add time Age but to thy industry,
In thee again will live Old-IEOFFERY.
NATH: GVRLYN.
The Author's Answer.
OF what is Here I forbid any Write
Praises. Why? Nothing Here can merit it:
Yet I Will Permit thee. Thou Wilt but Praise my Name.
And that is Deficient. Then Praise not for shame
Where do (FITZ) right: Write, place it to ye mind:
Still rightly must (FITZ) IEOFFERYES come behind wrought:
French must turn English first, (strange wonders)
(Old) be a newborn: The (Son) brought to naught.
HORAT: De Art Poeti.
NVnc satis est dixisse, Ego mira poemata pango:
Occupet extremum scabies!
Anglice sic

NOw it is enough to speak,
I wondrous Poemes make:
Then, Devil the hindmost take.
Satyra prima.
LIB: 1.
VVHo'd not at venture Write? So many ways
A man may prove a Poet now a days?
Does Nature wit afford to break a Ieft?
This is a Poet: and his friends protest
He is to blame he Writes not: when (indeed,)
Th'Illiterate Gull can neither write nor read.
Let Nature fail! Takes he but so much Pain,
To write obscurely: adding so much Brain.
As end his crabbed senseless verse in Rhyme:
This might a Poet been in Perseus time.
And more! (Though Horace in his book reherses)
(Nature and Art are both required in Verses.)
There are those, of their Poetry will vaunt,
Which do (God wot) both Wit and Learning want:
I know them! Such as they at Table sit
Each Jest you speak, will to a Meter fit.
And thus your Witt's sell for their private gain
And be accounted Poets for their pain.
Others there are, that Others works suruay,
And must from all things some thing filtch away,
Who if to weaker Brains they can unfold
A Learned Author: nick a Phrase that's old:
Or change but one word in a line or two:
Straight all is their own, they write, who doubts it so?
When I wood scarce beleeu't, though they, in fine,
To every Verse subscribe: By Jove it is mine.
Nor is't^inough they this in private show,
But these are Poets, all the world must know.
It Is strange to see what stretching is of Wits,
What spare of speech this plentious Press begets.
Some (if you keep them company) you will find
As choice to break a Jest as to bteake wind.
And what is the reason think ye? Only this:
All they can speak's too little for the Press.
Where it is not loss of Friend, Life, Liberty,
Shall cause them keep a Jest in secrecy.
Others have helps: when their Invention fail,
Straight they begin abusiuely to rail.
Then out comes Whelps of the old Dog: for sport:
Shall bark at Great ones: bite the meaner sort:
When the On-setters (after all their pain:
For fear, wooed gladly call them in again.
And these will Poets be accounted too:
Because they Dare do more then others do.
Though they their Verses write, (a man may say:)
As Clown's get Bastards, and straight run away.
Montanus needs will be a Poet! why?
Because the Muses on a Mountain hy
Inhabited. Peto for that his Name
Denotes him Poet in the Anagrame:
And Quaint Castilio: (since his Father died!)
Who many Volumes published: and beside
Diverse neglected, Left unto his Son:
Which dubbes him Poet, by praescription.
True! And Castilio will approved be,
Or he will Print his Fathers Legacy.
And mark Crisippo, but what shifts he will find,
Ere he will be counted once to come behind,
In every Book he will bespeake before:
The coming out, room for half a score
Or a dozen Verses, which he will hugely puff
With commendations of the Authors stuff.
And in Hyperbolyes his Name extol
Yond Homer, Virgill, Ouide, Iuuenall.
Vouching no better Volume, ere was Writ,
And that himself has had a Hand in it.
Oh this vain- Praise-Affecting Poetry
Is a bewitching-itching Leoprosie:
That makes men Rub, scrub, rouz and touz their Brain,
Pump their Pates dry for Jests: and all to gain
So much Report: might serve to make them vaunt,
They are Applauded (though of Ignorant.)
They Will snatch, and scratch, and scrape (though nere so ill)
And rather smart then hold their fingers still:
Be there a City show: or sight at Court:
Of Acts Heroicke: or of Princely sport:
(which right to write of, or in Type to tell:
Might tax a Daniels or a Spencers quill.)
Mark how these hungerbit Inventions scud
To eye! to spy! All for no other good
Then only this! poor this! But to obtain:
Some sodder for their needy greedy strain.
See then how (Envy) gin's her eyes to fat
On dainties plenty, and repines there at!
How muttering Momus (that knows not to bite,
Grumbles and mumbles mouthfuls out of spite.
How currish (Critticks) most severely hark:
Ready at each sound of applause to bark.
How all together, and how each a part
Stretch, retch, feign, strain, Invention, Judgment Art
Rail, Lybell: what not? Rather then labor loose
Jest on your Gesture: or be-lye your clothes.
A subject fitter for a Beadles fist
Then the tart lines of a smart Satyrist.
Let Natures causes (which are too profound
For every blockish sottish Pate to sound)
Produce some monster: some rare spectacle:
Some seven years Wonder: Ages miracle:
Be it a work of nere so slight a weight,
It is recorded up in Meter straight,
And counted purchase of no small renown,
To hear the Praise sung in a Market-towne.
How many Volumes lie neglected thrust
In every Bench-hole? every heap of dust?
Which from some Gowries practice, Powder plot,
Or Tiburne Lectur's, all their substance got:
Yet toss our Time-stalles youll admire the rout
Of careless fearelesse Pamphlets fly about.
Books, made of Ballades: Works, of Plays,
Sightes, to be Read of my Lo: Majors day's:
Post's, lately set forth: Bearing (their Back at)
Letters, of all sorts: An intolerable Packet.
Villains discovery, by Lanthorn and Candlelight:
(strange if the author should not see it to handle right)
A Quest of Inquiry: (Jack a Douer's)
The Jests of Scoggin: and diverse others
(which no man Better the Stationer knows)
Wonderful Writers; Poets in Prose.
What post pined Poets that on each base Theme,
With Inuocations vex Apollo's name.
Springes for Woodcockes: Doctor Merriman:
Rub and a good Cast: Tailor the Terriman.
Fennor, with his Vnisounding Ear word;
The unreasonable Epigramatist of Hereford:
Rowland with his Knaves a murniuall;
Non worth the calling for, a fire burn em all;
And number numberless that march (vutolde)
Among Almanacks and Pippins, to be sold.
Apology.
THese Ill which better Dare the^ know to wrigh^
Makes those (I know) not dare with better might
For who is it now attempts to Print, but knows,
He must be one or censured on, of Those!
For my part (Gallants) it was nere my hap,
On high Pernassus Top, to take a nap:
Or the Divine Nine sisters Fount to see:
Whence I might steal a sip of Poetry.
These Idle Verses (which I Idly made)
None but the Idle I request to read:
Then what Applause look I for, all may guess,
When none may look for Praise from Idleness.
Finis Saty: Primae.
Satyra Secunda.
A MORAL SATYR.
Sunt Videntur.
QVidam and non
Videntur Sunt
Proaemium.
I Tax no Times, I bear no Furyes scourge:
I bring no powerful Fountain springes to purge
This vicefull Lerna, this Augean stye,
From long neglected noisome filthery.
Vaunt Varlots then: Grizely Tartarian curres:
Vice-Pack-horses: Swains of enchanting pleasures:
Wallow in Lake of Lewdness: racket: yell
And all the world with thundering vproare fill,
Till angry Love his Chaos drench again
And a new nature of mild molde begin.
Yet know ( Earths Of-scums) I have force, and wooed
Uncase, vnlase, your Leaudnes: make ye scud:
Lash at Lines length: and instrike such a print,
Should make ye startle, had ye hearts of flint,
Coo'd I find Patrons to maintain me in it.
But range my Muse! find out some fresher Game,
Some Maiden matter, some vnchased Theme.
Beat through ye throws of these disordered times,
The thorny thickets of contagious crimes,
And rouz from squat, pursue with aeger cry,
The lurking Lewdness, strong scent villainy,
Of those close Foxes, who (in milder skins)
Inuey, and guess inuectiuely at Sins:
Bite with sharp censure: and severely scan
The inward Virtues, by the outward man.
Beshrow me (Sirs) if I dare strout in street,
Wink at a Window: A God-dam-me greet:
Usher a Lady: but salute her Glove:
Or Kiss a Maid for manners more then Love:
Cringe to a Scriuener: be conuersing seen
In Ludgate, with a broken Citizen:
Turn often in Paul's: call for a stool o'th Stage:
Or walk atended with my Hackney Page:
Pace Turnball, Shorditch, Long-lane: or Pickt-hatch
Least I be taken by this heedfull watch.
These pickthanke Pesants; that with Lynceus eye,
Inspect man's Actions too Injuriously.
First to yon Mass of man: yon load of Guts,
That all he handles in his belly puts:
Who every meals meat makes a Mass cry,
Of Shambles, Poultry, Sea variety.
How on the Table he his Panch does rest,
And stuffes it as a Wallet of the best
Yet close his Buttockes rams up as in Pound
For fear o'th worst, to'th'good-behauiour bound
S^orts at midday: yet startles at the stir,
Of a betraying Boot, or tel-tale Spur:
Cries out of Fashions, as of Fasting-dayes,
Rebukes Excess: against Vanities inueyes:
Hates Vice as Hunger: and abhorres to stand
In sight of a (Sir reuerance) Saffron-band.
Tell him his Wo^ship is so strictly wise:
His closest Trounces, full as full of vice.
As wide from Virtues mean as Largest size.
Next to yon Prester John, that Learned Clarke:
Who after all my closest acts does hark.
A man, that for a Wise one sure wooed pass,
Should there but 6. be, as there 7. was:
He heretofore (out of his Love exceeding)
Wooed ever be examining my Reading:
Now (more Officious) ever Checking is:
A strickt Remembrancer of all amiss.
Bid him be less in Office: more in Love:
Least he ere long Jack out of Office prove.
Laugh, Laugh, Demorritus! who can hold to hear
Socraticke Doctors, Catoes most austeer.
Roll up the Records of Antiquity,
To frame Abridgements for youth's Liberty.
Accuse Wits folly. Times strange alterations:
The vain expense of cloth consuming fashions,
When their allowance was (themselves can ^ell)
At least unto a Codpisse half an Ell.
Lend me Athenian but a while thy light:
To scowre the scoutes, the Lurking holes of Spite,
And execrable Envy: see the rout
Of Rascals ^ venom Vermin, I Will find out:
Cankermouth'd Catchpoles, that in Ambush lie,
To wreck, to seck Virtues aeternitie:
With poysnous blast of miscreant Infamy.
( ^ustinian) is too Fortunate to bear
The name of Just: (Flora) too Curtious far
To harbor Honesty: ( Varro) held to be
Vain, for his skillful vain in Poetry.
(Fantastic) cannot with his Flaunders feet
Locked in his foure-wheele-casket vex the street:
Knock in a Tavern, but his Father hears,
Some 20 Leagues off. Luxurio fears
R^taine a servant fairer then his wife:
Nor will L^rella in despair of Life
Tell of her side-stitch or the Belly-ake,
Le^st she be said Lucinas aid to lack.
Who is it from scourge of Censure can escape free,
Yea (Temperate Nature) men will jerke at thee!
How suffer some but for a Sanguin Nose?
A Scarlet scone? when each Logitian knows
It Is Virtues color. How envy some at
A Stirrill Chin? Or a top naked Pate?
Emblem of Truth, and Graces. What reproof
Goes with a Limping Leg? Or Vulcan Hoof?
Yea some so far presume, as to define
Knaves, by their Bunch-back's, and their Goggle-eyne
When Accidents (affirms the Stagerite)
Not Natural cause no note but in Spirit.
Peace then Melampus, peace Albertus, Cocles:
Ptolomie, Rasis, and Auerroes.
Gall^n, Palemon: hence be silent all,
Or prone the cunning Huperphisicall.
And all less learned in Rules of Phisnomy:
That Natures notes, hold marks of Infamy.
Else ( min^ing Madam's) why do we ( alas!)
Pine at your Pencill and conspiring Glass?
Your Curles, Purles, P^rriwigs, your Whalebone-wheels?
That shelter all defects from head to heels.
Making but Good what these count Vicious:
Yet not iniustly termed odious.
To strout in Purple or rich Scarlet dye
With silver bar^es begarded thriftily:
To set in print the Hair: Character the Face:
Or dye in grain the Ruff for Visage grace.
To clog the Ear with plummets: clag the wrests
With Busk-points, Ribbons, or Rebato-Twists:
From Barbors tyranny to save a lock,
His Mistress wanton fingers to provoke:
Such Trifles, Toys: in these sharp Critti^ks view,
Throws us in number of the damued Crew.
As if a Frounced, pounced, Pale coo'd not,
As much Brain cover, as a Stoike cut.
Or practicke Virtue, might not lodge as soon
Under a Silken, as a Cynicke gown.
Fond fond Philosophers: who e're definde
Virtue a Habit of the Clothes but mind?
Tell me (precisely) what auailes it ware,
A Bongrace Bonnet, Eye-brow shorter Hair?
A Circumcized Ruff? Converting Eye?
In Sadness? Yes Indeed? Yea Verily?
To bear a Bible every Edifying day
Of an Armefull, ( beside the Apochriphay?
To carry no more cloth then skin: to show
The Stockens worn at Knees, the Shoes at Toe?
If thou but nod at Friars, Or be taken
Cloasly converting an impure Queen?
Found in a Morgage, not a minute spare?
Or turn Informer for a demyshare.
Who Virtue holds a bare apparent Good,
Makes nothing Vice, that may assume a hood,
A veil of Well, pure honesty no more
Then flat Hypocrisy: a painted Whore.
Countes nothing more (when indeed nothing less)
Then others men's Opinions Happiness.
And Virtue (rare!) All things to be at End:
When every action needs to Good must tend.
Give me a Genius: a well tempred mind
which no Fear urge: no Siren note can wind
From way of Right: that does all Good approve
For no Good else, but for bare Virtues Love.
Whom not Cymerian darkness, more then day:
Nor Giges Ring could corrupt any way.
A Mind well mounted, that will scoff at Hate,
Trample on ^ortune, feircel Encounter Fate,
Spurn at the sound of Vulgar praise as base:
Spit a defiance in proud Enuyes face:
An armed Conscience that dares grapple with
A muster of Opinions, in the teeth:
Who though a Theater should strive bring out
His closest grosest Faults, and all about
Set on to bark: durst boldly stand it out.
Who thinks to trauerse so upright the Stage
(Free from Control) of this Censorious Age:
Or aims in Action at the Vulgar grace,
Of Hydra-Headed multitude, Applause;
Need frame him self a Nature that will brook
As many shapes as ever Proteus took.
To cry God save you with a Courtly grace,
To Kiss the Hand, to lay at Foot the Face:
To act the Cros-point Longey slightly:
Is held Affecting Proud Humility.
To Veil the Bonnet: stiff as Elephant,
A Furlong off to cast a Complement:
To titch the Brimmes: or scarce to speak at all:
We stately, scornful, hateful Gesture call.
And careless carriage argues Loves neglect:
In best endeavors Critticks find defect.
Let me no oftener then Apollo appear
To Laugh, to skip (like Phoebus) once a year,
To go more formal then my wonted fashion,
Corrected in my Taylours last Edition.
To rectify my Fore-top: or assume,
For one nights Revels a 3. story Plume:
(Though some will La^es we are, and Le^kes as often,
And with a more (perchance) Ambitious thought,)
Straight it is surmised, rumord round about
I roar, I score, I lavish, lash it out.
Trifle Times Treasure: And keep open port,
To all Companions of licentious sort.
When in a day or two, being found alone,
Hemmed in the hopeful habit of a Gown.
By me a Plowdon or a Littleton.
Lord! what a new bred fame gins hence to pass,
How I am changed from the man I was?
Thus I can expectation falsify:
Weary out Censure in uncertainty:
Redeem Time as I list: prove Want of Wit
In those that most inuectiue jerke at it:
And most precize, of greatest vice condemn.
Making my Faults theirs: by Belying them.
Know I can Frolique be with (Fregio)
Court it in Comptest phrase with (Curio.)
Come deep the Caster: and Carouce it free.
(As far as Virtues limits License me.)
In as rich Grograns, Sattins, Tissues, go
As Florence, Carles, Tartary can show.
Meet, and cry farewell, to those spirits bold
By Pistol tenure that their Livings hold,
Confer with Crop-eard knights ath'post; hear tell
Of Stangate prizes, and of Shooters Hill,
Of Brothells, Stews, of vilest villainies,
And learn out Virtue by her contraries.
Fond Affectation, to be counted Great,
To be The man held: to be pointed at.
I eu're neglected. Singularitye
May sometimes virtue be: nere Policye.
Who is a man of Note (not this from me)
Is sure never to offend in secrecy:
To live in Bondage in Fames Iealosie.
It Is not the mouthfull of man's breath I care,
Nor severe Censure of strict Critic fear
In spite of Envy, Hate 'twas never known:
But ever Fame will Virtue wait upon;
And now, when Virtue Vice is held: whom is it
We may not Praise or Dispraise as we list?
THen (Snarling curres) turn to this gaully slyme.
Feed on the putrid substance of my Ryme,
Here Is Hotch-pot: Sosse: provided filling stuff
Shall find your greedy Censures work enough.
Where if I find ye! Or but spy a train:
A fresh have at ye (Varlots) once again.
FINIS.
To his worthy Friend upon these Satyrs.
Satyrs in English? I pray God your fate,
Send's you not into the world too late
To prove there may be such: For there has bin
So much deceit in Satyrs, it is a Sin
(Almost) to hope for good ones: They who best
Have done, have only Dared: and more expressed
Their Passions, then a Poem. Nay eeuen all
Do but convert their little Brains to gall:
And be it bitter once they care not then
How venomous it be. Which errors when
I see, and see how well approved they are,
It Is more then miracle, Yours be so far
Distinguished. And that you survive to Write,
More out of true discerning then of Spite.
I. STEPHENS.
THE SECOND BOOK: OF Satyricall Epigram's.
To his True Friend Tho: Fletcher of LINCOLN'S-INNE Gent:
TOM!) 'twas thy Speeches did me first possess
These scattered E^igramm's deserved the Press.
Whose Learned Judgment, and Love, I knew such,
Might well Commend, and Command, twice as much.
If ( Reader) then here is ought may breed delight,
Give half the thanks to him it brought to light.
Nor blush not (Tom!) nor blame not! that I seem,
Thee the halfe-parent of my Book to deem.
Here Is naught but Good (if nothing they mis-scan!)
Let Critticks, Momus, All, say what they can!
They Are Good: who doubts it? not, for ought I know:
Yet Good I Will swear: because Thou say they are so.
Satyricall Epigram's.
Ad Emptorem. Epig: 1.
THese Epigrams thou see whose are they? mine?
No! The Book-binders: buy the^, they are thine.
In Thrasonem. Epig: 2.
SInce (Thraso) met one stoutly in the field,
He cracks his Spirit knows not how to yield.
Looks big! Swears! stroutes with set-side arms ye streets:
Yet gently yields the wall to all he meets.
And to his Friend that asks the reason why?
His Answer's this: my self I grace thereby.
For every one, the common Proverb knows:
That All-wayes to the Wall the weakest goes.
Of a Railing Clyent. Epig. 3.
I Called one Knave: who answered: ( Sir) not so!
The Knave does all-way's with the Lawyer go.
How could I well but well approve his speech?
Each Lawyer walks, his Clyent at his breech.
Of Debt. Epig. 4.
TO be Indebted is a shame (men say!)
Then it is Confessing of a shame, to Pay.
In Medicum. Epig. 5.
WHen (Mingo) cries How do you sir! it is thought
He Patients wants? and his practic's naught.
Wherefore of late now every one he meets,
With Sir I Am glad to see you well he greeteth.
But who will believe him now, when all can tell
The world goes Ill with him when all are Well?
Against the Accademicks of their abusiue * Ignoramus. Epig. 6.
THe Law is in our Hands! How dare ye then
Abusiue be? Cause ye are Law-lesse men:
Your fault was great! but we neglect the same,
For ye excuse your Error in the * Name.
In Cornutum. Epig. 7.
ONe told his wife a Harts-bead he had bought
To hang his Hat upon: and home it brought,
To whom his frugall Wife: what needs this care?
I hope (sweet Heart) your Head your hat can bear.
No-lawes Reformation. Epig: 8.
SInce (No-law's) Father did him Counsel give
And said, he only by his Book must live:
Has bought the Law: and vows his life to mend,
And most on's time will in his Studdy spend.
And (doubtless) so he means, for wot ye why?
Has changed his Bed, and does in's Studdy lie:
How like ye (No-law) now? Is he not wise?
Thus he is certain by the Law to Rise.
Of Lucus and his long Hair. Epig: 9.
LVcus) long locks down to his shoulders wears:
And why? He dares not cut them for his Ears.
Francisco's Travels. Epig: 10.
TEn months (I take it) are not fully gone,
Since bold (Francisco) crossed the Seas alone.
Who late returned (one would think it much)
A complete Linguist: skillful in the Dutch.
And more (if you knew all) for wot ye what?
In the Low-cuntry's he the French has got.
Of Braggado and his Valor. Epig: 11.
Give one bad word out comes Braggadoes sword,
And swears (in rage) to sheath it in your guts.
But draw and stiffly stand unto your word,
And gently up again his blade he puts.
Craves your acquaintance: vows he loves all such
As on their Reputation stand so much.
But be he One that can his wroth contain,
He Scorns to strike him! He Will not strike again.
When will Braggado then his manhood prove?
When he^ meets one he does not scorn, or Love.
Of Duke and his Imprisonment. Epig. 12.
DVke) lies for Debt, yet nothing owes he will swear.
Beleeu't, it is false, as sure as he Lies there.
Again: Of Duke and the Debt. Epig. 13.
DVke's not in debt: ye do him wrong to say it:
The Debt is -- God knows whose. His that will pay it.
(Guido's) Bounty. Epig. 14.
GIft-gobling Guido always, as he takes,
Unto his Friend this hopeful answer makes.
I thank you kindly: You have been at cost:
But (if I live) you shall not find it lost.
Then can I ever hope to live and find
Close-fisted Guido in the Giving mind?
Nor can I think gifts lost, though Guido dye?
For who can loose that he does Give away?
Of Lawyers. Epig. 15.
SOme, Lawyers praise: and some their sect defame:
The first I cannot: the last I will not blame.
Nor yet esteem Those less Praiseworthy, when
All love not Virtue: No not most of men.
Whom All men Praise I praise him not at all,
But rather him a Temporizer call.
When Two contend for, what but One must have,
Who can do Right and eithers favors save?
When one man's Loss another Game does make,
And Loosers must, and will have leave to speak:
Then (Gentle Lawyers,) think it more then well,
If the half part of men your Praises tell.
To his Fellow Students. Epig. 16.
TO Rise by Law, a Life we covet all:
Why? It Is Death to us, by the Law to Fall.
Of Him self. Epig. 17.
A Friend of mine, (and yet no friend to me,)
Comes often and craves my Epigram's to see.
He waighes each word, and highly does commend 'em
And much entreats me to the Press to send 'em.
Thus (Fool!) my Labor's I let him partake,
That Labor's me a Fool imprint to make.
Of Phantasmo a Mistress Boaster. Epig. 18.
Fie! fie (Phantasmo!) cease to raise
Such Trophaeis in thy Mistress Praise.
She Is Fair! what then? The house most white
Seem Venus Birds most to inuit.
And Trees that fairest Fruit do bear
With Stones assaulted oftnest are.
She Is Pretty^ Witty! cruel Wit,
If not Wisdom, Joined with it!
She Is Kind! It Is true! what better known?
What worse? when Kind to more then one.
Wrong not then my Purest Fair,
With this mean this skin compare.
Rather by thy Sonnets, seek,
To make her Praises Venus like.
How ere she Propper: Fair her Feature:
Beleeu't she is but a Common creature.
In Sextum. Epig. 19.
SExtus) 6. Pockets wears: 2. for his Uses:
The other 4. to Pocket up Abuses.
Epig. 20.
KIt) I commend thy care of all I know,
That p^un'dst thy Cushion for a Pipe of To --
Now thou art like (though not to studdy more!)
Yet ten-times Harder then thou did before.
Cynna's Theft. Epig. 21.
Stolen Fruit is sweet: So cannot Cynna say,
That Stole a Wench, and had her took away.
Of Luce and her 4. Husbands, 3. of them thus Named, Small, Forman, Middleton.
Epig. 22.
LVce) late is left a Wealthy widow:
(How can it other be then so?)
Four Husbands she has buried,
Yet would not stick again to wed,
Which on her Hand she thus does cast:
Small, Forman, Middleton: And my Last.
(Counting for every finger One)
Which all (God wot) are dead and gone,
Then (Luce) beware a Fifth to take,
Least so a Hand of all you make.
More-dew's Payment. Epig. 23.
MOre-dew) the Mercer (with a kind salute)
Would needs entreat my Custom for a Suit.
He're Sir (quoth he) for Sattins, Veluets, call:
What ere you please, I Will take your word for all.
I thank't! Took! Gave my word! (say than?)
Am I at all indebted to this man?
Clyms Account. Epig. 24.
CLym calls his Wife and reckoning all his neighbors
Just Half of them are Cuckolds he auer's.
Nay fie (quoth she!) I would they heard you speak
You of your self it seems no Reckoning make.
Of Sim, and his speedy Marriage. Epig. 25.
SIx months (quoth Sim) a Suitor and not sped?
I in a Sennet did both Woe and Bed.
Who green Fruit Loves must take long pains to shake.
Thinc was some Downe-fall I dare undertake.
A Manly Woman the best Wife. Epig. 26.
Fair! manly! Wise! Imagine which of these
In Wedlock choice would best my fancy please?
Of all: give me the Woman half a Man:
So I shall (happy) have but half a Woman.
The Woman's Answer. Epig. 27.
IF Half a woman best your Humor fit:
'Twere best to marry an Hermophrodite.
Tom's good Fortune in being Robbed. Epig. 28.
TOm) tells he is Robbed, and counting all his losses,
Concludes: All Is gone ye world is full of Crosses.
If all be gone (Tom) take this comfort then,
Thou Art certain never to have Cross again.
Of Lawyers and Poets. Epig. 29.
NO mar'le that Lawyers, rich: Poets, poor live,
One gives to take, the other, takes to Give.
In Ignotum. Epig. 30.
What bred a Scholar: borne a Gentleman,
Of 5. years standing an Oxonian.
Of person Proper: of a comely Feature:
And shall I basely now turn Seruing-Creature?
(^oole!) hug thy fortune S'fut't may be thy making
A Ladies proffered Service not worth taking?
Who her serves (sure) shall be well Borne: (and more)
One known sufficient for the Turn before.
The more thy Standing, greater (Fool) thy Grace.
And thou far fitter to supply the place.
For men in serving Ladies much may get,
Then men of Best-parts soonest they will admit.
In Sprusam. Epig. 31.
WHen men speak Baudy know thou what is the matter.
(Sprusa) so often spitteth? (not to flatter!)
The cause (I take it) is this: Her teeth do water.
Of the Riming Sculler. Epig. 32.
HOrace the Poet, in his Book reherses,
That Water-drinkers never make good Verses.
Yet I a Poet know, And (in his Praise!)
He Is one has lived by Water all his day's.
Sues Slip. Epig. 33.
SVe swore she Loved me: and vowed faithfully
Never to match with any but with me.
Now she has changed her mind: and of All men
Will none of me. Has she not matched me then?
Tell her she Trifles. Ask but to what end
She swore she Loved? She meant but as a Friend.
Ask why Love tokens she did private send?
Still she replies: She meant but as a Friend.
Ask why sh'Inuited me to walk alone
where she her thoughts more fully did make known
Binding with Oaths, Delivering Hand on that,
Sealing with Lips, In Wttnesse I know what:
Casting her self down by mee^ where I could
And might have took, what Suerty I would.
Still blameless, shameless, She will all defend,
Saying in all: She meant but as a Friend.
Then be Sue such to all her Friends, as me,
I'ad rather she my Friend then Wife should be.
Of Win and her Suitors. Epig: 34.
VVIn is much wooed to, but not won of any:
The troth on it is: She does admit too many.
Tym's Studiosity. Epig. 35.
Mark ye how studious (Tym) is turned of late?
How he breaks Company to meditate?
Does he but thus continue, certainly,
He Will be (at least) a Sargeant, ere he dye.
He may do (doubtless) much! yet I can tell,
He Will not come near a Sargeant, by his will.
AEnigma.
A Beggar once exceeding poor
A penny prayed me give him:
And deeply vowed n'ere to ask more:
And I, nere more, to give Him.
Next day he Begged again, I gave,
Yet Both of us onr Oaths did save.
Of an Egregious Whore. Epig. 36.
THy Belly is thy God. I well may say!
All thy care is to serve it Night and Day.
Fear then thy God: least (whilst thou worship so!)
He Rise, and Hellish torments put the to.
Of Felo and his Poetry. Epig. 37.
FElo) that lately kissed the Jail, has got
A smacke of Poetry! yea more then that!
He will maintain none can be truly said
A Poet, that was near Imprisoned.
: No Bird sings sweeter then the Bird in Cage.
: And Satyrists (like Dogs) tied, fiercest rage.
Thus will fond (Felo) prove by Disputation,
That Newgate is the Muses habitation.
But how so? when some there cannot rehearse,
In a month's Learning, for their Lives a Verse.
To his Unconstant Mistress. Epig. 38.
I Dare not much say when I thee commend,
Least Thou be changed ere my Praises end.
Woman (quasi) Woe-man. Epig. 39.
HAd I not felt it misery to Woe,
I had been married (certain) long ago.
Had I Not married, straight (Moroco) says,
I had not once felt Woe in all my days.
If after Woman as before comes Woe,
Woe worth the Man with Woman has to do.
For Lawyers. Epig. 40.
I Muse that Lawyers fear no more to marry
That from their Wives must all the Terme-time tarry.
O Sir! If Termely absence breeds the Fear,
How many Frights each Lawyer, in a year?
Speudall's Policy. Epig. 41.
NOuerint Vniuersi per prae -- Thus began
(Notario) read, ere he would his Coin forgo.
Hold (cries young Spendall:) S'fut you mar all man!
By any means my Father must not know.
For any money I Would not have it so.
Of Liber too wary to Thrive. Epig. 42.
LIber) is late set up, and wants Custom.
Yet great resort has got: but he will not Trust 'em.
Is not his Love unto his Friend the greater?
He Will want himself, ere he will see him a Debtor.
In Lesbiam, ingratam. Epig. 43.
WHy I should Love thee I no Reason see:
Then Out of Reason (Lesbia) I Love thee.
Sir Hughes mistake. Epig. 44.
IN Marriage, Woman promise makes:
To serve her Husband all her Life.
Hence comes it that Sir Hugh mistakes:
Tha^ uses Servants as his Wi^e.
And further yet the sense does wrest,
Loving Her most that serves him best.
In Pontum. Epig. 45.
POntus comes Posting almost every day,
And cries How do you Sir? Come, what is the play?
Who doubts but much his labor he has lost,
I nere coo'd tell, no more then coo'd the Post.
In Milonem. Epig: 46.
MIlo) much blames me, that in all my Verse,
I nothing in my ^istris Praise rehearse.
Know I have Volumes, and would (I confess.)
But can not get consent of Her to Press.
Of Wine. Epig. 47.
Physicians) Wine at Springtime poison call;
I hold! It never hurts but in the Fall.
In Presbiterum. Epig. 48.
PResbyter) that of late his Parish crossed,
By his loose Living, has his Living lost.
And will turn Beggar: hoping by his Wits,
To raise a Benefice from Benefitts
Fool! Studdy better, better means to live.
To Learned B^ggers, rate, or never men give.
Where Art and Poverty together dwell,
It Is shrowdly to be feared all is not well.
Men do by Beggiug Livings get (we see!)
Yet few get Livings by their Beggary.
In Ignotum. Epig. 49.
A Cornish Citizen came to his Wife,
Swore he had been in danger of his life.
How man (quoth she!) Faith pointing but at One
Counted the arrant'st Cuckold in the Town.
Nay Lord (quoth she!) wha^ meant you Man to say it?
Fie you forget your Self too bad, be quiet.
The Jealous Man.
I Care: I Fear: I Vex full sore:
To Know of what would Vex me more.
The Wittall.
I Know my Fate, and that must bear,
And since I Know I need not Fear.
Epig. 50.
HOw can (Sir Amorous) in his suit speed ill,
That has his Mistress, every where at Will.
Then work thy Will of her, for know, of Old,
Tail Tenure has been held the surest hold.
Incerti Authoris Of a Bald-man. Epig. 51.
THy Hairs, and sins, no man may aequall call,
For as thy Sins increase thy Hairs do Fall.
An Answer to the same. Epig. 52.
YEs: If thy Hairs fall, as thy Sins increaese,
Both will ere long prove aequall, Numberless.
In Philippum. Epig: 53.
CAll Phillip, Flat-nose, straight ^ee frets thereat!
And yet this Phillip has a Nose, that is Flat.
To his Ingenious Friend Will: Goddard of his Book entitled: Waspes. Epig. 54.
TRue Epigrams most fitly likned are
To Waspes, that in their tail a sting must bear.
Thine being Waspes. I say, (who'st will repine!)
They are not Epigrams are not like Thine.
Amor ex visu. Of a Blind-man, Loving. Epig. 55.
IF Love comes but by Sight: (as true we find.)
Then needs must (Caeco) see: for he is Blind.
Maxima amicitia inter aequales. The Younger Brother to the Elder. Epig. 56.
IF Amongst aequals greatest Friendship be,
Our Love was Best in our minority.
When as this mutual Lesson we were taught,
To be as Equal branches from One graft.
Then did we Go and Grow alike, as One,
No Difference had in Education.
So our Affections Sympathiz'd in all,
That no event could come but mutual.
So Near so Dear, we both did Love and Live,
That each ones Breath to each might Being give,
What more? So Life, and Love, in all did link us,
That One that knew us both, both one would think vs^
Which in our Father bred this foul mistake,
Who gave One all, and so did Difference make.
Vaitas non est numerus. Epig. 57.
ROme for (Reuersio:) there is but One, I Will swear
Betwixt him and 5. hundred a Year.
O happy, thrice ( Reuersio) if that One,
(As none a Number) thou coo'dst number none!
Again: Vnus Homo nullus homo. Epig. 58.
ONe Man is no man: Prove that if you can,
( Reuersio) you for ever make a Man.
Natura nihil agit frustra. Against Painted Women. Epig. 59.
MOst are of mind that Women are less Fair,
And more Deformed: then of Old they were.
True! else In vain wooed Nature labor take.
To give them Beauty, that can Beauty make.
To his Hearts conciled Honor.
THen Thee, the Goddess did Divinely frame.
For her Art's glory, and these Artists shame.
In Amicam dotem quaerentem. Epig. 60.
( --) Loves me, and wooed wed, but wot ye what?
Unless I make her Ioynture she will not.
And what is this Ioynture? A future Estate
: Purchased by Providence, possessed by Fate.
Whereon to Hopes unkindness, grief t'inioy,
A Sin, to wish for, in it self a toy.
A merely neerl' Invention, only fit
To part false hearts, and not to Join on it.
Then ( --) on Ioynture do not so much stand,
All faithful Lovers are not borne to Land.
It breeds Distrust: Inferres suspicion
Of other dislikes, to dislike there on.
For was thy Love, so firm as mine! with me
Thou Would think no other but to live and dye.
Yet be it as 'twill! ere I Will my Love forgo,
For want of what I need not: this I Will do,
Take me! I Will play the Good-husband, and I will
Both Day and Night be getting for thee still.
And what I get (and I will get for Life,)
Dying I Will wholly leave upon my Wife.
If this contents not! mark then what I Will say,
Dues must not be demanded till the Day.
Let ( --) then Justly Join me to her now,
And then ask Ioynture when it shall grow Due.
Of a Lawyer and a Physician, which the Better man. Epig. 61.
A Quaint Physician that had took Degree,
Like in his Habit: aequall in his Fee.
Being a man of Universal grace,
Contended with a Lawyer for the place:
Sir (quoth 'Physitian) I am One you know
That before Lords and Ladies use to go.
My Life secure, void of seditious strife.
Not one dares once molest me, for his Life.
I of^ am sent for, ( Lawyer then be se'd)
And have to do, with Ladies in their bed.
Lawyer.
Be Patient (D^ctor,) And take this from me,
It Is no^ your Grace: like Habit: aequall Fee:
Nor Privileges all: (say what you can)
May make you be, or seem the better man:
I (as Apollo) am the God, to whom
All Countries croutching do for Counsel come.
Judge then my state! how Honored I live:
How Liberal: Counsel unto all I Give:
How Honest, That am sought too: free from Hate
When men will trust me with their whole estate.
No ^ot the statelyest Lady in the Land,
Will stick ^o put her Case into my hand:
Go to our Practice! (for my Countries care)
I most am sturing where Contentions are.
You in Infections, and Diseases ^aining,
Make out of Others loss and Hurt, your gaining.
I to suppress Deceit, Truth's Causes urge:
You, Humors to exhale, with Glisters purge.
Mistake not Doct^r then, and you shall find,
It is your Office for to come behind.
Of 2. Painters contending for Preeminence in their Art. Epig. 62.
TWo Painters on a time at variance fell,
Which might each other in his Art excel.
One thinking straight to end so vain a strife,
Pluckes forth the curious Picture of his Wife,
Swearing if ought of his could this surpass,
He, of the Two the better Artist was:
The other more Learned in Philosophy,
Saves All compares must amongst aequalls be.
Now then (if this must the Contention end)
You of necessity your Wife must lend.
Then let me presently her with me take,
And I her Image shall more Lively make.
Let no suspicion cause you to deny her,
I Will make it speedily: And send it by her.
This done! The Artist cunningly did bid her,
Before him stand, as when her Husband did her.
Who speedily his Pencill forth did pluck,
And close himself unto his work betook.
So Justly Her he fitted every where,
She swore her Husband could not him come near.
: No better Judge then, can I have, nor Will,
: Go home and tell thy Husband of my Skill.
At whose return the Good Man (fond to know)
Asked her the Ensign of his Art to show.
(Quoth she) this time the Ground he only laid.
It shall in time be perfected (he said)
Often was he urgent, (and wooed Answer none,)
From day to day he would ask ( What has he done?)
It chanced so that in some 10. Months after.
She was delivered of a goodly Daughter.
So like in all, to th'Mother was this Elfe,
That none could thought be mother but herself.
Which Borne, she took, and to her Man did send it
Lo here my Picture: Try if you can mend it.
FINIS.
To the worthy Author upon these Epigrams.
LEt me not whilst I praise an Epigram,
Deserve a Satyr: Let not me who am
As nice in praising as dispraisi^g still,
Commend your work as trading Poets will:
For then I might praise Books I never read,
Books senseless, at least not Interpreted,
And swear I know them good. Thus many do
Commend and yet maintain, their credits too^
Which, my poor Innocence has much admired,
Till I perceived these Poets who are hired,
In all respects are Shopkeepers: And they
Grow Bankroupts, if forsworn but once a day:
So these in wit grow beggarly whose sloth
Has nothing but a Wager, or an Oath
To prove their own or other men's desert:
And did not my per-vsall now convert
My Judgment to consider what I praise:
I might (as they) approve, and many ways
Recant hereafter: But I give them leave
To Write upon me, when they shall perceive
Such scorned Inconstancy; and if they please
To do it in Epigrams, Let them first learn These.
Which if they can learn, they may truly boast,
They have advantage gotten with the most.
IO: STEPHENS.
THE Third Book of Humors: Entitled Notes from BLACKFRIARS.
Epigram. To his Lou: Chamber-Fellow, and nearest Friend NOT: GVRLIN Of
Lincolnes-Inne Gent.
NOT) Counsel me I (faith!) what wod'st have me do?
My private Notes produce in public view?
Tush! move me not: yet (doubtless) it is rare stuff
And may Take, why not? if so! Good enough.
How ere (Not) Patronize it, thou can tell,
(If ought mislike:) I meant, and wish all well.
Then, Good: or Bad: here ( Sirs!) on liking take it:
If Good, it is I: If Bad: it is you that make it.
Notes from Blackfriars.
WHat (friend Philemo) let me thy corpse Embrace
So jumpe met in this unfrequented place?
Then, faith! 'lets Frolique't: prithee what is ye Play
(The first I visited this twelve months day.)
(They say) A new Invented Toy of Purle
That ieoparded his Neck, to steal a Girl
Of 12: And (lying fast impounded for it)
Has hither sent his Beard, to Act his part.
Against all those in open Malice bent,
That would not freely to the Theft consent.
Faines all to's wish, and in the Epilogue,
Goes out applauded for a famous --)
Now hang me if I did not look at first,
For some such stuff by the fond peoples thrust.
Then stay! I Will see it, and sit it out (what ere)
Had I at coming forth took a G^ister:
Had Fate fore-read me in a Croude to dye:
To be made Adder-deafe with P^ppin-crye.
Come^ let us bethink our selue^ what may be found:
To deceive Time with, till the second sound:
Out with these matches forerunners of Smoke,
This Indian pastime I could never brook.
SEe ( Captain Martio) he in the Renounce me Band,
That in the middle Region does stand
Woth' reputation steel! Faith! lets remove.
Into his Rank, (if such discourse you Love)
He Will tell of Basilisks, Trenches, Retires^
Of Pallizadoes, Parepets, Frontires:
Of Caluerins, and Baricadoes too:
What to be Harquebazerd: to lie in Perdue:
How many men a Soldier ought to slay
For a Lieutenant-ship: or Twelve month Pay.
He Will read a Lecture (by his skill exceeding)
Of Reputation: when it lies a Bleeding:
When Titcht: when Engaged: when quite Dead:
: How none may ever Fight once Baffled.
What satisfaction for the Lie: and when
Quarrels are mortal: when Seconds may come in.
Then of the Nether-lands! what Passes there:
What stout Performances: wherein he will swear
As many weekly fall but for the Lie,
As did in hottest time of Sickness dye.
Last for his Manhood: how in fury (crossed)
For a false reckoning once he slew his Host.
And late in England, (since his coming over)
Into the Channel flung an Oyster-whore.
For taking th'wall of him: seem but to doubt
(The least) of these: straight he will pluck ye out
Handfuls of Reputation: gained of those
That dared not his Valor counterpose.
But wronging him: and called to account for it
In Satisfaction from their Hands wooed part.
Which he puts up, and gloriously puts forth
In Ordinaries to proclaim his worth,
Thinking to get (what common sense denies)
Credit: by Pocketting up Iniuryes.
Then Learn of him, he will teach you how ye might
Be counted Valiant, and never Fight.
LOok next to him too, One we both know well,
(Sir Island Hunt) a Trauailer that will tell
Of stranger Things then Tatterd Tom ere li't of,
Then Pliny, or Heroditus e're writ of:
How he a remnant lately brought with him
Of Jacobs Ladder from Jerusalem:
At the Barmodies how the Fishes fly.
Of Lands enriched by a Lottery.
Of Affricke, Egypt: with strange Monsters filled,
Such as nere Noah's Arc: nere Eden held.
And rarer Rarities, then all of these:
Just now to be discovered (if ye please!)
Such as wooed make a Blind-man fond to see;
Convicted Gallants loose their hopes and fly,
Most younger Brothers sell their Lands to buy,
Guyanian Plumes: like Icarus to fly.
But stay! see here (but newly Entered,)
A Cheapside Dame, by th'Tittle on her head!
Plot (Villain!) plot! Let Us lay our heads together!
We may devise perchance to get her hither.
(If we to-gether cunniningly compact)
She Will hold us doing till the Latter Act.
And (on my life) Inuit us Supper home,
We Will thrust hard for it, but we will find her rome,
Here Mis -- (pox ont! she is past, she will not come ore,
Sure she is bespoken for a box before.
Know thou yo^ world of fashions now comes in
In Turkey colors carved to the skin.
Mounted Pelonianly until he reeles,
That scorns (so much) plain dealing at his heels.
His Boot speaks Spanish to his Scottish Spurs,
His Suit cut Frenchly, round bestucke with Burres.
Pure Holland is his Shirt, which proudly fair,
Seems to outface his Doublet every where,
His Hair like to your Moor's or Irish Locks,
His chiefest Diet, Indian minced Dockes.
What Country may game might we this suppose,
Sure one wooed think a Roman by his Nose.
No! In his Habit better understand,
He is of England by his Yellow Band.
NOw Mars defend us! see thou who comes yonder?
Monstrous! A Woman of the masculine Gender.
Look! thou may well descry her by her groath,
Out, point not man! Least we be beaten both.
Eye her a little, mark but where she will go,
Now (by this hand) into the Gallants Roe.
Let her alone! What ere she gives to stand,
She Will make her self a gayner, By the Hand.
WHat think thou of yon plumed Dandebrat,
Yon Ladies Shittle-cocke, Egyptian Rat:
Yon Musk-ball, Milke-sop: yon French Sincopace:
That Vshers in, with a Coranto grace.
Yon Gilded March-pane: yon All Verdingall,
This is the Puppet, which the Ladies all
Send for of purpose and solicit so
To dance with them. Pray (Sir) a step or two.
A Galliard or a I^gg: Pox ont! cries he,
That ere I knew this Toyling fa^ulty.
Yet mark! No sooner shall the Cornets blow,
But ye shall have him skipping too and fro.
A Stool and Cushion! Enter Tissue slop!
Vengeance! I know him well, did he not drop
Out of the Tyring-house? Then how (the duse)
Comes the misshapen Prodig^ll so spruse,
His year's Revenues (I dare stand vnto't,)
Is not of worth to purchase such a Suit.
Tush! is it now to question Gallantry,
When No-land for a rich Gra^uity,
May Seal as deep as can Auaro's Heir,
That may d^spend five hundred a year?
When Tradesmen take by whole sale all they can,
Venting it out, on day, to any Man.
And then thems^lu^s for Twelu-pence in y^ pound,
Will in the payment of the Debt be bound
And escape free by Breaking. This an age
To fear preferment? When a Rascal Page
An Ab^ect ou^side shall presume to Woe
Rich bruted (Cashia:) and hope better too,
Then he that of the Of-scums of his Brain,
Can a man better then the (Vice) maintain.
(Tut! it is the Mothers plot! Now she shall see
The Court sometimes! Oh Carnal Policy!)
Then who in Studdy wooed spend Time in vain?
Omit youth's pleasures for a fruitless pain?
Or for an Ay^ie puff of Enuy'd Praise,
Live bound to the Good-behauiour all his days.
Hanged! Let Us be Iouiall! Brave it whilst we can!
What Is Coin ordained for, but the use of Man?
To Borrow is a Virtue, when to Lend,
Is to beget an everlasting friend:
And may a man have more said in his grace,
Then to be Credited in every place?
He Is not a Gentleman I dare maintain,
Whose Word runs not as Current as his Coin.
A Pipe here (Sir) no Sophistocate.
(Villain) the best: what ere you prize it at.
Tell yonder Lady, with the Yellow fan,
I shall be proud to Usher her anon:
My Coach stands ready. Lord how me thinks I long!
To carue the inside of a dried Neats-tong.
England cannot afford a kinder relish,
For Backragg, Deal, or your more pleasing Renish
When shall we make a pleasant cut to Dover,
In a mad merry Humor? And send over?
A Laugh shall rouz the Hage: shake Lesbon walls:
And raise in Arms the fearful Portugalls.
Say Gallants (faith) shall's never see the day,
When we shall Fish-street once again survey.
A butterd Crab or Lobsters leg to get,
O Venus! How a Life I savor it?
Who wooed not all his Land spend had he more,
Then in a day a Kite could hoouer ore.
T'inioy the pleasant Harmony that we
Find in this Microcosme, Man's society.
When all is gone, it is weakness to despair,
Are there not wealthy Widows every where.
Ambitious Sick, wooed part from all their Good,
To crown their latter days with a French-hoed?
Are there not Pates, in strange discoueries teaching
where mountains are of Gold?s'fut, it is but fetching!
Twenty such Fetches has the (Sharke) to move
Gallants of the first Head, but to approve
His swaggering Humor, vows that all he spends,
He gets bravely by his Fingers ends.
There Is not a Cheap side Mercer (if he look)
That will not swear to it deeply on his book.
No noted No^ary in Cornwell row,
But is subscribed Witness there too.
Silkmen, Haberdashers, Tradesmen all:
Inamor'd on him, for his Custom call,
And he takes all of them But woe to him
If he be taken but by one of Them.
: W' Ant it for Women woe should all be men.
I cannot present better instance, then
In yon Spruse Coxcombe, yon Affecting Ass,
That never walks without his Looking-glass,
In a Tobacco box, or Dial set,
That he may privately confer with it.
How his Band jumpeth with his Peccadilly,
Whether his Band^strings balance equally:
Which way his Feather wagg's: And (to say truth)
What words in utterance best become his mouth.
Oh! Had thou yesterday beheld the Valor
I saw him exercising on his Taylour.
How, out of measure, he the Ruscall beat,
Not fitting to his mind his Doublet.
Lord! how I laughed to see the witless Noddy,
Du^st not reply, he meant it to his Body.
See Villain, Rogue! (And in he shrinks his breast)
Oh Heavens! Too wide a handful at the least,
Straight it is Cut! And then proves (being tried)
As much too little on the other side.
But what skil't^ He Will have an attractiue Lace,
And Whalebone-bodyes, for the better grace.
Admit spare diet, on no sustnance feed,
But Oatmeale, Milk, and crumbs of Barly-bread.
Use Exercise until at last he fit:
(With much ado) his Body unto it.
He Will not approach a Tavern, no nor drink ye
To save his life Hot-water, (wherefore think ye,)
For heating's Liver Which some may suppose
Scalding hot, by the Bubbles on his Nose.
He Will put up any public foul disgrace.
Rather then hazard cutting of his Face.
If in his Element you would have the ( Fool!)
Ask him when he came from the Dauncing-schoole
Whereas much Leather he does daily waste
In the French Cringe, which Jeremy brought last.
And more, then Coriat (I dare maintain)
In going to the Alps and back again.
Whereof, that all the world may notice take,
See! every step an Honor he does make
That Ladies, may denote him with their Fan,
As he goes by, with a Lo: He Is the man.
Is It not a thing to be admired at
That any man should Sing himself in debt.
Then who'd not give as willingly a groate,
To hear (Fantasticks) admirable note?
: As see a Mandrake, or a Sea Monster:
: Edwards blade: with the Tombs at Westminster.
The Eagle at the Tower: St. James's Rarityes:
The Estrich, or Beauer, that wooed worrey Trees?
(Amorous Fantastic) that did never aim at
A smaller Rise, then Ela in the Gamat.
That never conuersed but with men of Note,
Your Crotchet Pate, and your Organick Throat.
Never Ambitious more then to be able,
But to attain unto a Chamber Treble.
Wondrous proficient! See how the Gentlewomen
Throng to his Chamber door, but dare not come in,
Why? least he ravish them! Tush! Laugh ye not,
H'as done (I wosse) as great exploites as that.
(Or else he cracks) the sweetness of his voice
Ore-heard of Ladies, has procured him choice
Of Matches: Noble, Rich: but he will not meddle,
And why (I pray?) for cracking of his Treble.
No^ bee'l with better industry make trial,
If ^ee can Match his Treble to the V^oll.
Against when, he has proclaimed throughout the City,
To A^l your Wits, an Angel for a Ditty:
Faith! was he here we would bargain for a Rhyme,
And here he comes. So truly he keeps Time.
But h'st! with him Crabbed (Websterio)
The Play wright, Cart-wright: whether? either! ho --
No further. Look as yee'd be looked into:
Sit as ye wooed be Read: Lord! who wooed know him?
Was ever man so mangled with a Poem?
See how he draws his mouth aw^y of late,
How he scrubs: wrings his wrests: scratches his Pa^e.
A Midwife! help? By his Brains coitus,
Some Centaure strange: some huge Bucephalus,
Or Pallas (sure) engendered in his Brain,
Strike Vulcan with thy hammer once again.
This is the Crittick that (of all the rest)
I Would not have view me, yet I fear him least,
Here Is not a word cursi^ely I have W^i^,
But he will Industriously examine it.
And in some 12. months hence (or there about)
Set in a shameful sheet, my errors out.
But what care I it will be so obscure,
That none shall understand him (I am sure.)
Others may chance (that know me not a right,)
Report (injuriously) all my delight,
And strength of studdy I do wholly bend
To this Losse-labour and no other end.
To these I wish my scandald Muse reply
In as plain terms as may be It Is a lie.
Here Is but Pate-pastime: Playhouse Observation,
Fruits of the vacants hours of a Vacation.
Then (say all what they can) I am sure of this,
That for Play-time it is not spent amiss,
Semel insaniuimus omnes.
Once we have all
Been Iouiall.
FINIS
To his worthy Friend, H.F. upon his Notes from BLACKFRIARS.
HAd the Blackfriars been still vn-suppressd,
I cannot think their Cloisters had bin blessd
With better contemplations: Seeing now
Less may be gleand from Puritanes then you
Have gathered from the Playhouse. And I must
(Though It be a Players vice to be unjust,
To Verse not yielding coin) let Players know
They cannot recompense your labor: Though
They grace you with a Chair upon the Stage,
And take no money of you nor your Page.
For now the Humors which oppress Plays most,
Shall (if the owners can feel shame) be lost:
And when they so converted do allow,
What they disliked once, Players must thank you,
And Poets too: for both of them will save
Much in true Verse, which hisses might deprave:
Since you have so refined their Audience,
That now good Plays will never need defense.
IO: STEPHENS.
Epilogue. The Author for Himself.
I Am no Poet! (yet I do not know
Why I should not: or why I should be so,)
I can (I must confess) a Meter s^an:
And Judge of Verses as an other man.
I have been Trayn'd vp'mongst the Muses: (more!)
The sacred Name of Phoebus I adore.
Yet I no Poet am! (I Would have ye know)
I am no Poet (as the world goes now.)
: My Muse cannot a Note so poorly frame.
: As Invoke a Penny-Patrons name.
: I cannot speak and vnspeake (as I list:)
: Exchange a sound friend for a broken Jest:
: Confer with Fountains: or converse with Trees.
: Admit in my discourse Hyperbolyes.
I cannot highly praise Those highest are
Because they sit in Honors lofty chair.
Nor make their States in Sonnets happy known,
Being (perchance) less happy then mine own.
I cannot sing my Mistress she is Fair:
Tell her of her Lilly Hand: her golden Hair,
Fetch a Comparison (beyond the Moon,)
To prove her constant in Affection.
: I dare not Her so much as Lovely call:
: Or say I have a Mistress at all.
: Why? Ere too morrow, she will changed bee^
: And leave me laughed at for my Poetry.
Had I of Scoggins Crows writ: or set out
In Woman's Praises what I was about.
I am persuaded (yet I cannot tell)
I had a Poet proved against my will.
Yet (ye unproven good) blame not because
I yet as (doubtful on your merits) pause.
I will produce and Patronize it too:
Find I but one amongst so many true.
But Feign I cannot, here is not a word,
Which I dare not maintain true with my sword.
Poets men Liars call. If so! Then (know it)
He is a Poet, does me call a Poet.
Postscript to his Book-binder.
STationer) A Good turn to thee I owe:
Here! I will pay thee now in Folio.
But stay! Not so: that I wooed have thee pu^
Me in the Folio: or the Quarto cut.
Rather contriue me to the Smallest size,
Least I be eaten under Pippin-pyes.
Or in the Apothicaryes shop be s^ene
To wrap Drugg's: or to dry Tobacco in.
First (might I choose) I would be bound to wipe,
Where he discharged last his Glister-pipe.
The Character I care not, Great, or Small,
So I be plainly understood of all.
Only preserve me from the sight of Those,
That cannot but must Read me in the Nose.
^he^ ^are to cast me: not in the Learned Ro^,
^eas^ I the Learned censure undergo.
Nor lay me with s^ald Poets least I titch,
And so become infected with Their itch.
Let not each Pesant, each Mecannick Ass,
That near knew further then his Horn-booke cross.
Each rauin- Rusticke: each illiterate Gull:
Buy of my Poesy, by pocket full.
Books like made-Dishes may for Daintyes go,
Yet will not every palate taste 'em so:
Then were it good, I should inioyne the Sell.
Me unto none but those that love me well.
If any Puff-paste, Bumbaste Iobernole,
Wrapped in the Hangings of a Brokers-stall.
A half- Nose: or a Carbonado'd face:
Of a suspicious subtle Serpents pace.
Trust to a Basket-hilt: chances to drop,
But for a Resting-roome into thy shop.
And catches in his fatal hand my Rhyme.
To lurk in it, until he see his Time.
Thrust him out headlong, for (believe him not)
Now (by the Mace) it is a Counter plot.
If thou behold a Courtcast Satten-show,
Fallen from the Fashion a Degree or two.
One as goes purueying up and down for Tales,
^o Jest his hungry stomach into meals.
that with a merry pocket- Pamphlet will,
^or a week after Laugh his Belly full.
^end him to Sojourne with Duke Humfrey,
^et him starve ere he get a bitt of me.
^east lying (Read) neglected in his Slop,
^bee conveyed unto the Brokers-shop.
Or by his theeuish Page discovered:
Quickly converted into Ginger-bread.
If any Younger Brother, that noe more
^ath then a Daggle-tayl'd Sheep-skin kept in store:
those Annual fleece will but bare means afford,
and with the Echer of his Brothers board.
That sits a Ledger at his Fathers Table:
My Book wooed fondly purchase: (hardly able,)
To win, the presence by the Fires side,
Of Mrs. Sis, or Sue the Dary-maide.
Or cho^ke the Rusticke Leather-lobs with laughter
Bid him go studdy how to live hereafter:
Read where more sollid substance he may get
To Live upon, or learn to go in Debt.
Ye, ye, Brave Gallants: Patrons of lively mirth:
Ye, the young hopeful Landlords of the Earth:
The youth of youth! That read most liberally,
More out of Pastime then necessity.
Ye worthy Worthyes! None else (might I choose)
Do I desire my Poesy peruse.
^or to save charges: ere the Plays begin:
Or when the Lord of Liberty comes in.
And if a Book must needs a Patron have,
Yours is the only Patronage I crave.
Orhers I wish the Stationer fore-warne,
With a Hand's off: It is not for your turn.
FINIS.

