SATYRS: AND SATYRICALL EPIGRAM'S: With Certain Observations at Blackfriars?
By H: F: Of LINCOLNES-INNE Gent:

Horat: Sermon: Lib. 1. -- Nil mi officit vnquam
Ditior hic aut est quia Doctior: est Locus vnicuique suus: --
It never vexes me a whit
That this man has more wealth or wit:
Every one has where he may sit.
LONDON Printed by Edw: All-de, for Miles Patrich, and are to be sold at his
shop near St. Dnnstons-Church in Fleet Street. 1617.

The Author in praise of his own BOOK.
COmmend my Self? No! But my Book I may!
And boldly (blameless) it is Praiseworthy fay.
How so? The senseless Substance well may plead
My Self I was not, when the Book I made.
Of his dear Friend the Author, H. F.
OF what is here thou wilt not have any write
Praises: that willing, would: and justly might,
Permit me then! For I Will Praise what I see
Deficient here (thy name FITZ-IEOFFERY,)
Where English FITZ aright, and I have done
So rightly art thou called IEOFFERYES-Sonne.
Then add time Age but to thy industry,
In thee again will live Old-IEOFFERY.
NATH: GVRLYN.
The Author's Answer.
OF what is Here I forbid any Write
Praises. Why? Nothing Here can merit it:
Yet I Will Permit thee. Thou Wilt but Praise my Name.
And that is Deficient. Then Praise not for shame
Where do (FITZ) right: Write, place it to ^ mind:
Still rightly must (FITZ) IEOFFERYES come behind wrought:
French must turn English first, (strange wonders)
(Old) be a newborn: The (Son) brought to naught.
HORAT: De Art Poeti.
NVnc satis est dixisse, Ego mira poemata pango:
Occupet extremum scabies!
Anglice sic

NOw it is enough to speak,
I wondrous Poemes make:
Then, Devil the hindmost take.
Satyra prima.
LIB: 1.
VVHo'd not at venture Write? So many ways
A man may prove a Poet now a days?
Does Nature wit afford to break a Jest?
This is a Poet: and his friends protest
He is to blame he Writes not: when (indeed,)
The Illiterate Gull can neither write nor read.
Let Nature fail! Takes he but so much Pain,
To write obscurely: adding so much Brain.
As end his crabbed senseless verse in Rhyme:
This might a Poet been in Perseus time.
And more! (Though Horace in his book reherses)
(Nature and Art are both required in Verses.)
There are those, of their Poetry will vaunt,
Which do (God wot) both Wit and Learning want:
I know them! Such as they at Table sit
Each Jest you speak, will to a Meter fit.
And thus your Witt's sell for their private gain
And be accouted Poets for their pain.
Others there are, that Others works suruay,
And must from all things some thing filtch away.
Who if to weaker Brains they can unfold
A Learned Author: nick a Phrase that's old:
Or change but one word in a line or two:
Straight all is their own, they write, who doubts it so?
When I wood scarce beleeu't, though they, in fine,
To every Verse subscribe: By Jove it is mine.
Nor is it enough they this in private show,
But these are Poets, all the world must know.
It Is strange to see what stretching is of Wit^,
What spare of speech this plentious Press begets.
Some (if you keep them company) you will find
As choice to break a Jest as to bteake wind.
And what is the reason think ye? Only this:
All they can speak's too little for the Press.
Where it is not loss of Friend, Life, Liberty,
Shall cause them keep a Jest in secrecy.
Others have helps: when their Invention fail,
Straight they begin abusiuely to rail.
Then out comes Whelps of the old Dog: for sport:
Shall bark at Great ones: bite the meanet sort:
When the On-setters (after all their pain:
For fear, wooed gladly call them in again.
And these will Poets be accounted too:
Because they Dare do more then others do.
Though they their Verses write, (a man may say:)
As Clown's get Bastards, and straight run away.
Montanus needs will be a Poet! why?
Because the Muses on a Mountain hy
Inhabited. Peto for that his Name
Denotes him Poet in the Anagrame:
And Quaint Castilio: (since his Father died!)
Who many Volumes published: and beside
Diverse neglected, Left unto his Son:
Which dubbes him Poet, by praescription.
True! And Castilio will approved be,
Or he will Print his Fathers Legacy.
And mark Crisippo, but what shifts he will find,
Ere he will be counted once to come behind,
In every Book he will bespeake before:
The coming out, room for half a score
Or a dozen Verses, which he will hugely puff
With commendations of the Authors stuff.
And in Hyperbolyes his Name extol
Yond Homer, Virgill, Ouide, Iuuenall.
Vouching no better Volume, ere was Writ,
And that himself has had a Hand in it.
Oh this vain- Praise-Affecting Poetry
Is a bewitching-itching Leoprosie:
That makes men Rub, scrub, rouz and touz their Brain,
Pump their Pates dry for Jests: and all to gain
So much Report: might serve to make them vaunt,
They are Applauded (though of Ignorant.)
They Will snatch, and scratch, and scrape (though nere so ill)
And rather smart then hold their fingers still:
Be there a City show: or sight at Court:
Of Acts Heroicke: or of Princely sport:
^which right to write of, or in Type to tell:
Might tax a Daniels or a Spencers quill.)
Mark how these hungerbit Inventions scud
To eye! to spy! All for no other good
Then only this! poor this! But to obtain:
^ome fodder for their needy greedy strain.
See then how (Envy) gin's her eyes to ^at
On dainties plenty, and repines thereat:
How muttering Momus (that knows not to bite,)
Grumbles and mumbles mouthfuls out of spite.
How currish (Critticks) most severely hark:
Ready at each sound of applause to bark.
How all together, and how each a part
Stretch, retch, feign, strain, Invention, Judgment Art,
Rail, Lybell: what not? Rather then labor loose
Jest on your Gesture: or be-lye your clothes.
A subject fitter for a Beadles fist
Then the tart lines of a smart Satyrist.
Let Natures causes (which are too profound
For every blockish sottish Pate to sound.)
Produce some monster: some rare spectacle:
Some seven years Wonder: Ages miracle:
Be it a work of nere so slight a weight,
It is recorded up in Meter straight,
And counted purchase of no small renown,
To hear the Praise sung in a Market-towne.
How many Volumes lie neglected thrust
In every Bench-hole? every heap of dust?
Which from some Gowries practice, Powder plot,
Or Tiburne Lectur's, all their substance got:
Yet to^se our Time-stalles youll admire the rout
Of careless fearelesse Pamphlets fly about.
Books, made of Ballades: Works: of Plays,
Sightes, to be Read: of my Lo: Majors day's:
Post's, lately set forth: Bearing (their Back at)
Letters, of all sorts: An intolerable Packet.
Villains discovery, by Lanthorn and Candlelight:
(strange if the author should not see it to handle right)
A Quest of Inquiry: (Jack a Douer's)
The Jests of Scoggin: and diverse others
(which no man Better the Stationer knows)
Wonderful Writers; Poets in Prose.
What post pined Poets that on each base Theme,
With Inuocations vex Apollo's name.
Springes for Woodcockes: Doctor Merriman:
Rub and a good Cast: Tailor the Ferriman.
Fennor, with his Vnisounding E'are word;
The unreasonable Epigramatist of Hereford:
Rowland with his Knaves a murninall;
No^ worth the calling for, a sire burn em all:
And number numberless that march (vutolde)
Among Almanacks and Pippins, to be sold.
Apology.
THese Ill which berter Dare the^ know to wrig
Makes those (I know) not dare w^ better mig^
For who is it now attempts to Print, but knows,
He must be one or censured on, of Those!
For my part (Gallants) it was nere my hap,
On high Pernassus Top, to take a nap:
Or the Divine Nine sisters Fount to see:
Whence I might steal a sip of Poetry.
These Idle Verses (which I Idle made)
None but the Idle I request to read:
Then what Applause look I for, all may guess,
When none may look for Praise from Idleness.
Finis Saty: Primae.
Satyra Secunda.
A MORAL SATYR.
Sunt Videntur. Q Vidam and non Videntur Sunt


A Moral Satyr.
Proaemium.
I Tax no Times, I bear no Furyes scourge:
I bring no powerful Fountain springes to purge
This vicefull Lerna, this Augean stye,
From long neglected noisome filthery.
Vaunt Varlots then: Grizely Tartarian curres:
Vice-Pack-horses: Swains of enchanting pleasures:
Wallow in Lake of Lewdness: racket: yell
And all the world with thundering vproare fill,
Till angry Jove his Chaos drench again
And a new nature of mild molde begin.
Yet know (Earths Of-scums) I have force, and wooed
Uncase, vnlase, your Leaudnes: make ye scud:
Lash at Lines length: and instrike such a print,
Should make ye startle, had ye hearts of flint,
Coo'd I find Patrons to maintain me in it.
Satyra.
But range my Muse! find out some fresher Game,
Some Maiden matter, some vnchased Theam^.
Beat through the throws of these disordered times.
The thorny thickets of contagious crimes,
And rouz from squat, pursue with aeger cry,
The lurking Lewdness, strong scent villainy,
Of those close Foxes, who (in milder skins)
Inuey, and guess inuectiuely at Sins:
Bite with sharp censure: and severely scan
The inward Virtues, by the outward man.
Beshrow me (Sirs) if I dare strout in ^treet,
Wink at a Window: A God-dam-me greet:
Usher a Lady: but salute her Glove:
Or Kiss a Maid for manners more then Love:
Cringe to a S^riuener: be conuersing seen
In Ludgate, with a broken Citizen:
Turn often in Paul's: call for a stool o'th Stage:
Or walk atended with my Hackney Page:
Pace Turnball, Shorditch, Long-lane: or Pickt-hatch,
Least I be taken by this heedfull watch.
These pickthanke Pesants; that with Lynceus eye,
Inspect man's Actions too Injuriously.
First to yon Mass of man: yon load of Guts,
That all he handles in his belly puts:
Who every meals meat makes a Massecry,
Of Shambles, Poultry, Sea variety.
How on the Table he his Panch does rest,
And stuffes it as a Wallet of the best*
Yet close his Buttockes rams up as in Pound
For fear o'th worst, to'th' good-behauiour bound.
Snorts at midday: yet startles at the stir,
Of a betraying Boot, or tel-tale Spur:
Cries out of Fashions, as of Fasting-dayes,
Rebukes Excess: against Vanities inueyes:
Hates Vice as Hunger: and abhorres to stand
In sight of a (Sir reverence) Saffron-band.
Tell him his Worship is so strictly wise:
His closest Trounces, full as full of vice.
As wide from Virtues mean as Largest size.
Next to yon Prester John, that Learned Clarke:
Who after all my closest acts does hark.
A man, that for a Wise one sure wooed pass,
Should there but 6. be, as there 7. was:
He heretofore (out of his Love exceeding)
Wooed ever be examining my Reading:
Now (more Officious) ever Checking is:
A strickt Remembrancer of all amiss.
Bid him be less in Office: more in Love:
Least he ere long Jack out of Office prove.
Laugh, Laugh, Demorritus! who can hold to hear^
Socraticke Doctors, Catoes most austeer.
Roll up the Records of Antiquity,
To frame Abridgements for youth's Liberty.
Accuse Wits folly. Times strange alterations:
The vain expense of cloth consuming fashions,
When their allowance was (themselves can tell)
At least unto a Codpisse half an Ell.
Lend me Athenian but a while thy light:
To scowre the scoutes, the Lurking holes of Spite,
And execrable Envy: see the rout
Of Rascals: venom Vermin, I Will find out:
Cankermouth'd Catchpoles, that in Ambush lie,
To wreck, to seck Virtues aeternitie:
With poysnous blast of miscreant Infamy.
(Iustmian) is too Fortunate to bear
The name of Just: (Flora) too Curtious far
To harbor Honesty: (Varro) held to be
Vain, for his skillful vain in Poetry.
(Fantastic) cannot with his Flaunders feet
Locked in his foure-wheele-casket vex the street:
Knock in a Tavern, but his Father hears,
Some 20 Leagues off. Luxurio fears
Retain a servant fairer then his wife:
Nor will Lorella in despair of Life
Tell of her side-stitch or the Belly-ake,
Least she be said Lucinas aid to lack.
Who is from scourge of Censure can escape free,
Yea (Temperate Nature) men will jerke at thee!
How suffer some but for a Sanguin Nose?
A Scarlet scone? when each Logitian knows
It Is Virtues color. How envy some at^
A Stirrill Chin? Or a top naked Pate?
Emblem of Truth, and Graces. What reproof
Goes with a Limping Leg? Or Vulcan Hoof?
Yea some so far presume, as to define
Knaves, by their Bunch-back's, and their Goggle-eyne
When Accidents (affirms the Stagerite)
Not Natural cause no note but in Spirit.
Peace then Melampus, peace Albertus, Cocles:
Ptoloemie, Rafis, and Auerroes.
Gallon, Palemon: hence be silent all,
Or prove the cunning Huperphisicall.
And all less learned in Rules of Phisnomy:
That Natures notes, hold marks of Infamy.
Else (mincing Madam's) why do we (alas!)
Pine at your Pencill and conspiring Glass?
Your Curles, Purles, Perriwigs, your Whal eb on^ wheels*
That shelter all defects from head to heels.
Making but Good what these count Vicious:
Yet not iniustly termed odious.
To strout in Purple or rich Scarlet dye
With silver bars begarded thriftily:
To set in print the Hair: Character the Face:
Or dye in grain the Ruff for Visage grace.
To clog the Ear with plummets: clag the wrests
With Busk-points, Ribbons, or Rebato-Twists:
From Barbors tyranny to save a lock,
His Mistress wanton fingers to provoke:
Such Trifles, Toys: in these sharp Crittitks view,
Throws us in number of the damued Crew.
As if a Frounced, pounced, Pate coo'd not,
As much Brain cover, as a Stoike cut.
Or practicke Virtue, might not lodge as soon
Under a Silken, as a Cynicke gown.
Fond fond Philosophers: who e're definde
Virtue a Habit of the Clothes but mind?
Tell me (precisely) what auailes it ware,
A Bongraco Bonnet, Eye-brow shorter Hair?
A Circumcized Ruff? Converting Eye?
(...) Sadness? Yes Indeed? Yea Verily?
To bear a Bible every Edifying day
Of an Armefull, (beside the Apochriphay?)
To carry no more cloth then skin: to sho^
The Stockens worn at Knees, the Shoes at Toe?
If thou but nod at Friars, Or be taken
Cloasly converting an impure Queen?
Found in a Morgage, not a minute spare?
Or turn Informer for a demyshare.
Who Virtue holds a bare apparent Good,
Makes nothing Vice, that may assume a hood,
A veil of Well, pure honesty no more
Then flat Hypo^risie: a painted Whore.
Countes nothing more (when indeed nothing less
Then others men's Opinions Happiness.
And Virtue (rare!) All things to be at End:
When every action needs to Good must tend.
Give me a Genius: a well tempred mind
which no Fear urge: no Siren note can wind
From way of Right: that does all Good approve
For no Good else, but for bare Virtues Love.
Whom not Cymerian darkness, more then day:
Nor Gyges Ring could corrupt any way.
A Mind well mounted, that will scoff at Hate,
^rample on Fortune, feircel Encounter Fate,
^purne at the sound of Vulgar praise as base:
^pit a defiance in proud Enuyes face:
An armed Conscience that dares grapple with
A mu^ter of Opinions, in the teeth:
Who though a Theater should strive bring out
^is closest grosest Faults, and all about
^et on to bark: durst boldly stand it out.
Who thinks to trauerse so upright the Stage
(Free from (...) of this C^nsorious Age:
Or aims in Action at the Vulgar grace,
Of Hydra-He^^^^ multitude, Appl^use;
Need frame him self a Nature that will brook
(...) many shapes as ever Proteus took.
To cry God (...) you with a Courtly grace,
To Kiss the Hand, to-lay at Foot the Face:
To act the Cros-point Longey slightly:
Is held Affecting Proud Humility.
To Veil the Bonnet: stiff as Elephant,
A Furlong off to cast a Complement:
To titch the Brimmes: or scarceto speak at all:
We stately, scornful, hateful Gesture call.
And careless carriage argues, Loves neglect:
In best endeauours Critticks find defect.
Let me no oftener then Apollo appear
To Laugh, to skip (...) Phoebus) once a year,
To go more formal then my won^ed fashion,
Corrected in my Taylours last Edi^ion*
To rectify my Fore-top: or assume,
For one nights Revel* a 3. story P^^me:
(Though some will Lases wear, and Leekes as of
And with a more (p^rchance) Ambitious thought
Straight it is surmised, rumord r^^^d about
I roar, I score, I lavish, lash it out.
Trifle Times Treasure: And keep open port,
To all Companions of licentious sort*
When in a day or two, being found alone,
Hemmed in the hopeful habit of a G^rne.
By me a Plowdon or a Littleton.
Lord! what a new bred fame gins hence to pass,
How I am changed from the man I was?
Thus I can expectation ^alsify:
Weary out Censure in uncertainty:
Redeem Time as I list: prove Want of Wit
In those that most inue^tiue jerke at it:
And most precize, of greatest vice condemn.
Making my Faults theirs: by Belying them.
Know I can Frolique be with (Fr^gio)
Court it in Comptest phrase with (Curio.)
Come deep the Caster: and Carouce it free*
(As far as Virtues limits License me.)
In as rich Grograns, Sattins, Tissues, go
As Florence, Carles, Tartary can show.
Meet, and cry farewell, to those spirits bold
By Pistolltenure that their Livings hold,
Confer with Crop-eard knights ath'post; hear tell
Of Stangate prizes, and of Shooters Hill,
Of Brothells, Stews, of vil^st villainies,
And learn out Virtue by her contraries.
Fond Affectation, to be counted Great,
To be The man held: to be pointed at.
I e're neglected. Singularitye
May sometimes virtue b^: nere Poli^ye.
Who is a man of Note (note this from me)
Is sure never to offend in secrecy:
To live in Bondage in Fa^es Iealosie.
It Is not the mouthfull of man's breath I care,
Nor severe Censure of strict Critick^ fear
In spite of Envy, Hate 'twas never known:
But ever Fame will Virtue wait upon;
And now, when Virtue Vice is held: whom is it
We may not Praise or Dispraise as we list?
THen (Snarling curres) turn to this gally slyme.
Feed on the putrid substance of my Ryme,
Here Is Hotch-pot: Sosse: provided filling stuff
Shall find your greedy Censures work enough.
Where if I find ye! Or but spy a train:
A fresh have at ye (Varlots) once again.
FINIS.
To his worthy Friend upon these Satyrs.
Satyrs in English? I pray God your fate,
Send's you not into the world too late
To prove there may be such: For there has bin
So much deceit in Satyrs, it is a Sin
(Almost) to hope for good ones: They who best
Have done, have only Dared: and more expressed
Their Passions, then a Poem. Nay eeuen all
Do but convert their little Brains to gall:
And be it bitter once they care not then
How venomous it be. Which errors when
I see, and see how well approved they are,
It Is more then miracle, Yours be so far
Distinguished. And that you survive to Write,
More out of true discerning then of Spite.
I. STEPHENS.
THE SECOND BOOK: OF Satyricall Epigram's.

To his True Friend Tho: Fletcher of LINCOLN'S-INNE Gent:
TOM!) 'twas thy Speeches did me first possess
These scattered Epigramm's deserved the Press.
Whose Learned Judgment, and Love, I knew such,
Might well Commend, and Command, twice as much.
If (Reader) then here is ought may breed delight,
Give half the thanks to him it brought to light.
Nor blush not (Tom!) nor blame not! that I seem,
Thee the halfe-parent of my Book to deem.
Here Is naught but Good (if nothing they mis-scan!)
Let Critticks, Momus, All, say what they can!
They Are Good: who doubts it? not, for ought I know:
Yet Good I Will swear: because Thou say they are so.
Satyricall Epigrammes.
Ad Emptorem. Epig: 2.
THese Epigrams thou see whose are they? mine?
No! The Book-binders: buy the^, they are thine.
In Thrasonem. Epig: 2.
SInce (Thraso) met one stoutly in the field,
He cracks his Spirit knows not how to yield.
Looks big! Swears! stroutes with set-side arms the
Yet gently yields the wall to all he meets. (streets:
And to his Friend that asks the reason why
His Answer's this: my self I grace thereby.
For every one, the common Proverb knows:
That All-wayes to the Wall the weakest goes.
Of a Railing Clyent.
Epig. 3.
I Called one Knave: who answered: (Sir) not so!
The Knave does all-way's with the Lawyer go.
How could I well but well approve his speech?
Each Lawyer walks, his Clyent at his breech.
Of Debt. Epig. 4.
TO be Indebted is a shame (men say!)
Then it is Confessing of a shame, to Pay.
In Medicum. Epig. 5.
WHen (Mingo) cries How do you sir! it is thought
He Patients wants? and his practic's naught.
Wherefore of late now every one he meets,
With Sir I Am glad to see you well he greeteth.
But who will believe him now, when all can tell
The world goes Ill with him when all are Well?
Against the Accademicks of their abusiue * Ignoramus. Epig. 6.
THe Law is in our Hands! How dare ye then
Abusiue be? Cause ye are Law-lesse men:
Your fault was great! but we neglect the same,
For ye excuse your Error in the * Name.
In Cornutum. Epig. 7.
ONe told his wife a Harts-head he had bought
To hang his Hat upon: and home it brought,
To whom his frugall Wife: what needs this care?
I hope (sweet Heart) your Head your hat can bear^.
No-lawes Reformation.
Epig: 8.
SInce (No-law's) Father did him Counsel give
And said* he only by his Book must live.
Has bought the Law: and vows his life to mend,
And most on's time will in his Studdy spend.
And (doubtless) so he means, for wot ye why?
Has cha ng'd his Bed, and does in's Studdy lie:
How like ye (No-law) now? Is he not wise?
Thus he is certain by ^he Law to Rise.
Of Lucus and his long Hair.
Epig: 9.
LVcus) long locks down to his shoulders wears:
And why? He dares not cut them for his Ears.
Francisco's Travels. Epig: 10.
TEn months (I take it) are not fully gone,
Sinee bold (Francisco) crossed the Seas alone.
Who late returned (one wooed think it much)
A complete Linguist: skillful in the Dutch.
And more (if you knew all) for wot ye what?
In the Low-cuntry's he the French has got.
Of Braggado and his Valor.
Epig: 11.
Give one bad word out comes Braggadoes sword,
And swears (in rage) to sheath it in your guts.
But draw and stiffly stand unto your word,
and gently up again his blade he puts.
^raues your acquaintance* vows he loves all such
^s on their Reputation stand so much.
But be he One that can his wroth contain,
He Scorns to strike him! He Will not strike again.
When will Braggado then his manhood prove?
When he^ meets one he does not scorn, or Love.
Of Duke and his Imprisonment.
Epig. 12.
DVke) lies for Debt, yet nothing owes he will swear
Beleeu't, it is false, as sure as he Lies there.
Again: Of Duke and the Debt.
Epig. 13.
DVke's not in debt: ye do him wrong to say it:
The Debt is -- God knows whose. His that w^ pay i^
(Guido's) Bounty.
Epig. 14.
GIft-gobling Guido always, as he takes,
Unto his Friend this hopeful answer makes.
I thank you kindly: You have been at cost:
But (if I live) you shall not find it lost.
Then can I ever hope to live and find
Close-fisted Guido in the Giving mind?
Nor can I think gifts lost, though Guido dye?
For who can loose that he does Give away?
Of Lawyers. Epig. 15.
SOme, Lawyers praise: and some their sect defame:
The first I cannot: the last I will not blame.
Nor yet esteem Those less Praiseworthy, when
All love not Virtue: No not most of men.
Whom All men Praise I praise him not at all,
But rather him a Temporizer call.
When Two contend for, what but One must have,
Who can do Right and eithers favors save?
When one man's Loss another Game does make,
And Loosers must, and will have leave to speak.
Then Gentle Lawyers,) think it more then well,
If the ha^^e part of men your Praises tell.
To his Fellow Students.
Epig. 16.
TO Rise by Law, a Life we covet all.
Why? It Is Death to us, by the Law to Fall.
Of Him self. Epig. 17.
A Friend of mine, (and yet no friend to me,)
Comes often and craves my Epigram's to see.
He waighes each word, and highly does commend 'em
And much entreats me to the Press to send 'em.
Thus (Fool!) my Labor's I let him partake,
That Labor's me a Fool imprint to make.
Of Phantasmo a Mistress Boaster.
Epig. 18.
FIE! fie (Phantasmo!) cease to raise
Such Trophaeis in thy Mistress Praise.
^hee's Fair! what then? The house most white
^eeme Venus Birds most to inuit.
And Trees that fairest Fruit do bear
With Stones assaulted oftnest are.
^hee's Pretty! Witty! cruel Wit,
^f not Wisdom, Joined with it!
^hee's Kind! It Is true! what better known?
^Vhat worse? when Kind to more then one.
Wrong not then my Purest Fair,
With this mean this skin compare.
Rather by thy Sonnets, seek,
To make her Praises Venus like.
How ere she Propper: Fair her Feature:
Beleeu't she is but a Common creature.
In Sextum. Epig. 19.
SExtus) 6. Pockets wears: 2. for his Uses:
The other 4. to Pocket up Abuses.
Epig. 20.
KIt) I commend thy care of all I know,
That p^un'dst thy Cushion for a Pipe of To --
Now thou art like (though not to studdy more!)
Yet ten-times Harder then thou did before.
Cynna's Theft. Epig. 21.
Stolen Fruit is sweet: So cannot Cynna say,
That Stole a Wench, and had her took away.
Of Luce and her 4. Husbands, 3. of them thus Named, Small, Forman, Middleton.
Epig. 22.
LVce) late is left a Wealthy widow:
(How can it other be then so?)
^oure Husbands she has buried,
Yet would not stick again to wed,
Which on her Hand she thus does cast:
^mall, Forman, Middleton: And my Last.
Counting for every finger One)
Which all (God wot) are dead and gone.
Then (Luce) beware a Fifth to take,
^east so a Hand of all you make.
More-dew's Payment.
Epig. 23.
MOre-dew) the Mercer (with a kind salute)
Wooed needs entreat my Custom for a Sute^
He'r Sir (quoth he) for Sattins, Vel^ets, call:
What ere you please, I Will take your word for all.
I thank't! Took! Gave my word! (say than?)
Am I at all indebted to this man?
Clyms Account. Epig. 24.
CLym calls his Wife and reckoning all his neighbor
Just Half of them are Cuckolds he auer's.
Nay fie (quoth she!) I would they heard you speak
You of your self it seems no Reckoning make.
Of Sim, and his speedy Marriage.
Epig. 25.
SIx months (quoth Sim) a Suitor and not sped?
I in a Sennet did both Woe and Bed.
: Who green Fruit Loves must take long pains to shake.
Thine was some Downe-fall I dare undertake.
A Manly Woman the best Wife.
Epig. 26.
Fair! manly! Wise! Imagine which of these
In Wedlock choice would best my fancy please?
Of all: give me the Woman half a Man:
So I shall (happy) have but half a Woman.
The Woman's Answer. Epig. 27.
IF Half a woman best your Humor fit:
'Twere best to marry an Hermophrodite.
Tom's good Fortune in being Robbed.
Epig. 28.
TOm) tells he is Robbed, and counting all his losses,
Concludes: All Is gone the world is full of Crosses.
If all be gone (Tom) take this comfort then,
Thou Art certain never to have Cross again.
Of Lawyers and Poets.
Epig. 29.
NO mar'le that Lawyers, rich: Poets, poor live,
One gives to take, the other, takes to Give.
In Ignotum. Epig. 30.
What bred a Seholler: borne a Gentleman,
Of 5. years standing an Oxonian.
Of person Proper: of a comely Feature:
And shall I basely now turn Seruing-Creature?
(Fool!) hug thy fortune. S'fut 't may be thy making
A Ladies proffered Service not worth taking?
Who her serves (sure) shall be well Borne: (and
One known sufficient for the Turn before. (more)
The more thy Standing, greater (Fool) thy Grace.
And thou far fitter to supply the place.
For men in serving Ladies much may get,
Then men of Best-parts soonest they will admit.
In Sprusam. Epig. 31.
WHen men speak Baudy know thou what is the matter.
(Sprufa) so often spitteth? (not to flatter!)
The cause (I take it) is this: Her teeth do water.
Of the Riming Sculler.
Epig. 32.
HOrace the Poet, in his Book reherses,
That Water-drinkers never make good Verses.
Yet I a Poet know, And (in his Praise!)
He Is one has lived by Water all his day's.
Sues Slip. Epig. 33.
SVe swore she Loved me: and vowed faithfully
Never to match with any but with me.
Now she has changed her mind: and of All men
Will none of me. Has she not matched me then?
Tell her she Trifles. Ask but to what end
She swore she Loved? She meant but as a Friend.
Ask why Love tokens she did private send?
Still she replies: She meant but as a Friend.
Ask why sh' Invited me to walk alone
where she her thoughts more fully did make known
Binding with Oaths, Delivering Hand on that,
Sealing with Lips, In Wttnesse I know what:
Casting her self down by me: where I could
And might have took, what Suerty I would.
Still blameless, shameless, She will all defend,
Saying in all: She meant but as a Friend.
Then be Su^ such to all her Friends, as me,
I'ad rather she my Friend then Wife should be.
Of Win and her Suitors.
Epig: 34.
WIn is much wooed to, but not won of any:
The troth on it is: She does admit too many.
Tym's Studiosity. Epig. 35.
Mark ye how studious (Tym) is turned of late?
How he breaks Company to meditate?
Does he but thus continue, certainly,
He Will be (at least) a Sargeant, ere he dye.
He may do (doubtless) much! yet I can tell,
He Will not come near a Sargeant, by his will.
Aenigma.
A Beggar once exceeding poor
A penny prayed me give him:
And deeply vowed n'ere to ask more:
And I, nere more, to give Him.
Next day he Begged again, I gave,
Yet Both of us onr Oaths did save.
Of an Egregious Whore.
Epig. 36.
THy Belly is thy God. I well may say!
All thy care is to serve it Night and Day.
Fear then thy God: least (whilst thou worship so!)
He Rise, and Hellish torments put the to.
Of Felo and his Poetry.
Epig. 37.
FElo) that lately kissed the Jail, has got
A smacke of Poetry! yea more then that!
He will maintain none can be truly said
A Poet, that was near Imprisoned.
: No Bird sings sweet^r then the Bird in Cage.
: And Satyrists (like Dogs) tied, fiercest rage.
Thus will fond (Felo) prove by Disputation,
That Newgate is the Muses habitation.
But how so? when some there cannot rehearse,
In a month's Learning, for their Lives a Verse.
To his Unconstant Mistress.
Epig. 38.
I Dare not much say when I thee commend,
Least Thou be changed ere my Praises end.
Woman (quasi) Woe-man.
Epig. 39.
HAd I not felt it misery to W^e,
I had been married (certain) long ago.
Had I Not married, straight (Moroco) says,
I had not once felt Woe in all my days.
If after Woman as before comes Woe,
Woe worth the Man with Woman has to do.
For Lawyers. Epig. 40.
I Muse that Lawyers fear no more to marry
That from their Wives must all the Terme-time tarry.
O Sir! If Termely absence breeds the Fear,
How many Frights each Lawyer, in a year?
Speudall's Pollici^.
Epig. 41.
NOuerint Vniuersi per prae -- Thus began
(Notario) read, ere he would his Coin forgo.
Hold (cries young Spendall:) S'fut you mar all man!
By any means my Father must not know.
For any money I Would not have it so.
Of Liber too wary to Thrive.
Epig. 42.
LIber) is late set up, and wants Custom.
Yet great resort has got: but he will not Trust 'em.
Is not his Love unto his Friend the greater?
He Will want himself, ere he will see him a Debtor.
In Lesbiam, ingratam.
Epig. 43.
WHy I should Love thee I no Reason see:
Then Out of Reason (Lesbia) I Love thee.
Sir Hughes mistake. Epig. 44.
IN Marriage, Woman promise makes:
To serve her Husband all her Life.
^ence comes it that Sir Hugh mistakes:
that uses Servants as his Wife.
and further yet the sense does wrest,
^ouing Her most that serves him best.
In Pontum. Epig. 45.
^Ontus comes Posting almost every day,
And cries How do you Sir? Come, what is the play?
Who doubts but much his labor he has lost,
nere coo'd tell, no more then coo'd the Post.
In Milonem. Epig: 46.
MIlo) much blames me, that in all my Verse,
I nothing in my Mistress Praise rehearse.
^now I have Volumes, and would (I confess.)
ut can not get consent of Her to Press.
Of Wine. Epig. 47.
Physicians) Wine at Springtime poison call;
I hold! It never hurts but in the Fall.
In Presbiterum.
Epig. 48.
PResbyter) that of late his Parish crossed,
By his loose Living, has his Living lost.
And will turn Beggar: hoping by his Wits,
To raise a Benefice from Benefitts
Fool! Studdy better, better means to live.
To Learned Beggars, rare, or never men give.
Where Art and Poverty together dwell,
It Is shrowdly to be feared all is not well.
Men do by Beggiug Livings get (we see!)
Yet few get Livings by their Beggary.
In Ignotum. Epig. 49.
A Cornish Citizen came to his Wife,
Swore he had been in danger of his life.
How man (quoth she!) Faith pointing but at One
Counted the arrant'st Cuckold in the Town.
^ay Lord (quoth she!) what meant you Man to say it?
^ye you forget your Self too bad, be quiet.
The Jealous Man.
Care: I Fear: I Vex full sore:
To Know of what would Vex me more.
The Wittall.
Know my Fate, and that must bear,
And since I Know I need not Fear.
Epig. 50.
HOw can (Sir Amorous) in his suit speed ill,
That has his Mistress, every where at Will.
Then work thy Will of her, for know, of Old,
Tail Tenure has been held the surest hold.
Incerti Authoris Of a Bald-man. Epig. 51.
THy Hairs, and sins, no man may aequall call
For as thy Sins increase thy Hairs do Fall^
An Answer to the same.
Epig. 52.
YEs: If thy Hairs fall, as thy Sins increase,
Both will ere long prove aequall, Numberless.
In Philippum. Epig: 53.
CAll Phillip, Flat-nose, straight he frets thereat!
And yet this Phillip has a Nose, that is Flat.
To his Ingenious Friend Will: Goddard of his Book entitled: Waspes*
Epig. 54.
TRue Epigrams most fitly likned are
To Waspes, that in their tail a sting must bear.
^hine being Waspes. I say, (who'st will repine!)
^hey are not Epigrams are not like Thine.
Amor ex visu.
Of a Blind-man, Loving.
Epig. 55.
^F Love comes but by Sight: (as ^rue we find.)
Then needs must (Caec^) see: for he is Blind.
Maxima amicitia inter aequales.
The Younger Brother to the Elder.
Epig. 56.
IF Amongst aequals greatest Friendship be,
Our Love was Best in our minority.
When as this mutual Lesson we were taught,
To be as Equal branches from One graft.
Then did we Go and Grow alike, as One,
No Difference had in Education.
So our Affections Sympathiz'd in all,
That no event could come but mutual.
So Near so Dear, we both did Love and Live,
That each ones Breath to each might Being give,
What more? So Life, and Love, in all did link us,
That One that knew us both, both one would think v
Which in our Father br^d this foul mistake,
Who gave One all, and so did Difference make.
Vaitas non est numerus.
Epig. 57.
ROme for (Reuersio:) there is but One, I Will swear^
Betwixt him and 5. hundred a Year.
O happy, thrice (Reuersio) if that One,
(As none a Number) thou coo'dst number none!
Again: Vnus Homo nullus homo.
Epig. 58.
ONe Man is no man: Prove that if you can,
(Re^ersio) you for ever make a Man.
Natura nihil agit frustra.
Against Painted Women.
Epig. 59.
MOst are of mind that Women are less Fair^,
And more Deformed: then of Old they were.
True! else In vai^e wooed Nature labor take,
To give them Beauty, that can Beauty make.
To his Hearts conciled Honor.
THen Thee, the Goddess did Divinely frame,
For her Art's glory, and the^e Artists shame.
In Amicam dotem quaerentem.
Epig. 60.
( --) Loves me, and wooed wed, but wot ye what?
Unless I make her Ioynture she will not.
And what is this Ioynture. A future Estate
: Purchased by Providence, possessed by Fate.
Whereon to Hopes unkindness, grief t'inioy,
A Sin, to wish for, in it self a toy.
A merely neerl' Invention, only fit
To part false hearts, and not to Join on it.
Then ( --) on Ioynture do not so much stand,
: All faithful Lovers are not borne to Land.
It breeds Distrust: Inferres suspicion
Of other dislikes, to dislike thee on.
For was thy Love, so firm as mine! with me
Thou Would think no other but to live and die.
Yet be it as 'twill! ere I Will my Love forgo,
For want of what I need not: this I Will do,
Take me! I Will play the Good-husband, and I will
Both Day and Night be getting for thee still.
And what I get (and I will get for Life,)
Dying I Will wholly leave upon my Wife.
^f this contents not! mark then what I Will say.
Dues must not be demanded till the Day.
Let ( --) then Justly Join me to her now,
And then ask Ioynture when it shall grow Due.
Of a Lawyer and a Physician, which the Better man.
Epig. 61.
A Quaint Physician that had took Degree,
Like in his Habit: aequall in his Fe^.
Being a man of Universal grace,
Contended with a Lawyer for the place:
Sir (quoth 'Physitian) I am One you know
That before Lords and Ladies use to go.
My Life secure, void of seditious strife.
Not one dares once molest me, for his Life.
I often am sent for, Lawyer then (be se'd)
And have to do, with Ladies in their bed.
Lawyer.
Be Patient (Doctor,) And take this from me,
It Is not your Grace: like Habit: aequall Fee:
Nor Privileges all: (say what you can)
May make you be, or seem the better man:
I (as Apollo) am the God, to whom.
All Countries croutching do for Counsel come.
Judge then my state! how Honored I live:
How Liberal: Counsel unto all I Give:
How Honest, That am sought too: free from Hate
When men will trust me with their whole estate.
No not the statelyest Lady in the Land,
Will stick to put her Case into my hand:
Go to our Practice! (for my Countries care)
I most am stirring where Contentions are.
You in Infections, and Diseases raining,
Make out of Others loss and Hurt, your gaining.
I to suppress Deceit, Truth's Causes urge:
You, Humors to exhale, with Glisters purge.
Mistake not Doctor then, and you shall find.
It is your Office for to come behind.
Of 2. Painters contending for Praeeminence in their Ar^. Epig. 62.
TWo Painters on a time at variance fell,
Which might each other in his Art excel.
One thinking straight to end so vain a strife,
Pluckes forth the curious Picture of his Wife,
Swearing if ought of his could this surpass,
He, of the Two the better Artist was:
The other more Learned in Philosophy.
Saves All compares must amongst ae^ua^ts be.
Now then (if this mu^^ the Contention end)
You of necessity your Wife must lend.
Then let me presently her with me take,
And I he Image shall more Lively make.
Let no suspicion cause you to deny her,
I Will make it speedily: And send it by her.
This done! The Artist cuuningly did bid her,
Before him stand, as when her Husband did her,
Who speedily his Percill forth did pluck,
And close himself unto his work betook.
So Justly Her he fitted every where,
She swore her Husband could not him come near.
: No better Judge then, can I have, nor Will,
: Go home and tell thy Husband of my Skill.
At whose return the Good Man (fond to know)
Asked her the Ensign of his Art to show.
(Quoth she) this time the Ground he only laid,
It shall in time be perfected (he said.)
Often was he urgent, (and wooed Answer none,)
From day to day he would ask (What has h^^ done?)
It chanced so that in some 10. Months after,
She was delivered of a goodly Daughter.
So like in all, to the Mother was this Elfe,
That none could thought be mother but herself.
Which Born^, she took, and to her Man did send it
Lo here my Picture: Try if you can mend it.
FINIS.
To the worthy Author upon these Epigrams.
LEt me not whilst I praise an Epigram,
Deserve a Satyr: Let not me who am
As nice in praising as dispraisiug still,
Commend your work as trading Poets will:
For then I might praise Books I never read,
Books senseless, at least not Interpreted,
And swear I know them good. Thus many do
Commend and yet maintain, their credits too:
Which, my poor Innocence has much admired,
Till I perceived these Poets who are hired,
In all respects are Shopkeepers: And they
Grow Bankroupts, if forsworn but once a day:
So these in wit grow beggarly whose sloth
Has nothing but a Wager, or an Oath
To prove their own or other men's desert:
And did not my per-vsall now convert
My Judgment to consider what I praise:
I might (as they) approve, and many ways
Recant hereafter: But I give them leave
To Write upon me, when they shall perceive
Such scorned Inconstancy; and if they please
To do it in Epigrams, Let them first learn These.
Which if they can learn, they may truly boast*
They have advantage gotten with the most.
IO: STEPHENS.
THE Third Book of Humors: Entitled Notes from BLACKFRIARS.

Epigram.
To his Lou: Chamber-Fellow, and nearest Friend NOT: GVRLIN Of Lincolnes-Inne
Gent.
NOT) Counsel me! (faith!) what wod'st hau^ me do
My private Notes produce in public view?
Tush! move me not: yet (doubtless) it is rare stuff
And may Take, why not? if so! Good enough.
How ere (Not) Patronize it, thou can tell,
(If ought mislike:) I meant, and wish all well.
Then, Good: or Bad here (Sirs!) on liking take it
If Good, it is I: If Bad: it is you that make it.
Notes from Blackfriars.
WHat (friend Philemo) let me thy corpse Embrace!
So jumpe met in this unfrequented place?
Then, faith! 'lets Frolique't: prithee what is the Play?
(The first I visited this twelve months day.)
(They say) A new Invented Toy of Purle
That ieoparded his Neck, to steal a Girl
Of 12: And (lying fast impounded for it)
Has ^ither sent his Beard, to Act his part.
Against all those in open Malice bent,
That would not freely to the Theft consent.
Faines all to's wish, and in the Epilogue,
Goes out applauded for a famous --)
Now hang me if I did not look at first,
For some such stuff by the fond peoples thrust.
Then stay! I Will se^'t, and sit it out (what ere)
Had I at coming forth took a Glister:
Had Fate fore-read me in a Croude to dye:
To be made Adder-deafe with Pippin-crye.
Come* let us bethink our selue^ what may be found
To deceive Time with, till the second sound:
Out with these matches forerunners of Smoke,
This Indian pastime I could never brook.
SEe (Captain Martin) he in the Renounce me Band*
That in the middle Region does stand
Woth' reputation steel! Faith! lets remove,
Into his Rank, (if such discourse you Love)
He Will tell of Basilisks, Trenches, Retires:
Of Pallizadoes, Parepets, Frontires:
Of Cnluerins, and Baricadoes too:
What to be Harquebazerd: to lie in Perdue:
How many men a Soldier ought to slay
For a Lieutenant-ship: or Twelve month Pay.
He Will read a Lecture (by his skill exceeding)
O^ Reputation: when* it lies a Bleeding:
When Tutcht: when Engaged: when quite Dead,
^ How none may ever Fight once Baffled.
What satisfaction for the Lie: and when
Quarrels are mortal: when Sec^nds may come in*
Then of the Nether-lands! what Passes there:
What stout Performances: wherein he will swear
As many weekly fall but for the Lie,
As did in ho^test time of Si^knesse dye.
Last for his Manhood: how in fury (cro^t)
For a false reckoning once he slew his Host.
And late in England, (since his coming over)
unto the Channel flung an Oyster-whoore.
For taking th'wall of him: seem but to doubt
(The least) of these: straight he will pluck ye out
Handfuls of Reputation: gained of those
That dared not his Valor counterpose.
But wronging him: and called to account for it
In Satisfaction from their Hands wooed part.
Which he puts up, and gloriously puts forth
In Ordinaries to proclaim his worth,
Thinking to get (what common sense denies)
Credit: by Pocketting up Iniuryes.
Then Learn of him, he will teach you how ye might
Be counted Valiant, and never Fight.
LOok next to him to, One we both know well,
(Sir I^and Hunt) a Trauailer that will tell
Of stranger Things then Tatterd Tom ere li't of,
Then Pliny, or Heroditus e're writ of:
How he a remnant lately brought with him
Of Jacobs Ladder from Jerusalem:
At the Barmodies bow the Fishes fly.
Of Lands enriched by a Lottery.
Of Affricke, Egypt: with strange Monsters fil^*
Such as nere Noah's Arc: nere ^den held.
And rarer Rarities, then all of these:
Just now to be discovered (if ye please!)
Such as wooed make a Blind-man fond to see:
Convicted Gallants loose their hopes and fly,
Most younger Brothers sell their Lands to buy,
Guyantan Plumes: like Icarus to fly.
But stay! see here (but newly Entered,)
A Cheapside Dame, by the Tittle on her head!
Plot (Villain!) plot! Let Us lay our heads together*
We may devise perchance to get her hither.
(If we to-gether cunniningly compact)
She Will hold us doing till the Latter Act.
And (on my life) Inuit us Supper home,
We Will thrust hard for it* but we will find her rome,
Here Mis -- (pox ont! she is past, sh^'l not come ore,
Sure she is bespoken for a box before.
Know thou yon world of fashions now comes in
In Turkey colors carved to the skin.
Mounted Pelonianly until he reeles,
That scorns (so much) plain dealing at his heels.
His Boot speaks Span^sh to his Scottish Spurs,
His Suit cut Frenchly, round besiucke with Burres.
Pure Holland is his Shirt, which proudly fair,
Seems to outface his Doublet every where,
His Hair like to your Mo^r's or Irish Locks,
His chiefest Dy^t, Indian minced Dockes.
What Country may game might we this suppose,
Sure one wooed think a Roman by his Nose.
^o! In his Habit better understand,
ee is of England by his Yellow Band.
NOw Mars defend us! see thou who comes yonder?
Monstrous! A Woman of the Masculine Gender.
^oke! thou may well descry her by her groath,
^t, point not man! Least we be beaten both.
e her a little, mark but where she will go,
ow (by this hand) into the Gallants Roe.
^ther her alone! What ere she gives to stand,
ee'l make her self a gayner, By the Hand.
VHat think thou of yon plumed Dandebrat,
Yon Ladies Shit^le-cocke, Egyptian Rat:
^n Musk-ball, Milke-sop: yon French Sincopac^:
at Vshers in, with a Coranto graco.
Yon Gilded March-pane: yon All Verdingall,
This is the Puppet, which the Ladies all
Send for of purpose and solicit so
To dance with them. Pray (Sir) a step or two.
A Galliard or a Iigg: Pox ont! cries he,
That ere I knew this Toyling faculty.
Yet mark! No sooner shall the Cornets blow,
But ye shall have him skipping too and fro.
A Stool and Cushion! Enter Tissue slop!
Vengeance! I know him well, did he not dr^
Out of the Tyring-house? Then how (the duse)
Comes the misshapen Prodigal so spruse,
His year's Reue^ewes (I dare stand vnto't,)
Is not of worth to purchase such a Suit.
Tush! is it now to question Gallantry,
When No-land for a rich Gratuity,
May Seal as deep as can Auare's Heir,
That may dispend five hundred a year?
When Tradesmen take by whole sale all they can,
Venting it out, on day, to any Man.
And then themselves for Twelu-pence in the pound,
Will in the payment of the Debt be bound
And escape free by Breaking. This an age
To fear preferment? When a Rascal Page
An Abject outside shall presume to Woe
Rich bruted (Cashia:) and hope better too,
Then he that of the Of-scums of his Brain,
Can a man better then the (Vice) maintain.
(Tut! it is the Mothers plot! Now she shall see
The Court sometimes! Oh Carnal Policy!)
Then who in Studdy wooed spend Time in vaine^
Omit youth's pleasures for a fruitless pain?
Or for an Ayrie puff of Enuy'd Praise,
Live bound to the Good-behauiour all his days.
Hanged! Let Us be Iouiall! Brave it whilft we can!
What Is Coin ordained for, but the use of Man?
To Borrow is a Virtue, when to Lend,
Is to beget an everlasting friend:
And may a man have more said in his grace,
Then to be Credited in every place?
He Is not a Gentleman I dare maintain,
Whose Word runs nor as Current as his Coin.
A Pipe here (Sir) no Sophistocate.
(Villain) the best: what ere you prize it at.
Tell yonder Lady, with the Yellow fan,
I shall be proud to Usher her anon:
My Coach stands ready. Lord how me thinks I long!
To carue the inside of a dried Neats-tong.
England cannot afford a kinder relish,
For Backragg, Deal, or your more pleasing Re^ish
When shall we make a pleasant cut to Dover,
In a mad merry Humor? And send over?
A Laugh shall rouz the Hage: shake Lesbou walls:
And raise in Arms the fearful Portugalls.
Say Gallants (faith) shall's never see the day,
When we shall Fish-street once again survey.
A butterd Crab or Lobsters leg to get,
O Venus! How a Life I savor it?
Who wooed not all his Land spend had he more,
Then in a day a Kite could hoouer ore.
T'inioy the pleasant Harmony that we
Find in this Microcosme, Man's society.
When all is gone, it is weakness to despair,
Are there not wealthy Widows every where.
Ambitious Sick, wooed part from all their Good;
To crown their latter days with a French-hood?
Are there not Pates, in strange discoueries teaching
Wh^re mountains are of Gold? s'fut, it is but fetching!
Twenty such Fe^ches has the (Shar^e) to move (...)
Gallants of the first Head, but to approve
His swaggering Humor* vows that all he spends,
He gets bravely by his ^ingers ends.
There Is not a Cheapside Mercer (if he look)
That will not swear to*t deeply on his book.
No note^ No ary in Cornwell row,
But is subscribed Witness there too.
Silkmen. Haberdashers* Tradesm^n all:
Inamor'd on him, for his Custom call,
And he takes all of them But woe to him
If he be taken but by one of Them.
:W' Ant it for Women w^e should all be men.
I cannot present better instance, then
In you Spruse Coxcombe, yon Affecting Ass,
That never walks without his Looking-glass,
In a Tobacco box, or Dial set,
That he may privately confer with it.
How his Band jumpeth with his Peccadilly,
Whether his Band strings balance equally:
Which way his Feather wagg's: And (to say truth)
What words in utterance best become his mouth.
Oh! Had thou yesterday beheld the Valor
I saw him exercising on his Taylour*
How, out of measure, he the R^scall beat,
Not fitting to his mind his Doublet.
Lord! how I laughed to see the witless Noddy,
Durst not reply, he meant it to his Body.
See Villain, Rogue! (And in he shrinks his breast)
Oh Heavens! Too wide a handful at the least,
Straight it is Cut! And then proves (being tried)
As much too little on the other side.
But what skil't! He Will have an attractiue Lace,
And Whalebone-bodyes, for the better grace.
Ad nit spare diet, on no sustnance feed,
But Oatmeale, Milk, and crumbs of Barly-bread.
Use Exercise until at l^st he fit:
(With much ado) his Body unto it.
He Will not approach a Tavern, no nor drink ye
To save his life Hot-water, (wherefore think ye,)
For heating's Liver! Which some may suppose
Scalding hot, by the Bubbles on his Nose.
He Will put up any public foul disgrace,
Rather then hazard cutting of his Face.
If in his Element you would have the (F^ole!)
Ask him when he came from the Dauncing-school
Whereas much Leather he does daily waste
In the French Cringe, which Jeremy brought last.
And more, then C^^iat (I dare maintain)
In going to the Alp^^ and back again.
Whereof, that all the world may notice take,
See! every step an H^^^r he does make
That Ladies, may denote him with their Fa^,
As he goes by, with a Lo: He Is the man.
Is It not a thing to be admired at
That any man should Sing himself in debt.
Then who'd not give as willingly a groate,
To hear (Fantasticks) admirable note?
As see a Mandrake, or a Sea Monster:
Edwards blade: with the Tombs at Westminster.
The Eagle at the Tower: St. James's Rarityes:
The Estrich, or Beauer, that wooed worrey Trees?
(Amorous Fantastic) that did never aim at
A smaller Rise, then Ela in the Gamat.
That never conuersed but with men of Note,
Your Crotchet Pate, and your Organick Throat.
Never Ambitious more then to be able,
But to attain unto a Chamber Treble.
Wondrous proficient! See how the Gentlewomen
Throng to his Chamber door, but dare not come in,
Why? least he ravish them! Tush! Laugh ye not,
H'as done (I wosse) as great exploites as that.
(Or else he cracks) the sweetness of his voice
Ore-heard of Ladies, has procured him choice
Of Matches: Noble, Rich: but he will not meddle,
And why (I pray?) for cracking of his Treble.
No! he will with better industry make trial,
If he can Match his Treble to the Violl.
Against when, he has proclaimed throughout the City,
To All your Wits, an Angel for a Ditty:
Faith! was he here we would bargain for a Rhyme,
And here he comes. So truly he keeps Time.
But h'st! with him Crabbed (Websterio)
The Play-wright, Cart-wright: whether? either! ho-
No further. Look as yee'd be looked into:
Sit as ye wooed be Read: Lord! who wooed know him?
Was ever man so mangled with a Poem?
See how he draws his mouth awry of late,
How he scrubs: wrings his wrests: scratches his Pate.
A Midwife! help! By his Brains coitus,
Some Centaure strange: some huge Bucephalus,
Or Pallas (sure) engendered in his Brain,
Strike Vulcan with thy hammer once again.
This is the Crittick that (of all the rest)
I Would not have view me, yet I fear him least,
Here Is not a word cursiuely I have Writ,
But he will Industriously examine it.
And in some 12. months hence (or there about)
Set in a shameful sheet, my errors out.
But what care I it will be so obscure,
That none shall understand him (I am sure.)
Others may chance (that know me not a right,)
Report (injuriously) all my delight,
And strength of studdy I do wholly bend
To this Losse-labour and no other end.
To these I wish my scanda^d Muse reply
In as plain terms as may be It Is a lie.
Here Is but Pate-pastime: Playhouse Observation,
Fruits of the vacants hours of a Vacation.
Then (say all what they can) I am sure of this,
That for Play-time it is not spent amiss.
Semel insaniuimus omnes. Once we have all
Been Iouiall.

FINIS
To his worthy Friend, H. F. upon his Notes from BLACKFRIARS.
HAd the Blackfriars been still vn-suppressd,
I cannot think their Cloisters had bin blessd
With better contemplations: Seeing now
^esse may be gleand from Puritanes then you
Have gathered from the Playhouse. And I must
(Though It be a Players vice to be unjust,
To Verse not yielding coin) let Players know
They cannot recompense your labor: Though
They grace you with a Chair upon the Stage,
And take no money of you nor your Page.
^or now the Humors which oppress Plays most,
shall (if the owners can feel shame) be lost:
And when they so converted do allow,
What they disliked once, Players must thank you,
And Poets too: for both of them will save
Much in true Verse, which hisses might deprave:
Since you have so refined their Audience,
That now good Plays will never need defense.
IO: STEPHENS
Epilogue.
The Author for Himself.
J Am no Poet! (yet I do not know
Why I should not: or why I should be so.)
I can (I must confess) a Meter scan:
And Judge of Verses as an other man.
I have been Trayn'd vp'mongst the Muses: (more!)
The sacred Name of Phoebus I adore.
Yet I no Poet am! (I Would have ye know)
I am no Poet (as the world goes now.)
: My Muse cannot a Note so poorly frame,
: As Invoke a Penny-Patrons name.
: I cannot speak and vnspeake (as I list:)
: Exchange a sound friend for a broken Jest:
: Confer with Fountains: or converse with Tree*
: Admit in my discourse Hyperbolyes.
I cannot highly praise Those highest are
Because they sit in Honors l^^ty chair.
^or make their States in S^^^^ts happy known,
Being (perchan^e) less happy then mine own.
I cannot sing my Mistress she is Fair:
T^ll her of her Lilly Hand* her golden (...),
Fetch a Comparison (beyond the Mo^^^,)
To prove her constant in A^^^ction.
: I dare not Her so much as Lovely call:
: Or say I have a Mistress at all.
: Why? Ere too morrow, she will changed be:
: And leave me laughed at for my Poetry.
Had I of Scoggins Crows writ: or set out
In Woman's Praises what I was about.
I am persuaded (yet I cannot tell)
I had a Poet proved against my will.
^et (ye unproven good) blame not because
yet as (doubtful on your merits) pause.
will produce and Patronize it too:
^inde I but one amongst so many true.
^ut Feign I cannot, here is not a word,
Which I dare not maintain true with my sword.
^oets men Liars call. If so! Then (know it)
^ee is a Poet, does me call a Poet.
Postscript to his Book-binder.
STationer) A Good turn^ to thee I owe:
Here! I will pay thee no^ in Folio.
But stay! Not so: that I wooed have thee put
Me in the Folio: or the Q^art^ e^t.
Rather con^riue me to the Smallest (...),
Lea^^ I be eaten under Pippin-pyes.
Or in the Apothicaryes shop be seen^
To wrap Drugg's: or to dry Tobacco in.
First (might I chu^e) I would be bound to w^pe*
Where he discharged last his Glister-pipe.
The Character I care not, Great, or Small,
So I be plainly understood of all.
Only preserve me from the sight of Those,
That cannot but must Read me in the Nose.
Then care to cast me: not in the Learned Roe,
Least I the Learned c^nsure undergo.
Not lay me with scald Poets least I titch,
And so become infected with Their itch.
Let not each Pesant, each Mecannick Ass,
That near knew further then his Horn-booke cross.
Each rauin- Rustick^: each illiterate Gull:
Buy of my Poesy, by pocket full.
Booke-like made-D^shes may for Daintyes go,
Yet will not every pall^^^ taste 'em so:
Then were it good, I should inioyne the Sell.
Me unto none but those that love me well.
If any Puff-paste, Bumbaste Iobernole,
Wrapped in the Hangings of a Brokers-stall.
A half- Nose: or a Carbonado'd face:
Of a suspicious subtle Serpents pace.
Trust to a Basket-hilt: chances to drop.
But for a Resting-roome into thy shop.
And catches in his fatal hand my Rhyme.
To lurk in it, until he see his Time.
Thrust him out headlong, for (believe him not)
Now (by the Mace) itis a Counter-plot.
If thou behold a Courtca^t Satten-show,
Fallen from the Fa^hion a Degree or two.
One as goes purueying up and down for Tales,
To Jest ^is ^ungry stomach into meals.
That with a m^rry pocket* Pamp^let will,
For a week after Laugh his Be^^y full.
Send him to Sojourne with Duke Humfrey,
Let him starve ere he g^^ a bit^ of me*
Least lying (Read) neglected in his Slop*
I be conveyed unto the Brokers-shop.
Or by his theeui^h Page discovered:
Quickly conuerred into Gi^g^r-bread*
If any Younger Brother* that noe more
Has then a Daggle*tayl'd She^p-skin kept in store*
Whose An^^all ^leec^ will but bare me^nes afford,
And with the Echer of ^i^ Brothers board.
That sits a Ledger at his Fathers Table:
My Book woo'^ ^oudly purchase: (hardly able,)
To win, the presence by the ^^ers side,
Of Mrs. Sis, or Sue the Dary-maide.
Or chooke the Rusticke Leather-lobs with laughter*
Bid him go studdy how to live hereafter:
Read where more ^ollid substance he may get
To Live upon, or learn to go in Debt.
Ye, ye, Brave Gallants: Patrons of lively mirth:
Ye, the young hopeful Landlords of the Earth:
The youth of youth! That read most libe^ally,
More out of (...) then nec^^^^ty.
Y^e worthy Worthyes! Non^ elss (^ight I chus^)
Do I desire my (...) p^ruse*
For to save charges: ere the Plays begin:
Or when the Lord of Liberty comes in.
And if a Book must needs a Patron have,
Yours is the only Patronage I crave.
Others I wish the Stationer fore-warne*
With a Hand's off: It is not for your turn*
FINIS.
Errors in the Printing.
Ye pro your, Folio 2. Saty: 1. Rome for half, pro Rome for some half:
Eare-word, pro Er'e-word. Non pro not.

Demoritus pro Democritus* Saty: 2. So pro too. Scoue pro Sconce. Longey pro
Congey.

Whos't pro whose. Ep^g. 54. L^ec^ pro C^ec^. in aliquibus. Ep^g. 55.
Puts pro Pull's. Lib: 3. page 6. Ye pro you.

