The Curse of Corne-horders: WITH The Blessing of seasonable Selling. In three
Sermons, on PRO. 11. 26. Begun at the general Sessions for the County of
Cornwall, held at Bodmyn, and continued at Fowy. By CHARLES FITZ-GEFFRIE.

D. Cyprianus ad Demetrian.. 8. Miraris in poenas generis humani iram Dei
crescere, cum crescat quotidie quod puniatur. -- De sterilitate aut fame
quereris, quasi famem maiorem siccitas quam rapacitas faciat, quasi non de
captatis annonarum incrementis and pretiorum cumulis flagrantior inopiae ardor
excrescat. Quereris cludi imbribus coelum, cum sic horrea cludantur in terris.

Printed at London by I. B. for Edward Dight dwelling in Excester. 1631.

To the truly ennobled and rightly honored, Sir REGINALD MOHVNE, Knight and
Baronet: Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied.
SIR,
THE end of Gods punishments is to bring sinful man unto Repentance. In
afflicting us he intends not our affliction, but our reformation. He who
delights not in the death of sinners, takes no pleasure in their sufferings,
but in compassion causes sometimes temporal suffering to prevent eternal
aching; according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 32.
We are chastened of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world. If
he attain not this end by one rod, he uses another. If the Pestilence
prevail not, he sends the sword; if that works not, he inflicteth Famine, and
like a good Physician, by diverse medicines he tends to the same cure. If the
same cross have not effected the end for which it was sent, he sends it the
second time, as a man does his servant who has not fully done his errand at
first. Thus does he with particular persons, thus does he with whole Nations,
whose good he intends. He visited our sins with the Pestilence, this
wrought not a sound recovery; he lanced us with the Sword, there yet remained
many peccant humors, those he sought to cure by Famine, Veteres omnes morbos
inedia curabant.
as the ancient Physicians used to cure all diseases by Abstinence. We seemed
to be on the mending hand, but we relapsed, and God was feign to go to work
with us again; as we renewed our old sins, so did he his old judgments. He
sent the Plague the second time, threatened it the third. About seven years
sithence the creature suffered and we by it, for our abuse of it, and for our
unthankfulness to the Creator. The same punishment he has inflicted this
year on sundry places of the land. Thus is God enforced to reassume his rods,
when we renew our sins; and as we use to take from our children their Bread
when they do wanton with it; so by want he corrects our former wantonness,
taking from us that which we abuse, thereby teaching us to use it better when
we have it, that by want we may know how to use abundance. These two years of
dearth (in some distance) called from me these three Sermons. That which in
the first was summarily delivered in one, unto the ears of that Bench on which
you have sat sundry years as chief, is upon this years occasion enlarged
into three, and now sent abroad into public, for the benefit of many, is first
presented unto your eyes. In this Dedication I crave not patronage, but only
acceptance. The Kings command, my calling, the necessity of the times are
sufficient to patronize it. Neither have I cause to doubt of your acceptance;
your care for your Countries good, and your endeavor in this particular do
assure me that you will approve his labors, who, according to his calling,
adds the best advancement he may unto yours* Whereunto he will not cease to
adioyne his continued prayers to the fountain of Grace, for all gracious
blessings on your person, on your public employments, on your noble Family;
who is, and will be (while he is)

Your worships in all Christian duty and service most ready, Charles
Fitz-Geffry.

A brief view of the ensuing Sermons.
Concio prima.
THe occasion of the choice of this Text. page 1 The division thereof into two
parts. In the former part are considered, 1. The sin, 2. The sequel. p. 3
1ma. me. The sin, withholding Corn. ibid. All conservation of Corn, not
unlawful. What is unlawful herein. ibid. Under the word Corn, every public
commodity comprehended. p. 4 Doct. 1. It is a grievous siune to procure or
further famine, by seeking to raise the price of Corn. ibid. Reasons. 1. It is
odious unto God. The detaining of other commodities not so necessary for the
life of man, as Corn, forbidden by God. Much more of this, without which, the
life of man can hardly, yea, not at all be sustained. The necessity of bread
unto man's life. p. 5, 6 2. It is opposite to Nature, unto which Cornehorders
are traitors. For, 1. That which Nature most desires, they do most detest,
that is, plenty. p. 7, 8 2. And that which Nature most detesteth, they most
desire, namely, Dearth and scarcity. ibid. 3. Condemned by the Laws of
Nations. p. 9 Application. Three sorts of people guilty herein. p. 11 1 The
greedy Farmer, who sometimes withholds Corn, even in selling it. ibid. 2
The covetous Merchant. p. 13 3 The Hucksters, or Badgers of Corn. p. 14
Concio secunda.
SEcunda primae, The sequel; The curses of the People. p. 17 A Common sin
draws on a common curse. p. 18 Doct. 2. The peoples curse, justly procured, is
a fearful judgment. p. 19 The peoples curse twofold, 1. Causeless or unjust;
this not to be feared nor regarded. ibid. Exhortation to Magistrates and
Officers to do their duties, though the people do causelessly curse them. For
such curses God will bless them. ibid. 2 The justly caused curse of the poor
and oppressed, this curse very fearful. p. 20 Use. Terror to all kind of
Oppressors. p. 21 Especially to Corne-horders. p. 22 That these curses are not
effectlesse in this life, showed by examples. A story out of Matthew Paris of
Walter Gray, Archbishop of York, a covetous Corne-horder, Anno Dom. 1234. p.
23 Another of a German Bishop devoured by Rats, An. 930. p. 24 The effect of
these curses, in latter times, wherein some of these Nabals have hanged
themselves, when the price of Corn has fallen. ibid. The greatest curse of
all at the day of judgment. p. 25 Objections answered. 1. May I not do with
mine own what I list? p. 26 Answer. Christ only may both say and do so: Man
cannot (without limitation) who can cast nothing his own properly, but his
sin. ibid. Men may not use their own, to the hurt of others. ibid. It is
damnable to withold our own, when our brethren are ready to perish for want
of that which we may well spare. p. 27 Two other Objections, Joseph and Gedeon,
their examples answered. p. 30, 31 Famine, a grievous punishment. p. 31 It is
proper to God alone to punish a sinful Nation with famine, or any other
judgment. p. 32 We have deserved to be thus scourged. But this famine is not
inflicted immediately by the hand of God, but enforced by the cruel
covetousness of men. p. 33 An inuectiue against covetousness. p. 35 These
Corne-horders worse than Usurers. ibid. The pitiful estate of poor
labouring-men in these times, deplored. p. 36
Concio tertia:
THe second part of the Text, wherein is considered; 1. The duty to be
performed; Selling. p. 39 2. The recompense, Blessing. p. 40 Doct. 3. There is
a charity sometimes in selling, as well as in giving. ibid. Use 1. To teach us
to acknowledge Gods goodness in accepting any service done at his command,
though for our own advantage. p. 41 God sometimes accepts selling, where
there is ability of giving. ibid. Use 2. To incite those who are of ability, to
this duty of selling. p. 42 Four things required in charitable selling. p. 43
1 To sell that which is good for quality, convenient grain, ibid. 2 To sell
for convenient gain, at a reasonable price. ibid. 3 To sell in convenient
season. p. 44 4 With measure convenient. p. 45 2da. 2de. The recompense,
Blessing. ibid. Obseruat. The reward more emphatically laid down, than the
judgment threatened. p 46 Doct. 4. God will bless him who sells charitably
in time of extremity, though men be unthankful. ibid. Two sins of the
poor: 1 Murmuring, 2 Unthankfulness. ibid. Neither of these should discourage
us from charitable actions, for though men be ungrateful, yet God is not
forgetful. p. 47 Application. 1. Unto Magistrates, exhorting them to do their
duties in this behalf, according to his Majesty's Orders. ibid. And to draw on
others by their examples. p. 48 Dehortation from withholding justice, and from
selling it. p. 50 2. To Ministers, to be careful and and faithful in
distributing spiritual Corn for the bread of life, especially in these
dangerous days. ibid. 3. To the poor. Here is no warrant for them to revenge
their wrongs with cursings, as commonly they do. p. 51 But rather to accuse
their own sins, the causes of all their calamities. p. 52 4. Encouragement
and comfort to charitable sellers. p. 54 God shall crown them with blessings,
External, Internal, Eternal. p. 55, 56.
THE CVRSE OF Corn-Horders.
The first Sermon.
PROVE. 11. 26. He that withholds Corn, the people shall curse him: But
blessing shall be upon the head of him who sells it.
THe extremity of the times do even extort from me this Text, The occasion of
the choice of this Text.
together with the Explication and Application thereof, as God shall enable me.
Our gracious Sovereign, like a provident Joseph, has endeavored to prevent
the famine, or to pro^ide remedies against it. To this end he has sent ^orth
his Proclamations, and has authorized his Hands in these remote places, the
Justices of Peace, to draw forth the poor imprisoned grain out of private
Barnes, and to afford it the freedom of the Markets. The Justices have done
their endeavors, and the best of them do continue so doing. But covetousness
cares for no Laws, being like the lawless Judge, Luke 18. 2.
Who neither feared God, nor regarded Man. Hence it is that Laws are eluded,
the Kings edicts not regarded, the Magistrates endeavors frustrated, and the
hopes of the poor disappointed. The deaf Adder will not be charmed; the
greedy Farmer will not enfranchize his Corn, though the Country do curse him,
and those curses be ratified in heaven. But let not us cease to do our duties
though others do not theirs. Let Aaren and Hur support the hands of Moses;
Ministers.
let Ministers (as his Majesty commands) join their forces with the
Magistrates against this monster, Et quae non prosunt singula, iuncta iuuant.
Avarice. The good effect which the one cannot produce alone, may (by Gods
blessing) ensue upon the religious endeavors of both together. I come therefore
to publish a Proclamation from the King of heaven, penned by the wisest King on
earth, against all ingrossers of the fruits of the earth, the terour whereof is
this,

He that withholds Corn, the people shall curse him, but blessing shall be
on the head of him who sells it.

Most of Salomons Proverbs are a Commentary upon that one sentence of his
Father David, Psalm. 37. 27.
Is^hew evil, and do good; and commonly they are bipartite, one part
dissuading from some evil, the other exhorting to the contrary virtue. His
Arguments are those which are most powerful, Punishment, and Reward; dehorting
from some sin by punishment threatened, exhorting to Virtue by some reward
proposed: Such is this sentence, resembling the two Hills, Deuteronomy. 11. 29. 27. 13.
the one of Curses, the other of Blessings: Josh. 18. 33.
He that withholds Corn, the people shall curse him; Division of the Text
into two parts.
there is Ebal, the Mountain of cursing: But blessing shall be on the head of
him that sells it; there is Gerizin, the Mountain of blessing.

In the former we are to consider, In the former part consider, 1. The sin,
2. The sequel.
1. The sin, 2. The sequel. The sin, hiding or withholding Corn; the
sequel, the curses of the people. In the latter, we have, 1. the duty, 2. the
benefit or reward: The duty, selling; the benefit, blessing: But blessing shall
be on the head of him that sells it. Of these (God willing) in their order;
and first of the first part, Prima primae. The sin withholding Corn.
and first branch thereof; namely, the sin condemned, which is, withholding
of Corn.

He that withholds Corn. All conservation or keeping up of Corn, All
keeping of Corn not unlawful.
is not always unlawful. Joseph, in the seven years of plenty, gathered and
kept Corn against the seven years of scarcity. Sundry Cities have their
Magazins, wherein they prouidently do store up Corn and other provision, the
better to endure the extremity of an assiege or famine. Paruula na^ exemplo est
magni formica laboris, Ore trahit quod cunque potest, acque addit aceruo quem
struit, haud igna^a e^ non incauta futuri Horat. Hyemis memores tectque
repenunt Virgil. 4. Aenid. Parcum genus est patiensque laboris. Ovid Metam. 7.
Videatur Plinius. lib. 11. cap. 30. et Ambros. Hexam. l. 6. c. 4. item Aelian.
de var. histor. l. 1. Inde dictum Granigerum agmen,
Nature has taught the silley Ant this lesson of husbanding her provision, a
See Pro. 6. 6, 7, 8.
and she by her example reads the same Lecture unto man, by the mouth of
Solomon.

What is unlawful herein.
But then to withold Corn when public necessity does call for the venting
it, upon hope to enhance the price, thereby to make a prey of the poor, who
have then most need to be relieved, this is a crying sin, causing the people
with bitter cries to complain to God against such detestable covetousness,
and to pursue the same with bitter curses.

The ancient latin reading does well express the meaning; Captans pretia
frumenti, (so Ambr. Offic. l. 3. c. 6.
Saint Ambrose alleges the place.) He that catches at all advantages by the
price of Corn, and endeavors to raise it higher, being more greedy of his
private gain, than affected with the public good, every one that does so,
comes within the compass of this curse. So that not only hiding or hording,
but selling and buying too, in some cases, are here forbidden; when they are so
done in private, as that the price is thereby enhanced in public: whereof we
shall have occasion to say more (God willing) in prosecution of this Text.

Under the word, Corn every public commodity is comprehended.
I doubt not but that under this one word, Corn, is comprehended any other
Commodity, useful for the Country; but the Times do confine my intendements
to that particular which my Text does here assign; namely, against all
auaritious horders or hucksters, who pinch the guts of the poor, to fill and
extend their own purses; taking advantage by the dearth of Corn, to make it
more dear: on which ground I may safely lay down this doctrinall Position.
Doctr. 1.


It is a grievous sin to procure a Dearth, or further a Famine, A grievous
sin to procure or further famine by raising the price of Corn.
by seeking to raise the price of Corn. When public necessity does require,
and our own ability does permit us to send abroad our Corn by reasonable and
seasonable selling, then to withold it in hope of greater Dearth, this is a
great sin: For it is odious unto God, opposite unto Nature, injurious unto
mankind, and therefore condemned by the Laws of Grace, of Nature, and of
Nations. Reasons.


First, 1. It is odious unto God.
it is odious unto God, as being directly a breach of his Law, a rebellion
against his Ordinance. Otherwise he would never have inueighed against these
Corne-horders so bitterly as he does, by his Prophet Amos, saying, Amos ^. ^,
5, 6
Hear ye this, o ye that swallow the poor, and make the needy of the Land to
fail, saying, When will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell Corn; and the
Sabbath, that we may set forth Wheat; and make the Epha small, and the Shekel
great; and buy the poor for silver, and the needy for shoes, and sell the
refuse of the Wheat? If any do except and say, What is this against horders?
this is rather against sellers of Corn: I intimated at first, that there may
be as great a sin, in some kind of selling, as in keeping: and those Jews
who sold at last, they did hord up Corn at first, to this purpose: that when
the time served their turn, they might sell it at their own pleasure and
price: Dod ad Text.
and now the time is come, they must sell it in all haste, lest the price
should fall again: They were now so eager after selling, that they thought the
days of Gods Service too tedious till they were at it. They kept it in while
it was good, and sold it when it was worse, they abated the measure and
augmented the price; they made the people pay for the best, when they sold but
the refuse; and so instead of selling to the poor, they enforced the poor to
sell themselves at a vile rate for necessary sustenance, and so to become their
slaves. verse. 8.
The Lord threatens a fearful judgment on the whole Nation, for this
inhumane cruelty of some particular persons toward their poor brethren. The
detaining of other commodities not so necessary for the life of man a Corn,
forbidden by God.


Lesser sins than this in comparison, the engrossing of commodities not so
necessary for the life of man as Corn is, are threatened with heavy judgments
in the word of God. The imprisoning of coin in Coffers, when it should be
dispersed abroad unto pious and charitable uses, is condemned by the holy
Ghost, who says by Saint James Iam. 5. 1, 2, 3.
, that The very rust thereof shall be a witness against the keepers, and that
the canker of their silver shall eat up their flesh as fire. The like judgment
is denounced in the same place against those who keep their garments close in
their ward-robes to clothe the Moaths, Much more of bread-Corne, without, which
the life of man can hardly, yea, not at all, be sustained.
rather than they will produce them to clothe Christ his naked members. What
then shall become of them who are kinder to Rats and Mice, than to their
Christian brethren, being contented that vile vermin shall devour that for
nothing, which poor Christians cannot get of them for money. The necessity of
bread unto man's life.
Bread is called in Scripture the Isa. 3. 1. Leuit. 26. 26. Ezech. 4. 16. 5.
16. 14. 13.
stay and staff of life, because life is thereby sustained as by a Staff: and
when God does threaten one of his heauiest punishments on a Land for sin, he
does threaten to break the staff of Bread; So necessary it is for this life,
that all necessaries are comprised under this one, Give us, this day, our daily
bread. Christ calls himself the bread which came down from heaven: his Word
is called the bread of life. All which do show how necessary bread is for the
use of man: so necessary, that neither body nor soul can well be fed without
it; not the body without common bread, nor the soul (in those of discretion)
without Sacramental bread: so necessary, that although a man have diverse
varieties of meats, and do want bread, the best is failing, because the binder
of all the rest is wanting: other meats, without bread, are but beesomes
without a band, they cannot sweep away hunger from nature; Satis est homini
fluuiusque Ceresque.
but if a man have only bread and water, sufficient for quantity, and
convenient for quality, he may live and do well: so that to withold Corn,
and thereby to break the staff of bread, is not only sinful, but savage;
not only against the Law of God and grace, but against the Law of Nature.

Nature teaches men to seek good and shun evil, to pray and strive to
auert those public punishments, 2. It is opposite to nature.
Sword, Pestilence, and Famine. Nature teaches us that we are not borne only
for our selves, and that public vtility is to be preferred before private
commodity. This could Cicero say out of Plato, one heathen out of another. It
was the praise of Cato Hi mores, haec duri immota Catonis secta f^it, scr^are
modum, finemque tenere, Naturamque sequi patriaeque impendere vitam. Nec sibi,
sed toti genitum se credere mundo. Lucan l. 2.
that he was, In Commune bonus, good for the Commonalty, being resolved, that
he was borne, not for himself, but for all mankind.

But these Antipodes to Nature as well as unto Grace, these Man-haters,
opposite to the Common good, as if the world were made only for them, would
appropriate the earth, and the fruits thereof, wholly to themselves, thinking
that they can never have enough, unless they have all; and that while others
have any thing, they themselves have nothing. Wherefore as Quails grow fat
with Hem lock, which is poison to other creatures, so these grow full by
Dearth, which is the famishing of others. Their whole study and endeavor is to
trouble the pure streams of public plenty, that they may have the better
angling for their private commodity. Eccle. 5. 9.
The profit of the earth is for all (says Solomon) and the King himself is
served by the field. But these, as if the earth, and the profits thereof, were
proper to them alone, as if they were the Kings of the field, and the whole
tribute thereof were to be paid into their insatiable Exchequer,, do study
how they may dry up the public fountain, or draw the whole stream thereof
into their own Cisterne. Corn-horders traitors to nature.
Traitors they are unto Nature; for that That which Nature most desires, they
detest; that is, Plenty.
which Nature most desires, they detest; and that which Nature teaches most
to detest, that do these most desire: Plenty is desired by every well minded
man, naturally, and Grace does allow such desire; for Plenty is a sweet effect
of Gods goodness and favor, therefore called by David, the Crown of the
year: Psalm. 65. 11.
Thou crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy steps drop fatness. But
these desire to pull the Crown of Plenty from the head of the year, and
instead thereof, would put thereon a crown of thorns, as the miscreant Jews
did on the head of Christ. Plenty is one of Gods chiefest earthly blessings;
but these envious children do think that their poor brethren have too much
of their heavenly Fathers blessing. Again, And that which nature teaches most
to detest, they do most desire, namely, Dearth and Scarcity.
that which Nature teaches most to detest, they do most desire; namely,
Dearth and Scarcity: that which Nature teaches to prevent, they endeavor to
procure; they pray for that which all men else do pray against; angry, in
their minds, at our Leiturgie for having prayers against Dearth and Famine,
and thanksgiuings for seasonable weather, which they cannot endure save in
their own fields; ready to chide God because he is so prodigal of his
temporal favors, as to cause Mat. 5. 45.
his Sun to arise on the evil as well as on the good, and his rain to fall
on the just and on the unjust; whereas these, by their wills, would have the
Sun to warm, and the rain to moisten no fields nor gardens, but of the
evil and unjust, that is, their own. What then can we think of them but as
enemies both to God and man, opposite both to Grace and Nature? Solomon at the
consecration of the Temple 1 King. 8. 38.
making way for the peoples prayers by his own, for the removing of common
calamities, sets Famine in the forefront of them, as the first and worst of
all. What shall we think of them who pray for tht which Solomon prayed
against, esteeming that a benefit to them, which is one of the greatest curses
that can fall on a Nation? When God threatens four heavy judgments on a
Land, wherein if these three Worthies, Noah, Job, and Daniel were, Ezech. 14.
13, 14.
they should deliver none but their own souls, he gives the precedence unto
Famine. What then shall we think of those who care not though Job, Noah, and
Daniel, and all the righteous men in the Country starued, so they may be
filled? When God by his Prophet makes a brief Catalogue of the crying sins
of Sodom, this comes in at last, not as the least of them, Ezec. 16. 49.
Manum pauperis and egentis non confirmauit; She did not strengthen the hands
of the poor and needy: It is not not said that she weakened, but that she did
not strengthen; and that not the heart, but the hand of the poor and needy;
and yet God rained hell out of Heaven, fire and brimstone on her to consume
her. What then shall become of them who do not strengthen, but enfeeble, not
the hands, but the hearts of their poor brethren, by withholding from them
that which is the staff of their hands, and (under God) the strength and life
of their hearts?

And that these Cormorants are such enemies to the public good, 3. Condemned
by the Laws of Nations.
all wise men who desired to procure it, have perceived. Therefore this cursed
practice of imprisoning the Countries provision, has ever been condemned by
the Laws of Nations. These Cankars of the Commonwealth were by the ancients
branded with odious appellations, commonly called by the old Romans,
Dardanarians, vexers, scourgers, torturers, of the store of the year. Annonam
vexare et tentare vel maxim Dardanarii solent, quorum auaritia itum est tam
mandatis quam costitutionibus. Vlpian. in leg. Annon. D. de extraordinar.
criminio.
These Dardanarians (says Vlpian their great Ciuilian) are they who chiefly
do vex and persecute the annual provision, against whose Avarice Princes and
States have always opposed the bars of edicts and constitutions.

There is extantan Epistle or Edict of Apollonius, an ancient Governor,
against those scourgers of the Country, by enforced Dearth and scarcity; the
beginning whereof, in effect is this; Terra communis omnium matter est,
propterea iusta; vos autem iniusti, qui eam duntaxat vestram matrem esse
voluistis; quod nisi ab huiusmodi incepto destiteritis, diutius vos in ea
permanere non sinam. Epistol Apollonies ad a^nona vex^tores in princip.
The Earth (says he) is the common mother of all, and therefore just, but you
are unjust who would ingrosse her wholly to your selves, and make a monopoly of
the Common mother, as if she were bound to be a mother only to you, and a
stepmother to all her children besides: but if you desist not from your
doings, I will take order that she shall not long be a mother unto you, but I
will root you out of her, as being unworthy to be a burden unto her.

I speak nothing of our National Laws, because I speak before them, who can
better inform me herein, than I can others. The last Proclamation, together
with the book, published by authority, for fuller declaration of his Majesty's
mind and purpose, for preventing the Dearth by punishing these Dardanarians,
has breathed some life into the poor Country, from whom these do labor to
take away life, by withholding the stay thereof. God put it into the hearts of
Governors to act, as well as to enact; to perform, as well as to proclaim;
that the Proclamation against these horders and hucksters be not like that
Senatus consultum against the Mathematicians in Rome, De Mathemalicis Italia
pelend is factum Senatus consultum atrox et irritum. Tacit. Annal. l. 12. c. 52.
Atrox at irritum, fierce, but effectlesse: and that these may not be among us,
Genus hominum quod in Ciuitate nostra and vetabitur semper and retinebitur.
Tacit. hist. l c. 22.
as the Historian complained, the others were among them, a kind of people
always condemned, but ever repriued, if not acquitted. Affliction is ever
fearful, and misery still mistrusteth the worst: No marvel then if the poor
people do misdoubt, because there seems a door left open to these their
oppressors, that they shall not carry their life from them without license:
wherefore finding after so much thunder by edicts, little lightning by effects,
no lightening of their afflictions: they fear that they have cause to
complain, We are all the worse for licenses. These fears would soon be
removed, and peradventure these afflictions too, if but one or two of the
offenders in a Country were punished for terror to the rest, Tacit, Annal. l.
2. c. 31.
as Pituanius and P. Martius were, when all the Mathematicians and Magicians
were banished out of Italy.

Three sorts of people are found among us, Application. Three sorts of people
guilty of this sin.
guilty of this sin, and consequently liable to the ensuing Curse: 1. the
greedy Farmar: 2. The covetous Merchant: 3. The cunning Huckster, or Badger, as
they are called. I add these Epithites to distinguish between the guilty and
the guiltless in every profession.

The greedy Farmar sometimes withholds Corn by selling it; 1. The greedy
Farmer, who sometimes withholds Corn even in selling in.
withholding it from those who need it, to sell it to those who will make
greater profit by it; so that the needy shall more need it: For who so sells
at a price too high for the poor, he withholds it from the poor, as he does
meat from a child, who sets it on a shelfe whereto he cannot reach. Now what
is this, but Captare pretia frumenti, to make the price too heavy, when either
he will not send it to the Market, or if he send, will not sell but at his
own price?

Thou say, I thresh out my Corn as fast as I can, and do fell it, and
therefore I am not guilty, I am no with-holder of Corn. Thou sellest, but to
whom? to the poor? No, unless as the Jews did, of whom Amos complained, that
they sold the refuse of the Wheat, and yet at the price of the best, as if thou
would add to the badnesse of the grain, and want of measure, the
greatness of the price, to make a sorry satisfaction. Thou sellest it, but to
whom? to them who help thee to sell the rest the deerer, to the Merchant or
Badger, who by exporting or transporting it farther, do cause it to be scarser
and deerer at home. Thou sellest it, but where? at home, in private, and so
causest the Markets to be unfurnished. For how can thou have time to thresh
for the Market, when all is too little to thresh for the Merchant, whom thou
have promised to furnish with so many scores of bushels by such a day. The
Markets are the Commons of the common people, and of many who use good
hospitality; let them be enclosed, soon will these grow lean: The Markets are
their Magazines; if the poor buyers be not there provided, how shall their
wants be supplied? The Markets are their Wels, if the covetous Farmers dry up
these, as the envious Philistims did the Wels of Isaac, these poor sheep must
needs perish. Thou sellest, but in what manner? In gross, or by such
quantities as the poor cannot accomplish; whereas if thou will shun the
curse threatened, and obtain the blessing promised, thou must do as the Word
imports in the second part of my Text, Perfringere frumenta, break it out
from the heap by small parcels, as the poor do need for the present and are
able to compass. Break thy Bread to the hungry; so break thy Corn by half
bushels, by peckes, by gallons to the needy, as their ability meets with
their necessity. To set a whole loaf before a child who has neither strength
to break, nor knife to cut, is not to feed him, but to famish him.

I am not vancquainted with some of their Apologies: I have made a Purchase, or
taken a Lease, or bought so much at a survey to be paid on such a day, and I
must sell many Bushels together to make up a good sum of money, I cannot
tarry the leisure of these lingering Markets. All this while I hear no
arguments but drawn from the common place of thine own profit; and thou
may remember that the buying of a Farm, and a yoke of Oxen excluded the
unworthy guests from the great marriage Feast; these excuses are worse. Thou
have made a purchase, and the calamity of the Country must pay for it: thou
have bought a bargain, and thy poor brethren, their wives and children must
pinch for it. A bad bargain (bare-gaine it may well be called) to buy the
curses of God and man. Say not that I condemn purchasing, because I am no
purchaser, God grant I never be in such manner. Buy Farms, take Leases, make
bargains for Oxen, Cattle, Corn, or what you will, as long as you wrong not
your own souls, which you cannot choose but do, if you wrong or pinch the
poor members of the Savior of souls.

The covetous Merchant is also free of the company of these Corne-catchers. 2.
The covetous Merchant.
He withholds Corn from the poor, by drawing it from Markets, to export it,
or transport it into other parts or places whether nearer or more remote;
especially out of the Land, and that without regard of Religion, or charity, or
any thing else, save his own gain, which to him is godliness. Tros,
Tyriusque, Protestant, Papist, Mahumetan, English, French, Spanish, Barbarian,
all are alike to him, so he may gain by them. The savor of lucre is sweet to
him, though raked out of the puddle of the most filthy profession in Europe, or
in all the world. Mistake me not, I traduce not the calling, not only lawful,
but laudible, I may add, honorable, the second supporter of the Kingdom. Not
the Lion and the Vnicorue, but the Plough and the Ship, under God, are the
supporters of the Crown. The Merchants by their travels and adventures join
together foreign Nations which the Sea has set far asunder; they make
remote Countries to be ours upon the matter, causing their commodities to be
ours; casting with their Ships such a Bridge over the Ocean, that the chiefest,
profits of both the Indies do come home to our houses. I have often yearned
that they have been no better considered of, but suffered to be a prey to
Dunkers abroad, and to as bad at home. I know that it is lawful to transport
our commodities, particularly our Corn into other Nations, upon some
conditions, as other Nations do make us partakers of their profits: yea, this
sometimes may be done to those who are of another, that is, of an evil
Religion. Nature teaches this: The Egyptians relieved the Israelites in the
Famine, Genesis 43. 32.
though it were an abomination to the Egyptians, in their peevish
superstition, to eat bread with the Hebrews, yet they would, in common
humanity, afford them bread to eat by themselves. But this I affirm; to famish
English, and to feed French or Spanish; to starve brethren, and to nourish
enemies; to pinch the members of Christ, to preserve the limbs of Antichrist;
to thrive by the death of Saints, and life of reprobates; this cannot possibly
escape a curse; and all Merchants that use such courses, I can say no better of
them, than a blessed Saint said at least three hundred years sithence, Basil.
They are all Mercatores humanarum calamitatum^ Merchants of men's calamities.

The third sort are these whom we call Badgers of Corn, 3. Hucksters, or
Badgers of Corn.
who were not to be condemned for conueying Corn from those places where it
may well be spared, to other places within the Country where there is more
want, if they did not procure want in those places where it does abound, nor
forestall the Markets, but would take that which the Markets do leave, nor
raise the price to make the poor to smart for it.

Sufficient has been said (I hope) to show the impiety, the inhumanity, the
injustice of this sin of procuring a Dearth by withholding Corn; and that it
is a lawless rebel against the laws of Grace, of Nature, The sin of
withholding Corn, more hamous in our land, than in others.
of Nations. Let this be farther added and considered, that this oppression is
the more cruel, and this cruelty the more heavy in our Land, where Corn
serves both for Bread and Drink; whereas other Countries by the benefits of
the soil do abound with wine; or because of the heat of the Climate, are
contented with water. But among us these with-holders of Corn do doubly
plague the poor people, staruing them with hunger, and choking them with
thirst; depriving them of that which they should both eat and drink. Our
children do not say unto their mothers, Lament. 2, 12,
Where is Corn and Wine? Keep you the Wine, give unto their Mothers Corn,
and they will find in it both bread and drink that shall content them as well
as wine. But deny them Corn, you take from them bread, drink, life and all.
Wherefore the curses of these Corn-mungers are likely to be doubled; for that
is the recompense they must expect for their cursed covetousness, namely,
curses: and as the mischief is common, so it is justly pursued with a common
curse, the curses of the Commons, The People shall curse him.

THE SECOND SERMON.
PRO. 11. 26. The People shall curse him.
THE sin and the odiousness thereof to God and Man, has been (in part)
discovered, that it may be shunned; and shunned it will be the sooner, if the
judgment threatened be seriously considered; which judgment is expressed in
these words: The People shall curse him.

Populares] So Iunius with some others, The sequel. The curses of the people.
do render the word, the Commons; or Popul^^, as most do read, the People,
implying a collectiue curse; as if there were a gathering of curses over the
whole Country, and none (save such as himself) refused to contribute curses
toward him. Not one man, not a few, but the whole Country (as with
Hue-and-Cry) shall pursue him with curses. Execrabuntur, shall curse and banne
him; or Maledicent, shall say all evil of him, and pray that evil may befall
him. The Original word is very Emphaticall, Persodient, they shall dig, or
stab, or run him through with curses. A Metaphor borrowed from digging or
stabbing; as who should say, the people with their curses shall dig on him,
as with Mattockes, or run him through, as with Rapiers.

A common crime still draws on a common curse. A common sin draws on a
common curse.
God, in justice does use to proportion the punishment to the offense. Who so
hurts or oppresses many, must look to be cried out against, and to be
cursed by many. The wings of their punishment shall spread as far as the
tallands of their oppression, their judgment shall be of equal dimensions
with their transgressions. Our Dearth-mongers, as they are procurers of a
common calamity, must look to be pursued with a common outcry, the whole
Country shall stab them with cursings, as they seek to stab it with staruing.

But is this such a punishment to be hunted with the clamours and curses of the
people? Doubtless it is, when those curses are justly caused by wrongs done
unto the people. In such cases we may safely lay down this assertion, Doct. 2.
that The Peoples curse, justly procured, is a fearful judgment.

Hardly can there be a greater plague, A fearful thing to be justly cursed by
the people.
then to be pursued by the clamours and curses of the people for oppressing
them. Here we must distinguish, that we may the more safely teach: The peoples
curse is twofold, The peoples curse twofold.
either caused, or causeless; just, or unjust; either justly procured by some
real wrong insticted on them; 1. Causlesse or unjust, this not to be feared or
regarded.
or unjustly vented out of error or malice, where no just cause has been
given. Solomon himself affords us this distinction, saying, Pro. 6*2.
As the Bird by wandering, and the Swallow by flying, do escape, so the
causeless curse shall not come to pass. Sciendum est quod scriptura sacra
duobus modis maledictum memorat, aliud videlicet quod approbat, aliud quod
damnat. Aliud enim maledictum profortur iudicio iustitiae, aliud liuore
vindictae Greg. Moral. l. 4. c. 5.
Where he shows, that there is a causeless curse, which is not to be feared:
when people out of spleen, or because their corrupt humors are not satisfied,
do fly to the fools Asylum, or shelter of execrations or curses. Such are
the curses of some impudent and insatiable beggars: such are the curses of some
desperate malefactors against the Judges, when they are sentenced according to
Laws and their deseruings: such are the curses of Roarers, sons of Belial,
against zealous Ministers, for discharging their duties. Hence Jeremy
complained, that he was causelessly cursed; Ier. 15. 10.
I have not lent on usury, neither have men lent to me on usury, yet every one
does curse me.

Exhortation to Magistrates and Officers to do their duties though the people
do causlesly curse them.
And it is not improbable that some of you (worthy Magistrates) for diligence
in doing your duties, and for your laudable endeavors to furnish the Markets by
drawing forth the Corn out of the bands of horders, and the hands of
hucksters, shall carry away some curses from the mouches or in the minds, of
these mizars. It Is not unlikely, but that some of them (such is their charity)
will reward you with curses, even for this your care to prevent the curses of
the people upon them. But be not discouraged, Solomon has secured you against
such airie execrations. These breath-bullets shall not pierce you; these
Spears of Reed, and Swords of Bull-rushes shall not so much as prick your
reputations, much less your consciences. Such curses shall not hurt their
credits or consciences, but rebound on those who do use them.
The bubbles of such curses shall fall into the faces and eyes of those who
blow them up: like madmen they run at you with the hilt, but the point of
the sword runs into their own breast. Let that be your refuge which was
David's in the like case, even flying unto the Lord, Psa. 109. 28.
Let them curse, but bless thou. Say you by them as he did by Shimei, when he
cursed him, 2 Samuel 16. 12. For such curses God will bless them.
God will requite good for such cursing. If for doing Justice, you be unjustly
pursued with virulent tongues, the same promise appertains unto you, which
the fountain of blessedness has made unto us: Mat. 5. 11. 12
Blessed are ye when men revile you, and say all manner of evil against you
falsely. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. Their curses
are but like the Popes Bruta fulmina, his banning Bulls, which the more lowdly
they bellowed against Queen Elizabeth, of blessed memory, the better she
prospered, the more she was blessed Beati super quos talis maledictio cadit.
Vtinam vt super nos ista maledictio veniat. Eusebius. Emis. seu. ser. 4. post. 4,
Domini.


Therefore, I^ai 51. 7.
Fear not the reproach of men, neither be afraid of their reuilings; but, lsai
8. 13.
Sanctify the Lord of Hoasts himself, let him be your fear, let him be your
dread. Rest in the blessing of the Lord, Ephe. 1. 3.
Who has blessed us with all Spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ. Let these causeless curses be so far from hindering or disheartning
you in your lawful courses, as that you do rather rejoice in them, and bind
them as crowns to your heads; and be you assured that the promise God made to
Abraham, belongs to every child of his, continuing in his faith and
obedience, and so particularly unto you, Genesis 12. 3.
I will bless them that bless thee, and will curse him that curses thee.

Contrariwise, formidable is that curse which is extorted by oppression, 3. The
justly caused curse of the poor and oppressed, this is very fearful.
and vented forth from a breast surcharged with vexation. No Iron Bullet, driven
by the strongest powder, from the mouth of a Cannon, is more terrible and
tearing. Such a curse being shot from earth, mounteth up to heaven; and being
sent up from man, is sealed by God. It is true, that the common people do
commonly err and offend herein; their curses, many times are their
fooles-bolts, shot without aim, and falling without hurt, save to themselves.
But many times they are enforced, by grievous pressures, to shoot these arrows
against their oppressors; and then they hit surely, and wound deeply. In this
case the people have a legatiue power like the Pastors, What they bind on
earth, is bound in heaven. Here the voice of the people, especially of the
poor, the people of God, is the voice of the God of the people. Therefore we
find in Scripture, that the curse of the people, and a woe from God, are all
one upon the reckoning. Our Wise man says, in this book, Prou. 24. 24. See
Pro. 17. 15
He that says unto the wicked, thou art righteous, the people shall curse
him. The Prophet Isay, inueighing against the same sin, says, Isai 5. 30. 23
VVoe to him that justifies the wicked for a reward. Here you see that God
adds a woe to that sin whereon the people do affix a curse: a curse
extorted from them is sealed with a woe denounced by Him; p whose curses, as
they are never discharged without just cause, so they never return without
effect.

Hear and tremble all ye Nimrods, Use.
all you roughhanded Esawes, Terror to all oppressors of the poor.
grinders of the poor, oppressors of the people. Think not to fillip off
these curses which your cruelties have squeised from them, Vt quidam memoratur
Athenis sordidus and dives vulgi cont^mnere voces Sic solitus, Populus me
sibilat ac mihi plaudo Ipse domi quoties nummos contemplor in arca.
with Tush, what care I what the people say? The Fox, the more he is cursed,
the better he fares. Maledictio diuina sicut nunquam temere emittitur ita
nunquam re infecta reuertitur. Cartw^ ad Text.
Let them curse and spare not, as long as such curses do fill my Coffers. Know
you, that the curse of the people, justly caused, is a vapor exhaled from
earth; or rather indeed a thunder, which causes a thunderbolt to be cast
down from heaven. Let the oppressor post from it as fast as he can, it shall
overtake him (r as the arrow of Iehu did Iehoram) and smite him between his
arms, Horat. l 1. sat. 1 ^ 2 King. 9. 24
and run through his heart; let him fence himself with the best ammunition
that he may, it shall pierce him through. No coat of male shall rebate the
edge, no armor of proof shall bear off the stroke of the peoples curse, when
it is edged with justly conceived passion and backed by the Almighties
approbation. Wise men therefore will hearken unto the counsel of wise
Syrachides; Ecel 4 2, 3, 5, 6.
Make not an hungry soul sorrowful, neither provoke a man that is in distres.
Add not more trouble to an heart that is vexed, defer not to give to him that
is in need. Turn not thine eyes from the needy, and give him no occasion to
curse thee; for if he curse thee in the bitterness of his soul, his prayer
shall be heard of him that made him.

And among all grinders of the poor, Especially to Corn horders.
tremble you who withold from them that which they should grind for the
necessary sustenance of life, and so grind them the more, because you keep
them from grinding. You rural Tyrants, who, by withholding your Corn, do
enforce the miserable people to fly to their for lorne hope of ringing a peale
of curses, against your covetousness, in the ears of the Almighty. If Iam. 5.
4.
the hire of the laborers, who have reaped down your fields, being by fraud
kept back, cries, and those cries do enter into the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath: then doubtless, the deserved curses of those who are ready to perish,
because you will not so much as fell unto them that which they labored to
reap, and to save for you, and which without the sweat of their brows, and
galling of their hands, you could not have saved, do sound like a volley of
shot in the ears of the God of mercies, and will awake him to take vengeance
on your cursed cruelties. Exodus 2^. 22, 23, 24.
If any widow or fatherless child be afflicted by thee (says the Lord) and
in their affliction do at all cry unto me, I will surely hear their cry, and
my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the Sword, and your wives
shall be widows, and your children fatherless. Will God hear the cry of
one widow, of one fatherless child, being afflicted, and can his ears be
shut at the general cry of the whole multitude, among whom are so many
widows, so many Orphans, and some of them (doubtless) his own children, the
sons and daughters of his dear Saints, the linely members of his only
begotten son Christ Jesus?

And that these enforced curses are not always effectlesse in this life, That
these curses are not effectlesse in this life, showed by examples.
witness the fearful judgments which God has inflicted on some Nabals for
terror unto others. I could tell you old Chronicle-stories out of Matthew
Paris, and others, of terrible examples in our own Land, upon offenders in
this kind. A story out of Matthew Paris, of Walter Gray, Archbishop of York,
a covetous Corn-horder.
As that of Walter Gray, an Archbishop of York, in the year of grace, 1234.
Who having five years Corn underhand, would not thresh it out for the
relief of the poor in three years famine, hoping still that the price would
increase. Being advertised by his Officers that it was greatly to be feared,
lest the Corn were consumed by Mice, An. Dom. 1234.
he willed them to deliver it to the Husbandmen, who dwelt in his Manor, upon
condition that they should pay him as much new Wheat for it after Harvest. They
attempting to take down a great mow of Corn which he had at Rippon, saw the
heads of many Snakes, and Toads, and other venomous creatures peering out at
the end of the sheaues. This being related to the Archbishop, he sent his
Steward with diverse of good credit to enquire the truth thereof, who seeing
what others had seen, enforced, not withstanding, certain poor men to go up
to the top with ladders. They were scarcely up, when they saw a great smoke
arising out of the corn, and felt withal a loathsome stink, which compelled
them with all haste possible to hye them down again: Moreover, they heard an
unknown voice saying unto them, Let the Corn alone, for the Archbishop and
all that he has, belongs to the Devil. In fine (says the Story) they were
feign to build a wall about the corn, and then to set it on fire, fearing lest
such an huge number of venomous creatures should empoison, at least annoy the
whole Country. I could tell you out of foreign Authors, of a Another of a
German Bishop devoured by Rats. Anno 930.
German Bishop, who in time of dearth kept in his Corn, and called the poor
which came about him begging relief, the Rats and Mice which devoured his
Corn. But God retorted his malicious scomme upon his own head; Hatto
Episcopus Moguntinensis. -- Nomineq idem Episcopus et Pastor, sed reipsa Lupus.
Scribunt quidam quod mures quoque ^o men eius detentes a parietibus et
tapetibus aebraserint. -- Inde and in hodiernum diem turris ipsa, turris muri^m
vocatu. Job Fincel. Andr. Housdorphius. Phil. Laui^er. in theat. histor. Theod.
Zuinger. in Theat. vit. human. l. 18. Rauisius Textor.
for he himself was soon after devoured alive by Rats and Mice,
notwithstanding that he immured himself in a strong Tower, which is reported
to be yet standing, and in the name it bears to retain a memorial of the
strange Judgment.

I had rather prefer to your consideration the pious action of B. Godwin.
Catalogue of English Bishops.
Ethelwald, a Bishop of Winchester, before the Conquest, who in a great Dearth,
did break up all the Plate belonging to his Church, and gave it to the poor,
saying, that the Church in good time might be provided of necessary ornaments,
but the poor that perished for want of food, could not be recovered.

But these examples of ancient times do less affect, and may be held
fabulous. The effect of these curses in latter times, wherein some of these
Nabals have hanged themselves, when the price of Corn has fallen.
That God has made the curses of the poor effectual upon such covetous
Corne-horders, even in recent remembrance, may appear by this, that some of
this cursed crew have become their own executioners, and in kindness have
saved the Hangman a labor by haltering themselves, when contrary to their
expectation, the price of corn has suddenly fallen: and this both in other
Countries, and among us, as Lauater, Cartwright ad Text.
Divines of good reputation have delivered upon their own knowledge.

But worst of all will be, The greatest curse of all, at the day of Judgment.
when Christ at the great and terrible day of his coming shall add unto all
these the insupportable weight of his heavy and intolerable curse, when he
shall say unto these, as unto others (in some respects more excusable then
these) Mat. 25. 41, 42.
Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels; for I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty, and you
gave me no drink: nay, you would not so much as sell me meat and drink for
ready money, and at a dear rate, when by relieuing me you might have enriched
your selves; by feeding me, you might have filled your own purses. Oh what
shall be said to them who will not sell for money, when Depart from me ye
cursed, is the mildest word that Christ shall afford them, who would not give
freely? What Hell shall be hot enough for those that will not sell, when Hell
fire is prepared for those who would not give?

Shall I speak now unto the deaf Adder, who will not hear the voice of the
Charmer? shall I loose my sweet words by spending them on stones or stony
hearts, who regard not the Law of God, the command of the King, the cry of the
Country, the curses of the people, the tears distilling down the widows
cheeks, the sighs exhaled from Orphants fainting tongues, the ruthful
spectacles of hunger-starued scellitons, whose very sight-might dissolve eyes
of adamant into tears? they who are not moved by any of these, by all of
these, what hope is there that they will be mollified by my weak words? But a
necessity is laid upon us, and we must speak; for if we should be silent,
the stones would even cry out against these, whose hearts are harder then the
nether Millstone. If they will not hear us, let them yet tremble at this
determinate speech of God himself by Solomon, Captans pretia frumenti
maledictus est in plebe: He is cursed by the people who catches at advantages
by the price of Corn. The sentence is peremptory ( Definita est sententia,
nihil disputationi relinquens. Ambros. Offic. l. 3. c. 6.
says a Saint) leaving no place for disputation. If thou do so, pretend
what thou will, fill thy mouth with arguments, cast the best color on the
matter that thou can, all thy fig-leaued Apologies will not fence thee from
the curse.

Thou will say peradventure, Objections answered.
I do no man wrong, I keep but mine own, I may sell mine own when I please;
Is it not lawful for me to do with mine own what I list? 1. May I not do
with mine own as I list?


But know, first, that thou abusest the words of Christ, Answ.
He only (because he is Lord of all) may do with his own what pleases him.
Christ only may do with his own as he list.
Man cannot, because he is not absolute owner of any thing; for what has he
that he has not received: He must therefore do with his own, that which
pleases the Supreme owner of all things. Man cannot, who can call properly
nothing his own save his sin.
Again, call it thine own; it is not lawful for thee to do with thine own
what thou will, unless thou will do that which is lawful and right. Thou
may not use thine own to the hurt of another man. Men may not use their own
to the hurt of others.
Thou may not murder with thine own sword, nor make men drunk with thine
own drink, nor burn thy neighbors house with thine own fire. God, who is
the owner of the earth, tells thee that thou may not withold his (which
thou improperly call thy) Corn, thereby to famish and impouerish thy
brethren. It is damnable to withhold our own when others are ready to perish
for want of that which we may well spare.
The purple Glutton fries in hell fire for withholding his own bread from
poor Lazarus, lying at his gate. It cost Nabals life, for denying his own
bread and victuals to David and his followers, when he kindly craved it in his
need. What can thou expect then, who wilt rather be cursed by the poor, than
sell thine own to them at a reasonable rate in their necessity? Know this
therefore, that this Corn is not thine own, but it belongs rather to the
poor when they need it, and thou can well afford it. Thou take from them
that which is theirs, by withholding from them that which thou call thine.
Thou do wrong enough, in not doing right; thou exercisest cruelty, in not
showing mercy; thou killest all, from whom thou keep that which should keep
them alive. Is he a thief that takes from a man his own, and makes him to be
in want? What is he less, that will not sell a poor man his own when he is
in want? It is the worst kind of covetousness (says a Videatur D. Basilius
ser. 1. in Auaros.
Saint) not to give to those who are ready to perish, that which otherwise will
perish; what is it then not to sell it unto them? Thou say (says the same)
To whom do I wrong, if I keep mine own? I demand of thee again (in the
words of that blessed man) What are those things thou call thine own? Thou
answerest, why? my Coin, my Clothes, my Corn. But how came these things to be
thine own? Did thou bring them with thee into the world? Did thou not come
naked out of thy mothers womb? Shall thou not return naked again? Whence
then have thou these things? If thou say, I got them by chance, or it is my
good fortune that I have them; thou do not acknowledge the author and
disposer of all things, thou art unthankful, thou art no better than an
Atheist. If thou confessest thou have them from God, that he gave them unto
thee; then tell me, why did God give them unto thee rather than unto another?
For God is not unjust, or one that knows not how to divide his own gifts in
equal proportions. Why then has God given thee so much, and him so little?
Why art thou rich, and he poor? Certainly for no other cause, but that thy
fullness might supply his want, and that both might, doing their duties,
obtain of him a reward; thou of faithful distributing, and he of his patient
enduring. If all were rich, what praise were there of patience? If all were
poor, who should be able to show charity? If there were, in this kind, an
equality, two precious virtues would be vile or not at all, Charity and
Patience. Therefore the most prudent disposer of all things, has most
prouidently ordained this inequality, that as the patience of the poor is
exercised in wanting, so the charity of the rich may be showed in releeuing.
But thou, griping all in the tallands of thine insatiable Avarice, and thereby
depriving so many of their portions, say thou keep but thine own, and
thou wrongest no man. Thou do herein (says the same blessed Bishop) as if
entering into a Theater, thou keep, or drive out all other spectators, as
though those shows, which were provided for all, were proper to thee alone:
or, as if invited to a feast by a great friend, together with many other guests
as good, or better than thy self, thou should sit down at the table, and
keep all the dishes to thy self, excluding the rest, as if the whole dinner
were provided for thee alone. Yet still thou say, I keep but mine own, I
do no man wrong. But tell me sadly, Who is a covetous man? He who is not
contented with that which is sufficient, but still craves more. Tell me
again, who is a thief? He who takes away that which is another man's. Art not
thou then covetous, who art not contented with that which is too much, and
which would well content an hundred men, as good, and as dearly bought by
Christ, as thou art? Art not thou a thief, who keep that to thy self which
thou have received of thy Lord and Master to distribute and divide among thy
fellow-seruants, thine own portion (and that double, treble, yea seven to one
of theirs) being allowed thee? Shall he who takes away a man's garment from
him, be called a robber, and shall not he who will not clothe the naked, if he
be able, be also a spoiler? Shall he who kills a man with a sword, be called a
murderer, and shall he be any better that withholds from him that whereof
the want will shortly kill him? Does not he put out the Lamp that powers not
oil into it, as well as he that blows it out? Does not he put out the fire
that puts not on wood, as well as he that throws on water? What Is the odds,
but that which the murderer does suddenly, thou do it leasurely and
lingringly, and so art the more cruel murderer of the two; because thou do
not quickly dispatch, but doublest Tristior est laetho, laethi mora.
Death by delaying, and Prob saeuior ense Parcendi rabies concessaque vit^
dolori. Claudian.
extendest life only for greater torment; not so merciful as a courteous
hangman, that leaps on the shoulders, or pulls by the heels, to put out of
pain; but rather as cruel as that Lutum sanguine. maceratum. Caligula^
Tyrant, who was said to be nothing but mortar made of blood, not contented to
put innocents unto death Ita ferivt sentiant se meri, Sueton.
unless the Executioner did so strike them, that they might be sensible of
their dying. Never say then that thou keep but thine own. It is the bread
of the hungry which thou detainest; it is the garment of the naked which thou
suffer to lie Moath-eaten in thy press; It is the gold and silver of the
needy, which rusteth in thy Coffer: It is the Corn of the poor, ready to dye
with hunger, which thou suffer to moulder in thy Mow or Barn. Never say,
thou do no man wrong. Thou wrongest so many as thou do not relieve, being
able. Call thou thy self a Christian, and arguest thou thus, quite contrary
to the rules of Christianity? Answer once an Heathen who never knew Christ and
his Gospel, unto his short question: Cur eget indignus quisquam te diuite?
Horat.


Why see thou any one to want; who is unworthy, while thou do abound? Art
thou not unnatural, who suffer that which nature cannot endure, vacuity?
Art thou worthy to breathe the air, who wilt not endeavor to do as the air
does, shift some of it self from places that are oner-full, to others that are
empty? How can thou call thy self a Christian, when the members of Christ
do quiver with cold for want of that which does clothe the Moaths in thy
press? Or to want necessaries, for lack of that which the rust consumes in
thy bags, or starve for need of of that which releeueth Rats and Mice in thy
Barnes? He is a bad servant who will flaunt it in silks himself, gotten by
his masters goods, and glut himself with the choicest food, and see his
Masters children, (yea the Master himself in them) go naked, or ready to
starve for want of bread.

But did not religious Joseph in the years of plenty, Object. 2.
gather and keep up Corn, which he sold afterward in the years of famine?
Joseph's example answered.
He did so, and that lawfully; for you have been told that there is a lawful
storing up of Corn, when it is done, as Joseph did, not to procure a Dearth,
but to prevent it, or to be the better provided against it. Fortasse dicet. Et
Joseph in abundantia frum^nta collegit, in caritate vendidit. Joseph sanctus
omnibus aperuit horrea, non clausit, nec pretia captauit annonae, sed perenne
subsidium collecauit, nihil sibi acquisiuit, sed quemadmodum fames etiam in
posterum vinceretur prouida ordinatione disposuit. Ambr. Offic. l. 3 c. 6.
Godly Joseph opened his Garners in the years of famine he did not shut them;
his intent was not to raise the price, but to provide a supply against the time
of want. He gathered and kept not for himself, but for others, even for
strangers: thou with-holdest it from neighbors, and wilt suffer vile vermin to
feed on it, rather than thy brethren. Shamest thou not to allege the example
of Joseph, whose care for the common good so directly condemns thy
covetousness, who carest for none but for thy self.

Object. 3. Gedeons example. Judge. 6. 11. Answered, B. o^ Exon. Contemplat.
vol. 3. l. 9. Gedeons calling.
But do we not read that Gedeon threshed out his Corn, not to sell it, but
to hide it, and yet is not blamed for so doing?

He did. But when did he hide his Corn? in time of invasion by the enemy. His
Garner might be closer and safer than his Barn. And from whom did he hide it?
not from his neighbors, but from his and their enemies, the Midianites. Thy
course is quite contrary. Then the Israelites threshed out their corn to hide
it from the Midianites: but our Midianites will not thresh out theirs, or if
they do, it is to hide it from the Israelites. The Sword of the Lord and of
Gedeon (the godly Magistrate) be against such merciless Midianites.

Famine, agrieuous judgment.
Dearth and Famine is one of the most grievous Judgments which God inflicteth
on a sinful Nation. Ezech. 6. 11
Thou shall fall by the Sword, by Famine, and by the Pestilence. These are the
three rods wherewith God uses to scourge a wanton and wicked people. I know
that some grave B. Cowper on Romans 8. 35.
Divines do affirm Famine to be the easiest of the three, because God, who
best knows the weight of his own rods, accounts three days Pestilence, and
three months of the sword, equal with seven years famine. But this to me
seems no sufficient reason: sure I am, that David, in his hard choice,
preferred pestilence before it; 2 Samuel 24. 14, 15.
and it is not probable, that he would choose the heauiest punishment.
Besides, the Prophet Jeremy says, Lamen. 4. 9. Dira fames semper magnorum
prima malorum 1st comes^^ Lucand^.
They that be slain by the sword, are better then they that be stain by
hunger. Moreover, this scourge of famine is the worse and the more intolerable
for the miseries and mischiefs that do commonly attend it. Pestilence often
is the companion of it, robberies, rebellions, outrages and other enormities
are the Pages that do wait upon it. Dire famine! thou have taught
tenderhearted Mothers to turn Cannibals, and to become Butchers, cooks,
caruers, eaters of their own children: Thou have taught men to exceed
Cannibals, and for want of other food to devour their own flesh, and as much
as they might, to eat up themselves. For this Jeremy most lamenteth, as for
the most lamentable judgment, Lam 2. 11, 12
Mine eye does fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is powered
upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people; because the
children and sucklings do swowne in the streets of the Catie. They say unto
their Mothers, where is corn and wine? They swowned as the wounded in the
streets of the City, their soul is powered out into their Mothers bosom. That
which follows is most patheticall; Lam. 2. 20.
Shall the women eat their own fruit, and their children of aspan long?

Now it is proper to the Lord alone to punish a sinful Nation. It* is proper
to God alone to punish a sinful Nation with famine or any other judgment.
He knows when it is fittest to whip a people with famine, and he has ways
enough to bring such a calamity on a Country whenever it pleases him: Psalm
107. 34.
A fruitful land he turns into barrenness, for the wickedness of the
people that dwell therein. Sometimes Leu. 26. 29.
he makes the heavens above as brass, and the earth beneath as iron: so that
albeit men do labor and sow, yet they receive no increase. Sometimes again,
Deuteronomy. 11. 14.
he gives the former and the later rain in due season, so that the earth
yields abundance; but the Lord sending blasts, rusts, Mel-dewes,
Caterpillars, Canker-wormes, does cause the hope of the year to fail: as if
such worthless creatures were more worthy to enjoy the fruits of the earth,
then sinful and unthankful man: sometimes even when the Corn is not yet
reaped, but expects the hook, or while it stands in the field awaiting to
be housed in the Barn, God sends airie threshers, violent winds, to beat it
out of the ear; the furrows of the field do become the threshing-floore; the
Wheat is sowed where it grew, and that without the help of hand, plow or
harrow: thus harvest, threshing, and seed-time do untimely meet together, as
they did some few years since. Our crying sins, We have deserved to be thus
scourged
particularly the vile abuse of the creature by Drunkenness and riot, have
called for vengeance, and we have deserved to be scourged, not only with
famine, but with the other two rods, with sword also and with pestilence.

But this Dearth is not inflicted immediately by the hand of God, But this
Famine is not inflicted immediately by God, but enforced by the cruel
covetousness of Men.
but enforced by wicked men's cruel covetousness. God has not broken the
staff of bread, but churlish Nabals have gotten it into their own fists, and
withold it from the people who should be supported by it. We cannot
complain, Joel 1. 10.
The field is wasted, and yet the Land mourns; the Corn is not wasted, but
withheld. God has not sent want of bread, but covetousness has caused
cleanness of teeth. God has not smitten us with blasting, nor sent
Caterpillars, nor Cankerwormes, but the Devil has raised up Caterpillars and
Locusts, those Frumentarii pretii captatores, Amb Offic. ^. 3. c. 6.
Catchers at the Dearth of Corn (as the Father styles them) and these do make
a private gain of a public detriment, improuing that as a profit to
themselves, which God ordained as a plague for sinners; Hos. 2. 21, 22
The Lord has heard the heavens, and the heavens have heard the earth, and the
earth has heard the corn; but those earth-wormes will not hear the voice of
the Lord, nor the crying complaints of the poor. The earth has answered the
expectation of the sower, but cannot answer the insatiable greediness of the
seller. Many Men's Barnes are full of Corn, but their breasts are empty of
compassion: their Garners are stuffed and stored; two years grain under hand
in many men's keeping, yet they still gape for a greater dearth, and do their
best, or rather worst to procure it. They suffer their Mow-hayes to stand laden
with corn near the highways, in the open view of the poor, the more to
anger their hunger. Thus they bring upon their brethren on earth a torment,
much like that which Poets devised for Tantalus in Hell, to have fair apples
at his lips, and yet to pine with hunger; and in the midst of fair water up to
the chinne, to perish with thirst. Ezech. 5. 16.
These arrows of famine that have wounded our sides, had less afflicted us,
had they been shot directly from the just hand of God; him we could have
entreated with our prayers, mollified with our tears, pacified with our
repentance; But nothing can prevail with impenitrable Avarice: Sam. 24. 14
O let us fall into the hands of God (for his mercies are great) but let us not
fall into the hands of merciless men. If our sins must needs be scourged,
let not greater sinners be the Beadles: Who has given you commission to be the
Countries hangmen? where is your warrant to thrust your selves into the seat of
Gods justice; or to take his quiver and to shoot against his children those
arrows which he keeps against his enemies? You may indeed, for a while, be
the rods of Gods wrath (as Ashur was to Israel) but upon our true repentance,
God will turn his wrath from us, upon you: and the child being humbred, the
rod shall be cast into the fire.

O insatiable Avarice! An inuectiue against covetousness.
Does not the earth yield thee sufficient increase? what meanest thou to plow
and harrow the very guts of thy poor brother for greater gain? Now it is
far worse then they said it was in the beginning of the iron-age; for then
Covetousness Itum est in viscera terrae.
went but into the bowels of the earth; but now men Itum est in viscera fratrum
dig into the bowels of their brethren, yea, Itum est in viscera Christi.
they delue into the bowels of Christ himself for coin.

Call ye me this Usury, or rather Fellonie? These Corn-horders worse then
Usurers. Latrocinium hoc an foenus appellem? Captantur tanqua^ latrocinies
tempora quibus in vis^era hominum clarus insidiator obrepas Ambr* vbi supr.
Usury it self is charitable in respect of this. Usury yet sends abroad money
for money; this rural sacrilege will not sell corn for coin. Usury indeed
biteth, but this kills by keeping away that which should sustain life. Usury
by money steals money out of men's purses (as one by pouring a little water
into a dry Pumpe, forces out a great deal more) but this Burglary breaks
into men's bowels, and robs them of that which should maintain them. Is not
this gain more odious, more base then that of the Emperor, who extracted gold
out of Urine? I perceive, that among our Pagan-Christians, it holds as current
as it did among the Pagans; Lucri bonus est odor ex re Qualibet -- Iuuenal
Sweet is the scent of Silver, out of what sink soever it be raked: seeing to
these Horse-leeches gain is sweet, though sucked out of the bowels of their
brethren.

Oh, if you have any bowels your selves, or have not drunk up that obdurate
river, Flumen habent Cicones quod potum saxea reddit Viscera, quod tactis
inducit marmora rebus Ovid. M^tam.
which is reported to turn the bowels of the drinker into hard marble; look
once over the threshold of your poor neighbor, some poor coater, some daily
labourer, for his groat or three pence a day, groaning under the burden of an
heavy house-rent, with a house full of small children on the bargain; and if
you will not enter in, yet stand without a while, and become officious
Eues-droppers, listen to the pittious complaints that are among them. There may
you see, The pitiful estate of poor laborers in these hard times, deplored.
or hear the woeful mother, with her eldest daughter, the one carding or
knitting, the other spinning a sorry thread, and singing to her turn an heavy
tune of some sorrowful Psalm; as, O Lord consider my distress; or, O Lord
how are my foes increast; or, Help Lord, for good and godly men do perish and
decay: Then awakes the poor sucking Infant, and crying, interrupts both work
and music: The mother takes it up, and gives it suck with tears, for with
milk she cannot. Alas! how can the infant draw milk from the breast, when the
Nurse cannot get meat for the belly: Mother, says another child, when shall
we eat? Mother, says another, where is bread? O mother, says another, I am so
hungry I know not what to do. Thus the feeble children do call upon the
woeful mother, she complains to the sad father, he answers her with pittious
complaints against the pitiless neighbors; Alas! What shall I do? I have
been at goodman -- such a ones house; from him I went to goodman -- such a one
(good men with a mischief, that have not a mite of goodness in them, because
no compassion on their miserable fellow members,) I have been over the Parish,
I have been out of the Parish, with money in my hand, and cannot get a pecke
of Barley: they have it, but they say they cannot spare it. O miserable
condition! the poor man is put to a double labor; first, to get a little
money for Corn, and then to get a little Corn for money, and this last is the
hardest labor: he might have earned almost half a Bushel, while he ruunes
about begging to buy half a pecke. Thus do our Country- Pharaohs make their
brethren bondslaues, enforcing them to make Brick, and denying them Straw;
crying, Hang them, hang them if they steal, yet not setting them on work, nor
releeuing them when they have wrought, and so enforcing them either to steal
or to starve.

Remember, O ye Palmer-wormes remember, your predecessor, the rich fool in
the Gospel. Luke 12. 16. Quid faciam? Nonne haec pauperis vox est, non
habentis subsidia viuendi? -- Quid faciam (inquit) quod non habeo? Clamat
sediues non habere; Paupertatis hic Sermo est, de inopia queritur abundans
fructibus. -- Et dixit, Hoc faciam, horrea mea destruam. Diceret potius,
Aperiam horrea mea, ingrediantur qui tolerare famem non queunt, veniant inopes,
intrent pauperes, repleant sinus suos. Desiruantur parietes qui excludunt
esarientes. Vt quid ego abscondam cui Deus facit ab indare quod l^rgior?
Ambros. l de Nabuth c 6. Id. ibid. c. 7. Dam incrementa pretiorum aucupor,
amisi vsum beneficiorum. Quantas anni superioris frumento animas pauperum
reseruare possem? Haec me magis delectarent pretia, quae non nummo aestimantur
sed gratia: -- Tu vero non h^c ditis, sed ais. De ruam horrea mea Recte
destiues ea quibus nullus pauper onustus reuertitur, etc.
The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plenteously. And he thought
with himself, What shall I do, because I have no room to bestow my fruits?
What shall thou do, man? Have thou so much that thou know not what to do
with thy goods? I will tell thee what thou shall do: Give to the poor out of
thine abundance; if thou will not do so, yet sell to them at a reasonable
price. What shall thou do? why? make the guts of the poor thy Garnors; their
bowels, thy Barnes; their empty mawes, thy Mow-hayes; so shall thou be sure
that both thy substance and thy soul shall be safe. How? no, I Will none of
that. Why? what will thou do then? I know what I will do: I will pull down
my Barnes, and build greater. Nay, soft and fair, thou may save charges and
labor; for, O fool, this might shall they take away thy soul from thee. So
let thine enemies perish, O Lord, even all these who are enemies to those whom
thou most befriendest, the poor and indigent: unless it rather please thee
(which we most desire) to give them grace to turn merciful, that so thou
may have mercy upon them: and unless it please thee to give them wisdom
from above, to fly from the curse, by forsaking the cursed sin which
procures it, and to buy a blessing at so cheap an hand, as by selling the
superfluity of their Corn, having reserved sufficient for their own
provision: For, Blessings shall be on the head of him who sells it.

THE THIRD SERMON.
PRO. 11. 26. But blessing shall be upon the head of him who sells it.
I Have almost been tired on Mount Ebal, The second part of the Text, wherein
it is to be considered.
the Mountain of Cursing; Whereunto the first part of my Text necessarily
tasked me. I do therefore (after some pause) the more willingly climb the
Mount Gerizim, the Mountain of blessing, whereunto the second part does lead
me; and glad I am to follow, because the ascent is easy, and the top
excellent. The ascent I call the Duty, which is selling, than which, what more
easy? By the top I understand the recompense, which is no less than Blessing;
than which, what more excellent?

But blessing shall be on the head of him who sells it. Consider we first,
1 The Duty to be performed* Selling.
the duty, which is selling of Corn, opposite to the sin of withholding it.

That sells.] Perfringentis Metaphora a rebus fractis* Cartwright ad locum.
The Original word imports breaking, or dividing. The meaning is, that Corn
must be broken from the heap, and by small portions distributed abroad among
many, according to the necessity and ability of the buyer; that they who cannot
reach a Bushel, may have a Pecke, or half a Pecke, for their money. The like
phrases are frequent in Scripture: Break thy bread unto the hungry. -- Give a
portion unto seven -- As a loaf of bread is broken and divided among many,
that every one may have some, and not one all; so Corn is to be broken from
the heap, and not to be sold by the heap to ingrossers, and to such as will
make a commodity by retailing it at a dearer rate, but in smaller portions to
be divided and subdivided to the poorer sort of people who do buy for
necessity. Thus to sell (especially in such seasons as these) is a work of
charity, and shall not want a reward; for it shall receive a blessing. So that
There is a Charity sometimes in selling. Doct. 3.


There are three principal deeds of Charity: There is a charity in selling, as
well as in giving.
1. Giving, 2. Lending, 3. Selling. Giving is the chiefest and most noble; It
is more blessed to give, than to receive; and therein man does most resemble
God, 1 Timothy 6. 17.
Who gives us abundantly all things to enjoy. Lending is next, if it be free
lending; Psalm.
A good man is merciful and lends, says the Psalmist. Selling is the last,
yet this also (rightly performed) wants not a blessing. The holy Ghost in
Scripture prescribes rules for selling, giving a charge, that 1 These. 4. 6.
No man do circumuent or defraud another in bargaining. Act. 16. 14.
Lydia, a seller of purple, is praised, and said also to be a worshipper of
God. In the last Chapter of this book, the godly Matron is commended, not
only (though chiefly) for her bounty in giving, Prou. 31. 20
Pro. 31. 20. She stretches forth her hands to the poor, yea, she spreads
them out to the needy; but also for her selling; She makes fine wool, Verse.
24.
and sells it, and delivers girdles to the Merchants.

Behold herein, Use 1.
and acknowledge the gracious indulgence and great kindness of our heavenly
Father, To teach us to acknowledge Gods goodness in accepting any Service done
at his command, though for our own profit.
and Master to us his poor children and servants. He imposes no hard task
upon us. Christ may well say, Mat. 11. 30.
My yoke is easy, and my burden light: If there be any hardness in any of
his precepts, it is mollified again with some mild qualification. Chrysostom.
ad pop. Antioch. hom. 65.
Can thou not (says a Saint) keep virginity? God gives thee leave to marry:
Can thou not fast? God gives thee leave to eat: Have thou a great charge,
many of thine own to be provided for, so that it is not for thine ease to
give? Behold, God gives thee leave to sell, yea, promises a blessing where
thou make a benefit.

Luke 12. 33.
Sell that you have, and give alms, says our Savior: Is that somewhat hard
to sell and give all? Why, then sell some, and give alms of a part, yea, give
alms even by selling some part of that which you may well spare to your poor
brethren; that 2 Cor. 8. 14.
now at this time your abundance may supply their want, that [at another time]
their abandance may supply your want, that there may be an equality. Yea, where
there is ability of giving, God accepts sometimes selling, even where there
is ability of giving.
there God accepts selling at some times, such times as these. He who
sells to prevent a Dearth, does a good work, as well as he who gives in
the time of Dearth. A few Bushels sent to the Market, and sold indifferently to
the needy, do please God, as well as money or bread given at the door: by
this, one or a few are, for the time, refreshed; by the other, many are weekly
relieved; by giving at the door, many times, idle bellies, loose lozels, lewd
loyteterers are pampered, whose backs had more need to be punished; but by
reasonable and seasonable selling, many poor painful families are
maintained, which having labored hard all the week, must not only pray, but
fast the Sunday, if they caunot buy a little Corn the Satterday. So that the
way to heaven is not so narrow, nor the gate so strait, but that a courteous
Farmer, with his Cartload of Corn may enter into it, who is ready to relieve
the Country by charitable selling. Use 2.
Behold how God esteems that mercy to others, To incite those who are of
ability, to this duty of selling.
which brings a commodity to our selves; and says, in effect, to you that are
of ability, in these extremities; Thy neighbor has need, yea, I my self, in
him, do suffer want, now enrich thy self. At other times (and so now too
especially) Prou. 19. 17.
He that gives to the poor, lends unto the Lord; at this time, He that
sells unto the poor, gives unto the Lord, and the Lord will repay him with
a blessing on the bargain. Does David say of him, Psalm. 112. 9. 2 Cor. 9. 9.
Who has dispersed and given to the poor, that his righteousness remains
for ever? Behold, his righteousness also remains, and a blessing is laid up
for him who disperseth and sells to the poor. Did that blessed Saint say
truly in one sense, Nemo dicat, Non habeo; Charitas de sacculo non erogatur.
Augustine. in Psalm. 103.
Charitas de sacculo non erogatur, Charity is not drawn out of a Sack: we may
as truly (in this sense) affirm the contrary, Charity is drawn out of a
Sack. When a man opens the Sack and sells as he ought, he deals
charitably. To sell, in Latin, is, Vendere quasi venum dare.
To give to sale; so that to sell to him that needs, is a kind of gift. The
charitable seller shall have his reward, as well as the charitable giver.

Not every one who sells, but he who sells charitably, has the recompense.
I say, The charitable seller: for, Not every one that sells, nor that
sells at every time, must expect the blessing. Even those whom the people do
curse for not selling at this time, do mean to sell at another time. But he
who will so sell as that he may buy a blessing, must sell charitably. How is
that? He must sell,

Fourethings required in charitable selling.
1. Convenient grain, 2. For convenient gain, 3. In season convenient, and 4.
Measure convenient.

To sell that which is good for quality, convenient grain.
First, he must show charity in selling, in regard of the matter; he must sell
that which is good for quality. He must not sell the refuse of the wheat, lest
instead of a blessing, he come within compass of the curse denounced by Amos
Amos 8. 6.
, against such sellers. Some will sell indeed, but it shall be the orts and
fragments of Rats and Mice. Plerumque, hoc homines nequeunt quod vendere
donant. Faern in fab.
Many will give that which they cannot sell. Haec hodie porcis comedenda
relinques. Horat.
But many are worse than the Calabrian host, who, if his guests would not
accept his proffered Pears, he would tell them that the swine should eat them.
Many will not sell to their brethren but that which is almost too bad to be
cast unto the swine.

For convenient gain.
Secondly, convenient grain must be sold for convenient gain, otherwise
there is no charity, but injury and oppression in selling. Gold may be bought
too dear, and so may grain. Wherefore, as Saint John Baptist counseled the
Publicans, so do we the popular Publicans, the Farmars, Luke 3. 13.
Exact no more than is appointed. Men say that light gain makes heavy purses;
some shall find that their light ware and heavy price will make guilty
consciences, and heavy hearts at the last. Too many do catch their poor
neighbor, the buyer, as, they say, men do use to catch the Panther, by
placing the prey on a Tree in his sight, so far above his reach, that he
breaks his heart strings in leaping at it: so, many do bring into the Market
good Corn, but as a bait in the sight of the buyer; for they pitch such an
high price on it, that the poor Coater, though he stretch his purse-strings
till they break again, is not able to reach unto it. And if they cannot have
their own price, home it must again, or be housed until the next Market;
and if the price do fall in the mean time, they are ready to hang themselves,
because they neglected their first advantage.

Thirdly, selling (especially in this) cannot be charitable, 3 In convenient
season.
unless it be also seasonable. God gives every thing food in due season; so
will the godly afford their poor brethren that which must feed them in the
fittest season. Tempestiuity in doing, adds weight and worth to every good
deed. What is a pardon worth, that comes after execution? As much as the
Cardinals Cap which the Pope sent to B. Fisher, when the head was off that
should have worn it. Farmers will sell (forsooth) but not yet, not in haste,
the price is not yet high enough for their purpose. They have learned the
language of the Jews in Haggaies times, and do say, by releeuing the
spiritual Temples of the Lord, as they did by repairing his material Temple.
Haggai 1. 2.
The time is not yet come, the time that the Lords house should be built. The
time is not yet come that we should sell; it will be dearer a great deal,
and that ere long. What is this but to delay a blessing, until it turn to a
curse; like the reprieuing of a good dish of meat till it be molded, and full
of worms? You who desire a blessing upon your selling, remember that of the
Apostle, and take it as spoken to you in this particular, ^ Cor. 6. 2.
Now is the acceptable time, now is the day of salvation. Now is the time (you
who have Corn to sell) now is your time to sell it; now that Corn is dear,
now bring it forth, furnish the Markets, bring down the price; now take your
time, that you may bring a blessing on your souls.

Lastly, as the matter must be good, so the measure must be just; 4 Convenient
measure.
there must be a conueniency as well in regard of quantity as of quality,
otherwise, charity and a blessing will be absent from your selling. Prou. 11. 1.
False balances are abomination unto the Lord; and are not false Bushels and
false Peckes also? Leuit. 19. 36 Deuteronomy. 25. 15. Ezech. 45. 10.
Just Balances, just weights, a just Ephah, and a just Hin shall thou have.
Amos 8.
To make the Ephah small, and the Shekel great, and to sell the refuse of the
Corn: bad ware, and as bad measure, this is not to sell unto the poor, but to
sell the poor, or to buy them for so base a price as a pair of shoes, says
the Prophet. Such Merchants are some of our mizars, who bring good grain and
great measure to the Market, only to fetch up the price, and do sell worse
Corn and less measure to their poor neighbors at home at the same price,
swearing that they sold it for so much at the Market, and so by a mental
reservation, reserve their souls (without repentance) for the Devil. What can
this be, but a manifest breach of that strict iniunction, Deuteronomy. 25. 13, 14.
Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse waights, thou shall not have in thine
house diverse measures, a great and a small; Verse. 16.
and mark what follows, and tremble all ye that practice such craft, All
that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are an abomination to
the Lord. And how can abominable selling expect a blessing? It is the
charitable seller, for whose head this Crown is prepared, as a reward, not of
merit, but of mercy; which that it may the more fervently affect us, let it be
a little more punctually considered by us, Blessing shall be on the head of
him who sells it. 2da, 2de.


Here it is obseruable, Obseruat.
that the reward promised, is larger and more emphatically laid down, The
reward more emphatically laid down, than the judgment threatened.
than the punishment threatened. For whereas the Antithesis requires that it
should be said, The people shall bless him, as it was of the contrary, The
people shall curse him, it is not so said, but, Blessing shall be on his head,
which is more emphaticall. For hereby it is signified, that God takes on him
to be the bestower of the blessing, he will not entrust the multitude
therewith, he will do it himself to prevent failing. In naming the head, (the
sublimest and noblest part of the whole body) he intimates that God, who is
the fountain of blessedness, will stream down blessings upon him
plentifully and comfortably. That which is powered down upon the head, must
needs proceed from something that is above the head. Now there is none higher
than the head of man, that can confer a blessing on man, but God alone. Hence
therefore it must needs follow, Doct. 4.
that God will crown with blessings that man who charitably sells his Corn
in times of extremity, God wilblesse him who sells charitably in time of
extremity.
thereby to mitigate or abate the Dearth.

These are two sins especially reigning among the poorer sort of people; Two
sins of the poor.
1. Murmuring, and 2. Unthankfulness: If they want, and be not presently
satisfied, 1 Murmuring
they murmr against God and man; 2 Unthankfulness.
they cry out on the hardness of the times and of men's hearts. This David,
long sithence, observed in some of that kind; Psalm. 59. 15.
They wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied. And
yet being satisfied, commonly they are unthankful both to God and man. They
have mouths full of cursing against them who withold Corn; but not a breath
of blessing (too many of them) for those who relieve them, either by giving,
lending, or selling. This makes men's hearts to be harder than they would be;
and this causes God to punish such murmuring, such unthankfulness, by
increasing their wants, Neither of these should discourage us from charitable
actions.
and removing the supplies. But let neither of these discourage good Christians
from doing their duties; let no man be disheartened from charitable beneficence
by the peoples unthankfulness: For though man be ungrateful, For though men
be ungrateful, yet God is not forgetful.
yet God is not forgetful. Good men in doing good, do look up chiefly to the
fountain of goodness, to God and his glory. Be ye assured therefore, that
though men do neglect their duty, yet God can as soon forget himself as his
mercy. If the people, who are ready to curse when they want, be not as ready to
bless when their wants are supplied, yet God, who has powered charity into
your hearts, will power down blessings upon your heads, and so crown in you
his own gifts.

I must reserve some time for Application, Application.
and so much the more, because my Text (rightly applied) surroundeth the whole
Temple, and bespeaketh all Auditors here present, of whatsoever condition, even
from the Chancell to the Church-doore, as well for application as attention.

And because Solomon says, Blessing shall be upon the head, 1 To the
Magistrates, exhorting them to carefulnes in doing their duties in this
behalf, according to his Majesty's orders.
let me first begin with the head of this assembly, and prepare them to
receive the blessing, which afterward (like Aarons ointment) may from the head
distill unto the beard, and thence run down to the hem of the garment.

To you (right Worshipful) does Solomon speak in this Proclamation, as
Proclamations are first addressed to the chief Officers, that by them they may
be published to the People. If you be failing in doing your duties, if you
discharge not that trust which God has imposed and his anointed has reposed
on you, how will you answer it? how will you escape the curse of God and man.
But (praised be God) the Country does witness, and we thankfully acknowledge,
that hitherto (some of you especially) have not been failing. Proceed in the
name of God; all the praise and recompense is paid unto perseverance: fear
not, faint not, be resolute, be courageous; you have God, the King, the
Clergy, the Country on your sides: only a few scarabees, whose element is
dongue, may assay to scare you from your commendable courses. But let not their
buzzing out-braue your worthy proceedings: let not the murmurings nor
reproaches of a few, worthier to be punished then regarded, daunt you in the
service of God and your Country. I have heard strange language from some of
their lips; The Markets are worse furnished, and the price of Corn more risen
since the Justices have been so industrious. Strange inferences! just like
Teuterton Steeple the cause of Goodwin sands. As if Judges were the cause of so
many fellonies, as Physicians (in some places) are of so many funerals, and
Attorneys of so many Lawsutes. These are but bubbles blown up by malice or
covetousness; let them not be Lions to stop you from going on courageously in
the way of Justice. Though the people do sometimes curse where they should
bless, yet God will surely bless, where he finds obedience. As blessing
shall be on the head of them who sell their Corn willingly, so shall it be on
your heads, who cause them, or compel them to sell, who are unwilling. The
blessing that might have been on their heads, if they had sold willingly,
shall be taken from theirs, And to draw on the people by their example.
and placed on your heads, for enforcing them to do their duty. And
doubtless, this blessing shall be doubled, if you draw them on by example, as
well as by authority. If blessing shall be on the head of the seller, how many
blessings shall be on the bountiful giver and releeuer of the poor? If it be
more blessed to give than to receive, then, doubtless, it is more blessed to
give than to sell. Let me incite you (Worthies) to an holy ambition, a godly
envy, or (to avoid the odiousness of the term, style it rather) zeal.
Disdain, disdain that your Tenants should carry away from your heads, such a
Crown by selling, when you may anticipate the blessing by bountiful giving.
Or let those Earth-wormes be so base, that they will not buy heaven by selling,
be ye more generous (Noble Bereans) buy it you by giving. O quae stultitia est!
Deus emit sanguine seruos, Mercari paruo nos piget aere Deum.
Christ was contented to be sold himself at a vile price, that he might buy us
at so dear a price as his own blood. How can we call our selves Christians,
if we will not buy Christ for a little silver, or a morsel of bread?
Hospitality at all times commendable, in these hard times is Royal. Learn of
Noble Nehemias, to make your houses Hospitals for the poor. Away with that
mock-chimney, or rather poison of Hospitality, entertaining of Nimrods, Esaus,
Ismaels, and those devouring Dromedaries, their followers. If ever, now, now
follow your Saviors counsel of inuiting and entertaining your poor
neighbors at your tables; if not at your tables, yet in your houses; if not in
your houses, yet at your doors; or if you will not have them come to your own
houses, yet send sometimes to see how they are provided at their own. Your
Ouer-seers for the poor, in many Parishes, are poor Ouer-seers: It is a
worthy work for a Justice of Peace, in his Parish, to ouer-see them, and if
need be, to be a Deacon in ministering and distributing to the necessities of
the brethren. Christ has descended to baser services for us. If any say, I
talk of cost and charges; I will soon show how that may be saved, at least
quitted. Stop somewhat of the stream in your Butteries and Sellars, and open
it rather at your doors. Rescue your Wine and your Beer from the tyranny of
Rorers, and turn it into bread for the necessary relief of your hungry
neighbors. Pluck your drink from the throats of them that waste it, that you
may the better bestow your morsels on those who want it. How many a hungry
family might feast it a week, on the healths that are wasted in some Gentlemen's
houses in a night?

One word more, Dehortation from withholding Justice, and from selling it.
I pray you, at parting: you have mystical Corn, as well as material.
Justice and Equity is your Corn; if you withold this, the people will curse
you, and God will add the weight of a woe to their curses. Only, this Corn
of Justice is not for the Market; it must not be sold, take heed of that, it
must be equally divided, and distributed freely. Justice must not be sold by
the basket, as Corn is by the Bushel. Though in Cities, commonly, Merchants be
Justices, yet neither in City nor Country must Justices be merchants,
especially of Justice. The sellers of this kind of Corn, are liable to a
curse, equal with the with-holders of the other. Blessing shall be on the head
of them who uprightly do administer it, and freely do distribute it.

I see here are Ministers present, 2 To Ministers. To be careful and faithful
in distributing spiritual Corn for the bread of life.
as well as Magistrates, and shall I dismiss my brethren without a blessing?
Were this a Visitation (as in some kind it is) here were a Text for a Concio
ad clerum, He that withholds corn, the people shall curse him. As for
material Corn, our neighbors will exempt us from the curse by keeping our
Corn from us, not allowing us (by their will) sufficient to serve our own
turns, much less to be sellers. But (blessed and beloved Brethren) let us
remember that we are Gods Husbandmen, Hieronym. Hugo Cardinal. et aly.
and Joseph's (as I may say) for spiritual Corn: some of the ancients do take
this Text in a mystical sense, and by Corn do here understand the Preaching
of the Gospel. O let us not be hiders and with-holders, but stewards and
dsposers of that grain whereof is made the bread of life. Never had we more
need to be bountiful in breaking it to the People, then in these dangerous
days: see we not how the seeds-men of satan, the Devils farmers and Proctors,
Jesuits and secret Sectaries do bestirre themselves? They are not sparing in
threshing out their tares: they sell, yea, they give abroad their Romish
grain, they impose it on the people, and do press them to take it: Shall we
be with-holders and hiders of Gods grain, when so many are ready to perish for
want of knowledge? It may be the common people, who care not much for this
mystical corn, will not curse us, though we keep it from them: but though
they do not, God will; for if he be cursed who withholds corporal bread, how
shall he escape who withholds the bread of the foul? And if blessing shall be
on his head who in a needful time produces his corn, that the people may have
the food which perishes, how blessed shall he be who in so needful times as
these, is bountiful in bestowing on them the food that endures to everlasting
life?

Let me now speak to them, 3 To the poor. Here is no warrant for them to
revenge their wrongs with cursings, as commonly they do.
for whom I have spoken all this while; namely, the poorer sort of people, who
are therefore the poorer and more miserable, because they care so little to
repair to the Temple, and to hear what God says unto them. Though the
peoples curse be the curse of Corn-horders, yet this is no warrant for you, O
ye Poor, to be impatient, and to revenge your wrongs with execrations and
curses. Vengeance is mine, and I will recompense, says the Lord. When Saint
James had bitterly inueighed against covetous rich men for keeping in their
coin, and their clothing, and for detaining from the labourer his hire,
though he said that Iam. 5.
The rust of their silver should be a witness against them, and that the
moaths of their garments should at their flesh as fire, and that the cries of
the laborers entered into the ears of the Lord; yet he does not counsel the
laborers to cry, much less to curse, but exhorting them to patience, advises
them to commit their case to the Supreme Judge, saying, Verse. 7, 8, 9.
Be patient therefore, brethren, till the coming of the Lord. -- Grudge not
one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned. Behold the Judge stands
before the door.

But rather to accuse and curse their own sins, the cause of that sufferings.
Malorum omnium n^^orum casa est pecc^um. Nihil imputerus astris; sacrilegio
annus Exaruit. Symmach.
Rather, look into your selves, accuse your selves, and if you will needs
curse, banne and abandon your own sins, for they are the causes of all your
calamities. Your grudging, your murmuring, your unthankfulness, these, and
the like, have caused God to harden the hearts of men against you. Sin, sin
is the procurer of Dearth, and of all other disasters besides. Psalm. 107.
God turns a fruitful land into barrenness: why does he so? For the
wickedness of the people that dwell therein. Only for sin, Bethleem, which
was an house of Bread, became an house of famine; and that land, which abounded
with milk and honey, was abandoned to Dearth and scarcity. In the Caldean
language Lingua patria Caldaei nuncuparunt Sodomam et Gomorram coecitatem et
sterilitatem. Ambrso. l. de Noe et Arca. c. 19.
(says blessed Ambrose) Sodom and Gomorra do signify blindness and
barrenness. Particularly that common sin of the vulgar, who are more
careful for material bread than for the word, the bread of their souls.
Consider with your selves, whether among your other sins, your affected
blindness be not a cause of this inflicted barrenness. Alas! you do not
feel your greatest famine: miserable is your ignorance: I have known some of
you that have not known whether Christ were a man or a woman. How sollicitous
are you for corporal, how careless of Spiritual sustenance? crying out that
you are ready to dye for want of a crust, and not perceiving that you do daily
perish for want of knowledge? Psalm. 59. 15.
You wander up and down for meat, and grudge if you be not satisfied; you may
be fed at home with the food that endures to everlasting life, and will not
come to receive it. If your neighbor deny you Wheat or Barley, you complain,
you cry, you are ready to curse him. But if God do send a famine, not of
bread, but of (that which is much more precious) the word of God, or if the
bread of life be withholden from you, by those who should break it unto you,
you are nothing grieved thereat, you never complain of that want. These, and
the like, your peculiar sins have caused unto you this Dearth. Accuse not so
much the covetousness of others, as your own corruptions: not the constellations
or courses of the heavens, but evil men, evil minds, evil manners, do make
the times evil. Mala tempora facit nobis contemptus Dei, temporum cursus non
facit. Chrysologus. De orat. et ^eiunio ser 43.
Amend them, and these will soon be amended. And amend, if not for love of God
and godliness, yet for fear of judgments. Repent, if not invited thereunto
by goodthings, yet enforced by these things which you account evil, What you
have lost by sin and negligence, redeem, recover by true repentance. Learn
you once to seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and then you
have a most sure word of promise, that Mat. 6. 33.
all these things shall be added unto you God will turn stones into bread, make
the most stony-hearted Mammonist relent and yield you bread, or he will rain
down bread from heaven, or cause the Ravens to feed you, or work any miracle
rather than you shall perish. Or if it please God to correct you with this rod,
and to exercise you with this affliction, yet despair not; for even these
public calamities are sanctified to Gods children. To them, this very scourge
of famine (as well as other curses) have their natures altered, as the bitter
waters of Mara, were turned into sweetness, and a stinging serpent changed
into a flourishing rod. No extremity of famine (no more then any other
temptation) can turn the love of God from his children; as is clear by that
bold challenge of the Apostle to all afflictions and crosses, and to this as
well as to any of the rest, Romans 8. 35.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or FAMINE? No, for in all these things we are more
then conquerors, through him that loved us.

Can I quit the Mountain of blessing, without bequeathing a blessing? I
cannot; and to whom should I bequeath it, 4 Encouragement and comfort unto
sellers.
rather then unto them on whom my Text does bestow it, the Sellers? We who are
the Preachers of Peace, may, and ought sometimes encourage men unto contention,
so it be against sin, and the courses of sinners. Contend you therefore
(charitable breasts) against these hard-hearted horders: Be you as covetous for
your souls, as they are for perishing substance: While they heap up curses on
themselves by withholding, strive you for blessings by charitable selling. Now
is your harvest, take advantage of these hard times to store your selves with
the best riches; see how God makes many to want, that you may abound, and
suffers others to be miserable, that you may be blessed by relieuing them.
Neglect not this opportunity, but now by seasonable selling buy unto your
selves an assured blessing; you see with what a fair offer God presents you,
to get heaven without loosing any thing on earth. That blessing which others
attain unto by free giving, you may get by profitable selling.

Blessed shall you be in your outward estate, you shall never be the poorer at
the years end; God shall crown them with blessings External.
you shall find as much coin in your purses, as the greedy cormorant that
sharketh after all advantages. God will blow on his store, and boar holes in
his bags, while yours shall hold, and be increased: A little that the righteous
has, is more then all the riches of the wicked. Blessed shall you be in your
names and reputations; you shall be praised and well reported of by all men
(all good men) and by the truth it self: the precious ointment of a good name
shall perfume the places of your abode: The righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance.

Blessed shall you be in the love of the people. The daily labourer shall daily
pray for you; and Magistrates shall praise you; godly Ministers shall rejoice
and take comfort in you; widows and orphans in their hearty prayers shall
send letters of commendation in your behalf unto heaven, to the King of
heaven, their special protector and assured friend to all that do befriend
them.

Blessed shall you be in your husbandry, and in your fields; this years
selling shall be the next years sowing and reaping: the earth which was cursed
for Adams sin, shall be blessed unto you: No worthing, no marle, no manuring
shall procure you more plenty of Corn, then this your selling of Corn; yea, a
blessing shall be on your children, and on your posterity after you, as is
promised unto the faithful.

God shall crown you with spiritual blessings: Internal.
Psalm. 4. 7.
He shall put gladness into your hearts, more then they have, when their corn
and their wine is increased, and the prices with them: you shall have peace of
conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, greater treasures then all full coffers and
barnes can afford.

You shall be blessed in your sickness. God himself shall be your Physician,
your keeper, Psalm. 41. 3.
your attender: The Lord will strengthen you upon the bed of languishing, he
himself will burn all your bed in your sickness. You shall be blessed in that
hour wherein others are most distressed, in your Death; with old Simeon you
shall depart in peace, your eyes beforehand seeing your salvation.

But most blessed shall you be after Death, (...)all.
when God shall crown you with everlasting blessedness in heaven; then shall
the head of blessings be on your head, when you shall be most nearly and
eternally joined unto your head Christ Jesus, who is blessedness it self, Who
is God blessed for ever. O how joyful shall you be at that day, when others
shall be most sorrowful: how blessed, when these Corn-holders shall be cursed*
for when they shall be sent away with the Goats on the left hand, with that
woeful word, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels: then shall you standing among the sheep on the right hand hear
that happy call, Come ye blessed Mat. 25. 34.
of my father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world.

To which Kingdom he bring us who has prepared it for us, and to him one God
in three persons, blessed for ever, be ascribed all praise, power, might,
majesty, glory, and Dominion, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

