A very fruitful Exposition of the Commandments by way of Questions and
Answers for greater plainness:

Together with an application of every one to the soul and conscience of man,
profitable for all, and especially for them that (being not otherwise
furnished) are yet desirous both to see themselves, and to deliver to others
some larger speech of every point that is but briefly named in the shorter
Catechismes:

By Geruase Babington.

PSALM 119.59. I have considered my vvayes, and turned my feet into thy
testimonies.

I made have and prolonged not to keep thy commandments.

AT LONDON Printed by Henry Midleton for Thoma Charde, 1583.

To the Right Honorable, his very singular good Lord and Master, Henry
Earl of Penbrooke, Lord Harbert of Cardiffe, Marmion, and S. Quintine, and of
the most honorable order of the Garter Knight. G. B. wishes increase of all
mercy and comfort in Christ Jesus for ever.
THe Lord knows, who searches my heart and reins (right Honorable and my
very singular good Lord) that being placed in the University with so great
content both for profit, pleasure, and the exercise of my ministry in such
place, as it pleased God most mercifully to bless it in, to my great comfort,
I had little desire to make change of that estate so accompanied both with these
and many other special commodities, til it pleased him that has his times
and oportunities for all men, to direct me to your Lo. in such sort as he did,
and there first of your self, and afterward of my ho. good Lady to make me
hear so careful, so Christian, and so zealous a regard both of your selves,
and your whole retinue to be directed in the course that became the professors
of the Gospel, and the inioyers of these happy days under so famous and
renouned a government of so worthy, blessed, and gracious a Princess. And
the^ I must needs confess I felt a forcing resolution after I had a while
striuen with the loss of these forenamed benefits, with the far separation
of my self from all my friends, and with the discomforts incident now and
then even to the best services. So was it (my good Lord) your zeal and
affection to your God, that then first persuaded me. And truly even the self
same thing it was, that ever after retained me, more unable than many, but as
willing as ever was any to the uttermost both of power and life to do your Lo.
service. The very self same thing it is also out of all question, that shall
ever, above any worldly commodity that may be offered them, procure unto your
Lo. both in one place and other, those that love virtue and upright dealing.
For very well with themselves will they ever imagine (as indeed it should be)
that where the Lord is feared and honored as he ought to be, there faithful
service will both be regarded, and conveniently rewarded, there me^ shall be
judged according to proof, and not according to pratles there heat of
affections shall not stir to souden and undeserved displeasure, but
conscience to give every man his due trial, shall find out the innocence of
the true dealer. And what should I say? There they will assure themselves,
every man shall be used with convenient incoragement, credit, and comfort, if
his dealings do deserve the same, beside many more very special virtues of a
master fearing God. Wherefore if I should wish unto your Lo. in a thousand
terms many several and singular blessings, and afterward include them all in
one, truly it must be this, that you may ever know the God of your father, and
serve him with a perfect heart and a willing mind: Know him I say, by
learning what he wills, and serve him, by daily practicing, as he inableth,
of that will. For thus to the Lord you shall become obedient, to your Prince
faithful, for your country careful, to your servants, that break both
body and brains in your affairs, and bear the brunt of many an unknown
toil and hazard, comfortable and beneficial, to thousands that live under
you, honorable and good, and to every man (in a word) so affected and
disposed, as they that are already in all dutiful right your own, may so
remain: and they that are not, by so cheerful usage and honorable virtue may
daily be added and won unto you. Wherefore (my good Lord) with all
christian care continue your happy course in the ways of the Lord, and what
Solomon says, remember often: Hear counsel and receive instruction (meaning
from the Lord) for they shall make a man wise in time. Yea they shall so
establish a man in the eyes of the Lord, as that his seed shall inherit the
earth, and his name never be blotted out. Continue also that Christian care to
other the desolat flocks of the Lords people, that with so great and just
praise your Honor has showed of late so many ways. And amongst all, or
rather even above them all (as many special causes bind me to wish) I most
humbly and heartily beg the same to your town of Cardiffe, unable peradventure
in many things, but unwilling I hope in nothing, to deserve both favor and
furtheraunce in all causes te^ding unto good. Amongst whom your Lor. in zeal
to their good has left me, and to whom for your L. sake I vow my self if I
may do them good. Yet not more to the^, than to the whole country, and even
the very meanest member therein, they being all in general so dear unto your
Lo. as many private speeches have declared. what my power inableth me unto,
both for duty unto your H. and affection to themselves, I trust they shall
ever find in me, and as faithful an heart withal as ever had stranger
amongst them. And if your L. shall vouchsafe thereunto your Ho. and loving
assistaunce in their worldly causes when they have need, then may they say
their affections are thrice well bestowed upon your Ho. and their service due
ten thousand times, if it were more. Presently I have endeavored, both for them
and others, to lay down a brief collectio^ of such things concerning the
commandments of God, as in larger manner both before your Lo. and them were
handled. And I presume to offer the same to your L. both for my private duty,
being bound, if ever was any, to be thankful, and that also it coming
unto them under the shadow and shield of your Lo. protection, whom they so
reverence and honor, may be the more welcome and the better accepted of. For
the Christian reader else where, that shall weigh my drift, and consider the
place whereunto especially I intend it, I assure my heart of his godly and
loving acceptance, notwithstanding the matter has bin handled by more able
instruments by much, because it is not in the same manner, and the Lord may
be glorified in all men's gifts. Only therefore of your Lo. I now most humbly
beg, that with wonted favor this small travel may be accepted, and that
under your Lo. name I may leave it to the world, as a speaking witness (when I
am dead,) of my thankful heart for all your Honorable goodness to me, which
has been such, as I wish may encourage upon my speech any that ever shall be
thereunto requested to succeed him in his place, who now inioyeth it. So the
Lord of power and mercy multiply his spirit upon your Lo. with all the
blessed fruits of the same, and grant you ever that grace, that has promise
both of this life, and that which is to come, Amen. From London this 1. of
December.

Your Lordships most humble bounden to death, Geruase Babington.

To the Right worshipful Sir Edward Manxell, Sir Edward Stradling, Sir
William Harbert knights, and to M. William Matthew, and M. Tho. Lewis Esquiers;
with all other Gentlemen in Glamorgan shire that fear God: G.B. wishes
increase of the same to the benefit of the Church, and their own everlasting
comfort.
SO often as I consider (Right worshipful) our happy days under the blessed
government of a most gracious Princess, and how we are become even a wonder
as it were and an astonishment unto many Nations, for the mercies that we enjoy
by her means: so often me think even with melting hearts in a sweet
conceit, we should cast our selves down before the Lord, and make a double
vow unto him. First yt we will with perfect hearts and most willing minds know
and serve such a gracious God, as amidst so many dangerous devises of intended
overthrow to her person, so mightily preserved her Majesty, and so mercifully
has at this day set her over us, daily still dealing both with her and us
according to his old loving kindness and mercy, keeping her to us in
despite of all the caytifes on the earth. Secondly that with hand and with
heart, with body and bowels, and with estate, whatsoever the Lord shall give
us within or without us, we will honor and obey, pray for, and preserve to our
powers amongst us, so famous and renouned, yea so wonderful an instrument of
all comfort and good unto us, in respect of other Princes of the earth. But O
the sin of our souls, and the stains of our thankelesse hearts in both
these duties so due ten thousand times of us For whom we should know, we
neglect to know, as his mercies bind us, our mighty GOD and heavenly
father. And whom we should thus obey and honor, pray for, and praise God for
day and night, with very weeping and woe, that we can be no more thankful
unto her, and for her our nurcing mother, and most gracious Queen, her we
disobey in holes and in corners, (to say no worse) and dead without feeling,
not considering the blessing of her, we provoke both our God, and her gracious
heart to displeasure with us. What proof this latter has, and what vnwished
matter to furnish out a larger complaynt, I spare to speak, I rewe to think
it, there are witnesses more, than I would there were, that know it. Those
things which more beseem my pen and paper, I presume unto your worshippes
to follow a little further, and first the neglect that abounds every where to
furnishe the rooms allotted thereunto with sufficient men both for gifts and
goodwill to discharge the duties of true ministers. A thing ever commanded, a
thing ever needful, and a thing in these days of ours even above all days
required, both in thankefulnes to the Lord, and in care to have her Highness
obeyed, which arises with religion, and so both Gods mercy and her Majesty
still to remain among us. For him that serves us, and thus deals with us
from day to day, does not very sense instruct us, we must serve again, if we
will enjoy him? And is this to serve him, to retain unto ourselves the wages,
that he has provided for sufficient men, and to thrust into his cloth we care
not whom? To furnish his harvest with idle loiterers, and never to look after,
no, nor accept being offered, most painful laborers? No, no, he knows it,
that must judge it, it is not. Yea men themselves know it, if the Lord would
give feeling, and strength to defy that spirit of having, that cries within
and says, reserve it to thy self. Yet least any should pretend the
contrary, where I wish them well resolved of this point, may it be lawefull
for me, with your loving leaves something to lay down in this behalf, that I
would wish him to consider, who is not persuaded of this duty, if I were to
speak with such an one? First then I would have him view the word of God
that shall stand and judge us all, when heaven and earth shall perish. Than
the which word nothing can be more contrary to this sin, if either we
respect the time of the law, or of the Gospel. For in them both this is ever
delivered, and ever bet upon, that the people of God should be taught, and men
chosen out in ability such, as the people might require the law at their
mouths, though the measure and manner were diverse as it pleased God to give
his gifts unto them. Which thing ever drew with it then, and at this day
still truly does infer, a godly regard, and even a necessary conscience,
when any place is void, by the laws we live under, allotted to that use, to
furnish it as sufficiently as we possibly can and may for that use.
Otherwise by us it comes to pass that the people are not taught. Now this
offense grows either by negligence, or by covetousness. By negligence when
(not weighing or feeling the sin of it) we are drawn by affection, or
kindred, or other men's suits, to bestow sufficient places upon insufficient
persons. By covetousness, when to reserve a portion to our selves, we do the
like. Both which are grievous offenses both against God and our country, and in
the word very plainly condemned. If the first be the cause, then crave I most
heartily the consideration of these, and the like conclusions. The Lord
threatens to the watchman death that warns not his people, and says he will
have their blood at his hand, Ezekiel. 3.
because he did not cry. Now by me has been put in such an one very
carelessly and negligently for affection or such like, yt though he would yet
for want of ability can not cry, and alas how then can I want my portion in ye
wrath of the Lord that is threatened against all such default? Secondly it is
love in the minister to his God, to feed his sheep. John. 21.15.
So is it assuredly in the patron to cause them to be fed. Contrariwise it is
want of love in the minister, Tit. 2.
if he do not feed, and is it not as much in the patron, if by his default it
come to pass? Thirdly it is a great fault we think to give the calling to an
unworthy one, and is it no fault to give the living to such an one? Thus then
we see how the word quickneth our consciences in this behalf if we be not
dead. And a number mo reasons might yet be brought, if I should make a treatise
in a preface. Only this one mo I must needs remember which me think should
awake any man alive in this matter. In ye sixth of Mark it is said of Christ,
that going out and seeing a great multitude of people gathered together, Mark.
6.
he had compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a
sheephearde, and he went out and taught them many things. And in the Greek
it is more vehement, expressing as it were an aching of his heart, as we call
it, or a yearning of his bowels, to see so pitiful a sight, as so many people
without a teacher. Upon which notable place I have used in my self to make two
conclusions. First a comfort, then a fear. My comfort is this, that he which
mourns to see his people want the benefit of his word, will give his people
his word if they seek it and wish it, and where he has vouchsafed it
already, there continue it, bless it, and give it power if we pray. For
otherwise how should it pain him to see it wanting? My fear is this, that
if his heart ache to see his sheep deprived of a shephearde, he will assuredly
be revenged even in great wrath of them that are the causers of it. And for
Christ his sake let it be considered. For as we live, we may not always
look to laugh, if we make our God to mourn. Thus then if negligence be the
cause that a country is not furnished with some able ministers, me think we
may awake our hearts by the word of the Lord, and weying it well, receive
from him some better feeling in so great a matter. But if covetousness be the
cause, and we greatly given to sequester that benefit to our selves, saving
only some portion to one to bear the name, then mark we again the witness
also of the same scriptures against us even in this. And to save mine own
labor, my judgment being young, hear I beseech you the proofs and reasons
against this sin, by a godly and grave Divine entreating of this matter,
laid down unto my ^ands. First he alleges against it yt de^criptio^ of a
wicked Prince in ye book of Samuel, amongst whose evils this is named one, 1.
Sam. 8.15.
that he will take the tithes and give them to his servants. Concluding
thereon that if the king might not take the tithes to himself, because then
they were due to the priests by Gods own order and commandment for the
mainteinance of his service: surely no private man now may do it, so long as
by authority the same are established for the ministers mainteynance and
support. Secondly if in the law he was accursed that removed the merestone of
the field, Deuteronomy. 27.17.
because he did wrong in succession to diverse: ten thousand times more is the
remoouing of the ministers living subject to the Lords wrath, because both
presently, and successively it is hurtful to a number more, and in a greater
matter. Thirdly by the Prophet Malachie the Lord complayneth in express
terms, Mala. 3.8.
that the taking away of the tithes and offerings from that end, that they
were appointed unto, was a robbing and spoiling of him, yea even such a
spoiling, as he would visit with a great and grievous curse. Now if it were
so then, all the world must confess, it is no less now, so long as authority
ratifieth this means to maintain the ministers: and therefore assuredly will
have a sharp revenge. Fourthlie in ye gospel ye Jews allege it unto Christ
as an argument of love to the^ and their Nation in the Centurion, that he had
built them a synagogue, Luke 7.5.
plainly insinuating yt they would have judged the contrary, if he had
spoiled their Synagogue of his mainteynance. And Christ reprehendeth not this
conclusion. Fifthly if David ye king standing in so great distress for water,
1. Chro. 11.16.
yet would not drink of the water of Bethleem, because it was gotten with the
danger of some few men's temporal lives: should it not teach a great
conscience to any man in the world, ye tastes of God and his truth, and hops
for comfort in any other world, how he (not needing peradventure, but
abundantly provided for otherwise by the mercy of his God) drinks and eats
yt which is gotten with apparent hazard of eternal life ^ro^ the bodies and
souls, God knows, ^f how many? Truly (rightworshipful) it should, 1. Cor.
9. Gala. 6. etc.
and the power of hell is not able ^o deny it. But such is the meat and drink,
or other mainteinance whatsoever, that we reap by the Church, when it is due
^o an other, for an other purpose, and ^herfore you know the conclusion. Sixt^y
all those places in the scriptures commanding and inioyning the world to a
maintenance, and sufficient mainteinance (...) able teachers in it, do
plainly prove (...) sin of this, to sequester to our selves ^he livings
allotted to the^, unless some other equivalent, or sufficient way be taken ^or
them by authority. Again, Possidon. in vita Aug. 10.24.
if ye grave and learned father. S. Austen was so high^ie offended, and so
sharply rebuked a gentleman in his time, for taking away ^is own gift, which
before he had given ^o the mainteina^ce of his Church: would ^ee not have bin a
severe censor against ^he^ think we yt should have taken away what neither
they nor any of theirs ever gave? If the stories so commend the noble Emperor
Constantine for co^ma^ding goods taken from the Churches to be restored to them
again, would they not have blotted him as well, Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 5. Tit.
Liuius, lib. 42.
if he himself had been a spoiler of the same? If the Romans so dealt with
Q. Fuluius, for uncovering a part of Iunoes temple to coue^ an other temple in
Rome with the sam^ tiles, that they misliked him, condem^ned him, told him
Pirrhus or Anniba^ would not have done so, told him (...) had been too much
to have done to private man's house, an inferior plac^ to a temple, and in
conclusion force^ him to send home those tiles again may not such as garnish
either the^selue^ or their houses with Church livings, an leave neither teacher
nor almost tile^ where both should be well, consider b^ it, what this people
would have though^ of them, if they had lived there? An^ what is the concept of
a people pro^phane, in respect of theirs that know^ and serve the Lord? These
then and d^^uers other reasons, which for fear (...) length I pretermit,
alleges he the^^ against this foul offense. Only o^^ place more I must
needs remember, an^ it is a good one, to wit, how Balthas^ ^^ng of Babylon,
himself, his Princes, ^^s wives and concubines drinking and ^asting in the
vessels of gold taken from ^^e Temple, even then espied the fin^^rs of an hand
writing upon the ^^all before his face, that his kingdom ^^od had numbered
and finished, weigh^^ him in the balaunce, and found him ^^o light, and
therefore divided and given ^^s government away to the Meades ^^d Persians.
At which sight his coun^^naunce changed, his thoughts were ^^oubled, his
loins loosed, and his knees ^^ote the one against the other. O Lord ^^at we
could think of this hand, ^^d fear the sentence of this writing as ^^t we
eat the corn of the barn, or ^^lace our selves with any maintenance
^hatsoeuer taken of our selves without authority from the Temple. But ^m too
long. For mine own part, I ^aue ever contented my self with this ^^ason, that
that which is enjoyed without warrant either of Gods law or ^ans law, is
unjustly inioyed and will ^ssuredlie one way or other have a ^^ourge: but such
is the fruition of all ecclesiastical living, not altered from tha^ use by the
magistrate, therefore unjustly inioyed, and to our assured punishment Now that
it has neither warrant of God nor man, it appears. For the scripture you
have heard against it: and touching the laws of men I have had it also from
the learned in them, yt they condemn it For to begin with the common law of
thi^ land, first therein it is true, yt an aduouso^ in respect of ye Patron is
accounted n^ Assets to yield a recompense, because it i^ not valuable. Secondly
the writ of qua^re impedit for ye patron has these word in it: quod permittat
presentari ad ecclesian quae vacat and ad indubitatam spectat dona^tione^,
which word ( donation) est libera di^spositio. Thirdly this law says that the
patron has but Ius Donationis, and the ordinary ius admissionis: and
therefore co^^pelleth the patron to bestow it in a time or else to loose it by
lapse, apparantlie therein denying him any leave to retain it either in whole
or part for ever to himself. Fourthlie it does affirm very pretelie and
significantly that the true right and simple propriety of the Church (...)
neither in patron, person, nor ordinary, ^ither in any man living, but that
the ^e simple of it is always in suspense, and (...) the very words of law
are ( in nubibus) ^^ording thereby this good reason against ^^is sin, that it
is a great wrong for a ^an to make a commodity to himself (...) that which
law cannot find he has, (...) is kept and preserved by law as far ^^m man's
possessing, as the clouds are ^^stant from our handling. Fifthly this ^^we
says further, that in time of voca^^on both the fee and the freeholde of the
church is in suspense, and in nubibus, and ^^at then though both patron and
ordi^^rie with some consent will by their ^^ant charge the Church with any rent
(...) pension, that yet notwithstanding the ^^me charge is no otherwise of
force a^^inst the Incumbent, but that he ^ust perforce hold himself
contented, ^^ee will have it, seeing he cannot have ^^e benefice otherwise than
by the pre^^ntation of the one and admission of the ^^her: that is, in plain
words it allows ^^t ye alienation of any profits from the in^^bent, though
both of the^ consent. Sixthly when this common law, thus hating this evil we
speak of, was by the corruption of men abused in this point, and patrons
usurping upon the Church be^gan to make gain by Simonie of their aduousons and
presentations, it was an^ is provided by statutes and positive law with a
pain and penalty therein appoin^ted, that if any incumbent come in b^
Simonie, then ipso facto the Church i^ void, and all bills and bands and deed
for the performance of any such pens^^ons be also void. Much more could the
learned yet allege even out of th^^ common law against this sin I know i^
they were to handle it, but this may suf^fice in steed of more, where
conscienc^ is made of offending laws and the god^lie government of a Realm.
Now for the Ecclesiastical laws, if I shall als^ note a little thence,
manifest it is, and true^lie very worthy marking how strongl^^ they also
stand against this vice we speak of. For first by the very name they give to
patrons they overthrow i^ tearming them aduocatos ecclesiarum, v^^cedominos,
Custodes, Gardianos, etc. a^ being names of fidelity, government and careful
preservation of the Church. For the word Patronatus does not signify Dominium
in Ecclesia, but as one notes very well, seruitii sollicitudine^. It is also
called Gratia, quod ex gratia vel gratis conferri debeant beneficia: also
aduocatia, because they should defend and tender the estate of the Churches
where of they be Patrons, as advocates do the causes of their clientes, and so
for the other names mentioned even now before. And hereupon the law gives
them all due and possible reverence even as masters from their servants, and
Fathers from their children. It gives them pre-eminence both in the Church and
abroad, in sitting, standing, going and such like. It is provided likewise that
if these patrons or their children fall into decay, By right of patronage
arises to the patron Honos Onus, and vtilitas, write the Canonists. What
utility, you s^^.
they shall be moderately maintained at the discretion of the Ordinary by the
Church goods, whereof they are patrons: and this is the only profit they are
to take of the Church. They may lay no service nor bondage upon the Church.
Tenetur etiam patronus protegere eccclesiam, and reparare, si minitetur ruinam,
and de bono sacerdote prouidere: that is, the patron also is bound to protect
the Church, and to repair it, if it be like to fall to ruin, and carefully to
provide a good minister. Mark it. Nam tus patronatus, etc. For the patronage
says the law is suspended, if the patron present an unworthy one, yea his
right, for ever by that law, as some think, passes to the Bishop, and he
shall never present more: but if not so, yet at the lest he shall be deprived
of that turn if he present an unfit man, even by the law in this land in
force. Furthermore in these laws there are so many notable rules and as it
were axioms or principles touching the duty of patrons, as might with great
profit and pleasure be noted, if I had not already too much passed the bonds
of a preface in a desire to prevail something with some in this matter. As
Patronus non potest presentare seipsum. A patron cannot present himself, as
God knows now many do in effect. Again debet presentare gratis, alias est
Simonia. He must present freely, or else it is Simonie, and no excommunicate
person or Simonist shall be a patron to present. Patronus non est vere Dominus
Ecclesiae etc. The Patron is not the Lord of the Church, but as it were an
advocate and defender, neither may he administer the goods of the Church. Ius
patronatus nullum ius proprietatis patrono tribuit. The right of patronage
gives no propriety to the patron. A notable saying. Again patronus facere
potest and debet, etc. the patron both may and ought to take heed that the
fruits of the Church do not go to any other use. Also that permission of
the Ordinary by this law to take any oath if he will of every incumbent for
his clear entrance, if there were nothing else in the world against it, does
strike a blow to the souls of them that so offend, and that a great one. C.
ex literis. C. de iure. C. cum saeculum.

Extra de iure Patronatus.


What should I note that which yet is most worthy noting in this law, to
wit, that Venditio iurispatronatus prohibita est, nisi vniuersitas quaedam
praediorum, cui hoc ius accedat, distrahatur. That is, that the right of
patronage may neither be bought nor soulde, nor pass in special words in
any alienation, but in general only with the land whereunto it is
appertayning. For the said law admits no patronage in gross. Or those
express words again, donatio and permutatio permittitur, not venditio I
warrant you. What should I note the most exact streytnesse of these laws in
making the very mind of the patron coveting reward for the gift of his
Church a Simonie before God which they call mentalem Simoniam? With a number
such like notable rules and places. So that we see even these laws also
detest it, and condemn it. And now then to conclude this matter, if I think
there is a God, and a day of judgment to come for me, and all my doings, what
should my heart minister to maintain me in this evil, when God and man be
against it? But why should I be thus tedious in this matter? Truly that it
might appear, if God so will, how far the corruptions wherein some sleep as
in no offenses, differ from the laws of God and man, and from synceritie of
former times and ages. But again, why unto you, (right worshipful) should I
write so much? Truly that by your godly care, conscience, and endeavor (having
the places that you have) this great wound of your country may by little and
little be relieved, and better provision daily made for the winning of that
good, that brings with it ten thousand blessings promised by the Lord.
Which care and christian consideration (as places fall) I most heartily crave in
the name of Jesus Christ, unto whose service I am called, both for his glory,
your own discharge, and the benefit of that place which I wish may ever be as
the blessed of the Lord. I can not be thought to plead any benefit for my
self, because I want the tongue, and therefore I am more boulde. But now I
cease to follow it any further. The second thing that I greatly rewe our want
in, is the careful and good bringing up of children in learning and virtue
whilst they are fit. Which how it wants for want of schools amongst us,
would God I saw no more, than I had ability (without charge to any) to
redress. But what wants in me, abounds in you, and might it please the
Lord, to give will to your ability, in this also to promote his glory, and
to benefit thousands in your country, truly his heart has mercy to accept
it kindly, and his hand has blessings to reward it richly. Other things
also yet mo there be, which these happy days of peace would have us careful
of. But some other times shall serve to name them, and increase of grace stir
up to do them. For this time therefore I leave off to trouble your worships any
further, beseeching you most humbly and heartily to consider the mercies of the
Lord which we all enjoy, by his word, by her Majesty, by most happy helps
about her, by freedom of our consciences, by plenty and peace, by health and
great comfort a thousand ways, and in thankfulness for them all, to vouchsafe
your assisting hearts and hands to these duties ever, that may long provoke
the Lord our God to be thus good and gracious to us. Of which number are these
that I now have named, the preaching of his word, and ^he careful bringing
up of children in ^ood letters. For my self I can do no ^ore, either for my
duty to his honora^le Lo. to whom I owe so much, or for ^ll the goodness
wherewith your selves and many others in the country so lo^ingly and liberally
have encouraged ^e, but vow my self to you at your ^irection with any pains
in my power whilst I live to do you service. And that I do with as desirous
an heart to ^he good of every one, as ever had ^^ranger in the place. The
Lord in mer^ie now multiply his spirit upon you, ^^ue your help to me, and
confirm my ^aines to you, that his name may be ^^owen upon earth amongst us,
and ^^s saving health in everlasting comfort ^^ioyed of us. London the first of
De^ember.

Your worshippes bounden in the Lord ever, Geruase Babington.

To the godly readers, and especially to them amongst whom this author and my
self exercise our function.
IT has pleased God (good Reader) to use my ministry, not in one, but in more
places in this manner, still to succeed the author of this treatise, to water
what he has planted, to labor in the ^aruest, whereof he cast the seed, to
seed, and ^urther to bring on those, of whom he was the spiritual father, and
by the immortal seed of gods word first begat them; and still to enter upon
his ^abours, and go forward with his beginninges: Always to my great help,
and comfort (God ^nowing otherwise my wantes and weakness) ^he easilier to
wade there, where he had broken ^he ye, the plainlier to go on, and lead
others, where he had beaten the path, and more readily ^o build upon, and
rear up, where he had laid ^he foundation, and squared the frame, and with
less pains to keep agoing that which he had moved, and set agoing. God
having dealt thus mercifully with me in my ministry, and by the hand of this
author thus helped me; I thought my self in duty bound, in respect of this
course which God has taken with me, (and especially by his means) to give to
thee some testimony of this his work, for thy further profit, and withal to
him some witness of my good will. Supposing my self in respect of the former
cause, as fit to do this as another, and knowing ye effect and having reaped
ye profit of these his labors, and daily reaping it, being, and abiding in the
place where this seed was cast, I thought I ought to do as willingly and as
readily as any other. If for no other cause, yet to commend this especially
to them, to bring forth further fruit among whom it was first sown, and in
whose hearts I doubt not, but it took root now long since. An especial
commendatio^ of this work, if I would take that way, might be drawn from the
workman of it most plentifully, from his stock, and kindred, education and
such like; which because it is rare fruit on such trees, to some may make it
seem the better: but I pass over these shows and outward leafes to deck it
with, it having enough in it self to commend it, least if I should long speak
of this color, and grace, I should speak the less of him, or of the thing it
self, minding not to speak much of either, and but little in all. And as I
pass the stock from whence this graft was taken, so will I not stand to show
you where it was ingrafted and planted, in what university, in what College,
what root he took, what sufficient time he grew, how he spread there, and with
what liking, which would make this fruit to many not without cause to realish
the better. But to come to that which comes nearer to the bringing forth, and
producing of this work, when he was first planted by a fellowshippe in that
famous College of the holy, and undivided Trinity, in Cambridge, wholly, or
most especially consecrated to the study of him, and his knowledge, whose name
it bears: so straight he took himself to that study whereby he might be
most serviceable to gods Church, and some trial first had of his guiftes, as
it were aduowed himself a man to ye Lord, to serve in his tabernacle: Not long
after, that betimes he might begin to be profitable and be profitable long; God
touching his heart, he took on him the ministry and so mercifully God dealt
with him, yt with all he placed him in one certain Charge, not far from his
College; that he might have where to sow, be still at hand to sow, and
know both what, and how to sow, and to his comfort see the growing up, and
fruit of it. Now having there painefully labored by the space almost of two
years, and seen the effect of that promise, with what measure ye mete, 4.
Mark. 24.
shall be measured to you again, and unto them that have shall more be given,
that though he cast in with full hand, and ever a zealous heart to do good, in
a continued course; yet God so blessed, that the harvest ouerabounded his
labor, and exceeded his hope; and that little town was a candle light, set on
a candlestick, and a tower upon the top of a hill. When God to his comfort
had thus encouraged him in his law, he by great means calls him from this
little town (where he had no pastoral charge) to a greater charge, and in
respect of the change, and dignity of the place whither he was called, it was
as it were from Tecon to Bethel, from preaching in some vplandish, and countery
town ^n the wilderness of Judea, to Herod's court, or as ^ndeede in many
respects, it well may be said, by a Sergius Paulus unto his house. When he
had there continued now a whole year and more, to the good reformation, and
great benefitte of that most honorable family; it pleased God, that his
Sergius Paulus leaving as it were Nazareth, went and dwelt for a time in
Capernaum, Math. 4.13.14.
which is near the sea, in the borders of Zabulon, and Nepthalin, beyond
Jordan, in Gallilie of the Gentilles, out of the borders of Palestina. I hope I
may without offense allude unto that place, in all points it so fitly
answers: where a while abiding, by his means, God wrought, that the people
which before in comparison sat in darkness saw great light, and to them
which sat in the region and shadow of death, light was risen up. Of this
place, and this people, he having yet further compassion, they being as sheep
without a shepherd, wandering in the mountains, and the harvest there great,
and the laborers few; the Lord moved his heart, to remain there, and
wrought this in the heart of his most honorable Lord; himself to forgo him,
and leave him there, for the further increase of God his Church, and for the
tender love he bare, and good he would to this people; where what pains has
been taken, and good has been done, it is by more witnessed than (...) need
to make relation* and this work, and some others of this authors, since that
time come forth give open testimony, though I hold my tongue I would not have
said thus much of the man, (...) the places themselves, of which I have spoken
were not ready to say and set down more tha^ I have said; and this have I
said that God in him may be glorified, they among whom he lives for ^im
thankful: and to admonish him what pro^eedinges these beginninges require.
The work (...) self, might many ways beside be commended, ^he matter, and
principal ground of it is the ^awe of God, brought from the highest heaven,
given by God himself to his servant Moses, with ^hunders and lightninges, 19.
Exodus 16. etc. 18. etc.
and the sound of the ^rumpe exceeding loud, on mount Sinay, the mountain
all on smoke; the Lord discending upon it in fire etc. and all the mount
trembling exceedingly, given to all the Israel of God, aper^ayning to all men,
containing infinite blessings ^or the hearers, and doers of it, and
innumerable and intolerable curses, and plagues, for the breaker ^hereof,
either by negligence or contempt. This principal, not laid upon with any
borrowed col^ours to hide the ground: but the workmanship and ingrauing of
it, is out of the matter it self, so that still the ground, and marble
thereof may appear, and dealt with all in this manner fitly answering to the
subject matter, delivered as it were in thunder, with a spirit as hot as
fire, zealous with judgment, setting an edge by received strength even upon
this rasier. The place also, and persons, where, and for whom, this work was
both made, and uttered, may add much grace, and strength unto it. In a most
honorable family, and for it, and with good liking, and profitte there: and
commonly men like that the better, which likes them well, and that which
profits such profits many. If it wette the mountains, it will water the
valleys: and if it be sweet ointment for the head, it cannot be but
acceptable to the re^^ of the parts, and to the borders of the garment. The
dew from Hermon, and the mountains of Sion, trickleth down sweeteli^ upon
the valleys about. And if this make i^ profitable to others, because delivered
here* then must it be most profitable to this family it self, for which it
was made, and first for it alone, and now is by me especially to it commended.
It is fruit of your own ground, the voice of your own sheephearde, the
sound of your proper trumpet, and therefore you must both know it, and like
it the better, and thereby be warned the sooner. It is a lesson, which already
you have learned, and therefore in it may and must be more ready than others.
It is not now first commended to you, but again recommended to your eyes,
which heretofore has been sent by your ears, to your minds, and to your
hearts, by a great vehemency, and zeal of spirit, wherewith this author
abounds. Which although so much, and with such life, and moving, will not
now altogether appear in this writing, as when it was with the lively voice,
and earnest spirit delivered, because that GOD promises to that, the more
especial blessing, yet shall you easily see, that it is a work coming out of
the same shop; a stream flowing from the same fountain; a print stamped,
with the same seal; and sparckles flying out of the same flame. Which the more
they shall inflame you, which ought most to inflame you, you having been
^^readie with them set on fire, the more they ^^all heat others, and by your
example be ^^ofitable to all, which is that the author wishes, ^^d I his
welwiller heartily pray for, to him who (...) the able worker of it: to whose
especial grace (...) good reader) in reading this work, to direct ^^ee, I
commend thee.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, Abraham Conham.

Certain profitable Questions and Answers upon the Commandments.
The first Question.

Has there ever been in the world amongst men some Religion?

Ans. Yea, for to make all men inexcusable, the Lord has ingrafted in the
mind of every one a secret sure persuasion, that there is a God: who as he
made man, so is he of man to be served and obeyed. By which secret persuasion
it came to pass, that there was never from the beginning of the world any
Region, Town, or House, wherein was not some Religion.

Que. Then is not Religion a policy of man to keep people in obedience?

Ans. No, it were horrible to think so, for it is plain that religion is of
nature and by nature, though true religion be not.

Que. How prove you that?

Ans. First, very reason teaches it. For what policy could ever have made
man the Lord of all Creatures, fall down and worship the vilest creatures,
unless there had been something before in his nature to lead him to it?
Secondly, it is plainly proved in the example of Pilate, John. 19.8.
who as soon as he heard that Christ was God, even by very nature feared and
stood in awe of him. And by the example of Gamaliel, with diverse others. Acts.
5.39.


Que. Seeing then that there has been ever in the world some Religion,
because it is natural, whether is there but one, or many?

Ans. There can be but one true Religion, but of false there have been and are
diverse, and ever will be, till Christ come again unto judgment.

Que. What false Religion can you name?

Ans. There has been and is false re^igion in the Church, Hist. Magdeburg.
and out of the Church. In the Church, Popery. Out of the Church, the religion
of the Jews, of the Gentiles, and of the Turks.

Que. What is the Religion of the ^ewes?

Ans. They obstinately denying that Christ is yet come, worship God still
with sacrifices, burnt offerings, and other ceremonies of Moses law.

Que. What the Gentiles?

Ans. Their Religion is a confused worshipping of all things: for so we ^eade
in the 14. of the Acts of the Apostles, in the 17. and in the 19. And the Poet
says of them thus: Quicquid humus, pelagus, coelum mirabile gignit,
Id dixere deos, colles, freta, flumina, flammas.


That is, What so the earth, the sea, the heaven does wonderful beget,
As hills, seas, floods, and flames of fire for Gods that have they set.


Que. What the Turks?

Ans. Their religion is a mass of all heresies, denying Christ to be God, and
vainly worshipping with man's devises.

Que. What is true Religion?

Ans. True religion is the true worshipping of God, and the keeping of his
commandments.

Que. Whence is it to be learned?

Ans. Only out of the written word of God, and not out of man's head or
writings.

Que. How is that proved?

Ans. Both by Scripture and reason sufficient.

Que. What Scripture?

Ans. Esaias 29.13. verse, God threateneth to plague them, because their fear or
religion toward him was taught by the precept of men. Michah the 4.2. He
shall teach us, and we will walk in his paths. Daniel the 9.10. Daniel
confesses that because the people obe^ed not Gods voice, therefore al their
worship was sin.

Que. What reason?

Ans. By many might it be proved, but these may suffice.

Que. How is it to be learned out of the word?

Ans. By hearing it preached, by reading it our selves, by prayer, by
conference one with another, by temptations, and by this exercise of
Catechizing.

For the other, they are usual means in deed, but this manner of Catechizing
it is a new devise not known to our old Fathers.

No, it is no new devise, but an old custom and ancient, begun as soon as
ever God had a Church, and continued ever since.

Que. How may that be proved?

Ans. First, in the fourth of Genesis i^ appears, Genesis 4.
that even Adam the first man used it to his Sons, teaching them to worship
God with sacrifices, o^ else they could never have done it. A^gaine we see
Abraham used it to his household, Genesis 18.
and God commended him for it. For if he had not by this exercise w^^
instructed his servants before, would^ they ever have suffered him to cut
a^way their foreskinnes? In many place^ also beside did God flatly command al^
parents to use it to their children. I^ the 6. to the Hebrews mention is mad^
of the parts of ye Catechism then used the ancient Fathers have carefully
tra^uailed in this exercise, and all well ordere^ Churches have ever had their
Cate^chismes, which we also have and read therefore no new devise.

Que. What be the parts of the Catechism?

Ans. The parts of the Catechism are these two generaly, doctrine and
discipline, and under doctrine these four contained. to wit The law of God, a
sum whereof is in the ten Commandments. Faith, a sum whereof is in the 12.
Articles. Prayer, a form whereof is the Lords Prayer. The Sacraments.
Of these parts in order afterward: Now to some questions in your book. And
first,

Que. What is the cheifest thing which every one ought to be most careful of,
so long as they live?

An. Every one ought to be most careful of these two points, first and
chiefly how to be saved in the day of judgment, before Gods judgment seat,
and so to come to life everlasting. Secondly how to live according to Gods
holy will during our life, in which two points wholly stands the glory of
God, so much as of man ought to be sought for.

Que. How may the first be proved?

The first reason drawn of the vanity of all things.
Ans. The great vanity of all earthly things, which men so hunt after, does
show, that our care should not be so much of these matters, as it is, but
rather how to have our souls saved, when all these shall have their end. For
consider eue^ the chiefest desires of men severally, and see how in the
attaining of them there is no stayed comfort, and yet often do men fail after
much endeavor, and not attain to them.

Que. What chief desires of men can you name unto me?

Ans. Mirth and joy, a light and a cheerful heart is greatly wished, Mirth
and joy.
and sought for of all men, by Music, by iesters, by sportes, and plays, by
much cost and many means as they can, and are able: neither is this simply to
be condemned in all: yet hear what sentence the spirit of God has given of
it, by the mouth of his servant, who tried the same, and let his experience
be our knowledge. I said to my heart, says he, go to now, Ecclesi. 2.1.
I will prove thee with joy, therefore take thou pleasure in pleasant things,
and behold this al^o is vanity: I said of laughter thou art mad, and of joy,
what is this, that thou do? And in another place. 7.4.
Better it is to go into the house of mourning, than of feasting, because this
is the end of all men, and the living shall lay it to his heart. Anger is
better than laughter, for by a sad look the heart is made better. The heart of
the wise is in the house of mourning: but the heart of fools is in the house
of mirth.

Mill parit luctus mortalibus vna voluptas.
For every joy that man does here possess,
A thousand woes his mind do daily press.
Secondly to rake up riches also in this world, and to possess great wealth,
Riches.
it is a thing endeavored almost of all. Happy is he and wise accounted, who
can fastest attain unto it, yet hear and note the speech of James amongst
numbers more to the same end. James. 5.1.
Go to now says he, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that
shall come upon you, your riches are corrupt, and your garments motheaten, your
gold and silver is cancred, and the rust of them shall witness against you,
and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. To build and inhabit great and
goodly houses how many men bewitched with vanity, Buildings.
delight in it, and with much care and cost apply themselves unto it? Yet see
they, or may see the speech of Solomon upon experience saying, I have made my
great works, I have built me houses, I have planted me vineyards, I have made
me gardens and orchards, and planted in them trees of all fruit, and so forth.
Yea even whatsoever mine eyes desired, I withhelde it not from them, neither
withdrew I my heart from any joy, then I looked on all my works that my hands
had wrought, and on the travel that I had labored to do, and behold all is
vanity, and vexation of the spirit, and there is no profit under the Sun.
When it shall be said to them as it was to that purposing builder in the
Gospel, Thou fool this night shall they take away thy soul, Luke. 12.20.
then may it also follow and fitly be demanded, whose shall these stately houses
be? Thus either may they know the vanity of their dealing, but yet will not,
or else do they know it, but regard it not.

Apparel again is another of the raging desires of many. Apparel.
Even a world it is to see how all, as dead, do taste no sin in it, but
spend and spare not what possibly may be gotten to bestow on it, yet what
beginning had it? Was it not then invented, when man had sinned, grieuouslie
offended his God, and cast himself away both body and soul? Seeing then in
our integrity it was not used, but after sin, bestowed on man to hide his
shame withal, what may it ever beat into us, but our rebellion against the
Lord, our sin and cursed disobedience? How should the sight of it and use
of it humble us, and not puff us up, seeing it plainly tells us, we are not
as we were when no apparel was worn, and yet no shame thereby? Were it not
monstrous pride, if a redeemed prisoner conditionally, that he should ever
wear an halter, should wax proud of his halter? Man's apparel is the badge
of a sinner, yea of a condemned and cursed sinner, and therefore the pride of
it and delight in it, no doubt very monstrous before the Lord, and hateful.
If every silken suit and gorgeous gown in England shrouded under it a saved
soul, and a sanctified body in the sight of God, O happy then England of all
the nations under heaven. But if under such guarded garments, may, and does
lodge a body and soul abhorred of the Lord, that in the day of wrath shall
find no favor: then is it not apparel, that ought to be sought after, but in
the day of judgment how we may be saved. Credit and favor with the world.
What should I say of favor and credit with great estates in the world, of
countenance and authority? O how do men desire it, and seek it sewe and
serve for it, their care both day and night is how to attain the fastest to
it, and yet what more tickle than the state hereof, if GOD gave us hearts to
mark it? For how soon faded the credit of David with his waver n^ Master
Saul? 1. Kings. 18.
How suddenly and quickly changed the liking of that king into cruel hatred
of a faithful servant and son in Law? Haman as it were to day, Hester. 7.
set at the Kings table, where none but the King and Queen were, the next day
quite out of favor, and hanged up full high. What credit had Joseph with his
master, Gene. 39.
when he committed all things to him that ever he had, saving his wife, to be
at his direction? Yet even in a moment without cause falsely slaundered, all
credit lost, and he clapped close up in prison. Many such examples has the
word, and all histories, and therefore truly said he it, whosoever said it,
as the Counter, so is the Courtier, for that stands even now for a thousand
pounds, and by and by through a little remove, but for a halfepenie, and so
he, to day in all glory, to morrow in little or none. Yet not more the
Courtier, than even every man in his place and service, to day trusted, to
morrow suspected, to day loved, to morrow misliked, to day with desire
entertained and made of, to morrow as needelesse cast off and contemned. Fickle
therefore is the worldly favor, and greater good there is for men to seek
after.

Great matches in marriage for their children, Marriages.
another of the daily desires of worldly men. This they seek, this they covet,
this day and night they beat their heads about. Yet daily examples be before
their faces of sorrow and torment not to be expressed, growing to parents by
such proud and greedy attempts, beside the continual grief, that son or
daughter so bestowed often rises and goes to bed withal. Therefore I say, to
go no further, since these usual desires of men in this world are often not
attained unto to their liking, though greatly labored for, and yet if they be
attained even in great measure, have no certain or sure comfort in them, but
all the pleasure in them, and ^y them quickly fades away, strongly ^t
proves, that our chief care should not be of these things, but rather what
^ur case shall be in another world, when al these things shall have their end,
which ^s the matter I have rehearsed the^ for. An other proof of the same may
this be, the revealed will of God the Lord testifies, he would have all men
saved, The second reason to prove that our chief care should be how to be
saved.
and ^ome to the knowledge of his truth, he would not the^ death of a sinner,
etc. therefore unless we also set our care to the ^ame end, namely how we may
be ^aued in the day of judgment, we oppose our selves not only against our
^wne good, but even against the Lords will we strive with our God, and we
shall surely reap the reward of such, ^s rob him of his creatures.

Thirdly the horror of hell, and condemnation, prove, The third.
that our care to be saved should be great. For what mean those fearful
names of hell, of prison, chains of darkness, the lake burning with fire and
brimstone, the death, pitch and brimstone, weeping and gnashing of teeth, the
worm that never dies, the fire that never goes out, with a number such like,
I say what mean they, or why has the spirit of GOD set them down, but to
strike a terror into us of damnation, and consequently thereupon a true care to
be saved?

The fourth.
Fourthly the unspeakable joys of heaven, that unmeasurable and endless
comfort, that there shall be had, with all the children o^ GOD, Patriar^hes,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, yea with the Lord himself, and all his Angels,
with Christ our Savior and Lamb slain for us, who shall wipe all tears from
our eyes, does cry upon us with shriking sound, now while we have time, to
use our time to see mercy, and seek mercy, to embrace it, and take it
offered to such good unto us, and never in security, passing our opportunity,
to be causes that then we shall hear these words, Depart ye wicked into
endless woe. What an honor would I think it, if the Prince passing by among
the great multitude, should spy me out, call me to him, embrace me, speak
kindly to me, take me with him, place me by him, and so forth? How would my
heart dance hereat, and all men talk of my good hap? Now is the passing of a
mortal Prince on earth like the coming of Jesus Christ in the clouds?

Is the honor they can give, comparable to that the Lord of Lords shall give
to his elect? O my heart feels what my pen cannot write, there is no
comparison betwixt the persons, the places, the preferments, and therefore if
the one so joy me, that for it I would take any pains, thrice dead is my
heart within me, if to obtain the other it be not careful.

Lastly, The fifth.
the examples of care continual and great ever in Gods children how they might
serve him, and please him, that hereafter they might sit with him, and never
part from him, ought mightily to persuade us to be like unto them in this
endeavor, their labors, their watchings, their sufferings, all shot but at
this end, the glory of the Lord, and their own salvation, and how great
were they? What speeches of desire, even above all treasure, to be saved in
the great day, have they uttered? And shall we not follow them? God forbid.
Thus therefore proved unto us is the first point of a Christian man and woman's
care, namely that it ought to be this, how they should be saved in the day of
judgment, and so come to life everlasting.

Que. How is the second point proved unto us, namely that in the mean time,
so long as we live in this world, we ought to be careful to live according
to Gods holy will?

Ans. Surely it is proved very strongly unto us both by our election,
creation, redemption, justification and vocation, if we will mark them. For
why has the Lord elected us to eternal joy in Christ Jesus? That we might
conclude liberty thereon to sin at our pleasure, Our election proves it.
as many wicked spirits reason? No no. But let the Apostle be judge and tell
us why, who says: Ephesians. 1.4.
He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should
be holy and without blame before him in love. So says he of our creation
also, Our creation proves it.
that we are the Lords workmanship created in Christ Jesus to good works,
Ephesians. 2.10.
which GOD has ordained that we should walk in them. And of our redemption
Luke plainly speaks, Our redemption proves it.
that we are delivered out of the hands of our enemies, Luke. 1.
that we should serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
life. Our justification proves it.
Our justification has ever joined with it inseparably the grace of
^anctification, and they cannot be parted. For how shall we, says the
Apostle, Romans 6.2.
that are dead to sin live yet therein? and so forth, as follows in the
place. Lastly of our vocation the Apostle Peter says thus, As he that has
called is holy, so be you holy in all manner of conversation. So that we see
thereby all these means proved unto us, that we ought as long as we live to
be careful of this, that we behave our selves according to the will of the
Lord, which is the second point whereof in your question ye demanded some
confirmation.

Que. But how can we know we are discharged before Gods judgment seat?

Ans. Your book answers you, that we can never know how we be discharged
before the judgment seat of God, until such time as we know our own
miserable estates by reason of the greatness of our sin, and the horrible
punishment, which we deserve for the same. And the proofs your book uses are
plain to infer this conclusion. For does man seek to the Physician that
has no need of health either to be procured or preserved by his means? No
our own experience does approve the speech of Christ to be true, when he
says, Matthew. 9.12.
The whole have no need of the Physician, but the sick. Matthew. 11.13.
For in deed it is the diseased that take care to be helped. It is the
travailing and heavy laden soul that sigheth to be refreshed. It is the
sinner that thinks of all sinners he is the chiefest, 1. Tim. 1.15.
which longs for pardon. And to end, Matthew. 9.13.
as Christ came not to call the righteous but the sinners to repentance, so
assuredly it is the sinner, I mean he that in deed feels ye weight of
sin, and knows his own miserable estate by reason of it, and the
punishment due unto it, I say it is that man and that woman, that seeks what
way to be discharged, and none else.

Que. And how do we know the greatness of our sin, and the horrible
punishment due to the same?

Ans. We know it says the book, by the law of God rightly understood, the
sum whereof is contained in the ten commandments. Romans 3.20.
For by the law comes the knowledge of sin, says Saint Paul, and read the
7. Chapter from the 7. verse to the 13. and mark it. Fitly then follows the
first part of my division of the Catechism before, to wit the law.

Que. What is the first Commandment?

Ans. Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

Que. What is the meaning of this Commandment?

Ans. The Lord straightly charge us in this Commandment, The Book.
that we worship GOD alone. Which worship stands in 4. points. First, that
we love God above all. Secondly, that we fear God above all. Thirdly, that
we make our prayers to none but to God. Fourthly, that we acknowledge God
alone to be the guider and governor of all things, of whom we receive all the
benefits that we have, and therefore that we trust and stay upon him alone.

Que. Can we do any of these things unless we know God?

Ans. No, it is impossible, for all these duties spring of the knowledge of
God, and the more we know him, the more we love him, the more we fear him,
and every way serve him.

Que. And what is the first point of the knowledge of God?

Ans. To know that there is a God, without which knowledge says the Apostle,
no man can come unto God. Hebrews. 11.^.


Que. What ways have we to know that there is a God by?

Ans. First, we know by the creatures that there is a God. Psalm. 19.
For the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handie work, says the Prophet. To whom agrees the Apostle also saying that,
Romans 1.19.
That which is to be known of God, is manifest in them. For the invisible
things of him, as his eternal power, and Godhead, are seen by the creation of
the world, etc. As by the greatness of this world and of many particular
creatures in it, as also by his making all things of nothing, we see his great
power, by the variety and notable order of the creatures, we see his wisdom,
and by the use that we have of them, we see his goodness, etc.

Que. How else know we that there is a God?

Ans. By his word written, as our fathers in old time did know him because
they heard him speak to them. For by his word he is to us, as by his audible
voice he was to them, unless we be Infidels.

Que. Thirdly how?

Ans. Thirdly, The spirit of GOD knows the things that are of God, and does
reueile them, says the Apostle, amongst which this is one, that there is a
God. Which the same spirit does so ingraue in every one, that is elected, as
he that feels not himself past doubting of it, is very justly for to fear,
he belongs not yet unto the Lord.

Que. Fourthly how prove you there is a God?

Ans. Every man's conscience accusing him, and fearing him, when he does evil,
excusing him and comforting him when he does well, tells him plainly there
is a God, which punishes evil, and rewards good. And their reason ^reuaileth
with the most desperate that ever was, or is, at some time or other, more or
less.

Que. How many Gods are there?

Ans. But one only God. And that ^o my heart I prove, There is one Lord, one
faith, one ^aptisme, one God and father of all. Ephesians. 4.6. 1. Tim. 2.
And ^n an other place, There is one GOD, and one mediator betwixt God and man,
^uen ye man Jesus Christ.

Que. How many persons are there?

Ans. Three persons. As first I learn^ by the third of Matthewe, where the
father speaks from heaven and says, This is my beloved Son, Matthew. 3.
hear him. The son is baptized, and the holy Ghost like a Dove descends.
Secondly by the words of Christ, Go and teach all nations baptising them, In
the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy Ghost. If there had been
any more persons, Christ would have named them and have commanded the same to
be done in their names also. Or else there is inequality in the Godhead,
therefore we know there are but three persons and no more.

Que. What is God?

Ans. No man is able to define fully what God is in his essence. But we must
content our selves to know him by his attributes, namely that he is strong,
mighty, merciful, wise, slow to anger, of great goodness, and so forth, as
he is described unto us by himself in his word.

Que. What is now the first duty that springs of the knowledge of God?

Ans. Of this knowledge of God arises first a true love of him before and
above all things whatsoever. Which ^s when my heart even effectually fee^ing
how wonderfully he loved me first, ^n electing, creating, redeeming, and
justifying me in Christ Jesus, besides infinite benefits else bestowed in
body and mind upon me, does even burn in affection toward him again,
submits it self wholly to him, serves him with cheerfulness, and makes
in truth more account of him and his will, than of all the world, yea than
even of mine own salvation, if they could come in comparison together.

Que. How prove you that I am thus bound to love God?

Ans. It is proved by Christ our Saviors words, He that loves father or
mother, sister or brother, wife or child, Matthew. 10.37.
or any thing more than me, is not worthy of me, and by ye practice of the
blessed Apostle, who when he knew Christ once, accounted those things which
were vantage unto him loss for Christ his sake, yea even all things he
esteemed loss for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus his Lord, and
did judge them to be doung that he might win Christ. And certainly, what
heart of man or woman soever knows God indeed what he is in himself, and to
all men, and particularly to it many thousand ways, as impossible it is, it
should not love God again above all, and even groan that it can love him no
more, as it is impossible fire should want heat or water moisture.

Que. What branches has the love of God springing out of it?

Ans. Whosoever loves God, loves also his word, Psalm. 119. verse. 103. Luke.
10. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1. John. 3.17. Psalm. 15.1.
the ministers of the word, the poor, and all that fear God, for these with
such like are the branches of the love of God, which if they be not in man and
woman, certainly neither is the other in them it self. And as these all are
commanded, so are the contraries forbidden and condemned ^y this Law. What
the contraries ^re, beside that by these they may be ^nowen, they are
expressed more fully (...) the examination of conscience tou^hing the same
annexed at the end of ^his commandment.

Que. What is the second duty that ^olloweth of the knowledge of God?

Ans. To fear him above all.

Que. What fear is meant here?

Ans. Indeed in the Scripture the ^eare of God does usually signify all
Religion, but here it signifies only a ^art of the worship we owe unto God.

Que. And what is it?

Ans. This fear is a reverent awe ^f God, whereby we are loath to offend ^im,
both because we love him, and because he is able to punish us.

Que. This seems to import some ^ifference of fear.

Ans. Very true it is. For there are ^wo kinds of fear of God, one a ser^ile
fear, dreading punishment: another joined with love of God, called a ^^nlike
fear, and this is meant here.

Que. How may we know whether this true fear of God be in us or no?

Ans. Truly as we know there is fire by the smoke, and that a man lives by
his breathing, so we may know by the effects that the fear of God does bring
forth in them in whom it is, whether it be in us or no?

Que. Why? what be the effects?

Ans. As the bank does keep the water from ouerflowing, so does the fear
of God in man or woman keep out sin that it spread not as otherwise it would.
We see it in practice proved before our eyes. For when Pharaoh king of Egypt,
Exodus 1.17.
commanded them to kill every male child that was borne of the Israelites
women, what kept out this cruel murder both from hand and heart, but this
bank, the fear and awe of God, more than man, for so says the text, the
midwiues feared GOD, and therefore did not as the King commanded them. The like
may we see in Job, who says Gods punishment was fearful to him, Job. 31.32.
therefore he oppressed not (...) fatherless. In Joseph also very no^^blie
whose heart nor body filthy a^^lterie with his mistress could stain, Genesis
39.
^^cause this bank of the fear of God ^as so strong and good in him. Lastly
^^e scripture proves it plainly to us, ^hen in several places it joins to
^^e fear of God a departing from evil (...) an inseparable effect thereof.
Job. 28.
For ^ost assuredly it is so. If we nothing ^^part from our old sins, and
yet say, ^e fear God, we lie, and there is no ^^ueth in us.

Que. If then in this view of the ef^^cts of it, we find that either it is
not in (...), yet at all, or at the most but very li^^, how may we obtain
it, or in^^ease it?

Ans. First a very good way to breed (...) increase this reverent awe and ^are
of God in our selves, How the fear of God is gotten.
is an often ^^d earnest meditation of Gods power, (...) he is able to deal
with us, to pu^^sh us and plague us, if we do not ^are him, and this we learn
by these ^ordes of Christ: Fear not them that can kill the body, Math. 10.16.
and then can do no more: but fear him that can cast body and soul into
eternal fire. For they sound unto me as if Christ had said thus, mark how
far Gods power exceeds man's power, and how much more fearfully he is able
to punish you than man can, and let this great power of the Lord over body
and soul to ca^^ them both into hell for ever, make yo^ fear the same God
above all, and stan^ in awe of his majesty. And assuredl^ if we had grace to
think of his power indeed effectually, it would maruelou^sly profit our
souls to this end. Se^condly another good way and meane^ is, a due meditation
of the great mer^cies of God proved by the Psalm* With thee there is mercy,
Psalm. 130.
therefore shall thou be feared. And lastly by diligen^ learning the word of
God preached o^ read unto us. For so we read in the Law, Gather the people
together, men, women and children, and the straun^ger that is within thy gates,
that they may hear and learn to fear the Lord See how he says by hearing
men learn this fear of God, and breed it or increase it.

Que. When is the fear of God to be learned?

Ans. At all times, but especially when opportunity either of teaching or
learning does serve us. For that we ought to take opportunity of teaching, our
savior Christ himself affirms, saying, Yet a little, and the light is with
you, walk while you have the light. And that we should then learn when we our
selves are able and apt to learn, the wise man shows in these words,
Remember thy creator in the days of thy youth, Ecclesi. 12.1.
before the evil days come and thy years approach, wherein thou shall say, I
have no pleasure in them. Also the often and sudden loss of hearing and
seeing by sundry occasions does vehemently admonish us to take time while time
is, and learn to fear God while we may. For to day we can read per adventure
our selves, and if not, yet at least hear others, but to morrow who is sure he
shall either have eyes to see to read himself, or sense of hearing to hear
others? Therefore again take time when we may.

Que. What is contrary to the fear of God?

Ans. Too much to stand in fear of men and their threats, so that by them we
are driven to any unlawful things. Too much to fear God, himself and his
judgments, as desperate men do, which nourish no hope of his mercy and
goodness. Thirdly security and too little fear of God, with many such more.
All these are contrary to that true fear of God, which we speak of, and are
as well forbidden here as the other is commanded.

Que. What is the third duty of this commandment?

Ans. Thirdly we are here commanded to make our prayers to none but to God.

Que. How may it be proved that only God of true Christians is to be
prayed unto, since other doctrine is delivered by the Church of Rome?

Ans. First it is proved by the words of the Apostle Paul, Romans 10.
How shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed: as though he
should say, Belief must needs ever go before prayer, whereupon then thus we
may reason. We must only pray to him in whom we must believe, but we may and
ought believe only in God the Father, God the Son, and GOD the holy Ghost,
therefore only to these three persons one only God must our prayers be
directed.

The first proposition we see proved by Paul, the second by the articles of
our faith, and all the scripture, the conclusion follows upon the^ both.
Secondly Marie. But when you pray says he, say Our Father which art in heaven.
That is, what form of words so ever you use, ever direct your prayers unto God
and to him only. And Father in this place signifies any of the three persons,
and is not to be restrained only to the first person.

Thirdly we have no commandment to pray to any but to God only, we have no
promise to be heard if we do, no example in Scriptures of any godly man or
woman that has done it ever at any time, or upon any occasion, we have no
punishment threatened, if we do it not: but to pray to God we are commanded,
Psalm. 50.
we are promised to be helped, we have examples, and we are threatened if we
do it not. Therefore whether of these two is to be done, who sees not?

Que. What is the fourth duty of this commandment?

Ans. Fourthly we are bound by this Law to acknowledge God alone to be the
guider and governor of all things, of whom we receive all the benefits that
we have, and therefore that we trust and stay upon him alone.

Que. Here are three several things affirmed very worthy to be severally
considered, and therefore first I pray you, how is it proved that God guides
and governs all things?

Ans. Besides a number of other places which might be alleged to prove it
withal, a very good testimony is that in the Psalm: Whatsoever pleased the
Lord, that did he in heaven and earth, Psalm. 135.6.
in the sea, and in all the depth. Where mark well the space of the Lords
dominion, in heaven he rulech, in earth he rules, in the sea he rules, and in
all these whatsoever it pleases him, that does he at all times and seasons.
The like speech again has the same Prophet in an other place, Psalm. 115.3.
But our God is in heaven, says he, and does whatsoever he will, The eyes of
all things wait upon him, Psalm. 145.15.
and he gives them meat in due season. So then nothing without him is done at
any time, but his power almighty guides and governs all things.

Que. How is it proved that all good comes to us from this directing
providence of the Lord.

Ans. The holy ghost in plain words affirms it by his Apostle James, James.
1.17.
Every good giving and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the father of light.

Que. This doctrine is plain. And yet notwithstanding ever it has had, and
even in these dais has some enemies. Such obiectio^s as I have hard at times, I
will propound unto you, and I pray you answer the^. The first is this, if God
rule all things by his providence and direction, then must he needs be author
of sin also, in that he hinders it not but suffers it to be done.

Ans. I answer to this your first doubt thus: that the argument is not good,
neither follows, that because all things are done by his providence,
therefore he should be author of evil. For one may be author of an action,
and yet not of the evil in the action: as in this similitude we see: If a man
cut with an evil knife, he is the cause of cutting, but not of evil cutting
or hackling of the knife, but the badnesse of the knife is the cause of that.
Again, if a man strike the stringes of an instrument that is out of tune, he
is the cause that the stringes sound, but that they sound iarringlie and out
of tune, that is in themselves, and the man that strikes is not to be blamed
for it. Therefore seeing one may be the cause of an action, and yet not of
the evil in the action, you see it does not follow, that if God be the cause
of the action, by and by the evil in the thing must needs also proceed of
him. Nay contrarily this doctrine is a sealed truth, That no evil comes of
GOD in any work, but though in every thing that is done, the Lord be some
worker, yet as he does it, it is ever good. Mark but an example or two. Job. 1.
Job his great adversity proceeded of God, and by God in some respect, it
proceeds of Satan also, and of the Chaldeans that robbed him. Yet see, that
which Satan did maliciously, and the Chaldeans couetously, that did the Lord
well and to good purpose, to the glory of his name, to the instruction and
comfort of us all, and to Jobs great benefit also. Genesis 38.
Joseph's affliction again, it came by God, by his brethren, by his light
mistress, and over credulous master, but yet so much as God did, was well
done, to the great benefit of his father and friends after, and what the other
did, was evil and wrongfully done to Joseph. The like again may be said
touching the death of Christ. Had not God his work in it, when his determinate
counsel appointed it, Act. 2.23.
and delivered him up? Had not Judas his work in betraying him? Had not the
Jews their work whose wicked hands crucified and slew him? Yet that which
they did most horribly, the Lord himself did in unspeakable mercy to all
our endelesse comfortes. Therefore whatsoever proceeds of GOD, as it comes
from him, it is most good, although the same thing as it comes of man and by
man, be wicked and evil, and no author of evil is he, though guider and
governor of all things.

Que. My second doubt then is this, if GOD govern all things by his
providence, then look how he list to have things, and so shall they be, men
cannot change his will, and therefore it skilleth not what we do.

Ans. Surely the conclusion is very wicked, and no way follows upon Gods
providence. For albeit he direct all things, yet we must ever use the means
that God has appointed notwithstanding, for so we see Gods children ever did
and tempted not the Lord by any such wicked speech as this. Rebecca had heard
Gods own mouth speak it, Genesis 27.
that he would of her two sons Esau and Jacob make two nations, and the
elder should serve the younger, whereby she well knew Esau could not kill
Jacob, whatsoever he threatened: yet did she not presume carelessly thereon,
and said to her self it skilled not what she did, but she used the ordinary
means to save Jacobs life, and sent him out of the country for a time.
Numbers of these examples are in the Scripture. Let this one more of Christ
himself suffice, John. 17.
who prayed to his father to glorify him, and yet was he most sure of it
before, all to teach us to use ordinary means. Therefore Gods providence
never ought to prejudice such means as he has appointed to obtain any thing
by, neither in deed does in the godly.

Que. My third objection is this, If God ruled all by his providence, then
should there be no misorder at al in the world as there is.

Ans. No more there is in deed and truth, I mean in respect of God.

Que. No? is not this evil in the world, and in regard of God wrong, that
evil men should thrive and flourish as they do, and the godly not?

Ans. No indeed. For good men and women are afflicted in this world for their
good, namely that they may not be condemned with the world. And evil men
receive Gods blessings to make them without all excuse, and ^o increase their
damnation if they serve not God.

Que. Why, but did not Joseph's bre^hren ill and they that killed Christ?

Ans. Yea in deed they did horribly as I have said before, but yet GOD
directed all to his glory, to the benefit of his Church, and our everlasting
comfort by Christ, and therefore in Gods government all was then well and ever
is.

Que. What then is the conclusion?

Ans. The conclusion is this, as has been said, that in truth there ^s no
misorder in the world in respect of God. For all that ever he does, or
^etteth be done is good and for good, but all misorder is in respect of man.

Que. What is the fruit and use of this doctrine of Gods providence?

Ans. Very great. For it makes us in well and woe give glory to god, who sends
^l. It makes us patient to bear things ^etter, because the Lord does send
them: it makes us hang still upon him for comfort, who will not see us want*
and many good fruits it works in us, if thoroughly we be persuaded of it.

Que. Next now what manner of consequence is this in the book, that because
God guides all things, and o^ him we receive all things, therefore we
should trust and stay upon him alone?

Ans. The consequence is very good. For the former settled in the heart once by
faith, ever begets the second in man or woman, and they cannot be parted.
We see a plain proof of it in David, who being in deed persuaded that the
Lord was his shepherd, by and by concludes thereupon, therefore shall I want
nothing. Psalm. 23.


Que. But what if I a frail man or woman do yet find my self weak in
trusting to the Lord, and in the Lord, when trouble assaileth me, how might I
help this great infirmity, and increase my trust in the Lords mercy?

Ans. First whenever we are tempted to doubt of any thing, it is a special^
thing presently to consider the promises ^f God, touching that matter, and in
them the generality and the certainty. ^s for example, if this cogitation
should ^rise in me, certainly if I do not as ^he world does, I shall never
carry cre^ite in the world, nor come to any ^ealth and estate like others, by
and by (...) should remember what is written ^ouching this matter, namely,
Matthew. 6.
Seek the ^ingdome of God first and principally a^oue al, and then shall all
these things be ^ast unto you. And again, The^ that ho^our me, them will I
honor, 1. Sam. 2.
with many ^uch. Then having the promises, consi^er next the generality of
them, and ^ee if they be limited either to poor or ^iche or any, so that you
may not ^oldelie lay as good hold of them as any, and well shall you see they
are ^ot. Thirdely I must wey the cer^ainetie of them, and the truth of them.
For is my God a liar? shall (...) mistrust his word, and think it ^hame to
doubt an earthly friend? God ^orbid. And if he has spoken it, that these
worldly things shall be cast upon those that serve him so far as is good for
them, is not he able to perform his promise, and to make his word good,
unless I use ungodly and unlawful extraordinary means? God forbid. Auant
then and avoid foul diue^ may I say: For I believe the promises of my God, so
true, so general, made to all men and women, old and young, rich and poor,
and so certain as nothing can be more. I believe them, I say I believe them,
and by his promises my trust increases. Thus may we do in all doubts else
whatsoever. For if it be a benefit to body or mind, in this world or the
next, we have the Lords promise to have it, if we serve him so far as it shall be
good for us. 1. Tim. 4.
For godliness has the promise of this life, and that to come. Therefore never
let Satan prevail, Psalm. 84.
for either God is no God, or you shall want no good thing: only be of good
comfort, be strong and trust in the Lord, Psalm. 27.
and he shall comfort your heart.

Que. What other way tell you me?

Ans. Another good way to increase and confirm your trust in God, is in all
^reefes very diligently to meditate of ^he Lords great power and ability to
^elpe you: how soon he can do it, how ^asily he can do it, even in the
twink^ing of an eye, were your case never so ^ard. And surely no more able is
he ^han willing, so far forth as shall be ^o your good, be assured of it. For
God ^orbid that ever we should think, that ^e, who before we were reconciled
vn^^ him so loved us, as that he robbed ^imselfe even of his own dear son
^or our sake, now when we are recon^iled to him by so dear a price, wan^eth
good will to do less things for ^s. Yet that this means might the ^etter
sink in your mind, mark I ^aye you how even God himself ^ath taught his
children to use it, kno^ing the profit of it to this end. As (...) his speech
with Abraham, why ^^th he these words to him: Genesis 17.
I am ^OD alsufficient, but to insinuate to Abraham, that if any distrust o^
weakness in any thing should assaul^ him, by and by he should help himself
and strengthen his faith with meditati^on of his infinite power whom he
ser^ued and followed? So again more plain in another place, Genesis 15.
Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield. As if h^ should have said, if any doubt
a^rise Abraham, fear not, but present^ly have recourse to the consideration of
this, that I am thy shield. For may it be, that I which have taken upon me thy
defense cannot do it* Is my power scant, or want I abili^tie to do any thing
that I will do* If I do not, then let the consideration of my power be thy
strength. Again (...) it in practice, and note the fruit of i^* Do we not
know how easily Abraham might have doubted of Gods promis^ that he should have
a child, if he had con^sidered either the age of himself, or the deadness of
his wives body in cour^ now past by much to bear a child? Y^ says the
Apostle, Abraham strong (...) ^aith, doubted not. And why so? Tru^y he used
this means that now I tell ^ou of, and with meditation of Gods ^ower,
strengthened his faith. For so it ^olloweth in the text: He was fully assu^ed,
Romans 4.
that he which had promised was al^o able to do it. Able I say and mark ^he
words. And the very same we read ^f Paul, who therefore says he fain^ed not
under affliction, neither was a^hamed of the cross of Christ, because ^e was
persuaded and soundly settled ^ouching the Lords ability to keep that which
he committed unto him. 2. Tim. 2.12.
So ^hen see how the consideration of Gods ^ower strenthened them, and why
should (...) not confirm us as well in all our ^ares? And mark in any case
how in (...) these places with Gods power is ever understood his willingness
also: (...) they did not sever these two, as sub^^ll Satan would persuade us to
do.

Que. Have you yet any more of this ^ounsaile?

Ans. Yea, this also is another excel^nt help for us weak wretches to
confirm our hearts by, namely to wey well what troubles us, and then to
search, ask and seek if in the scripture there be any example of any that
ever was in the like case: and to see what his end or issue was, comforting
our selves with assuring hope of the like, since God is no respecter of
persons. This wisdom is learned of David, Psalm. 34.6.
who says, if God be merciful to him, and help him, it will be a forcible
means to make others trust in his mercy. For they shall reason in their
hearts, says David, and say: This poor man cried unto the Lord, and he
heard him: Therefore he will do the like to us, we are assured of it. What is
it then that troubles your conscience? Have you been an adulterer, or a
murderer? so was David, and yet found mercy. Have you persecuted the Church
and children of God any ways? so did Paul grievously, and yet found mercy.
Have you been an idolater? Manasses was a cruel idolater, and yet found
mercy* Have you denied Christ and his truth upon any occasion, and shrinked
from ^our God? so did all the Apostles, and ^et found mercy. Nay, have you
with oath forsworn him? so did Peter, and yet found mercy. Then take Da^ids
counsel. Mark how all these (...) their several sins cried unto the
Lord, and found his ready pardon, and gather strength by it, for he is the
^ame God that ever he was, as loath a ^^nner should dye as ever he was, and
that body and soul of yours cost him ^s much as ever did theirs: therefore
^eare not, for he loves you as truly ^s ever he did them. And his hand ^s
out with help in it, only be^eue, and take hold of it, it is your ^wne.

Que. I pray you still go on in this ^atter as long as you will.

Ans. Only this one mo will I ad^ertise you of, and it is as profitable ^s any
of the rest, namely, to note and ^ery diligently to weigh what experi^^ce of
the Lords goodness you your self have had heretofore, and by trial had make
strong your heart for that which is to come. Thus did Jacob when he was to
meet with his brother Esau. Genesis 32.
First he looked upon Gods commandment to him to return, and thereby he
assured himself God would not leave him helpless when he took in hand
nothing but by his will, and secondly he well marketh what a God he had ever
found him till that day, whereof faith inferred a conclusion comfortable,
Jacob, fear not, God, thy God is no man, that he should change, he has
defended thee, and still be assured of it he will defend thee* Thus did David
when he should figh^ against Goliath, 1. Sam. 17.
he remembered wha^ help he found against the pawe of the Bear and the Lion,
and then assure^ himself by passed proof of so good ^ God, he should not
miscarie with the Philistine. Matthew. 16.9.
Thus dealt Christ with hi^ doubting Disciples for want of food willing the^
to remember what a mul^titude with a very little they had seen^ ^eleeued, and
yet plenty remaining, and even for shame by passed trial of Gods power to be
strenthened in assu^ance touching that which was to ^ome. And if you read the
7. of Deute^onomie the 18. verse, Deutro. 7.
it is a very fit ^lace to this end. But peradventure ^ou will say it is not
a sound buylding (...) conclude, because God has been ^ood, therefore he
will be good. Yes in ^eede is it, and that course of buylding which the scripture
uses in sundry pla^^s. By name it is the argument of ^aul to the Corinthians,
that therefore ^od would confirm them to the end, 1. Cor. 1.8.
because he had begun a good work (...) them, and because God is faithful,
^arke that. The like does the same ^postle to the Philippians, Thessaloni^^s,
and to Timothy, Philip. 1.6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. 2. Tim. 4.18. 2. Peter. 1.3.
beside other pla^^s. And Peter in his Epistles again (...) very same. And I
pray you mark (...) what you know. Does not the ^^mer tried goodness of a
mortal man ^orke in him that finds it a good opi^^on, and even a confidence
in that man, if he should need again to him? O what comparison betwixt man
and God? The one is mutable in liking and favor, the other whom he loves, to
the end he loves them: the one subject to diminutio^ of power, so that if he
would be as good as he has been, yet can he not: the other in power almighty
ever* so that what he will, he can at al^ hours. Therefore challenge you the
Lord as David does boldly I warran^ you: Thou have been my succor O Lord,
Psalm. 27.
then leave me not now, neithe^ forsake me O God of my salvation.

Que. Do not now all these duties infer thanksgiving unto the Lord?

Ans. It must needs be so: For cer^tainly, if we be bound to know, to love* to
fear, to trust in, and pray to the Lord at all times, and for all wants, by
the same law we must needs be bound^ to give thanks to him for that measur^
of grace which in any of these duetie^ he bestows upon us, and for his great
benefits which we receive.

Que. But has this duty no other proof?

Ans. Yes in deed: Express and plain ^ommaundements, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18.
that in all things ^e should give thanks. Evident prac^ise of Gods children,
as of David, Psalm. 103.
cry^ng upon his soul to praise the Lord, and upon all that is within him to
praise his ^oly name: of Marie, professing that her ^^ule did magnify the
lord, Luke. 1.
and that her ^^irite rejoiced in God her Savior, ^ith many such like.

Que. Since then this duty both is ^ommaunded, and has of Gods children ^ene
ever upon all occasions so careful^^ performed, me think at our meats
^specially we should remember it.

Ans. Truly you have named a time and occasion when in deed Christians should
neither forget nor shame to look ^p unto the Lord and to praise his name.
Saying of grace at the Table.
For even then have they his mercies before their eyes, to put them in mind.
Which if they receive thankfully, they ^eceiue rightly: if not, then very
^aungerousely, both in respect of ^^e creatures them selves, which, as the
Apostle says are not sanctified otherwise unto us, 1. Tim. 4.
so that we may receive them with a good conscience, then by the word and
prayer, and also in respect of the breach of Gods commandments, who
expressly willed his people Israel, and in them even all others, that when
they had eaten and filled themselves, Deutro. 8.10.
they should bless the Lord their God for the good land which he had given
them. Beside which reasons yet even further we have the practice of the godly
to call upon us for this duty. For it is well noted that the same people
chosen of the Lord, the Jews I mean, did not sit down to eat, but either
the good man of the house, or he that was Primarius in mensa, that is the
chief man at the table, did take either the bread or the cup in his hand, and
so holding it, prayed unto the Lord, that he would vouchsafe to bless them
and those his good gifts, which then they were about to receive at his
merciful hand. Likewise after meat they gave him thanks for it. Hence
comes the mention of taking the cup twice by our Savior Christ in Luke,
Luke 22.17.
the former taking was this saying of grace and giving of thanks which I
^peake of, the other was the celebration of his supper. How even of purpose
also does the Evangelist mention this same practice still in Christ, Matthew.
14.19. Mark. 6 41. Mark. 14.26.
sometimes saying when they had sung (...) Psalm, sometimes when he had given
thanks, etc. all to teach us that ^uery such precept and practice shall
^ondemne us, if we do not the like. And truly if men and women would ^ooke
into their hearts, and not flat^er themselves in dangerous securi^ie, and
would even say to themselves, why do I not say grace or cause it to ^e said in
that place where I am chief, and ought to do it, what think you would they
find to be the true cause ^ndeede? Certainly nothing but shame and
bashefulnesse because it has not ^eene used. But O fearful shame that
shameth to do Gods commandments, and consequently makes us eat our own
damnation, the creatures being not sanctified unto us. And O damnable following
of our wicked custom, and leaving the custom of Christ and his children. God
in mercy awake us. For assuredly we little know what we do, when we
pretermit and shame to do this duty to the Lord.

Que. You have well satisfied me touching the necessity of this duty, and
now I ask you an other question, whether we may not also give thanks to men,
but whatsoever they say or do to us, yea if they drink but to us at the
table, we must say, I thank God?

Ans. Truly to be persuaded that any kindness or good can come to us by men*
from men, whereof our merciful God is not the sender and giver, woorking by
those instruments, were very wicked and horrible: but for the phrase of speech
my heart knowing GOD to be the author, I may well and lawfully vs^ it to the
instrument no doubt, and say I thank you, at any time or upon any occasion,
when I reap the benefit of their love, and by name upon such occasion as you
named. And this I take to be warranted by the practice of Paul, Romans 16.3. and
4.
who no doubt in heart knew God to be author of all his good, and yet are his
words directed to ye instruments. Greet Priscilla and Aquila, says he, my
fellow helpers in Christ Jesus. Which have for my life laid down their neck,
unto whom not only I give thanks, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles.

Que. As you have said of the other duties, so I take it in this also: namely
that whatsoever is contrary or against it, is as well forbidden us by this
first commandment, as this is commanded.

Ans. It is very true. Both the pretermission of thanks for any goodness upon
^odie or mind, our selves or ours, ^emporall or eternal bestowed by the
^orde, as also the ascribing of it to ^ur selves, ^ur wit, our strength,
poli^ie, friends, or any thing, it is horrible, and a breach of this
commandment, Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

Que. Thus rest I instructed more than I was touching this commandment the
first of all the ten. And now only I could wish, if you might, that you would
show me some way how profitablie to examine mine own heart touching this
Law, and how with my self I might meditate upon it fruitefully, and with
feeling.

Ans Indeed your request has great profit in it, and that course or practice
ye now desire, shall any man or woman find very fruitful, if they do use
it. For even as in earthly matters our affection and love cleaves fastest to
them, that in greatest extremities have brought us help and ease, and as there
is nothing yt will blow up the coal of that remembrance more vehemently, and
make it flame out into open show of a thankful heart, more effectually than
some true meditation of the greatness of danger, and greeuousnesse of estate
that we were in before: So in heavenly and spiritual things the same is found
as true, or rather more, that sight of greatest good procures greatest measure
of such fruit as ought to flow thereof. For by example what so kindeleth in a
man the heat of burning love, and makes his heart to flame with true
affection to his God, as does (...) lively sight of that fearful estate,
utter extremity desperate and damnable condition, that he was once subject
unto without all recovery by himself or any creature either in heaven or
earth, ^ut only Jesus Christ the Son of God both God and man, together with
(...) sight of certain safety from the same? Did not this bring that blessed
woman and happy Saint of God Marie Mag^alen to such a sweet taste and great
^^ue, as that her melting heart mini^^red tears to her weeping eyes, Luke.
7.38.
wherewith she washed the feet of her dear ^auiour, wiped them with the
hairs (...) her head, kissed them, anointed them ^ith precious ointment, and
what was (...) which that woman thought too much for such a friend. True it is
therefore that the less we see the goodness of our God, the less we love
him: but great is the affection of them, to whom many sins are forgiven.
Knowing this then that remembrance of hard estate before will stir the heart
up to him in love that has made it happy, and that sight of ougly sin
lodging still in me and cleaving to my soul and flesh will make me praise
his name, who yet in mercy imputes not the same unto me: Use indeed often
with your self, and especially when you feel your heart most prone and fit
thereunto, to view your sins against every commandment, how many and
monstrous they are in thought, word and deed, sit and think with your self
what is commanded, sometimes in one, sometimes in another, what wonderful
perfection is required in every one, what branches and members every one
has, what terrible judgments are due to the breakers thereof, how far from the
full and absolute perfourmance of any tittle of any one of them you your self
are, and therefore in what case you stand for ye same, even sure of eternal
destruction both of body and soul in hell fire. Yet notwithstanding how you
are released of mercy, not of merit, and that with the preciousest ransom yt
ever was, ye heart blood of Jesus Christ the son of God both God and man, so
that heaven and earth may perish, but you cannot perish.

Que. The examination of the conscience touching this commandment.

Ans. As for example I set and view this commandment whereof now we have
spoken, Thou shall have none other gods but me. Considering what things are
bidde^ ^r forbidden unto me in the same. And ^s already now has been
proved, first I see I am commanded herein to wor^hip the Lord my God and him
only to ^erue, not joining any fellows to him ^t all, of which worship many
points ^here be, but they may be reduced unto a few. First I see I am bound
to ^oue him above all, that is, in my heart and soul to make more account of
him than of all the world or any creature in heaven or earth, to cleave faster
unto him and his will than to any thing, to esteem him and prefer him, yea
even above mine own salvation, if they could come in comparison together, for,
He that loves father or mother, Matthew. 10.28.
sister or brother, wife or child, or any thing more than me, is not worthy
of me. Secondly I am commanded to fear him above all, that is with a godly
reverence to stand more in awe of him and his word, than of any thing else
whatsoever, to be more loath, not for fear only, but even for love to
displease him, grieve him, and offend him, than any or all the creatures in
heaven or earth beside, in respect of that which he is able to lay upon me, if
I forsake him, to account nothing of any thing that any man can do unto me,
mindful ever of this saying: Fear not them that can kill the body, and are
not able to kill the soul: Matthew. 10.
but fear him that can cast both body and soul into hell fire. Thirdly I see
that in this commandment I am charged to make my prayers to none but to God
only, for the reasons above in their place alleged. Fourthly I see I am
commanded not to think that things go by fortune and chance, or that any
thing is done which GOD knows not of, or could not let, but that I
acknowledge him to be the guider and governor of all things, and that what
good soever I receive I have it from him, and therefore that I trust and stay
upon him alone at all times, and in all my matters whatsoever. And for so much
as neither I nor any can either love him, or fear him, pray to him, or trust
in him, unless we know him: therefore I see also that I am in this
commandment straitely bound ^o long as I live, to labor and travel by all
means appointed to know the Lord, and his truth out of his word: and look
how much I want of knowing any thing, that is reueiled in his word, so far
am I guilty of the breach of this Law. And if it please ye Lord to bless
me with knowledge of his truth, or any thing else whatsoever, I see that in
this commandment I am charged to give thanks to him for it in such full
manner and measure of feeling, as any way is due to that benefit. For if I
forget to be thankful, I forget that the Lord in that thing is my good God.
And if I ascribe the praise and thanks to any thing else whatsoever, otherwise
than as to the instrument of God, I make my self another GOD beside the Lord,
even that thing, whereunto I give the thanks, and I break this commandment.
These and many such other things I see are laid upon me and al men, and women
in this first commandment, and then I think or say with my self unto ye Lord,
O my good God and gracious father, O my sweet Lord and guide most righteous,
what do I see even in this but one law of thine against my self, my soul and
body, why I should never come in thy kingdom, nor lift up mine eyes to heaven
in hope of any comfort? This is but one Law of ten, and contains but a few
duties in respect of all that I owe to thee and my brethren, yet ah Lord,
with wailing woe I speak it, so guilty I see my self, so foul and ouglie
before thy face, and so full of breaches every way, even of this one
commandment, that I am ashamed and confounded to ^ift up mine eyes unto thee
my God. For mine iniquities are increased ouermine ^ead, and my trespasses are
grown up to ^he heaven, to me belongs nothing but ^hame and confusion, it is
thy mercy that ^ am not utterly destroyed, yea eue^ thy ^ercie marvelous,
that the earth, as ^eary of so wicked a burden, shrinketh ^ot from under my
feet, and hellish pit (...) gulf of endless woe receives me ^ot into it?
For what pleasure is ^ere in that servant, that being bid (...) his master,
do diverse things, yet ^ot in any one obeys or perfourmeth (...) masters
will? Can he like him? ^ill he love him? No no, full soon even I my self
would loath and cast off such a one. Ah Lord then for my self what should I
say? Is there any servant so bound unto his master, as I am bound to thee? Is
there any master that can and will so quitte his servant pains, as thou in
mercy my obedience? Or can any mortal man so justly challenge the obedience
of his hireling, as thou my God may challenge the service of me thy creature,
first made of nothing by thy hand, and then most dearly bought again with
precious price? No no, my body, my life, my heart, my soul, and whatsoever I
am, within, or without, of thee I had all, and to thee my gracious God I owe
them all again. Yet see, ah wretch, and woeful plight, although thy goodness
to me far passes all masters their servant, and my duty to thee more
due ten thousand times than any man's unto his master, yet is my disobedience
greater, the sin of my soul more grievous, and the whole cours^ of my wicked
life more opposed to thy will, than ever was any earthly servant to any hard
and evil master. For he will do something that he is bidden, but I have done
nothing, as I plainly see by viewing of my life, and as my conscience tells
me being privy to my paths. For have I loved thee as I ought? Namely even
with all my heart, with all my soul, with all my strength, which is the first
thing that is commanded me in this commandment? If I have done it, then have
I loved thy word and every way made that account of it that I ought. For David
thy dear servant loved ^hee, and behold what he says, Thy word unto me
was sweeter than the ^onie and the honey comb. Jeremy ^hy Prophet loved thee,
and see what ^ollowed, Thy words were found by ^im, and he did eat them, and
they were unto him the joy and the rejoicing of his heart. And a number more
such ^xamples have we, whereby we learn that there is no true love of thee in
us, ^nlesse there be joined thereunto a sincere and fervent liking of thy
word. Now forasmuch as I am guilty to my self, that I have not had that care
of thy word, that I ought, to read it, to hear it, to learn and seek it,
and every way to show my love toward it, therefore O dear Father, to say I
have loved thee as I ought, with all my soul and power, alas I dare not, alas
I cannot. For much more occupied might I have been in the meditation of thy
Law, than ever I have been. I confess it O Lord, I confess it even with
grief of heart. And therefore if thou werst not a God most merciful, I even
for this one thing were a wretch most miserable. The like might I say of that
light and little account that I have made of thy Ministers, which being
another branch of the love of thee bewrays my want unto me. But see yet
further how greatly my heart has failed in loving of thee. For looking unto
my self a little deeper, behold even such things as flatly and directly are
contrary to the love of thee, alas I see them to have been, and to be, at
times in me most horrible. To murmr and grudge, to repine and be offended
with any cross or grief whatsoever laid upon me by thee, or not even
willingly to accept it as the messenger of a gracious friend, to seek any
wicked means to be eased of it, is contrary to that love that we owe to
thee. And how frail my self have been herein, thou searcher of hearts
know it well, and I wretch most weak, with ruing heart beseech thy
pardon. Again to suffer the world, or any glistering glory thereof, further
to creep into our hearts and to tickle us with delight and liking, than it
ought, is a thing ^^at contrary to the love of thee. For so we read: 1. John.
2.
Love not this world nor any thing that is in the world. For, If any man love
this world, the love of the father is not in him. To draw back also my
helping hand from those that are in need, and not with ready heart and
willing mind to comfort their poor estate, with whom thou have dealt more
hardely than with me, I know it bewrays a want of love to thee. 1. Ioh.
3.17.
For so I learn, Whosoever has this worlds good, sees his brother need,
and shuts his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? But
these O Lord have taynted sometimes this heart of mine, and therefore I have not
loved thee as I ought. But what should I say when I view in my self, how my
flesh and my heart runs back as it were to hide it self when I think of
any persecution to be abidden for thee and thy truth, and specially when I
look upon these horrible torments, that some of thy Martirs have suffered, oh
what want of love bewrays it to me? My household and family, my children and
charge, my life and present estate step in unto me, as Peter once did to his
master, Matthew. 16.22.
draw me aside, and whisper in mine ear to save my self, if that day come,
and my power fails, with courage to an^were, as then my Savior did, Come
after me Satan's, your counsel is not good, neither savor you the things that
^re of God: so that every way I see I ^oue thee not my God as I should. Look
^t my behavior when I see or hear ^hy name dishonored any way, and I ^muther
it up, I hold my peace. I make ^s though I heard it not, yea and some^imes I
approve wickedness with my ^aughter, and I break not out in zeal ^f rebuke.
No I that hearing as much ^y any worldly friend, would readily ^hallenge the
wrong, and hotly seek ^euenge thereof, in thy cause, and for thy ^ake, I have
no heat nor courage, but ^ither persons, place, danger, or some ^ircumstance
or other, quenches my ^eart, tyeth up my tongue, and makes ^e like a
traitor, to my Lord and ^aster. What might I say of that se^ret misliking
that sometimes will creep (...) closely into my mind, of the poor ^state of
Christ in his members here on ^arth? Christ likes me not so well, when he
lies in the stable, Luke. 2.
in the manger, when he flies into Egypt for his life, Matthew. 2 13.
when he has not an hole to lay his head in, except it be in a cold prison,
as he does when he rides to the City, and the people cutting down bowghes
of Palms straw them in the way, spread their garments, and cry, O Zanna,
blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord, Matthew. 21.8.
as when they seek to make him a King and the world does seem his friend.
No, my heart will even slip sometimes privily into this wish: O that the
Gospel and the world might always be friends, and go hand in hand. So
that liking not every way so well in truth of Christ in poverty, as in
plenty, and feeling not my heart so well contented to beg and suffer with
him, as to rule and reign with him, there is not that love in me towar^ him
that ought to be. Again mark ho^ I fail in public assemblies to hear (...)
word, to pray and such like, when I might be present if I would. Mark how^
negligent I am in publishing the praises of my GOD, and laboring thereby to
draw others to a greater liking of him, with a number such like wantes, and O
love of GOD, in me no love in deed, but ^ead, blotted out, and quite
extingui^hed. See now how guilty I am even of the first thing that is
commaun^ed me in this commandment. The second thing is, that I should ^eare
thee above all, the third is, Fear of God.
that I should pray to none but to thee, ^he fourth to acknowledge thee the
^uider and governor of all things, ^f whom I receive all the benefits that
I have, and therefore that I trust and stay upon thee alone. Fifthly, that (...)
should labor to know thee out of ^hy word, so fully and perfectly as ^hou
have revealed thy self therein, because of knowledge all these other ^^llowe.
And lastly, that I should for ^ll benefits give thanks only to ^^ee, and in
such full manner and ^easure of feeling as any way is due to that blessing
which I receive. In which points as in other more, which might yet be named, O
merciful father I here before thee confess I am no better than in the first. I
dare not clear my self, I cannot, I ought not: O Lord give me eyes to see my
wants, for I have feared men and their threats more than I ought, I have
feared the loss of their favor more than I ought, I have feared the loss of
worldely commodities more than I ought, and have not as thy blessed Apostle
taught me by this example, Philipp. 3.
accounted those things that were vantage unto me loss and very doung for the
excellent knowledge sake of Jesus Christ my Lord. Sometimes Satan has rocked
this soul of mine in the chayer of security, that I have even slept as it
were a dead sleep, and not considered of thy judgments against sin, as I
ought, neither taken ye profit by thy extraordinary works in the air, in the
earth, in the bodies of men, and beasts, that I should, but passed them over
with a little wonder or motion for a short time. When my sins have been
touched, or appeared unto me, I have flattered my ^wne soul and put upon them
honest ^ames, as clokes to hide them withal. The plain pride of my heart and
mere ^anitie I have judged clenlinesse or necessary for my estate. Miserable
coue^ousnesse have I judged lawful care for things necessary, and so forth, a
manifest token of a dead heart within, and ^oide of tasting any horror in
sin. By ^ll which and many more things that my mind may easily see, it is
apparent ^o me, that I have even broken this ^oint also of thy Law in not
fearing ^hee, so as I ought. Alas Lord, what shall I say of the rest of the
branches ^f this commandment, named even now? Am I any perfecter in them,
^han in these? No, no, I have sinned against thee in them all, and that most
grievously, so that if there were no mo ^f thy commandments, but even this ^ne
the first of al, yet does my conscience ^ell me, I am before thee guilty, and
good Lord most fearfully to be touched. But there are nine more, spreading
out their branches to all sincerity and holiness both in body and mind,
toward God and man, with threatened cu^^es to all flesh that shall do
contrary. And therefore when I view my course even at the first to be so
crooked, O dear Father, what shall I think i^ (...) appear when I shall be
judged in them all? Shall I boast of merits and keep no fyttle of thy
commandments? Shall I challenge salvation for my works, and every branch
of thy law does call me cursed, because I have so fowlie and often broken
the same? No, good Father, no, this little view of my obedience to thy hestes
does plainly tell me, I have no merits or good works to come before thee
withal, much less am I able to do works of supererogation, that is more
than I need to do, but of sins and evil works alas I see a number. With
David may I cry, Psalm. 34.
They are more than the hairs of my ^eade, and my heart has failed me. I ^ay
truly say with the prodigal Son, I have sinned against heaven and against
thee, and I am not worthy (...) be called thy child. I may say ^ith the
Publican, God be merciful (...) me a sinner, and add thereunto, a ^reat and
grievous sinner: I may say ^ith Jeremy: O Lord though mine ^^iquities
testify against me, yet deal ^hou with me according to thy name, ^or my
rebellions are many. And with (...), I have sinned, Job. 7.
what shall I do to ^^ee, O thou preserver of men? Yea ^ell may I say, I lie
down in my con^^sion, and my shame covers me. ^or I have sinned against the
Lord my GOD, from my youth up till this ^ay, and have not obeyed his voice. ^o
conclude, I may look about me, and from a wounded soul cry unto ^^ose that
can give me counsel: In re^^ect of my sins, men and brethren what ^^all I
do? And see, how never the Lord ^^rsaketh those, yt want his help and aid.
^oe I not even now remember what he advises me and all sinners in my case to
do? Prou. 28.
He that hides his sin, says the Lord by Solomon, shall not prosper: but
he that confesses his sin, and forsakes it, shall have mercy. And see in
David the proof and trial of it. For when I held my tongue says he* my
bones consumed, Psalm. 32.
or when I roared all the day. For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night,
and my moisture is turned into the drought of sum^mer. Then I acknowledged my
sin vn^to thee, neither hid I mine iniquity* For I said I will confess against
my self* and thou forgauest the punishment o^ my sin. Therefore O Lord I
hearken to thy counsel, and though I ha^^ sinned above the number of the sand
o^ the sea, as plainly I see I have, if I (...) charged with every branch of
thy com^maundements, how I have kept them though my transgressions be
multipli^ed and are exceeding many, so that I am not worthy to behold the
heigh^ of heaven for the multitude of m^ unrighteousness, yea I say, thoug^^ I
have provoked thy wrath, and done evil before thee, and not kept any ^ot of
thy commandments so fully as I ought, yet knowing Thou desire ^he death of
no sinner, but rather that he should repent and be saved, and have ^hewed the
truth thereof in forgiving David and many mo confessing truly their sins
before thee: Therefore O good Lord and sweet refuge, full of mercy, pity,
and compassion, I bow the ^nees of my heart with king Manasses, and all
sorrowful sinners, and beg ^hy mercy. I have sinned, O Lord, I ^aue sinned,
and I acknowledge my ^ransgressions, but I humbly beseech ^hee forgive me, O
Lord forgive me, and destroy me not, as I have deserved, ^e not angry with me
for ever, by re^eruing to me evil, neither condemn ^e into the lower parts of
the earth. For thou art the God, even the God of ^ll them that repent, and on
me thou ^^ilt show mercy. My sorrow good ^orde, alas I know it is not great
y^ough, neither answers it the greatness of my sin, but thou can give
greater, if it please thee. O dear Father, rent my heart and give me feeling,
cleave it a sunder, by thy pearcing spirit, that from it may flow the tears
of true repentance, strike good Lord this hard rock of mine, that it may
gushe out sorrowful water for so foul offense, and what wants in me any
ways, supply in mercy with my Savior, in whom thou art perfectly pleased.
Grant O God unto me, thy gracious spirit to kill in me continually more and
more the strength and power of sin, and to raise me up in body and soul to
more obedience toward thee. Let not my wantes stand ever, sweet Lord,
betwixt thy mercy and me, but give me will to wish it, give me power to do
it, give me love to like it, and ever strength to continue in it, that thou
have appointed for me to walk in before thee in this world. Hear me O
Lord, O God, O sweet and endless comfort of my sinful soul, for Jesus
Christ his sake, that living hear, I may ever serve thee: and doing so, I may
never loose thee. Amen, Amen.

The second Commandment.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, etc.
FIrst for the order of this Commandment, either we may answer that this
first Table containing the honor and duty of men to the Lord, as the se^ond
does their duty to man, and the worship of GOD being part^y inward,
partly outward, ha^ing in the former Commandment laid down the former
kind, to wit of inward worship, fitly now in this, and the two next follow ye
outward duties, which to the same our gracious God we justly owe. Or else thus:
That the Lord in the first commandment having separated himself from al
other gods, devised and made by men, and commanded all mortal men and women
his creatures subject to his Law to worship him only and none but him, here
now in this second precept (as order required) he sets down modum and
ratione^ iuxta quam coli velit, the way and manner how he wilbee served:
Forasmuch as in vain he should have done the first, except he had done the
second also. The way and manner is this, even according to his will and nature.
Which albeit it may seem to flesh and blood not so fitly done by a negative
law, as by an affirmative it might, yet besides that we are not to teach the
Lord, even in special wisdom has he thus done it. For first our natures
are very prone to the breach hereof, which by a negative is stronglier beat
down than by an affirmative, and then again the Gentiles next neighbors to
the Jews were very much given to idols and images, and therefore by name
forbidden to the Jews, least by the Gentiles in that point they should be
defiled. And yet does not the Lord here so set down a negative, but that he
includes an affirmative in it. For as he says, Thou shall not make to thy
self any graven image, and means thereby, Thou shall not worship me with
any devise of ^hine own, contrary to my will and nature, so implies he herein
the affirma^iue, namely thou shall in every re^pect worship me according to my
will and nature. Moreover remember here ^gaine, which has been touched be^re,
that both in this commandment (...) in all other, the Lord sets down (...)
name that thing, the doing whereof (...) not doing is most decent or horri^^e.
And therefore in this place for^^^ding all false and fond worship (...) his
Majesty, he sets down in name that which is most unseemly and vile, to
wit, Idolatry. For of all wrong worship, to make him like a man or woman, or
other worse creature, to prostrate our selves thereunto, and to think we
worship him in so doing, is most horrible. What expositions your Book gives
you may look and mark, adding for more plainness thereunto thus much, that
the very meaning of this commandment in effect is thus much: as if the Lord
should have said: although the corrupt nature of man be such, as naturally he
desires my presence in some visible form and shape, foolishly thinking that
then he is most near unto me when he has before his eyes some visible
picture of me: yet for as much as this, and the worship hereby done unto me
is neither agreeable to my will nor nature, I therefore command thee that thou
make to thy self no graven image, etc. That is, that thou go not about to
represent me by any likeness of any creature whatsoever, neither to worship
me in or under any such shows, or after any way than out of my word thou
learnest to be agreeable both to my will and nature. Easily then may we see
what we are occasioned here in this commandment to consider of, namely, 1 The
making of Images. 2 The worshipping of them. 3 The reasons God uses here.


Touching the first then usually upon this occasion is moved this question,
whether simply it be unlawful and misliked of the Lord to make any kind of
Image by painting, car^ing, ingrauing, etc. And it seems yea, because the
words are so flat without exception, Thou shall not make any graven image,
etc.

For answer whereunto 3. several ^udgements are found amongst men. ^ome
think in deed all pictures and ^mages to be unlawful as well in Ci^ill use as
in religious, and such are the ^urkes by name if it be truly writ^n of them.
Whose money they say has never any image upon it but certain Arabike letters,
their other works as carpets, couerings, quisshins etc. utterly also without
any image of man or any living creature upon them, and all because they think
it unlawful.

Others think it lawful to make any picture at all, yea even of God himself,
so that the same be not worshipped as a bare picture and image. And they
understand this commandment of images made to this end to be adored. These
are our Papists.

The third judgment and best, is of them that think it lawful to make
pictures of things which we have seen to a civil use, but not to use them in
the Church and for religion.

Now for the first opinion, it is out of all question false and too
superstitious. For howsoever the Turks receive not such proof, yet we that
embrace and cleave to the authority of Gods word, know that the Lord has
not left this commandment neither any other without large and plain
exposition in other places of the scripture, and therefore we are to confer
place with place, practice with precept, and so to see whether in deed all
images be forbidden to be made or no. First then mark ye words in Leuiticus:
Leuit. 26.1.
Ye shall make you no Idols nor graven Image, neither rear you up any pillars
etc. Out of which place thus I reason. Look how the Lord forbids the
rearing up of a pillar, and so does he forbid the making of images, for he
joins them here in one prohibition: but he does not simply forbid and in all
respects the rearing up of a pillar, therefore neither the other. The second
proposition is proved thus: Genesis 28.18.
Jacob pitched the stone on end that had lien under his head all night,
powered oil on it, and calls it Beth-el, the house of God. Iosue. 2*
Joshua commanded by the commandment of God twelve stones to be pitched up.
Samuel pitched up a stone also betwixt Mispeh and Sheu, 2. Sam. 7.12.
and called the name thereof Ebenezer. Therefore not the rearing up of a
pillar, but the rearing up of it to be worshipped idolatrously was forbidden.
Even so of images. For, as I said, they are joined of GOD in the place of
Leuiticus as things like equally forbidden. A most notable place also for the
proof hereof is that in Joshua, where the Israelites would have warred upon
their brethren, Joshua. 22.
if they had erected that altar for religion, which in deed they did set up
for a civil use, as there you may see. Besides all this, do we not see that
GOD himself commanded the Cherubims, Lillies, Pomgranetes, Oxen, Lions, and
such like pictures to be made, and says he had given his Spirit to Bezaliel,
Exodus 25.
whereby he might have understanding to work all these works. Now think
with your self, would GOD either have commanded images to be made, or
ascribed the ability to do such works to the grace of his Spirit, if in
this commandment given and published before the time he had simply forbidden
the same in all respects? It can not be, unless GOD should be contrary to
him self, and therefore the Turks, or whosoever else so thinks, are
deceived. The same might yet further be proved by the commandment of GOD to
make the Brazen Serpent, and by Christ's not finding fault with Caesar's image
upon the money that was showed him, and many proofs more if need were. For the
second opinion of them that think it lawful to make any picture, yea even of
GOD himself, and to set them up in Churches, so long as no worship is done to
them as they are bare images, there is great cause why they should be gainesaid
and resisted even in both. But especially in the first, for they oppose
themselves to the true sense of this commandment, to diverse other plain
Scriptures, to the nature of God, to reason, and to the judgments and
practice of godly men, as by particular view of every one appears. The
sense of the commandment against it.
For touching the true and direct end of this commandment, it has been said
before, and is most true, that it is chiefly to forbid al pictures of God, as
the most gross blindness and impiety of all other, because he may not be
imagined to be like either man or woman, or any other creature. Other
Scriptures.
He never was seen, and therefore can not be painted or pictured like any
creature, Deutro. 4.15. Esa. 40.18. Acts. 17.29.
but with a breach of this commandment. For other places of the scripture
plainly forbidding the same, I have quoted them before, and nothing can be
more express. Thirdly they oppose themselves to his nature, Nature against it.
which is such as no heavenly creature can resemble, much less any earthly: no
natural thing, much less any artificial. And to set up a picture of God not
like him, whether it be to offend him, and to dishonor him, if otherwise we
cannot conceive it, let us judge by our selves, who quickly would take it in
great snuff, if one picturing us should make either the eyes too great, the
nose too long or high, the ears, mouth, arms, hands, or any thing wrong. Yea,
we would burst it in pieces, bid away with it, and not abide the sight of it.
Yet dare we abuse the God of heaven our creator and maker, and set up 20.
thousand pictures of him in several places, never awhit like him, for it is
impossible they should be, neither one like another. O Christ open our eyes,
that we may see this vanity and the sin of that church, that maintains
this as good. For truly it is fearful thus to play with the Lord, whom never
eyes saw, nor can see, as he is in nature and being. Fourthly, they do against
al reason: for God is a spirit, Reason against it.
and therefore cannot be pictured: God is infinite and therefore cannot be
pictured. God, as often has been said, was never yet ^eene of any, and then
how is it possible ^o picture him? Youth and age, length, ^readth, thicknes,
white or black, this ^ember or that, these are not things ^^cident to the
Godhead, and therefore ^mpossible in very reason to picture God. Last of all,
they oppose them^elues both to the judgment and prac^ise of the Godly in thus
doing. All practice of the godly against it.
For to omit the judgments of the Prophets and Apostles so lately quoted,
crying against this impiety. It is very worthy noting that the ancient
Father Damascene a defender of other images and pictures greatly, yet says:
Deum conarivelle effingere, Lib. 4. cap. 8.
rem stultam esse and impiam. non enim imagines Deus admittit. To go about
(says he) to picture God is both a very foolish thing and a wicked. For God
may not be pictured. And if you mark the practice of the godly, I pray you of
all those notable visions and manifestations made unto them, which of them ever
went about to make a picture? Surely if they would not ever presume to picture
God in that manner that they saw him and talked with him, because they well
knew these were but sparcles as it were of his glory and majesty that they
saw, and he in nature a far other thin^ than ever he appeared unto them or
they able to behold, if he had done it, how shall we behold, nay O Lord
what blindness is it in us to set him out as we list our selves, and even as
every sinful man and rude painter pleases? Therefore I trust we see this
to be a fault, and even forbidden in this second commandment, to make any
image of God himself.

The third opinion of them that think there is a lawful use of some Images
and pictures, though not in re^igion, is most true, otherwise were the ^ift,
cunning and ability to do these things by painting, caruing, grauing, or such
like, a wicked thing, when as yet we heard before yt it proceeds of Gods
^pirite either in Bezaliel, or whosoever ^lse endued with it. But then hereupo^
ari^eth another question, as namely whether ^mages and pictures in churches may
not ^e had though we put no religion in the^. Whereunto we may answer that
how^oeuer it be tolerable in some men's o^inions, and a thing indifferent to
have ^ome sort of pictures in the Church for (...) civil use, as either for
story and remem^ra^ce sake, or for ornament and beauty of (...) place, and may
seem to be warra^ted by ye act of Joshua, who set a stone in the sanctuary of
God, and by the deed of Solomon, who had the pictures of diverse things in the
temple, and of the Cherubins in the holiest place of al, yet certainly in this
matter, it is not so good to look what may be done, as what is convenient to
be done. For if in any thing, surely in this it is true, some thing is in some
sort lawful, which is not expedient. Images in Churches we well know, have not
ever been used, howsoever Rome does urge the matter, but then began, when as
the idols of the Gentiles being destroyed and peace restored to the Churches
under Constantine, they used with great affection and resort in certain places
and times to solemnise the memory of such godly Martyrs as constantly for the
truth had suffered: Setting up in their Churches at these their solemn
meetings for ornaments partly, and partly for a better remembrance of their
constanty and faith, the pictures and images of such dead Martyrs, as
especially they judged worthy chief remembrance, and this began not to be
any custom til about the year of our Lord 380, as by much authority is
easily and evidently to be proved. Ann. 380.
And yet see and note it diligently which indeed is to be marked of us al,
albeit the beginning of images in Churches was for no worse end than I now
have named, yet did the godly Fathers in those days even vehemently speak
against the same, not condemning in it self the historical use of pictures,
but yet wishing in such places of meeting to serve GOD, as the Churches were,
rather pristinam and primitiuam simplicit atem, the old and primitive
simplicity, than such deckinges and ornaments of images. Justly fearing the
mischief, that indeed followed of it, and now so greatly abounds in ye
Church of Rome to wit gross impiety and idolatry. Therefore I say again,
howsoever in it self any men think it to be lawful with some conditions, yet
certainly it is no way convenient, but very dangerous every way to have them
in the Churches. This first point then of this commandment is now
sufficiently explaned unto us, if one word be added of the very first
beginning of Images, The original of Images.
and to what end they were invented. Read the fourteenth Chapter of the book
of Wisdom, and mark the story well. The inuenting of idols, says he, was
the beginning of whoredom, and the finding of them is the corruption of life.
They were not from the beginning, neither shall they continue for ever, etc.
Before the flood we read not of them in the scriptures. And after the flood
about 300. years lived Terah, Abraham's father, who as he was the first
idolater that we read of, so thinks Epiphanius he was the first maker of an
image, and even he that is meant in the 14. of Wisdom before named. But
whosoever first invented them, and whenever they first began, it skilleth not
much, only note his judgment that writ that book of Wisdom, whosoever he
was, how he plain^y affirms from the beginning they were not, but the vain
glory of man ^rought them in, and the finding of them was the corruption of
life. Now beside ye ^se which there is touched, namely to mitigate ye grief of
a father for his dead ^hilde, other uses followed. For Noble men, wise men and
good common wealth men being dead, had at their gates, doors (...) other places
set up their pictures both (...) honor their memory, and to mitigate ^he
grief of their friends for their de^arture. So writes Valerius of Scipio and
Cato, and many other stories of ^he like done to other men. Accepta de^^de res
est (says Pliny) humanissima am^^tione per totum orbem: That is, The ^^stome
was taken up even through (...) world as it were by a courteous and ^uil kind
of ambition. So that the child ^ould have his fathers picture, the cly^^t his
good Patron, the soldier his ^aptaine, and the Captain his soul^^er, the
field, the camp, and all circum^^^nces. And thus grew it from dead ^^en to
living, and that sometime for honor, sometime for dishonor. And from private
places to be set up in Churches, from policy to religion, as has been said
and showed before. And thus much of making of images and erecting them either
in houses or Churches, private or public places.

The second point general of this commandment is to consider the worshipping
of images, Of the worshipping of Images.
whether it be lawful for a Christian man or woman to fall down before a
stock and a stone, and to do it reverence, capping, kneeling, knocking,
creeping, crossing, kissing, lighting up candels to it, and such like, as we
see done in the Church of Rome, with great observation. If we look the
scriptures of God, we have first here a plain commandment, Thou shall not
bow down to them, nor worship them* Then have we David in plain words
pronouncing destruction to all that do^ it, Psalm. 97. Deutro. 27.
saying, Confounded be all they that worship carved images, etc. with a
number like testimonies. But I pass^ them over because our adversaries the
Papists themselves are ashamed of ^his their folly and wickedness: but ^owe?
Ashamed I say to confess it, although they have not grace to blush ^t the
doing of it. For what say they with one consent, so many as have a^y wit, but
that which their great Doctor Thomas Aquinas, Summa 3. part. q. 25. art. 3.
with many other, says, namely that Ne imagini ^uidem Christi, in quantum est
res quae^am, puta lignum sculptum, vel pictum, vlla ^ebetur reuerentia, etc.
That is, That to ^^e very image of Christ, as it is but an ^^age, or matter of
wood, graven or ^ainted, no reverence is due, etc. and there^^re in no case
they will confess that ^^ey do any woorship to bare images. (...) happy men
if they had grace to shame (...) do, that which they so greatly shame (...)
say they do, or consciences to take ^way yet at the last, that which they ^owe
many thousands stumble and ^^ll at, howsoever a few of them, that ^^ue
learning can distinguish betwixt (...) image, and the thing represented
^^ereby. But what is it then that they say for the maintenance of their
images, if they deny to woorship them?

Popish shifts.
But where alas have they their warraunt, that GOD will be thus woorshipped of
them, and that whatsoever they do in outward show to the image, he will
repute it and take it as done in heart to himself? What we have to say
against this vain devise of theirs, I pray you mark. First the very Gentiles
had the selfsame excuse and shift for their idolatry, and yet was their doing
wicked. Arnobius says of them, Non adorabant statua^ quod putabant, Lib. 6.
aes, aurum, argentu^ aut similes statuaru^ materias Deos esse, sed quod per ea
dij inuisibiles honorentur. That is, They woorshipped images, not for that they
thought, brass, gold, silver, or such things to be God, but because by thos^
things the invisible gods were worshipped.

Judges, for that the people left the God of Israel, and served Baalim, Iud.
2.11.
and what I pray you was that? Did they think that image to be God? No says
the prophet Osee, They have called me Baalim, meaning God, that is, Osee. 2.16.
they thought that worship which they did to Baalim, was done to God under the
image, and by the image, and yet says the word, They did evil in serving
Baalim. Iud. 2.11.
What can be plainer against this idle excuse, if you will look and mark the
places well? Again in the 17. of Judges we read of Micah his idols in the
form of men, Iud. 17.
as some think, because Christ appeared diverse times like a man. And what?
Gen 32. Dan. 7.
did he think those his idols to be God, or worship the^ as gods? no his own
words testify the contrary, for he says, Now shall the Lord bless me, when
I have a Leuite to my priest: he does not say, Now shall my Teraphim bless
me, but now shall the Lord bless me, distinguishing betwixt God and his
images. So that Micah did not think his idols ^o be GOD, and so certainly
did not worship them as God, but in them rather and by them thought he served
God who accepted that to himself, that was done to the image which
repres^nted him, yet did he wickedly and sinned like an idolater in so doing.
How then should this popish excuse be good of worshipping GOD in the image? I
would to GOD with modesty and Christian chastity men and women would think
of this reason drawn by a godly man a pari, of the like. Would the husband be
content with his wife, or the wife with the husband, if that duty which is
due of them one toward the other, should be performed of either of them to a
stranger with this excuse that the Papists make? No we know we could not
bear it, neither would we with any such answer be contented. And why should
our hearts be so hard, and our judgments so bewitched, that we should not
think the Lord loves his Church, and every true member of it, as well as any
man his wife, or any wife her husband, and is as ielous of that spiritual
duty, that is due to him, as men are of the other? The one is actual
fornication, the other is spiritual so learned eue^ in wisdom of God to
beat into us that he can as ill abide the one, as we the other: and yet we
will not see, nor conceive. Again shall we think that the Israelites were so
gross, as to think the golden Calfe to be a very God, when as they knew it
molten and made of ye earings that they plucked off? Truly it is impossible.
For they knew that had a beginning, and a God there was who had done great
things for them ere that day, whose beginning they knew not: How then? Why,
out of question they did imagine, that the worship which they did to that
idol, was done to God in the idol. And yet whether God was pleased with that
excuse or no, judge we all. Let it fall then even in the fear of God, what
man's head inuenteth against the Lord and his own duty, and at the last let
us see it to be a vain mock, to think we can worship God in an image, and
by it, or under it.

Another shifte they have for defense of images in the Church, but it is as ill
as the former. They are (say they) lay men's Books, and stand in very good
steed, to put us in mind of GOD. It is very well. And is every kind of
Book then good and to be allowed of? Or is every manner of rememberaunce by
and by commendable? If not, then should they not only say they are lay men's
Books, but prove that they are good books also in deed to that end. (for
otherwise many books may as well hurt as profit the users of them as I said.)
But this they do not, neither in deed can they do, and therefore the
consequence they make is naught, and falls of it self if you mark it. Now
that they are no good Books, but very dangerous and deceyuing sightes for
lay men or other whatsoever, let the word of the Lord himself be judge.
Iere. 10.8.
The Prophet Jeremy in zeal of spirit detesteth such Books, verse. 15.
and refuses to be put in mind of GOD by any such deceitefull means. For
the stock says he, is a doctrine of vanity, yea they are vanity and the
work of errors, and in the time of their visitation they shall perish. The
Prophet Abacuck again says, That the image is a teacher of lies, Chap. 2.18.
though he that made it, trust in it, etc. Shall then a Book full of lies,
vanities, and error be so good a Book, and rememberaunce to lay men? Shall
that which indaungereth the learned, nothing hurt think we the unlearned? O
that we knew not by experience into what fond and wicked opinions poor
people have been brought of GOD by these painted and carved Books? How many
hearts lament their folly, and how many tongues to the praise of GODS mercy
in visiting them with his light, can, and do tell, what fond conceytes they
had of the Lord and heavenly matters, seduced by the sight of their eyes?
Therefore since God has said it, and experience found it, that they are so
dangerous, let them be Books for Paganes and Heathens, surely for Christians
they should not be. Which of the Prophets or Apostles went about ever to have
images made, either to put themselves in mind of any thing which the Lord
taught them, or their people of any thing which they delivered to them from the
Lord? But they used the admonition of their brethren, and especially by
writing down what they taught they helped this infirmity of ours. Signifying
even by that their practice what the means ought now to be to put us in
mind of God and heavenly things, chiefly his word. The Lord himself
says, Deutro. 4.
Ye saw no image, but heard a voice only. Therefore make no image: and
again, You saw that I spoke to you from heaven, therefore ye shall make no
Gods of gold nor silver: as if he should have said, my practice in speaking
to you by voice, not by image, should teach you that by my word and not by
image, I am to be remembered. And it is a notable place in Esaias, Esaias. 30.21.
that when the word shall take place with his, then they shall abhor images.
And thus much both of making them, and worshipping them.

Next it does follow, that we consider how under this outward appearing
gross idolatry, are comprised all devised ways and means of our selves to
serve the Lord, yea, even all, be they never so glorious in our eyes, and our
intentes never so good and godly and reasonable, as we think, yet if they be
but our own inventions, not warranted to us in the word, here under this name
of images they are contained, and together condemned. So that the very sense of
this commandment is this, Generally by no devise of man, and particularly not
by this.
as has before been said: by no devise of thine own, or invention
whatsoever will I be served, and namely not by images erected up to me, or in
rememberaunce of me. But ever at all times, and of all men according to that
rule that my self have laid down, and prescribed only. Deutr. 12. Esaias. 29.
You shall not do every man what seems good in his own eyes, for in vain
do men worship me with traditions of men. Moses did nothing in building the
material tabernacle beside what was commanded and showed him. Nadab and Abihu
the sons of Aaron dyed for presuming of themselves to serve the Lord with
strange fire. Leuit. 10.
The very heathnish Romans had this reason with them, that it was better for
them to be quite without Christ, than to worship him, and others with him
against his will and liking. And ad placandum deum ijs opus habent homines quae
ille iubet, that is, To please the Lord, says Lactantius, men have need of
those things that he himself commands. And a Christian mind does not
find a sure stay, but when it hears, Hoc dicit dominus: 1. Sam. 13.
This says the Lord. If Saul break ye course that God does appoint and of
himself devise to serve the Lord, be his necessity to do so, as he thinks
never so great, and the intent of his heart never so holy like, certainly
Samuel both must, and will tell him to his face, he has done foolishly, 1.
Sam. 15.
for the Lord has more pleasure in that his will is obeyed, than in all the
fatlings of the Amalekites offered up unto him of our own wills and heads.
Intents will not serve, neither voluntary Religion stand accepted. And
therefore ever let us weigh and follow the counsel of Solomon. And look to
our feet, when we enter into the house of God being more ready to hear,
Ecclesi. 4.
than to offer the sacrifice of fools, for they know not what they do.

Last of all we are to consider the reasons that God makes here. The reasons
of this commandment.
The first is drawn of his love toward us, yea of his exceeding great love,
which is even grown to a jealousy. So dearly, so vehemently is his heart set
upon us, yet not for any worthiness in us, that look how grievously a
ielous man can take the misbehauiour of his straying wife, even so ill can the
Lord abide that we should impart our selves to others beside him in
obedience, worship and love. Now had we any feeling left within our sides, and
our hearts were not altogether so hard trampled and beaten as they are, what
a reason were this for ever to keep us knit unto the Lord? O mark.
Why should he love us, why should he care for us, why should he think of
us, or ever once vouchsafe us good, who of our selves cannot think a good
thought? There is no cause but in himself. Yet does he not only love us, but
is ielous of us. How then should this force us to cleave unto him, only his,
and none but his for evermore? Is he ours and will we not be his again? Would
he only enjoy us, and we will not be tied unto him? Take heed. The greater
love, the greater hate, when unkind refusal is to reap his just reward. The
second reason which the Lord here uses is drawn of the punishment that will
light upon us, if we break this commandment. He will visit the sins of
the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation, and sore
is that anger, the flame of whose punishment casts out smoke so far, yet
the meaning thereof is, as Ezekiel well shows, Chap. 18.
if the children do follow the fathers wickedness, and not otherwise. nor
give our hearts leave to think of his threatened judgments, but headlong in
vnfeelingnesse run on, and in blind ignorance imagine, that our intentes if
they be good must needs stop Gods mouth and make him contented with the
breach of his will, this, this is the poison of ye whore of Babylon that
infecteth our souls to eternal damnation and wrath. O God and Father of
mercies disperse this dimnesse as may stand with thy goodwill from the eyes of
thy deceived creatures, and yet once ere they dye, let them see their sins
against this commandment, that in wrath they pass not to greater judgment,
so due and so sure to all wilful contemners of the light of thy word and
Gospel. Amen. Furthermore again if we do well, mark here the words of our
God wherewith he utters these promises and threateneth these judgments,
truly they aforde unto us two or three profitable notes, and considerations.
As first, because in our devises and worship of our own will the best we can
say, is that it comes from a good meaning and intent, and therefore we
think God cannot of his mercy refuse that which is well meant, and intended
toward him: I beseech you mark how the Lord here overthrows utterly this
defense, saying in express words, that they be haters of him and so led with
the liking of their worship from the Lord and his true service, that when
occasion serves they bewraye extreme hatred thereunto, persecuting it with
fire and fagotte in the true professors thereof. O my brethren if GOD repute
me for an enemy, what can my pretended love avail me? If he say I hate
him, how dare I still bewitched with my folly, think I love him? Shall his
own mouth tell me, that I hate him, and that he so takes all my doings, If I
swerve from Gods commandments. I hate him intend what I can.
and will I not believe it? is it not possible to make us feel our fault, and
to see our sin in this behalf? will we still challenge the Lord with our
good intentes and honest meanings, as we think, when yet his own tongue
speaks it, that if I either serve with him any other, as saints, Angels,
images, or whatsoever, or him alone after any other way, than he prescribes, I
love him not, but hate him, yea even extremely hate him, and shall at his
hands find the reward of a deadly enemy to his glory? Now Christ for his
mercies sake touch us and give us feeling. Secondly let us mark again in
these the comparison of mercy and judgment together, how far the one
exceeds. His enemies and haters of his will he punishes but to the third
and fourth generation, but shows mercy to thousands of them that love him
and keep his commandments: Who would not serve then, and only serve a God
of such a nature? Yea what heart is it that will not seek to please according
to his will so good a Lord as powers mercy so long after his decease upon
his offspring and posterity?

Last of all, it is very worthy observation, how that speaking here of his
commandments, he places love before it, saying he will show kindness to
thousands of them that love him, and keep his commandments. As though he
would have us know that these two cannot be separated, but whosoever frames
himself to obey the Lord, he must needs love him before, for out of that, as
out of his fountain and proper head, flows the other, not accepted else nor
liked of if it do not, and contrariwise if we do love the Lord in deed, in
truth, in verity, then will we keep His Commandments, mark it, His
Commandments, he does not say then will he devise this thing, and that
thing, with twenty things more of a good mind and meaning to please GOD
withal, but we will then keep His Commandments, that is, we will then seek
and search, we will then read and hear every man, we will endeavor to be
instructed what GOD in his word has prescribed us to do and we will keep
His commandments. Now then once again, even as the blood of Jesus Christ
is dear unto us, let our brethren of the Church of Rome, (for so we yet call
them in hope of amendment) look and mark what love of GOD is in them. Here
is a note, and else often repeated in the Scripture to know their love by.
Alas they devise laws, ways, and means, every day to serve GOD withal of
their own heads, but his prescribed rule in his word they utterly contemn
and neglect. Now where true love of GOD is, out of it flows a burning
constant care to keep His commandments, not our own. They keep their own
and with fire and faggot do revenge the breach of them, but the Lords word
not so, with abstayning from this meat and that meat, this day and that day,
with single life, though most impure, with prayers in an unknown tongue, and
thus often repeated over and over, with crossings, and creepings, Paxes and
Beads, holy water and Cream, Ashes and spittle, with a thousand such things
have they devised to worship the Lord, and who so breaks these, an
Heretic he is, a runneaway from the Church, cite him and summon him,
excommunicate him and imprison him, burn him and hang him, yea away with such
a one, for he is not worthy to live upon the earth. But if he blaspheme the
name of the Lord by horrible swearing, Read the L. Cobhams last examination in
the beginning of it.
if he offend most grievously in pride, in wrath, in gluttony, and
covetousness, if he be a drunken alestake, a ticktack tauerner, keep a whore
or two in his own house, and more abroad at board with other men, with a number
such like grievous offenses, what do they? Either he is not punished at all,
and most commonly so or if he be, it is a little penance of their own
inuenting by belly or purse, or to say a certain of prayers, to visit such an
image in pilgrimage, etc.

But all this deserves neither fire nor faggot. Is not this for that man of
sin to exalt himself against all that is called God, or that is worshipped?
Can it be denied but that he that punishes the breach of his own laws above
the breach of Gods laws, in that prefers himself before GOD? Surely it
cannot, it is too plain, and therefore once again remember that the love of
God in man or woman draws them to the keeping of His commandments set down
in the word, and not of their own constitutions devised by themselves. And
thus much in brief of this commandment.

The examination of the conscience.
Now if I would fruitefully meditate and think of this commandment
secretly, and shortly with my self, as I did of the former, then consider I,
that as in other so in this also, little is said, and much is meant, part is
put for the whole, and in the negative the affirmative is employed. Therefore
thus do I take the commandment, as if it were said, Thou shall not worship
me with any carnal, earthly, superstitious or outward devised worship by thy
self, and namely not by images, but in heart, in spirit, in truth, as is
commanded in my word. Which when I know, if I would at any time rip up this
heart of mine, and disclose unto my self my secret guilt and sin herein
against my God, I carefully consider, and as I can in mind behold, how I
have ever served the Lord, or thought in judgment that he might be served.
And peradventure I find, that living in the days of superstition and
blindness, ignorant of God and his truth, for fear and weakness with
others, I have bowed my knee to Baall, worshipped stocks and stones, or as I
thought GOD in them, and even been polluted with gross and grievous
idolatry. For which if it so have been, what can I say? Shall ignorance
excuse me? Did I labor then and ever by all means possible to attain to
knowledge? Or lived I rather carelessly as others did, thinking it good that
many followed, and having or seeking no better ground for my conscience, than
the practice of my forefathers, kings and governors? If of this latter my
heart condemn me, how should my ignorance excuse me, since it was so plainly
wilful? Shall good intent or my good meaning stand for warrant before my God?
Ah how shall he that gave me in charge expresselie, that I should not do what
seems good in mine own eyes, but what he commanded, accept for excuse my
wilful and stubborn disobedience? Neither ignorance therefore nor intent may
warraunt so witles walking before the Lord, but only pardon in Christ Jesus
my Savior. But if either age, which then was young, or other providence of the
Lord have freed me always from so gross idolatry, yet seek I further
whether with any outward thing else whatsoever, not warraunted by the word, I
have thought or sought to serve and please the Lord, being by reason thereof,
brought asleep with an imagination of my well doing, and so careless to seek
or practice the duties of the word. If I have, this also know I to be a
breach of this commandment. Then from things not warraunted, I came to things
commanded, as the hearing of ye word, prayer, conference profitable with my
brethren, and such like: knowing that if even in these by the Lord ordained,
as things wherewith he is honored and pleased, I have otherwise used my
self, than I should, in stead of perfourming the Lords appointment, I have
brought before him mine own invention, walking unwittingly in mine own ways,
and fearfully broken this precept of my God. Which when I consider, I need no
further show of grievous guilt to cast me down from height of all supposed
soundnes in this law. Mine eyes do see, my heart acknowledges, my conscience
cries, my sin is great. Stand O soul before the Lord, the just and upright
Judge, whose pearcing eyes discovers al thy ways, set thy self more in his
sight, while mercy may be had, whose voice shall sound thy lasting woe, if
sight of sin procure not true remorse. And say now soul before the Judge of
truth, have thou always used as he has willed thee, the hearing of the
word? Did never desire of worldly praise provoke thee to this service? Never
did thou think to day such shall I see, and again of them be noted if I
go? Did never fear of worse opinion to be bred of thee in worldly states by
thy absence, draw thee out? No fleshly thought or earthly liking of the
speaker has there been within thee to prick thee to his hearing? Has
painted pride and new or strange attire never said secretly in thee, to day
go hear the Sermon? Lie thou may not, the Lord being Judge, clear thy
self thou can not, O my so^le thy self being judge. Therefore yt which ye
Lord appoints as a service to himself, and for our endless comfort, by this
corruption begins a service of thine own, and to thy just damnation. For to
hear the Lord bids, but not for these ends. Thus serving the Lord in a
thing commanded, not as he commands, I serve him with mine own invention,
and guilty most grievously I am before him. O that I were any better in the
duty of prayer. Am I never negligent, cold, and frosen? Burns the fire
within me before, or whilst I speak with my tongue? Shakes my flesh with the
vehemency of my spirit? Never straieth my heart from present prayer? Never
have I to an end, or wearilie wish the voice, I hear to cease, it is too
long? Ah wretch, how dare I say it? Conscience cries and will not be bribed,
this duty of prayer thus corruptly performed, the Lord acknowledges not as
a service by him commanded, but as mine own invention, and a breach of this
his precept. My conference with others in show so good, in words so fair,
tastes it never of liking of my self, or vain delight to hear mine own
discourse, of pride to seem and to be known a man endued with such and so
good gifts? Tends my heart in truth to the praise of my God, and the comfort
of my hearers, whenever I speak of fruitful things without all vain
respect and hidden evil whatsoever? If it do not, then the thing that in it
self the Lord has commanded, as I perform it, he utterly abhors, and it
is wilworshippe of mine own, not prescribed duty by my God: therefore a
breach of this commandment. What should I say? The more I search, the more
I see: and I am not as I thought concerning the keeping of this Law. Mo things
yet in it are commanded, and more things well by these I see I have not
performed. Thus much serves to sound damnation to me, and witness sufficient
in dreadful day shall this my guilt exhibit against me, beside a curse upon
my posterity to many generations. But O Lord thy mercy reaches unto the
heavens, Psalm. 36.5.
and thy faithfulness unto the clouds. Nehem 9.17.
Gracious art thou O gracious God, and full of compassion, slow to anger, and
of great goodness. Were my sins as crimsin, Esa. 1.18.
thou can make them as white as snow: though they be as red as scarlet,
soon can thou cause them to be as the wool. Dear father have mercy upon
me, and bury in the bottom of the sea, that they never more appear before
thee, all my sins, and by name my breaches of this commandment. O my God as
thou have vouchsafed me a Savior to quit me from this curse, so due unto me
for my disobedience, so in that Savior of mine thine own dear son look
upon me. He was borne for my sake, he lived for my sake, he died for my sake,
then let his birth, his life, his death good Lord profit me, in winning
pardon of thee for my faults, and direction of thy spirit for the time to
come, that better daily I may know to serve thee, and even in truth as thou
have prescribed, perform the same unto thee. Amen good Lord, hear me.

The third Commandment.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, etc.
Question.

WHAT is the meaning of this commandment? Your Book.


Ans. God charge us in this third commandment these three things. First,
that we use with most high reverence the name of God, whenever we either
speak or think upon him. Secondly that we never blaspheme the name of God by
coniuring, witchcraft, sorcerie or charming, or any such like, neither hy
cursing, or banning. Thirdly that we never swear by the name of God in our
common talk, although the matter be never so true, but only where the glory
of God is sought, or the salvation of our brethren, or before a Magistrate in
witnessing the truth, when we are thereunto lawfully called. In which causes
we must only swear by the name of God. But as for Saints, Angels Roode,
Book, Cross, Mass, or any other thing, we ought in no case by them to
swear.

Que. What is meant by the name of God here?

Ans. Not only any one word usually given to him in scripture, as Jehovah, or
such like, Philip. 2, 9.
but also his majesty and excellency, with such attributes as declare the
same, as his wisdom, his justice, his providence, his mercy and so forth.
Again his law and commandments or his doctrine and word are usually
signified by it, Leuit. 22.31. 1. Tim. 61.
to make us more careful to attend upon them, as things whereupon depend the
honor, glory and name of God.

Que. What is it to take his name in vain?

Ans. Surely either to speak or think of it without most high reverence, and
especially to swear by it otherwise than we ought. Also to cast behind us the
diligent care of his commandments.

Que. Of the latter we shall speak hereafter, now in the mean time how
prove you that we must every way use reverently the name of God?

Ans. To name but one place of many, it is proved evidently by these words
of the law: Deuteronomy. 28.58.
If thou shall not fear this glorious and fearful name, the Lord thy GOD,
then will the Lord make thy plagues wonderful, etc. That is, if thou do
not with most great fear and reverence use the name of GOD at all times, and
show the same by keeping and doing all the words of this law, then will I
plague thee to the example of all others, even in thy self and in thy seed,
V. 59.
with great plagues and of long continuance, and sore diseases and of long
durance.

Que. How prove you that by swearing I must use his name reverently?

Ans. By necessary consequence. For if I must ever use it reverently, then
when I swear by it.

Que. The argument were good, if it were lawful to swear at all, but the
Scripture seems to deny all swearing, Math. 5.33. Iam. 5.12.
saying: swear not at all, but let your communication be yea, yea, and nay,
nay. Whereupon the Anabaptists have thought this law a ceremonial law, and
now abrogated.

Ans. Those places you name are to be understood either of common talk, or
of swearing by creatures, and they do not in general condemn all swearing.
Of this judgment is Augustine, who says: In nouo Testamento dictum est ne
omnino iuremus, non quia iurare est peccatum, sed quia pe^erare est immane
peccatum: That is, In the new Testament we are forbidden to swear at all,
not because all swearing is a sin, but because forswearing is an horrible
sin. And in an other place, Admonitio non iurandi, conseruatio est a peccato
periurij. The admonition in scripture not to swear is a preservation from
false and wrongful swearing.

Que. Is it then lawful to swear?

Ans. Yea it is both lawful and a glory to God.

Que. First how prove you it is lawful?

Ans. God in his law expresselie commands us, saying, Thou shall fear the
Lord thy God and serve him, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Chap. 10.20
and shall swear by his name: therefore it is lawful. Secondly GOD himself
and all his children (as occasion served) have used to do it, and therefore
lawful. God him self (as we read) Because he had not a greater to swear
by, Heb. 6. Genesis 2. Cor. 1.23.
swear by himself. And the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles did honor God
with this service. We see it.

Que. How prove you that it is honor to God?

Ans. By the testimonies before cited we evidently see, Heb. 6.
that the thing we swear by, we make it the greatest of all other, we make
it the witness and discerner of our truth we mean, 2. Cor. 1.23.
and the revenger of falsehoode and our fault if we do not as we swear, all
which to be given to the Lord by swearing only by him, is a glory to him,
and contrariwise a dishonor to him to ascribe them elsewhere, since indeed
they are not incident to any creature.

Que. But do all swearers by the name of God honor God in so doing?

Ans. O no, unless we swear as we ought, we dishonor him greatly.

Que. How is that?

Ans. First the matter must be true, to Gods honor, and the benefit of our
brother. Secondly before a Magistrate when we are lawfully called. Thirdly
the name of God must only be used, and lastly our affection ought to be good.
The first is proved by the oath that Joshua his espies made to Rahab. 2. Iosue.
12.
Against which it should be an offense very fearful if men having the
places of Judges, Justices, etc. should minister oaths to men in every light
trifling cause for more speed, because they will not stand to search and
examine the matter otherwise, and should either do it themselves, or sit and
hear their servants do it in such hudling, poosting and vnreuerent manner,
as that a man can scarce tell what he says. Whereas amongst Christians it were
very commendable if there were some pithie and godly admonition either longer
or shorter to advise them of the nature of an oath, what honor it is to God, if
it be as it ought to be, and what dreadful woe it pulls upon them, if it be
otherwise. Exodus 22.10.11
The second is proved by the law of God provided and set down to that end.
The third is proved by ye Prophet Jeremy, Iere. 5.7. See Amos. 8.14. Sophon.
1.4.
by whose mouth the Lord complains, that therefore he was forsaken of them,
because they swear by them that are no Gods. And mark it well. Is the mother
of Christ a God? Are Peter and Paul, Saint and Angel whatsoever so many gods?
Is the Roode a God, the Mass a God, your faith and truth a God, etc. Is the
body of Christ a God? is his blood a God, his arms, sides, feet, and heart
so many Gods? If they be not, how swear we by them then so usually and so
fearefullie? We hear what GOD says by the Prophet, namely that they that
swear by any thing that is not God, do flatly forsake the true God him self,
and will we not mark it? Shall it not fear us from so foul a custom? I hope
it shall. Last of all, that my affection should be good, very reason may
assure me. For if I come to swear not for any care or love to the glory of
God, to the truth of the cause, and peace and right of my neighbor, but in
choler, in malice, for spite and envy, certainly howsoever my oath does good,
yet shall the Lord never ascribe that good to me, but in wrath punish me
for doing a good thing with so evil a mind. Thus then we see how we must
swear if God be pleased and honored by us in that action, and how if we do
otherwise we break this commandment, and take his name in vain.

Que. One question by the way let me ask you, whether may a Christian admit
an oath by an Idol having to deal with an Infidel, or no?

Ans. The civil law they say permits strangers to swear by their own
Gods. Tertullian in his book of Idolatry says, we ought not to contend
with them overmuch about this matter. Augustine in an Epistle says plainly,
it may be admitted of a Christian, and we see it in the word, that when
Jacob and Laban swear each to other, Jacob swear by the true God, and Laban by
the God of Nachar, besides diverse other examples.

Que. Then to go forward, certain it is that we are not only bound to
the affirmative, that is every way with most high reverence to use the name of
GOD, and namely in swearing, but also to the negative, no way to pollute this
name, and chiefly not in swearing. Having then heard how by others he is
dishonored, I pray you what other breach do you know of this commandment
beside ungodly swearing?

Ans. Truly Gods name is taken in vain, dishonored, Prayer.
and this commandment broken, in praying also as well as in swearing: for if I
power out a sort of words without feeling, or any burning entire affection, if
I draw near with my lips, and my heart be far away, certainly I abuse the
holy name of my God in so calling upon him, and I am guilty of the breach of
this law. For beside that reason teaches us God cares not for lip labor,
it is the rule of the holy Ghost, that when we pray, Ephesians. 6.18.
we should pray in spirit, that is with heart and affection.

Que. How else?

Ans. Again, Gods name is taken in vain, and polluted whenever it is called
upon in coniuring, witchcraft, Coniuring.
sorcerie, charming, and such like. For the words of the law are plain, Let
none be found amongst you that makes his son and his daughter to go
through the fire, Deuteronomy. 18.10. etc.
or that uses witchcraft, or a regarder of times, or a marker of the flying of
fowls, or a sorcerer, or a charmer, or that counsels with spirits, or a
soothsayer, or that asks counsel of the dead. For all that do such things
are an abomination unto the Lord, and because of these abominations the Lord
thy God does cast them out before thee. And many other notable testimonies
has your book quoted in the margin.

Que. Why but in earnest (to let the rest pass) do you not think much good is
done and may be done by charming, that is by virtue of some wholesome prayers,
as a pater noster, two or three good auees and a creed, or such other good
words, neither english nor latin, nor any thing else in signification
oftentimes?

Ans. I answer to this question in three degrees. And first I say, the
question is not only whether any good, as you term it, be done or may be
done by a charm, but whether it be or may be done lawefully by the same, or
no. And you hear the word of God plainly condemning the practice of it.
Wherefore with what conscience can we derive health or any help whatsoever
either to our selves or ours by that means that GOD has so fearfully
threatened vengeance unto, were we never so sure to obtain it by the same?
Secondly what benefit soever we reap by such forbidden means, I dare assure
you all things considered, we get no good, but much harm. For what GOD
will not have done, GOD is never the author, worker, and cause of properly,
and directly, but health or any help to our selves or others by charming, the
Lord will not have procured: therefore of that health and help so gotten,
assuredly the Lord is neither author, worker, nor cause directly. If then not
the Lord, who but the devil? And if it be he, as most assuredly it is he,
then I pray you let us all men and women thus reason with ourselves: Is the
devil our friend or our foe, our welwiller or our enemy? Surely we cannot be
ignorant of it, he is the sworn enemy of mankind, the serpent that in burning
malice deceived us once and ouerthrewe us quite, the roaring lion that rangeth
about without any rest, still seeking out whom he may devour. And will ever he
that has even sworn the woe of us all, and seeks as Peter says, that is
with all diligence and endeavor, with might and maine, with tooth and nail as
we say, with his candle in his hand light least by any means we should escape
him, applies his whole power to destroy us and to bring us to endelesse
calamity, will he I say ever do us any good, think we, but to the end to
infer thereby a greater plague upon us? Certainly he will not: for he were
not the devil if he should, and we may be as assured of it, as we are sure yt
he has that name and nature. Then I say let us mark. We find by a charm,
bodily help in our selves or ours. But this would never Satan have done,
unless he had known that the using of means forbidden by God would sting our
bodies and souls to eternal death in the world to come. Then see still I
say, and note it. Good he does us in body, that a thousand times more evil
he may work both to body and soul in the day of judgment. Temporal ease he
is content to bestow upon us, that endless disease, misery and woe he may
procure unto us. This is most true, and now what good does charming if all
things be considered? Shall a Christian man and woman so hunt for help of
body or goods, that they shall for it loose body and soul eternally? Shall
our health and wealth be deerer to us than the Lords commandment? God forbid,
and therefore let us rest persuaded, howsoever we think such ungodly means
procure us good, yet in deed all things considered, it is no good: For Satan
being our foe will never do us good but to the end to hurt us more by it, and
the breach of Gods commandment will ring our souls a passing peale from
face and favor of the Lord. Last of all (which especially I think you would
hear) I deny that by the charm any thing at all is done, whatsoever the
words be. For every action must have a fit and convenient means applied unto
the patient to be done by, but bare words, Pater nosters, auees, and creedes,
characters and figures are no means appointed of the Lord to do any cures
by, either upon men or cattle, and therefore if any thing be done, assuredly
it is not done by these things as the true and working means, but by the
devil himself bleering our eyes by these shadows. And this vain opinion
very Aristotle could mock and disdain as absurd and foolish, Pliny also
with diverse others.

Que. But how prove you by scripture that bare words being good words be not
forcible to this end?

Ans. Surely me think beside others that example in the acts of the Apostles
proves it, where we see those vagabund Jews there spoken of used as good
words as might be, but all to no purpose, when the devil listed not
dissemble. And therefore we may see it is not the charm that can do any thing
by virtue of the bare words. And you can not say that unto the words come any
faith and good mind of the charmer, for faith leans upon promise, and
promise annexed to a thing makes it lawefull: but charming has neither
promise in the word, nor is allowed, but by name expressly forbidden and
condemned.

Que. Yet we see many things are done by it, and experience daily confirms
a contrary assertion to you.

Ans. True it is and I grant it, that by charms diverse are healed, etc. But
therefore they were the very words that did it? It is no consequence. For
other means might do it, and yet nothing apparent to us but the charm. As a
witch may hurt me with speaking to me, not that her words do it, but some
pestilent thing of an infectiue operation held in her teeth delivered her of
her devil to such use, Danaeus out of Augustine.
as some of them at death have confessed.

Que. What then is your conclusion touching charmers, southsayers, and such
like?

Ans. Truly this, in such things as I can be assured by mine own true
understanding or others counsel, they do by true natural cause and means in
reason effectual to such an end, I may lawfully use the benefit of the
knowledge given them of God and seek their help. But where I shall know the
want of these means, or but in mine own heart suspect it, surely there I may
not, there I cannot with a good conscience use them or seek unto them, for the
law that wills a witch should die, being broken of me by using such a
means, shall bring greater death to me without repentance.

Que. How yet further is Gods name taken in vain?

Ans. By rash and ungodly vows either made or kept.

Que. Whether might the Jews vow what they would, or no?

Ans. No indeed. But first they had a warrant to vow, and then also even the
thing that they did vow was warranted. And if they went further than their
commission, were their intent never so good, it was rejected. Sometimes they
vowed in adversity, to the end that if it pleased the Lord to deliver them,
they might not only in general, but even in special show their grateful
heart to the Lord for the same. Thus vowed Jacob at his going to Padan Haran,
and many more in their several distresses. And this they did to prevent and
stay in some manner the mutabilitie of their will, and frailty of their
nature, which in any grief easily promises to the Lord, but being once
freed and set at liberty, soon forgets that sweet feeling and all
speeches that proceeded from the same. Sometime in prosperity they used to
vow for several ends. As for the amplification of that outward service of
sacrifices which then the Lord required, Leuit. 7.22.
and this was warranted unto them to do. First fruits and tithes warranted
also, Deuteronomy. 12. Exodus 25.
goulde and silver to the building of the temple warranted also. Sometimes they
vowed abstinencie for the subduing of the body, Numb. 30.
warranted also. Sometimes men vowed themselves unto the Lord, as Hanna her
son Samuel, Numb. 6.
and this her and their deed was allowed of the Lord. But if once they came
without a warrant, we see their service rejected were their heart and meaning
never so good. Example is David promising to build the Lord an house, with
many others. So ever has the Lord kept man under his hand and direction
touching religion, hating the boldness of man presuming to invent any service
of himself. I answer you therefore I say and you see it, that the Jews might
not vow what they listed and what they meant well in, but what the word of
the Lord gave them leave to vow.

Que. Were they bound ever to keep their vow if once they had passed it out
of their mouth?

Ans. No in deed. But it is marvelous worthy noting the exceeding care that
the Lord had least their vows should become snares to their consciences.
Therefore he would not the wives vow to stand unless her husband heard and
allowed it, nor the daughters without the fathers consent. And if they vowed a
wicked thing he would not have it performed as we see. Deutro. 23.
If an unclean thing were vowed it might be redeemed. And which is especially
to be noted if a poor man vowed a vow above his ability, being decayed
betwixt the time of his vow and the perfourmance, at the priests discretion he
was released, Leuit. 27.
and not snared with the word yt had passed him once. For all which you see a
great liberty granted to man's infirmity, least by any means his mouth might
cause his flesh to sin, and how it never pleased the Lord that drew sin
with it in the other hand, as the unchaste vows do of chastity in the
Church of Rome, with such like. But in deed if they vowed a thing lawefull and
warranted, and in their powers without inconvenience to perform, then were
the Jews very straightly bound to perform their vows, and not otherwise.

Que. What say you then to the argument of the Papists, The Jews vowed and the
Lord accepted them. Therefore we may do the like.

Ans. I answer it is a senseless conclusion: for they had warrant, we have
none so to do: the things they vowed were warranted, we vow pilgrimages to
this Saint and that, to this Idol and that, we vow to be Monks, Friars,
Nuns, to wear this apparel and that, to live single, to abstain from this
meat and that, with a number such inventions of our own no where warranted.
Lastly, they were released if any inconvenience grew, our vows must stand
though body and soul perish for it. Therefore to reason from the Jews vow
every way warranted, to the alowance of popish and rash vows no way
warranted, is absurd.

Que. How yet further is Gods name abused?

Ans. Gods name is yet further abused whenever it is prefixed before any
wicked instruments, as the Popes bulls and pardons, which commonly begin
thus, In the name of God Amen. So did the sentences of condemnation against
Gods children in Queen Mary's days pronounced by those bloody Bishops
begin also, with such other diuilishe instruments, before which to set the
name of GOD as though he were author and approouer of such acts, can not be
but a fearful pollution of the name of GOD, and a breach of this
commandment. Again to speak of the name of GOD lightly and without any dew
regard thereof in sportes, plays, and pastimes, when my conscience tells
me I not once think of God, neither is that a right use of prayer. Also to
use the phrases and sentences of scripture in jest, in dirision, in mirth
irreverently as a number do most fearfully. Sure it is a grievous breach of
this commandment.

Que. And what say you of banning and cursing which the book here names, and
yet is it usual with David as it seems?

Ans. Even this also in some circumstance is a great evil and forbidden by
this law. For thus we are to weigh this question: the matter either is the
Lords or mine own. If it be mine own, in no case ever should I curse and
wish any evil, but patiently abide the Lords good time to see to it. If it be
the Lords, then is the party either corrigible or incorrigible, and past all
hope of amendment in man's eyes. If he be corrigible not even in the Lords
cause should I curse my brother, but if he be past hope in man's judgment, then
conditionally may we pray the Lord either to turn him or to remove him,
that no longer he may resist his glory. And to this head are David's speeches
most of them to be reduced. Others are pleased with this answer also, that
David had the gift of prophecy, whereby he might see and say more than we may
safely follow having not the like gift in us.

Que. What if I hear a man commit any of all these?

Ans. Certainly they that in zeal of heart and love to the offender do not
rebuke the abuse of Gods name, as their calling allows them, do also sin
against this commandment. So do they again that being utterly unworthy take
upon them rashly or couetously the calling of the ministry, as they also who
admit such into the same. Malach. 1.
The Prophet is plain if we mark him in this case. And to speak much in a
word, that we may sooner end* by a careless and a wicked life is the name
of GOD greatly profaned. For the Lord says, You shall keep my
commandments and do them, Leuit. 22.31.
neither shall you pollute my holy name. Where we plainly see that whosoever
does otherwise than GOD commands, polluteth his name. And let servants
count their masters worthy of double honor says the Apostle, 1. Tim. 6.1.
that the name of God and his doctrine be not evil spoken of. And more near
go other places, when it is said, Deutro. 28.58. and 15. etc.
Thou shall observe and do all things, etc. That is, thou shall bend all thy
thought and care upon this, how thou may keep my laws and statutes.
Whereby we first see excluded all feigned and careless walking in the ways of
the Lord, and that the Lord regards him that trembles at his words.
Secondly we see by it not only Atheistes, but even every one that is not
touched with a great desire by their good life to glorify God, to be guilty
of this law. And therefore we may hereby cease to marvel at the afflictions of
those men in whose lives we have spied no great outward offense. For albeit
they have not greatly to man's eyes offended, yet if they have not observed to
keep his statutes, that is carefully feared and fled even from very little
breaches, the Lord has just occasion to punish their coldness. Last of all
the neglect of those means that God has appointed for welfare either of body
or soul, is a breach of this law. For the words and works of his wisdom
may not be refused as needelesse, which were to detract from his wisdom, but
with all thankfulness and readiness embraced, that in so doing his wisdom
may be honored. And thus do you see in some part, the breadth of this
commandment.

Que. What then remains yet to consider?

Ans. These words (thy God) are not to be passed over without some profit to
us: and very well may we see in the^ that our obedience ought even in this
commandment also to proceed of love, an love ought to make us most careful
to please the Lord. Then are we to weigh the reason annexed, namely, that the
Lord will not hold him guiltles that takes his name in vain, which is as
great a threatening as may be. For all our help stands in this, that the
Lord in Christ pardons us and will not charge us with our faults, which if
he will not do, but enter into judgment with us, needs must we die, and
abide eternal woe. Therefore how should this reason move us all and ever to
a reverent regard of his name?

Que. Now then I pray you, as in the former, show me how I may fruitfullie
use the cogitation of this discourse?

Ans. In the examination of our selves by this commandment, what should we
do, but even lay before us, as with one sight we may see then fully the
several branches now repeated of the same, carefully waying in what case we
stand, if we should be judged according to them. And first to begin with
false and vain swearing, where is that man or woman that can excuse themselves
in it? Swearing.
Has there never passed an oath from me in all my life, but before the
magistrate when I was lawfully called thereunto? Yes, yes, God knows both
often and grievously has my sin appeared in this behalf. My speech has not
been yea, yea, and nay nay, as it should have been, but bitterly and
vehemently, earnestly, and vngodlilie has this tongue of mine added more. Yea
(which was madness now I see) I have sought to get and keep my credit with
mortal man by swearing, and to loose it with my God by so offending. But O
cursed credit so gotten, where were mine eyes, where was my understanding?
Whether is it better for the present time of me^ to be believed, and of the
Lord for evermore abhorred, or with light ungracious people, with whom oaths be
only truth, to abide a little denial, and of God my God ever for my obedience
to be loved? Yet have I witless wretch made choice of the former many a time
and neglected the later. For sworn I have often to be believed, when I should
have abstained, of God to be loved. If any rebuked me, it was unseasonable,
it was unsavory, sure I am, I liked not of it, and sure I am I amended not by
it. Nay have I not either excused oaths to be no oaths, but affirmations, or
openly evil spoken of so good admonition, or at least secretelie in my heart
disdained with scorn, and judged it foolish and precise curiosity? What has
any man to do with me? Let every vessel stand upon his own botome, if I
sin it is worse for me, amend your self and care not for others. These have
been our speeches and such like, I fear me, in the impaciencie and ignorance
of our hearts, and therefore of swearing to say no more, sinned we have and
excuse we want, the Lord grant pardon to our trespass. If I look at the
rest, am I able to say I am not guilty in them? No, no, not I, nor any flesh
living, I am sure of it, but that the Lord for sin will not let us see our
sin, weigh our sin, nor grant us judgment to discover our guilt. For what
man or woman may not the righteous God summon to his high court and say,
Praying, or Singing.
Thou art faulty of taking my name in vain by praying? Alas for my self, I
see it in the time of mine ignorance I have pattered often with cold
affection, for paraduenture I knew not what I said, thinking the deed done
to be service liked, and the words pronounced all to be well. And even now
since the Lord has opened mine eyes that I know it to be sin to pray
without attentive mind upon the thing I do, and without ardent affection,
yet how hard it is to do it ever, and never to swarne or stray, I find it,
yea even impossible to my corruption. For this thing and that thing is satan
ready to trouble so fruiteful an exercise withal, and a thousand ways he
has to make the mind to wander from the thing it only should attend. If
affection be good, attention fails: and if attention stand, affection dies.
And therefore seeing that even reason teaches me that to call upon the name
of God not as I ought to do is plainly to abuse his name and take it in vain,
neither in this point can I clear my self but broken herein also I have this
his commandment. What vain vows and promises have passed from me needelesse
to be made, Vows.
and fruitless to be kept? For sorcerie and witchcraft, charming and coniuring
am I able to say I have as earnestly abhorred them as I ought, and every way
so absteyned from them as I should? Nay has not rather ease been sought in
pain of me by these means, Charming.
or at least wished if I could have gotten them? My self and my friends, my
children and goods have I loved obedience more than the^? Or has not ever some
base creature as swine or such like been dearer to me than the Lord, seeking
by charm to save the one, and not fearing by sin to loose the other? God
sift not my guilt even now in this: for practice or will, for my self or for
others will surely accuse me. Further and beside al these, let it be well weied
of any Christian heart that fears God indeed, and carefully seeks the
credit of his name, how often irreverently in sporting and playing, in
shooting and bowling, in dising and carding, Gaming.
we use his name, Scripture phrase.
how the phrase of scripture will roll out of our mouths in jesting and light
conferences, how fearfully we use him in cursing and banning our brethren,
Banning.
and surely he shall see no small guilt touching this commandment in every one
of us, if God in justice weigh us in the balance, and reward us as he finds
weight of sin full duly to deserve. Where is that happy man or woman, so
waking and sleeping, so sitting and going, so speaking and keeping silence, so
living and dying as for no sin of theirs, for no infirmity, for no slip or
fall, ye name of God and truth has bin evil spoken or thought of. Let this man
and woman appear and boast that in great measure they have kept this
commandment. But if none such can be found, whose frailty has not fostred
in reprobate minds a misliking of good things, then let all flesh fall down
before his footestoole and sewe out pardon, for that living so looselie they
have taken his name in vain and broken this commandment. Last of all if we
cast our eyes about and consider a little the manifold means provided by the
Lord to do us good in body and soul and every way, Means not used.
are we able to say we have neglected none, but ever used them as we ought,
reverently, carefully and with thanksgiving? Has never an unprofitable
bashfulnesse made us conceyle our bodily grief, or refuse the means thought
meet to do us good? Has not careless contempt robbed us of the remedy
appointed for our souls? And has not unthrifty selfewill rejected means to
increase our wordlie estate? If these all or any be true, we have despised the
wisdom of the Lord, which appears in these things, and should be magnified
by them, and in them, we have polluted his name our selves, greatly occasioned
others to think lightly of good things, and grieuouslie guilty we stand
before him for it, of the breach of this commandment. What should I say of
not rebuking others according to our place, whom we have noted to offend in
any of these, Not rebuking.
which is a thing as has been said, required also in this Law, and
therefore a thing that resting in us does cry for vengeance, though in all
the rest we were pure and innocent? For we were not borne for our selves, but
also for others: and the body, the soul, the goods and estate of our brethren
should be dear unto us, we not seeing and suffering them by our wills to do the
thing that we know will hurt them. What I say should I speak of this and many
other branches yet remaining? Do we not see already shame enough and grievous
sin in great abundance? Where were we now then even for these that have
been named, if the percing eyes of the living GOD should pry into us, and
with just reward seek to pay the wants he could epsy in us? Could we escape
the pit of endless pain? Speak in the fear of God even what you see. Are
you pure and blameless in these all? Dare you stand out and make the
challenge, Come judge and stay not, sift me and spare not, thy trial I fear
not, for all these have I kept from my youth? O sinful flesh epsy thy
case. Thou can not, thou may not, and I know thou dare not, unless the
dreadful wrath of God have sealed up thy sight. And therefore even in this
commandment also as in the former, cry rather up to heaven with shrillish
shrike, Wash me O Lord from these my sins, and cleanse me from my
wickedness. Have mercy upon me O gracious God, and according to the multitude
of thy mercies do away mine offenses. O sweet Savior, who may not see what
he is without thee? Full heavy laden I come unto thee Christ my dear God, as
thou have promised, refresh and ease me. Amen, Amen.

The fourth Commandment.
Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day.
Question.

WHat is the meaning of this commandment?

Ans. Your book answers that the hallowing of the Sabbath day, is to rest
from our labors in our calling, and in one place to assemble our selves
together, and with fear and reverence to hear, mark and lay up in our hearts
the word of GOD preached unto us, to pray altogether that which we understand
with one consent, and at the times appointed to use the Sacraments in faith
and repentance, and all our life long to rest from wickedness, that the Lord
by his holy spirit may work in us his good work, and so begin in this life
everlasting rest.

Que. Had not the Jews diverse feasts beside this Sabbath?

Ans. Yes in deed. Some of God immediately appointed, and some by themselves
upon special occasion. By ye Lord they were tied to three solemn feasts in the
year, at which he would have all the males to appear before him. To wit, The
feast of unleavened bread, that is Easter, Leuit. 23. Exodus 23.15.
or the passover in remembrance how the Angel passed over their houses, when
in one night he slew all the first borne in Egypt both of man and beast. The
feast of the harvest of the first fruits of their labors which they had sown
in the fields, Verse. 16.
which was Whitsontide or Pentecost, in remembrance that ye law was given
fifty days after their departure out of Egypt. And the feast of gathering
fruits in the end of the year, Verse. 16.
when they had cleansed the fields. This was the feast of Tabernacles, putting
them in mind that 40. years they dwelled in tents and tabernacles in the
wilderness. Besides these they had the first day of the month, the 7. year,
the Iubile, and such others. Judith. 16. 1. Machab. 4. Hester. 9.
The feast of the Macchabees, the remembrance of deliverance by Hester, and
such others had they then again appointed by themselves.

Que. And even of this feast of the Sabbath as I do think there were diverse
kinds: were there not?

Ans. By that which has been said it partly appears so. For in deed they
had every seventh day a Sabbath, Exodus 23. Leuit. 25.
and that was called the Sabbath of days, they had every seventh year a
Sabbath, and that was called the Sabbath of years. Then reckened they 7. times
7. years, which was 49. and the fiftieth year was their Iubile. They had also
their great Sabbath, as when the Passover fell on the Sabbath day, as it did
when Christ suffered. For it is there said that that Sabbath was a great day.
John. 19.
But passing over these thus named by the way, this commandment occasioneth
us to think only of the Sabbath of days, and to consider therein what
remains and what is taken away. Where mark first that both in the Sabbath
and other feasts, they were precisely tied to certain circumstaunces of time,
as what day in what month, how many dais together, when begun, when ended,
what feasts only at Jerusalem, what elsewhere, with what rites and orders, and
so forth. And for this Sabbath of days yt this commandment speaks of, so
precise rest was required in it, yt further than a Sabbath days journey, they
might not travel in it. They might not bake, Exodus 16.29. Chap. 35.3. Numb. 15.
nor sees any meat, nor so much as gather any sticks to do it withal. Now
confer and lay unto these places thus strictly tying the^ the words of Paul to
ye Galathians, ^.70.
Ye observe days and months and times and years. Days as the Sabbath, new
moons, etc. Months as the 1. and the 7. Times as Easter, Whitsontide,
Tabernacles, etc. Years as ye 7. and the 50. etc. Which beggarly rudimentes
are most pernicious to them which have received the sweet liberty of the
Gospel, thrusting them back unto superstitious bondage again. I am afraid of
you, says Paul, etc. Therefore if we mark this conference of scriptures and
times we evidently see the case stands not now under ye Gospel touching this
Sabbath, as then it did. Mark again the same Apostle to the Colossians. Let no
man (says he) judge you in meat or drink, or in respect of an holy day, 2.
verse. 16.
or of ye new moon, or of the Sabbath days which are but shadows of things
to come, but the body is in Christ. Therefore you see a change. Add hereunto
and mark ye practice of Christ, who indeed not refusing al use of their Sabbath
and feasts at ye first did both himself teach and be present at other
exercises in ye same. But yet yt he might show that he did not that of
necessity (as in former time it was done) now and then would he both by word
and practice insinuate an abrogation or a change of the same from former
estate under the law as by those words: The Son of man is Lord also of the
Sabbath, Matthew. 12.8.
and again by defending his Disciples when they had plucked and rubbed the
ears of corn on the Sabbath day, healed on it, and preached other days
beside that day, etc. By all which I say it may well appear, that there is not
the same estate of the Sabbath now under the Gospel, that was of it under the
Law.

Que. How then I pray you stands it now?

Ans. There was in this commandment touching the Sabbath ever something
moral, and something ceremonial. Whatsoever is moral remains still to us
as much to be observed as ever of them: and whatsoever then was but
ceremonial, that is now by Christ taken away, and we freed from it. As for
example, to have one day in the seven to serve the Lord generally in, that was
moral and remains still, binding us unto it, as also to rest that day from
all labors, letting the course of piety and sanctification that that day
ought to be kept. But to have precisely the Saturday, and to rest so straitely
from all labor as they did, that was but Ceremonial and a shadow, and
therefore now abrogated by the coming of the body Christ.

Que. Yea but even the day also now in our Church is changed from Saturday to
Sunday.

Ans. Truth it is, and for that matter mark and consider in the Scriptures,
that as Christ in his time, so after him his Disciples in their time did bear
a while with the infirmity of the Jews and taught on the Sabbath, and Paul
hasted to Jerusalem against the feast of Pentecost, yet so, Acts. 13. Acts.
20.
that ever still they insinuated a freedom by Christ, Act. 2. and 5. etc.
and therefore daily also met, etc. But when as false teachers vehemently urged
a necessity thereof, to show the freedom by Christ from days and times,
then in deed stood they against it, and changed even the very day quite and
clean.

Que. But did the Apostles in deed themselves make this alteration of the day?

Ans. How should we otherwise think when we consider these and such other
places? First it is said in the Acts that The Disciples being come together
the first day of the week to break bread, Paul preached, Acts. 20.7.
etc. Now the first day of the week with the Jews was Sunday, immediately
following their Sabbath, wherein they used not to receive the Sacraments and
hear the word preached ordinarily, yet here we see the Disciples did, and
not on their Sabbath, which was but the day before: therefore you see a change
of the day even by the Disciples. Again to the Corinthians Paul commands
that the Collection for the poor, which was a work of the Sabbath, should
be made every first day of the week, that is on the Sunday, 1. Cor. 16.2.
Mark. 16.2. 1. John. 20.1.
as we call it. And therefore we plainly see what day they celebrated and
met upon having their solemn assemblyes, namely, on this our Sabbath,
laying aside quite the Jewish Ceremony. And it adds also further strength to
this, that John says in his Revelation calling this our Sabbath day the
Sunday, Dominicum Diem, The Lords day. Apoc. 1.10.
All or any of which testimonies if we would seek to delude, beside the
judgments of them that have noted these places, the Historical testimony of
those days, and since will prevail. For in Eusebius we read it the witness
of Dyonisius the Corinthian, Eusebius. lib. 4. Cap. 23.
that in those days they celebrated for holy the Lords day. Lib. de
idololatria.
Tertullian naming the solemnities of the Christians, begins first with the
Lords day, which they celebrated, and shows their exercises. Apollog. 2.
Justinius Martyr names the same day and shows the works. Ignatius against
some that being Christians would retain the Jewish Sabbath says in plain
terms, We celebrate no longer the Jewish Sabbath, but every one that loves
Christ, keeps now holy the Lords day being honored with his resurrection.
The like witnesses Augustine, Cyrill, and even all antiquity. And therefore
though we see not the very time definitely named when this Sabbath was
changed, yet we see it was by the Apostles in their times, and therefore has
credit enough. Now the holy Church of Rome that would by this alteration made
by this primitive and pure Church challenge authority and liberty to change
and do what they list, surely we must deny their consequence till such time
as they breed in us by good proof that credit of their spirit that we have
and ought to have of the Apostles that made this alteration of the Sabbath from
Saturday to Sunday.

Que. This satisfies me for my part touching the alteration of that which was
but ceremonial in this commandment, namely, the day and the precise rest in
it, neither can it be otherwise than absurd for any false Church, only under
a title and an usurped name of a Church to challenge authority to do matters
both contrary to piety and comeliness, because the true Church of God has
done what was most agreeable to them both. But now as I see the bond unto any
particular day only, and to such strict rest in the same as the Jews observed,
is taken away by Christ, so yet see I what is moral remains, namely a day in
seven, and a certain rest in the same. Wherefore I desire as well to know the
reason of the remaining of the one, as I have the cause of the abrogation of
the other: and therefore first I pray you why have we still yet a Sabbath and
shall have till the end of the world: and secondly, what rest and exercises
are therein required?

Ans. The ends of the remaining of a Sabbath yet still in the Church of God,
are chiefly three. First that we might have a kind of resemblance and form
of our eternal rest from sin in the kingdom of God. Secondly, that by this
means servants and cattle might be provided for against the cruel
greediness and insatiable covetousness of some masters and owners. And
lastly, that Ecclesiastical discipline and some estate of a Christian common
wealth in performing to the Lord jointly together demanded duties, might this
way be established.

Que. Of every one of these I pray you severally, Master N.
for more plainness, and first, what is that spiritual rest and sanctifying
of the Sabbath which lays before us a resemblance of eternal rest?

Ans. That is when resting from worldly business, and from our own works and
studies, we yield our selves wholly to GODS governance, that he may do his
work in us, and when (as the Scripture terms it) we crucify our flesh, we
bridle the froward desires and motions of the heart, restraining our own
nature that we may obey the will of God. For thus doing our Sabbath day here
upon earth shall most aptly express a figure and likeness of the eternal
and most holy rest which we shall for ever enjoy in Heaven. Yet ever must we
know that these things are not to be done only on the Sabbath, but even all
our life long, every day of every private man, and this one day is appointed
chiefly above the rest, for our negligence and weakness sake only, without
which such appointment it is greatly to be feared some would never do it.

Que. And is this spiritual resting from sin in deed necessary in every
one that will as he is bound sanctify the Sabbath?

Ans. Surely it is even so necessary, as that without this all our other
resting, putting on our better apparel, going to the Church, hearing service,
etc. is nothing, but even abhorred of God and detested. This is a great matter
if we had grace to consider of it, yet nothing but plain and open scripture.
For what says the Prophet Esaias? Blessed is the man that does this, Esaias. 56.2.
and the son of man which lays hold on it, he that keeps the Sabbath and
polluteth it not, and keeps his hands from doing any evil. See what it is
to keep holy the Sabbath in the judgment of the Prophet, even to keep our
hands from doing any evil, that is to cease from sin and our own ways.
Again the same Prophet in another place: Esaias. 58.13.
If thou consecrate the Sabbath as glorious to the Lord, and shall honor him,
not doing thine own ways, nor seeking thine own will, etc. And in his first
Chapter also, Esaias. 1.13.14.
I cannot suffer your new Moons, nor Sabaothes, nor solemn days (it is
iniquity) nor solemn assemblies, my soul hates the^, etc. And why so? The
reason follows in the next words (For your hands are full of blood) that is,
you abstain not from sin, remain still in avarice, deceit, cruelty,
extorsion, and such like, which as long as you do, howsoever you seem to
sanctify the Sabbath, I abhor you and your doings. And then follows
notably a description even of this spiritual rest: Wash you, make you clean,
take away the evil of your works from before mine eyes, cease to do evil,
learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, defend the widow, etc. Many other such places are there.

Que. Now I pray you of the second end and use of the Sabbath a little also.

Ans. That was and is, as has been said in regard of servants, and the brute
beasts, who are to have mutual rest from their travel, which yet some cruel
insatiable wretched misers would hardly have granted, had not God instituted
this day both for man and beast to rest in. This yt I say is evident in ye
words of this law, and therefore it needs no further proof. But let us thus
profit by it. First it does woonderfully show the goodness of God, who
neglects nothing that he has made, but carefully provides for ye welfare
even of brute beasts. O faithless hearts, if we can doubt the goodness of our
God to us, when we here before us see his care for those creatures who^ he has
made us lords of. Secondly, it well teaches us what nature, piety, and
charity requires at our hands touching our servants and Cattle. Nature
says: Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est.
What wants his mutual rest and ease still tossed in pain and strife,
Can not continue long that course of labor, or of life.


And therefore nature has appointed as well the one as the other for her
creatures, and wills that senseless hearts in us should not break the same.
Piety wills yt we should let them serve God on this day as well as our selves,
yea eue^ see yt they do it, Ephesians 6.
Who are all one with us in Christ, made of ye same god, redeemed with ye same
price, subject to ye same hell if they do not, etc. Charity requires yt we
should have a feeling of ye pains of our servants. Deutro. 5. Chap. 15.
Thankfulness would acknowledge ye mercy of god, in making me master and him
servant, when he could have don otherwise if it had pleased him. And to
conclude, if this rest we deny either to servant or cattle, we show there is
no regard of nature in us, no piety, no charity, no thankfulness to God for
our estate, but the contraries of all these. I would to God men would
carefully think of this, who upon every occasion can find in their heart to
send horse and men, cart and carriage too and fro on the Lords day most
wickedly. Assuredly it will have a smarting recompense in the end.

Que. The third and last end of the Sabbath, yet remains touching rest and
exercises required. I pray you what rest are we bound unto, and what special
exercises on this day?

Ans. Concerning the former it has bin said before, yt there is required of us
this day a resting from our proper labors in our calling, as your book says,
so far as they are hindrances to that sanctifying of the Sabbath, that is
required of us. For in it thou shall do no manner of work, etc. That is no
manner of work that thou can not do, and attend also to the exercises
commanded for the Sabbath: as the artificer cannot work in his shop and go
to Church to pray and hear, the country man cannot both serve ye Lord with
his neighbors at home as he ought, and serve to his chapmen his sold Corn in
the week days also, etc. Therefore from these we must abstain.

Now for the second thing, namely, the exercises demanded at our hands, many
they are, and hard of me or any to be either named or espied, so large is the
law of the Lord. But as I can I will lay before you some of them. And first
to begin withal, forasmuch as without knowledge of God there is no love of
God, without love no faith, and without faith no salvation by God, therefore it
is a work or exercise of the Sabbath, a duty that we are straitely bound
unto, in that day to attend to ye knowledge of God, by assembling our selves
together into one place, and there with fear and reverence to hear, mark and
lay up in our hearts the word of God read or preached unto us.

Que. How prove you this?

Ans. Do you not remember ye speech of the Shunamites husband to her when her
child being dead, 2. Reg. 4.23.
she desired an Ass to be sadled that she might go to ye man of God? What will thou do with him to day says he, since it is neither new Moon nor Sabbath
day? Whereby you may plainly see that on those holy days they carefully
resorted to the Prophets to be instructed in the will of the Lord.

In the Acts of ye Apostles again thus we read, that The first day of the
week, Acts. 20.7.
that is on the Sabbath day, the Disciples being come together to break
bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow and continued
preaching till midnight.

In another place, Acts. 13.16. Read Luke 4.16. etc. to the 21. verse.
After the lecture of the law and the Prophets, the rulers of the synagogue
sent unto them, saying, ye me^ and brethren, if ye have any exhortation for ye
people, say on: with a number mo such places. Whereby evidently we see ye
manner of keeping holy the Sabbath in those days. Yet is not the going to the
Church and outward hearing of the word all, but they are The good ground that
hear the word and understand it, Matthew. 13.23.
bearing fruit and bringing forth some an hundred fold, some sixty, and
some thirty.

Que. These places are plain touching the custom of Gods children in times
past, and beside these very reason would teach us that if God has of set
purpose in great wisdom appointed one day generally, of all men and women to
be observed: surely he would have on that day none to lurk at home in an
hole, withdrawing themselves from GOD, from his word, from their brethren, and
from all commanded exercises on this day: and therefore in my opinion our
recusantes, as we call them, that is our refusing Papists to come to Church,
do greatly offend, I pray you what think you?

Ans. I settle no sentence of them, but what the dreadful voice of the
eternal Judge shall pronounce upon them, in his general day to the horror of
body and soul everlastingly, in the boiling heat of unquenchable fire,
unless they repent, see and amend their intolerable obstinacy against the
Lord. For can it be that the Lord should pronounce accursed all them that
keep not every tittle of his Law, Deutr. 27. vlt.
and yet not punish them, that profane his Sabbath by withholding themselves
from the Congregation, refusing appointed duties by GOD himself, and at home
or abroad, in this corner and that, under this hedge and that, patter to
themselves, what God knows they understand not, and therefore consequently
what the Lord detesteth, and will assuredly charge them withal as sin in
that day of his? How can we hear these examples of Gods children, purposely
set down in his word to teach us and our selves perfourming no such duty,
yet boldly presume of mercy? What the best of them with all their learning
could say, for defense of this their folly, have we not heard, and may we
not read? Too childish and frivolous are their reasons to justify so great
impiety. I refer you to ye reading of them your selves, together with the
answers made unto them by the godly. This only my self I say, yt if I were a
Papist and had to this day refused to come to the Church to receive the
sacrament, etc. yet I assure you now seeing the weak grounds of these doctors
(for mo tha^ one had their heads about them, though one bear the name) I
should begin to look better about me, and never pin my everlasting estate in
pain or bliss upon so slender and ungodly persuasions of perverse men. But
what should we speak of reason which truly they have not of their denial? God
and many a conscience of theirs know full well, yt it is not any impiety,
which they are able to charge our prayer or preachings withal, but a secret
sworn or promised obedience to the foreign Antichristian power of Rome, without
knowledge what they do, blindly consenting to do as others do, and have done,
for vain glory, and worldly speech amongst a few of their own pack, that
makes them obstinate against ye Lord, despisers of his Sabbath, rebellious
against their lawful and most gracious Prince and her laws, unkind co^temners
of the counsel of their dearest friends, breakers of their hearts whose
lives they ought to love, increasers of their woe whose pain in piety they
should never wish to see, and finally even every way to God, to Prince, to
Country, to friends, and their own souls enemies most dangerous and
pernicious. The Lord Jesus Christ open their eyes, touch their hearts, and
conform their practice of behavior to his will, if it may stand with his good
liking.

Que. I pray you now go forward in recital of the exercises of this Sabbath.

Ans. Secondly beside the diligent hearing of the word preached on this day
and read unto us, it is our duties and a godly exercise fit for the day
amongst our selves, or with our pastor and preacher to confer and talk of
that which has been said, and to ask questions how this and that is to be
understood. Such example have we in the Gospel, where it is said that when
Christ was alone, Mark. 4.10.
they that were about him with the twelve asked him of the parable which before
he had vttred, and he readily expounded the same unto them. Then uttered he
more, and without parables says the text, spoke nothing unto them, Verse. 34.
but he expounded all things apart to his Disciples.

Thirdly to receive together the supper of the Lord, Luke. 22. Acts. 20.7.
as we are commanded, and the Church ever accustomed to do. To attend unto
Baptism, if occasion so serve, duly pondering the promise that is past us, to
serve the Lord, and praying faithfully for his guiding grace to be powered upon
our selves, and that or those infants then presented to the Church, that they
and we may ever fulfill what we have vowed before the congregation. Fourthlie
from a true feeling heart of Gods received goodness to give him thanks on this
day for his many and great mercies upon body and soul, at home and abroad,
upon our selves and ours, known and unknown, bestowed the week passed upon
us, to pray for the continuance of the same, all the next week ensuing, and
ever else, with his gracious supply of all necessaries whatsoever, without the
which either our worldly estate, or spiritual obedience to him cannot be
sustained.

Fifthly to consider of the poor which the Lord has set amongst us as
subjects for our love to work upon, to see what they want, how they live, and
to visit them and provide for them. This has ever of Gods children been
greatly regarded, and is a part of the discipline of the Church also. The
Apostle Paul ordained a gathering in the church of Corinth every Sabbath day to
this use, 1. Cor. 16.1.
and that to the example of other reformed Churches. Christ visited the
cripples and lazers on the Sabbath day, John. 5.
and healed him that had none to put him in the poole. The borne blind he
healed on the Sabbath day. John. 9.
And from the godly care of our forefathers touching this matter, have flowen
our hospitals, and almes-houses, with such like. This is an exercise of faith
and love fit for all times, but chiefly on the Sabbath day to be regarded.
Thus we feed Christ when he is hungry, Matthew. 25.35.
cloth him naked, visit him sick, and so forth, and sure sure shall we be
to find it at the general accounting day of his.

Lastly to take care and confer amongst our selves how to mainetaine all
means that serve to the knowledge of God, as the ministers, scholars,
universities, schools, and such like: To meditate also this day more than
other days of the creatures of God and of his exceeding goodness toward us in
them, What it is to keep holy the Sabbath day.
is an exercise of the Sabbath, with a number such more, that were now too long
particularly to name. Therefore to conclude and end this matter, easily may
we hereby see, that to keep holy the Sabbath day, is nothing else but even to
separate, and consecrate the same to all godly exercises wherein our faith to
God and obedience is to be showed.

Que. If these then and their like be commanded to us on this day to be
performed, their contraries I take by the same Law to be forbidden.

Ans. Truth it is, and must needs be so, but I think it needelesse now again
to go over them, and show their contraries: rather wey them your self, and
mark them particularly. Only these I wish by name may more duly be thought
of, that if the sanctification of this day consist greatly in laboring to
know the Lord by the preaching of his word, how shall they safely pass the
curse of God for the breach hereof, who with benumbed souls, parched, padded,
senseless, and every way most hardened hearts, either lie and sleep on the
one side idle, or tossing the alepot with their neighbors, suffer this day to
pass without any instruction, and like dumb dogs hold their peace, no way
discharging the duty of a true minister, and one that tendereth the glory of
God, his own, and his peoples souls. What should I say of them that seeing
the harvest great and the laborers few, and feeling within themselves.
working a secret power, persuading to put their helping hand to this
business, yet do not, but suffer the people to pollute the Sabbath for want
of teaching, and stay themselves from this work of the Lord upon causes, that
as it is to be feared will melt away and not stand to excuse them, when GOD
shall come unto judgment. Every servant to his own master, it is true,
stands or falls, yet may one servant admonish an other to beeware betimes,
and therefore with my whole heart I wish a due regard hereof. Again, if to
sanctify the Sabbath, be to consecrate it to holy uses, such as have been
named, is it possible for us to escape the revenging hand of the eternal God,
if he content in mercy with one day in the 7. we deny him that also, and
dedicate it to drunkenness, to feasting and surfeiting, etc. Now in ye name of
the God of heaven, and of Jesus Christ his son, who shall come to judge the
quick and the dead at the latter day, I require it of all that ever shall read
these words, that as they will answer me before the face of God and all his
Angels at the sound of the last trump, they better wey whether carding,
dising, and tabling, bowling, and cocking, stage plays and summer games,
whether gadding to this ale or yt, to this bearebaiting and that bulbaiting,
with a number such, be exercises commanded of God for the sabbath day or no. O
hartal frosen and void of the feeling of the mercy of thy God, yt having every
day in 6. every hour in every day, and every minute in every hour so tasted
of the sweet grace of thy God in Christ, as that without it thou had perished
every minute, yet can not tell how possibly to pass over one day to his
praise, unless one half of it be spent in carding and bowling. Awake awake in
Jesus Christ admonished awake, and seeing all the week long, ye Lord of heaven
does defend and feed thee, comfort and bless thee, and is contented but in
one day especially to be regarded, vow with thy self in request of strength to
keep it, that to the Lord yt one day shall be consecrated of thee, and
observed according to his will.

Que. These things the^ thus passed over, I pray you are these words, Six days
shall thou labor, etc. a commandment, so that we sin, if we labor not on
them al?

Ans. No, they are no commandment, but a permission, or a remission rather of
so much right of ye Lords. For ever has ye Church upon occasions separated
some of ye week days also to the service of the Lord, and rested from their
labors. Which they never would have presumd to do, if ye Lord had commanded to
the contrary. And even now our holy days commanded by public order, are not
all to be misliked, if to the glory of GOD and sanctification of his name, they
be bestowed as they are intended. Therefore a commandment I say they are not,
but a remitting of the Lords right who in deed might challenge all.

Que. And for the 7. day it self may we not in case do any thing thereon,
because the words here are so, in it thou shall do no manner of work, etc?

Ans. I have said before if you remember that the precise and strict rest of
the Jews on this day was ceremonial, and therefore now by Christ taken away,
that it binds not us. And therefore touching your question and our estate in
these days under the Gospel, very certain it is, that not even in the
seventh day we stand so bound to rest, but that in it also we may work, if
either necessity so vrgently requires, or the deed done be greatly to the
glory of God. Examples of the first are David eating the shewebread, 1. Kings.
22.
and the Disciples gathering and rubbing the ears of corn. Of the second,
Christ himself healing on the sabbath day many, which yet the Jews thought to
be unlawful. The discourse of Christ touching this point in the Gospel is very
worthy noting, wherein he flatly and strongly refuteth this superstitious
conceit of the sabbath in the Pharisees, and all other by diverse arguments:
as first by the example of David above named. Secondly of their lawful
practice, they circumcised children, and slew their sacrifices etc. on the
Sabbath. Thirdly by the testimony of Osce, I will rather have mercy than
sacrifice. That is, love to our brethren, than outward service. Fourthly from
the less to the greater, it is lawful on the Sabbath day to pull out a brute
beast that is fallen into a pit, or is in such like danger, as needs it must be
helped, or else it perishes, therefore much more a man, etc. By all which you
see that man is not made for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath for man. And even in
the right of our Christ, we also are in some sort Lords of the Sabbath, as in
it, to do what urgent cause constrains in deed, and may not conveniently be
differred.

Que. Here is named in the words of the commandment the stranger that is
within the gates. I pray you therefore how far think you this binds us?

Ans. I do willingly still tell you my opinion in every thing, my self and
you also I trust ready to yield to better advise when we shall hear it. For
my part I see not how we may answer it to the Lord, if being private men and
householders, we suffer within our gate to lurk and lie hid, and that refuses
to obey the Lord in the sanctifying of this day, as is commanded to the glory
of his name, after that such means have been used for the reforming of them
as possibly we can. And the more I wey with my self that most strait law of
ye Lord for execution of them that should seek to estrange any from the true
God, Deuteronomy. 13.
the more I am confirmed by the very end, equity and meaning of it in this
opinion against al affection of kindred, aliance, friendship, or whatsoever.
Read the words, and mark the zeal which God requires in all men toward him,
when as no means will reform our friends, but they still peradventure tempt
us. And then by the way let it not pass unmarked I pray you, how straitely
all masters and mistresses stand bound to see that the Lord be honored not
only in themselves, but by manseruaunt and maid servant, old and young in
their houses of discretion, of the Sabbath day, seeing God of purpose names
them. And see again how this naming of the stranger doubleth the bond more
upon us. For by comparison if we stand charged with our stranger and guest,
much more with our daily servants, children, etc. it must needs be, and
indeed wey it well.

Que. I am then thus I think satisfied in every point of this commandment,
neither do I remember what further to ask you herein.

Ans. The commandments of the Lord (says David) are exceeding broad, neither
in deed is any man able so to lay open any one of them, but judgment by the
gift of God increased more may be seen and espied in them: but thus much now
shall suffice for my measure, this only added, that this reason drawn for the
Lords own example, who rested from his work on this day, ought greatly to
move us to the careful keeping of it: as even the very first word also of
the Law, for if you mark it, he does not say, Keep holy the Sabbath day,
but Remember to keep it holy, that is, have an earnest care of it, and in any
case forget it not, but remember to keep it holy. And thus much of this
Commandment.

The examination of the conscience.
The profitable use and application of this commandment, is to wey and duly
consider that it is the Law of no man, but of God the chiefest lawegiuer, the
wisest, most righteous, and most able to revenge, instituted of purpose by him
for these and such like ends. First, that we should wholly consecrate as that
day ourselves unto the Lord, and his service, hearing, reading, meditating
those things, which might lay before us the goodness of almighty God toward
us, and our great ingratitude to him again, with all other sins, whereby we
have provoked him to wrath, stirring up our hearts to true repentance for
them, and amendment of the same. Secondly for the ease of servants and
cattle, which otherwise by the unmerciful greediness and cruelty of some
might happily be abused. Lastly to express and lay before us some show of that
spiritual and eternal rest in heaven, which we all so look and long for. Then
these things considered, to call to mind how often and grievously we have
offended against every one of these, as against the first by absenting
ourselves from the Church, What it is to be absent from Church, and place of
common prayer.
and place of common meeting, when we might have been present, if we would,
a very horrible thing, if we could duly regard and think of it. For what is
it but to contemn GOD and his wisdom, to strive and fight against the
Spirit, teaching and converting men by the ministry of the word, and even
in effect to say I am as wise and godly, as either he can make me, or shall
make me: I will none of his grace. What is it but to give a grievous offense
to others, for the which the living God hangs a woe over our heads, saying,
Woe be to him by whom offense comes: it were better for that person to have a
millstone tied about his neck, and to be cast into the bottom of the Sea: And
again, It were good for that man if he had never been borne? What is it but
to feed the devils humor, and to do that thing, that most highly pleases
him? Again to consider how we have offended, when we were present at Church
by negligent and cold performaunce of that thing, which time, place, and
duty required at our hands. Have we never come to the hearing of the word,
but with reverence, with willing desire, preparing our hearts before unto it by
some secret prayer within our selves, to the Lord, that he would bless the
speaker, that he may speak to our hearts and bless us, that we may
attentively hearken, profitably feel, and thankefully taking whatsoever is
spoken, increase in obedience to it? Have we never come to the Sacraments,
when we could, and never without such examination, and other circumstances, as
are straightly required of a Christian? Have we spent the Sabbath in godly
conference and meditation, pouring out thanks from a feeling soul for ye Lords
goodness ever to us, and namely the week passed? Have we visited or thought
upon the sick, sore, diseased, imprisoned, banished, or any way suffering for a
good cause and to our power comforted them? Have we studied how either to
procure or continue or increase amongst our selves, or our neighbors the
means of salvation, as ye preaching of the word, and such like? O beloved, we
have not, we have not, we know it and must needs confess it, if there be any
truth in us. Too much have we neglected all these, yea even diverse of them,
it is greatly to be feared, have little or never at all troubled our heads: but
for their contraries in most full measure we have wallowed in them, and with
greediness ever accomplished the^. Where is the minister whose negligence has
not made his people to pollute the Sabbath? Where is the people whose
consciences awaked may not justly condemn them for ungodly gadding on this day
to Churchales, to weddings, to drinkings, to ba^kets, to fairs, and markets, to
stage plays, to bearebaytings, and summer games, and such like? Where is that
master that has had a conscience to restrain his servants from this impiety,
or the servant again that has either brideled himself for ye Lords cause, or
else well accepted his master or mistres restraint being made unto him, and
which has not rather burst out into ungodly and disobedient speeches,
murmuring yt because he has wrought all the week, therefore he should have
liberty to do what he list on ye Sabbath, not considering yt this commandment
binds not only ye master himself to honor God on this day, but to see to his
family so much as he can, yt they also do it. Nay I would to God ye masters in
many places were not ringleaders to their own and al other men's people, to
profane this Sabbath of the Lord, and that even such masters as in respect of
their calling, office and credit in the country, should far otherwise do.
When does a gentleman (to name no higher estates) appoint a shooting, a
bowling, a cocking, or a drunken swearing ale, for the help as they say of
some poor one, but upon the Sabbath? And if he be at ye Church in the
forenoone, for the after noone it is no matter, he has been very liberal to
God in giving him so much. What day in the week usually does he give so evil
an example of unmeasurable sotting in bed, as on the Sabbath? But O filthy
savor that arises out of this loathsome channel, thus raked up into the
nostrels of the Lord! I spare to speak, I shame to see, I rue to know what I
fully know against our souls in this respect. Let every man and woman more
particularly view themselves, and lay open unto the Lord their sin in sorrow
for it, by this occasion think what is commanded, look what we have done,
and the Lord make our sinful hearts to see, and sigh for so great offense
against our God. What should I say of the second end of the institution of the
Sabbath, namely for the rest of servant and cattle? But even in an word, woe
to the man whom God shall judge according to his guiltiness herein. For it is
too usual with all estates to be a means to rob their servants of the
blessing due to the keepers of this law, and to pull upon them the plague for
the contrary by making them ride and run, post and away, upon every occasion
that comes in their heads, when in truth if they would but even look into it,
the matter may be done well without such have. O happy is that man whose heart
thinks how his servant is bound to this commandment of keeping holy the
Sabbath as well as he, has a soul to loose or save as well as he, to be
nourished with the food of the word as well as he, and therefore thereon
concludes, he will neither sin himself nor make his servant sin in breach
of this or any other commandment. The third end of the Sabbath we heard it
was, that hereby might be resembled in some sort our spiritual rest in
heaven, we ceasing from our own works, and doing the will of God. But are
we able to say, we have this done? O miserable men ten thousand times if in
this we should have our deserts: for wherein or how crucify we the flesh
more on this day than any other, bridle the froward desires of the heart,
restrain our own nature, and do the will of God more on this day than any
other? Alas our own consciences cry unto us, we do nothing less, we
drink, we eat, we surfeit, we swear, we play, we dance, we whore, we
walk and talk idly, vainly, uncleanly and ungodly: these are our works
on ye Sabbath more commonly than any day in the week else, and if this be to
resemble a spiritual rest, then in deed we do it, not otherwise. Thus stand
we therefore guilty and grievously guilty of this commandment. So that if
we had not a Savior who in our flesh had fulfilled this law and every one
for us, and appeased the wrath of God his father, justly conceived against our
sins, never should we have looked within his kingdom. And how shall we be
better for all which he has done, but by seeing our passed sin, and namely
our foul and careless abuse of this Sabbath of our God, by lamenting the same
even from our heart roots, purposing unfeignedly to amend it hereafter, and
even ever while life endures to be more careful to honor God on this day
than we have bin, and by steadfastly believing in Christ, and for Christ, and by
Christ, to have all that is past forgiven? This is the way to be freed from
the curse of this commandment, and all other which we so grievously have
transgressed, and therefore justly deserved. O mercy great and marvelous, O
nature sweet and patient of our God, who contenting himself with one day in
seven chiefly to be his, and yet robbed of the same also by us vile wretches,
notwithstanding til this day has spared us, whereas a thousand times and a
thousand he might with great right have destroyed us either amongst our pottes,
or in our daunces, or idle in our beds, asking us if that were to halow his
Sabbath, or to honor his name to swill and to bibble, to leap, to walowe and
tumble in bed, till it be noone, with such like. Now does he speak, now
does he warn, now does he admonish, loath to punish us if any saying will
serve, as a most merciful God, and if now we will not consider, learn and
be instructed, that our ways heretofore have not been good, and therefore
amend them, surely surely, if God be God, we shall taste his hand, for so great
disobedience. Now the living God awake us, and touch us truly in this
behalf, merciful father lay it never to our charge, for thy great mercies
sake, wherewith we have grieved thee touching this commandment, but increase
our knowledge, increase our feeling, increase our conscience, carefully to
live and spend our days in thy fear and favor, as thou may be honored,
the power of thy word magnifyed, our brethren moved with good example, our
selves saved in the great day, and this Sabbath of thine for ever hereafter
more carefully kept of us, to the better performance of the former, for Christ
his sake, Amen. Ame^.

The fifth Commandment.
Question.

WHat contains the second Table?

Ans. As the first contained all duties due to the Lord, inward and outward,
so the second Table contains all duties due to our brethren, either in
heart or action. And therefore in this second table are laid the very grounds
of all civil society, from whence all men's laws proceed, if they be just.

Que. But do these works of the second Table concern only our neighbors?

Ans. No, we may not think so. For though outwardly they be done to men and
immediately as the proper object of them, yet in deed they are done also to
God, and he more delights in them, than in all burnt sacrifice. For if we
feed our brethen, cloth the^ naked, visit them sick, or any way do them
good, God takes it as done to himself.

Que. When any prescription is made to men in the Scriptures what they should
do, why so often and usually are the works of the second table appointed?

Ans. Not that they are better than the works of the first Table, but for that
they are the true bewrayers of them: for every hypocrite will say he loves
God, fears God, trusts in God, etc. because these are secret duties in
the heart, and of man cannot be judged, but look how he lives toward his
neighbors, and it may soon be seen that failing in the duties of the
second Table toward men, the duties of the first which he boasts of in
truth are not in him. For if they were, they would bring forth the other. He
that says he loves God whom he never saw, 1. John. 4.
and hates his brother whom he has seen, is a liar.

Que. Which is the first commandment of the second Table?

Ans. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long, etc.

Que. What is meant by honor here?

Ans. Reverence, obedience, and maintenance, if need require.

Que. What is this reverence.

Ans. It is a true acknowledging in my heart and mind of that superiority,
which God has given either my parents, or any other person, together with a
willing declaration of the same, by any such outward gesture or behavior, as
it may be declared in, or by.

Que. How prove you that we must reverence our Parents?

Ans. Many sufficient proofs has it in the word, but a few may suffice us.
You shall fear every man his father, Leuit. 19.3.
and his mother, says the Law of God, that is, if we expound it, ye shall
stand in a reverent awe and regard of them with love: for we must needs
understand a sonnelike fear, not a servile in that place. Again, Honor thy
Father and mother, Ephesians. 6.2.
which is the first commandment with a promise, says the Apostle: this
honor implies reverence. Thirdly the example of our Savior Christ performing
this reverence to his mother and his reputed father Joseph, Luke 2.
does prove it to us. And that example of Solomon, who being King, and
hearing that his mother came to speak with him, went to meet her, bowed down
to her caused a seat to be set for her, 1. Kings. 2.
and placed her on his right hand. Lastly, the Scripture expressly forbiddyng
such things as are contrary to this reverence, manifestly proves the same
to be our duty.

Que. What is contrary to it?

Ans. First, to curse Father or Mother is manifestly contrary to it, and has
not the Scripture forbidden it, saying: Deuteronomy. 27.16.
Cursed be he that curses father or mother, and let all the people say Amen?
And again, He that curses father or mother shall die the death, Exodus 21.17.
yea he shall die, Leuit. 20.9.
and his blood be upon him.

Que. What else is contrary to it?

Ans. To smite Father or mother is apparently contrary to it, and this also
has the word forbidden: Exodus 21.15.
He that smyteth Father or Mother shall dye the death. Also to mock our
Parents is contrary to this reverence we owe them: and therefore is it said
in the thirty of the Proverbs, Prou. 30.
The eye that mocketh his father, or despises the counsel of his mother, let
the Ravens of the field devour it, and the young Eagles pick it out.

Que. How if the Son be a Magistrate and the Father none, whether must he
then reverence his Father, or no?

Ans. In matters that concern his office he must do his office, and his
Father must acknowledge his authority, but in private places, and matters,
notwithstanding he is a Magistrate, he must do reverence to his Father, as is
due, neither takes Magistracy this duty from man, or out of man, for they
may both well stand together.

Que. How prove you it?

Ans. King Asa executes his office, 1. Kings. 15. verse. 13.
and deposes his mother, we read, yet otherwise no doubt he reverenced her
as a child. And pretily was it said of Taurus the Philosopher, when the Father
and Son came to him about a matter, the Son being a Magistrate and the
Father none, that the Father should sit down upon that one stool, that he
had, till the question was disputed, whether of them ought of right to have it.

Que. And are the children only bound?

Ans. No in deed, but there is a duty as well of the Parents to their
children, as of the children to their Parents.

Que. And what is that I pray you?

Ans. In generality this it is. If Parents look for at their childrens
hands, honor, that is reverence, obedience, and maintenance, if they need
according to ability, then is it questionless their duties, so to behave
themselves toward their Children, as that these things may be dew unto them.

Que. In particularitie what procures reverence to them?

Parents behavior.
Ans. First and formest, if Parents will breed this in their children, let
them in any wise carefully look to their life and behavior before them. For
truly grave, modest, and virtuous behavior strikes the hearts of both
children, servants, and all other beholders, with a reverent conceit of such
persons, and contrariwise light behavior loses the same.

Que. What especial things can you name that in deed loose Parents and
superiors this reverence?

Ans. Neglect of Religion, Drunkenness, incontinencie of life, uncomely talk,
wanton behavior, swearing, with such like, and which may not be forgotten,
brawles, iarres, and unkindness betwixt man and wife before their children and
servants.

Que. What else breeds reverence?

Ans. Good bringing up, a duty which the Parents do owe to their children,
as far as their power will reach, and which in deed makes the children
perform to them their duties the better.

Que. How prove you that parents are bound to this?

Ans. The Apostle gives an express commandment of it saying, Ephesians. 6.4.
Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in instruction
and information of the Lord. And the neglect of this bringing up makes many
Parents want good behavior in their children. For very great is the force of
it to good or evil, as that Heathen man Lycurgus by his two whelps very
liuelily set out, the story whereof is this: Lycurgus desiring to let the
Lacedaemonians see the force of Education, brought forth on a day to them two
whelps, The force of Education.
which he had diversely brought up: ye one he had accustomed to the field, the
other kept ever at home, and with them he brought out also an hare, and a pot
of potage: which when he had set down, the one according to his use of
bringing up, took presentlye to the Hare, and the other utterly neglecting,
what even nature should have wrought a regard in him of, as presently betook
himself to the pot of Potage. See then says Lycurgus O ye Lacedaemonians,
what bringing up is in very brute and unreasonable creatures, how much more
must it needs be effectual to good or evil in your children? And the
example moved them much. But in how many more examples out of good writings
may we plentifully see how careful ever all godly Parents have been, that
in the fruit of their bodies the Lord should be honored, and his true
religion planted and placed in their posterity: for very well knew they
that, which experience taught both them and others, that as virtuous and godly
fruit is a special blessing of the Lord, so an ungracious and froward
offspring is a cross, that next after sense of Gods wrath against themselves,
does sting most bitterly the heart of godly Parents. And again they knew
that, which we also cannot be ignorant of, that by nature neither theirs
were, nor ours are borne so pure, as that they needed not the industry of
their Parents to reform them. For both then was it, and now is it most true,
which the spirit of wisdom says: Foolishnes is bound in the heart of a
child, Prou. 22.15.
but the rod of correction shall drive it away from him. And in another
place, The very imagination of man's heart is altogether evil from his
childhoode. Genesis 8.
Wonderful has the care of heathens bin therefore in this respect, as partly
you have heard and might most largely have laid further before you, if it were
needful. An ancient saying it was and common amongst them: Nil dictu foedum
visuue haec limina tangant Intra quae puer est. That is, Let never any thing
indecent to be said or seen enter into the house where a child is within.
Cato that wise Counselor of Rome, thrust Manlius from the Senate, because on
the day time his daughter being by he kissed his wife. Plutarch in his book of
this matter singularly discourses of this care, how great it ought to be, and
ever has been in good men, and he makes a comparison betwixt Education and
other matters which men much esteem, preferring it before them all: Natalium
splendour, says he, res est praeclara, at bonum a Maioribus profectum, etc.
That is, Birth and Parentage is a notable thing, but yet descending to us from
others. Riches are highly regarded, yet suddenly taken from them that have them,
and given to them that looked not for them, and ever common to the bad as well
as to the good. Glory is a thing in man's eyes honorable, yet ever most
variable. Beauty much wished for, yet not to be kept any long time with all ye
wyshes and wisdom in ye world. Only one thing, says he, there is, the
benefit whereof never fails, but with life, and that is the singular fruit
of good bringing up. Lycurgus the Rhetorician, when it was objected to him,
that he wasted too much upon the teachers of his children, answered most
wisely, that to a man that in deed would undertake to better his children to
his desire, he would not only give that wages, but even the half of all that
ever he possessed. Such a care had this Heathen of that, which Christians
professing God, can be so careless of in these dangerous and infectiue days.
Aristotle could say, that look how much better it is to be well, than to be:
so much more bound are those children to their parents, that receive by them
good bringing up, tha^ they which receive but their bare existence in the
world. An other in Plutarch again says very pretily, that if he could, Crates.
he would get him to the top of the highest hill that any where he might
find, and with all his power, from whence he might furthest be heard, cry out
upon the monstrous madness of thousands of Parents, that take such
intolerable and vncessaunt pains to leave much unto their children, and yet
never any care at all in comparison, what manner of men or women they shall be, to
whom so much must be left. As though that earthly pelf either wholly made a
man, or else must of necessity with worldly credit, continue his posterity
upon earth, when want of bringing up makes want of knowledge any way, with
credit to use the same. But what view I so much the commendable care of
Heathens in this behalf? Have not Gods faithful been in this point as
careful as they? Yes truly, many have, and in better order a great deal. For
there being in this thing degrees and steps to be observed, as first of
piety, secondly of learning, thirdly of manners, and lastly of the function or
calling: the children of God, many of them have in this excelled the Heathen,
that being generally as careful as they in all, particularly in this as men
better acquainted with it, through greater given light and knowledge they have
far excelled them, that first they have attempted what in deed is first to be
cared for, namely, to frame the hearts of their children to God and grace, and
then in order to the things following. We see it in Adam, Genesis 4. Genesis 18. 2 Timothy 3. 1. Chron. 28.9. 2. Kings. 4. Deuteronomy 6. Psalm. 78.5.
who taught his sons to serve the Lord. We see it in Abraham most notably. We
see it in Timothies parents, who brought him up from a child in the knowledge
of the scriptures. We see it in David, Ioas the king, and a number others.
Generally to them all it was a commandment, that as soon as their children
could understand and ask them questions, they should carefully instruct them
concerning the Lords dealings with them, and for them. And I doubt not but many
did it of the ancient Christians. Philo writes that they were called cultores
ac cultrices, that is to say, Tillers, because as men painefully till their
ground, so they carefully labored the ground of their childrens hearts, to
plant in them the fear of God. Nos hodie vastatores ac vastatrices, says he,
That is, We in these days may better be termed destroiers than tillers, so
rechlesse we are, and careless in this so great a matter. Hence sprang the
Cloisters in the beginning says Chrysostom, and that kind of life, Lib. 3.
contra vituperatores monast. vitae.
namely of the exceeding care that men had to have their children well brought
up, and excluded from evil company, and hurtful sights in the world, till
years and settled instruction had made them less capable of the harm thereof.
Afterward they degenerated from that institution, and became as we well know
dens of drones, and nurceries of ungodliness, corrupters of all, not
correctors of any, and the wrath of the Lord has now destroyed them. It is a
good admonition of wise Solomon: Prou. 22.
Teach a child in the trade of his way, and when he is old, he shall not
depart from it. And that experienced son of Sirach in many places speaking of
this mtater, Syrach. 16.22. and 30. also.
has these words, in my opinion not lightly to be looked on: Neither desire
nor delight (says he) in children, though never so many, unless the fear of
God be in them. For one that is just, is better than a thousand: and better it
is to die without children, than to leave behind us ungodly ones. Thus let it
suffice to have touched this matter, whereof long and large treatises are made,
needful to be touched, if ever needful, and even long stood upon. For too
much it is of parents neglected, and yet are they grieved, if of their children
they be not reverenced: and howsoever many there be, that in these days are
careful enough to procure unto their children knowledge of Arts, of
Countries, and of any thing that in worldely sort may make them mighty,
famous, and spoken of: yet is the ground of all very fearfully neglected,
namely to setle in them the true fear of the God of Israel, delivered and
taught in his word. Yea it is even accounted by father and child not so
needful or beseeming for a gentleman, to the great exasperating of the Lords
wrath against them and their seed. Humility also and shamefastnes are taken
from youth in these days even by their parents and their teachers, and where
it has ever been held, that blushing in measure, modesty, and silence have
been commendable tokens in young years, now is it a shame to be ashamed at
any time, blushing is want of countenance and bringing up, silence is
ignorance, modesty is too much maidenlinesse, and in short now virtue is
vice, and vice very comely and gallant behavior. So times are changed to and
fro, and changing times have changed us too. But of this thus far.

Que. What else nourishes in children due reverence?

Ans. Due correction. Due I say with wisdom and moderation. For he that
spares his rod, Prou. 13.24.
hates his son: but he that loves him, does chasten him betimes. 19. verse.
18.
Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his
murmuring. And in an other place, Withholde not correction from thy child, 23.
verse. 13.
for if thou smite him, he shall not die.

Que. But what if parents in foolish pity cocker up their children, and
pretermit this due advertisement?

Ans. Then will they loose this reverence most assuredly in their hearts, and
often make them come to evil ends. It is proved by Heli his two sons, 1.
Sam. 2. and the 4. also.
who by their fathers lenity conceived not what it was to sin against the
Lord, and therefore to their own hurt, and their fathers great grief, tasted
the heavy hand of God, and dyed both in a day. Also by Absolon, Ammon, and
Adoniah David's sons. Whose fearful ends may serve for ever to admonish all
parents, how they foolishly love their children, and cannot abide to say or
do their duties to them, or yet to let others. Mark well the sixth verse of
the first Chapter of the first book of Kings, and be wise betime. A small
twigge will not kill the tenderest Prince, Lord or Lady in the world. If thou
smite him, says Solomon, Prou. 23.23.
you heard before, he shall not die. I warrant him.

Que. What is the second part of this honor that children owe to their
Parents?

Ans. Ready and willing obedience.

Que. And what is that?

Ans. Obedience is the performance of Parents will so far as lies in our
power, and lawfully we may.

Que. And how prove you that this children are bound unto?

Ans. First, by the words of Solomon: Obey thy father that has begotten thee,
Prou. 23.22.
and despise not thy mother when she is old. Secondly by the Apostle to the
Colossians: Coloss. 3.20.
Children obey your parents in all things, for that is well pleasing unto the
Lord. And to the Ephesians again, Children obey your parents in the Lord,
Ephesians. 6.1.
for that is right. Thirdely it is very strongly proved by the sharper
punishment, which God appointed for all disobebient children, to wit even flat
and present death. For so we read in the Law: Deuteronomy. 21.18. etc.
If any man have a son that is stubborn and disobedient, that he will not
hearken unto the voice of his father and mother, and they have chastened him,
and he would not hearken unto them, then shall his father and mother take him
and bring him unto the elders of the City, and unto the gate of that same
place, and say unto the Elders of the City, this our son is stubborn and
disobedient, and will not hearken unto our voice, he is a riotour and a
drunkard, and all the men of the City shall stone him with stones to death,
and thou shall put evil away from thee, and all Israel shall hear and fear.

Que. But how far must a child obey?

Ans. If we pass over the discourse of Philosophers touching this matter, and
come to the scriptures, the Apostle Paul determines it thus, Colos. 3.20.
That children must obey their parents in all things.

Que. Why but shall we think Paul would have a child in deed obey his
Parents in all things, as the words sound? What if they command a wicked
thing?

Ans. No indeed we may not take Paul's words so generally, but we must
expound that place by an other place of Paul to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 6
where he bids children (as you heard above) obey their parents in the
Lord. And by the words of Mathewe where it is said, Matthew. 10.
He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me.

Que. And how then conclude you touching my question?

Ans. Thus I conclude, that a child is bound to obey his parents in all
things in the Lord, that is, so far as his obedience may stand with the
duty which he owes to his God, and with such circumstances touching his own
person, as both reason and piety would, should be regarded. Which
conclusion compriseth assuredly their obedience as touching marriage.

Que. What begets this obedience in children?

Ans. When parents desire obedience, they must know that it is their duties
to command things lawful in respect of God, This excludes forcing to marry
against all likeing.
and convenient in regard of their children.

Que. What is the third and last part of this honor?

Ans. Maintenance of our parents, if need be.

Que. What mean you by this maintenance?

Ans. It is a thankful sustayning of the want of our parents either by our
riches, counsel, strength, or any other thing, which God has blessed us
withal, and they have not.

Que. But how dare we interpret the commandment thus: Honor thy Parents:
that is maintain them as thou art able and they have need?

Ans. Surely first very reason tells us, that this is as due as either
reverence or obedience: but to let that pass, we have apparent scriptures,
where by honor is meant maintenance. As namely in the Apostles speech to
Timothy: Honor widows, 1. Timoth. 5.
that be widows in deed. That is, provide for the^ and let them be sustained.
Again in the same place a little after, They that rule well are worthy of
double honor, 17.
where by honor in part is meant maintaynance. Lastly in the gospel of S.
Mark our Savior Christ notably shows that the Scribes, and Pharisees,
Mark. 7.
persuading children to give to their use, that wherewith they should have
helped their Parents, caused them to break this commandment in not honoring
them as they should. Where we evidently see Christ himself includes in this
honor, maintaynaunce, and these places as they warrant this interpretation, so
do they also plainly prove that children owe this duty to their parents.

Que. What further may be said for the warranting of this, that children ought
to relieve their parents wherein they can?

Ans. Beside the testimonies of scripture now alleged to prove it, the
spirit of God has added reasons to urge it, and there are also examples to
persuade it, and fearful experiences of Gods wrath upon the contrary to
fear us from it.

Que. What reasons?

Ans. In the 6. to the Ephesians the 1. verse this reason is added, because it
is a just thing or right. And indeed so it is right both in respect of God
that appoints it, and in respect of that which our parents have done for us
before.

Que. What else?

Ans. Again in the 3. to the Colossians, the 20. verse this reason is aledged,
because it is well pleasing to the Lord.

Que. What examples?

Ans. Valerius in his 5. book and 4. chapter shows a notable example of a
daughter that nourished her mother in prison with her breasts. And if heathens
by the law of nature knew so much to be their duty, how much more christians
having added thereunto the light of Gods word?

Que. What else?

Ans. It is also read of the Storkes, that when they are old they keep
continually the nest, and their young birds provide for them, and feed them
till they die.

Que. Well then, yet what now if children refuse thus to behave themselves to
their parents, or neglect it?

Ans. They are then to look for the wrath of the Lord in them sharply with
heavy hand punishing so foul a fault. And to consider well that as others
have found him, so shall they undoubtedly. Cham, Reuben, Hophin, and Phinees,
with a number others are before their eyes, as experiences to be wise by, if
they have grace. And above all other Absolon that graceless man, who like a
disobedient child to a good father sought greatly to dishonor him, 2. Sa^^.
18.
and so horrible was this sin, that even the earth was weary of so wicked a
burden and would carry him no longer. The heavens also were ashamed of him, and
the wrath of God hanged him up betwixt heaven and earth, by the heir of his
head, till Ioab thrust him through with three darts being yet alive. A
fearful spectacle to all rebels against their Prince, or disobedient
children against their Parents.

Que. Breefely now whom do you note to be comprehended here under the title
Parents?

Ans. First Parents by nature, secondly by dignity and office, thirdly by
age, and fourthly by benefit. Generally they are all in steed of Parents to
us, by whom as by instruments the Lord deriueth his mercies to us.

Que. Who be Parents by dignity, or office?

Ans. Magistrates over the people, masters over their servants, ministers
over their charges, and such like.

Que. For Magistrates what say you?

Ans. I say their place and calling, that portion above others which the Lord
has given them of his authority, majesty, and excellency proves unto us,
that we must reverence them. The increase and safety of that which we
possess through peace maintained by them, proves that we ought again
thankefullie to maintain them, their estate and government by tribute, taxes,
subsidies, and such like: and for obedience it is in a number of places
commanded, as are also the former. Therefore when as all the parts of honor
are due unto them, as reverence, maintainaunce and obedience, I may conclude
Magistrates as Parents are to be honored.

Que. There is no question of any of these, but now how far are Magistrates
to be obeyed?

Ans. Certainly but in the Lord, as was said before of our natural parents.
For the limittes both of the Magistrates bidding and our obeying, are these
two, piety, and charity, contrary to these must neither they command, nor we
do.

Que. How prove you this?

Exodus 1.
Ans. In the first of Exodus, when the kings commandment passed these
limittes, the midwiues would not obey, and the Lord blessed them for it. The 3
children obeyed not the king, Dan. 3.
as we read in Daniell, Obediah, and Heliah obeyed not the king and Queen, 1.
Kings. 18.
Daniell himself obeyed not, and the Apostles said God before you must be
obeyed, with many such examples.

Que. What if statutes be strait, and in yielding our policy great, may we
not yield a little?

Ans. In deed be the wether never so hot, statutes never so strait, policy
never so great, God is God, hell is hell, we may not do what is good in our
own eyes, nor decline either to ye right hand or to the left. Read ye prophet.
Mich. 6.14. etc


Que. How prove you that ministers are contained under ye name of Parents?

Ans. They are in scripture reputed spiritual fathers, as we may see in many
places, namely to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 4.15.
Though you have ten thousand instructours in Christ, says ye Apostle, yet
have you not many fathers, for in Christ Jesus I have be gotten you through
the gospel. Again to ye Gala. Gala. 4.19.
My little children says he, of whom I travel in birth again until Christ
be formed in you. And in his Epistle to Philemon, V. 10.
I beseech thee for my son Onesimus whom I have begotten in my bonds.
Therefore truly termed Elizeus the prophet Eliah, when he cried, my father,
2. Kings. 2.12.
my father, the charet of Israel, and the horsemen of the same. Now the^
since, they be thus accounted in the word, proof enough it should be that
all those three parts of honor lately spoken of belong unto them. Yet for
more full contentation let us wey the words of Christ in the Gospel, As my
father sends me, John. 20.
so send I you, he yt hears you, hears me, and he yt despises you,
despises me, Math. 10.
with many such. Whereby apparent it is yt in his ministers God is honored or
dishonored, for obedience to the^ in the works of their calling the scripture
also is plain, Heb. 13.
saying: Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves, for
they watch for your souls as they that must give accomptes that they may do
it with joy and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. And for
their maintenance also testimonies many are there in number both in the old
and new Testament, as Thou shall not mussel the mouth of the Ox yt treads
out ye corn, The workman is worthy of his wages, He that serves the Altar
let him live of ye Altar, He that delivers us spiritual things by very good
right ought to challenge and reap at our hands again temporal: and to
conclude in flat words the Apostle commands, let him yt is instructed in the
word make him that has instructed him partaker of al his goods, with other
such speeches diverse.

Que. How prove you yt masters are fathers to and over their servants?

Ans. For the office and duty, no man yt is godly will dout (I hope) that ye
Lord has blessed him with that superiority above others, not yt he should rule
as a tyrant over them, but to love, cheerish, and defend the^ eue^ as a father
his children, they doing him true and faithful service. And for the name it
self, beside a number other proofs, ye plain place warranteth it in ye book
of ye kings, where Naama^s servants come unto him and say, Father, if the
Prophet had commanded thee a great thing, 2. King. 5.13.
would thou not have done it? See how the spirit of God gives to masters
the title of fathers.

Que. What prescription is there in the word for servants duties toward
their masters?

Ans. First see the words of Paul to the Ephe. Servants be obedient to them
that are your masters according to the flesh, Ephesians. 6.5.
with fear and tre^bling, in singlenes of your hearts, as unto Christ, not with
service to ye eye as me^ pleasers, but as the servants of Christ doing ye will
of God from the heart, with good will serving the Lord and not men, and know ye
that whatsoever good thing any man does, that same shall he receive of the
Lord, whether he be bond or free. Secondly weigh well the same Apostles
speech to Titus, Let servants be subject to their masters, Tit. 2.9.
and please them in all things, not answering again, neither pikers, but that
they show all good faithfulness, that they may adorn the doctrine of God our
Savior in all things. Again to the Colossians most notably speaks the
same Paul saying: Servants be obedient to them that are your masters according
to the flesh in all things, not with eye service as men pleasers, but in
singleness of heart fearing God: Colos. 3.22.
and whatsoever you do, do it heartily, as to the Lord and not to men, knowing
that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance, for ye
serve the Lord Christ. The same counsel gives Peter also, adding that not
only to the loving, kind and courteous master, but even to the froward also,
of servants this duty must be performed. And mark this well I beseech you,
because many servants take their masters unkindness for an excuse of
their disobedience or infidelity in their services, which indeed must not be
so, says Peter, but be they never so froward, yet we must do all duty if
we be servants, and even joy heartily in that cross, that notwithstanding
our faithful and paineful duty, yet we suffer vnkin^de words, sower and
severe looks, with such like at their hands. For we serve not them, but GOD in
them, said the places before cited, and what good thing soever we do, we
shall receive it at our good Gods hands again assuredly what contempt soever
they show of us, casting us off unrewarded, yea even with hatred, peradventure
for our good wills, as often it falls out. O sweet and most sweet comfort
for all servants. What stony heart does not even melt at the consideration
of this gracious nature of the Lord, that if I be a seruannt, and honor him
in that my calling by true, faithful, painful and loving service to my
master and mistrisse, be they neneuer so sower, so waiward, so unkind, so
bitter, so without either discretion to discern a good servant, or conscience,
to reward him: yet will my God, my God, I say, never forsake me, but return
into my bosom with his blessing my true dealing, living and meaning, most
assuredly, and mark the proof and practice of the same upon Jacob and
Joseph, with others, as you read them. Stand therefore in strength, serve with
comfort, slip not from your calling for want of reward, if other ability
serve to continue. The Lords word is past him, his promise is out, he will
consider and recompense all true servants, fear it not, doubt it not, but
cleave to the Lord, and when ever any snubbes and checkes in word or
countenance undeserved arise, say in your heart with David cheerfully, Psalm.
84.
O Lord blessed is the man that puts his trust in thee.

Que. What say you of parents in respect of benefits?

Ans. I must needs say they are greatly to be honored and truly loved
again, whose love and affection has broken out in fruits to us ward^ For
ingratitude before God and man is hateful. Proueb. 17.1^.
And he that rewards evil for good, evil shall never depart from his
house, says Solomon.

Que. How prove you that under the title of Father and Mother old men and
old women be meant, and to be honored?

Ans. The words of Paul to Timothy teaches it: 1. Tim. 5.2.
For rebuke not an elder, says he, but exhort him as a Father, and the elder
women as mothers. Leuit. 19.32.
And touching the honoring of them. the law is plain, Thou shall rise up
before the horeheade, and honor the person of the old man, and dread thy
God: I am the Lord. Job. 32.6.
And in Elihu we see the practice, who stayed his speech, that his ancients
might speak before him.

Que. Let all town officers consider this, and become parents not spoilers of
the town.
How then may we conclude this matter?

Ans. Thus for this thing we may note and end. That if ye scripture to
Magistrates, ministers, masters and such like superiors have given ye name of
parents, the^ ought they al, and every one of them in heart, affection, and
action, be aunswerable to the same.

Que. Now then to proceed, here is a promise added to the keepers of this
commandment, that their days shall be long in the land. Ephe. 6.
And to the Ephesians it is said, that this is the first commandment which
is a promise, yet was there one added to the second, if you look on it, how
then answer we this?

Ans. We answer, ethat the promise annexed to the second commandment
belonged to all, but this belongs particularly to this, and therefore it is
the first with any special promise.

Que. What might be the reason of this promise?

Ans. This may seem to be some reason of it. Natural parents are the
instruments of life, other parents as Magistrates, Ministers, and benefactors
are the instruments of good and comfortable life. Now it pleased the Lord to
give them for a blessing long life, who duetifullie behave themselves to the
instruments of life.

Que Why, but is long life such a blessing?

Ans. Surely man's life is full of trouble and grief, it can not be denied.
Yet I answer first, that notwithstanding even to live and have a being is of
it self a mercy of ye Lords, yet to continue living, to serve and praise the
Lord, to increase his kingdom, by any ability in us, is a greater mercy.
For a good nature rejoices in opportunity given to show himself thankful,
though it he to his trouble and cost, and so must we. Secondly I answer, that
al these miseries of man's life have come of man himself, and not of God, and
therefore we ought no less to account of Gods blessing for ye thing, which we
ourselves have been cause of. Thirdly it may be answered, ye god does not
promise barelie long life in this place, but good with it also* either in
respect of outward prosperity, or inward comfort.

Que. How prove you that?

Ans. By having recourse to Paul's words, who repeating this blessing upon them
that honor Father and Mother, does not say only, that thou may live long on
earth, but, that it may be well with thee, and thou may live long upon
earth. Therefore though man's life be full of miseries, yet as God promises
continuance of it, it is a blessing and a great blessing.

Que. How can this promise respect us, seeing, it names particularly Canaan
saying that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God gives
thee, meaning it?

Ans. Paul again does answer this, who boldly puts for those words these,
on the earth: therefore by his interpretation it is not to be restrained to
Canaan only.

Que. Do always they that honor Parents live long, and contrariwise again?

Ans. We may not say so. For all things fall out alike to the good and evil,
just and unjust, says Solomon, meaning of outward things as life is, and it
is the wisdom of the Lord it should be so, that good things (as we call
them) may not be too greedily sought for, because they are common to the
wicked, neither evil things be unlawfully eschewed, because they are
incident to the good.

Que. How then is God true in his promises?

Ans. So far as long life may be a benefit to his children, so far he
ever gives it: but if in wisdom he know it better for them to be gathered
to their fathers, then he takes them away and recompenceth want of temporal
life with eternal.

Que. Yea but that is not his promise then, for his promise is long life here.

Ans. He that promises money, and gives gold, breaks not his promise: he
that promises little and gives much, breaks not his promise: but so does
the Lord with us, and therefore who is he that unthankfully pleads against
his mercy?

Que. What fruitful notes now gather you of th^se words?

Ans. First we may note that the Lord joining a promise of mercy to this
commandment, and not dealing so with any thing which he likes not, greatly
pleasing out of question in his sight is the keeping of this law: namely when
every man does duty where duty is due, and in love we allow, cherish and
maintain one an other.

Secondly if long life be a blessing promised to such as obey their parents,
and this obedience proceeds greatly of good education, then they that
carelessly and ungodly neglect the same in their children, do as much as
lies in them shorten the days of their poster^tie.

Lastly we also in this promise annexed note, that if long life be a gift of
God, then comes it not by nature or good constitution of body, further or
longer than it pleases the same GOD to bless the means, and grant it. And
thus much briefly of this commandment.

The Application.
Now remains it to apply these things to our selves, every one disclosing
his life, and inward thoughts before the Lord, and before our selves, as near
as we can, to the end that sight of sin if it be found in us, may bring forth
sorrow: and given grace in some strength to stand, if we can find we have
had it, may increase our thanks to the Lord our God, who did so assist us. Let
every one wey their calling and estate, see what of them in this law the
Lord requires, and what of them in their places has been performed.
Children in duty subject to our parents, we are, or have been every one of
us. Have we then ever done it, or presently do we in the true testimony of
a feeling conscience reverence in heart and by all outward ordinary means
those ordained instruments by the Lord of so great good unto us our natural
parents? Never have our hearts harbored any light or unworthy thought of them
or against them? Never have we failed in any outward gesture to testify to
the world our hidden love and duetifull regard of them? Can we say in truth,
what of a child any way ought to be, or (to mitigate ye matter a little) what
of us possibly could be performed in respect of age, of strength, of ability,
of time and opportunity, with such like, that of us has been done ever
fully, and willingly to them? O conscience casting in our teethes our
corruption, thou accusest us. These boiling hearts not bearing just reproof,
vndutifullie have often, if we could remember it, repined at their authority,
impatiently fretted at their due correction, and the most of us out of
question at one time or other, if we have not openly thrown out a curse, yet
have our hearts included a wish, and words peradventure uttered as much, not
consonant every way with our duties. Nay have not even outward violences
been offered to them by us? Joyful were the speech to the Saints in heaven,
if in truth we all could answer, no. But God knows a guilty mind in
many a one, does stop his speech, and filthy fact to beat or wish to
beat the^ who brought him forth, does cry to God without repentance for a
plague. What should I name, what should I fear to name, so will it wring us
all, the mocking of our Parents? Where is that child that has carefully
covered to his power and ever borne withal in him self the wantes or
infirmities whatsoever of his Parents? No, no, the Lord has not only
something against us in this behalf, but even great and grievous has been
our fault and still it remains in many of us. We laugh to see our Parents
shame, we smile at their wants, we publishe their infirmities, we disdain
their ignorance, we loath their age, and in many a thing to our own
confusion, if the Lord give not an amending repentance, we bewray a robbed
heart of yt true reverence which ought to be in children to their parents.
Alas if God judge us for our obedience, where are we? what witles will erecteth
a kingdom in us? How cleave we to our selves in all matters, and think our
own direction best? How despise we^ the counsel of our friends, and cast
behind us their experience? Every son and every daughter would rule their
marriage wholly themselves. And even in every action, alas what disobedience
shows it self in us unto our parents? For mayntaynance which is the third
branch of (...), even that also accuses many a thi^^^, before the Lord.
Rare is the man that has employed every ability of his wit, of wealth, of
knowledge, of strength at every need to his parents comfort. And therefore
the Lord in (...) not in fury deal with us as we are children. Are we
parents? th^^ w^y and mark whether so we have always behaved our selves, as
that th^se duties of our children might be (...) unto us even in regard of our
behavior. If not, then have we pulled upon us the guilt of our childrens want
of duty being causes of the same, and the Lord is angry with us. What life
have we led before our children to breed and continue these duties in them?
Has it been holy, grave, and modest, and so remains as near as we can,
seeking to hide from the eyes of their witless heads, such wantes as we know
our selves subject unto? No no, but carelessly and loosely, even in every place,
parents bewray neglect of religion, they will go to the Churches or good
exercises when they list, and that very rarely, they show no regard of the
duty of Christians, they carry no gravity in their doings, no modesty often
in their behavior, but live most dissolutely and often incontinently, they
swear fearfully without regard, speak profanely not respecting the
frailty of the youth that hears them, father and mother let unkind speeches
pass from them one toward an other in the presence of their children, to the
great impayring of their credit with them, careless God knows of their
bringing up, and too full of foolish pity when they should correct them. All
these are means to make the children fail in reverence to their parents, and
to tempt them to sin. And therefore let us look if we be parents, and
grieved with vnreuerent regard in our children of us, whether we our selves
be not causers of the same. Again, for their obedience it fails often by fault
in us. For if we be Parents, we lay great burdens upon our children, pressing
them still with our authority, we inioyne them what we list, not weying well
what they can like, and not carefully considering as well their natures, as our
own desires, as well their comfort and convenient being, as our own affection
and will to have it so, what marvel if often GOD break our hearts with their
disobedience? The like may be said of that thankful maintaynaunce that
should of children to their Parents be performed. The very unnatural and
unkind dealing of Parents with their children in their youth, denying them
relief, and comfortable help, makes them often (though it should not) when
they have attained to any estate, to deal as undutifully with their needy
Parents again. Consider therefore I say, if we be Parents, what cause we
give, and compare it with the fruit we find in our seed. Let sin appear,
if we have offended, and let the law condemn us, if we have transgressed.
For surely what duties this law binds all children to perform, it as
straitely binds all parents to deserve. The Parents evil excuses not the
child, but it makes him guilty of his childs offense. Thus may the rest
also descend into themselves. Too apparent is contempt in our lives of
Magistracy and authority. We honor them not as Parents, but both in
reverence, obedience, and maintaynance of their state by retribution of some
part of that we have got by them, we bewray ungodliness, and sin against
the Lord and them very grievously. For where is that heart that rises up in
thankfulness for them to our God, that obeys them secretly as well as
openly, for conscience not for fear? Nay O sin of ours, if it be sought out by
the Lord in this respect, even grown assuredly up to heaven. For how dare we
and do we defeat their laws continually? How set we our shifts against
the wisdom and working of the Lord by them? We mock the Lord and swell in
pride against him. For be he as wise as he will in directing the Magistrate to
a law to rule us by, we shortly after will be up in wit against him to shake in
pieces by a shift all his endeavor. Truly our hearts be dead, our sin is
great, and the Lord has wrath in store, if this our dealing with our parents
be not confessed and amended. Thus deal we also with our ministers and
spiritual fathers begetting us to the Lord. With most vile usage we often
abuse them, and if not, yet in heart at least as the refuse of the world we
esteem them. Let God be judge or our own souls what base and scorneful
concepts we harbor of them, and whether in truth, as parents they be loved,
accounted of, and dealt withal. What swelling pride in youth against the aged?
What ungrateful hands and hearts against our great and gainefull friends?
Every way, every way guilty we are of the breach of this commandment, if
we can see it. Magistrates also, and ministers even as much for their great
offenses in their callings, so that if in justice we be repayed, short shall
our lives be here on earth, and in the world to come eternal death. Who can
say he has done the duties of a governor? who can say he has lived
lawefully as an inferior? Alas we are touched all with sin, and robbed by it
of all the blessing. Yet sin espied and truly loathed, finds ever pardon.
For this cause Christ died, that we should not be damned if we will be taught.
Things past be gone, and the Lord forgive us. Some be to come, and the Lord
strengthen us. Whether we be parents and have not deserved, or we be children,
and have not performed, the Lord has mercy if we do amend, the Lord has
love, if our lives do seek it, and judgment also if persuasion profit not.
Life does he promise if we keep this law, and life will he give us, as he is
GOD, and true, both here and evermore.

The sixth Commandment.
Thou shall do no murder.
Question.

HOw stands the order of this commandment?

Ans. Great wisdom has our God showed even in the order of every one, and by
name of this. For having in the former established degrees amongst men, some
to rule and some to obey, if he should not also have set limittes for their
authority, it had been to arm injustice, and to strengthen oppression and
wrong.

Que. What is the equity of this law?

Ans. It is a very just law, and meet to be established and made in three
respects. First in respect of God himself, who loving all good preservation
of life, goods, credit, etc. and hating the contrary, fitly provides to
work the same in men, whom he would have holy as he is holy. Secondly in
respect of man, for our brother is our own flesh, and we come all of one
root, and therefore we should not kill. Lastly forasmuch as the society
and traficke of man with man cannot be, unless life may be in safety,
therefore even in respect thereof also, meet it was that the Lord should make
this law, that we should not kill.

Que. Is all killing of any thing that has life forbidden in these words of
the law?

Ans. No indeed, but if we would understand what notwithstanding these words
we may do, we must consider that all living things are of three sorts, either
they are plants, herbs, trees, and such like, or brute beasts, or
reasonable creatures. And al these in time, place, and for some causes we may
kill notwithstanding these words. For the first we have our warrants in these
words: I have given you every herb bearing seed, Genesis 1.29.
which is upon all the earth, and every tree wherein is the fruit of a tree
bearing seed, that shall be to you for meat. For the second, Every thing
(says God) that moves and lives shall be meat for you, Genesis 9.3.
as the green herb: I have given you all things. For the third and last
sort, both the sundry commandementes of God in sackages of cities to put to
sword man, woman, and child, prove it, as also many his laws made to that
end.

Que. But may any man shed man's blood?

Ans. No, only they have lawefully shed man's blood, which have had a calling
of the Lord to the same, as the Magistrate.

Que. And what say you of the warrior?

Ans. We must comprehend him under the title of a Magistrate, for so indeed
he is, if he be thereunto appointed. The calling also, Luke. 3.
John Baptist approoueth in that his speech unto the soldiers, whom he does
not bid to leave that life, but to use it rightly, which yet he would not
have advised them, if it had been ungodly. Also in the gospel Christ touches
not the Centurion for his kind of life, Math. 8.
neither Peter, Cornelius, who was a Captain, or yet his messenger, Act. 10.
which was a Soldier. And I come unto thee (says David) in the name of the
Lord and blessed be the Lord which teaches my hands to war and my fingers
to fight. Psalm. 143.


Que. Is only the actual killing of a man forbidden?

Ans. No, but even as well also the ordinary forerunners of murder, to wit,
fighting and quarrelling. For if a man cause any blemish in his neighbor,
Leuit. 24.19.
(says the law) as he has done, so shall it be done unto him. Eye for eye,
tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, Exodus 21.24.25
burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe. Whereby we see
plainly how the GOD of heaven allows that hurting, and laming of our
brethren in fight, which a fleshly man takes to be so lawefull, so glorious,
and an argument of such valor in him. And no doubt but this law of God thus
executed upon us would quickly cool that raging heat within us, which no
counsel of our friends, no consideration of necessary circumstances, as of
our calling, the place where we live, the charge of wife, children, and such
like hanging upon our safety, the law of man, no nor the law of God it self
condemning us for it, can stay or aswage. Math. 5.39.
Again, Resist not evil, (says the Lord) but whosoever shall smite thee on
the right cheek, turn to him the other also: That is, be so far from
yielding to the rage of thy affections, which provoke thee to strike again,
that even rather thou be content to take as much more, than to displease thy
God, by ungodly and forbidden revenge. And for quarrelling what a sweet and
vehement persuasion is it of the Apostle against such bitter words of a boiling
and boisterous heart? Now therefore (says he) as the elect of God, holy, and
beloved, Colos. 3.13.
put on tender mercy and kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long
suffering, forbearing one an other, and forgiving one an other, if any man
have a quarrel to an other, even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye.
Hateful therefore before God are as I say the ordinary forerunners of
murder, quarrelling and fighting with their fellows whatsoever. And assuredly
if the Lord were in us, as we think he is, that meek spirit of his would
kill more and more that fearful hastiness to revenge that is even in all, and
we would learn of him, Math. 11.25
for he is meek and lowly in heart.

Que. What think you of killing by combat?

Ans. I must needs think that the practice in a Christian common wealth being
naught and unlawful, the death that thereby insues, is horrible murder, and
condemned in this commandment. Now that to fight a combat in a godly state
is not tolerable, it may easily appear if you weigh the causes for which it
is at any time taken in hand. For if they be not (as it will appear)
sufficient to warrant it, then is it not warrantable. The first cause that is
alleged for it, is to try a truth, which otherwise can not be known say
they. But it may be answered that the end good, does not by and by make the
means good: to try out a truth is good, but to try it with the hazard of
life, is more than can be warranted. There are many lawefull means to find
out truth by, and if all those fail, then is it evident that the Lord for
some cause reserueth it to himself for a secret, and to seek importunately
and impaciently by extraordinary means (as a combat is) to find it out, is
to tempt the Lord, and even as it were by violence to draw from him the
manifestation of ye which as yet he would not have reueiled. Secondly the one
party is innocent, yet either of the^ desires ye death of an other
indifferently, so ye murder is in the heart of both of them, which amongst
Christians should not be countenaunced. Sometimes the combat is craved for
vain ostentation of courage and strength, many a Thraso thinking his glory to
stand in the chalenging of an other to ungodliness, but this I hope no man
will say to be a good cause for a Magistrate to admit of a combat. Sometimes to
avoid or revenge some great disgrace offered to a man, he beggeth thus to fight.
But a Christian man that must make an account at the day of judgment of his
life given him from above, must learn to esteem more of life, than honor,
(if honor by lawefull means may not be kept) and more of God, and his
commandment, than of them both. Besides the profession of a Christian is to
hear evil and to suffer evil though he do well, and deserve so: therefore
far should we be from yielding to such heates. Some allege that it ends
strife, and therefore is to be admitted: but to this may serve the answer to
the first cause alleged for it. And besides, who knows not that howesoeuer
it ends it betwixt those two, because the one of them dies, yet lays it
the foundation of even deadly hatred in the hearts of all their frindes, seed
and posterity, so that for one which is killed there starteth up an hundred
discontented hearts, seeking and following all occasions of strife against
their enemies. Therefore in peace and at home how a Christian Magistrate may
allow the combat, we find no sufficient cause and warrant. For the field
yet some do think it is meet, and that they have reason for it, for say they
when two armies are encamped in battle together, if upon causes it be judged
fit not to hazard the loss of many, but to commit it to two champions,
either side agreeing to yield upon the overthrow of their man, who can
mislike this? But we answer that as yet the combat in it self is not proved
good, but is evil: and to do evil that good may come of it, we may not.
Again in such a case as this, we must consider, not only of the men and their
safety, but also of the cause and his honesty. The cause is certainly either
good or evil, either just or iniust. If it be good and just, then is not the
credit of it to be laid upon one man only to the mocking of justice and
right: and if it be evil and unjust, then of a Christian Magistrate not one
man's life is to be spent in it, and for it. Yea but say they yet further, the
party that has the good cause is far the weaker, and not able to stand if
they once join all together, and therefore this other way of two to try all,
is good. And we answer also further, that this were a marvelous distrust of
Gods mercy and power not tolerable in a Christian. For if the cause be good,
and meet to be maintained, then is the cause the Lords, the men the Lords,
and he saves not by bow nor spear, nor by the multitude of an host, so
that we should so regard these, but gives victory at his will to the
weaker, and drives away, as the wind the dust, very mighty force assembled
against him, and his children. Therefore not even yet do I see a cause to
bear out any combat. If there be any corruption in men that justice be
not done (which sometimes also is a cause alleged) we must say as he said,
committing our selves and our matter to GOD. Video, fero, spero, That is, I
see, I suffer, I trust in God. And even with a good heart, be ready to bear
any thing, rather than by a thing whereof I have no warrant, to seek my
satisfaction.

Que. Why? what say you then of David's act with Goliath?

Ans. I say it was an extraordinary motion in the heart of David, wrought by the
Lord upon the hearing of such blasphemy against God, Number. 25. Exodus 32. 1.
King. 18.
and it may not be our imitation, no more than the fact of Phinees, of the
Levites, or of Eliah which were all mere extraordinary, and had their warrant
by such specialtie from the Lord as that others may not look, it shall extend
to them, if they do the like.

Que. What now of killing of our selves, is that never tolerable?

Ans. Much of this matter has S. Augustine in his first book of the city of
God. And first he reasons thus, Chap. 1.
If Judas did evil in hanging himself (which he thinks no man will deny)
what may warrant any man or woman to lay violent hands upon themselves?
Chap. 28.
For never can any fall in earth to a fowler fact, or to worse estate in the
eyes of God and man. Secondly says he, the law says not, Thou shall not
kill thy neighbor, limiting it as it were to some, but indefinitelie, Thou
shall not kill, extending it largely to all: and therefore says he, not even
our selves may we make away. Thirdly not Job in all his extremity durst do
this when as yet one prick would have finished all his woe. Chap. 24.
And therefore no man may kill himself.

Que. Well, but yet because you name Augustine, I have heard of some causes
propounded by him in this matter.

Ans. Truth it is, but none to ye warranting of this sin. For first says
he, what if a woman do it to shun pollution of her body, or after she is
polluted to fly the ignominy following upon it? And he answers to it, that
the first is wicked and proceeds of this error, that whatsoever is done in
us, the same is also done by us, which is not so. For then were chastity a
virtue of the body and not of the mind. It is not for a christian to say, this
will I not suffer, but this will I not do. The mind being stained ye body is
filthy though it never did act, but not contrariwise: for the body by
violence abused is never able to make guilty yt mind which co^senteth not to
it. And therefore this excuse, says Austen can not warrant such sin as to kill
ourselves. For flying of shame which would follow ye fact, neither yet may it
be done. For the shame is not so great as the act, and therefore if the deed
done unto her may not warrant her, the ignominy following may not do it. Si non
est impudica quae inuita comprimitur, non est illa iustitia qua casta punitur.
That is: If she be not unchaste which unwilling is oppressed, the^ is it no
justice whereby the harmeles is punished. Sed mulier auida laudis metuit, ne
quod violenter passa est dum viueret, putaretur libenter passa si viueret. But
says he a woman that stands upon speech and praise reasons with her self,
that what she suffered against her will while she lived, she should be thought
to suffer with her will, if she lived. And therefore, she will kill her self.
Indeed so may a woman reason ye regards more man tha^ God, but ye christian
guided with ye spirit that David had, learneth to say with him: O god thou
know mine innocence, etc. And to rest in joy of spotless mind whatsoever
the world speaks. Then goes he further, and they will answer says he,
what can they tell how they may be tempted to consent by long importunity or
by sight of hard extxemity, and therefore they will provide before hand, least
they should offend, and they will kill themselves. O says Austen, what a speech
is this? Iam nunc peccemus, ne postea forte peccemus; iam nunc perpetremus
certum homicidium, ne postea incidamus in incertum adulterium. That is, Let us
now sin, least hereafter we do sin: let us now commit certain murder
least we fall hereafter into uncertain adultery. Let us now do that which
we cannot live to repent, least hereafter we do, what we may repent, etc.

Que. But indeed is it not a vile thing to fall into the hands of mine
enemy?

Ans. In deed Cato an heathen with many other could not abide it, neither Saul
a cast away could suffer it. But better is the warrant ever of this ought to
be done, than of this is done: and therefore we must not weygh the latter, but
the former. And we see neither Patriarchs, Prophets, nor Apostles ever to
have done it. Nay says Christ, When they persecute you in one City, fly
into an other. Where he might have said, dispatch your selves, least your
enemies triumph over you. Now if they might not do it, for whom everlasting
mansions in heaven were provided, what care we for a thousand examples of
infidels and Paganes? Thus then I conclude that neither for these causes
alleged, nor any other whatsoever, we may violently deal with our selves
and end our life.

Que What if we neither kill others nor our selves, but yet peradventure
consent?

Ans. Even that consent of heart is horrible murder and condemned in this
law. Herodias as guilty for consenting to the death of John Baptist, and
seeking it, as if she had hewed off his head her self. Haman as guilty for
Mardocheus, as if he had done it: David for Vrias, Iesabel for Naboth, Pylate
for Christ, as if they themselves had been executioners.

Que. Often also have I hard men say yt sorrow and care will shorten our time.

Ans. Indeed it is not man's speech only, but even ye doctrine of the spirit of
God. Prou. 17.22.12.25.
For a joyful heart, says Solomon, causes good health, and a sorrowful mind,
dries the bones. Heaviness in the heart of man brings it down, but a good
word rejoices it, yea a joyful heart makes a cheereful countenance, 15. v. 13.
and by the sorrow of the heart, ye mind is heavy. This doctrine of god has man
by experience found ever so true, yt when any of the^ in their writings have
spoken of care and sorrow, they have given unto the^ the epithites of biting,
eating, consuming care, and such like, because in deed they have that work in
those yt are too much subject to them. Galen the Prince of Physicians in his
book of the preservation of health, affirms plainly that cares do pull on
and hasten many diseases in us. Aristotle a Philosopher says that sorrow
dries and wastes that natural heat in us, wherein our life consists, and
so as it were gives a reason of Galens assertion. No doubt the thing is true
tried and found to their harm in thousands. And therefore eue^ in this respect
must a christian beware least the Lord have against him in the day of
judgment, yt he shortened his own life by suffering uncomfortable sorrow to
lie snubbing and cheecking his heart within both day and night. Alas, what is it
that ever happen to that man or woman in earth, which taste the mercy of God in
Christ Jesus toward them so bitter, as that it may not be delaied, and
comforted even with this, that God is on their side, Romans 8.
and who or what can be against them? Does not every thing, yea even every
thing happen for the best to those that love God? Have a true heart, and mean
not falsely, and then say in faith as David does My help comes of God which
preserves them that are true of heart. Yea, Psalm. 7.11.
let me say to all that ever shall read this in the name of the Lord of
heaven, when cause of humility happens, differ not to be humbled, harden
not your hearts in the day of affliction, but sacrifice them up bruised and
troubled to the LORD, O Lord help. Omnes cum valemus, etc.
yet ever so far yield to sorrow, as that you constantly and even
cheerefullie hold that which follows in the Prophet, a broken and contrite
heart is never despised. And therefore whatsoever the matter is, with David unto
your sad soul in every corner cry: Psalm. 42.
Why art thou so sad, O my soul, Psalm. 27. vlt.
and why art thou so disquieted in me? Still trust in God, still trust in God,
for I will yet thank him, he is the help of my countenance and my God. Thus
tarry ye the Lords leisure, be strong and he shall comfort your heart, and
put your trust in the Lord.

Que. Thus then having spoken of actual murder or murder of the hand, as we
say, together with the branches thereof, proceed if you think good to the
murder of the tongue.

Ans. That even by the tongue also this commandment is broken, it is evident
by the testimony of our Savior Christ himself, who expounding this law in
the fifth of Matthew, Math. 5.
concludes them in it that say Racha, or thou fool to their brethren, that
is, that by bitter and uncomely speeches show their hearts to be robbed of
love, and to lodge an unlawful affection toward them.

Secondly the comparisons which the scripture uses of the tongue, proves
plainly there is a murder by the tongue. It compares it to poison, to fire, to
spears, to sharp arrows, and many such things, and al to teach that as
these are the instruments of murder, so is the tongue. Psa. 14. Iam. 3. Psalm.
56. Psalm. 120.
Wherefore justly prays David in his Psalm, O Lord deliver me from lying
lips, and from a deceitful tongue. Justly pronounces he the curse of God
upon it in an other place, saying that the Lord shall root out all deceitful
lips, Psalm. 1 20.
and Salamon also flatly affirms, that, he which has a naughty tongue
shall fall into evil. Prou. 17.20.
Marvelous me think is also the discourse of that wise man Syrach touching
this matter, and to be carefully weyed. Abhor, says he, Chap. 28.
the slaunderer and double tongued, for such have destroyed many that were at
peace. The double tongue has disquieted many and driven them from nation to
nation: strong cities has it broken down, and overthrown the houses of great
men: the strength of the people has it brought down, and been the decay of
mighty nations: the double tongue has cast out many virtuous women, and robbed
them of their labors. Who so hearkeneth unto it shall never find rest neither
ever dwell quietly. The stroke of the rod makes marks in the flesh, but the
stroke of the tongue breaks the bones. There be many that have perished by the
edge of the sword, but not so many as have fallen by ye tongue. Well is him that
is kept from an evil tongue, and comes not in the anger thereof, which has
not drawn in that yoke, neither has bin bound in the bands thereof. For the
yoke thereof is a yoke of iron, and the bands thereof are bonds of brass. The
death thereof is an evil death, and hell were better than such one. With more
such speeches in that chapter if you read it over. And in an other place, Who
shall set a watch before my mouth, Chap. 22.26.
and a seal of wisdom upon my lips, that I fall not soudenly by them, and
that my tongue destroy me not? Fearful therefore is the fault of the tongue as
we plainly see.

Que. How do men use to kill by their tongues.

Ans. By slanders, reproaches, mocks and tauntes, says your book, and
consider indeed the displeasure of God against all these: as against the first
by an express law against it: Thou shall not walk about with tales among the
people, meaning, as slaunderers, Leuit. 19.16.
backbiters and quarrel pickers do. Also by the hatred of it which the
spirit of God works against it in the godly, Psalm. 101.
as in David, who says he will destroy the ungodly slaunderer which privily
slandereth his neighbor, Leuit. 19.14.
in Solomon who counsels in any case to refrain harkening to them, and in
many others. Against the second by his law also published in that behalf:
that we should not curse the deaf, neither put a stumbling block before the
blind, that is, no way reproach them with their infirmity, but fear the
Lord, for he is our God, as though he should say, reproaches of our brethren,
and to fear the Lord, are never in one man together. And it is a speech
worthy noting, of the wise Syrach, Syrach. 22.20. etc.
That whosoever casts a stone at birds frayeth them away, and he that vpbraideth
his friend, breaks friendship. Yea mark what follows, though thou drewest
a sword says he, at thy friend, yet despair not, for there may be a
returning to favor. If thou have opened thy mouth against thy friend, fear
not, for there may be a reconciliatio^: but if vpbraiding, or pride or
disclosing of secreates, or a traitorous wound do let, then by these things,
every friend will depart. And again, in an other place: Chap. 23.15.
the man that is accustomed to opprobrious words will never be reformed all the
days of his life.

Que. Horrible I see then it is either to slander or to reproach any with such
infirmities as they have, but a mock I take not to be in so high a degree.

Ans. What degree so ever it is in, it skilleth not, certain and sure it is,
that God abhors it. And I refer but any heart yt has feeling to the first
words of David in his Psalm, Psalm. 1.
Blessed is that man yt has not sit in the seat of the scorneful. I beseech
you if they be blessed that have not done it, what are they that daily do it?
The wicked thought of a fool is sin, Prou. 24.9.
and the skorner is an abomination to men, says Solomon. Yea scornful men
bring a city into a snare, he that rebukes a scorner purchases to himself
shame, 29.8.
and he that rebukes the wicked gets a blot. Rebuke not a scorner least he
hate thee, but rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. 9.7. and 8.
Wherefore not without reason seems the translation of Hierom, and the
Greeks of the Hebrewe word Lezim mockers, into pestilentes, pestilent
fellows and hurtful, for so they are in deed, even the plagues of a common
weal. Yet if we mark the usual cause of mocks it will make us see more into
the vileness of this sin. For it is ever lightly for doing well, and refraning
euel yt the wicked mock the godly, and is it not a vile spirit yt cannot abide
virtue, but so greedily thirsts after vice? Drink not with ye drunkers til
thou be drunk, and they mock thee^ swear not with the swearers, but
admonish them, and they mock thee. Be not vain in words, in apparel, in
behavior, and they mock thee. Hear the word, read the word, talk of the
word, and by and by, O young saint, old devil, you will to heaven or your
bones be cold, with a number such mockes and devilish tauntes. The degrees be
diverse, yet all devilish, some scorn all admonition, and they would have
every fat, they say, stand on his own bottom, and every man to meddle with
himself. Some scorn, but at that which touches themselves, shooting out their
lips, and refusing to be charmed. Some secretly in hearts by a most
contemptuous concept of that good thing whatsoever, which their crooked natures
cannot like of, others openly by very vile speeches uttered against God and
godliness, against their brethren, and what graces God has given them. But it
is a sealed truth, and god give us hearts to consider it well. Judgments are
prepared for ye scorner, Prou. 19.29.
and stripes for the back of the fool. Michall David's wife a mocking
mistress out of her gasing window not sparing her own husband the king of a
frumpe, and that in a good thing, found the reward of it at the Lord, she
was cursed as barren while her life endured, and never had children. Those
mocking children at the baldness of the Prophet, felt the reward of such a
sin. For our example the Lord caused Bears to devour them all presently.
Semei that scorned the estate of David, 2. Kings 2.
went not to his grave in peace. Bician that scoffer, was devoured of dogs,
as they write. And as yet never escaped the vnrepenting scorner the hands of
the Lord. For how should it stand with his justice, to call us to a
reckning for our idle words, and not for our mockes and ungodly tauntes?
Wherefore truth it is, and shall ever stand: Blessed is that man that has
not sit in the seat of the scornful.

Que. Why but may we not jest merrily one with an other?

Ans. Yes indeed, for all jesting is not mocking such as now we have spoken
of and showed to be evil. Merrily, if you remember, did the Prophet Eliah
jest with the Idolaters and worshippers of Baal, bidding them cry loud, for
their god paradue^ture might be talking with some body, 1. King. 28.
or pursuing his enemies, or in some iornie some whither, or paraduenture a
sleep. Thus says the text, did Eliah mock them, and yet this mocking being
but a pleasant jesting to have taught them good if they had had grace,
displeased not the Lord. An other example also we have in the prophet Esaias
laughing as it were at their folly who would worship that as God the chippes
whereof had made them such a fire yt they cried A, Esaias. 44.
ha, I am well warmed. And for ye place to the Ephesians it condemns not this
manner of speaking and jesting, Ephe. 5.
but that which proceeds either of a vain desire to show our selves, or of
an ungodly coveting to sting our brethren.

Que. Thus then I see the malice of the tongue to be great and even al men by
it to be made guilty of this commandment, though their hands never shed
blood: yet is it such a mischief as the godly are much subject to, I mean
to be stinged with the tongues of the wicked: and therefore I pray you if you
know any give me some counsel how to think of this cross.

Ans. Truth it is, that howsoever the sin be great to mock, or to speak
against any despitefully, and especially the godly, yet is it a cross usually
incident to them that will separate the sins of this world, so near as they
can from their lives, to be taunted and spoken against, by both open despisers
of goodness, and by open professors also of religion. And that comfort which I
know, is to think even often and seriously of these, and such other places.
The mouth of the wicked, Psalm. 109.2.
and the mouth full of deceit are opened upon me (says David.) They have
spoken to me with a lying tongue, they compassed me about also with words of
hatred, and fought against me without a cause. For my friendship they were
mine adversaries. But I gave my self to prayer. See the refuge of this saint
of God in this kind of cross, even to heaven: mark the rest of his
conscience, even the Lord, and if ever the like case be ours, let us power with
him our guiltless grief into the bosom of our God, and there an end, till
the Lord think good to make our truth appear also to men. The like speech
and practice note again in an other place of the same book. Princes (says
he) did sit and speak against me, Psalm. 119.23.
but thy servant did meditate in thy statutes. And again, The proud have had
me exceedingly in derision, yet have I not shrinked from thy commandments.
Ver. 51.
And what a speech is it of Paul to the Corinthians? I take pleasure in
infirmities, 2. Cor. 12.10.
in reproaches, etc. Wherefore in God rejoice, who sees the heart yt meant no
harm: in the Lord be cheerful, whose mercy turns the deserved cross of
many great greefes into the biting but of a peuish tongue, and in patience
passing the time on, say in faith, what many have said in folly: That time
shall try the truth.

Que. Yet there are some mo branches of this murder of the tongue.

Ans. Indeed by the tongue also no doubt they kill, who by cruel counsel
stir up the hating hearts of men to any bloody persecution, or which with
their mouths witness an untruth, to the end to shed any blood thereby, as
did the judges of Susanna, and as many consciencelesse men in these days do,
being upon an inquest of life and death, to be masters of their will.

Que. Now if you think good, a little also of the third kind of murder, namely,
of the heart, and first how it is proved?

Ans. The words of our savior Christ are plain, That there is a murder of
the heart.
that out of the heart come evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders.
Therefore there is a murder of the heart. Again, S. John says, Whosoever
hates his brother is a mansleaer. But hatred is in the heart, and therefore
manslaughter. Thirdly the mind and the will being ye beginnings or the
fountains of al actions if they be infected, the man must needs be gilty before
ye Lord.

Que. Does this fearful sin step into the heart at first, or it creeps
rather by degrees as other great sins do?

Ans. Satan is more subtle than so, to draw every man to the extremity of
sin at the first, and therefore howsoever in some men he does upon a sudden,
yet ordinarily this murder steals into our hearts by these steps. First
Satan bree^eth by his unmarked creeping into our affections a misliking of such
a man or woman, and yet we well know not why, but we can not like them. Then
does this misliking breed anger. For we cannot bear at their hands, that
which we can well suffer at others. Anger breeds hatred, hatred desire of
revenge, and desire of revenge murder. Thus steals sin into us, and by
these steps. Therefore first every Christian is to take heed how misliking
of any grows upon him, Misliking.
and to snubbe the course of Satan at the first. Secondly to look the fruit
thereof, namely, anger, weying well what was said to Caine, Genesis 1.6.
Caine why art thou angry? And by our Savior Christ in the gospel, Math. 5.
But I say unto you whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, Anger.
shall be culpable of judgment, expounding there this commandment, and
including as you see anger in it. And hence have grown all those vehement
speeches in the scriptures against it. Let all bitterness and anger, and wrath
be put away from you, Ephesians. ^.31.
and be ye courteous one toward an other, and tender hearted, forgiving one an
other, even as God for Christ's sake forgave you (says the Apostle). And
again, Be slow to wrath, says an other. Iam. 4.19.
For the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God: That is,
anger and wrath hinders Gods work in us. Unto which and a number such other
persuasions in the word the profane writers by the very light of reason have
agreeed, and sought in their sort to give men a sight of this foul vice. Anger
have they said is the beginning of madness, anger is the drunkenness of the
mind, anger admits not any good counsel, anger is the root of murder
and death, with a number such speeches.

Que. Foul then I see is this vice in all, and especially in a Christian: and
therefore it were good we knew how to avoid it.

Ans. We read that a king of Thracia being presented with a sort of very fine
glasses, by and by brake them all in pieces. And being asked the reason,
answered, that he did it to avoid the wrath that he was sure would be in him
against them that should break them afterward. How then are we taught by
this king, though not every way to do as he did, yet with him to be
careful to prevent our anger by taking away the occasion? The occasions of
anger in many men are play, and gaming, curiosity in dealing and meddling,
taking a matter as they think they heard it, when indeed they heard it not
right, nipping words, and gawling speeches, with a number such: which if men
will not have any care to eschew, then in vain do they say they are afraid
to let murder into their hearts. For in truth the effects will follow if
the ordinary causes do go before.

Que. Why but is all anger forbidden ^o a Christian?

Ans. No indeed, it is as lawful for a man in time, place, in his office, and
for a just cause to be angry in a convenient measure, as it is unlawful
otherwise. And it is apparent by the children of God, in all ages, the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and others, whose hearts have burned with
misliking of evil, and words bewrayed as much unto them. Wherefore truly was
it said of the godly father, Nolle irasci, vbi irascendum est, nolle emendare
peccatum est. That is, for a man not to be angry, when he should be angry, is
as much as to be unwilling to amend what is amiss.

Que. Proceed now I pray you to the other branches.

Ans. Anger as was said, begets hatred, nay becomes hatred if it be let
to settle. For Odium est inueterata ira: Hatred is nothing else but old anger.
And therefore since anger is apparently forbidden in this commandment, hatred
by consequence being festred anger must needs be much more. Besides we have
heard the words of the scripture plain, He that hates his brother is a
mansleaer. 1. John. 5.
Therefore I pass it over and come to the fellow that is ever joined with it,
when it meets with a fit subject, to wit, Envy, a vice compounded of the
hatred of an other for virtue, Envy what it is.
guiftes, favor, honor, and such like, and of self love which makes us
grieve to see our selves in these things excelled of him. A vice also of the
spirit of God by name forbidden. Eat not the meat (says Solomon) of him
that has an evil eye, Prou. 23.6.
neither desire his dainties. Let us not be desirous of vain glory (says the
Apostle) provoking one an other, Galat. 5.26.
envying one an other. But laying aside all maliciousness, all guile and
dissimulation, all envy and evil speaking, 1. Pet. 2.1.
as new borne babes, let us desire the sincere milk of the word of God, that
we may grow thereby* Unto which express testimonies if w^ join the
experience of such evil as en^uie has wrought, we shall plainele se^ the
foulnes of it. Number. 12.10.
Aaron and Miriam en^uied Moses, and the Lord with leprosi^ plagued her. Corah
and his company envied him also, and the Lord as abhorred, made the earth to
shrink, and swallowe them up quick, with all that they possessed. Saul had an
eye upon David, for the women's singing, and it stirred him still to seek the
life of his son and servant. Joseph's brethren envied him, and it almost
brought them to his bloudshedding. Every way therefore is envy in a Christian
poison, and apparently it falteth against this commandment. It is a
possession besides that destroys the possessour. For as the rust the iron,
and mothes a garmen, so eats up envy the man that enuieth. These things
make envy loathsome enough to a godly mind, and yet is there more to be
said against it. For besides all this, envy, as it wishes an other man's
fall, so does it rejoice if it happen unto him. Which also is a thing very
horrible in the eyes of God. For he that mocketh the poor (says Solomon)
reprocheth him that made him: Prou. 17.5.
and he that rejoices at destruction, shall not be unpunished. Again, Be
thou not glad, when thine enemy falls, 24.18.
and let not thy heart rejoice, when he stumbleth, least the Lord see it, and
it displease him, and he turn his wrath from him to be avenged of thee. To the
which words of Solomon how consonant was the practice of Job testified in
that most excellent speech of his: If I rejoiced at his destruction that
hates me, Job. 31.
(says be) or was moved to joy when evil came upon him: If I suffered my
mouth to sin by wishing a curse unto his soul, etc. Meaning that he never
did it, neither would do. For it is a fearful sin. Calamitas illius fores
pulsat qui aliorum calamitatibus non mouetur. That is, Misery knocks at his
door of right, whose heart sorroweth not to see others in adversity. And never
object his hard hap to any man could the Greek Orator say, for fortune is
common to all, and what is to come, is not yet seen. Therefore even this
companion of envy makes it worse, as I hope we see, and of all that would
please the Lord more carefully to be shunned. To rejoice at the sins of an
other much more must be grievous, if his worldly estate may not be rejoiced
at that it is evil. Besides when by sin the Lord is grieved, and my brother
wounded to eternal death, what a spirit were it to rejoice? Again consider
our selves in comparison with them that offend, and either we are better,
like, or worse: the two later give no cause of joy, and the former should fill
our heart with praise for our grace given of God, and not our mouths with
mockes at the infirmity of others.

Que. What else is forbidden?

Ans. Last of all, as the murder of the heart is forbidden all cruelty and
heard dealing with our brethren, for even this the Lord abhors also.
Deutr. 2^.
The law that was made of forty stripes to be given to an offender, and not
above, did evidently draw to some pitiful feeling our cruel, raging, and
fierce affections. The ^awe for widows that they should not be wronged, and
for the fatherless that they should not be forsaken, shot at the same mark.
So did the forbidding of usury to the poor, the taking of his raiment to
pledge, the detayning of his hire, and such like things. All were to work
some mercy in us toward others, and to tell us plainly that the Lord
abhors cruelty toward any.

Que. Thus then if you think good, let it suffice to have spoken of these
three sorts of murder, to wit, of the hand, the tongue, and the heart,
together with their branches: and now a little of the affirmative part of this
commandment if you will.

Ans. The affirmative part of it easily may be known by the negative. For who
sees not that if generally all hurting or taking away of life (unless it be
by the Magistrate lawefullie) be forbidden, then generally also is commanded
all care and preservation of the same: Deutr. 19.20.
and if in specialitie the bitterness of the tongue be forbidden, then is the
sweetness, the softness, and the comfort of the same commanded. If anger be
forbidden, gentleness is commanded: if misliking, hatred, envy, and ioying
at other men's harms be forbidden, then is an heart well thinking and accepting
of others commanded, then is love and a true rejoicing at the good happes of
our brethren commended: and to conclude, if all cruelty, rigor, and extremity
be forbidden, then is all lenity, mercy, and pity commanded. All which are
virtues of great praise, and afording large persuasions unto our hearts, to
love and like them, to embrace and follow after them. But so should I dwell
too long in this commandment. The blackness of their opposite vices I hope
does make their beauty and brightness great before our eyes. Only I wish
us, to the end we may abound in all mercy, that we would often consider
that comfortable speech of the Lord by his prophet: Esaias. 58.10.
If thou refresh the hungry and troubled soul, then shall thy light spring
out of darkness, the Lord shall satisfy thy soul in drought, and make
fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a spring of water, whose water fails
not. As also that sentence which at the day of days shall be pronounced upon
it, Come, come ye blessed of my father, and possess the kingdom prepared for
you: Math. 25.
for when I was hungry ye fed me, when I was thirsty you gave me drink,
when I was naked ye clothed me, when I was sick ye visited me, and so
forth. Both which places with many more to the same end being often thought
upon, will soften our hearts in all dealinges with our brethren, and make us
profitable to them ever to our powers. And yet (which I had almost forgotte) it
is not enough for us to do good, to be kind, and to show mercy, but we
must do it also speedily, readily, and fitly, that is, when the need of our
brethren requires it, observing carefully all occasions. For as it is said
of guiftes, that qui cito dat, bis dat, he that gives a thing quickly, gives
it twice, so is it of all things we do, to help in time is a double help,
and a benefit having lost the opportunity of our brothers need, loses his
welcome. Wherefore Job professes that he had not caused the eyes of the widow
to fail in long looking for his help. Job. 31.16.
And Mardocheus requires of Hester not only help, but present, Hester. 4.
a singular example for all estates.

Que. What punishment had the breach of this commandment?

Ans. The spiritual punishment of it, as of all other sins, is eternal
damnation both of body and soul. For without shall be dogs, Apoc. 22.15.
inchaunters, whoremungers, murderers, etc. (says S. John): the temporal
punishment of it was amongst the Jews by the law of God blood for blood,
Genesis 9. Leuit. 24.
and before the law by express words, unless in such cases as the cities of
refuge were ordained for. And even as it were above all other sins it is
worthy marking how ever the judgment of GOD has not suffered this sin to
lie unknown or unpunished. All stories be full of examples, Phocas. Boniface.
7. Alexander. 6. Ethelbert. Richard. 3.
and every man almost in his own days, has known some experience. Hot is
the wrath of the Lord against this sin, and his mercy therefore ever keep
us from it.

The Application.
WIth what words now should I wish every one to descend into themselves,
and to take a view of their estate before the Lord, touching this
commandment? Many branches of it have been laid before us, and what branch
is it which we have not broken being narrowly sifted by the Lord? The murder
of the hand, I know will be our instance: but alas, how many things make men
guilty in this? If ever in service against the enemy we have passed the
bounds of a Christian heart, in cruelly murdering concerning the manner, who yet
might have died respecting the matter, we are guilty and spotted before the
Lord. If women and children, aged and impotent, sick and diseased that carried
no weapon against our cause have not so far forth been regarded of us and
spared, yea defended by us from our feercer fellows as by right we might, our
hands have faulted and our love has wanted to the life of our brethren. If
cruelly we have wished, but in our inward hearts any disorderly and
unmerciful spoil of our foes in feelde, we have sinned certainly in so doing.
For even the spoil that a Christian soldier makes of his enemies in the
wars should savor of the merciful nature, so near as he can of that God
whom he professes. If we have been ever as you heard, but any occasion of
the death of any, either present, or speedier than otherwise it would have
been, or of the shortening of our own health, life, and ability by
intemperancie, incontinencie, or any means whatsoever, the justice of our
undefiled God does find it out, and we have sinned against him in this thing.
Where the^ is our righteousness, but eue^ in this branch of actual and hand
murder? for ye tongue what should I say? Does no man's heart accuse him of
unrighteousness? Have we never passed any spiteful slander, to the hurt of the^
whom we should have loved? Denial of it can never hide it, but confession of
it has mercy promised. The name peradventure of slander is odious to us, and
we hardly can accuse our selves of so foul a vice. Slander.
Well then, let him change his cote, but remain ye same mo^ster still. Have we
never reported any unknown thing to ye harm of our brethren? Never whispered
that matter in ye ear of an other against any body, which yet if it had bin
mine own offense, I would willingly have wished conceiled and covered? Has
this heart of mine carried ever ye love in this respect, and that true tender
regard of my brothers credit ye possibly it might, or of duty it should? O the
God of gods be merciful unto us, and deal not with us according to our
sins, neither ever reward us according to our iniquities. For I am sure I may
speak it in truth, and yet in sorrow against all flesh yt lives, we are
guilty, we are faulty in this behalf. We snub not our hearts when we see
their want of love provoke our tongs to speak vnlouingly. We say not in our
selves with a pause upon the matter, what am I about to say, to who^ of who^,
to what end? Will it hurt him or profit him, what is my desire, how would I wish
if his case were mine and so forth? but headily, unadvisedly, and I fear
vnlouingly we speak what we list, and almost say with ye wicked: Psalm.
our tongs are our own and who shall control us? Therefore I say again for this
branch of murder by the tongue the god of mercy be merciful to us and truly teach
us both how we sin in it, and how we ought to be reformed of it. For reproaches
how stand we? Reproach.
Have we never cursed ye deaf, nor put a stumbling block before ye blind?
That is, have we never insulted over any ma^s infirmity, or unkindly reproched
him with his imperfection? O spiteful tongs of ours, how pass they the bonds
of love herein? It is our pleasure to bewray the wantes of others, it is our
pastime to grieve their spirits and t^ gaul them for the^, yea we glory in
their ignominy, we swell in conceit of our selves when we see them, and we
stretch out our necks and lift up our hautie eyes when we pass by them. Their
weakness is our boast all the day long, haunting them and riding them as we
use to speak in every corner, and as very Pharisees we are in an other
case, we look at their wantes, we exalt our selves, and in pride we speak
it, or at least inwardly think it, we are not as those seely Idiotes are.
Rare is that man and woman that with a tender heart comfort and covers
who^ they see to need, as they wish their own wantes with the sufficiency of
Jesus Christ covered from the wrath which they deserve. But I trust for the
time that is to come, it shall never be verified of us, which we have heard
before out of Solomon spoken, that, The man which is accustomed to opprobrious
words, Prou. 23.15.
will never be reformed all the days of his life. Prou. 28.13.
And for that which is past the God of mercy wipe it out as he has promised.
Let us consider the mockes and tauntes that have passed from us even with joy
in our wits that we could so do, and every speech so near as we can,
whereby our brethren have received harm privately or openly in place of
justice, or out of it. And are we then upright before the Lord touching the
murder of ye tongue? Psalm. 7.32.
Blessed is the man whose unrighteousness is forgiven and whose sin even in
this respect is covered. The murder of the heart remains, wherein we are to
wey how we have ever upon any occasion suffered mislike to grow within us
of our brethren, or anger, or harred, or envy, rejoicing at other men's falls,
desire of revenge, cruelty, or bitterness, pretermission of opportunity, or
any other branch thereof, and whether through our negligence and suffering
Satan to creep upon us, even all these almost have not been within us at one
time or other, one pulling on an other, as things inseperable. How has
misliking of some, and we well knew not why, made us apt to anger with any
thing which they did, and often displeased with them more than we should? How
has anger being lodged too long changed his nature and become hatred in us?
How has hatred hatched up envy and desire of revenge? How has envy wished
the fall of others, spited their good whatsoever it was, ioyed at their
misery, if we lived to see it? How has desire of revenge pricked us to the
thing it self, nurced up cruelty and over great severity? What wantes have
we showed of tender compassion and comfort to the comfortles? What prolonging
have we made of the good which we have done, and how carelessly have we
passed many an opportunity to do our duties in kindness to our brethren?
Alas then where is the perfection of our love, where is the innocence of our
life, where is that integrity of ours touching this commandment which we
dare present of it self to please before the Lord? Our hearts are stained,
our tongues have strayed, and even our hands also peradventure against it ^aue
greeuouslie offended. Let us ^hinke of it and the Lord give us ^eartes
effectually to feel it. For the ^ight of sin, can never hurt us when ^t
causes sorrow and true repentance. And to see sin to dispare we need not,
^ince Christ our Savior has fulfilled ^he law for us. The very strength of
^he law is but conditional damnati^n, if we will not be humbled, if we will
^ot repent: but if we do, then step^eth Christ in with all his perfection,
and presents himself to his father ^or us, then does he justify, and who
can condemn? then will he save us, and what can loose us? O that we would
therefore see our offenses against every commandment, and namely against
this. O that we would confess them and leave them as we can hereafter. The
Lord give it, and the Lord grant it, and so shall we live with the Lord for
ever.

The seventh Commandment.
Thou shall not commit adultery.
Question.

WHat is the meaning of this commandment?

The act.
Ans. First there is forbidden all adultery, fornication, and other
uncleanness in our bodies (says your book) which needs no proof besides
the plain words of the law, and that print which in his conscience every
one carries about: yet has the author added some for more strength against
the froward, which I leave to every one to read by themselves. Secondly there
are forbidden all vnpure thoughts, and lusts of the heart. For as in the
other commandementes it has been said, The thought.
so is it to be thought of again in this: The law giver is spiritual, and
therefore this law. Besides it is testified in plain words, that not only
he is guilty of this law which commits the act, but he also which looks
upon a woman and lusts after her. Math. 5.28.
Thirdly the Apostle places chastity in body and mind, and therefore the
contrary is incident both to body and mind. Nay in very truth, man is rather
that, which he is in mind, Man is that which he is in heart.
than that which he is is body. The quality of the heart is the quality of the
man, and therefore an adulterous heart, an adulterous man no doubt, and a breaker
of this commandment. Now what a generality may this particularitie very
profitably teach us, namely not only to run to the outward show we bear,
and to our body with the actions thereof, when we would judge of our selves,
but even to our very heart, and inward thoughts, to see how all does there,
and as there we find, so to give sentence. If there be integrity, then so
think: but if there be lust and adultery, if there be dissimulation and
falsehood, if there be iniquity and sin, then according to it let us think
of our selves, and say the Lord be merciful to us such and such, for as our
hearts are, so are we. Moreover it may give us a great light to discrie ye
spirit that guides the Church of Rome. For if God condemn the thought, how
allow they the fact of simple fornication at the least, And of Sodomie for the
3. hot months
if not of adultery, and yet say, they have the spirit too? Is the spirit of
God so variable that sometime he condemns the thought, and sometimes allows
the very fact? What an impiety were this to be said or thought? Therefore
strange out of question from the Lord is their spirit. Thirdly in this
commandment is condemned that thing whatsoever, which inticeth to any
uncleanness whereof there might many particulars be named.

Que. And I pray you for more plainness let it not be grievous to name some of
the chief.

Ans. First then here is forbidden all wanton and immodest looks, for the eye
is a vehement inticer unto lust, as appears by many proofs. For thus fell
Putiphars wife into ungodly lusting after Joseph: Genesis 39.
for the text says she cast her eyes upon Joseph. Thus came David to
adultery with Bersabe, even by disorderly looking upon her from his house
top. Thus fell the sons of God into unlawful love with the daughters of men,
Genesis 6.
by seeing that they were fair. This caused Peter to say of the wicked that
they had adulterous eyes. 2. Pet. 2.
And the knowledge of it made Job to take a bond of his eyes, Job. 31.
that they should not look upon a maid. Whereunto for an other inticement
to uncleanness we may refer all indecent and uncomely pictures, the
corruption of our eyes, and consequently of our hearts, and therefore no
doubt here also condemned. Thirdly unchaste behavior such as the Lord cries
out against by his prophet, saying, that The daughters of Sion are hautie,
Esaias. 3.
and walk with stretched out neeckes and with wandering eyes, walking and
musing as they go, and making a tinckling with their feet, etc. Fourthlie all
wanton speech, filthy tales, songs, and sonets of love and lightness,
lascivious salutatio^s and such like. For evil words corrupt good manners, 1.
Cor. 15.
and there must no corrupt communication proceed out of our mouths, but such
as is good to the use of edifying and may minister grace to ye hearers. Ephe.
5.3.
As for filthiness, foolish talking, jesting, and such like, they are things
uncomely for a Christian. Again, unchaste books and wanton writings, who
knows not how they tickle to uncleanness? and therefore both they and the
reading of them forbidden in this law. Sixthly too much show in apparel,
painting, tricking and trimming of our selves above conueniencie, it is a
dangerous allurer of lust, and therefore forbidden.

Que. I could wish yet a little larger speech of apparel, because I see it is
one of the worms that wastes at this day the common wealth, that decaieth
houskeeping, that makes strait the hand of the master to his servant, and the
Lord to his tenant, and a thing to conclude that the dear children of God
cannot overcome them selves in.

Apparel.
Ans. And I will willingly answer your wish with a little more speech of it,
yet not such, as with diligence might be made, but such rather as I have at
times thought of, and found in some manner effectual. First therefore me think
ye very original of apparel should much move a Christian feeling heart. For
when we had sinned, the^ were we clothed: Genesis 2.
when we had lost our honor, then were we apparelled: so that it is the sign
of our sin, the badge of our rebellion, the witness of our shame, and it
remembers unto us, what we should weep continually to think, that we have
lost. Now alas how small cause have we to be proud of such a liuerie? Nay see
the dullness of our hearts and the absurdnes of our dealing. If a thief should
be saved from hanging, with this condition added, that he should ever wear a
halter, were it not a strange hardness of his heart, if he should so forget his
fall, and so glory in his shame testified day and night unto him by ye halter,
that he should begin to boast of his halter, to be proud of it, and to make it
of silk in sumptuous sort, for an orname^t to his neck? Truly it were. And so
it is in man a very strange work of satan, yt he should so exceed in pride
with ye thing the sight whereof should rather pinch his heart with sorrow, than
be so exalted even out of his own knowledge, with apparel, which in truth
(speak as a good heart should feel it) should humble us, beat us down, and make
us even with ye peacocke let our feathers fall for the foulnes of our feet.
Therefore I say one thing me think to draw us to mediocritie in this matter
should be the well weying of the first beginning of apparel. Secondly the
speedy wast of it is something. For how can a good conscience warrant unto us
such great charge, yea such exceeding charge in a thing so changeable, when we
shall give an account how we bestowed our goods? The matter or ye form fails,
ere ever our price be half answered with use. And there is no estate in earth yt
may warrant a christian man or woman to be a wilful waster of the lords gifts
unto the^. Thirdly the misliking of ye word should make misliking in my heart of
excess or vanity in this matter. Now the Lord says in the law: Thou shall
not wear a garment of diverse sorts, Deuteronomy. 12.
as of woollen and linen together. The meaning whereof was this, he would not
have the^ newfangle, wanton and fantastical in their apparel. The same God
cries out against the Jews by his prophet that he would take away ye ornament
of ye slippers, and the calls, and the round attires, Esaias. 3.
the sweet bals, the bracelets and the bonets, the attyres of the head and the
slops, the headbands, the tablets, and the earings, the rings and the mufflers,
the costly apparel and the vailes, the wimples, and the crisping pins, the
glasses, the hoods and the lawnes. With which in extremity used no dout they
had prouooked the Lord, and daily did offend him. Also by an other prophet, I
will visit the princes and the kings children, Sophon. 1.8.
and al such as are clothed with strange apparel: that is, as imitate the
vain fashions of other countries in any vain manner. And the Apostle Paul
has a most plain speech to women, 1. Tim. 2.9.
whereby men also may know their duty. I will says he, that the women araie
themselves in comely apparel with shamefastnes and modesty, not with Read the
note of this word in the Testament.
brodred hair or gold, or pearls, or costly apparel, but as becomes women
that profess the fear of God with good works. Which very same words Peter
also has to the same end. 1. Pet. 3.3.
These with many mo such places show us the misliking of ye Lord of disorder
in apparel, and they should I say me think make us mislike also with it. S.
Bernard says: Exterior superfluitas vestiu^, interioris hominis inditiu^: The
outward superfluity and wast of the garment, is an evident token of the
inward man (that he is unreformed.) If the form and fashion be unseemly or
wanton, then says the same father, Vestiu^ curiositas deformitatis mentis and
moru^ inditium est, The curiosity of thy garment bewrays deformity of mind
and manners in thee. Thus matter and form being unseeming, either of the^
discredit man and woman, and make their inward hidden corruption appear to
the world. and therefore wicked. Castitatis comes frugalitas, The companion of
chastity is frugalitie, says a learned man, and even in apparel. I would to
God, if with a Christian heart any will not think of these two last reasons,
yet that they would think of them with worldly wisdom, and in policy
weigh them. For there is no man nor woman so far fallen out with religion,
and honesty, but that if they be not such yet they desire to seem so, and to
be so taken. Now apparel in matter or form unseemly robs them of this
that they neither seem nor are thought to be of many. For touching religion,
who can think them mortified to sin within in heart, who so seem to live to
all vanity and excess without in body? Who can think they are reformed in
soul, who are very much above their calling unreformed in show? Man can not
enter to the inward heart, but judges ever by the outward fruit, and
religion within uses always to show men effects without. For honesty of
body, though our hearts never meant any thing contrary to it, yet do we by
apparel bring our credit in question, when it passes our calling and
conueniencie. And therefore even in policy, if we care not for Christianity
we should beware. Last of all, modesty in apparel both touching matter, and
form, answers to the original of it well, which was to hide us after sin,
confirms by practice that apparel is vain, lives according to the named
scriptures, escaping the threatened evils, and finding promised good, saves our
credit out of question, answers the gravity of the gospel, hinders no
piety (for often under an ill garment a good heart is hidden) and lastly is so
far from alluring to lust, that it even cutteth the throat of it, and very
greatly stops it. Sex sunt enim quae incorruptam servant castitatem:
Scilicet, sobrietas, operatio, inhibitio sensuum, asperitas cultus, raritas
sermonis, euitatio oportunitatis, personae, loci, and temporis. That is, There
are six things which keep chastity uncorrupted: To wit, sobriety, labor,
restraint of our senses, coursenesse of apparel, rarenes of speech, and eschew
all of opportunity, of person, place, or time. O but yet it sticks in our
hearts ye apparel makes a man. Indeed many so judge both of themselves and
other, that they are made, and beautified by apparel. But the very heathen
man shall condemn us, if we do so, who could thus say, that: Ornamentum est
quod ornat, ornat autem quod honestiorem facit. Id autem non aurum, non
smaragdus, coccus, sed quaecunque grauitatis, pudoris, and moderationis speciem
praebent. That is an ornament (says he) which adorneth us, and that adorneth
us yt makes us honester. Now that does not gould, precious stone, skarlet,
but that which gives a show of gravity, shamefastnes, and moderation. And
thus now let it suffice a little to have answered your desire touching apparel,
pretermitting ye judgment of God upon Herod eue^ then when he was most
royally clothed above all other times, Act. 12.
with many things mo, which to this end might be brought. And this I pray you
take not spoken to draw all to an equality, or yet any from the thing that
is meet for their calling, but to kindle care in all, that we deceive not our
selves with our calling worldly so much, that we forget our calling to God, to
his gospel, and to his mercies so many in Jesus Christ, and what is
convenient for the gravity and excellency thereof. This is my meaning, and
this is my end.

Que. Now then proceed I pray you to recite such other prouocations to the
breach of this commandment as you know.

Ans. These profane and wanton stage plays or interludes, what an occasion
they are of adultery and uncleanness by gesture, by speech, by conueyances,
and devises to attain to so ungodly desires, the world knows with too much
hurt by long experience. Vanities they are if we make the best of them, and the
Prophet prays to have his eyes turned away by the Lord from beholding such
matter: Psalm. 119.
Evil words corrupt good manners, 1. Cor. 15.
and they have abundance. There is in them ever many dangerous sightes, 1.
These. 5.22.
and we must abstain from al appearance of evil. They corrupt the eyes with
alluring gestures: the eyes, the heart: and the heart, the body, till al be
horrible before the Lord. Histrionicis gestibus inquinantur omnia: (says
Chrysostom) These players behavior polluteth all things. And of their plays
he says, they are the feasts of Satan, the inventions of the devil, etc.
Councels have decreeed very sharply against them, and polluted bodies by these
filthy occasions have on their death beds confessed the danger of them,
lamented their own foul and grievous faulles, and left their warning for ever
with us to beware of them. But I refer you to them, that upon good knowledge
of the abominations of them, have written largely and well against them. If they
be dangerous on the day time, more dangerous on the night certainly: if on a
stage, and in open courts, much more in chambers and private houses. For there
are many roumes beside that, where the play is, and peradventure the
strangenes of the place and lack of light to guide them, causes error in
their way, more than good Christians should in their houses suffer.

Que. What else?

Ans. Dancing again is in the number of vain pastimes, and the allurements to
uncleanness, as much experience has too well proved. The scriptures check it,
the fathers mislike it, the councils have condemned it, and the proof of Gods
judgments upon it bids us beware. Instrumenta luxuriae tympana and
tripudia, says one, the inticers to lust are pipinges and dancinges. Laquei
sunt and scandala non solu^ saltatoribus, sed spectatoribus. They are snares
and offenses not only to the actors, but also to ye beholders. Job. 21.11.
Job notes it as an old practice of the devil to occupy men withal, and as
an ancient exercise of the wicked, that they should dance. Upon which words a
godly writer says: Calu. sermon. 80. upon Job.
that from the tabret and the flute, which in themselves are not unlawful,
they come to dancing, which is the chiefest mischief of all. For there is
always (says he) such unchaste behavior in dancing, that of it self, and as
they abuse it, (to speak ^he truth in the word) it is nothing else, but an
inticement to whoredom. In the gospel the spirit of God notes it in a
wicked woman as an immodest thing, Math. 14.
and of a damnable effect in her wicked father Herod to dance. And such as
interpret the place are not afraid of these words, Marlor. ex Calu.
that it was meretriciae lasci^iae turpis nota nubilis puellae saltatio. That
is, that for her to dance being a maid for years mariageable, was a note of
whorish wantonness. For whosoever (says he) has a care of honest gravity,
he ever condemns dancing, and especially in a maid. Again he calls it
spectaculum familiae Regiae probrosum. A dishonorable sight in a kings house:
with many speeches more of mislike. Sirac a wise man, Syrac. 9.4.
and of great experience, bids a man not to use the company of a woman,
that is a singer and a dauncer, neither to hear her, least he be taken with
her craftiness. The godly Fathers as I said mislike it. For saltatio ad
adulteras, Ambros. de virgin. lib. 3.
non ad pudicas pertinet, says one of them: Dancing belongs to adulterous
and not to honest women. A sharp speech: Yet was this grave father not
afraid to speak it. Saltatio barathrum diaboli, Christ. Math. hom. 48.
says an other: dancing is the devils hell. And we hear speech of Jacobs
marriage (says he) in the scripture, in Genes.
but not a word of any dancing that was at it. Theophilact. in Mar. 6.
Mira collusio says an other, Saltat diabolus per puellam: It is a strange
iugling, when we think the maid does dance, and it is not so, but the
devil in her, or by her. The councels have condemned it as others have at
large showed. And very Tullie could say, an honest man would not dance in an
open place for a great patrimony. For the judgments of God upon this vain
pastime, it is strange which Pantaleon notes out of Crantzius, that in
Colbecke a town in Germany, certain light persons hopping and dancing in
the Churchyearde of S. Magnus, An. 1505.
being by the minister admonished to cease, and not ceasing, did for a long
time (not able to stay) run round about, and at last fell all down dead.
But because others have so largely writ against this vanity, I say no more of
it at this time, but wish us to consider that it is an inticement otten to
adultery, and therefore in this commandment forbidden. And as for any
dancing that we read of in the scriptures to have been used of the godly,
we must understand, that their dancing was ever a sober modest motion, with
some song usually to Gods praise, and men by themselves, women by themselves.
Which nothing will warrant our custom and guise in these days.

Que. Are there yet any more allurementes?

Ans. There are yet many mo. But I may not in this sort stand upon them.
Gluttony and drunkenness, Ezekiel 16.
with houses of open whoredom, your book names and proofs for them.
Idleness also is an other means, 1. Cor. 7.39.
the vow of chastity, the denial of second marriages, the going of men in
women's apparel, and women in man's apparel, Deuteronomy. 22.
with a number such. This only must I say, and so conclude this negative part
of the commandment, For he that will no evil do, must nothing do that longs
thereto.
look whatsoever, it is, that we can see to be any allurement, any
occasion, or means to uncleanness, all that is condemned in this
commandment as much as the very act of adultery, which here only is
expressed. Then how the holy Pope of Rome can warrant by the word of God the
erection and continuance of his stews, judge you, although his gain be never
so much thereby. Nay how could that monster Sixtus the fourth warrant the
erection of a stews of both kinds, In king Edward 4.
that is both of women and men, whereby 20000 and some years 40 thousand
ducketes came to his coffers? Or the whole Church of Rome so like of, and so
diminish the sin of fornication? Can this their spirit that guides them, be
the spirit of GOD, when it condemns not the act, whereof God condemns all
occasions and allurementes? No, no, the Lord give us eyes, and then have we
marks sufficient to bewray them by.

Que. Thus then may we see what we ^re forbidden in this law: now I pray you
add something of the things we are commanded in the same.

Ans. For this matter your book answers well, that as we are forbidden in
it all uncleanness, and all inticementes to the same: so on the other side we
are commanded to keep our bodies and souls chaste, and pure as temples of the
holy ghost, or if the gift of chastity be not given us, then to use the
lawefull remedy appointed for us by God, which is marriage. Concerning
therefore chastity we are to know, that very greatly the scripture lays
down Gods liking of it, and with many words exhorts us unto it. This is the
will of God (says the Apostle) even your sanctification, and that you should
abstain from fornication, that every one of you should know how to possess
their vessels in honor and ho^inesse, and not in the lust of concupiscence,
even as ye gentiles, which know not God. And in an other place, 2. Cor. 7.1.
Seeing (says he) that we have these promises dearly beloved, let us cleanse
our selves from al filthiness of the flesh and spirit and grow up unto all
holiness in the fear of God. And again the same Apostle beseeches the God
of peace to sanctify them throughout, 1. These. 5.23.
that their whole spirit, and body, and soul may be kept blameless til the
day of the Lord Jesus Christ. Many such as these are there, all which our
vner^ring Papists take and expound of sin^gle life, and will have them, so
many testimonies of the same to excel mari^age. But their bold speaking is
no^ ever sound proouing, and therefore w^ stay to believe them.

Que. In other matters indeed we have good cause to refuse them, but in this
(give me leave to speak as I think being ready to learn if I err) me^
think we are not to mislike so much o^ their speech. For, surely it cannot be
denied, that the single life is far above the married. The scriptures you
know have many speeches to this end.

Ans. Well then, for your better satis^faction it will not be amiss, if we a
litl^ consider the course of this error. And first I pray you mark, that
during al^ the time of the old testament they dare not, nor do not say, that
single life passed marriage in excellency, but contrary to be fruitful and
stored of children was a blessing, and to be otherwise was a reproach unto them.
Therefore this perfection and excellency of single life, they set it to be but
now in the time of the gospel. Where let us also begin, and going with
them, see whether it be so or no. We consider then and see, that as the Lord
is holy himself and pure, and therefore has ever liked and loved all
holiness in his children, and by name this cleanness of body and mind, which
we speak of: so on the otherside Satan being impure and filthy, has ever
sought and labored to work the like in us, and by name to draw us to
impuritie of flesh and stain of mind in this behalf. The Lord has had ever
his means to work the one: Satan has had his again to breed the other.
The Lord by his word and spirit, and what else it pleased him to use: Satan
by sundry also very forcible ways wrought the contrary. Some he so
mightily hardened, and strangely overcame, Want of feeling one means of Satan.
that even contemning the Lord and his threats, and smoothering what in their
own consciences at any time they found contrary to it, gave themselves over
as it had been brute and savage beasts to all lust and uncleanness without
remorse. Of these spoke the Apostle to the Ephesians saying: Ephesians. 4.19.
That they being past feeling gave themselves to all wantonness to work
uncleanness even with greediness, where the word he uses is very
significant. And again to the Romans he says, that God gave them up to their
hearts lusts unto uncleanness, Romans 26.
to defile their own bodies betwixt themselves, yea he gave them up to vile
affections. For the women changed the natural use into that which is against
nature. Then shows he the means and way, whereby all this was wrought in
them. For a man would think yt even reason and nature should keep us from
such pollution* They regarded not (says the Apostle) to know God, Ver. 28.
and therefore God delivered them up into a reprobate mind to do those things
which are not convenient. That is, God suffered Satan so to harden their
hearts and to deprive them of the use even of natural light, as that those
things seemed but sportes unto them, and matters of small weight, which
otherwise would have feared them even to think upon. The prophet Ose seems
to allege the very same manner of proceeding of Satan in those that know God.
When he says of Israel, Ose. 4.11.
that whoredom and wine and new wine took away their hearts. That is, their
judgment and understanding, their conscience and feeling, whereby they should
abhor so displeasing a life before the Lord. And what means Solomon when
he says, that The young man follows the inticeing harlotte to her house as
an ox to the slaughter, but even this, Prou. 7.22.
that by the subtle malice of Satan he is deprived of sense to decerne
whither he goes, and what his fall will be? So then I say one means whereby
Satan in times past drew men from chastity, the virtue of this
commandment, to lust and impuritie the breaches of the same, was by dulling
their hearts in most fearful manner, that they felt not sin to be sin, no
not even very great and grievous sins to be any at all. An other means was
by instilling into their minds an opinion of indifferency in these matters,
Opinion of indifferency an other means.
and that God (so he were served in spirit of them) passed not for their
bodies, but left them in some sort to themselves, to use to their pleasures.
This (to omit a multitude of heathen histories, as also Simon Magus whom
Austen notes a defender of this doctrine) may appear by that decree of the
Apostles, that the Gentilles should abstain from fornication, Act. 15.
as also most evidently by the epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, who thought
of this matter as of a mere natural thing, so lawefull for them as either to
eat or drink, so they reserved their souls and spirits to worship GOD.
But the Apostle shows it to be far otherwise, and with many vehement
repetitions of the duties of their bodies, impugneth so vile a conceit of
liberty to use them unto lust. He has created your bodies says the Apostle,
V. 13. and 14.
as well as your souls, and therefore you must glorify him as well in body as
in soul. He preserves also the one as well as the other, the blood of Christ
was shed as well for the one as the other to redeem it from death, they are
both indifferently the Temples of the holy ghost, they are both the members
of Christ, and at the latter day they must both by Christ be raised, the body
then to be joined to the soul, which before lived separated, and therefore
as well in body as soul God must be glorified, and both of them from filthy
lust and pollution kept chaste. Many more are the reasons of Paul in that
Epistle to drive the Corinthians from this detestable conceit, V. 17.
that fornication was a matter indifferent, and chastity required not so much
in body as in mind. But I refer them to the diligent reader himself to
mark, and thus much only note to show the means whereby Satan in those
days prevailed so much to draw men to the breach of this commandment. A
third means we read of which argues not a little the dullness of man, and
the boldness of satan if once he get any vantage. Even ye very word of god
abused to confirm yt which neither God nor his word could ever abide. The
scriptures wrested an other means. Chap. 2.
In the Apocalips, mention is made of ye Nicolaitans sinning in this respect
most fearfully: and it is also by learned me^ recorded how Nicholas the first
father of ye filthiness fell into gross and most fearful sin. Clemens and
Eusebius say that he did it of mere simplicity to remove from him the
suspicion of ielosie, and to give a testimony unto the world, that he was
not, contrary to the profession of a Christian, too much addicted to any
earthly thing, since it is written, that he which hates not father or mother,
wife or child for Christ, cannot be his disciple: and no man can serve two
masters, with such other places most wickedly wrested to bring in a most
horrible conclusion. Carpocrates and his sect through their abominable life was
warranted by that speech of Paul, Romans 2.
that anger and tribulation shall be upon every soul that sins. See say
they, how he says upon every soul, not upon every body, so that our bodies we
may use as we list. Others used these places: We are not under the law, but
under grace. Iusto non est lex posita, There is no law for the just, and such
other. By all which things it is apparent how mightily Satan has bent his
force to draw men to the pollution of their bodies, and to uncleanness
forbidden in this commandment. Now mark still I pray you ye course of this
matter, and see how as ye Church of God ever withstood this work of satan in
measure, and sought to establish honest life and chaste behavior, as I have
before showed: so in the beginning of ye gospel especially (as most cause was
given through the abundance of ye contrary sin) very vehemently, and sharply
was condemned ye liberty of lust, and filthy affection, which then ruled, and
on ye contrariy side was urged chastity, chastity, with reasons laid down
for ye excellency of it, and the co^mandeme^ts of god for it. And indeed so
zelously, so diligently, and so effectually was this done by the godly
teachers of those times, as that Satan's subtilties prevailing so much before to
the contrary, began to loose their strength daily more and more. For the
hardness of men's heart through which sin so greatly increased, was turned
into softness, and Christian feeling: their ignorance which accounted so foul
a sin an indifferent matter, was daily diminished and turned into knowledge:
their judgments before abused with show of scriptures to confirm their
evil, were bettered by the spirit of light to perceive and see how fowlie
these scriptures were wrested to a wrong end, and how many apparantlie
commanded the contrary. So that their consciences being quickened, their eyes
opened, and their understanding augmented by continual and godly teaching,
lust waxed less or at least more orderly to the show of man. For it brake not
out in such confused manner, as before, to all and every one, that was liked,
and might be obtained. Now then yet see a devil. When he saw his kingdom
in men thus every day fall to ruin through diligent exhortations unto
chastity, so that he was not able to deal with men as before, and to make
the^ little account of actual pollution as he had done, what deuiseth he yet
still to continue his venime in mankind? Surely even this (note it and
wonder) he himself falls to preach and teach chastity also by his
ministers, and to extol it to heaven. But how? Not as he should I warrant
you, but as it best served for his wicked intent. He does not teach men to
keep body and mind pure from all unclean actions or conceiptes, but he
laboreth to persuade that outward continency of body (what broils of
scorching lust soever the mind abides) is an holy thing before God, of it
self acceptable, and meritorious. He does not teach men that there is an
acceptable chastity in godly matrimony, if ye gift of continency be not
given, but unto certain persons he flatly forbids it, as not tolerable,
and generally in all he does note it as culpable, preferring single life in
dignity, holiness, and merit before it in all men. Thus taught his scholar
and instrument Marcion the heretic about the year of Christ 133. publishing
and teaching, that the conjunction of man and woman even in matrimony was
sin, that it proceeded or was invented of a contrary God, that women wholly
were ye work of the devil, and men also the one half of the^. He would allow
none to be baptized, unless they either were single or would promise ever after
to be so, etc. To this end again stepped up Tatianus and his crew about the
year 142. and he at the first as well as Marcion condemned matrimony altogether
also, but afterward he drew in his speech from openly touching it any more,
and under the high commendation of single life privily pinched at the stained
estate of wedlock, and sought to make it hateful. Whereupon his folowers were
called Encratites. After Tatianus came Montanus about the year 145. who
suffered first mariges in such as were weak, (...).
but condemned the second as intolerable in any. Then followed Manicheus and
his ^^rt, and they gave to the ruder sort as they ^^lled the^, leave to marry,
but for such (...) were of any credit amongst the^, and ^^owe^ as they say to
any perfection, they ^ight not in any wise marry but live ^ast. Thus began yt
opinion of single life (...) excel ye other even by these steps. From ^he^ce
diverse godly fathers received in^^ction, as Tertullian, Hierom, Origin,
^lement, Nazianzene, wc others falling ^ery far with these heretics into a
mis^iking of ye ordinance of god against in^o^tinency, and into an over great
opinion ^f single life. Then from a thing co^menda^le in all men, it was
brought at last to ^e a thing necessary in some men, and so ^rew more and more
daily. Then did ne^essitie to observe what infirmity could not observe, cause
much secret and very often, even unnatural and fearful pollution, whereby it
fell out, that by this subtle slight of his, to extol chastity, and to place
it only in single life, satan brought as great an harvest into hell, as before
with his other named means.

Que. Thus then by this story I see how this opinion began of single life,
and how subtillie Satan transforme^ himself into an Angel of light, but ye^
I see nothing why single life is not bet^ter than matrimony.

Ans. That is strange, seeing b^ the story it is apparent, that durin^ the
time of the old Testament, ther^ was never such a thought amongst the children
of God, but even the quit^ contrary, and secondly even under the Gospel it
sprung from such teacher^ as Marcion, Montanus, Tatianus, and other heretics.
But if yet we would^ more fully be settled, let us duly we^ what the
scripture says of godly ma^trimonie, and then shall we see whe^ther
chastity be only in single life, o^ whether we can find any grea^^ praise
of it and acceptaunce before Go^ than of marriage, or no. First then I pray
you, let us consider what in the gospel is said in matrimony: to wit^ that
those whom God has joined to^gether no man ought to put asunder* Surely if
God join them, Matthew. 19.
then is the life accepted, and not unchaste before him. Again every man has
his proper gift says the Apostle speaking of this matter, some to marry, 1.
Cor. 7.
and some to ^iue unmarried. Whereof we may true^y conclude, that if to marry
be the gift of God as well as continency is, then is ^t as well accepted of
him, and no way can ^t be unholy. Again in the same place ^t is said, V. 14.
that the unbelieving husband ^s sanctified by the believing wife, and
co^^rariwise. But that could not be, if ma^rimonie were either impure simply
or ^n comparison to single life. In the place ^boue named to ye Thessalonians,
1. These. 4.
it was generally said unto all men, and not only to unmarried men, that they
should possess their vessels in holiness and honor, and not in the
concupiscence of the flesh. Therefore marriage is holiness and not uncleanness
before God any jot more than single life is. In the Epistle to Timothy the
forbidding of marriage is called a doctrine of the devil, 1. Timoth. 4.
which could not be if it were a stain to a Christian man or woman. And art
thou ^ounde to a wife? says the Apostle, seek not to be loosed. 1. Cor. 7.
Which he would never have said, if in it self the single life, had been
more holy and good before God than the married. We know also what the Psalm
says, for a blessing shall befall to him that fears God, namely this: His
wife shall be like a fruitful vine upon the walls of his house etc. Whereby
very evident it is how the Lord allows wedlock, when he vouchsafes so to
bless it and speak o^ it. How then dare we say that to be married is to be
unchaste, or any way to displease the Lord? How dare we say the single life in
it self is better, or more holy? What ever find we in the wor^ of God more
setting down the praise^ single life, than these have done the tru^
commendation of godly matrimony? I^ is noted of many even under the gospel
that they were married, but not in a^ the world do I remember either man or
woman noted as liked the better fa^ a single life. Therefore to cut off this
di^^course which might very greatly be in^creased, apparent it is that of
those tw^ estates there is no pre-eminence of m^^rite or holiness of either
above the ^^ther, but both of them good and allow^^d of God in those persons
for whom ^hey are expedient. And it is also mani^^st, that albeit ye commanded
virtue in ^his commandment be chastity, yet is ^ot that in single life only
situated or ^n the body alone, but both in body and ^inde, both in single
estate and double, and as well in the one as in the other. ^or both of them are
capable of the ^^me.

Que. Yet am I troubled still with the ^^eaches of Paul two or three in one
^hapter together, which evidently seem (...) prefer single life before
marriage. You ^now the places I am sure, and therefore ^ame them not, but
expect your aun^were to them.

Ans. Why, it is very true, and I ^enie it not that Paul in that Chapter ^^eth
prefer single life before mar^age, but how I pray you? 1. Cor. 7.
As more ^^dly, more holy, or more meritorious before God than it? No I
warrant you. and yet this is the question.

Que. How then?

Ans. Altogether in worldly respects, (...) you may easily see, if you mark
the places. For first for those words in the 26. verse: V. 26.
that to live single was better for the present necessity, you see that is a
worldly cause, and no matter of more holiness. For necessity there either
signifies the perils and persecutions of the Gospel, which in those days it
was subject unto, wherein it were better for a man to be single than tied to a
charge yt would both trouble him to keep, and grieve him to part withal, or else
it sig^nifieth the scarsitie of christian wives (...) husbands, as then to be
had the gospel being but young, in regard whereof i^ they had the gift to tarry,
without sin it were better to be single than matche^ to an Infidel. So that I
say this caus^ is altogether worldly. For the second^ speech of Paul in the
same chapter, tha^ they which are married shall have tribu^lation in the flesh,
that he would hau^ all men as he was, and that he wishe^ them without care,
etc. you see again^ it is a worldly cause. For what sign^^fieth tribulation in
the flesh there, bu^ either those griefs, cares, hartbreake and sorrows which
are incident dayl^ ^o married folks, sometimes obout one thing sometimes about
an other, as a^out their children, about the government of their family,
about getting or keeping these wordlie matters, or by reason of contrary
religion, etc. in respect whereof says Paul I spare you, that is, I do wish
you free and single, that you might miss them all, if it might be, and that
for the love I bear you. For his third speech, that the married woman takes
care to please her husband, but the unmarried to please the Lord, no way may it
be taken to prove that none yt be married either do or can take care to please
God, for the contrary of that has bin evidently showed in the places before:
or yet to infer yt the unmarried do ever seek to please him, for experience
too much teaches the contrary: but it only shows thus much, that such as
be unmarried if they be godlily disposed, may more freely and readily as it were
attend their devotion than others yt be married, having nothing to trouble the^
or to distract their cogitations withal. Which also as you see is but an
outward respect. And therefore we may now conclude that far was it from the
meaning of Paul, to prefer single life before matrimony, in respect of greater
piety or merit before God, but only in respect of outward incu^brances,
whereof indeed it is much freer than the other estate is. Which pre-eminence
and dignity if it would content ^ur papists, we and they should well agree:
but they will needs have virginity and the vow of single life to be a
satisfaction for sins, a deserving of remission, of the grace of God, of
salvation, and life everlasting: As you may see in the Catholic confession of
one of their great teachers Petrus a Soto, and may also note in the speech of
the bishop to the^ that made this vow, who ever answered (after they had
promised) in this manner, Et ego promitto tibi, si haec obseruaueris, vitam
aeternam: That is, and I promise thee, if thou keep these things life
everlasting: That is, if thou live single etc. Yet see we Paul who they sai
lived ever unmarried, Romans 3. Philip. 3.
not to dare once to exhibit his single life to ye majesty of God to merit
any thing for him, or to purchase him any favor, but only and wholly to depend
upon ye merits of christ Jesus. And we see not Peter, Philip or any in the new
Testament, yt were married to beg any pardon for it at Gods hand, or to
insinuate any way, any impiety of theirs in so doing. Which yet assuredly
they would have done, if the opinion of popery had bin true concerning single
life and matrimony. Lib. 10. ca. 26.
S. Augustine in his book of Virginity has many words of the rewards of
matrimony, and concludes thus, that eternal life is given of the Lord both
to married and unmarried indifferently. The council of Gangren thought good to
make this canon, An. 333. Can. 10.
yt if any living single for the Lord should in arrogancy and pride contemn
those yt were married, they should be accursed. Wherefore we conclude this
matter and say as ye Church of God said in yt time: Virginity we commend,
Council. Gangren. Epiph. tom. 1. lib. 2. baeres. 48
widowhood we praise, and the chaste bond of godly wedloocke we honor and
receive. But as for adultery, fornication, and uncleanness whatsoever, either
of body or mind, we abhor it and condemn it. Thus then I I hope you see how
the opinion of chastity to consist only in living single, spru^g up even by
the devil, who knew not otherwise how to draw men to uncleanness, being robbed
of his former means, than by making them to abridge themselves of the ordinance
of God against ye evil. You have seen also how false this is, and that in
godly matrimony as well as in single life there is liked chastity of ye lord.
You have seen, yt neither of these estates have any premine^cie above the
other in respect of greater piety, or merit, but both of them alike acceptable
to God, if for the parties they be expedient, only in regard of outward
incu^brances the one is more free, tha^ the other. Lastly you see ye virtue of
this commandment opposed to adultery to be chastity, but how? not to live
unmarried, as ye papists dream, but both in marriage, and out of it, to keep
body and soul unspotted of filthy lust and concupiscence. The other points
of marriage it self, of second marriages, of poligamie, of divorce, and such
like, which were in this place to be handled, I think good to cut off, having
tarried already too ^ong in this commandment, and to reserve them till some
other occasion.

Que. Yet add some thing concerning the punishment of them that break this
commandment.

Ans. The law of God, as we all may ^ee, Deutro. 22.
punished adultery with present ^eath: Fornication with marriage of ^he party
if the parents would, and if ^hey would not, with a dowry to be given. The
Athenians punished it with ^eath. This land of ours in the days of Canutus
had a law to cut off the no^es and ears of adulterous women. And for the
spiritual punishment of it, ^t was ever, is, 1. Cor. 6.
and shall be damnation ^f body and soul in the pit of hell without
repentance.

The Application.
Now then consider what has been said, and even as we desire true fruit of
the word of God unto our souls, let us weigh our ^wne estate in every branch
of this commandment. The act of uncleanness how it can accuse us, that God
does know, who has hell in his hand to cast us into it, if we have sinned.
And therefore if either with married, or unmarried we have ever thus offended,
let his power be thought of, let hell be feared* and so foul a fault from the
very hear^ root be earnestly lamented. Excuse i^ not with youth, or any
circumstaunce* cause or occasion in the world, these scoffings of the Lord will
not ever be borne* in youth we are Gods as well as in age* and in youth we
should serve him aswe^ as in age: if we do not, even youth shall to hell as well
as shall age. Sin seen and sorowed for, left and forsaken has pardon
promised: but sin iested at, and played withal has vengeance threatened. It
is ye voice of a Christian to say I have sinned, but it is ye voice of a
reprobate to say still I will sin without remorse* The best may offend, but the
best can never continue offending. And therefore take heed, and if act can
accuse us, let it never hereafter be able to blame us* for souden and fearful
is the vengeanc^ from heaven that lights upon adulterers. From the act let us
come to the ^nwarde thought, and as it is more privy and we all more prone
unto it, so let it be more carefully weighed and searched out even of us all.
Let us call to mind with a feeling heart, how foullie, how fearfully, and
how even continually we offend the Lord by our hidden conceits. How quickly
cree^eth into us an evil thought, and how swells it within, when it once is
there? It works within us, as a thing most strong, and very fowly stayneth
us, often ^ere we do consider it. Yea our negligence in this befalse does
condemn us before the Lord, and pronounces against us that we fear more men
than God. For our outward actions we are careful of so near as we can to
keep the blottes of them out of sight, but our hearts being things hidden
from the eyes of men, we carry little care over them to keep them clean from
impure concepts. What man may see, we are ashamed yt he should see: but which
God beholds our secret thoughts, we fear not at all to have them foul,
filthy and wicked. O what a God serve we, that being able to set every
thought we think visible in our foreheads in great letters, that every one
which runs by, might read them, yet most mercifully spares us, and is
content our secret shame should not appear to men. Shall we still provoke him,
shall we still offend and grieve him? Surely the^ hot will be the wrath at
last, which so long his mercy has withhoulden. Wherefore to conclude this
matter, even as we love the Lord and our own health, let us see and weigh how
deeply this law against impure thoughts is able to charge us, let us
consider the cause, if we can find it out, that drives us usually into such
hidden sin, and hereafter as men touched with some Christian remorse, that
so good a God should so still be offended, let us rid our hearts as we can
of the effect, by taking away or at least stopping in some measure the course
of the cause. The means and allurementes either to the actual offense, or the
thought ^ondemned in this commandment as we have heard before, are many and
diverse. Sometimes the eyes disorderly wander, and being not checked by a
Christian conscience that fears to give them liberty too long, they become
the occasions both of thoughts and acts, wicked and damnable. Sometimes
behavior unchaste and unseemly. Someties speech wanton, and light stir the
heart up to conceive that thing, and the wicked flesh to perform it fully,
which God and nature abhor as filthy. The dalying tattles of these courting
days, the lascivious songs made by loose minds, and the wanton greetinges in
every place now used, alas what thoughts procure they never liked of the
Lord, that I may say no worse? Books written by unreformed hearts, and
continually read to the grief of God, are they no occasions to frail flesh,
both in thought and deed to offend against this law? God knows, and
experience teaches such souls as ta^t of Christ, that very deadly poison
under a false delight, does this way creep into us. An unchaste look make^ an
unchaste heart, and a rouing tongue beyond the listes of godliness ere eue^ we
well know what we do. So subtle is the sin that this way creeps into our
souls. Apparel is next, a most fearful allurement to the breach o^ this
commandment both in thought and deed, if God once in mercy would open our
eyes. So are these stage plays and most horrible spectacles, so is our
dancing, which at this day is used, so is drunkenness, gluttony and
idleness, with a number such like, as can witness each one in the world that
will weigh them. Now what care we have had of these things the Lord knows,
and to our profit if we list a little we may consider it. Our eyes O Lord,
how do they offend through our careless bestowing of them to their own
desire? Where is the testimony of truth within us, that we do restrain them
so soon as ever we perceive any tickling motion arise by them? Where is the
counterpane of that band we have taken of them that they shall not cause (...)
to offend? Job did it, and yet we ^eaker than he ten thousand times ^hinke
it needelesse. Alas our folly, Job. 31.1.
alas ^ur security! By this means our souls ^^rk in their bane, and yet we
care not nor ^ilbe warned. The Lord of his mercy ^^ue us once the grace to
desire it with ^auid and very heartily to beg it, Psalm. 11^.
yt our ^^es may be ever turned away from be^olding vanity. For the rest which
fol^owe consider the^ well, and let never Sa^han or selfeloue so still bewitch
us, that ^e cannot be brought to see our sin. In ^ehauiour or speech have we
never offe^^ed? But ever in them both so used our ^elues, as yt neither we nor
they whom ^e dealt withal may be charged of more ^ightnesse, than became ye
professors of Christ and his word? Have we never ^ransgressed in matter or
form of apparel? O yt we could say it. But in truth we can not. For the
contraries abounding in the eyes of al men would give us the lie. Light
behavior and alluring ^aliance is every where accounted comely boldness,
Behavior.
and good bringing up: Speech.
discoursing speech to a vain end we count a quality commendable in us, and
the want of it we esteem simplicity, wheresoever we see it. And therefore by
books to such ends set out, we endeavor to attain unto it, and having once
polluted our speech (for I will never call it polishing) we are never better
than when we have company to bestow our tales and greetinges upon. Our
apparel in matter to our power we make sumptuous, Apparel.
and in form to allure the eye as much as we can. If this be true, in the name
of Christ let us better think of it than we have done. These are allurementes
to sinful lust, and this law of God forbids not only both act and
thought, but even every allurement to either of them. What should I speak of
stage plays and dancing? Can we say in truth before the majesty of God that
we carefully abstain from these things, because they tickle us up either
more or less to the breach of this commanndement? Alas we cannot a number of
us. But we run to the one continually to our cost, Plays.
when we will not be drawn to better exercises that are offered freely, we
suck in the venom of them with great delight, and practice the speeches and
conueyances of love which there we see and learn. Dancing.
The other we use with especial pleasure, and God being witness to many an
one, they wish the fruit of their dancing to be this, even the fall of them
selves and others into the breach of this law. What should I say of gluttony
and idlensse? Do they not make us sin? Good Lord give us eyes to see,
Gluttony and drunkenness.
and hearts to weigh the occasions of our fall. The spirit of God has said
that these pricked up the flesh of the filthy Sodomites to that height of
sin, and yet we can imagine they will cause no sin at all in us against
this law. And therefore professing the gospel and integrity of life, yet
dare we so pamper, so stuff, and cramme this rebelling flesh, as if we were
gods that could suffer no temptation: we dare gull in wine and hot drinks
continually, being peradventure both strong and young, and every way needing
rather pulling down, than setting up. Idleness.
We dare solace our selves in soft beds too long for our constitutions, and
all the day after betake our selves to nothing whereabout the mind might
walk, and so escape impure conceptes. We dare differ the means which God
has appointed for our help to live undefiled, for every trifling cause, and
feeling the flesh to arise in disobedience against this law even daily, yet
neither fast we, nor break our sleep, nor labor, nor marry, nor any way
stop the course of it. But certainly as unfeeling men pass on the time and
heap up wrath against the day of wrath for our boulde offending. And yet we
hope to be saved, and yet we hope to have a joyful resurrection. But (O dear
in the Lord) it will not be so. For is not this the law of God, Thou shall
not commit adultery? Does it not forbid both act and thought as we have
plainly seen, and even every allurement to either of them? And must not God
judge us according to his law? Now then should we live, when we have
witness within us that we offend his ^aw? Be not deceived, but as we fear
the loss of body and soul for evermore, let us be warned. Can nothing accuse
us that has been said? Did we never in act or in thought receive any stain
contrary to this commandment? Have we ever had care and power to avoid all
means? What mouth dare speak it, what heart can think it, if it be not
brass or steel, and as void of feeling? Wherefore awake let us all from our
former sleep, let us stand up at last from the dead in trespasses and sins,
and Christ our dear Savior shall give us light. Let us acknowledge what this
law requires, and what we should have done every one of us. Let us
confess we have straied from it many a time and way, and are no way able to
offer up our selves righteous, clear, and innocent to the Lord touching this
law, and for the time to come that we shall yet live here, O let us carry
some greater care to observe his will. We now know not our acts only but
our inward thoughts must ever be holy, we now know many means that lead to
offense herein, and that even the means must also be eschewed. Now then if
we live as in ignorance we did, scorning at counsel, cleaving to our
pleasures, and rejecting the Lord and his law, shall we escape? He that
knows his masters will, and does it not, shall he be unpunished? Mark what
I say, and pray ever to feel it as the wrath of the king bad heat the furnace
seven times hootter than ever it was to consume the men that withstoode him to
his face for truth: so shall the wrath of God, that made this law, cause hell
to be hette 70 times 7 times hotter for us, if wilfully after warning, and
maliciously after knowledge we oppose our life against it. That is, he shall
multiply the pains of hell upon us for these pleasures of our flesh, that
sweet sin may have bitter and sower confusion for evermore. Now the God of
heaven give us sense and feeling, the Lord of mercy touch us with a taste of
sin by the viewing of his law. For we cannot always live and thus dally
with our own souls, neither stands it with the nature of our God, who is
just finally to forgive us though he long forbear us, unless we amend. But he
must have his judgment, and we must have our torment as sure as we live. Now
does he wish us to consider our ways, and to turn our feet into his
testimonies, his warninges waste, and his wrath increases if we settle our
selves against him. Yet O how I fear we will wilfully do it? For it is so
sweet and so incident to us which this law forbids, that a thousand to
one we forsake the Lord. The allurementes I have named we will never
withstand, no, we will not hear of it that they cause us to fall. But
pleasing this flesh for the time we do use them, we will never epsy the
pain that will follow them. Yet why should I fear since God is of power to
pierce any heart, and has promised to do it if we heartily beg it? O Lord
I hope thou will work with us, that by this law we may see how we have
offended thee, and what hereafter we must more eschew, the one with sorrow
and true remorse, the other with faith and continual care. Then shall thy
Christ and our comfort, who in our flesh fulfilled the law for us, cover with
his righteousness all our sins against it. Then shall sins past in his
blood be forgiven, and we by him ever hereafter strengthened. Then we shall
order our eyes with a careful heart, we shall set a watch before our mouth and
keep the door of our lips, all false inticementes to forbidden lusts we
shall gladly refrain, and so escape the sin it self the better. This I say
good Lord we shall do, if thou work with us, that is, thou and thy power,
and thou and thy mercy shall do it in us. Which voutchsafe O father of heaven
for thy unmeasurable and unsearchable goodness sake. Amen.

The eight Commandment.
Thou shall not steal.
Question.

How can this commandment possibly stand with that opinion of community?

Ans. Indeed no way: for it manifestly overthrows so vile an imagination,
and shows ye distinction of dominions, and propriety in things was, and is
the ordinance of the Lord. For every prohibition shows an ordinance before
established, which should be observed either in Gods laws, or man's, though not
always expressly. As the forbidding of murder shows preservation of life
to be the will of God, and the denial of adultery infers the liking of
chastity either in marriage, or out. So the forbidding of stealth which is an
alienation of an other man's goods to our selves, shows that every thing is
not our own to take at our pleasure, but propriety in possession is the will
of the Lord. For if all things be common there can be no stealth, and so this
law frivolous and to no purpose which God forbid we should affirm or think.

Que. Yet many have bin of this opinion, affirming that tyranny, and not
divinity makes this difference amongst men.

Ans. It is very true. Yet I hope you see how evidently this law of God which
I trow they will account divinity, does overthrow them and their folly, as do
also all other laws, that may heereunto be reduced with many scriptures mo.
For as there can be no stealth, if all things be common, and therefore this
law of God as I said in vain given, so there can be no buying or selling, no
borowing or lending, no letting or leasing, or any such thing amongst men, if
every man have like interest to take at his pleasure, and therefore the Lord God
even in these also greatly ouerseene for yt he would troble himself to make
laws touching these matters, when as no man has or ought to have any
propriety in any thing more than an other. Again all the exhortations in the
Scripture to alms deeds, and to mercy toward the poor is frivolous, for
they have as good right to take any thing they want from any man, as the
other have to give them. But all these you see are absurd, and therefore the
opinion, and the contrary of it the will and ordinance of the Lord.

Que What is then the very drift of this commandment?

Ans. The very end of it is this, to bind our love and care to our neighbors
goods, as before it has been to his life, and things dear unto him as his
life. For it cannot be, that our hearts should be right in affections
toward our brethren, and we spoylers and wasters, or any way harmers of the
commodities which they enjoy. Love cheerisheth and keeps even every thing so
near as it can, which he accompteth of, whom we love, and especially which
he lives by, and maintains both himself and others by. And therefore as I
think we cannot take a better course to lay before our own eyes yt wants of
love in us toward the goods of our neighbors, and consequently our breaches of
this commandment, than diligently to wey some particular duties specified in
the word, wherein the Lord God would have our love to show it self. As for
open rapine, and plain stealth no man I think will excuse it or deny it to be
sin, and therefore I stand not upon it, your book has evident places quoted
against it. I come rather to those other duties of borowing and lending, of
hyring and letting, of buying and selling, and such like.

Que. First then what is the Law of borowing and lending in the word?

Ans. If a man says the law borow any thing of his neighbor, Exodus 22.14.
and it be hurt, or else die, the owner of it not being by, he shall surely
make it good. If it be an hired thing, he shall not make it good, for it came
for his hyre. In which law, if we well wey it, we may first see, that if we
have that thing, which our neighbor would borowe, and we able without our
hurt well to spare it him, we are bound to do it, or else we sin against this
law of God, and we even steal from our brother, that which in right is his.
For GOD would not ever have made a law for recompense of the lender, if his
thing lent receive any harm, unless it had been a necessary duty of love
to lend when we may. Therefore this narownesse of heart, and unkind
disposition, to grudge unto any that good, which by lending we can possible
do him, it is hateful in the eyes of God, and a plain breach of this
commandment. Secondly in this law, as one very well has noted, Usury.
we may see a great light given to that hard controversy concerning usury of
money. That if the thing were hired, although it perished in use, yet should it
not be made good by him which hired it, for it came for his hire. The money
which usurers give out is hired as we know. Therefore if (...) were a thing
that might be hired yo^ see the sentence of God though it per^^shed. (...)
will be no looser, and therefore pro^^^^on is made for recompense, if the (...)
lent received hurt: but usurers ^^ll have their goodwill, as they call it,
^ertaine, and an excessive gayner.

Que. But I pray you what think ^ou of giving usury which many a good man is
constrained to do?

Ans. Truly for mine own part I ^m satisfied to think it also evil, by the
words of Jeremy, who says, he has neither given usury nor taken, and yet
they hated him. Insinuating plainly, yt i^ he had done either, he could have
found just cause in himself, why he should be evil thought of.

Que. What is the law of pledges?

Ans If thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge, Exodus 22.26.
says the law, thou shall restore it to him ere the sun go down. For that
is his covering only, and this is his garment for his skin wherein shall he
sleep? Therefore when he cries unto me I will hear him, for I am merciful.
Deuteronomy. 24.6.
And in an other place: No man shall take ye upper or nether millstone to pledg^
for this gage is his living. 10.
And when thou shall ask again of thy neighbor any thing lent, 11.
thou shall not go into hi^ house to fet his pledge, but thou shall stand
without, and the man which borrowed it of thee shall bring the pledge out of ye
doors unto thee. 12.
Furthermore i^ he be a poor body, thou shall not sleep^ with his pledge, 13.
but shall restore him the pledge when the sun goes down, tha^ he may sleep
in his raime^t, and bless thee* and it shall be righteousness to thee before the
Lord thy God. The very end of al^ which laws as you see is nothing but this
^ercy and kindenes of man toward man ^^en in this matter of taking paunes. and
therefore if my dealing herein be ^^arpe, hard, and cruel, laying aside as it
^ere al regard of other men's needs, so my self may be safe, is it not
apparent I fail in love toward the wealth and ^ood estate of my brother
outward, and ^^erefore have broken this commande^ent? It must needs be granted.

Que. What is the law for things com^itted to our custody?

Ans. If a man deliver unto his neigh^our, says the law, to keep, ass, or
ox, Exodus 22.10.
(...) sheep, or any beast, and it die or (...) hurt, or taken away by
enemies, and no ^^an see it, 11.
an oath of the Lord shall be be^^ixt the^ two, yt he has not put his hand ^^to
his neighbors good, and the owner (...) it shall take ye oath, and he shall not
make (...) good. But if it be stolen from him, 12.
he ^^all make restitution unto the owner ^^ereof. If it be torn in pieces,
he ^^all bring record, 13.
and shall not make it ^^odwhich is deuored. By which laws ^^us much we may
note, that notwithstanding for things committed to their custody, it might
fall out that they might be brought before the magistrat^ by oath to protest
their truth and ho^nestie, which corrupt flesh will lightli^ grudge at, or
else to their cost to make that good, the keeping whereof never gained them
penny: yet nevertheless would the Lord have man even here in to show his
love, and in no case for either of these respects or any other t^ deny it.
Wherefore it follows the^ and both now and ever shall follow that whosoever
shall not willingly, an^ readily take into his custody that thin^ which he
may keep to the benefit o^ his neighbor better than he that dot^ deliver it
him, and so taken truly keep and faithfully restore it again vnt^ them, that
of right should have it, tha^ man or woman want in their hearte^ affection or
love to their neighbors they withholde the thing which is du^ unto them,
namely the fruit of their love in this particular we stand upon and
therefore guilty they are before God of stealth the breach of this
com^mandement.

Que. What is the law of finding things lost?

Ans. Thou shall not says the law, see thy brothers ox nor his sheep go
astray, and withdraw thy self from the^, Deuteronomy. 22.1.
but shall bring the^ again unto thy brother: and if thy brother be not near
unto thee or if thou know him not, 2.
then thou shall bring it unto thy house, and it shall remain with thee until
thy brother seek after it, then shall thou deliver it to him again. 3.
In like manner shall thou do with his Ass, and so shall thou do with his
raiment, and with all lost things of thy brother which he has lost, if thou
have found them, thou shall not withdraw thy self from them. See here the
love of man to the goods of his brother in what sort the Lord requires it.
Now least the name of brother used here in this place should deceive us, to
think we are bound but to our friends in this duty, it is profitable to
note how in an other place in steed of brother is put enemy, and all these
particulars nevertheless named. If thou meet thine enemies ox, or aff^ going
astray, thou shall bring him again, and so forth of the rest. So that this
being a fruit of love, which God requires in us all toward the goods of all
men, be they friends or foes, that we should keep them, and cheerish them,
and in safety restore them, if we find them lost, when once we know the
owners of them: surely we must need confess that to conceile, and retain
things found of us, after we know who should have them is plain and
flat theft. Yea it is a breach of conscience no doubt in this matter to enjoy
any thing found, without tru^ testimony in our selves, that we hau^ used as
many means as we could to learn out the looser, as by asking, by
proclayming, and such like. This wel^ considered and waied should a little more
awake such as be Lords of waife an^ straies, as we say, that they carry a^
eye over their baliffes in that behalf s^ near as they can, to see that they
bring not sin upon them, by making them unjust retainers of other men's
goods, (...) ^omplaint common in most places, and (...) theft not to be
warranted in any place.

Que. What is our duty in buying and ^elling?

Ans. When thou sellest ought to thy ^eighbour, says the law, or buiest at
^hy neighbors hand, Leuit. 25.14.
you shall not op^resse one an other (meaning by deceit ^r any otherwise) but
according to the ^umber of years after the Iubile thou ^halt buie of thy
neighbor, 15.
also accor^ing to the number of the years of the ^euenewes he shall sell unto
thee. 16.
Accor^ing to the multitude of years thou shall ^ncrease the price thereof, and
according to ^he fewnes of years thou shall abate the ^rice of it, for ye
number of fruits does he ^^l unto thee. Oppress not ye therefore any man his
neighbor, 17.
but thou shall ^eare thy God. For I am ye Lord thy god. ^n which law this I
mark, that when (...) sell or buie I must show even a love to ^y brother, and a
tender affection in that ^y dealing with him. For so is it meant, when it is
said, you shall not oppress one another. Secondly yt then consequently ^y
greedy affection may not set ye price but the value of the thing, and the
benefit which it is likely to yield. For how can I love him, and yet take
more of him than I give him, yt is more money, than the thing is worth? Which
things if they be wanting, surely then our selling is deceit and guile, yea it
is theft by this commandment proved. For the very equity of this law, as
every one may plainly see, was this, that as good should be given as taken,
and taken as given. Even that commutatiue iustic^ which heathen men could see
to be so ne^cessarie in all contractes and bargans as that without it no
trading could stand or society endure. Upon which law well considered and
sound^^ settled in our minds, a godly man draw^eth these conclusions, and let us
think (...) the^. First it condemns al ouersellin^ I mean known and
wilful ouerse^^ling of any thing, for so say the word^ (according to the
number of years sha^ thou sell) that is, if the Iubile be far o^ thou shall
sell dearer by reason the bu^^ shall reap longer profit of it: but if it (...)
near, then cheaper for ye contrare re^^son. So that an equality of
commodities present is plainly shot at in this law. How then can they warrant
their dealings to have required love in them, who in respect either of passed
loss or supposed possible in time to come, do inhaunce the price of the
things they sell, above the value of the things? This dealing, if you mark
the words well, could not be allowed amongst the Jews. And as yet I am
ignorant of any larger commission granted to us to wrecke our selves upon our
brethren, and to rob the^ because God in his pleasure has crossed us with
loss, or may do hereafter. Secondly it condemns all uttering of naughty and
counterfeit coin or wares. For first for ye seller, if he raise his price to
the value of good wares, and then deliver evil or counterfeit, how does he
observe an equality of commodotie? And then for the buier if he beat it down
to as low a price as he may, til be consent to give so much for it, and then
deliver counterfeit and evil coin, where is again the equity of this law on
his part who is bound by it to give as much and as good as he takes so near
as judgment can any way serve him. Thirdly it condemns all lying in wayt to
pray upon one that must needs sell for present money, to get his commodity for
half the value, if I can, when as rather I should for pity give him
equality. For what love is this to the goods of my neighbor, when I can be
content even to rob him in his necessity by taking that for a penie that is
worth in mine own conscience three, and not to be bought under, were his need
not so great? Now see and note then how commonly, yet fearfully, for want of
love and conscience to give as good as we take, our buying and selling one with
an other is spotted and stained with great and grievous theft. For most
assuredly even as in the time of law if they observed not a proportion betwixt
the Iubile year and their price, they offended against the commandment of
theft: so now the law being gone, if the equity of it be not observed, to
wit, equality of commodity given and taken, the same sin is committed* in
the day of the Lord we shall find the burden of it.

Que. Thus then how ourloue should show it self in these common duties we may
easily see, now I pray you go forward with other branches of this law.

Ans. Oppression generally al, is contrary to that love, which the Lord by
this law seeks to draw out of us, and therefore no doubt forbidden in the
same. And if in particulars we list to lay it out, First says the word, Thou
shall not oppress an hired servant, Deuteronomy. 24.14.
that is needy and poor, etc. But thou shall give him his hire for the day,
neither shall the sun go down upon it, for he is poor, and therewith
sustaineth his life, least he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be
sin unto thee. Secondly it forbids to do injury to any strangers, Exodus
22.21. Leuit. 19.33.
or to oppress them, and adds this reason to the Jews, because they were
once strangers. Thirdly you shall not trouble or oppress any widow, says
the law, nor any fatherless child: Exodus 22. v. 22.
for if you do, he shall cry unto me says the Lord, and then mine anger
shall burn, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows,
and your children fatherles. Where by the way mark the vehemency of this
speech, and see what comfort to the godly, and terror to ye wicked it may
justly exhibit. For the former, God knows and the world sees how often they
are wrecked and wronged and set to the wall by cruel, ungodly, and hard
hearted men, how often they fail of friends to maintain their right, and
defend their cause against the evil. But yet see here a comfort, though all
forsake us, if we cry to the Lord, the cause shall be his, and he will
help us, the Lord will awake and stir up his wrath, till the wrong we have
suffered be revenged fully. And for the second, what knows the oppressing
and merciless man, whether any cries pass from the grieved hearts of such
as he hurts or no? If they do, as it cannot be but they should, why
trembles he not to consider what hangs over his head, even ready to light
upon him every hour, if God be GOD and true of his word? O that our hearts
then may cleave to the Lord if we be oppressed, and tremble at his
judgments if we use it to others. But to return to the matter again, if
all oppression be stealth before God, what I pray you shall we think of the
fountain of much oppression, to wit, acceptance of persons in judgment?
Surely it must needs also be evil before the Lord. Reason does teach it, and
yet God for more assurance expressly forbids it as a mischief in a common
wealth. The Lord your God (says Moses) is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords,
Deutro. 10.7.
a great God, mighty and terrible, which accepts no persons, nor takes
reward. Which does right to the fatherless and widow, and loves the
stranger and gives him food and raiment. What also shall we think of one
cause of acceptatio^ of persons to wit of bribes and rewards, but even also as
the very poison of justice abhor them and condemn them, and the rather for
that so expressly they are forbidden in the word? Wrest not the law (says
the Lord) nor respect not any person, neither take reward. Deutro. 16.19.
For the reward blinds the eyes of the wise, and peruerteth the words of
the just. Exodus 23.2.
That which is just and right, shall thou follow, that thou may live, and
possess the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Thus then as branches
of this commandment, we see not only oppression generally, and particularly,
but even also the causes of it, acceptance of persons, bribes, and rewards,
forbidden. And I will yet add one thing over unto all these, Liueries are often
means and couers of oppression.
which must needs be included in this head of oppression, because it is a
common and a dangerous cloak of the same, to wit, liveries of Prince or
subjects, noble men, gentlemen, or whosoever. Which if they maintain and
bear out the unjust and wrongful dealings of any man with ye knowledge of the
Lord, not only the deed doer, but the giver of that cloth and cote whatsoever
he be, stands guilty of that oppression before almighty God. The
consideration whereof being so true and sure should justly cause in all estats,
that deal their cloth to others, a more vigilant eye and ear to see and hear
the conversation of their folowers, and a restraining hand of such countenance,
credit or cover to the^ (all worldly reasons set apart) when so ever they
shall understand the same to be abused. For why should any earthly respect
ever stand so great in men's eyes, as yt for it they dare take upon them the
guilt of other men's sins, and spoiling oppression? But alas great is the
vnfeelingnesse of many men's hearts in this matter in these days. Either Pope,
profit, or policy do make us deal our cloth too liberally, and regard our
men's behavior too negligentlie. But a word is enough.

Que. Yet still proceed on.

Ans. An other branch of this commandment of stealth is idleness. For since
the fall of our first parents, whatsoever we enjoy justly and truly as our
own, we must get it by labor. And whatsoever I labor not for, and yet enjoy,
I steal it, and the use of it belongs not unto me. For then was it said to
Adam and his posterity for ever that in the sweat of their browe^ they should
eat their meat. The mea^ning whereof binds not all estates to a like
bodily labor, but it inioyneth every one some lawefull calling, the
magistrate must govern, cherish, and defend, the judges determine the causes
of the people, the ministers deliver their gifts to the Church, and every one
in some sort of sweat, that is in some godly indeueur of body or mind derive
unto himself the use of these outward things. Otherwise if idly he live by
the labor of others, having no testimonies that he deserves his hire, be
that man or woman whatsoever assured, that they make a breach o^ this
commandment. 2. These. 3.10.
For if any work not, let him not eat, says the Apostle: as if he would
say, if he do, he does more than he has right to. The labourer is worthy of
his wages, but not the loyterer. The Ox that treads out the corn must not
be musled, but the idle ass if he be pyned, is but well served. Idleness what
mischief it hatcheth in town and country, what tongue is a^^e to lay down?
It causes contenti^n and strife by prattling speeches, Prou. 10. c. 20*
it ^^rceth and nourishes whoredom and ^^th, it pulls on poverty, and
loses honor, it hinders virtue, and mayn^^yneth vice, and by name to the
breach ^f this commandment it mightily ^oueth. For let him that stole steal
^o more (says the Apostle) but let him ^ather labor and work with his own
^ands ye thing which is good, Ephesians. 4.
that he may ^aue to give him which needs. Nothing ^s it were very plainly,
that the cause ^hy the stealer stole, was want of la^ouring in his calling.
Many goodly ^awes and customs have heathen men ^ade, and had against
idleness. Some have punished it with very death, as did Draco the lawegiuer
of the Athenians, others have admitted none to dwell in their towns with them,
unless he had some art, and carefully followed it also. All contreyes and all
people to conclude, that have lived under any good government, have abhorred
it. Solomon sends the idle belly to learn his duty of the very vilest
creature the pismire, who labors in sum^mer to live in winter, Prou. 6.
and whose ma^ny little cariages, as you see, make (...) great heap at last.
And in an other place he says, that he which will no^ plowe because it is
cold, Chap. 20.
shall beg hi^ bread, when it is warm, and no man shall give him, which is
worse, even pu^nishing justly his great sloth. Ther^ was a little tittle
tattle, when time wa^ they say betwixt the grasshopper and the pismire, and we
may laugh at it, and ye^ look better about us as admonished b^ it. The
grasshopper having passed the summer over merrily, as her custom^ is singing and
tuning the notes of (...) thoughtlesse mind under every leaf at last when
winter came on, begann^ to shake, and to go to bed with a^ empty belly
many a night, to the great weakening of her lively limbs and the quite
marring of all her mu^sicke. To steal she refuses of he^ honest nature, and
to beg she i^ ashamed for fear to be mocked. Ye^ need makes the old wife
trotte^ they say, and modesty in this hungri^ ^^eature must yield to
necessity. To (...) therefore she goes, and having a ^ealthie neighbor not
far off, that (...) labored sore all summer, and ^^de up much good
vitaile, to her (...) comes, and craves some suc^^ur at her hand. Who by
and by ^^maunded of her what she did all ^^mmer? Alas (says the grashop^^r)
I sung and little remembered ^is change. Did you so (says the ^^t) in deed did
you sing all sum^er? Now trust me, for me, you all dance all winter, for I
live (...) my labor, and I will never main^^ine idleness in any. Thus
re^^iued sloth a check, when it loo^^d for help, and we warned by it ^^ay
learn this moral, to labor ^^ast we lack. Optimum obsonium ^pectute labor,
(says one) They are ^ood refreshinges in our age the wel^estowed trauelles of
our youth. ^eares pass, and strength fayles, ^^tte nothing in youth, and have
^^thing in age. But O care^^sse hearts of ours, and headie will, who can
persuade this, or beat it into the heads of young men, and maids of
servants, and such as are commin^ on? No, no, we will hoppe and dance tipple
and drink, banquet and reuel^ what counsel soever is given us to the
contrary, with that little we have, an^ sing care away. And a litlegaie
apparel on the back, is worth much mone^ in the chest. But wise is he whom
other men's harms can cause to tak^ heed. Sickness may come, and euer^
master will not keep a sick servant, mayme may fall to us, and we the^ may
hear it, I have no wages vnles^ you could work, many things man happen, and
a man's own is his own^ and great is gods blessing to faithfu^ labor, as
truly his plagues are no^ little or rare to idleness and sloth.

Que. Well sir then since labor w^ must and so live, I pray you is not euer^
labor commendable?

Ans. No indeed. For the Apostle i^ the place I named before, makes (...)
distinction, which I pray you mark^ and says, Ephesians. 4.18.
Let him labor with (...) own hands the thing that is good: as ^f he should
have said, there are labors which are naught, and yet labors too. Wherefore
it is not enough to make ^s guiltless of this commandment ^o say, we get
that we have by labor, ^ut it must be good labor (says Paul) ^ust labor,
and lawefull labor. The which distinction overthrows al maintaynance gotten
by massing, by iugling ^y charming, by playing interludes, by ^idling and
pyping up and down the ^ountrey, by carrying about bears and ^^pes, by
telling of fortunes, and such like trades, mentioned in the statute of this
land, touching vagabundes. For though they be labors, and make them ^weate
often, some of them, yet want they warrant in the word to prove them good,
and lawefull labors. And therefore subject to the penalty of this law before
God.

Que. And I pray you let me add one thing more because you say all labors
must be lawefull: what if a man in the pursuit of a pyrate or any enemy in
field get a spoil, whether is it lawefull to retain it, and conceile it, or
it is stealth so to do? The labor is just, honest and lawefull.

Ans. Truly I must needs answer you, that albeit the labor in resisting,
and repelling any enemy be commendable and good, and therefore goods so gotten
lawfully possessed of the Prince, the leefetenant, Genesis 14.
the general or chief whosoever: yet is there no warrant that every soldier
should be his own caruer and take what he can get. But the custom and law of
all well ordered wars is this, or should be, that what spoil soever is got,
and not given before hand by the captain to the soldiers, ought by them to be
brought unto him, and by him to be disposed to every man geometrically that is
according to every man's service and worthiness, 1. Sam. 30.20. etc.
no^ Arithmetically, that is to every man alike. And if any man of his own
greediness alienate to himself any thing, any otherwise than thus, tha^ is,
either with a general gift of the captain to take what he can, or a
particular gift to take this and thus much, surely that possession is not
warranted by Gods law, but lights under this commandment. For as for a
man's labor, first he owes ^t both to God, and to his country, and then he
has his set pay for it, which he agreeeth to as sufficient, and therefore
he should not serve his greedy affection disorderly. As for the case of
pirates if upon any cost they be taken and imprisoned, surely ^t is very
barbarous cruelty to leave them utterly vncomforted, with any portion of that
which was taken a^out them, and with them, even so that for food they starve
ere ever their cause be heard. This spoil to ^peede our selves, and spill
our bre^hren, in this lamentable and unmerciful manner, what defense so^uer it
may have by law of man, ^urely it sauoreth not of that compas^ion and tender
bowelles of pity, which is required by the law of GOD. And therefore I
include it, where no doubt the day of judgment will find it, even within the
forbidden branches of this commandment.

Que. I take your answer, and therefore now follow your own course again.

Ans. It is now time to draw to an end, and there yet remain to be some
what touched the theft of the heart through greedy covetousness, and the
theft of the tongue by false and filthy flattery. Wherefore a little of these
also as of the other. That this commandment then does reach unto the
thoughts and inward conceits of the heart, it is first proved by that
reason, that often before has been alleged, namely, because the lawegiuer
is spiritual, and therefore his laws not resting only in outward actions,
as men's laws do. Secondly by that speech concerning adultery, which is true
in all the commandments, He that looks, Mark. 7.23.
and lusts, or coueteth, has sinned. And by the testimony of our Savior
Christ, who reckneth covetousness amongst those things that proceeding out,
and not going in difile a man. To all which Chrysostom subscribeth, and
says, In These. homilia 11.
Auarus fur and latro est. A covetous man is a thief. Now what covetousness
is albeit every man for the acquaintance that he has with it, may know, yet
do I thus define it, to be a damnable vice of the mind, pricking and provoking
us to follow after filthy lucre. Which thing without the name, and even under
the name, is maruelously inueighed against in the scripture. Chap. 2.5.
The prophet Habacuc cries out against the heart that inlargeth his desire as
the hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathers unto him all
nations, and heapeth unto him all people. No, he that coueteth an evil
covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on heigh to escape from
the power of evil. Thou have consulted shame to thine own house by destroying
many people, and have sinned against thine own soul. The stone shall cry out
of the wall, and the beam of the timber shall answer it, woe to him that
builds a town by blood, and erecteth a city by iniquity, and so forth. It
is cried out against in the gospel, called the root of all evil, idolatry,
and a thing not to be named amongst Christians. Luke. 12. 1. Timoth. 6. Ephesians.
5. Coloss. 3.
There is no special calling amongst men, whereunto by name this vice is not
forbidden as a venom of all virtue, in every degree in Princes, in judges, in
ministers, in all it is forbidden, and surely this is no small argument to a
Christian man against it. Fearfully punished was it in Gehezi the prophets
man, in Achan, and a number mo. And to conclude our scriptures Job the servant
of the Lord most notably shows, Job. 31.
how he shunned it, Psalm. 119.
and David with all the heat of his heart prays against it: O Lord let my
heart be never inclined to coueteousnesse. I might recite the laws o^ God
against raking their lands too clean in the time of harvest, Deuteronomy. 24.19.
and against gathering so clean their grapes in the time of vintage, as that
nothing was left for the poor. All which directly shoot at the shame of this
sin in (...) professor of godliness. And I might also heap up heereunto a
thousand^ testimonies of men, heathen, and Christian, uttered in detestation of
this foul sin. But whom the word fears not, men shall hardly move. Only a
speech or two I cannot pass over, which pretily describe the corruption of our
nature. De breuitate vitae.
Omma tanquam mortales timemus, omnia tanquam immortales concupiscimus, (says
Seneca.) That is, We stand in fear of diverse things as though we thought we
could die, but we covet so as though we thought we should never die. Fortune
(says an other) has given too much to many, but enough to none. And again,
Non solum auarus est, quirapit aliena, August.
sed qui cupide seruat sua. He is not only covetous which greedily catches
at more, but he also which pinchinglie spares that which he has. Whereof
very excellentie speaks both Solomon and Syrac, Eccles. 6.1. Syrac. 14.3.
paynting out the filth of this folly to have the blessings of GOD, and yet
to want no thing more through a miserable mind, than the blessings of GOD.
But I will follow no further this common place: this little which I have
spoken, I have done it, to give us a taste of this subtle sin, which, with
grief we may mark, those men and women very grievously assaulted withal and
fearfully overcome after their profession made of Gods truth, and his
glorious gospel, who in the days of their vanity before their calling, never
felt any such temptation. So seeks Satan to slander the word, and to hinder
the credit of the gospel. When he cannot longer detain us in swearing, in
excess of diet, or apparel, in adultery and uncleanness, in spoiling and
spending wastfully Gods given graces, and in other fruits of ignorance and of
an unreformed soul, then creeps he in, and draws us subtlelie, ere ever
we epsy him to the other extremity, even greater care to get, and nearer
seeking how to save, than can or may stand with the credit of the truth
which we profess, or calling often, which we have in the common wealth. This
is too true, we see examples daily, and men's own hearts being well examined
shall confess it. The Lord then give us judgments to see, and hearts to
abhor so foul an evil. For what a derogation from Gods promises, and
damnable mistrust is this, when we do fear God, and serve him, attend to
his word, use his Sacraments, forbid sin in others, and forbear it our
selves, then so to look at wife and children, and other expenses, as that we
fear to want, who living before in a far looser sort never doubted yet any
such defect? Will God be worse to men when they follow him, than he was when
they forsook him? Surely an eye must be had unto this thing, and ^erie dear
unto must be the credit of the Gospel, that others by us may be woonne unto
it, or at least none deter^ed from it. God strengthen us, for satan is subtle,
and we are soon deceived. And truly better we had never given our names to
Christ, than by any faith^esse greediness, or unseemly hardness, to overthrow
all again, and hinder by offense others that are yet without. The earth is the
Lords, and the Lord ^s ours, if we serve him, with all that either heaven or
earth has to do us good withal.

Que. And what of the stealth of the eye?

Ans. The eye is said to steal, because it makes the heart to covet. For by
our eyes creep in desires into our hearts both in this behalf which now we
mean, and in other also as before has been said. By the eye first did Achab
steal Nabothes vineyarde, 1. King. 21.
and then by his eye the desire of it creept into his heart* And the Prophet
says, They covet feeldes, meaning no doubt, which they saw to lie commodious
for them. Wherefore Gods children must stop the very first beginnings, and
look^ to their eyes, Match. 2.2.
and ears, that they mak^ no flame, which God or charity does mislike: and
let us learn to think a^ an heathen said, Turpe est, non solu^ pedes, sed
and oculos in alienas possessione^ immittere. It is a foul thing not only t^
let our feet but even our eyes walk^ into other men's possessions any further
than becomes us as we ar^ Christians.

Que. What stealth commits the ^ongue?

Ans. By fraud and subtlety, by ^moothing and flattery, and such like. 2.
Sam. 16.
For thus stale false Siba his master Mephibboshethes goods from him. Thus
steal many crafty pleaders in ^ublike places, and make no conscience ^f it.
Thus is it said in express words, that Absolon stale the hearts of ^ll
Israel, to wit by his shameless ^^atterie. Thus steal men the hearts of
subjects, even in these days from their Princes, and lawful governors the
hearts of the people from their ministers, of servants from their Masters,
of Children from their Parents, Et hoc magnum ^urtum est, says one, And this
is a great theft. A kind of this tongue ^tealth it is for a Gentleman or a
greater estate to cast out a word to his inferior in way of begging what he
conveniently may not spare, and yet dare not deny, but brings and delivers
with fair words, what God knows his heart grudgeth, and peradventure his
wife weepeth to see him part with all. And unto this head is referred all
ungodly counsel, whatsoever, and all lewd vanity, or ba^bishe seruilitie
to make men deligh^ more in us, and less in the fear o^ God. Is it not
lamentable to see, tha^ a popish, or an atheistical Spirit shall do more
hurt at a table, or such lik^ place with one peevish jest, and gir^ding skoffe
in the hearts of the hea^rers, than twenty good men can reco^uer with much
good counsel? And ye^ what say we? O he is a merry greek a pleasant
companion, and in faith (...) good fellow. He cannot flatter, hi^ words must
be borne, and so forth. Bu^ mark mark what effect this mirt^ has in us, and
whereto it tends. And if it increase our knowledge, increas^ our zeal, and
increase good graces i^ us, then like it, and spare not, an^ cheerish such an
one. But if it poyso^ the profit of the word unto us, deca^ our diligence,
and liking of good exer^^^^es, and decrease all that I have na^ed, then know
him for a thief, though (...) hands be true, for he steals our ^^ules from
the living God, and both bo^^e and soul from eternal life. It is ^^etilie
said of a flaterer, that as the ^ood maintains the fire, to the con^^ming of
it self, so riches does him (...) he eat up our wealths, and I ap^^e it to
this case with no less truth, ^^at countenance bears out many e^^ll
counselor till he and his counsel ^^ue brought his mayntayners to ^^rie but
a small port. Such greeks ^^ake grief in a Christian heart to ^^are them,
and if sin be sweet to (...), the Lord in mercy rowze us (...) so dead a
sleep. But I go no ^^rther in this matter. I wish that I would, and I
would what ^ight kindle in every man and wo^an more faith and obedience
to^ardes GOD and man: for we ^^ede no cooling Cards, our hearts are (...) and
evil enough by nature of them ^^lues.

Que. Yet must I once again make bold, and crave your opinion concerning
goods got by play. For in truth me think the possession of them has no
found warrant. And if you will join a little concerning corrupt Pa^trons, I
think it will not be vn^fit.

Ans Surely you do most iustli^ doubt of the former, and I dare a^uouch it,
you may as fitly doubt of the latter. For neither play nor Patro^nage will
ever bear out, when ou^ consciences shall awake, what at thi^ day is done by
the title of them. O the latter I purpose some other speech and therefore will
not here entreat (...) it, but only say thus much, that i^ truth as you have
well noted thi^ commandment of stealth is his sta^ wherein he must be
placed that stea^leth to himself the reward of the m^^nister. Lamentable are
our daye^ wherein such wickedness is wisdom^ and thrice dead are those
hearts, th^^ daily dare enjoy, what neither before ^OD, nor man, they may
openly ^^nde to. But of the latter a few ^^e words at your request. A mat^^
as you know greatly liked, and ^^erefore hardly blamed without great
^^sliking. For what we have to do, ^^e love not to be let to do, and
^^toothsome is that truth ever, that ^^adeth down my liking. But be (...) as
it will be. To this was I ^^ne, I do willingly acknowledge, (...) to this am
I called, as I am, a ^^nister, even playnelie to speak that I see a truth,
when the place ^^uireth it, or else to carry the brande (...) ill conscience to
my grave. And ^^ether mislikers of any truth here, ^^ll find a day of
misliking else^^ere before the GOD of truth, (...) them now betimes, in love
ad^^nished, well consider and weygh. ^^ncerning then playing and ga^^ng in
general, diverse you shall ^^de both in writing and speaking ^^rie strait, who
hardly will be ^^rswaded to allow unto Christi^^s almost any pl^ie at all.
For say they we must give account in the day of judgment of every action,
(...) every idle word, and of every jot (...) time, how we have bestowed
it, an^ therefore we should not play. Second^ly the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10.
Whatsoever you d^^ do all to the glory of God, but our id^^ sportes rather
dishonor God, an^ therefore we should not play. Third^lie Peter says it is
sufficient that w^^ have spent the time past of the life a^^ter the lust of the
Gentiles walking (...) wantonness, 1. Pet. 4.3.
drunkenness, in gluttoni^ and such like, therefore now we shou^^ not play.
Fourthly the multitude (...) Christian exercises and duties that we a^^ bound
unto cry unto us to spend (...) time in play. And last of all by the
se^^tences of grave and godly fathers wh^ have and do condemn all idle
sporte^^ and say the devil, Ambros. 1. offic. 23. Chrysostom. ho. 6. in Matthew.
not God was the a^^thor of them, they prove, and wish (...) profit, that we
should not play. T^^ meaning of these our brethren no dou^^ is good, and
willingly would draw v^ to greater duty to our God. And the^^ reasons of
theirs ought to have this e^^^ect in us even to abridge that excess which al
may see in our playing and our sportes, and to bring us home to a greater
strictness of life in heeding what we should. But to cut us off from all
recreation by any play (be it without offense of any spoken) indeed they
cannot. For we are men, and no Angels, and as men in this world we must
walk our course, subject to dullness, and weariness, even in good things,
and we must refreshe that feeble weakness of ours by lawful and allowed
comforts. Which I so term because I am assured that the word of God
condemns not all our play, and the corrupt constitution of our bodies, Zach.
8.5. Exodus 13. 2. Sam. 18. Leuit. 23.
together with the dullness of our minds require some play. Sparing in truth is
the word in giving, The appointing of festiual days.
because well knew the Lord we would not be sparing in taking liberty for
to play. Yet is it plain enough. Notwithstanding fitly may it be said of
play, as he said of studying philosophy, Philosophandum paucis: We must play
but ^itle.

But now the second step is more hard than this, namely to know what
games we may use, and at what we may play. Wherein not purposing any set
and curious treatise, I answer briefly, that of those many and differing
kinds of sportes, that are devised and used in every place, I condemne^ none,
which make for the quickening of body or mind, which serve to actiuitie, and
prepare men for better service an other day, unless they have joined to them
any ungodliness, or are by Law of that particular place forbidden: no no^
Cards or Tables in all respects and to every person at all times* and in all
places: Nevertheless I am fully assured, and do willing^lie affirm, that
they ought not o^ Christians professing the Gospel t^ be so much used as they
are. I have joining with me, that godli^ Father Master Peter Martyr, whos^
judgment it is in plain terms That, P. Martyr de ludis.
non statim damnandus est siqu^ ^um aegrotat, aut debilitatur, eo genere ^udi
se recreet, quod a fortuna vel casu ^endeat, modo ibi pecuniae non
pericliten^ur. It is not by and by to be misli^ed if one that is sick, or
weakened (...) body, whereby he cannot use other exercise, do recreate
himself with those kinds of play, which depend ^f chance and fortune, as
Tables and ^ards. (For against Dice he has flat^^e spoken before.) Let us
therefore ra^^er enter to consider an other point, which is harder than this,
namely, ^hether we should play for money (...) no. And first I reason thus:
If (...) be lawefull to play for money, then (...) it lawefull to win money
in this (...), and the money lawefullie posses^^d: But this second is false,
there^^re the former also. That the second (...) false, the end and first
invention (...) play proves, which as every (...) can well witness was
never ^^uented to this end, but only to ^^^resh either body or mind, and
corrup^^^n afterward brought in money, as we (...) daily before our eyes. For so
long as a game is strange or new to us, we can take great delight to play for
nothing: but when once we are perfectly acquainted, and see the course of it,
then forsooth, unless we may peruer^ the end of it, and make it a way to
gain^ or loose by, we cannot like any more t^ use it. Therefore I say, since
it is ap^parant, that the first beginning of play^ and the true use of it was
never ani^ such matter, we ought not thereby t^ gain any goods. Secondly I
say^ that as play in the beginning wa^ not made for it, neither is it yet
a^^lowed a means to alienate our good^ by to an other either by Gods law^ or
man's Law. For mark (...) heads of any lawful conueiaunc^ and it is either
buying, selling, l^^^ting, hiring, or such like, among^^ them al you find not
gaming. Whe^^fore the looser is unjustly dispossess^^ and the winner as
wrongfully p^^^sessed. Danaeus handling both this m^^^ter and this reason, De
Iudis.
adds this wh^^ I pray you mark, that albeit (...) private law or custom
of some (...) ^^uate place should allow it, yet is the law of nature against
it, and the former ^ought to give place to the latter. But ^aith he, I have not
read ever any private law of any private place published in writing that
money woone and lost by play could either be retained, or ^ecouered, if it
were denied by ver^ue of any such title or right. And ^ee brings Ottoman a
famous law^er to confirm as much. Lib. 2. de vsuris cap. 2.
Augustine ^oulde have all things gotten by play taken from the winner, Epist.
54. ad Maced.
and never re^ored to the looser, but given to the ^oore, that both the winner
might ^ant what so greedily he gaped for, and the looser not to recover what
so ^^lishlie he parted with. Danaeus ^^side would have them both puni^^ed
with a further mulct of money. ^hirdlie I reason from the multi^^de of
miserable creatures, that are ^^e same flesh that we are, and (...)
pitifully cry for want of suc^^ur: from the multitude of godly and ^^ristian
uses, to employ that which ^ee may spare upon, and even from the want of
many necessaries for our selves, that it is not lawefull nor tolerable to
play for money. For is it not lamentable, and most fearful, that any
Christian man should carry about in his conscience day and night a witness,
that this seven years he has not given seven shillings to the naked, needy,
and comfortless members of Jesus Christ* and yet he has lost at vain play*
in a vain manner, twenty times as much? Can a man be so dull, as to think
this thing will never prick^ him, or never have a just reward^ of punishment at
Gods hands? I^ it not lamentable, that a man ca^ see no Christian use to give
of hy^ abundaunce to, but think all that ^^uer he can get little enough to
con^sume in play? Are we exempte^ out of the number of them that a^^ bound
to works of love, and deede^ of mercy, so that we need to d^^ none of
these, and yet shall be s^^ued too? Naie is it not woonderful^ and a thing
that heaven and ear^^ ^re ashamed of, and even all the cre^tures in both of
them stand asto^ished at to consider, that a man ^houlde not either do the
former due^ies, or him self have either any ^ood apparel to wear, any
books ^o benifite his soul by, no not so much as a Bible or a prayer book,
^nie meat at home for his wife and Children, any wages to pay his
Servants, or his other debtes, or (...) number more such necessaries, and ^et
think his playing, yea his costly ^laying lawefull, and not to be ^poken
against? Is it I say possi^le that ever a Christian man, that ^hinkes he has
Gods spirit, should ^hus have his conscience seared up? Truly, for mine
own part, I pro^esse I have stood in my heart a^azed at it, and I beseech
the ^orde to drive away from us such ^rosse security. For else as we live,
^ee shall know we have deceived ^ur selves, and others, we were never any
thing less, than Christians. These duties therefore due to others, so many,
and great, and these wants of necessaries for our selves, improoue our playing
for money. Lastly the judgments of men, both grave, godly, and wise, who
have ever condemned it, ought in very right to make all men leave it. To those
that I named before we may add Peter Martyr, who gives not leave to the
sick and weak in their houses to play, but with this condition, that they
play for no money. Modo pecuniae non periclitentur.
And we may reason from Augustines fact, that if he thought it evil to give
money to a iugler, or a stage player, which yet to their pain, do serve our
senses: much worse is the warrant to give to a gamester, that plays with us,
since he laboreth no more to make us sport, than we do to make him. Much
have many men writ, whence larger speech may be fetched, and o^ me for a
taste let this suffice to be said.

Que Why, but do you think it simply unlawful to play for money?

Ans. Surely no. For when either so little is playde as no way inableth me to
any duty of my calling, or the money (not much) is bestowed in some meeting,
for the increase of love, or that which is won, is a reward appointed to
that exercise, then think I, with others, that it is lawefull. And thus much
of these three questions, whether we may play or no, at what games, and whether
for money.

Que. Nay one thing more I pray you, and that is this. Whether make you like
account of dising that you do of other games, and think it as tolerable?

Ans. No surely do I not, to speak plain, but judge it most unseeming for a
Christian man or woman, and a very shame to the place where it is used. For of
all games it has neither wit in it, memory in it, nor art in it, (but false
art) nor exercise of any thing, except it be the elbowe, nor any thing to
commend it. And yet if this were all, it were not in so evil estate, howbeit,
surely this is not a little against it. But see (which is far more) even of
all men by a general consent as it were, thi^ vile game as most vile detected
an^ detested. For if you cast your eye^ to the heathen they ever hated it, i^
you look at Christians they ever abhor^red it, the scripture has forbidden it
the Councelles have condemned it the Laws of every good Com^mon wealth, and
especially of ou^ own have severely punished it, an^ what kind of argument
of misliking is there not against it? Thus have the^ not dealt with other
exercises, an^ therefore surely there is in it more shame to the vser, and
more hurt^ to the place where it is used, than i^ the other. But let us wey the
na^med heads in order. And first for the heathen, do we not see how Tulli^
lays it to the shame of Catiline an^ his company, that they were di^sers:
and when he would have even sp^^ fire in Authonies face, and galle^ him as
greatly as he could, thi^ comes in for one great dishonor t^ him, and
dishonestie in him, he i^ (says Tullie) a dicer, and his house a re^^eptacle
of such men. Augustus Caesar (...) worthy man as we know in ma^ie respects,
Suetonius in his life. cap. 71.
and greatly renow^ned, yet got by his dising a reprooch ^euer dying, even to
be accounted (...) dissolute man. Gobylon an Em^assadour of the Lacedaemonians
being sent to make a league with the Corinthians, when he came and ^awe they
used Dicing, counterfei^ed some other cause and went home a^aine, and would
not make it, aun^wering when he came home that they were a vile people, and
unworthy to ^e cared for, they were disers. The king of Persia sent to
Demetrius king ^f Asia Dice of gold in reprooch to ^im, because he used
dising. And an ^ther says flatly thus, that quanto ^leator est in art
melior, tanto nequior. Publius.
^st, The cunninger that a Dicer is in ^ys Art, the worse man assuredly ^ee
is. The Poet lays it down amongst the Cankers that consume ^^en and make
them beggars, Dise, Wine, and Women. What should I ^ay? Take any book in
hand of an heathen man, and it is a wonder, if you find not some thing
against dysing* Now come from heathens to Christi^ans, and see even as great
misliking* Austen begins and is not afraid t^ say plainly, De cinit. Dei,
lib. 4.
Aleaminuenit Demon, The devil first found out the game of dising Lyra
detesting it seeks to make other men do as much by diverse reasons It
coueteth (says he) an other man^ goods greatly, In praeceptorio.
it is a mighty means o^ deceit, it passes usury, it causes ly^ing,
swearing, brawling, and mani^ idle words, it is an offense to the god^ly, it
breaks the laws, it misspende^^ the time, and what not? Old Chauce so long
ago set his sentence down a^gainst this exercise, and spares not t^ display
the virtues of it in this mane^* Dising, (says he) is very mother of
lea^singes,
And of deceit and cursed forswearing*
Blasphemy of God, manslaughter, an^ waste also,
Of battle, naughtiness, and other (...)
It is reproof and contrary to honor,
For to behold a common disesour.
and ever the higher he is in estate,
^he more he is houlden desolate.
(...) thou a Prince do use hazardie
(...) all governance and policy
(...) is by a common opinion
^oulden less in reputation.
^ordes might find other manner of play,
^onest enough to drive the day away.


But of all other speeches me thinks (...) is a marvelous saying of Sir Thomas
^^iot, and ought very greatly to move (...), who affirms that if a man hear
(...) to be a diser, and knows him not, ^y and by he judges him to be a
light and vain person, and of no credit or ^ccompt. Consider again the
decrees (...) councelles, and see how with one ^eart they have hated it. The
first coun^el of Constantinople determined thus: Can. 50.
That no man whether he be clarke or (...) man from that time forward should
^^ay at dise. If he did being a clergy ^an he was deprived, and if a lay man
(...) was excommunicated. The council (...) Eliberis concluded, that if a
Christian ^an did play at dise he should be forbidden the communion and never
admit^ted again till he left it, and not under a year then also. Two godly
Sinode^ at Rochel and Nimanx in France by the Pastors, Elders, and Deacons of
the reformed Churches in that kingdom, utterly condemned it. Amongst the
Ca^nons called yt Apostles Canons this is one, that if a minister, Elder or
Deacon give himself to Dice, cards, or drunkenness, if he did not admonished
cease from it, he should be deprived. The ciui^ and canon laws they say are so
against it, as that if a man should be beaten o^ him that he played withal or
robbed at home whilst he were a playing, he may have no benefit of law or
justice in that case. And if any man constrained or allured an other to play
with him, he should be imprisoned or cast into the quarries to dig. Geneua
condemns the very making of Dice in their City. Last of all peruse the
Statutes of this our own country, and I beseech you mark the liking they
have showed of dising. In the twelfth year of Ri^^arde the second all
unlawful ^^mes were forbidden, and by name ^ising generally. In the 21.
year (...) Hentie the fourth, disers taken were ^^prisoned six days. And if
any ^^ade Magistrate, as Mayor, or She^^fe made not diligent search for ^^em,
they forfetted forty shillings: If (...) Constable were negligent, he lost
^^e shillinges and eight pence. In the ^^uenteenth year of Edward the fourth,
^^ey that kept dicing houses were to ^^ue three years imprisonment and (...).
pounds fine. Players at dice in ^^ose houses two years imprisonment ^^d ten
pounds fine. In the eleventh ^^are of Henry the seventh, Dicers ^^oulde be
openly set in the stocks by ^^e space of one whole day, and the ^^use keepers
that suffered him to play ^^rfeit a noble, and be bound to their ^^od
behavior. In the 33. year of ^enrie the eight, Dicing houses forfet^d forty
shillings every time, and disers (...).s^.viij. d. and bound in recognisance
^^uer to play again. And yet more may (...) see in Pulto^s abridgeme^t. Now it
is wonderful that notwithstanding a^ this, yet so foul a thing should seem^
so fair, and that a man should n^^ think himself used as a gentleman (...)
almost as a man, unless he may ha^^ liberty in this looseness and the larg^
reine to so great an evil. And yet (...) be Christians, and that of the bett^^
sort too, or you do us wrong. The hea^then hated it, and we hatch it up in
^^uerie house, and yet we be Christian* The godly writ against it, we wai^ for
it, and yet we be Christians. T^^ councels have condemned it in the sp^^rite of
Christ, and christian laws ha^^ most sharply punished it: we day a^^ night
use it, and cannot be reaued of (...) and yet we be Christians. But alas ^^las
the day of understanding, or the da^ of damnation for our ignorance sha^ teach
us an other thing. We swear^ we lie, we revile, and we run in^^ the field
with murdering minds ((...) such anger is murder) moved by pla^^ and yet we
will not leave it. And if do not thus in show, yet inwardly frette, I chafe,
I gnash with my teeth and tear the Cards, burn the Dice, ^hrow away the
Tables, and such like, and yet I am religious. The Lord ^orbiddeth all
appearaunce of evil, 1. These. 5.
all ^ccasions of sin, and yet we are the Lords, and do neither. The Lord
says, If thy right hand cause thee to ^ffend, or thy right eye, cut it off,
pluck ^t out, and cast it away, we will be the Lords, and not restrain a
little ^lay, that mine own soul being witness most greeuouslie makes me
offend. Fie, fie, what deadness is this? Where is either love of God, or
fear (...) us? Love makes us burn with desire to do well, fear makes us
shake, ^o think of any sin, we continually sin in our greedy gaming, and
yet we be godly. But this either makes us see it, or we will never I fear see
the mischief of playing, and by name of Dising. The Lord for Christ his sake
^wake us, and so I end.

Que. What is now contained in the ^ffirmatiue part of this commandment?

Ans. Even as al these former branches are forbidden, so the contraries of them
are commanded, as in general al help al succor, al care and providence for the
safety and benefit of the goods of ou^ neighbor that possibly we can show*
And again the right use of our own^ goods as to the mainetainance of the
knowledge of God amongst us, to the defense of the common wealth, and the
magistrate, to the nourishing of our fa^mily, and to the relief of the poor.
Lastl^ as diffidence and mistrust in Gods pro^uidence for us the root of
stealth and vn^lawfull priuision for our selves was i^ the negative part
forbidden, so here con^trariewise is faith and full persuasion if we seek his
kingdom and the righ^teousnes thereof these outward things shall be cast unto
us commanded. Math. 6.
The punishment of this commaundemen^ temporal or worldly was ever diverse (...)
diverse places, somewhere death, som^^where but four fold etc. The spiritua^
punishment as of all other commau^^dementes was and is everlasting dam^nation.
1. Cor. 6. Zach. 5.


The Application.
NOw, now my beloved to the work of further fruit in our souls, let us lay
this rule to them and them to it, and let us even heartily I beseech you
every man secretly betwixt God and us see how we have answered in
obedience this law of our God and father merciful and almighty. We are bound
by it generally to show all love and careful regard to our neighbors goods
that we possibly can, and to do him with our own goods what benefit we may.
In particulars if we will speak, we are bound to lend. We see both when and
what we may, not hurting our selves, profit our neighbors withal, and to take
no recompense, unless it be hurt which we lend. Now look I say if you have
ever observed this thing without any want. Have you done it? Nay have you not
often refused of a mere pinching and an vnneighborly mind even small matters,
when you have been very earnestly entreated, adding often a lie to mende the
matter withal and saying that you either had not that which indeed you had,
or occupied it your self, when indeed you did not. And have you not often
contrary to the law of God made in this behalf, taken reward, when the thing
you lent received no harm? Surely your money and many things else do
witness against you. Pledges.
For the law of pledges and taking of pawnes, have you never passed the bonds
of love, or the limits of mercy in that respect? Have you never gone in to
take what you could, but stood at the door to receive what he might spare you?
O that our hasty hands, and hard hearts deserved not the wrath which in
truth they do in this one thing. Many a time do I greatly fear have we
little regarded the case of the party, whose pawn we took, so we might be
safe our selves from our feared loss. And if it were so, surely we wanted
love and we have sinned. Again in the things commended to our keeping,
Custody.
let us look also a little how we have satisfied the law of God. We should
neither deny for any fear of harm thereby to keep for our neighbor, which
we may better than he defend, neither conceile, hurt, purloyne or convey
away what ever any trust reposed in us, has brought into our custody. But
many a dogged nature denies the former, and many a covetous heart offends
in the latter. What say you of things which you have found being lost? Have
you ever regarded even as your own to keep it, to cheerishe it, and to find
out the owner of it, the straying beast of your neighbor, and even of your
very enemy? Have you never either of negligence, or of malice and spite, or
by a pinching mind transgressed herein? Consider it well. And have you never
even in the true testimony of a good conscience retained any thing, that ever
you found, from the true owner if you knew him, neither ever neglected any
means to find him out, if you knew him not? Well were it with you if a
privy witness within you did not cry and say, that a greedy covetous heart
has made you often to offend in this duty. Alas we see it not, we know
it not, we feel it not to be a sin to retain what we find, or almost to
find before it be lost and so to conceyle it. So gapeth each man after worldly
gain, and so seek we to have how so ever we have it, if it happen into our
hands, and we well like of it. But sin will be sin when such gotten goods
will no where be seen, and the Lord give us feeling of it now betimes. Next
let us look of our buying and selling, wherein also all love is to be showed
to our brethren, and an equality kept so near as we can of commodity given
and taken. But how many of us do this, there is a God that knows, and a
conscience within us, that if it were wakened would cry I fear me loud, we
are greeuouslie guilty. For where is that man or woman of trade almost to be
found that taking up a standing in fair or Market does once think with
themselves that there they stand to show their love to their brethren as to
them selves, and so to interchange their commodities with them, as that in the
testimony of a good conscience and even God being witness, so near as they
can, they keep an equality giving as good as they take, and taking no more
than they give in value and worth. No alas it is too well known and too much
amongst us daily seen, that we think we have our standing there to pray
upon all that come to us so much as we can, to deceive them, to spoil and
rob them in a sort, and to get for our wares what possibly we may with an
utter neglect and refusal of equality. And therefore we sell as we may be
safe though we never be paid above half, we sell to day with a pinching
price, we make account God may send us some loss, and therefore betimes we
wrecke our selves upon our brethren, and so take of them for that which we
do sell, as that if it happen that GOD do so deal with us, we may be
revenged before hand, and able to abide it if it be not great. To conclude,
we are meriest when we have robbed most, and then go we singing home when we
have given occasion to the most to cry. So dull and dead are our hearts
within us, and so has a greedy mind to rake up riches spoiled us of love or
any thought thereof toward our brethren. And as little conscience there is
often in the buyer, who if he might have for a penny that is worth a pound,
could well enough digest it. And therefore if one in his need come unto us
for present money, we will none of his commodity, we want it not, we
esteem it not, we look lightly both of the man and the matter till we have
brought him to our own price, and God knows far far under the value of
the thing. So that he which of charity in his need should be helped, is of
us commonly by reason of his need prayed upon and most cruelly robbed. And
yet we be no thieves. Ah, God be merciful to us and awake us and never deal
with us according to our iniquities for his Christ's sake. But pass we now
on (...) other branches of this commande^ent, and so shall we further see what
^anner of men and women we are (...) obedience to the Lord. Who sees ^ot,
who knows not, Oppression.
that all oppres^^on of my brother in his goods is con^rarie to that love that
I ought to ^eare to him and his goods? And how ^ande we in this matter? Have
we ^euer detained the poor servants ^ages, Of servants.
and wrecked our anger upon ^im to his harm further than a merciful heart
should have done? Have we not taken even the flower of ^is youth, the
strength of his years, and the very juice and sap of his ^odie to serve our
turns withal, and ^hen either turned him off unrewarded, ^r taken from him,
or diminished without cause, other than our own co^etousnesse, the reward that
our aun^estour gave to his service before? If ^ee have done it, alas it is a
great ^ppression, a great wrong, and it stan^eth not with that love that I am
^harged withal toward him in this ^ommaundement. But a man must first know
sin before he can fly (...) and now we know it, I trust w^^ hate it.
Strangers.
Have we never again dea^ unkindly with a stranger, but eue^ so as if GOD
should banishe (...) from our warm home to fore^ coast, we would be glad
to fee^ our selves at their hands? If we have this is oppression, and we
should n^^ do it for any thing. Widow and fatherless.
Have we n^^ hurt the desolate Widow, the fatherless child, or any whose
might wa^^ less than ours to bear off the hardne^ of our hands? Have we not
lift up ou^ force against them when we saw we^ might have helped them in the
gate? I^ we have what can we say why we shul^ not rot in pieces for it, and our
arms be broken from the bones, Job. 31.22.
as Job wishe^ to him in such a case? Have we neue^ respected the person more
of one tha^ an other in cause of justice, a strong means to draw us to
oppression* Have we never suffered these hande^ to feel the weight of a
bribers gift to draw us to oppression? Bribes.
O spare no^ to spy your sin even to the full if you ^^ue offended, and yet
accuse not your ^^ues if you dare boast of innocence. ^^ppie were our country
and a thou^^^de comfortes were it to every one (...) us if the dullness of our
hearts in ^^ese deadly sins pulled not upon us ^^e often offending in
them, and then ^^ch sin such wrath again from heaven above as is most due
unto it. Alas ^^e see not neither ever will be made (...) see, what love by
this law we owe (...) all men in their goods, but we rob ^^em, we spoil
them, and we take ^^^tes to do it, and yet we be no thieves. But God is God as
he was ever, ^^^ne is sin though we will not see (...), and a just day of a
just reward to ^uerie man for every matter must ^here be. We believe it, we
say it in ^ur articles often, and yet we deal as if ^ee never thought it.
What should I ^^y of that cloak and cover and cause of ^uch oppression the
cloth and liueries ^f Superiors? Liueries.
Am I the giver or the ^aker? If I be the giver, have I never boulstred my
cognizance out to do ^he thing that God forbids? Have I harkened about to
see and learn ho^ they use the credit that is given the^^ God knows we have
little need to (...) charged with other men's sins, (...) no doubt such a
master shall with su^^ a man's offenses. For we shall never (...) able to bear
in our selves the bu^^ then of our own. Am I the taken what then says my
conscience, have (...) sought it and sued for it for affection and true duty
in my heart to him th^^ gave it? Do I wear it and wish (...) wear it to
have my heart known (...) him or her the better whom with hea^^ and hand,
body and goods, power an^ might till my death in right I honor and serve and
wish and will do eue^ Or rather a false faith seeks a fai^^ show, and a
powling hand of man^ a seely weak wretch seeks a streng^^ to establish my
wickedness, and a ba^ker to bear out my foul oppression^* If it be so,
consider betimes how little love such a servant deserves (...) he shall be
found out, and fear lea^^ either the wrath of God to thee or lou^ to thy
master that is so abused and lit^^ ^^perteth it cause such a false hypocrite
(...) a treacherous Ziba come to light. (...) let us consider what our hearts
(...) say concerning idleness. Idleness.
For it (...) been proved before that what (...) not inioyed by the benefit
of some ^^wefull labor, is but stolen and we ^^ue no right to it. If then my
heart ^nswere that I live all of other men's ^^^ours, doing nothing my self, I
nei^^er govern with the gifts of mind (...) quiet peace of my country,
neither (...) with bodily labor and true faith^^^l service seek to eat the
meat^ of (...) master whom I serve, feel it, and (...) it, hate it, and
abhor it. For such (...) is looseness, such a liver is a rob^^r, and we
should not take any sure com^^^t till we have changed so naugh^^^ a course
and altered quite soloathe (...) ^ife. Too full too full is every house ^^d
town of such idle bellies. Neither ^ere must I only examine my self ^hether
by labor I live, but also as ^^rrowlie by what labor I live, and (...) it be
such as the word condemns, ^^e laws of man punishes, and each good man
misliketh. I sin, I sinne^ for such labor is no life. But I refe^^ you to
what I have said before. Look^ we also even as we love our souls I beseech
you, at our hearts, eyes an^ tongues, whereby we may steal asw^^ as by the
hand, as before in the co^^maundement has been proved. The heart by
coveting and catching, Stealth in heart.
or b^ too near and nigardlie keeping, tran^^gresseth against this law of
God. T^^ eye by looking beyond his limits a^^ sending in word to the heart
with to make it in love and set it in longi^^ for other men's goods. Eye.
The tongue (...) false flattery and filed forgerie comm^^teth a stealth which
is called a gre^^ stealth, as has been showed and pr^^ued before. All which
or any where how they touch us and stayne us, (...) Lord knows that knows
all, and (...) with profit may well now think (...) weigh. Do our hearts
and have (...) hearts ever rested upon Gods promi^^ for all necessary
provision while (...) live for us and ours, not caring (...) carking, not
wishing not willing (...) ^^at which the Lord allows and we ^ay justify? No
no, we suffer our hearts (...) go too far, and for want either of ^nowledge
or care to live according to ^^r knowledge, we boldly look of e^^rie man's
commodities. As we go ^^d ride, we straight way covet, and ^^at which is
worse, presently we de^^e to obtain our will to the impay^^g of our brothers
wealth, and the ^^e fearful breaking of this comman^^ment. And would God the
rage of ^^r lust were not sometime so vehe^^nt, as that missing to get what it
^eedelie seeks, it casts us down (...) in our bed, or causes us to hurt
(...) who hinders our wish, as we (...) fell out in Achab to Naboth for his
^^eyarde. But of this hereafter more ^^ine in the tenth commandment. (...)
the tongue alas what should I (...), By tongues.
I will never bid you enquire whe^^^^ you be guilty or no. For whi^^^ should
a man fly in these days (...) flattery, or where may we live (...) not light
of false forgers seeking by (...) phrase to bleere the eyes of such as least
suspect them. Rather look in wh^^ measure you have or do sin in th^^
behalf. For I fear not to say you (...) offend. And if your conscience tell
y^^ your sin is great, run not headlo^^ into hell without return. Cursed
(...) that tongue that flattereth any m^^ in his sin for any commodity, or
the cools such heat as Gods spirit ha^ wrought to grace and good amendeme^^*
Well may I reap a reward wi^^ him for feeding his humor, but as live I shall
loose my reward with G^^ for stealing away his honor. L^^ them join
hereunto, Lawieres.
whose calling such a true view of the drift and s^^cesse of their pleas,
whether they ha^^ not often endeavored with their tongu^ and often also obtained
by their spea^ the wrongful alienation of men's rig^^ from them to other men.
And is (...) this a theft? Might not he even asw^^ have robbed him with his
hands, (...) to be a means by speech of wrong p^^^swasion that others do it?
But al^^ what words can I use or any m^^ else this day alive to make men fee^
that neither golden gain, nor any re^arde to be named whatsoever should ^ake
them speak untruly against the ^ood estate of their brethren in any cau^es?
Surely if this will nothing move, that it is in nature theft which in name ^hey
so abhor, I will assay no further. The day will come let them well remember
that sin will be sifted both ^y name and nature, and reap for re^arde at a
just judge such torment as shall twitch above any conceit which ^an now be had
of it, and so continue ^or evermore. To draw to an end of ^his application
are we al clear of that ^heft of theftes committed in conueying ^f the Church
liuinges to our own use from them that ought to have them and do the duty
for them, to the disho^our of God, the ruin of the Church, and the fearful
casting away of many (...) soul into the pit of hell for want of ^nowledge?
If we have these liuinges (...) our disposition, and are able to make (...)
good account of the bestowing of them (...) our power, thrice happy we in
es^hewing so carefully the wrath of God, and regarding so tenderly the health
of others. But if either corruption in taking some, or loose negligence in
unworthily bestowing all, may justly stand and give to the Lord a witness
against us, how should we escape for so great a sin? Shall the Lord so
lowdly cry that he will require of every watchmans hand the blood of the
soul that dies in his sin without his warning, Ezekiel. 3.
and shall that patron escape scotfree by whose greedy hand and cruel heart
they have all been robbed of one that should have warned them* Shall the Lord
cry woe upon woe wrath upon wrath, vengeance upon vengeance to the careless
shepheardes that feed themselves, and not the flock, and shall he so quietly
pass them over, that put in, and place such dum^ dogs, and unable drones to
do ani^ duty for their own lucre? Is it a token of love to feed his sheep
to feed^ his lambs, and is it not a want of lou^ both to God and his lambs to
put i^ for my gain such a dry nurse as ca^ give no milk nor feed at all,
except (...) be with folly and a foul example of drinking, swearing, carding,
tabling, ^owling, sleeping, and such like? Think we if Jeremy were now alive
to survey the parishes of this our country, Ierem. 9.1.
and should see the fearful estate of so many souls not able to tell how
they ^halbe saved, or to prove any one prin^iple of religion, not flying
sin, because they feel it not to be sin, nor ^auing light, because they
know it not ^o be light, think we, I say, that he should not wish his head
full of water, and his eyes a fountain of tears, that ^e might weep day and
night for the ^ame of England through these pou^^ng patrones? Assuredly he
would. For the heart that harboreth any porti^n of pity to the Lords people,
or has ^nie care what become of the price of christ his blood could never
abide vn^uched deep, to see so great a spoil for ^orldly wealth, of that
which all the ^orlde cannot redeem, when it is lost. ^he Lord, the Lord
look upon his church for his mercies sake, and either ^^ter the hearts of
these Church robbers by giving them to see what hangs over them and their
posterity mos^ justly for such a sin, or else pluck ou^ of their hands by
restoring disciplin^ the bestowing of them any longer* Next let us weigh what
goods we hau^ ever gotten by unlawful gaming, o^ by false deceit in the same,
and remem^ber it has been proved before a gree^uous stealth. Let us also
consider how^ we stand touching the affirmatiu^ part of this commandment
which we^ are as well bound to perform as we^ are to fly the contrary, as
how we^ have ever to the uttermost of our abil^^tie preserved and cared for
the goods o^ our neighbors, that they might be safe, how we have used our
own^ wealth to the glory of God, the main^taynance of the magistrate, the
defend of our country, the comfort of our fa^milie, the relief of the poor,
and the e^stablishing of the knowledge of Go^ amongst all. How we have
abhorre^ distrust in Gods providence, the roo^ of stealth, and rested assured
of his good^nesse if we served him with such lik^* Are we clear, and have
done them all without reproof, or blemish? If we have, let us boast and
look for life for our works, but if any thing touch us, and stain us, know
and remember what S. James says, He that is guilty of one is guilty of all.
And does nothing touch us; that has been said? Has neither hand by deed,
nor heart by thought ever straied in any degree? O beloved he that says even
in this commandment he has no sin, deceives himself, and there is no
truth in him. Let us therefore rather see our sin, know our sin, bewail
our sin, and ^rie to the Lord for his grace to clappe ^ould of Jesus Christ
his son, who ^ath filled this and every law for us, ^o the end that we
believing might be ^aued by his righteousness. The Lord give us pardon, the
Lord give us faith, the Lord change our lives to a better course, for his
blessed name and mercy sake. Amen.

The ninth Commandment.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
A commandment teaching us our duties toward the good name and credit of
our brethren in speaking never any thing of them which is untrue as the former
have toward their lives and goods.

Question.

THen by this it seems it should have gone before the other in order, because
a man's name is dearer than either life or goods.

Ans. It is true, to some it is so, bu^ not to all, and rather does the Lord
re^spect the multitude than a few, an^ the common nature of the vulgar sor^
rather than the disposition of the better but far lesser sort. And first and
for^^most could the wise Orator say by na^ture is it given to every kind of
creature to maintain himself, his life and body, and to avoid whatsoever
may be any way hurtful to the same. Noting in effect the other to follow,
but in a second degree.

Que. What right is there to establish this law?

Ans. Even a threefould right as you have heard and seen in the former. For
first the Lord himself is true and truth it self, hating ever and abhorring
falsehood, and therefore very meet that he should seek the establishing of
the same amongst his children, and the careful avoiding of the contrary.
Secondly the very light of nature has ever taught it to men, that lying is to
be ^oathed and has made them cry, Socrates is my friend, and Plato is my
^riende, but truth before and above them both. Wherefore very meet (...) was
and right, that this law of nature should be strengthened and ^aintained by
the Lord. Lastly without truth there is no safety in men's ^ounselles,
bargans, meetinges, conferences, and such like, and therefore most fit and
necessary that for the stay of truth amongst us, and the avoiding of the
contrary, the Lord should make one law at the least. The equity of it then
you see is great. And now to the particular branches of it, as they lie in
your book. Where the first named hurt and annoyance of my brothers credit is
false witness bearing, when in open place of justice and judgment or any
where else any man shall of evil will and malice or for lucre, or favor of
others testify or depose that which is untrue against his neighbor* Which
thing how horrible it is may first appear by due considering the price of an
honest name, 1. reason.
and good report in the world amongst our brethren. Which (as the wise man
says) is to be chosen above great riches, Prou. 22.1.
and loving favor above goulde and silver* And in an other place, Eccles. 7.3.
A good name i^ better than a good ointment: Because that thereby we smell as
it were sweete^ly unto many to the edifying of them and working many things
in them b^ our persuasions, which others could not of whom they have or do not
think and hear so well. Philip. 4.8.
The Apostle Paul also in that excellent speech of his to the Philippians,
which I often very wil^ingly remembe^r unto you, notes effectually how dear
unto a Christian any thing should be that belongs to a good name, and the
working of a good report amongst men of us. For whatsoever things my brethren
(says he) are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are worthy love,
whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any ver^ue, or if there
there be any praise, think of these things, etc. Again, 1. Petr. 2.12.
S. Peter in his epistle, I beseech you dearly be^oued as pilgrims and
strangers abstain from fleshly lusts which fight against the soul, and have
your conuer^ation honest among the Gentilles, that ^hey which speak of you as
of evil doers, may by your good works, which ^hey shall see, glorify God in
the day of visitation. What is this, but even plainly enough have a care of
your dooinges that your good name may never justly be touched and stained of
any? And a number mo such pithie persuasions in this behalf has the word.
But I pass them over, and remember unto you, that pretty saying of the godly
father S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. de communi sermon.
so fitly at this time confirming my persuasion. There are two things (says
he) necessary for thee as thou art a Christian man and woman, to wit, a good
conscience and a good name, the former for thy self, the later for thy
neighbor. But alas (says an other) Plures famam, Plin. lib. 3.
pauci conscientiam verentur. Many are afraid of the touch of their fame, but
few of the hidden breach of their conscience. Add unto these if you list,
also the judgments of the heathen, and first of him whose words be these:
Cic. offi. 3.
there is nothing so great, neither any commodity in the world so of thee to
be esteemed and desired, as that for it thou should blemish the beauty and
brightness of the good name of a good man. For desire ever says an other,
rather to hear well, than to be rich: yea prefer it in thy heart to leave
unto thy posterity an honest report and name, before heaps of any riches
whatsoever. For riches are ficle and soon dispersed, but a good report is
permanent and never dies. Again by a good name may wealth be gotten, but not
again by wealth a good name. Lastly riches are common to the good and bad, but
a good report is proper only to the good.

Que. And how may a man or woman best breed a good report of them?

Ans. Agesilaus was once asked the same question, and he made this answer. If
thou speak ever what is the best, and do the thing that is most honest.
Socrates thus: if from thy heart thou endeavor in all truth to be, as thou
desire ever to be thought to be. For a fame that is gotten by gifts or
hypocrisy, will never endure, but perish. Wherefore now if the word of God,
the testimonies of his children, and the ^erie light of nature in heathens have
ever so commended a good name, judge we hereby, if we will be taught what a
sin it is to be a false witness against this preciouse treasure and jewel
of my neighbor, his good name. Judge we what a monster before the face of God
he is, that for the satisfaction either of his own or other men's cursed
natures seeks to deprave, to bite, and slander any man wrongfully, be the
discredit he works never so small. And thus much for my first reason.

The second I draw from the punishment which has usually happened unto this
vice either by gods express commandment amongst the Jews or secret working
in the hearts of magistrates in other places. For very effectually have I
ever thought bewrayed by these things the foulness of false witness bearing.
The law of God said thus: Deuteronomy. 19.16. etc.
If a false witness rise up against a man to accuse him of trespass: Then
both the men which strive together shall stand before the Lord, even before
the priests and the judges which shall be in those days. And the judges shall
make diligent inquisition, and if the witness be found false, and has given
false witness against his brother, then shall ye do unto him as he had
thought to do unto his brother, so thou shall take euel away forth of the
midst of thee. And the rest shall hear this and fear, and shall henceforth
commit no more any such wickedness amongst you. Therefore thine eye shall
have no compassion, but life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for
hand, foot for footh. A marvelous law, if the spirit of feeling work
withal to print in us for ever a true conceit of the perfect hatred wherewith
God abhors false witness bearing. Beside which law mark what Solomon
says: Prou. 19.5.
A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall not
escape. For howsoever the land of the Lord which is ever full of mercy, and
long suffering even toward the wicked, may spare them for a time, yet in the
^nde with sharpness of his rod will ^e recompense the long differring of
it. And what marvel, if we mark the nature of the sin? For does not a
false witness, abuse the judge, hurt his neighbor, make the place of justice
and right, the nurcerie of sin and grievous wrongs, does he not cause the
Lord to set in the eyes of men the crown of innocence, upon the offenders
head, and to put the halter about the just man's neck? Than the which
dishonor, what can be greater against the Lord of life, and lover of right, to
pull upon us his heavy hand? Pericles an heathen man could say, we must be a
friend to our friend no further than the altar. That is, no further than GOD
and a good conscience guided by his word may warrant unto us. But we in these
days esteem not a straw of that man or woman, that will stick to lend us an
oath at any time, when we stand in need be the matter never so false and
foul. For he is no friend which is not ever a friend, to feed our filthy
humor with all wicked and wrongful usage of himself. But woe unto us wicked
wretches for so great and grievous sin against the Lord, and also our
selves. For do I not tremble and shake every joint of me to pre^erre any
mortal man in love before any God, and so to become unworthy of him for ever?
Yet this I do when I ^are do for him, what God forbids me to do for him,
and I think not of ^t. Should an earthly bond of earthly minds together
work a fearful fi^all confusion, both of body and soul, ^n the flashing
flame of bottomless hell ^or evermore without regard? Yet ^his it does to
speak untruth for my ^riendes favor, when committed sin should reap a
just punishment in this world, that body and soul might both ^emaine in
comfort hereafter. I stay ^he rest of gods revenging judgments ^ppon false
witnesses till I come to ^he end of the commandment, and ^hus for this time
pass over this ^oint.

The next thing that your book lay^th down is lying, an other foul ^reache
of this commandment, con^emned of God, improoued by reason, and eschewed ever
of all gods children (...) some measure, Scripture.
Cast off (says the Apostle) lying and speak the truth every man to his
neighbor, Ephesians. 4.25.
for we are on^ an others members. Psalm. 15.1.2.
Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, (says David and who shall rest upon
thy holy hill* Even he that walks uprightly, and speaks the truth from his
heart. In the law this was one property, Exodus 18.
that was ever regarded in the choice of a judge namely that he was a true
lover o^ truth. Help Lord again in an other place (says David) for faith
and truet^ are perished from amongst men. Psalm. 12.1.
And again, Psalm. 101.
He that tells lies shall not tar^rie in my sight. For this is a sin tha^
shall shut a man out of the heavenly city the new Jerusalem as we may se^ in
S. John, Apoc. 21.8.22.15.
and cupple him companion to whoremaisters, thieves, sorcerers, such like. The
reasons yt improoue it ar^ these. Reasons.
Abusus signi.
and therefore to lie in any matter (...) for any cause, it is to abuse the
good gift of God my tongue and speech to a quite contrary end. Gregor. 17.
Moral. August. enchyrid. Epist. 8.
All lying is iniquity says a godly father. All untruth ^s sin says an
other. And it is not ^awefull to lie, though it could be for the praise of God.

Que. But I have often heard a distinction of lies, as some to be merry lies
made in jest, some to be lies of duty made to do my friend a pleasure in
his danger, and some to be lies of spite made to hurt others thereby. I pray
you what think you of it?

Ans. For the first many go about to excuse them and to diminish the fault of
them, because they intend no evil to the parties to whom they are told. But
we heard before what both Augustine, and Gregory said, namely, that all lying
is sin, and yet it has a stronger check than this. For if we make the best
of it we can, it is but an idle and a frutelesse speech, Math. 12.
whereof we know we must give account. And again, Psalm. 5.6.
The Lord shall destroy them all (says the Psalm) that speak lies, adding
no distinction of merry lies from the rest: and where the law distinguishes
not, we may not distinguish. The second sort many go about to allow and
justify, bringing in for warrant the lie of Rahab, of Abraham, of the midwiues
and such like, made for the safety of life. But touching them all and how
many more soever as may be brought like unto these, I answer as one speaks
particularly of Abraham, Non videtur mihi laborandum, omnino v^ Abrahamum
defendamus: homo enim fuit and nimio timore potuit labi: etc. That is, I think
it altogether needelesse to go about to defend Abraham's lie, for he was a
man, and through too much fear he might offend. And so say I of all the rest,
they were faults in them and blemishes, and offended God. And concerning the
midwiues lie Augustine plainly says, that their fear of God and tender care
mercifully to spare the infantes pleased God, but not their lie. If this do
not content us, then remember the same Augustines judgment before in
generality that it is not lawful to lie, though it could be to the praise of
God, surely then not for any man's help. Job. 13.7.
Remember the words of Job who checked in his friends a false speech although
it tended to defend the Lord. And remember the words of Christ himself how
he makes the devil the ^ather and author of all lies whatsoever without
distinction. Joan. 8.
If we fear to bewray the man or matter, which we would not, then hide the
truth (says S. Austen) but in no case speak an vn^rueth. For the last sort
of lies nothing ^s said of any to excuse it, for every conscience cries it
is a sin. And therefore now I conclude, one kind of lie is worse than an
other, but all naught, and of a Christian man and woman ever to be forborne to
their powers. The hyperbolicall speeches in the scripture are ever truethes in
matter and meaning, Veritas non reised rationis.
though not in words and form, as I may say. For modesty sake neither may
we lie, in any case. But as Aristotle prettily says: Declinet veritas
nonnihil ad defectum, cum de se quis loquitur. That is as I interpret it, When
a man speaks of himself, let him speak sparingly, but not falsely.

Que. What say you of flattery and dissimulation the next things in the
book?

Ans. I say I have touched them before sufficiently, and therefore now I ad no
more but this, they are both breaches of this commandment. Enough to terrify
a feeling heart, and a dea^ soul what can move? From these the^ I follow your
book, setting down^ next the vnlawefulnesse of telling fals^ tales, Telling
false tales.
hearing them, and believing them of others. And first to speak of the first,
do we not see the direct law of God in these words, Leuit. 19.1^.
Thou shall not walk about with tales amongst thy brethren? Do we not hear
the Lord by his prophet cry out against Jerusalem, for that ^n her were men
that carried tales up and down to shed blood? Ezekiel. 22.9.
2. Cor. 12.20.
Does not the Apostle say, He fears he shall find amongst them backbiting,
whispering, and such like? Is it not the persuasion ^f James, that we speak no
evil one of ^n other? Iam. 4.1^.
Is it not expressly named as ^ne of ye things, that may not be in man ^r
woman elected to dwell in the Lords ^abernacle, to false report and slander
^nie man behind his back? Psalm. 15.3.
Than the which things what may be more said in ^etestation of so foul a vice?
Certainly that God so plainly discovers to us (...) offend him, it will as
plainly be pu^ished when God shall think it good in ^nie graceless wretch
whatsoever that ^ill not be warned. To be a tale teller and a false witness,
why it is like a ^^mmer, a sword, and a sharp arrow, Prou. 25.18.
^ayth Solomon) Et quid interest vtrum Deum neges, an infames, (says Seneca)
What difference is there betwixt denying of God, and false reporting thy
brethren? Nothing, but a man may even as well do the one as the other thought
he. And in truth it is a notable saying of Hieron. Note.
Vilium est hominum, alios viles facere, and qui suo merito placere non
possunt, placere velle aliorum comparatione. It is the property of a vile
nature, to seek by tales to make others vile, or by a comparison with others
(whom they press with their prattles) to come to be accounted of, when
simply and truly there is nothing in themselves worthy of commendation.
Filthy therefore and foul^ it is to be a false reporter. And what better is it
to be a willing hearer of all detractions brought unto me of others? Does not
even the same God and law condemn this also as well as the other? Thou shall
not receive a false tale (says the law) no not receive it I say, Exodus 23.
and mark it well. Math. 7.1.
Judge not (says Christ) and ye shall not be judged, for with what judgment
ye judge, ye shall b^ judged, and with what measure ye mete it shall be measured
to you again. He that has itching ears to hear of others, shall reap for
reward himself as privy speeches to his own discredit. Hieron. ad Nepotian.
Take heed therefore (says a godly father) that thou neither deprave thy
self any man, neither yet willingly hear others do it. But fly to hear as
thou would fly to speak what tends unto slander. For as he that speaks
evil has the devil in his tongue, so he that hears evil has him in his
ear. It is the poison of friendship, and the very cutthrote of all amity
betwixt man and man, to love to hear what peevish tongues shall seek to
speak. For soon creepes it in by mine ^are that will never creep out again
whilst the breath is in me. Let no proof be brought for it, and never so
much against it, yet sticks the scarre of ^uspition still, and something I
think ^o the blotte of my brother, though I ^an be content not to credit all.
This ^pen ear so greedy to hear, and not ^isely waying, who tells it, of
whom, (...) what manner, to what end, with such like circumstances, what loss
has it laid full many a time upon both men and women? What hatred, what
envy, what jealousy, what suspicion, what disquiet thoughts, and grinding
grief has it settled soundly in many an one? How steals it the love of
man from his wife, of father from his child, and of friend from his long and
liked acquaintance? How alienateth it the heart of a true servant from his
master, if he will yield to what his frail flesh will assuredly prick him?
And how many a master has shaken off through speech of hate light
pickthankes, such truth and love, such service and strength, as never after
could in like manner, be gained again with goulde? But what should we say?
There is no mischief to the mischeife of the tongue: and therefore no question
but a danger great to attend unto it without good discretion. Then to proceed
to the third. If telling, and hearing the deprauinges of the wicked be
forbidden* must it not also needs be evil to beleeu^ them? Certainly much
more. For i^ is a degree further to believe the report that is made unto us,
than to hear it. And if a man ought to be slow to speak when he is not
certain, much more should he be slow to believe what may be false before he
knows it. See therefore how the Lord speaks to such among the Israelites
as were to punish the offenders. Deutro. 13.1^.
If thou hear (says he) (concerning any of the cities which the Lord thy God
has given thee to dwell in) wicked men are gone out from among you, and have
drawn away the inhabitants of their city, saying, let us go and serve other
gods, which you have not known, then thou shall seek and make search, and
inquire diligently if it be true, and so forth. What I pray you might mean
this repetition of words, to seek, to search, to inquire, and that
diligently, but to admonish us what a fault it is to condemn before we know,
and to believe what ever we hear by and by? Likewise again if an idolater
were accused, and had but one witness against him, Deutro. 17.^.
he might not be put to death upon the testimony of that one, but at the mouth
of two or three witnesses shall he that is worthy of death, die, (says the
Law) all to teach us that we may not be light of belief, when we are
whispered in the ear against a man, and by and by kill him in our hearts by
ceasing to think well of him any more upon one reporters speech. For to rob
him of that credit in my heart, that he had before with me, unless he
deserve it, is a branch of murder as has before been proved. Again as
Solomon says of answering a matter before a man hear it, that it is folly
and a shame to him that does it: so say we and think we of believing a matter
before we know it, Prou. 18.13.
for it is as true. Genesis 39.
Is it not registered of Putiphar Iosephes master to his blemish as long as
ever the world indureth, that he was too credulous? Was it not a blotte in
David, and so by gods special wisdom left unto us to consider of it, that he
would believe so quickly a false flattering Siba against his trusty and most
true hearted servant Mephibbosheth? 2. Sam. 16.1.
But what should I heap up examples? May not even every man's conscience tell
him, that the fault is not little, the discredit whereof God has left unto us
but in one example? I conclude therefore this matter of light believing such
tales as ungodly and falsely are made unto us with the speech of wise and
experienced Syrac in his book. Blame no man (says he) before thou have
inquired the matter, understand first, Syrac. 11.7.
and then reform righteouslie, give no sentence before thou have heard the
cause, neither interrupt men in the midst of their tales. God give us the use
of it. For great is the hurt of light belief both toward body and also
soul.

Que. Yet there remains one thing more in the book.

Ans. It is true, and that is this. In private offenses to speak any thing
(although it be true) to the hurt of our brothers good name, if by private
admonitions he may be won, is a branche and a breach of this commandment.
The Apostle Peter proves it, when he says thus, But above all things have
fervent love among you. For love covers a multitude of sins. Paul proves
it in like words also: 1. Petr. 4.8.
Love suffers all things, 1. Cor. 13.7.
it believes all things, it hops all things, it indureth al things. If
therefore we love our brother, there will be a care we plainly see, that we
utter nothing to the hurting of his good name. And if there be but any
wisdom in us (says Solomon) we will be careful of it also. Prou. 11.12.
For he that despises his neighbor is destitute of wisdom, but a man of
understanding will keep silence. But to strike up the matter fully we see the
words of our Savior Christ in the gospel plain: Math. 18.15.
If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault betwixt him
and thee alone: if he hear thee, thou have won thy brother: 16.
But if he hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two, that by the mouth of
two or three witnesses every word may be confirmed. 17.
And if he will not vouchsafe to hear them, tell it unto the Church: and if he
refuse to hear the Church also, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a
publican. Here we plainly see, that private offenses are not to be made
openly known, so long as there is hope of amendment. But remember I say that
we speak of private offenses, for in public faults there is quite an other
course, even openly to rebuke them that have openly sinned, 1. (...). 5.20.
that others may see and fear.

Que. Thus then of the negative part of this commandment, now I pray you
add some thing also of the affirmative.

Ans. Easily may we gather one contrary by an other, for who sees not, that
if all falsehood be forbidden in general, likewise all truth by the same
words is commanded? As therefore no way we ought to do the former, so by all
means we should maintain the latter. And namely in the delivery of any
doctrine, in place of justice, Prou. 14.25. Psalm. 15.
and judgment, in contractes, couenantes, and bargans, in our speeches, in our
actions, and every where and way is truth to be maintained and showed of us.
Cic. 1. Offi.
For man is borne to truth, and by nature we have to inquire after it. Man is
borne to know God, to consider the creatures, to preserve the difference
betwixt honesty, and dishonestie, and what is this but truth? Man is borne to
learn and know such arts, as God has brought into our practice, and every
art seeks a truth. Therefore a shame and a discredit we should ever think
it to be found untrue, yea even so far we should think we are degenerated
from the nature of man, as we are led with any liking of falsehoode and
untruth. It is a notable place of Zachary to show us the great liking which
the Lord has of truth, and how he desires it in all godly men and women
ever. For these are the things that ye shall do (says the Lord) Speak ye
every man the truth unto his neighbor, execute judgment truly and uprightly
in your gates, and let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his
neighbor, and love no false oath, for all these are the things that I hate
(says the Lord.) Zachary 8.16. And if we weigh with this again and many
such other testimonies that might be brought ye sentences of the godly
Fathers, even thereby also may we gather greatly the excellency and precious
account that all good men should make of speaking truth. For if any man be
offended for a truth (says Augustine) Vtilius scandalum permittitur, quam
veritas amittitur. August. de doctri. christi.
That offense were better still to be, than that to remove it any loss should
be made of the truth. And in an other place again, To strive or fight against
a known truth passes in evil even idolatry, Aug. epist. 48.
not much differing herein from the words of Syrac. Syrac. 4.25.
In no wise speak against the word of truth, but be ashamed of the lies of
thine own ignorance. And most excellently Hierome if you mark it: Tantus sit
in te veritatis amor, Ad Celan^.
vt quicquid dixeris iuratum putes: That is, Carry ever such a love in thy
soul of truth, that whatsoever thou speak thou imagi^est thou swearest it.
And again in an other place. In Ezekiel.
If a man for the fear of ^eath be not licenced to conceile a truth that is
asked of him, how should it not (...) a far greater impiety for the belly
or vain hope of worldly honor to do it. Wherefore we plainly see that if
either God or his children carry any credit with us, great should be our
regard of truth, and no less hearty and unfeigned our hatred of falsehoode.

Que. What then might that be which some philosophers maintained touching a
general uncertainty in all things, Academici Pichonij.
and that there is no truth that can be attained unto or known of us?

Ans. Their senseless folly is very well discovered by an other Philosopher
of an other sect, Epictetus Stoicus*
first by examples, the^ by absurdity, and lastly by experience^ and practice.
For says he do we no^ know whether the snow be white o^ black, do we not
know whether the fire be hot or cold, is it vncertain^ whether the ise will
melt against the fire or no? If then these and a thousan^ things more be
assuredly known, wh^^ absurd opinion and unworthy of lea^^ned men might this
be, that no certain^ truth can be attained unto? Second^^ (says he) if I were
one of their s^^^uantes, and my master bad me fet^^ him bread I would fetch
him a stone, if he called for wine I would give him water, and what else so
ever he should bid me do, I would do the contrary. Then if he asked me what
I meant, I would answer how should I know that I brought him a stone and not
bread, or so of any of the rest which I named? Or how knew he himself that
I did not fulfill his commandment, seeing there is no truth, by their
opinion, that can be known. Thus does he merrily deride their folly by showing
what absurdity follows of it. Lastly (says he) by their own practice they
confute themselves. For when they are cold, they go to the fire, and not to
the water to warm them, and can they not tell which does warm and which does
cool? If they be dry they take water, and yet can they not tell whether it
quenches thirst or no? Foolish therefore and most absurd is that opinion, we
know no truth. For both by experience, by certain principles that nature
has set in us, Four waie^ to know truth by.
by order of a good conse^uence, and by testimony of Gods certain word we
know and do attain to many truths.

Que. But because you say ever and in all things truth ought to be
maintained, 1. Sam. 21.
I pray you what say you of David's dissembling when he fained himself mad
before Achis?

Ans. I may answer with good authority of learned men, Danaeus.
that it was a weakness in David not to be imitated. Or I may with others
make a distinction, P. Martyr.
and say thus. That if he did it upon any distrust, doubt or fear that GOD
would not or could not deliver him in that distress from the danger that was
imminent, then did he sin no question very greatly, but if his heart rested
upon God in assurance of his merciful eye and hand watching over him and
defending him ever, and did use that dissimulation, but as the means that then
he could, because he would not tempt God, then did he well, and yet that his
doing is no warrant to break this commandment, by reiection of truth and
following a falsehoode in any of our particular dealinges above named.

Que. And what say you of the Stratagems and policies in wars, whereby the
one party dissembling, faining and counterfaiting with the other, seeks his
overthrow? Is not this a kind of false witness?

Ans. First I answer that it cannot fitly be called any dissembling, Dolus
an virtus, quis in host requirat.
because the one party ever presupposes and expects what devise and
conueyance so ever the other can make. P.M. in Iud. cap. 3.
But rather it is a conceiling from him of a truth. And then do we rightly
dissemble, ly, and exhibit a false testimony, when as one thing is expected
at our hands, which also we ought to do, and yet we perform a contrary.
Secondly I answer that it is the law of just war, just I say again and not
wrongful, that it may be made either openly or privily, by force or by
policy with a good conscience. And for warrant hereof we have the
commandment of God to his people and their practice of the same. Joshua. 8.
For Joshua intrapped the men of Ai by an ambush and slew them down right
suffering none to escape. So did the Israelites vanquish and overcome the
Beniamites, Judge. 20.
2. Sam. 20.
David the Philistines, and many examples more has the scripture of Stratagems
and policies used in the wars, when the cause thereof was lawful and
warrantable, but these may suffice now.

Que. Will you then allow no little pretty gloss or color at no time, but must
we ever turn the right side outward?

Ans. No indeed, no color of honesty, piety, friendship and love, or any
good thing, unless indeed it be there. For both God and man abhors all
such colors. And it should ever be the speech of any Christian man or woman
whilst they live, 2. Cor. 1.12.
and that in truth that their rejoicing is this, the testimony of their
conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness and not in fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God they have had their conversation in the world
as Paul said to the Corinthians of him self.

Que. What if I set no false color on, but only conceile a truth and say
nothing?

Ans. It has been showed before that in some cases and times it is lawefull
so to do, as by name, when it may stand both with my love to God and my
brother. But if it be contrary to both these, or to either of these, then is
it wicked and ungodly. And then (says the holy ghost) The fearful shall
have their portion in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Apoc. 21.8.
which is the second death. And Hieroms comparison is good if we may not for
our life deny any way a truth, much less assuredly for lesser causes. Yea
be ready ever (says Peter) in matters of faith to give an account of the hope
that is within you, 2. Petr. 3.
to any that shall ask you a reason thereof.

Que. You promised before to adioine in the end, some more examples of gods
justice upon this sin of false witness bearing, and now if you will, you
may perform it, and so conclude this commandment, for in all things else I
am sufficiently satisfied.

Ans. First consider the punishment allotted to it by express word of the
Lord, in this world even to reap by just sentence of the judge, whatsoever
he by his false witness had thought to have brought upon an other, life for
life, hand for hand, (...). 16.
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, foot for foot, without any pity or sparing,
and in the world to come everlasting death. Then if you will remember also what
Eusebius writes of the accusers of Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem: How
three evil disposed persons that seeing the soundenesse and grave constancy
of his virtuous life, and fearing their own punishment (as a conscience that
is guilty, is always fearful) thought to prevent his accusations with a
great oath, one wishing to be destroyed with fire, if he said not true, the
other to be consumed with grievous sickness, the third to loose both his eyes
if they did lie. Narcissus although having his conscience clear, yet not able
being but one man to withstand the accusation bound with such oaths, gave
place, and removed himself from the multitude into a solitary desert by
himself, where he continued by the space of many years. In ye mean time to
them which so willingly and wickedly foresware themselves this happened. The
first by casualtie of one little spark of fire, was brent with all his goods
and family. The second was taken with a great sickness from the top to the
toe, and devoured with the same. The third hearing and seeing the punishment
of the other confessed his fault, but through great repentance powered out such
tears, that he lost both his eyes. And thus was their false perjury and
witness bearing punished. Narcissus after long absence returning home again
was by this means both cleared of his fact, and restored to his bishopric
again. An other good story to this end is that of king Canutus the Dane, who
being established in the kingdom, caused a parliament at London, where
(amongst other things there debated) it was propounded unto the Bishops,
Barons, and Lords of the parliament there present, whether that in the
composition made betwixt Edmonde and Canutus any special remembrance was made
for the children or brethren of Edmond for any partition of any part of the
land. Whereunto the English Lords falsely flattering with the king, and
speaking against their own minds as also against their native country,
answered and said, nay: Affirming moreover with an oath for the kings
pleasure, that they to the uttermost of their powers would put off the blood of
Edmond in all that they might. By reason of which answer and promise, they
thought (many of them) to have purchased with the king great favor. But by
the just retribution of God it chanced far otherwise. For many of them, or
the most part, such specially as Canutus did perceive to be sworn before time
to Edmonde and his heirs, and also considering that they were native English
men, he mistrusted and disdayned ever after. Insomuch that some he exiled, a
great sort he beheaded, and some by Gods punishment dyed suddenly. See
therefore the heart and hand of the Lord against a false witness. Many
histories are there to this end. And many experiences even now adays of
gods just plagues upon this sin. But I will not run over them now. Easily
may they be turned too in our own Church story. Only these two I cannot
omit. First how Hamelton the Scot being brought unto his death by the false
accusation of a false Friar called Campbell, when he was in the fire cited and
summoned the said Friar to appear before the high God as general judge of
all men to answer to the innocence of his death, and whether his accusation
was just or not, betwixt that and a certain day of the next month, which he
there named, and ere that day came the Friar died without any remorse of
conscience, that he had persecuted the innocent. And secondly how Calice men
in the days of King Henry the 8. being falsely accused escaped safe from the
danger of such witnesses, and they themselves (a just plague upon their
iniquity) hanged, drawn, and quartred, ere they went home. Therefore let us
ever tremble to provoke the Lord by this sin, let us speak a truth if we
do speak at all, and shame to lie even of the devil. The daily beggeries,
discredits, shames and deaths, strange and fearful of such as have made no
conscience by false witness bearing to pollute their consciences ought
mightily to move us, and very effectually to persuade us never to do it. For
God to us as he has been to others will most assuredly show himself either
at first or at last, at one time or other, when our sin is the same and he no
changeling in his nature at all. And thus much of this commandment.

The Application.
Now let us weigh the guilt or innocence of our souls, if the Lord should
call us to an account for this his law. Generally we see the care that
should be in us to preserve the credit, and good name of all men, and what
heart so dull or dead, and past all feeling that it does not epsy even a
general want in it self, concerning the same? Generally all truth would the
Lord by this law have loved, cherished, and maintained, and the contrary
hated, shunned, and avoided, but what eye so blind, that cannot see the course
we commonly take, and the race we wholly run to the maintaynaunce of the
vice, and rooting out almost of the virtue from amongst us? But consider the
particulars one by one, and so shall we reap most profit. Have you never in
all your life testified of your neighbor an untruth publicly, for favor, or
gain, or hatred, or any cause whatsoever? Have you never slipped neither in
your own behalf, nor your friends, nor your town and liberties, nor any
way? But have ever dealt in all the testimonies that ever you gave as you dare
abide gods searching eye to judge you? Consider well the matters that you have
dealt in, remember the times past, remember the suits that have been made unto
you, and peradventure the rewards that have been offered you also, and if you
be clear and no way to be touched, though God sift you never so narrowly, be
glad and give God praise. But if you can not, if you may not, if you dare not
clear your self, both because a guilty conscience accuses you within, and
because both men and matters may be produced, and named, for whom and wherein
affection has led you, gifts corrupted you, malice incensed you, and sin
stained you, then see it, see it in the fear of God, and think of it,
confess it was naught, acknowledge your blemish, consider this law that so
flatly forbids it, tremble under the hand of the God of heaven, that has
ever plagued it, either by one way or an other, in a man's self or his seed,
in this world or the other. And so by the grace of God shall sight breed
sorrow, and amendment of life hereafter. Fie of that affection that damneth our
souls, woe worth the gain, that gets us hell. And accursed is that iuror
and witness, that so respects his present purpose, as that he casts away
the care of God, of life, of hell, of death, of civil honesty, fame and good
name in his country and dwelling, never able after to come in company where
he may not fear the touch in talk of his ill dealing. Certainly certainly
if a good name be above gould and silver, a false witness is the dross and
dregs of the world that the Lord hates and every honest heart very
perfectly loatheth. The next branch that breaks our obedience and duty to
the Lord in this law is lying, Lying.
the foul filth whereof has in part before been displaied and opened. And
now it remains but to consider our course and how grievously guilty we are
before God of this ougly vice. Where is that man, that woman, that aged or
younger, that will clear themselves from all blotte or stain in this behalf?
Does not every master in his man, every mistres in her maid find it,
mislike it, hate and abhor it? Does not every estate find it in other? And
God in us all to the just incensing of his wrath and fury against us? If we
can clear our selves let us, if we can not where is our righteousness, where
is our perfection, where are our merits? Nay why dread we not the death that
is the desert of lying lips? O sift and search the guilt of guilefull tongue,
cover it not, excuse it not, remember what I have said of it before, mock not
God, dally not with your damnation, hate to be the child of the foul
fiende, and with sorrow in truth for passed security, fly with perseverance
for ever hereafter so sinful iniquity. Truth may be blamed, but it can never
be shamed, yea even man in the end shall like it, and God for ever bless it
and crown it. There follow then in the book as particulars of this general
flattering, Flattery, etc.
and dissembling, and telling false tales behind our neighbors back.
Concerning the first what should I say? Should I ask whether you have or do
offend? should I make a question of it, or bring you into doubt with your
self whether you have herein faulted, or no? Alas how want I rather words to
move us to repentance than proofs of daily practice to convict us of
transgression? Help Lord, Psalm. 12.
help may I truly say with David, for good and godly men do perish and decay,
and faith and truth from worldly men is parted clean away. Who so does with
his neighbor talk, his talk is all but vain, for every man bethinketh how
to flatter, lie, and feign. But what follows? Certainly even that which we
shall find if God by his grace change not our hearts to more sincerity. For
we make no conscience to lie, to flatter, to fawn, to halt, to ^ogge, to
gloss, and dissemble honesty, piety, friendship, and favor, love, and
obedience, faithfulness and trust, and whatsoever may be profitable to us even
from morning to night, from we rise till we go to bed, and then how should
we escape and yet God be just too? It is even the wisdom we extol in others
and that we strive continually to attain unto our selves, to have neither ^rue
eye, true heart, nor true tongue, but only to seem to have all to every one,
whose word, wealth, or authority, may gain us any thing in this cursed
world. And so man is our strength, our policy is our GOD, flesh is our arm,
and what Paul so rejoices in, we laugh at, as vile and too sily simplicity.
David assures himself the Lord will defend them that are true of heart,
Psalm. 7.11. Psalm. 32.11. Psalm. 36.10. Psalm. 64.10.
we verily think if we be true of heart we cannot, nor shall not be able to
live in the world, we must Critisare cum cretensibus, that is, we must smooth
it, and sooth it, and carry two faces under one hoode, or else we are not so
wise as we might be. Thus sin we I am sure of it, some more and some less,
and the reward of the least sin, is eternal death. But it is the Lords
great mercy to move us from any sin. For dull are our hearts to fear any
judgment, till it be upon us. 1. John. 1.7.
And therefore to him I commend us to open our eyes, that we may even
earnestly see and consider effectually, how impossible any feloweshippe is
ever to be had for me holowe, subtle, guilefull, hypocritical, and s^ forth,
with a God, all truth, sincerity, simplicity, and open assured faithfulne^^
it self. For the second which was telling of tales, we have heard it before
showed, and our own knowledge does assure us it is a branch of the breach of
this commandment, which shall burn both body and soul in the fire of hell.
And yet see, do we fear it, or fly it? Alas we know I am sure of it, we have
been too too secure in this point, and our security not seeing and weighing
the wickedness of the vice has stained both heart and tongue horribly. Look
about the world and veiwe the general course of all. Fears any man to
discredit his neighbor privily, and to whisper upon hearesay or his own
imagination what tends to the blemish of his name whom he speaks of?
Fears any woman when she has met with her gossippe to tittle tattle, to
the slander of an other, this thing and that thing, which yet has no
certainty, and which full both she would have said of her self upon like
conjectures? No ^o we see to much the cursed course of lawless tongues in
every place, though the Lord in mercy gives some consciences, and a
thousand times I beg that we would see our sin, confess our sin, and
rippe up our guilt in this respect. Why should we be so dull and without
feeling? If it be a virtue thus to prittle and prattle of every body
uncertain tales, but most certain discredites, then prove it so and use it:
but if it be a branch of false witness that does truly witness gods wrath to
hang over us for it, good Lord, shall we still be polluted with it? Shall hell
have us without any help? Will not the dread of doleful day strike such a
filthy fault into the waning, and by little and little cut quite the throat of
it, and make it bleed to death in us? I hope the best, and I wish the best,
the Lord in his mercy set a watch before our mouths, and keep the door of
our lips for ever hereafter. Next comes hearing and believing to be
considered of faults in necessity also, if telling false tales has before
been justly blamed. For there is nothing that so nurceth and nourishes up a
tale teller, as does the credulous heart, and attending willing ear of the
hearer. And therefore if the one be a vice, the other certainly is no virtue.
Now how guilty are we in this again, how stained, how blotted before our
blemishlesse God, if he should enter into judgment with us? For Christ his
sake let us weigh it, let us view it, and even earnestly think of it, and
fearing to be damned, let us fear to sleep soundly in the sin that ^eadeth
to damnation. We do not discountenance the whispering carper, we do not
eschew the reports of peevish pratlers, but we itch to hear, and take
pleasure in hearing, what true charity in our hearts toward our brother
should make us abhor to hear and weep to have it true. And for believing
mark and consider, if you dwell amongst neighbors, whether you have ^ot
grievously offended toward many ^f them in this respect. How have you
^uffered a false tongue to fire your ^eartes with belief of your neighbor,
that could never yet be extinguished ^^nce you heard it, and yet you do not
^nowe it? Alas is this charity which who so wants, wants God? Is this to
love thy neighbor as thy self? When full sore it offends me that any man
should credit a surmise of me, if it be not true? O eyes, O hearts, where is
their sight and feeling? What love can my neighbor bear me, or with what
heart can a servant serve me, when he sees whisperers still about me, and
finds my nature so credulous of them, as that all his faith and truth, all
his traueile and labor, all his affection and love were it never so sincere
and upright, and even flowing from the roots of his heart and the very
bottom of his soul, yet is in hazard every hour of unjust condemnation, of
unkind regard, and most undeserved reproof? Truly as I have said before, it
is the very tried cutthrote of all amity, friendship, or faithful loving
service to have a listening ear, and a credulous heart without marvelous good
discretion. And I am most assured o^ it, there is no plague nor infection
grievous in the world comparable to this poison, in estranging, alienating,
and in the end quite driving away from me those hearts, that were mine own
with body and all worldly ability, in truth, in honesty, in alleadgeance,
in God, in Christ, and in all good meaning to the death. Who loves for gain,
and serves for hire, he is a slave to the thing that he gapeth for, and to
make up his mouth he will carry any thing: but to whom love is gain, and due
regard of his poor true heart an abundaunt reward, the denial of it
discourageth his meaning, grindeth his soul in sunder, and raketh him up in
dust, by untimely death. And therefore since it offends God, hurts our
brother, and very greatly indamageth our selves, O that we would see it,
consider it, and as God by grace shall strengthen our frail natures scoule
upon the speech that practices manies harm, and covenant with our hearts
to know before we credit: so would God bless us, many report well of us,
and true hearts of neighbor, friend, servant, or whosoever never leave us.
Passing then on in this examination further, we may not forgette the
publishing of our brethrens private offenses, a displeasing thing unto the
Lord, and a grievous breach of this commandment. We should cover in
charity what no body knows but we, if the party will be reformed, even as
willingly and readily as ever we would our selves find favor for our
infirmities. But do we it? Is my brothers shame my grief, is his credit
dear unto me as my life? Go I backewarde with a cloak on my back to cast
upon his offense, loath that either others or I my self should see it, as good
Sem and Iapheth did to their bared father in his drunkenness? Genesis 9.23.
No no, we grinne and laugh rather with cursed Cham, and blabbe it out to
others. Good beloved, let us weigh our wantes, and never make our vices
virtues. God asks but our confession in grief and sorrow, and he will heal
us. It is a branch and a breach of this commandment, and therefore no thing to
be continued in. But I dwell too long in this speech unto you. Many things mo
might yet be rehearsed, but see them your selves, and let my silence pass
them. These few bewraye our want of perfect obedience to the law, and so
consequently of any life and safely by the works of the same. And therefore I
hope we clearly perceive that without a Savior we were but lost, make what
distinctions we can of obedience, of justification, or such like. Fast cleaves
to us and cannot be denied grievous guilt against both this law and all the
former, and cursed is he which abides not in all to do them (says the
Lord). Deutro. 27 Iam. 2.10. Galat. 3.11
He that is guilty of one is guilty of all, and by the works of the law can
no flesh living be justified. For the just shall live by faith. We have not
done all, but we have broken much, and therefore the conclusion lights upon
us, and all the subtilties of all the wits in the world, can not remove it
from us, if the Lord should mark what we have done amiss, but in this one
law of his, and judge us thereunto and by, we are not able to abide it, we
are cast away. Therefore let us fly from the law as fast as ever we can, and
take the right use of it thereby to be led unto Christ, and let this be our
firm comfort, Galat. 4.4.
that When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son made of a
woman, and made under the law, that he might redeem us from the curse
thereof, and so by him we might receive the adoption of sons which without
him we could never attain to. This is sure, and this is comfortable to hold
by, and the Lord increase this faith in us ever.

The tenth Commandment.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his etc.
Wherein (says your book) the Lord plainly forbids all inward desire of
any thing unlawful to be done although we never consent unto it, as the
rebellion of the flesh, all corruption of the old man, all blotte of original
sin, so that by this commandment most clearly we may see the image of that
man that pleases God, even such an one in whom nothing is impure neither in
will nor nature.

Question.

YEt playner I pray you, if you can set down the difference of this
commandment from the other, for as I have heard, some have half thought it
superfluous, seeing as the former did also forbid the inward thought as well as
the outward act.

Ans. It is as plain as may be already, yet to content you thus over again.
The former commandments did forbid the act and the settled or consenting
thought of the heart, though the deed were not done, as for example, the
precept of killing forbids the deed, and with all, once to think in heart
to do such a deed, with a resolution verily to accomplish it if I can. But
now this commandment comes nearer, and condemns not only that thought
that is settled, and lacks but opportunity to do the deed, but even the
very thinking also of any thing contrary to the love of God, or my neighbor,
though I do never consent to it, but snubbe it, mislike it, and reject it. For
even yt having of an evil thought in my mind is a fruit of my corruption,
such as in innocence if we had stood we should never have had, and therefore
naught. So there are two degrees of thoughts, the one with consent to
accomplish in deed what we do think, if we can, and the other without consent
repulsed away when we awake and see it. The former in the former
commandementes was forbidden, and the later in this. A strange doctrine in
show no doubt to many that think this their thought is free. But we must not
marvel, since even the Apostle Paul himself would never have suspected any
danger in concupiscence, lusts, and desires, if the law had not said, Thou
shall not lust or desire. Romans 7.7.
Nay it appears very plainly in that place (says a godly man) that he
thought marvelous well of himself before he came to this commandment. He
took himself before to be living, and in good liking toward God and
godliness, but when he had looked upon this law and beheld himself a while
in this part of the glass he saw himself plainele to be no body, but a dead
man sold unto sin. And therefore a thousand times needful, that the Lord
should add this law to all the rest, to humble us thoroughly, seeing so
singular a man was not fully cast down before he had wrestled with the justice
of God in the same. Let us therefore think of this thing that seems so little
in our eyes. For we hear what the Apostle says, it is sin to desire, Romans
7.7.
and we may join unto it the words of the Lord himself affirming plainly,
that the very imagination of man's heart is evil even from his youth. Genesis
8.21.
God has made the heart as well as the body, to seek his glory, and
therefore good reason the cogitations of the heart should no more straie from
their true end, than the actions of the body. Neither may our reiection of
such thoughts in the end, and not consenting unto them to accomplish them in
act, bleare our eyes with an imagination, that we have not offended in them, in
going so far as we went. For it is a blemish, a want, an impiety, and a
degree of unchastity in a woman to suffer the cogitation of any foreign
friend beside her husband to tickle her with conceit unlawful, though in
the end she repulse it, and abhor to accomplish it, and how can it then be
faultlesse in these hearts of ours the spouse of the Lord to dally with such
delights, and to pursue in mind, by thinking of them, the pleasures that such
conceits do plead before us, though in the conclusion we give the denial
and do not consent. O it is a greater matter to love the Lord with all the
heart, than that it may abide any light licentious wandering from the same for
any time. For they are opposed to love the Lord ever, and to think evil at
any time: to love the Lord with all my heart, and to think now and then of
vain follies or flat impieties with my heart. And if it be a certain truth
as we know it is, which I said before, that if we had stood in our
innocence firm and immovable, we should never have conceived in our time any
evil thought at all, or vain or foolish conceit for any moment or point of
space, but should ever have been able to have justified our thoughts before
God whatsoever they were as agreeing with the love of him, and our brother,
then is this tickling delight, that now and then will take us and possess us
for a time to enjoy our neighbors house, his wife, his child, his man, maid,
or any thing that he has, otherwise than we should, wicked, vile, and against
that rule of right, wherein we were created, and whereto our regeneration daily
tends if we be the Lords. And therefore let this argument convict us, and
this consideration ever assure our souls within, that it is unlawful for the
child of GOD once to conceive an ill thought, although we never consent unto
it. And consequently let it stir us up to pray with David against our
corruption, Psalm. 51.
that the Lord in mercy would vouchsafe to make us clean hearts and to
renew a right spirit within us evermore. Let it be still the property of a
popish spirit to extenuate sin, and exalt flesh and blood and corruption
above truth and right, saying, concupiscence is no sin, Iam. 1.25.
but only brings forth sin after it has conceived. But let the child of
God schooled up in the truth of the gospel, press flesh and blood and his
corrupt nature, so far as gods word and law presses it, and let him know
that first very concupiscence in it self is a damnable degree, of vice, yet
not the highest degree, but upon the conception thereof follows actual
accomplishment of wickedness before, but thought in heart, an higher and
further step of evil in us, which is the meaning of James. For if
concupiscence were not evil, then must it needs be either good or
indifferent. But neither of these it can be, and therefore it is evil. Good it
is not, for the whole 7 Chapter to the Romans denies it. And S. Austen pretily
against Julian gathering upon his words that concupiscence remained in the^
that are regenerated though not the guilt of it, that therefore is was good,
answers, Si hoc sentirem, Libr. 6. cap. 6.
non dicerem eam malam esse, sed fuisse. Nos autem malam eam dicimus, and
manner tamen in baptizatis. That is, If I had thought so (to wit that it was
good) then would not I have said it is evil, but it was evil. But we say it
is evil, and yet remains in them that have been baptized. And when Julian
goes on and urges his assertion that nevertheless the guilt was taken away,
yea (says he) Reatus quo hominem reum facit, non quo ipsa rea est, vt
homicidij reatus tollitur in aliquo, non tamen ideo bonum est. That is, That
guilt is taken away wherewith she stayneth man, not wherewith it is stained it
self in it self. As the guilt and the desert of murder a man may be quit
of, and freed from, and yet not the wickedness it self in it nature changed
for that cause, but remains evil still. Good therefore you see concupiscence
is not. And indifferent it is not. For the Apostle flatly gives it an harder
name, saying, Romans 7.21.
That when he would have done good, he was so yoked, that evil was present
with him. If the spirit of God call it evil, beware we presume not to call it
indifferent, and beware more how we play with the pleasure of it, and take
delight to do it. Again what conclusion carry all those exhortations to
crucify, Crucify the old man with all his lusts, and that percing plaint of
an Apostles mouth, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of death? I know, I know that in me that is in my flesh dwells no
good. I say what conclusion carry they all, but this, that concupiscence is
neither good nor indifferent but flatly evil?

Que. How then falls it out, that it condemns us not?

Ans. The Apostle answers in the 25. verse, Romans 7.25.
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord, and in the next Chapter, There is
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the
flesh, Cap. 8.1
but after the spirit. For the law of the spirit of life which is in Christ
Jesus has freed me from the law of sin and of death. So that we see it is
Christ, in whom, and by whom, and for whom we are not charged with the
condemnation due to concupiscence and corruption ingrafted and growning in us.

Que. But is then all desire and affection and all coveting unlawful by this
commandment?

Ans. No indeed, for God has created affections and desires in men as mirth,
joy, hunger, thirst, etc. and they should have been in man though he had never
fallen, they should have loved their children, their parents, and friends even
standing and abiding in innocence, and therefore these things are not evil.
Nay the want of them makes a monstrous absurdity in nature, and therefore not
to be maintained. The instruments of affections, and delight, and dolor,
created by the Lord, prove them allowed, the law of God commands them, and
reprooueth their want, Christ our savior untouched by sin showed them in
great measure, they are spurs, and pricks unto virtue in us, and therefore
allowed. Besides numbers of other reasons that might be alleged.

Que. What else do you observe in the commandment?

Ans. I do duly weigh the particulars that God restrayneth our coveting in,
and I see them to be such as most commonly, and most without check, men
suffer themselves to be carried away withal. As the house of my neighbor that
is his inheritance, lands, and possessions, which we so greedily often
behoulde and mark, wishing and willing them far far otherwise than a Christian
heart should. We can flatter our self with our offering of money for them, not
remembering that so did Achab for Naboths vineyard, and yet greeuouslie
offended. Our neighbors wife or an other wives husband, God knows the
sinful thoughts they cause within us. For coveting the child against parents
liking, and intising away the servant of an other against their good, they be
things wherein few of our hearts have any feeling. And for their cattle,
with such sinful eyes we look upon them, that we ever think our
neighbors bullock has a fairer yowre, than our own has, as the Poet
speaks: and therefore, wisely in the naming of these particulars has the
Lord taught us wherein commonly our thoughts offend, and what most carefully
we are to take heed of. Also I further consider the marvelous care and strict
regard, that every Christian man and woman ought to have of their senses,
seeing all evil thoughts are forbidden. For it is the eye and the ear, that
sends in sin in store into our hearts, and never shall we have the one
reformed unless there be a stable covenant made with the other. Job. 31.1.
The heart will conceive wickedly if the eyes freely behoulde vanities. But
check the one and ye stay the other marvelously. And no more quench you the
fire by withdrawing the wood, than assuredly you stay the course of wicked
conceits, when you watch and ward well over your senses.

Que. But I pray you what shall we think of dreams, which seem to be
sinful and we cannot amend them?

Ans. We must consider the causes of them, and thereby, as well as we can, grow
to some right conceit of our offending by them, and in them. The causes are
either inward or outward, and of inward, either the mind it self or the
body. For often does the mind, the body sleeping, and the senses resting,
remember those things which it waking conceived, and either desired or feared.
Also the diverse complexion and temperature of the body occasioneth diverse
kinds of dreams, whereby the physician will guess the nature of the body,
and causes of disease in the sick. Choleric men will dream of fires and
downefaules. Melancholicke men of monstrous and horrible things. The
phlegmatike of waters and dull matters. And the sanguine of pleasant and
comfortable euentes. The outward causes are also diverse, as the influence of
the heavens, the circumstance of elements, necessity and want, some happening
chance, and such like. Thus do hungry men dream of meat, drunken men of
moisture, and so forth. Quae vigilantes cogitauimus, ea solent postea
dormientibus obuersari (says one). That is, Such things as waking we
earnestly thought of, even such things often we sleeping dream of.

Aucupibus volucres, aurigae somnia currus:
The fouler dreams, that birds he takes,
And carters cart his visions makes.
Therefore these things thus known and weighed, if we dream wickedly, (to
name no particulars) let every one consider well what occasion in him self he
can find of the same, and if his own disorder either in diet, or speech, or
meditation, or any way has done it, then needs he none to tell him, his
conscience is a thousand witnesses, he has offended. Thus answered Gregory
bishop of Rome, when he was writ unto for his judgment of this matter, and
if I can find in my self none of all these to procure it in me, yet know if
it be evil it is a fruit of corruption, and weigh well the law of the Lord
in this behalf laid down. Plutarch says, Leuit. 15.
Honest dreams are an argument of virtue in a man, and then me think in
reason a contrary effect should bewray a contrary cause. The same man says,
Peruersorum somnia semper turbata. De virt. and viti. Plutarch.
Evil men's dremes are commonly troublesome. But I refer you for more of this
to others. And this only I say again, the body well ordered, and the mind
well occupied, hardly shall our dreams fear us for evil.

Que. What now then might be the affirmative part of this commandment?

Ans. If thus we see all wandering ways from upright integrity be they but
even in thought, and that also in the least degree without any consent, to be
by this law condemned as impure, what should we see on the contrary part to be
commanded, but even a full, perfect, and absolute conformity, both of mind,
will, appetite, and whatsoever is in man to the law of God? That which Moses
in these words describes, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, Deutro. 6.5.
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might, Luke. 10.27.
and our Savior Christ does add unto it for plainness sake, with all thy
thought: That also which S. Paul describes thus: This is the will of God even
your sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4.7.
and that ye should abstain from fornication, that every one of you should
know how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lust
of concupiscence, and so forth. From which exact perfection look how far
our conscience truly awaked does tell us we are wanting, even so far
accursed stand we before the Lord for not fulfilling all, if we had not a
Savior.

Que. Is there any punishment outward appointed to this law?

Ans. No, and that because man can not judge the guilt of hidden heart. But it
suffiseth to fear any man that fears any thing, to consider that the
spiritual punishment allotted unto it as to the rest is eternal death, and
endless torture both of body and soul for evermore in flame of lasting fire.
Only one story, that I remember, there is recorded of some outward execution
upon an inward thought, and that is of Glaucus King of Sparta, Herodotus.
who for conceiving but a thought to retain Milesius his pledge committed to
his keeping, yet not doing it, was utterly destroyed both he and his, and so
foretold by the Oracle whereat he asked counsel

The Application.
LEt us weigh now well what has been said I beseech you, and never spare to
speak, or fear to confess, if not openly before the world, yet secretly in
our hearts unto the Lord, what due regard of passed course compared with
this law shall make us see. Though we were able (which yet never any could but
Jesus Christ) to stand clear before the Lord in all the former precepts,
either for deed or thought, yet are we never able to say we are clear of
this. For consider, has there never thought but good crept into that heart of
yours within at no time since the day that you were first able to think a
thought, till this present hour? weigh it well. And what though you have never
consented to it (yet woe woe unto us for consent) we see nevertheless by this
law of God that we are but gone. For here is condemned the very entrance and
being of any vile conceit within us for any time, though upon some better
wakening, we repel it, and abhor it, and thrust it away without his act. And
who is able to say he never thought awry in the least manner or measure that
might be? Nay what conscience cries not, if it be a little rowsed, that in
very fearful manner and measure we have all herein transgressed and
offended? Call out our houses, and chambers, wherein and under which we have
lived, ask the fields, the gardens, the walls, and hedges, where we have
often walked, summon the seats where we have sit, examine the pillowes whereon
our heads could take no rest, what guilt against our hearts in this behalf
they well can witness every one of them. Shall they not speak first one by
one, and then all with one consent cry in the ears of the Lord with shriking
sound that hours and days, months and years, have we spent in tossing and
turning, in debating and scanning such conceits and thoughts, as we would not
for all that we enjoy were written in our forheads? Fie fie the pleasures that
we have felt in this folly, nay in this impiety, how have they tickled us
within, and made us laugh to our selves, rub our hands together, forgette our
meat, not hear what was said about us, and such like? How have we longed to
be at an end peradventure of some business, that we have been about, that we
might even fully debate the matter you know of, and play with the conceit
thereof to our fuller pleasure? Can we excuse our selves beloved, do I depaint
out unknown dispositions unto you? O I say again, beside greater impieties
the follies, the toys, the trifles, the very babish fancies, that will and
do steal upon us will we, nill we, even when we are best occupied, and would
not be solicited in such sort. All which are breaches lesser and greater of
this law of our God, which requires exact obedience and conjunction of all
the motions of our mind to his good will and liking. And if we had never
fallen, we should never have felt them. Therefore to sh^t up this matter, for
one whom I know better than I know any of you, I confess a guilt, and a
grievous guilt against this precept of my God, and I acknowledge damnation due,
if I should be rejected: but the Lord I thank, I fear it not, not that I
have not sinned, but because my Christ has not sinned, and He is my
justification, sanctification, and redemption, 1. Cor. 1.
he is my strength and my stony rock, both against the curse of this law
and all the rest, He is my defense and my Savior, Psalm. 18.1.
my God and my might, in whom I do trust, my buckler, the horn of my health,
and my refuge. And to him in the true sense of my weakness, and with the
kneees of my heart bowed down to the dust I say for my case as David said for
his, Turn away my heart O Lord, that it may never feed upon the follies of
vain conceits, or grieve the sweet spirit, that I sometimes feel by
ungodly wandering from his sugared motions. Yea set a watch before my soul most
gracious father, and keep the door of my strengthlesse heart, that I may
less offend and more obey in this behalf than ever I have done heretofore.
And now pass we on to particulars mentioned to our hands by the Lord
himself in this his law. O my beloved, how often have we coueted our
neighbors house, that is his earthly possession and inheritance, if not in
whole yet in part? How often have we tossed our heads from the one end of
the pillowe to the other, not able to sleep, for thinking how to compass
that piece and this piece, not weighing how well he might spare it, but how
well it would fit us? Yea this house must be had, and that garden, and the
other close to the wringing out of tears from the man, the wife, and al their
poor children that part from it, to the greeuing of their hearts, and the
very utter undoing of them all. We stop not our eyes that they gaze no
further upon our neighbors helps than a Christian soul may warrant. We shut
not our ears, neither take regard of the sin that may ensue, when we are
whispered in the ear, that this thing is fit for us, and that thing, and
thus and thus may be had. No alas we account them the best members about us,
whose godless counsel shall work our endless woe. Whereas a Christian
as soon as he hears such a motion, should by and by think in himself, O
Lord thou have dealt mercifully with me ever, let not me now deal unmercifully
with any, thou have made me a master of much, this man a master but of a
little. O Lord let not my much eat him out of his little ungodly, let not my
power oppress his weakness and so forth, and then talk with the informer,
be it either a man, or mine own greedy eye, that has spied it, and see
whether what I may get, I may well get, and well take into my hands, so as I
may not be stinged for it an other day before my God, nor exclamed upon justly
in the world. This does your own conscience tell you, you should do, and
the other you should not do, yet the other have you done, and this have you
not done, and are you not guilty? Good beloved go with me in this trial of
our selves, and let us see sin to be sin. The looking eye, and the lusting
heart further after our neighbors wife, than they should, would God they
accused us not. What should I say of his servant, man or maid? You know it
as well as my self, there is almost no conscience any where showed in this
behalf no fear of God, no love of man, but only of our selves. For if we
like an other man's servant, for any quality that we desire to be served with
all, what intisementes, what allurementes dare we use to draw him to us? What
offers make we, what practices devise we, till we have them? Yet (says this
law) Thou shall not covet thy neighbors servant, man, or maid, And that is
as now we know, not once think of it, although I consent not to it. The like
is said of his ox, his ass, or any thing that is his. And yet we see the
world, ever in our eye, Vicinum pecus grandius vber habet: Our neighbors kowe
does give more milk than ours. His horse we must have there is no remedy,
his hawke, his hounde, his pleasure or profitte must be ours, and that which is
worse often without any consideration any way, either by favor or value, yea
it must be given out, that we covet our neighbors goods, and we our selves
have twenty pretty indirect and figurative kinds of begging, and if we
either are not understood, or will not be understood by him that has it,
because he is loath to loose it, then we frette and are offended highly, and as
our calling, might and power is, we sit upon his skirtes. Thus sin we may
dear beloved against this law of GOD, and yet we see it not. Now would God
have us to open our eyes, to incline our ears, and to forgette this old
fathers house of our corruption. Now would the Lord have us reconciled to him
by repentance, and offend no more. And therefore I cry unto you in the name
of the Lord, and to this soul within me, Thou shall not covet. If we will
hear his voice, and yet harden our hearts, if we will not restrain our
senses, the common carriers of conceits into us, if we will not even every
way we can hereafter seek to let and lessen our disobedience in this thing
against the Lord, the day of our visitation is past, and our destruction is at
hand. The lion is come up from his den, Ierem. 4.
and the destroyer of the Gentilles is departed and gone forth from his place
to lay our land waste, and our cities shall be destroyed without an
inhabitant. Yea so near is our desolation assuredly my beloved, that even as
it were presently my soul hears the sound of the trumpette, and the alarome
of the battaill. Destruction upon destruction is cried even at our doors, if
we could hear it, and suddenly shall our tents be destroyed, and our curtains
in a moment. But I hope what I wish, and I wish what shall be our sure safety,
if we will be persuaded, even that we would now see how far we are from
ability to fulfill these 10 commandementes of our God, either all, or any one
of them, devise what distinction we can, horrible sinners and transgressers we
are and so we shall be found: and therefore that we would acknowledge it,
lament it, fly to the propitiation appointed of our gracious God for our
sins, and only cleave to him, only trust in him, and claspe him in our
arms, so as all the world, nor the power of hell can loose our houlde, carry
him so to his father, and there offer him to him for all our misdeedes as the
salvation which he has prepared before the face of all people, and in whom
he is perfectly pleased. This wish I, this beg I, this crave I with all the
bowelles of my affection, my flesh shaking, mine eyes watering, my soul
groaning, and all the stringes of my heart enlarged, as you fear God, as you
love your selves, as my calling is regarded, as my affection esteemed, or as
hell tre^bled at, yt Jesus Christ may be our only hold, and our own
obedience no hold, and yet performed as a fruit of faith daily more and more,
but not with hope of safety by the fame, either in part or in whole: and this
O my good God grant unto us, as thy mercy is unmeasurable, and thy goodness
and loving kindness unsearchable: what passed is good Lord forgive, and make us
better ever live. Amen Amen.

Prouer. 19. Hear counsel and receive correction, for they shall make a man
wise at ye last.

Deutro. 5. O that there were such an heart in this people to fear me, and to
keep all my commandments always, that it might go well with them and with
their children for ever.

Psalm. 19. Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart be always
acceptable in thy sight good Lord.

When gracious God by sacred word
vouchsafes to call from cursed course,
O happy we ten thousand times
if feeling hearts do yield remorse.
But if contempt of offered grace
accuse us, craving sentence just,
Then cursed we ten thousand times,
for hell remains when hence we must.
Consider this my country dear,
and mark it Cardiff heedily,
The Lord now speaks, then take thy good,
or look for vengeance speedily.
Hwyra dial dial duw
Tosta dial dial duw.
Hugh Poole minister of the word of God in Cardiff.


