A SERMON PREACHED AT THE COURT AT GREENEWICH THE XXIIII. OF MAY, 1591.

By Geruase Babington Doctor of Divinity.

ANCHORA SPEI
printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by Richard Field for Thomas Chard. 1591.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY SINGVLAR good Lords, the Lords of her Majesty's most
honorable privy counsel.
WHAT it pleased God (right Honorable) to enable me to speak of late before
your Lordships in her Majesty's Court at Greenwich, I have, as near as I could
remember, laid down here now in writing, to the end, that what then both
pleased and profited some, may in the blessing of like mercy, do the same
again, and what misliked any, may be further considered, whether it so
deserve in deed, or was but only the^ mistake^. Which little labor I am bold to
present unto your Honors, who with most holy and religious attention heard the
same, that under the like favor of your Honorable countenance, being found
without cause of just dislike, it may both pass to the view of others also
that heard it not, and remain a poor testimony of my dutiful heart and true
affection toward your Lordships ever to my death.

Your Honors most humble bounden GERVASE BABINGTON.

The second of the Kings the fifth Chapter. 13 But this servants came, and spoke
unto him, and said, Father, if the Prophet had comanded thee a great thing,
would thou not have done it? how much rather then, when he says to thee,
Wash and be clean?

14 Then went he down and washed himself seven times in Jorden, according to
the saying of the man of God: and his flesh came again, like unto the flesh of
a little child, and he was clean.

15 And he returned again to the man of God, he, and all his company, and
came and stood before him and said, Behold now I know that there is no God in
all the world, but in Israel: now therefore I pray thee take a reward of thy
servant.

16 But he said, As the Lord lives (before whom I stand) I will not receive
it. And he would have constrained him to receive it, but he refused.


Having elsewhere of late (right Honorable) considered of this Chapter to this
place, I have thought good to go forward with thus much more of it at this
time, hoping it shall not be judged unfit for this place, and these days
wherein we live. The words read as we see, are parcel of the story of Naman
the Assyrian, a story so well known unto us, that I shall not need to make
any long rehearsal of it. In few words for order sake thus much. Naman was a
mighty man and very honorable in the Court of the king of Assyria, and even
with the king him self very highly esteemed. The reason is alleged in the
story, namely, (...)delitie to (...)rinces and (...)ountrey, a (...)ause of
ho(...)our: trea(...)herie of co^(...)usion.
because by his hand the Lord had delivered the kingdom from great danger:
thereby the spirit of God teaching us, that there is not in this world a more
just cause of honorable regard, and most high account to be had and made of a
man, not only with people but even with Prince, then faithful love and fruteful
service to king and country: as the contrary is most worthy also of al
hatred, Leprosy.
shame, and confusion. But amidst all this honor (says the story) Naman was a
Leaper, an ugly and grievous disease we all know, even in a poor man, but in
one of such place far more grievous. Great men have their humblings.
We learn and see by it how often God thinks it good to season the pleasures
and glory that otherwise he voutsafeth great men in this world with some
humblings and chastisements, either maladies in body, or miseries in mind,
from which yet after trial and exercise of them to his pleasure, he is able to
release them as he did here Naman, if it shall be good for them. The story
again tells us, there was dwelling with Namans wife an Israelitish maid,
taken by ye Assyrians as they scouted abroad and placed with her: This maid
seeing her Lord and master his woeful estate, like an honest servant pitied it,
and wished that her Lord were with the Prophet in her country, doubtless he
would heal him. The words of the maid were brought to Namans hearing, he
yielded to the wish, and intends a journey to ye Prophet, acquainteth the
king his master with his desire, who not only gave him leave, but writ also his
honorable letters to the king of Israel in his behalf: which letters were
wonderfully mistaken when they were read, as if a quarrel by the^ should be
sought against him, so that he rent his clothes for grief and anger at these
letters. The prophet Elisha hearing of this behavior in the king, sent word to
him to send Naman to him, and he should know that there was a Prophet in
Israel. Upon which message Naman came to him, and received this direction, that
he should go wash seven times in Jorden, and he should be whole. But so far was
he from ioying to hear of health after this sort, yt he took it to be a mere
mockery of him, and brake out into words, that he looked the Prophet should
have come forth to him, and have laid his hands on him, prayed for him, and so
have healed him, as for water and washing are not Abanah and Pharpar (says he)
rivers of Damascus as good as the waters of Israel, etc. In which chafe and
choler his servants spoke unto him as we have now heard. Father (say they) if
the Prophet had commanded thee a great thing, would thou not have done it?
how much more this that he says, wash and be clean, etc. This is the story.

Now for the words read, if we mark them, they offer unto our consideration
four things.

1 First the speech of the servants to their Lord. 2 Secondly, his yielding
thereunto. 3 Thirdly, the fruit of his obedience, health. 4 Lastly, his
thankfulness when he was healed*
The speech of the servants again, has in it to be observed:

The ground from whence it came. The manner of it. The matter of it.
His yielding has in it,

To whom he yields: even to his servants. In what sort: readily, without
check or snub.
The fruit or effect, being his health, has in it,

How it was obtained, to wit, by washing in Jorden. How many times: seven
times.
His thankfulness lastly has in it,

To whom, to wit, to God. The Prophet,
In what sort, vehemently, not only formally.
Concerning the first, the speech of the servants, and therein first the ground
from whence it came, what was it, but a loving, a true, a dutiful, and an
affectionate heart to the good of their master. This made them speak,
Faithfulness in servants ever blessed
this made them venture, this made the^ bold to persuade with him as they did:
A thing that ever God required in servants, (...)aithfulnes (...) servants
(...)er blessed.
and a thing that ever God has honored with his blessings upon it, and
remembrances of it in his word, Ephesians. 6. Servants (says the Lord) (...)ph. 6.
5. etc.
obey them that are your masters with fear and trembling, that is, with
careful reverence in singlenes of your heart, as unto Christ. Not with eye
service as men pleasers, but as servants of Christ, doing the will of God from
the heart. With good will serving the Lord and not men, and know ye, that
whatsoever good thing any man does, that same shall he receive of the Lord,
whether he be bond or free. Genesis 24.
With what remembrance is the servant of Abraham registered in the book of God
for his faithfulness and love to his master, that having received in charge to
go seek a fit match for his masters son amongst his own kindred, from whom
he was then far separate by the commandment of God, that willed him to
remove as he did, the servant fell upon his knees to the Lord for direction,
every way in that business to his masters good: would not eat nor drink
when he came to the place, till he saw how he should speed, etc. How also is
Jacob spoken of, Genesis 29.
as true a servant as ever man had? Genesis 39.
How Joseph, how many more for their true hearts and faithful service to their
masters? Therefore dear and precious (I say) was ever this disposition in
servants that here we see in Namans servants to day: Love to master, is love to
God, service to master is service to God, and so reputed, esteemed, and blessed
of God. Now if we should ask by what means this love was wrought in the
servants to their master, certainly (with great probability we may say) it was
by the honorable usage of them by their master, for the whole story speaks
of Naman as of a very honorable minded man to all sorts. A remembrance that
way again to masters, Honorable favor and good usage in masters of servants.
to regard their poor servants with comfort and favor, as shall be fit, if they
will possess their hearts, as they own their bodies for their times. For this
is it yt pearceth with a sugared sweetness, even to the reins of a man, and
makes him think no toil of body or brain too much for so good a master.
Example Joseph, Genesis 39. 8. 9.
who inflamed in heart with his masters most honorable favors to him, in
putting him so in trust that he knew not what he had under his hand, defied all
wickedness, temptations, and baits against him, whatsoever they might gain him
in the world. (...)ardnes in (...)asters.
The contrary in a master wou^deth the heart and the very soul of a true
servant when he sees it: Example Jacob, Genesis 31. 2.
who seeing the countenance of Laban changed upon him, brake into grief,
bewailed it to his wives, and as utterly discouraged to serve any more,
purposes a departure, which to Labans great loss he performed. I know the
masters Posie is, The masters Posie.
Deserve and then desire, and but good reason that desert should go before
desire: but then when desert is, and desire upon desert to relieve lack, let
not the servant set down his Posie again with mourning mind, The servants
Posie.
Fidelis seruus perpetuus asinus: A good servant and a perpetual drudge. Chapt.
7.
Jesus the son of Syrach was a wise man we al know, and amongst many precepts
he gives this as one: Let thy soul love a good servant, A note for all masters.
defraud him not that bestows himself for thee, neither leave him ever a
poor man. Neglect of this has deprived men of such as were worth gold, and
furnished them with slipperie ones in their places, of whom after trial, they
were forced to say (...). Aristotle.
O friends I find no friend; feeling the truth of this.

Cum tot populis stipatus eas,
In tot populis vix vna fides.
Guarded thou art with troops of men, but faith thou find scarce in one.
Remember here Naman furnished with faithful servants toward him, because he
was most honorable toward them. Love in master makes love in man, except in
form of man he be a devil.

Having thus considered the ground of this speech, A term given then and since
to Magistrates and men in authority, to teach them with what affection they
should love their inferiors, even as children, and how inferiors ought to
honor them even as Fathers. Genesis 41 43.
let us next consider the manner of it, which as we see is modest* humble,
reverent, with the title and term of Father and no worse. Thus spoke men in
those days that tasted but of civility: If more we would see, more we may
well see in the 23. of Genesis, where the Sichemites speak to Genesis 23. Number.
12. 11. How good men speak to men of authority. 1. Sam. 9. 6.
Abraham as to a Prince, Abraham to them again with all reverence. Aron
speaks to Moses his own brother with title of Lord, Let not my Lord be
angry etc. Saul's servant that went with him to seek the lost asses says,
here dwells in this town a Seer, an honorable man. And he that spoke so of
the Prophet, would have used no less reverence to the Prophet we may well
think. The Angel himself to a man chosen to office, uses reverence and
terms of honor, Judge 6. 22.
God save thee Gedeon thou valiant man. Thus I say again spoke men in those
days to men in authority. But alas the change now, when we rhyme in verse,
rail in prose, and sin in both, against God and his chosen instruments here
on earth, most fearfully. We ruffell with them as Corah and his company did
with Moses and Aron, proudly and maliciously telling them that they take too
much upon them, never remembering the dreadful judgment that befell those men
for such behavior, Number. 26. 10.
nor that which is more, that it is said expressly in the text, that it was done
in signum for a sign, to wit, of that which shall befall first or last, one
way or other, to all those that ever should do the like: For Sequitur superbos
vltor a tergo Deus, The plague of God follows the proud stomach even at the
heels: And most notable is it that Chrysostom has to this purpose, when he
says, Humility.
Esto, multum edifices, habeas elemosynas, ieiunia, preces, virtutes omnes,
omnia ista prophana sunt, impura, abominabilia sine humilitate. Let it be that
thou edifiest much, have alms deeds, fastings, prayers, and all virtues, if
thy heart be proud, malicious, envious against thy superiors, and void of
humility; certainly all these are profane, impure and abominable in thee. The
very same judgment had Austen when he said, if he were asked what was the
chief thing in piety and religion, and what the second, and what the third;
he would answer to all, and that all in all were humility, as the Rhetorician
said, pronunciation was in eloquence. Modest speech shall not be unblessed.
Look we then often, even with a religious eye at this modesty and reverence
in Namans servants, and be sure what the wisdom of God has not passed
unnoted in them, he will not pass over unblessed in us, if we have it. Think
of this.
He that tuneth an instrument, and will hastily hoyst a string, may happily
sooner break it then tune it, but by mild and gentle strayning, he may bring
it to a pitch that shall fit his purpose. Thus of the manner also of their
speech.

The third thing in their speech is the matter of it, The matter of the
servants speech
which as we all see is a plain persuasion of their Lord and master, to that
thing that disliked him, that he was offended with, and could not abide to
hear of at the Prophets own mouth. And why persuade they thus? Surely because
it tended to his good, therefore they adventure to speak. Then these servants
soothed not their Lord in his wrong humor, (...)othing (...)ruants.
they played not as the reflection of the face does in the glass, ever
performing that same gesture that we use, and no other. In a word, they
flattered not either for favor or fear, but with duty spoke truly to their
masters good, though his present humor carries him then to a contrary course.
O glass of glasses for all men to look in with great profit, A glass for
(...)ll servants.
but especially such as in this place now behold and see it. For here, here
are they, who if they were dealt withal truly and dutifully, would certainly
avoid what many times they do with great hurt, either to themselves or others.
And where as the common saying fears many that wish the best: to wit, Veritas
odium parit, obsequium amicos, Truth gets hatred, and flattery, friends:
without doubt it is not so ever, Good men not offended with truth.
but quite contrary with grave, wise, and good men. My warrant is not only
experience, which yet is a sure teacher, but the express word of God,
Prou(...).23.
that says, he that rebukes a man shall find more favor at the last,
Flattery.
then he that flattereth with the tongue. The venom of flattery, and the bane
that is brought by smoothing tongues, no words can utter, no thoughts of hearts
abhor sufficiently. What monsters of men were those servants of Absolon? 2.
Sam. 13. 29*
who to content their masters wicked humor slew ye kings son, and their
masters brother in the midst of the banquet that was made for such a purpose.
What a wound to the kingdom gave those flattering young counselors, 2. Chro.
10. 10.
when with their smoothing the king in his vain of youth, and crossing ye
advise of the old and prudent counsailers, at one blow they cut from the
kingdom, of twelve tribes, ten? What an ugly vice in Vriah the Priest was it
to follow the kings humor, 2. Kin. 16. 11
and make an altar expressly against the word and will of God? Many such filthy
flatterers with their harms could I remember if needful it were, these not
suffising. Not without cause therefore said Antisthenes once, Antisthenes
that it was better to fall in (...), quam in (...), amongst ravens, then
amongst flatterers, for ravens feed but upon the dead, flatterers upon the
living, ravens eat the body, flatterers devour the mind, and what virtue so
ever might be in the same. Who hastened as it were, and even pulled out of God
his hand that fearful plague and judgment upon Herod, to be smitten with the
Angel of God suddenly, and eaten with lice, but those smiling smothers that
cried the voice of God and not of man. Act. 12. 22.
This filthy flattery makes a Welsh Proverb that we have in Wales true, Tree
feth see a noth y dde (...)abod deen, derwin a duarnod.
that it is hard to know three things, an oak, a day, and a man: An oak for his
privy windshakes that may be within, seem it never so fair without: a day
for his variableness of wether, and accidents that fall therein, and a man for
his hollow heart when his words are softer then oil, and most comfortable: But
let this sin go to hell, whither it will carry all that use it without
repentance, and let us mark the virtue of these servants of Naman yt were so
far from it. They are dead, and yet live for dealing plainly with duty for
their masters good, and hating to sooth him to his harm, and live they shall
with God assuredly that ever use it.

The reason of their persuasion is an argument drawn from the greater to the
less. The reason of the servants.
If the Prophet (say they) had commanded thee a great thing, would thou not
have done it? then much more willingly should this small thing be performed. A
maiori.
The grounds of their Antecedent are two: why a great thing should be done if
commanded
The calling of the bidder, a Prophet, (therefore they say if the Prophet, The
calling of the bidder.
with an emphasis in the title and name) and the end of the thing bidden to
attainment of health, and deliverance from so grievous a disease: either of
which, but much more both together, were a sufficient reason to make a man do a
great thing, if it had been commanded. Being as much in effect and sense, as
if they should have said, Ministers words to be regarded for their calling
sir his calling first is reverent and high, not to be despised or lightly
regarded; He is a Prophet, the minister of God, by whom God has showed his
power greatly, as we have heard, and therefore his words must be of weight, and
his direction followed, though he had enjoined a great matter. Secondly what he
wills, tends to your health, and to no worse effect: for he says Wash and
be clean. Now for a man's health very great things are to be endured,
especially if his grief be great. Therefore, as well for his calling that
wills, as for the fruit of the thing willed, this counsel of the Prophet
should willingly and readily be embraced and followed. This is the persuasion
in substance, and the grounds they build upon in ye same. A very plain, a
very true, and a very profitable persuasion in whole and in part: Apply it to
our selves and it may thus avail us.

Do Namans servants seem to regard the calling of the Prophet, Application.
and to think his words may not be despised without great folly? Alas what knew
they concerning Gods Prophets and ministers, to that which we know this day and
this hour? We know the Lord now speaks not, nor builds his church in this
world by his own voice in his own person, Ephesians. 4. 11.
but he has given some Prophets, some Apostles, some Evangelists, some Pastors
and teachers for the repairing of the saints, for the work of the ministry,
and for the edification of the body of Christ, till we all meet together in
the unity of faith unto a perfect man, etc. And by these he teaches, by these
he conuinceth, by these he corrects and instructs unto righteousness. 2.
Tim. 3. 16.
To these we know he has said, Matthew. 28. 19
Go into all the world and teach, and I will be with you. We know he has said,
He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me,
Contempt of ministers contempt of God.
even me my self and mine own person. 1. Sam. 8. 7.
Non reiecerunt te, sed reiecerunt me (said God to Samuel.) They have not cast
thee away, but have cast me away: And it is true, in the contempt of any man's
ministry duly and truly used. None of these things (as we know them) knew
Namans servants, and yet they reverenced, they regarded, and persuaded their
Lord and master to regard, and feared a contempt of such a man's words. What
judges in the dreadful and judging day of God shall they then be against us,
that knowing what we know, and convinced in our consciences with the truth of
that we hear, yet fearfully despise both speech and speaker, both calling and
counsel: and not only so our selves, but either by example, or by persuasion,
or by both, endeavor to effect ye same in others? A word is enough to men wise
and learned: God will not endure disdain and scorn for ever. His own mouth
has said, he indureth it when his messengers endure it. His own hand will
plague it therefore if he be God, unless we leave it. Cyprian said well, Lib.
4. Epi. ^
and to this end most truly, Qui non credit Christo Sacerdotem agenti, credet
tandem vindicanti. He that believes not Christ when he does the office of a
minister, shall believe him to his woe, when he does the office of a judge. How
does Christ the office of a minister, but in, and by those, that be our
ministers? believe not them then, believe not Christ, and so receive indgement
for contempt of Christ.

Secondly, was the good of body (the release from a fleshly leaprosie) such a
matter in these servants eyes, The end of (...)ur counsel and preaching far
better (...)hen the Prophets now to Naman.
that for it eue^ great things were to be obeyed and done? What think we then
of good for body and soul, of deliverance from spiritual leaprosie of soul
that infecteth to death eternal, both of body and soul? should not great
things be endured for that, should not hard things be obeyed and followed for
that? Such is the fruit of our ministry, and such is the effect of our
persuasions if they be received. Hoc fac and viue, This do and thou shall live.
In Christ and by Christ we do it when we believe and practice as we are taught
and God inableth. And thus of the matter of the servants speech.

The second general head was the obedience of Naman to the counsel: Namans
obedience.
wherein we may observe first, whom he yields unto, and follows. Surely his
own servants, men, for place so far inferior to him, as servants to such
noble and honorable masters be, yet their counsel he imbraceth, and their
advise, though contrary to his liking, he will not reject. How true then do we
see it to be? Wise men regard not ever who speaks, but what it spoken.
that grave and wise men do not regard so much who speaks, as what is spoken,
knowing that Saepe etiam est holitor valde opportuna locutus. The poor gardner
many times speaks greatly to purpose. Saepe sub sordido paliolo latet
sapientia. Often under a poor cloak lies wisdom shrouded and hidden.
Dangerous therefore it is, Dangerous to pin our selves to titles of men.
and prejudicial to good discretion, to tie our selves to titles and places of
men that shall counsel us, as willing to regard nothing, except it proceed
from some man of note, graced with some worldly place and title of dignity in
the world: for Naman we see was healed, and received a great good by yielding
to his poor servants, when they spoke well and to good effect. And we know God
himself tieth not his wisdom ever to men of greatest note for worldly place,
1. Cor. 1.
but has often chosen the foolish things of the world to confirm the wise,
and the weak things of the world, to confound the mighty things. And vile
things of the world, and things which are despised has God chosen, and things
which are not, to bring to naught things that are, That no flesh should rejoice
in his presence.

Optimus ille quidem, qui paret recta monenti: The best man therefore is he,
that imbraceth good counsel, be he never so mean an instrument from whom it
comes.

Next we observe how readily and willingly Naman does it, Good counsel to be
followed readily without checks.
making no reply to the contrary, giving them no check, no snub, no rebuke
for intermedling with his matters. Certainly a great virtue and a very
honorable mind in him, to the check of all those that rate and revile, beat
down and disgrace at the first, such as perhaps after they follow, though not
seeming so to do. Surely he spoke it moderately that spoke it, and it is most
worthy marking. Si merito reprehenderit quis, scito quia profuit, si immerito,
scito quia prodesse voluit. If a man rebuke a man and cross his mind with some
persuasion, if there be cause of that persuasion, then has he profited thee,
if there be no cause, yet was his heart and mind to profit thee, and that is
to be regarded and accepted without any unkind check ever.

3 And his flesh came again like the flesh of a young child, and he was
clean. This is the fruit that followed his obedience, The fruit of Namans
obedience.
he was healed. But you will say, Did the water of Jordan heal him? No, no
more the^ the clay and spittle that our Savior used gave sight. God healed not
the water.
But there then that, and now here this was the means that it pleased God to
use, he him self both there and here healing by his divine power and might. If
we ask again, Why he washed 7. time*
why seven times he washed, and was not healed with once or twice washing? The
answer may be this, that as well at once as after seven times washing God could
have healed him, if it had pleased him, and without any washing at all if he
would, for neither the washing nor the number auayled any thing to his health:
but the one used, because so it pleased God, who uses outward things as he
pleases, and leaves them also when he will, and the number of times used
only for exercise of his faith and obedience. As he brought the children of
Israel to the land of Canaan after many years trial, which he could have given
far sooner if he would. He could by and by have released Joseph from his
wrongful imprisonment if he would, yet he let him alone a long time, and all
to school him. David he could have brought to the kingdom, with half the
difficulty that he did if he would, and have delivered also Daniel and the
three children, before ever they had come into such danger: but thus he
thought good to exercise their faith, patience and hope, that much more they
might shine having thus been tried. And this is a note for all weary suitors in
this place to take with them. Weary su(...)ers comfort
If it pleased God he could effect your desires, and dispatch you away in a
day, but then should not you know, what perhaps thus you learn, neither inward
faith receive such fruitful exercise, as thus it does, looking to God, hoping
in God, and resting upon God, to receive from him what shall be best, and in
such time and space as shall be best. Yet may I not say that your profiting any
way by your delays may be a just excuse to them, that without any need are
causes of the same. For surely the Lord would have all honest suits with
convenient speed ever dispatched: and that made Moses first sit him self from
morning to night, and after to choose others his coadiutors in that business,
that men might more quickly and easily be relieved. And thus much briefly of
Namans healing.

The fourth and last thing is his thankfulness when he was healed, Namans
(...)ankfulnes.
set down in words and in deeds, to God, and to the Prophet, and that not
formally but vehemently performed. (...) words.
His thankfulness to God in words, that he knew now there was no God in all the
world but in Israel. In deeds.
In deeds, that he would thence forth offer neither burnt sacrifice, nor
offering unto any other God save unto the Lord. Both words and deeds a duty
sweet, performed as it should be in any man. For what may the Lord more justly
require for his mercies and benefits then a thankful heart? Perform this and
perform but duty, Good men ever thankful*
yet perform this and perform what God esteems highly, and what godly men
have ever performed zealously. Jacob the great Patriarch, when he considered
what he had been, and what he was, and by whose means he was what he was, how
brake out the flame of such sweet feeling into praise and prayer, saying: Genesis
32. 10.
O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, etc. I am not worthy
of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed
unto thy servant, for with my staff came I over this Jorden, and now have I
gotten two bands, etc. God make them that have gotten two bands with Jacob,
beginning but with their staff, as thankful to the giver as Jacob was.

What felt David when he cried, Quid retribuam? What shall I give, what shall I
give to the Lord for his benefits bestowed upon me? When again he cried,
Psalm. 103.
O my soul praise the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name: O
my soul praise the Lord and forget not, forget not, forget not his benefits,
which gave thee pardon for thy sins, etc. That is, which has done this, and
done that, and done a thousand things for thee. When again he cried, O Solomon
(my son) know the God of thy father. (...) Chro. 28.
That is, that preserved thy father, exalted thy father, set up thy father, so
greatly, so graciously, so mercifully and so bountifully, as ever man was. Know
him (I say my son) and serve him with a perfect heart and a willing mind,
etc. What felt the blessed virgin Marie? when she cried, Luc. 1.
My soul does magnify the Lord, etc. with thousands mo I might name, ever
feeling, and ever thankful for mercies received. The contrary, to wit a dull
and dead heart in this behalf, is as odious on the other side, and as damnable
as this is sweet and acceptable: witness the Lord Jesus, one for all, and once
for all, when he said Were there not ten cleansed, (...)uc. 17.
where are then the other nine? Behold there is not found that returns to
give thanks but this one: As if he should have said, O sin of sins, ugly
and monstrous, so many cleansed and so few thankful. One writes a
Commentary upon the book of Wisdom, Holcot in Sap.
and there in the end tells certain stories moralizing upon the^, amongst
which this is one: A story of an unthankful woman.
That a certain woman named Nephastes being with child, went into the Temple
of the gods to ask what it might be that she went withal? Unto which desire
of hers one of the gods answered, Faetus tuus filius est, and dabo
pulchritudinem: Thy child is a son, and I will give him beauty. Another,
Faetus tuus filius est, and dabo fortitudinem: Thy child is a son, and I will
give it strength. The third, Faetus tuus filius est and dabo diuitias: Thy
child is a son and I will give him riches. Three great gifts, beauty,
fortitude and riches: yet (says the story) the mother made a truth at all
these, because her heart wished somewhat else, that was not named: to wit, favor
of great personages and long life. Which when the gods saw, to reward
unthankfulness with a condign punishment, they changed their gifts, and he
that said he would give beauty, gave the child when it was borne the head of
an ape, he that said he would give strength, gave it for hands goose feet, and
for arms goose legs: the third that said he would give riches, Dedit
excoriatum, gave it so bare that it had not so much as any skin upon it. Thus
was unthankfulness punished, and be if story or fable, or whatsoever, the drift
of it is Gods truth, as true as God, that unthankfulness is odious to the Lord.
Naman therefore a blessed man that had such a feeling heart of Gods goodness
toward him.

But was he only thankful? Naman with an edge thankful, and so ought we.
No (I say) but with an edge he was thankful, and that also is to be noted.
His words have an emphasis in them, and a vehemency: No God, no God, no God,
but the God of Israel: I will never sacrifice to any else, never, never, Yea God
be merciful unto me when I shall but bow down in the house of Rimmon, by
reason of the king my master leaning upon my shoulder, God (I say) be merciful
unto me and forgive, but even thus much declining from this my God, that has
thus healed me, etc. All which words we see have heat in them, and proceed
from a heart that is thoroughly touched. Away then (says this example) with all
formal and frosen thanks, Word di(...) thankful(...)*
such as comes not from the heart, and therefore has scarce power to come out
of the mouth, but half cleaves in the teeth: Such never God loved, such never
Gods children used or liked. Mad Machiauel talks in this as in other duties
of religion, of a seeming, and not a being: but as good a politician as he, and
far better, says, O dogma, ad principis perniciem pariter and subditoru^.
Lipsius, N(...)polit. To seem not to be.
O rule tending to the subversion both of Prince and people. Whatsoever men
say, the truth of God says, thankfulness to God is to be performed, not in
show, but in truth: not for form, but with feeling, as here did Naman. For
what is that fire that the Lord Jesus baptizeth with all, Matthew. 3.
is it colder then water? Act. 2.
Why came the holy ghost upon the Apostles like tongues of fire? Surely these
places tell us that heat in heart, and heat in tongue is whersoeuer Gods
spirit rules: and if where there is some warmth, that is a lukewarmnes,
Revel. 3.
yet there the Lord threatens destruction and confusion: saying, He will vomit
such out of his mouth: how much more where there is none at all? no not even so
much as a lukewarmnes, but only a seeming, to sooth the world withal, and no
more. Far therefore from all Gods children be this wicked paradox, and in
steed thereof this example of Naman thus vehemently feeling, and speaking,
together with that most certain and sure truth, that Religiosa pietas solum
immobile fundamentum. Religious piety not seeming piety, is the only
immouable foundation ever to any man. Thus was he thankful toward God. Lastly
is to be considered his thankfulness also toward the Prophet, together with the
earnestnes thereof again, and so to end.

His thankfulness to the Prophet is set down in these words, (...)amans
(...)ankfulnes (...) the Pro(...)het.
I pray thee take a reward of thy servant: testifying thereby, that his heart
felt with a sweet taste the benefit done unto him by his ministry: a thing
which likewise God ever required, and men of virtue have ever performed, as
might by sundry scriptures be showed if it were needful. Our ungrateful days.
But alas the days and times wherein we live, as far from sweet conceits
toward men by whom we have been pleasured, as ever any days since the world
began. Galath. 4. 15
The Galathians, when saint Paul had taught the^ the word of God, opened their
understanding and brought them to the faith, thought the very eyes in their
heads not to much to bestow on him. We in steed of giving eyes, could find in
our heart to take the eyes of them that have begotten us unto Christ, and are
the ministers by whom either first we believed, or at least were greatly
increased and profited in belief. God turn our hearts and lay not to our
charge in his judging day what the true teachers of Gods eternal testimonies
find at our hands in these days. But do we deal thus only with the
ministers? No, even the civil Magistrate, whose cares and toils, no love, no
life, no death ca^ ever requite, drinks of the same cup, and receives the
same measure at our hands as the ministers do: for we rail, we rhyme, we gird,
we glance, we tell old wives tales of them also. Note this story.
Plutarch reports of some Grecians in the life of Flaminius, that Philip
being overcome, and liberty proclaimed unto them by Flaminius, they cried with
such vehemency (...), Savior, Savior, that the very fowls in the air fell
down dead with the sound of the cry, and they so pressed to see the face of
him that was so good unto them, that time it was for Flaminius to make away,
lest the vehemency of the people might have ouerrunne and crushed both him and
others. good (...)ued far (...)e this.
Here was love and thankfulness we see most vehement. God does know, and our
souls and consciences testify unto us this day, how far we exceed these
Grecians in freedom and mercies bestowed upon us, not by a Roman or Heathen,
but by a most Christian Queen and gracious governor over us (his hand and
power that hitherto has done it, long mercifully preserve her to us.) Where be
our cries with these Grecians (...), Savior, Savior? (Who is me to speak it)
some of us cry, and too many of us cry in steed of this, No church, no
sacraments, no ministers, no discipline at all, and therefore we must leave all
open assemblies in this land, and combine our selves together to erect a form
according to our wills, in woods, in fields, in holes and corners where we can:
Yea with more woe I speak it, some fear not to write, Pharao of Egypt gave the
Israelites leave to worship God truly, (...)e pamph(...) upon (...)atth. 23.
but our Magistrates, If they should give us leave yet could we not be suffered
for such and such. Making an If, after these infinite mercies powered upon us by
God, in the gracious government we live under, and casting down the governors
in merit toward us, beneath Pharao of Egypt. O sinful If, O damnable and
undutiful If. If this be our thankfulness toward me^, from whom we have
received health, and health not of body as here Naman did, but of soul and
body infinite and unknown ways, without doubt we be no Namans, a man may
swear we be no Namans, nor Grecians that so felt the friendship of Flaminius,
nor men in this behalf of civil virtue: God make us in the end good subjects.

But from whence might this great unthankfulness both to Magistrate and Minister
arise and flow in these men? Surely the very fountain is this (as I think)
that they may not be suffered by either of them to alter and change the laws
they like not of at their pleasures, not considering, or regarding, as may be
thought, with that stayednesse of head and trembling of heart that were to be
wished, what either the wisdom of God has set down in his word, in conscience
to be followed, or what wisdom of men in government and policy expert, have
delivered, in discretion to be regarded. For the word of God, me think the
place in the Proverbs in steed of many more should greatly move us, where the
Spirit of God says thus. (...)rou. 34. 21. (...)c.
My son fear the Lord and the king, and meddle not with them that are
seditious, for their destruction shall arise suddenly, and who knows the
ruin of them both? That are seditious, says the English, but that are
Changers or Variers says the Hebrew gnim shonim. And that we might understand
what Variers and Chaungers are meant, Tremellius and Iunius say thus: Cum
varijs, id est, variantibus and perfringentibus leges Dei and suorum Principum.
Denique deficientibus vita sua immorigera a reuerentia Dei and Regis. With
Variers, that is variers and breakers of the laws of God and of their own
Princes. Changers of Princes laws
And finally by their undutiful and disobedient life, making default of
reverence to God and Prince. Cum mutantibus, say others, Lauaterus in Prou.
scilicet leges, consuetudines, ritus bonos, statum regni. With chaungers, to
wit, of laws, customs, good rites, and state of a kingdom. With these my
son meddle not, but fear the Lord and the king. For the destruction of such
men shall be sudden, and who knows the ruin of them both? For the writings of
men let Austin both for learning, Testimonies of men.
virtue, and experience weigh something with us, who setting down that chaunges
sometimes may be either by adding or detracting, Epist. 18.
yet sets this down as a most tried truth, that when a change is made, Quae
adiuuat vtilitate, perturbat nouitate. What it profits by his goodness, it
troubles with his newness. Worthy is the place advised reading, and
religious marking, if we regard any men's judgments but our own. Innovation
Others have joined with this judgment of Austin fitly and fully if need were
to show many. Tutissime agunt qui praesentibus moribus legibusque etiamsi
deteriores sint, Alcibiad apud Thu. lib. 6.
minimum variantes, rempublicam administrant. (...)(...).
They deal most safely that varying as little as may be from present laws and
manners in use, (...).
govern the common wealth thereby, although they be somevvhat worse. (...).
Positas semel leges constanter seruate, (...).
nec vlla^ earum mutate. Nam quae in suo statu eademque manent, etsi deteriora
sint, tamen vtiliora sunt Reipublicae his, quae per innouatione^ vel meliora
inducuntur. Laws once established keep constantly, Apud Dion. 52.
neither change any of them. For things which remain in their state and the
same, although they be worse, yet are more profitable to the common wealth,
then those which by innovation are brought in better. (...)neca (...)pist.
Non conualescit planta quae saepius tra^sfertur. The plant that is often
removed does not prosper. (...)uint. lib. 3. (...)stitut.
Sperne circa te nouatores, qui vt aliquid videantur afferre sui, etiam recta
co^mutant. Despise about thee innouators, who that they may seem to bring
something of their own, change even right things. Many such things out of
wise men's writings might be alleged. By which all, as by these now named, my
conscience profits but only thus: Not to think that what man does, may never
be changed or bettered, for I have approved Austins judgment before to the
contrary, but to learn as much reverence toward things established by grave
and godly advise, as possibly there may appear cause in them, to hate rash
business, and busy rashness, and if things must and ought to be changed in
deed, then to do it, if I were a doer, or to seek it, if I be a seeker, as
that wise Orator said, Quam minimo sonitu. With as little noise as may be.
Cicero ad Attic. lib. 11. Epist. 9
Thus in mine opinion might we somewhat lessen the cause, and dry up the
fountain from whence springs ingratitude now named toward Magistrates and
Ministers, and make us cry, as thankfully as ever the Grecians did, of whom I
have spoken, or as Naman the Assyrian does, whom now we entreat of. God guide
us and direct us in his mercy.

The heat I said of Namans thankfulness was to be observed, Naman ha(...)tely
thankful to man not formal(...)
which god his wisdom has not concealed, but purposely noted in this ( He
would have compelled him.) It affoordeth us this doctrine, that it is not
enough when we have received a benefit from men, to utter a few formal
thanks, or to conceive a few fine phrases, but both man ioyeth in and God
himself requires a heat, a zeal, an earnest, faithful, and feeling
thanksgiving after God the giver, to man the means of his mercy toward us.
Naman had it here in the text, and God will not conceal it, but utter it for
our knowledge. The Leaper cleansed in the Gospel, turned back, fell down on
his face at Jesus feet, Luke 16. 17.
and with a loud voice gave him thanks: all words and gestures of heat and
hartinesse in this duty. The blind man when he had received sight, Followed
Jesus, and praised him: followed him (says the story) which was heat, when a
frosen zeal would have slipped away after a few formal words. What hearty
heat was in Marie for good received, when she lay at his feet, and with
tears that came from a ravished heart washed them, and wiped them with the
hairs of her head. Was this an ordinary thankfulness, or a heat in her,
honored by God himself, and in us assured ever of blessing, if we have it?
Thankful therefore we ought to be not only to God but to men, for so was
Naman, and that fervently, not falsely, for so was Naman.

Why the Prophet would not receive this offered gift at Namans hands, Why the
Prophet refused his gift
two causes may be coniectured: One, that he might breed in Naman a conceit of
difference in him, and all true Prophets, from false dissemblers, where of then
were many, with whom all was fish that came to net. Another, that he might
hereby occasion Naman to think of God, as the only giver, worker, and
effecter of his health, and not of any virtue in him (the Prophet) thereunto,
which happily he might have done, if his gift had been received. A care of our
name.
This teaches us a doctrine of care to preserve our honest estimation in the
world with all men, as we may well, Not to rob God of glory.
and not to rob God of his glory by ignorance in men to discern aright, but
the time is gone: The God of mercy and power give his word a blessing, make it
a savor of life unto life to us, and let it never be a savor of death unto
death: Increase our knowledge, but increase our obedience also according to our
knowledge, that we may not only know what to do, but do it every day, and
every way more and more through Jesus Christ our Lord, who with the father and
the holy ghost, be blessed, praised, and honored now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 13. for (...) read (...), for (...) read (...). Page 33. in the margent,
for Epist. 18. read Epist. 118. Page 14. read the Welsh note thus. Tri feth
sydd anodd y ddynabod, din, derwen, a duwarnod. Page 19. line. 21. for
confirm, read confound.




