THE ESTATE of the German Empire, with the description of Germany.

1. Declaring how the Empire was translated from the Romans to the Germans:
with diverse and sundry memorable accidents following there-vpon. written
certain years past as the estate then stood.

2. Describing the situation of every Country, Province, Dukedom,
Archbishopric, Bishopric, Earldom and City of Germany: The Princes and
chief officers of the Empire in their several places: who have their seats
and voices at the election of the Emperor, and at the Jmperiall Parliaments:
and who are the Electors of the Emperor: and also what companies of Soldiers
(both horsse-men and foote-men) every Prince, Archbishop, Bishop, Nobleman and
City, is bound yearly to find against the Turk.

Newly set forth for the profit and pleasure of all Gentlemen and others,
that are delighted in travail or knowledge of Countries.

AT LONDON

Printed for Raphe Blower, and are to be sold at his shop in Fleetstreet,
near the Middle Temple Gate. An. Do. 1595.

To the Right Honorable, Robert Earl of Sussex, Viscount Fitzwaters, Lord
Egremond and Burnell: W. F. wishes Gods great favor, with everlasting weal.
THE fame (right honorable) of your magnanimous and heroical mind, together
with the present accident of your reported purpose, in traueling beyond the
seas, has imboldened me to present your Lordshippe with this treatise of the
Estate and Description of Germany: the which (peradventure) may serve your
honor in some stead, for discerning the several parts of Germany with their
scituations.

The work (I confess) was not of mine own collection: but the one part I
received in Italian, the other in Latin, both collected by men of great
worth, after that they had been much employed in foreign Lands, about their
Princes service. And now having joined both together, and clad them in English
attire, I humblye crave your Lordshipps patronage to privilege these new
pilgrims against their peeu^^^ persecutors: Which, if you shall vouchsafe to
grant, your honors Bongre shall be as a bulvvarke vnexpugnable to fafegarde
this book: and your acceptable allowing hereof, shall encourage me, not only
to be ready to celebrate your name, most worthy of your progenitors, by
dedication of greater works hereafter: but I will also be ready to deuote my
whole skill, service and life to be at your Lord-ships command.

Your honors suppliant and affectionate servant: William Fiston.

THE ESTATE OF THE German Empire: Declaring how it was translated from the
Romans to the Germans: the manner of electing the Emperor: who are the
electors: and which are the chief officers and Cities belonging thereunto.
FIrst we are to note, that in the time of Charlemaigne and for a certain
season after his time, the ordaining and election of the Emperor consisted and
was in the full power of any Emperor reigning, to chose for his successor one
whom he thought good: so, as his Majesty choosing one, the Princes of the
Empire did thereto forthwith agree to such his election. And (for the most
part) was elected still by the father his son, or else the next kinsma^ that
he had: and to such a one as the Empire was descended by inheritance unto, the
princes did never gainsay unless by chance the Emperor elected such a one as was
not meet for such a charge and dignity. And this order endured until An. Do.
993. After the death of Otho the second of that name, the Romans endeavored
to bring again the Empire from strange Nations unto themselves, and to cause
that this dignity might be and abide in their power: and their desire was,
that the Emperor should be chosen either of the order of Senators or of some
Italian princes stock and lineage, such a one as were fit for and worthy of
such an office and dignity. For thus they esteemed it lawful for them to do,
as in times past the Emperor was accustomed, and was of duty to be chosen in
Rome by the Senate, or else out of Rome by the army of Romans. And if
(happily) it fell so out, that the Emperor were suddenly killed either in Rome,
or out of the City, in such a case it was lawful for the soldiers and
gentlemen to choose a new Romain Emperor or Captain general to be their guide
and Governor, and to rule as principal in the commonweal. This ancient
manner of electing Emperor did the Romans pretend to seek for to have
restored at that time when Emperor Otho the second dyed. But the Germans
which had already possessed the imperial dignity no small time, did not give
them selves to sleeping when they saw matters go thus: but they making have
for an election, chose Otho the third, the son of Otho the second: who
presently was obeyed as Emperor, and so acknowledged of every body: and by
this mean the intent of the Romans was frustrate and of none effect. It
happened also at that very instant that pope John dyed, and the Emperor Otho so
befreended a Cousin of his in the election, that he was chose^ pope and was
called pope Gregory the fifth: which thing did exceedingly vex and displease
the Romans: they therefore so outraged and troubled the said pope Gregory,
that he was forced to forsake Rome and to get him again into Germany to the
Emperor: during whose absence the Romans and other of the Consistory elected
for pope an other named John the ninth, the bishop of Placentia. For which deed
the Emperor was so wrathfully displeased, that having gathered together a very
puissant army, he passed into Italy, there he besieged Rome and conquered it,
imprisoned the new pope, and caused his eyes to be dug out, and placed his
cousin Gregory the fifth in his see again. At whose restoring to the popedom,
the Emperor moreover ordained, that from that time forth it should be
established as a law, that the election of the roman Emperor should be only in
the power of the Princes of Germany, and whosoever should be elected by them,
he should forthwith be allowed, holden and obeyed as king of Romans and
Emperor, and that he should presently after be crowned by the pope, and
proclaimed Caesar Augustus. But before that Otho published this decree, he
assembled together a general council in Germany, whether came all the Princes
and potentates of Germany, to whom the Emperor propounded as follows.

For as much as heretofore there have happened diverse inconveniences and
controversies in the election of the Emperor, to the hinderance and annoying of
Germany with continual wars, which by such occasions have hapened, the
which evils may breed to cause a disagreeing and utter destruction of the
Empire in Germany: For, the father has heretofore been careful to prefer
unto the Empire after him, his son or near kinsman, rather then to appoint
thereto a man fit and worthy of such a charge and calling. For remedying of
which inconvenience and danger to the state, it seemed unto his Majesty a
thing expedient and profitable, that among the princes there should be chosen
certain, which for time to come should always have full power to choose him
that should be Emperor: to which election of theirs, it should be ordained that
euerybody of duty should be bound forthwith to agree and consent. And how
much less the number of these electors should be, so much the more easily and
without controversy they should agree in the election. It seemed also to his
Majesty a matter reasonable, that such persons as should have the choice of
the Emperor, should be chosen from among the chief officers of the Empire,
forasmuch as they (by reason of the daily business and affairs they used to
have about matters of the Empire) were men very meet and best experienced to
know what belonged to the Empire, the state thereof, and what manner of man he
had need to be, that should to that place and authority be elected: so that
justice might the better be administered, the Imperial state better vpholden,
and the commonweal better provided for.

When this sacred and profitable counsel and opinion of the Emperors majesty
was propounded, immediately the Princes and potentates of the Empire concluded,
according as his majesty had said, with one consent and opinion. And in
conclusion it was ordained that only seven persons should have their voices
and full power to choose the Emperor, namely, the three great Chauncellors of
the Empire in the country of Germany: that is the Archbishop of Mentz great
Cha^celor of Germany, the Archbishop of Treuers great Chancellor of the
provinces beyond Rheine called the Low countries: the Archbishop of Collen
great Chauncellor of Italy: and these are the ecclesiastical persons that be
Electors. There were appointed with these, the Count Palatine of Rheine, great
Steward of the Empire, the Duke of Saxony great Marshall of the Empire: the
Marquess of Brandenburg great Chamberlain of the Empire: the King of Bohemia
the^ but Duke, great Secretary of the Empire: and this King was not in those
days anointed and crowned as King, but had only the title of Duke. And these
were the other four Electors, the Duke of Bohemia being put in after when a
controversy had risen about the election, and could not be decyded by reason
of the equality of number, three holding one way, and three another way, he
was added to make always the one side greater. This decree was made in the
year of our Lord 1001. and the first Emperor that was elected by the seven
Electors was Henry, that was canonized for a saint, being the first founder of
the Bishopric of Bamberg. There was also in the said council or parliament
established many other laws for certain men appointed Officers to the Empire,
and lands thereto allotted, as next unto the seven Electors were ordained four
Dukes of the Empire, four Earls of Provinces called Lant-graues, four
Marquesses, four Burgraues, four Earls martial, four Counties, four
cities, four Marshalls, four free Barons, four knights, four Towns, four
Country-farmers, four Casals, four Lords in Italy, four Abbeies the Abots of
which were Princes, four Mounts, four Borough Towns, four Hunts-men, four
Officers of the Dukedom of Sweuia, four servants of the Empire. Yet these
ordinances of the Empire have many times changed, and some order have since
been added and some taken away, according as time and opportunity required,
and there have been added more Earledomes and Earls and also Dukedomes and
other dignities: and of Earledomes have been made Dukedomes: and again, of
Dukedomes Earledomes. Moreover the names of many Dukedomes have been lost by
reason of men that possessed them dying without heirs, as has come to pass
by the Dukedom of Sweuia, the Dukedom of Impurg, the Dukedom of Zaring, and
the Dukedom of Iioytland.

Within three hundred years, these Potentates hereafter named have been
instituted and established according to their degrees and dignities in their
Offices, as an ornament of the Empire.

Dukes 4. Branswich. Bauier. Sweuia. Orhue.
Lantgraues 4. Thuring. Hessia. Liehtenberg, ^allasia.
Marquesses 4, Misnia, Morania, Badense, Brandenburgh,
Burgraues 4 Mardenburg, Renech. Norimberg. ^tronburg,
Earls 4 Cleue. Squarcemburg. Goricia. Souoya.
Counts martial 4 Flaunders. Tyroll. Aldenburg, Ferrethi,
Marshalls 4 Bappenheim, Gulch, Meisen, Frustingen,
Free Barons 4 Limpurg, Thusuis, Westerburg. Aldenvalden,
Knights 4 Audlay. Meldingen. Strondech, Fronsberg,
Free City 4, Augusta. Aquisgraue. Maets. Lubech,
Towns 4, Bamberg. Vlme, Haghnaun, Sheltzstat,
Farmers or Peasants. 4 Collen. R^tisbone. Constance. Saltzpur,
Casals. 4 Ingelheim, Altdorf, Lietchtenanu. Dechendorf,
Lords of Italy 4, Millain. Scala. Padoua, Mirandola.
Abbats Princes 4 Fulda. Campidonia, Maidenburgen. Murbach.
Mountes 4 Munsterberg, Fridberg of Verdanu Heidelberg, Norinberg,
Burghes of the Empire 4 Aldenburgh. Maidenburg Rottenberg. Mechelburg,
Hunters of the Empy^e 4 Hurne, Vrach, Sconburg, Metz by Chura,
Officers of the Duke of Sweuia. 4 Steward of walpurg. Secretary of Rhadach.
Marshal of March dorf. Chamberlain of Cenuat.
Servants of the Empire 4 Waldech. Pulchen. Arnsperg. Rabnaun.

It is to be understood, that after the death of Charlemaigne, Germany
increased wonderfully in buildings, Cities, Castles, Fortes, Towns and
Villages, so that woods and desert places being made plain and tylled, were
brought to be both pleasant and profitable to the use of men: men also
multiplying there exceedinglye. And the said Charles and other Emperors after
him, for the beautifying of Germany, priuileged the chief Cities with
Bishoprics, and gave them great revennues and possessions, and made them
princes and feodataries of the Empire. Furthermore the Emperors made by
succession many princes in Germany, and divided the Land among them, according
to the place and deserts of every one in regard of the Empire: but always it
was reserved, that the Cities Imperial should be free from all Taxes to be
due unto any other princes, or service to any, but they were always reserved
in liberty and in the Emperors hands: and for more securitye, the Emperors
priuileged them and made them free with many privileges according to their
Customs: so as those priuileged Cities were not only called Cities of the
Empire, but free and great franchised Cities, meaning thereby, that they were
in obedience to the Empire of Rome, and in the society thereof. And by example
of these free Lands and places, Ecclesiastical princes and other seculer
Lords, began more and more to make and enlarge Cities, Castles and many
worthy buildings, in such sort, that in short time, they exceeded in
beautifying, in civil government, in fair show, riches and strength, any
whatsoever free Cities of the Empire.

These be the Ecclesiastical princes and Bishops of the Empire.
Magunce. Treuers. Collen. Salzpurg. Herbipolis. Bamberg. Lutich. Vormatia.
Spire. Argentine. Churie. Auguste. Trent. Brissinon. Breme. Bissanzon. Rhige.
Eystet. Constance. Hildesnuense Ratzenburg. Freizing. Ossenburg, Munster.
Ratisbone. Patauia. Basile.
Also the great Master of Prussia of the dutch order, the Abbots of Fulda, of
Hirfeild, of Murbach, of Campidonias, of Maidenburg, and other.

These are the free Cities of the Empire that were in old time, of which,
some are now by diverse ways alyenated from the Empire. They were all in time
past 95.
Aquisgraue, Alen, * Antwerp. Augusta, * Basile a canton of Switzers. * Berne a
canton of Switzers. * Bernehein. Biberach. * Bisanzon. * Bon Perch, Buchorne
Bopfingen. Campein, * Chura under the Grisons. Collen. Colmarie. * Canstance. *
Deuenter. Doctinured. Dinchen spisel. * Durche. Durcheim. Eger. Esford. Esling.
Francford Menofin. Francford Oderafni. Fridberg in Werdan. * Friburg in
Brisgone. Chelu Husen. Genge. Gotting in Saxony. * Groining in Friseland.
Gniunde. Goslarie in Saxony. Hagenowe. Halla in Sweuia. Halla in Saxony.
Ha^lprune. Hamborow. Heidesfert. Isna. * Ingelheim in the County palatine.
Kamffpeiren. Kaysersperg. * Kaysers lantern in the County palatine.
Kampidonia. Landona. Lindo. Lukires. Lubeck. * Lucerne a canton of Switzers.
Luneburg. Maidenburg. Memming. Metz. Magunce. Mulhausen in Thuring. Mulhausen
in Sugonie Northhausen in Thuring. Norimberg. * Nenmage of the Duchy of
Geldre. Nerling. Oderheim. Obernesheim. Offenburg. * Oppenheim in the County
palatine of Rheine. Perfullendor. Rauenspurge. Ratisbone. Rottenburg at
Tamberfin. Roshim. Rotweil. Rentling. * Saint Gall canto of Switzers. *
Schafhuse^ canto of Switzers. Schlestat. * Solturne canton of Switzers.
Strasburg, Argentine, Spire. Schunfurt. Treuers. Vbirling. Vlme. Wange. Werdte
by Danubie. Wesel by Rheine. * Wesel in Cleue. Welzfflay in Hessia. Weyl in
Sweuia. Wenisenburg, Wimpfon, Wormatia, Wuisheim. Zurich of Switzers.
Among these cities abouenamed there are some that bear rule of themselves and
yield no odebience to the Empire, as those that are in Heluetia in the
possession of the Switzers, and those are marked with a star on the margin:
and so are those that have been pawned to Princes by the Emperors, at such
times as they stood in need of money. Like as it came to pass in the year of
our Lord 1230 that King William of Holland pawned the City of Newmaga to the
Earl of Gelderland for 21000. marks of money: Likewise did King Robert the
Count Palatine, who pawned to his son the Count Palatine Oppenheim and
Ingelheim and Keyserlawterne for 100000. Gilders: and this was in the year
1402. notwithstanding some say it came to pass after this sort: after that
Charles the fourth was elected Emperor, he sought, and with great importunity
labored with the Princes, that they would choose for Emperor his son
Wenceslaus, and for to get the good will of the electors; he promised to give
them a great sum of money: as says Aeneas Siluius defusedly in his history
of Bohemia. He promised to every one of the electors a hundred thousand
florines, assuring the payment of the same, by letting them take possession,
and giving them certain places, because he was not otherwise able to satisfy
them with ready money, and so to the Count Palatine for his share fell the
aforesaid three Cities of the Empire. This Emperor Charles the fourth did
most greatly hinder the Empire, for whatsoever treasure he could get and
gather, he carried all into Bohemia, to enrich that kingdom that was his
inheritance. Wenceslaus also son to Charles the fourth, after he had
obtained the Empire, which he held 22. years, did no less hinder the Empire
than his father had, he took much money of the Prince of Millain, who was
then a subject and officer of the Empire in Italy, and for that money he
stalled him as Duke, in his own right, of Millain and the Appertinances
thereof, loosing yearly from the Empire the chief part that before it held in
Italy: and the like he did with some other Cities of Italy. And the like did
Lewis of Bauaria, making free certain Cities in Lombardie for money: how be
it some will have that it was Robert the Emperor, and not Lewis. Let it be as
it will: It is well known how the Egles feathers have been plucked away, and
how every one has endeavored to get for himself what he could by spoiling the
Empire. In the end, the above named Wenceslaus for his greedy covetousness and
unfit behauiours and lewd doings thus spoiling the Empire, was deposed and
deprived from the Imperial dignity, by the Electors with the consent of all
the other Princes and potentates, and by the Bishop of Rome, and with the
consent and knowledge of all in Germany. And for the publishing of this
sentence there was made a judgment seat in the open feeldes or plain of
Brubach near to the river Rhein, in the bishopprick of Treuers: and all the
Empire being gathered together in the year of our Lord 1400. on the twentieth
day of the month of August, upon which seat of judgment, it was openly
declared to all them of the Empire how that Wenceslaus was dismissed and
deprived quite ftom his Imperial majesty: which was published in manner
following. We John Archbishop of Magunce, prince Elector and chief Chancellor
of the Empire in the Country of Germany, in the name of all the other princes
Electors, Dukes, Lantgraues, Earls, Lords, Barons and other Potentates of the
Empire, for because of many grievous annoyances and dangers to be avoided, and
special matters of weight concerning the whole Empire, do dismiss, renounce
and deprive, with common consent and an advised judgment, Wenceslaus, as a
negligent, unprofitable and unworthy Emperor of the sacred Roman Empire. We
do therefore spoil and disgrade him from all degrees, dignities, honors and
high estates, as in such a calling and majesty were due unto him: and we do
openly declare him (in presence of all the princes, Barons and Potentates of
the Empire) as a profane man and unworthy of such honor and dignity: and we
charge every man, of whatsoever degree or calling he be, that from henceforth
he must not yield him obedience of commaundment, nor fee or tax, nor any other
bounden duty belonging to an Emperor: And we forbid every man to pay or yield
him any manner tribute, duty or forfaiture, to be claimed by law or covenant,
or any fine to the Empire appertaining. But we will and command, that all such
rents and duties be kept, until that God shall give us grace to choose an
Emperor that may be beneficial to the whole Empire and to the Christian
common weal. And J cease to speak how often and with what exhortations he
has been admonished and reproved by the Electors both privately and openly,
by every one of our Order, to the end he would have left off his misdemeanors
and evil behauiours, and to have used him self as was fit for one of his
calling, but all has been in vain.

Now for to return to the ordering of the Empire, you must understand that the
Emperor Lewis of Bauare assembled a general council at Francford: in which
assembly it was by the princes ordained, that any Emperor who had the more
part of the Electors voices and should be by the greater part created Emperor,
he should forthwith have full power to reign and rule as Emperor though he
were not confirmed by the Pope, as before the use had been. Neither should it
consist in the will of the Pope to allow or disalow of him any more at his
pleasure: for that papal authority to make or confirm Emperors is not due by
any law of God, nor by the decrees of ancient Fathers, but by their own
vsurpings and persuasions, and by the motions of certain their practices. Yet
heerewith it was decreed, that immediately when an Emperor was chosen, he
should straight way give notice to the Bishop of Rome, declaring how he was by
Gods grace and in due sort, elected as right and lawful Emperor, that he was
a christian and worthy that Office, wherefore he desired the Pope that it would
please him to confirm him in the Empire. And if by chance the Pope gainsaid
him this without just cause and occasion, then the Emperor elected might
receive his crowning at the hands of any Christian bishop. And because we may
the better see not only this decree to be the first that took this authority
from the Pope, which some hold to belong to him of necessity: let us consider
who crowned the Emperors of Constantinople? who those that were in Italy before
Charlemainge? who those that were Heathen before Constantine? None of these
were crowned by the pope, and yet they were Emperors of most great authority
and most worthy and mighty princes: as in the Histories we may read.

Charles the fourth ordained and added afterward many laws and decrees both
worthy memory and profitable: especially he ordained that when soever the
Emperor should sit in his seat of majesty, the Archbishop of Treuers as his
great Chauncellor of the low Cuntries should sit right over against him, the
Archbishop of Magunce, as great Chancellor of Germany should sit on his right
hand, the Archbishop of Collen great Chauncellor of Italy, on his left hand,
the King of Bohemia on the right hand of the bishop of Magunce, and hard by him
the county Palatine: on the left side hard by the Archbishop of Collen should
sit the Duke of Saxony elector, and by him the Marquess of Brandenburg.

He also ordained, that in their statelye goings this order should be
observed: the Archbishop of Treuers should go before his Majesty, and by him
on either side one of the ecclesiastical Electors, the king of Bohemia should
go alone after the Bishops Electors, and after him the Elector Duke of Saxony
with the sword of the Empire naked in his hand, on his right hand should go
the Count Palatine, carrying an apple of Gold, which signifies the World
under the Empire: on the left hand of the said Duke should go the Marquess
of Brandenburg with the Imperial Scepter in his hand, and after followed the
Emperors majesty himself.

And now me thinks I have declared sufficientlye how the Romain Empire came to
the hands of the Germans and how the decrees touching the Empire were
ordained: And as it has also been spoken before, the Duchy of Orhen, Sauoy,
and the Realm of Arle, abode in the hands of the Germans, when the male
issue of Charlemaigne failed. The French since that pretended thereto a title,
and would by force have recovered and holden the Empire in their hands,
auouching that from Charlemainge the Empire was descended unto them: and they
considered not, that besides Charlemainge was by nation a Germane, and his
successors had held France together with Germany united and under the Empire,
and that Charlemainge made always his abode in Germany. But the Germans chose
(after the line failed) the mighty Duke of Saxony Otho the first, who by his
valor and sword kept still the Empire in Germany, and recovered again many
provinces beyond Rheine, as Loraine, the chief Cities of which is Metz*
Brabant and Burgonie, and subdued in Italy the Bere^garij that would by force
have made a king of Romans. He restored moreover to the Empire Sicilie,
Calabria, Apulia and Lombardie. He had in his enterprises so great victories,
that he was called Otho the great, and above all the victorious battles that he
made, that which he had in a great plain near to Augusta is most worthy of
rebrance, where he discomfited the army of Hungarians with a terrible conflict,
and freed Germany from that heathenish people who had long time vexed and
spoiled them.

FINIS.
A Description of Germany.
GErmany is two ways to be understood, either Old, or great Germany
containing all beyond the Rheine. Or, Germany that is gotten by arms.


The old Germany is also two ways. The hither Germany, which is bounded East
upon the river Nabus, Sala and Albis having taken Sala into it on the west
side, Rheine on the Southside, and the German Ocean, on the northside. The
further Germany, the bounds whereof are Eastward on the coast of the hilly
Hungary and Polonie, has on the west Nabus, Sala and Albis taking in Sala: on
the north it has the Baltic sea, and the sea toward Sweuia.


That gotten by arms is By the Rheine, or beyond the Rheine.


The hithermost Germany is either The south Germany, which is bounded on the
north, with mountains that run along even from Rheine by the borders of
west-Phalia, Hessia, Turing and Saxony: on the East has the River Sala. The
north Germany, which lying together with the south part, has on the back for
the bounds all the residue of Rheine and Albis and the Ocean sea.


The south-part. The Forest of Hercinia called the black forest Brisgraue. The
Marquess of Bade his possessions. The Duchy of Wittemberge The part of Sweuia
beyond Danow. The upper County Palatine. The part beyond the Rheine of the
lower County Palatine. Wedderaw. The Forest or close called Hesperia silua.
All Hessia. Turing. Eyfeild even to Hessia and Hercinia, sometime the Duke of
Brunswikes, but now by purchase, the Archbishops of Mentz. The Forest of
Hercinia in the borders of Turing and Saxony with the Counties lying there
about, and certain ancient Lordships therewith incorporated. The East-Fraunce.


Earle-domes and Baronies within the Forest of Hercinia. Furstenburg under the
Lordship and rule of Henry and Albert brethren, Earls there. Waldburg Sewer
to the Emperor for the County Palatine. Cymberie. Lymborne. Suthense. Colleren
some part.


The most famous Cities of Brisgraue. Friburg where is an university Brisac.
New-burg. Waldkirk.
under Ferdinand Archduke of Austria.

The possessi of the Marquis of Bade. The upper Sussenburg a Lantgraueship.
Rethelense by office a Champion. Badanille. by office a Champion. Hochburg a
Marques-dome.
The lower Marquess towns are Baden, or the common weal of waters. Ethling.
Dumac. Fortrenium.
In the Lordship of Frederick James and George brethren




Chief Cities of the Duchy of Witte^berg.

Imperial as Esling. Rentling. Gemund. Heilprume.
Stuckgard a place for the Court. Tubing having an University. Gepping.
Dukedomes proper

The chief Cities of Swueia. Donawerd. Nordling. Bopfing. Dinkels-pijhel.
Wending, now in the jurisdiction of Boiarik sometime the Earls of Orting.


Norway, under which are Noremberg and Weissemburg imperial Cities sometimes.

Noremberg was sometimes a Burgraue, but now it is under the rule of the
Marquess of Brandenburg, under the iuridction thereof are towns. Onoldspach,
Swabach and other.

Bishoprics there are Baleburg wirtzburg Eystacht.
The Cities thereof so named. Fulda a part of Aspatia wherein is Hamborough.


Earledomes in East France. Henneberg, a Prince-dome now holden by George
Ernestus, after whose death it comes to the Dukes of Saxony, called Viuarij,
because they hold in Turing a Palace called Viuaria, gi-them by the Emperor
Charles the fifth. Castellane, the Lords and Governors of which are Conradus
and George brethren. Hoentoie, governed by Wolfgang, Phillip and Frederick
brethren, and Eberad their Cousin german. Wertherne, which after the death of
Michael the last, came by covenant to Lodouike and Roingst and the heirs his
sons in law. Rieneke, which twenty years ago, after the death of Phillip
the last, came for the most part to the Archbishop of Mentz, by reason of fee:
part to Count Ersbach, by consent of the Count Palatine: part to County
Isenburg, by consent of Bishop of Wyrtzburg, in Phillips life. Erparch, under
the possession of George, John and Count Eberhard. Baronies Schwartzburg,
Limperg.
Forests of king Edmiriald, between Tuban, Nicre and the river Maene: which
are partly under the Archbishop of Mentz: partly under the Lordship of the
County Palatine. Albeit many of them belong also to Wertemberg. And thereto
belong also the County of Erpach. The Forest of Spessart bounded with the
rivers Morn, Synna and Cynthie, or Rintzey, whereto are adjoining
Aschalfenburg, wherein dwells the Archbishop of Mentz, and to this belongs
almost all the County of Reyme. Roenia which belongs partly to the Bishop of
Wirtzburg and the Abbot of Fulda, and partly to the Earl Henneburg. Buconia,
which belongs to the Lantgraue of Hessia and Abbot of Fulda for the most
part, but especially the town Fulda. Coburg that has the commanding of
twenty and three Castles: it was sometimes under the jurisdiction of Heneburg:
but now it has for many years been holden by the Dukes of Saxony. Hilly
Boetia or Voitland unto the tops of Pinie mount and Botruus: partly under the
Marquesses of Brandeburg George and Frederike, and the Burgraues of Norimberg:
and partly under the Bishop of Babeberg.


Chief towns of the upper County Palatine. Amberg. Newmerkt. Waldsasse,
sometime an Abbacie or most rich Lordship.


The lower County Palatine in which are Heidelberg, the seat of the Elector,
the Count Palatine: and other less Towns.

Wedderaw, the parts of which, are Earldomes H^mian. Buding called Isenburg.
Sulme. Konisten. Diesen.
Baronies. Mnitzenburg. Epistin.
Cities Imperial Francford. Fridberg. Gelhus.



The Forest Hesperia with parts thereof. Earldomes Nassamie. Catimelihors.
Seyne. Witgenstry. Waldeccie. Weden.
A City of the Empire. Wettiflaw the less.



Hessia, all which contein Earledomes Zigenheim the Lantgraues of Hessia.
Niddan.
Cities. Cassel, the seat of Lantgraue William. Marpurg, where is an
University the seat of Lantgraue Lodouike. Gisen. Zigenheim most strong Towns.

Fridestar. Omeburg Being under the jurisdiction of Menta.





Turing with the parts thereof. Bishopric. Maunburg.
Earledomes Schwartzburg, Gleishen Brickling.
Baronies Sundershus under Schwartzburg. Heildring under Mansfield.
Imperial Norhus. Muthus.



Cities not Imperial. Erford under the bishop of Madgeburg having an
University. Igenhaim. Geecha. Vineyards of the sons of the Duke of Saxony.
Salfeild. Naoburg. Iene, where is an University, this belongs to John,
William, James and Fredrick sons of the Duke of Saxony. Sangerhus under the
Elector bishop of Augusta. Frankenhus under Schwartzburg. Eyfeild being under
the bishop of Mentz.


The Forest Hercinia being partly Earledomes: partly Baronies. Mansfield.
Stolberg. Hohustein Regenshein Cerfurt. Weinugerod.


The north, containing VVestphal^al between Rheine and VVisurg. Cleue land
beyond the Rheine. The County of Zutphen. The country beyond Sissenan. All
Friseland. All Saxony between Wissurg and Albinu.


Bishoprics. Monasteriensis. Padeuorne. Osnabrug. Minden.


Dukedomes. Bergen under the Duke of Cleue, Angria or Angrinaria under the
Bishop of Cole^.


Earledomes, Rauenspurg ioynning to the Dukedo^e of Bergen. Marchian joining to
the Dukedom of Cleue. Brutheim. Terkreilburg. lying by Bentheim. Sleyword
lying by Bentheim. Lyppian laid to Lippan by marriage, Spiegelburg laid to
Lippan by marriage, Pimountane. laid to Lippan by marriage,


Westphalia Rethberg. Oldenburg Delmenheist
These are thereto adjoined.

Of Westphalia. most famous Cities. Munster or Minegard. Padeborne Osnaburg.
Minda. Tremona Sucat. Hernard Hamele

The residue are devoured up either by Bishops or princes adjoining.

most famous Abbeys. Corbey a town of princely state Assend, or Nuns
countesses, and others,


The most famous cities of Cleue beyond Rheine. Tertoburg, Dumbach, VVesel. --
These contend with the Duke touching Imperial right.

Ressium Amerike.


The Earldom of Zudfarie of Gelderland conjoined, under the Lordship of John
brother to Nassaw,

The Country beyond Sisselane chief Cities whereof are Deuenter, Snole, Campene.
Yet these by Charles the fifth were laid to other jurisdictions of the
low countries.

All Frisel and the Countries whereof are East-Frisland, West Frise. Groining
the midst of them Chief of which are Sinden Maricone, Sranestare Laward Groaning
a city and Earldom.



Archbishoprickes. Magdeburg Sreme.


Bishoprics Halberstate, Hildesteim Veiden


An old Marquessedome called in times past Soltnadlense co^teining 5 Cities
now under Marquis of Brandeburg Soltwadele. Stendale. Tangermond Gardelbe
Osterwy


Earledomes. Ascania, or Aischercall Briburg Schowenburg Hoian. under Anhault

Staden under the Archbishop of Breme


Cities 1 Maidenburg 2 Hallis the rich 3 Halherst 4 Brundswick 5 Goslane met
allis dives, 6 Gicting 7 Hannonere 8 Hildensheim 9 Munda Apostatae Erui the
Duke of Brundswickes seat. L^^^^burg a free City, Saledines, The ^^ll and
(...) of William Duke of Luneburg, H^^burg Duke Othoes, the cousin german to
William Duke of Luneburg, Gothor the (...) of Henry brother to the Duke of
Luneburg. Wolfenbentel the seat of Julius Duke of Breme, Heilmstad^, with a
University belonging to Julius D^^^ of Breme.


The elder. The south p^^^ which is stretched out beyond Nabus and Sala to the
eastward, eue^ unto the borders of Hungary and Polone the less. The North
which on the back part is bounded with the south, the residue, is enclosed with
the river Albis, Polone the greater, and the Balthik sea.


The south part has The kingdom of Bohemia in which is the Archbishopricke of
Prage. Morauia, a Marquessedome in which is the Archbishopric of Chunixe.
(...) a Marquessedome sometime enriched with many Earledomes, with Banor and
other. South Countries lying on the left hand of the river Danow. Lus^tia under
Bohemia. Silesia sometime under Polone, but now under Bohemia.


Mis^^a has Bishoprics Misne. Mo^burg,
cities Lipha where is an university. Di^s^^ the sea of the bishop of
Augusta, Mi^^tia. T^^ga sometime the seat of the Ancestors of Elector
Frederick. Cygnea Zurkall. F^^b^rg. ^^^perg. Maneberg. Schweberg.



Lusatia has Budissine or B^^dsin. (...) or Bor^i^a. C^^^^i^^ or C^^i^^h.
(...). Lamberie. Lubun.
less towns Luke G^^^ G^^th^^ Hayme or H^^^,



Silesia has the upper, Dukedomes diversely divided. Teschine. Olesnike
Ratisbein Opelien Segerdorf Byegen Lignike Monsterburg Sindnierne
A Bishopric Vratistaw. Vratistane. Nissa the sea of bishop Vratistaw
the chief Cities Oppotia Briga Lignike belonging to the Duke of Lignice, his
brethren and nephews.





The lower. Dukedomes brought from Glo^^ngie. Sarge C^^sne. Being under
Elector of Brandeburg.

lesser cities Gl^sgonike under the King of Bohemia. Fridestade. Crosna under
the Elector of Brandeburg. (...) under the king of Bohemia.



The north parts. Dukedo^es of Saxony the chief towns whereof are, first
Wittemberg, where is an University, a part of the jurisdiction of Anhault
beyond Sala and Albis where are towns. Serbesca Pessania. Cathena.
The Marquessedome of Brandeburg beyond Odera, called March, Brandeburg
between Albis and Odera. The Dukedom of Mechelburg. Pomerland. Prussia which
was sometime of the dutch order. A Dukedom of Saxony called Lawenburg with
the territories. Hamborough. An old Dukedom of Saxony beyond Albis


Marquesdome of Brandeburg between Albis and Odera. Bishoprikes Brandeburg.
Hamelburg.
Cities Bertinne, the seat yet of Brandeburg. Francfort on this side Odera
called in times passed Sweue, where is an university. Brandiburg. Spardin
Premiglane.



Marquess of Brandeburges. an Earldom Ruppin which now the Elector holds
since the death of Earl Oliver. A Bishopric, Lubiss^ chief towns ^^strine
^a^dreberg, Ronigsberg



Dukedom of Mechelburg. Bishoprics Swerin Racenburg.
Cities of best account. Rostoch VVilmare Suerin. Gustr^^e, the seat of
Huldrike of Mechelburg.



Pomerland. The hither on this side Oder^ Rugia an I Will by the Balthike sea.
Earledomes. Barden Gutscone.
Cities Sundine. Griphizne Andlein. Demminy Wolgast Ernest the seat of Duke
Lodouike.

The further part beyond Odera, to the borders of Polone the greater and
Prussia. Dukedomes. Aetni which has towns Statine. Sangard Garsia
Cass^rior Vernedor Sauorum
A Bishopric called Canine having towns Cannine. Colberg. Costum,




The Lordship of Lowenburg.

Fressia the first of the Dutch gentlemen, was afterward spoiled and consumed
by the continual wars there made by Albertus the Marquis of ^^^^^burg, who
having gotten it into his dominion by help of the king of Polone, and after by
him created Duke in Prussia, founded first the University of Regiomontanum.

Saxony beyond Albis. Bishoprics Lubek Slenike.
Dukedomes. Holfatia. Ditmarie. Stermarie. Sleuien.
Cities Lubeck imperial. Aldenburg. Rilie. Sasnike.



Gotten by arms on this side the Rhene. Above Rheine enclosed by the rivers
Mosella and Araris, and with the Alps. Below the Rheine compassed with the
rivers Scalde and Mosa, and on one part with the Forest of Ardenne.


The first is Heluetia, whereof Simlere is the most fruitful.

The second is Sungauia, sometime belonging to the jurisdiction of Austria,
which Montisbetgard an Earldom belonging now to the dukedom of Wittemberg
^^^th border upon, and was long since laid thereto by marriage.

Alsatia. The upper where are Baronies. Richouillane, an earldome joining to
Montisbetgard. Rabesteine. Burtheime. Triberg.
Cities. Colmarie 1. Church Selestadt. Reisesperg. Benheim. Munster in
Gregory's valley. Turkheimie. Roshexmie.

The lower where are Baronie. Lichenburg under Earl of Hanani.
Cities. Haganoe. Weissenburg. Landanie.




These are under the Bishop of Argentine, who has in Alsatia Prouffac and
Taberne for his see.

Argentine is a free imperial City in the midst of both the Alsatiaes.

Westria. The bishopric of Mediomatrike. The Dukedom of Loraine. Earledomes
Bipont joining to the County Palatine. Culme. Bitike under the Duke of Lorain.
Serapont. Licelsteme under the Count Palatine of Rheine. Valedence under the
same.
Cities Mets holden from the french for a time. Taberna montana.
The Archbishopricke of Mentz, the part of it beyond the Rheine.


The vppet. Bishoprics Spire on this side Rheine. Worms.
The part of the County Palatine on this side Rheine Lotharie. Oppenheim.
Inglesheim. Newstadt. Alzemie. Baccharake.
part of the Archbishopric of Treuers on this side. Cities Bessardie
Confluence.
Earledomes. Lening Westermeg Rhenigraue. Kalikenstein Obenstein, Spanheim,
partly under the Count Palatine, partly under the Marquess of Bade.

Cities. Spire and Worms imperial. Magunce, sometime imperial but now the
Archbishops. Begiake VVesalia Bepardie. The Archbishop of Treuers.

Crucemake in the County of Sanheim.



The lower parts. The Archbishopricke of Treuers beyond the river Mosel with
the City of Treuers. The Archbishop of Collens jurisdiction below and above
Colle^. The Cities of which are Andernake. Bonna, Soncie, Nussie. Berke,
Dukedom of Bolllion. The Bishops land of Leodine with the towns. Leodke
Berge,
Lucenburg with the Cities partly the Dukes partly the Bishops of Leodine.
Luce^burg Artume. Damllerie Idonie, Didehonie
Limburg with the City. Iuliake with the Cities Iuliake. Dure Susterne,
Ziecard. Link of Austria. Stire of Austria. Welse of Austria.




The further. the City of the lower, bounded by Nasse, Danow and the border
of Stiria. Vienna, where is an University. Newstadt. Genissie with their
bishoprics. Huneburg
All the County of Friole between Oene. Athese and the Alps of Tre^t, is
under the Duke of Austrie and has. Bishoprics Trent Brixinie in times past
called Sabone
Cities Ornigons. Snazia Hake by Oene made fruitful by the Sale. Brixinie
Stirzing. Radaburg Porzene.
There is Stiria the upper Stiria the lower
Cities of Carnithia belonging to the Archduke of Austria are Vissake
Clangfurt Santomite Lanuaken Gurcen Bishoprics.

Nassa Lamba Cities






The County of Gorth.

The Universities that be in Germany.
Heydelberg in the County Palatine Strasburg in Alsatia. Friburg, in Brigame
Tubing in Wirtemberg. Marpurg in Hessia Erford in Turing Iene in Turing
Hehustadt in Saxony. Witte^berg in Saxony.
Lipsia in Misnia Francford in Marchia Rostoch in Mechelburg Gripsna in
Pomerland Regiomo^tana in Prussia Ingolstadt in Bauaria Diling in Bauaria
Vienne in Austria Prage in Bohemia Magnuth in Eisfeild Collen by Rheine Basil
in Heluetia. Lausannia in Heluetia. Geneua in Heluetia.
Cassimires University. The number 24.
Archbishops in Germany be 7.
Archbishop of Mentz. Archbi. of Treuers Archb. Salisburg. Arch, of Breme.
Archbi. of Collen. Arch. of Magdeburg Archb. of Bissantz
The Sitting and Orders of the Officers of the Empire which be distinguished
into three Courts.
1 Into Electors and their Ambassadors, 2 Into Princes of both Orders. 3 Into
Imperial Cities.
Electors or their Deputies
On the right hand On the left hand County Palatine of Rhein King of Bohemie
Archbishop of Mentz Chauncelor of the Empire The Emperor sitting in
co^sultation Archbishop of Treuers and Archbishop of Collen Duke of Saxony,
Marquis of Brandeburg. These by course change their seat. The Bishop of
Treuers reherseth the causes of the Parliament or assembly. Which done, he was
wont to sit right before the Emperor. Then sit thus on sides Princes of both
orders
On the right hand Churchmen. On the left hand civil Magistrates The Archduke
of Austria, taken among the Churchmen by reason of a controversy of ye chief
place among the civil Governors but so as he must change seat with the
Archb. of Salisburg, The Archbishop of Salisburg, The Archbishop of Madgdeburg,
who although he be chief bishop of Germany, yet he yields to Salisburg, as
to the elder Bishop, The Archbishop of Breme The Archbishop of Rigen in
Liuonia, which was invaded by Stephen King of Polone, Anno. 1580. The
Archbishop of Visance or Rombizant, now under the King of Spain. The great
Master of the dutch order, as Agent of the great Master of Prussia. The Bishop
of Baleberg or Bamberg, who is subject to no Archbishop. These are as
Suffraganes under the Archbishop of Mentz, but diversely. Wirtemberg Spire.
Argentine. Eychstate Constance. Augusta.
There strive about the order of sitting. Curta Heidelheim. Veiden. Padeborne.
Halberstat.
Suffragans of the Archb. of Treuers. Mete, Tulle, Verduen.
Suffragans of the Archbishop of Collen. Monster. Traiect laid by Charles the
5. to Burgundy. Leodine. Mind Orwaburg
Suffraganes of the Archbishop of Salisburg. Ratisbone Passauie Trent Brixia
Fressin
Suffraganes of the Archbishop of Magdeburg. Meisburg Misne. Naunburg in old
time a city Brandeburg Hamelburg
Suffraganes of the Archbishop of Breme. Lubeck Schiderin. Lebusie Sleswie.
Rahemburg, Cammyne
Suffraganes of the Archbishop of Region Renalie. Carlandie. Oesalie. Oerpent

Cassamire Count Palatine of Rheine, The Dukes of Boanie do strive with this
Count about their sitting. Marquesses of Brandeburg. Dukes of Brundswike. Dukes
of Luncburg, Duke Iuliak of Cliue,
Duke of Wirtemberg Dukes of Pomerane Dukes of Mechelburg Lantgraues of Hessia
Marquesses of Bade These last 5. contend much for their sitting.

Lantgraue of Leuchtenberg, Prince of Anhault, descended from Ascanius son to
Aeneas, and it is the auncientest house in all Germany. Earl of Henneberg,
Burgraue of Misne. The Duke of Sabaudia, being seditious and coming seldom
to the Parlements, is scarce suffered to come to sit there. The Dukes of
Holsatie requested in Anno Domini 1555. that they might have a meet place
assigned them: but I hear of nothing yet thereof determined neither is it
likely that they are placed, for their complaints have been often therefore
exhibited. This Holsatia is a part of Denmark. After the Princes are set, if
any Earls or Barons will be present at the assemblies: they sit as they can
get place, and in every common place, two Ambassadors sit in the last places.


In times past to the great master of Prussie as to one bearing ye room of an
Archbishop, these Prelates were subject. The Master of the dutch order in
Germany. The Master of the dutch-order in Liuanie and Italy. The Master of the
order of S. John. Prelates or Abbots and Abesses who had a princely Empire and
authority with the Empire.


These in times past had their seats in the Parlements of the Emperor: but
now they come seldom there, as likewise do these Bishops of Fulda. Minbach
Corbeie Campadune Herfeeld S. Galls holden by the Heluetians. Governor of
Weissenburg whom the Bishop of Spire does now represent. Governor of Elfang.
Governor of Berchtolsgate. Ambassadors of two other Prelates.


And many of them have not any Ambassadors there.

Cities Imperial.
Seats of the Rhenish order. Collen strive about their seats. Aquisgraue
strive about their seats. Mediomatrice or Mete under the French-King. Argentine
a free City in league with the Emperor. Worms. Lubeck Spire Francford.
Hagenoe, Columbarie Sleistadt, Norhuse Mulhuse in Turing Gedan called Dantig
holden by the King of Polone Tormina likewise holden Tremonie strive with Duke
of Iuliake for freedom Dusburg strive with Duke of Iuliake for freedom
Wessalie strive with Duke of Iuliake for freedom Basil now under the
Heluetians. Landaw Vesunce, Geneua, a free City, Lawsamie under Bernates
Tulle under the french King Verdun under the french King Camerake under the
Spaniard Reisserberg Wettisflane Tridburg in Wederaw Gelhuse in Wederaw
Wesenburg at Rheine Offenburg Lelle Durkhenie Rohenie
Seats of the Sweuish order. Ratisbone. Augusta Norimberg. Constance under the
Duke of Austria. Vlme Esling. Rentling. Nordling Hale of Sweuia Obormse
Ellenhenie the over monastery in Saint Gregory's vale Rossenburg at Tubar
Memming Campidune Ratwyle Heylorume Dinkelspinghhel Gemimd Wessenburg of
Nordway, Winshemie Donawerd Planebeur or planebone Lindaw Rauispurg Brabacie
Ssua Wimpin. Bopfing Sweuifurt Wangen Gyeng Lutikurke Pfulendorffie Vberling.
Buchorne. Wyle

It is very sildome seen that all do appear, either they or their
Ambassabors. And many times one City authoriseth an others Ambassadors to do
all for them.

Free Cities Argentine Geneua
Of the spanish kings one Camerake
Of the Duke of Austria Constance
At strife with the Duke of Cleue Tremonia Dusburg Wesale
of the French Kings three Mediomatrice Tulle Verdune
Of the King of Polonie Gedane Torume
Of Heluetia two Basile Lausanna

There abide still 56. There have been rejected 14. The sum of all is 70.

An ordinance or decree standing established from year to year, as it was
made at Hormatia, touching the furnishing and finding of soldiers against the
Turk. Showing what company of horsemen and footmen every Potentate, and
member of the Empire is to find, or else what sum of money.
Electors find Horsemen Footmen. ARchbishop of Mentz. 60 277 Archbishop of
Collen. 60 277 Archbishop of Treuers. 40 180 King of Bohemia. 400 600 Count
Palatine of Rhene. 60 277 Marquis of Brandeburg. 60 277 Duke of Saxony. 60 277
1100 2165 Archbishops. Magdeburg with the Cities. 43 196 Salisburg. 60 277
Bissant. 40 75 Breme, with the City. 36 150 179 698 Bishops. Bamburg. 30 182
Wirtzburg. 45 208 Worms. 2 13 Spire. 18 16 Argentine. 18 100 Eychstate. 20 132
Augusta. 21 100 Gonstance. 7 30 Hildesheim. 18 80 Padeborne. 18 34 Schiere. 5 8
Halberstadt. 14 66 Verden 5 15 Munster 30 138 Osnaburg 6 36 257 1212 Passauie
18 78 Freising 12 80 Kenise 6 24 Cursen 3 15 Seskaule 6 24 Lauance 5 19 Basile
2 15 Sedune 0 226 Ratisbone 8 30 Misne 6 20 Naunburg 6 20 Minden with the
Cities 10 16 Holland with Campense Zwollen Deuenter and Amersford. 50 250
Cammyne 6 28 Schewrine 10 10 Geneua 3 13 Verdun 14 30 Lansanie 14 60 Cambrike
23 82 Mete 20 70 Tolosse 6 20 Leodine 50 107 Trent 14 91 Brixie 14 91 Meisburg
10 30 Lubese 2 10 Lubek 5 10 372 1679 Brandenburg 2 10 Rattenspurg 5 15 Slewike
8 15 Hamelburg 9 33 The King of Denmark, of Stiria and Ditmarie. 35 164 The
Duke of Bauarie 80 369 Archduke of Austria 120 600 Duke of Burgondie for all
the lands he holds of the Empire, by a bargain made 1549. 120 554 Maurice
Duke of Saxony, and Augustus his brother. 60 277 Otho, Henry and Philip,
Palatines 20 100 Duke Wolfgang earl of Veldence. 10 30 Duke John Earl of
Sponheim 8 26 Duke of Iuliake and Cleue 34 556 Albert, George and Frederike
Marquesses of Brandeburg. 30 556 Henry the younger Duke of Brunswike and Duke
Frederike with the cities Brundswike Hannoner, Wattingen and Northeim. 34 556
Ernestus Duke of Brunswike and Luneburg, with the City Luneburg. 20 206 Philip
Duke of Brunswike and Grohengen, with the City Embeck, upon condition that a
greater company shall be found after twelve years. 50 0 Duke of Stetnie and
Pomerane 34 20 Duke of Mechelburg with the City. 40 120 Francis Duke of
Lowenburg 8 30 Francis Duke of Lorraine 40 188 Philip Lantgraue of Hessie 50
260 Vlricus Duke of Wittenburg 60 277 Ernestus, Philip and Christopher,
Marquesses of Bade, for the City. 24 60 Philip and Christopher Marquesses of
of Bade for Sponheim and Rumark. 6 20 Ernest, Marquis of Breda for Hochberg and
Rottelin. 8 23 920 4174 George Lantgraue of Lenchticeubur. 6 14 Prince of
Anhault and Ascanie. 12 30 Bartold and Albert Hemeburg. 6 24 William Earl
Henneburg. 9 24 Vicount of Misinie. 12 30 Strangers. Duke of Masia. 12 135
Gharles Duke of Sabandia. 60 277 Prince of Stahlie. 30 94 Abbots and Prelates.
Of Fulda. 17 15 Herchfeld. 2 9 Kempten 5 20 Reichnaw 2 4 Governor of
Wissenburg. 2 14 Saint Gallense 2 13 Salfelde 2 13 Elwing 5 18
Doz-Tousch-mester. 20 18 Doz master of Saint Ionhs 10 30 Weingozt 7 18
Salmansweirel 7 77 Murbach 6 19 Walkennedle 2 2 Schuter 2 12 Weissen or
Munderen 2 14 Saint Blase. 4 18 251 962 Maulbrwne. 5 22 Cozvefen, with the
City Hoxere. 3 10 Schneweissendweid 2 14 Ritershans. 2 10 Stenie 0 20
Schalfhusie 4 24 Weildsauht 0 24 Anisteidel 3 22 Regenburch 2 10 Ochanhanse 4
20 Governor of Steltz 1 3 Abbot of Saint Giles at Norimberg. 1 7 Abbot of
Maximies 3 22 Humolthanse 2 9 Regenhanse 2 10 Saint John's in Danowdale 1 4
Gengenbanchen. 1 3 Kombrimin 1 10 Reiden 1 10 Marchtaile 2 5 S. Peter's in
Blackwood in Herine 1 10 Governor of Odenheim 1 7 Stabel 2 20 Disside 1 10
Reichanse 3 13 Krentzling 2 9 54 314 Elihing 4 20 Iesine 0 14 Blankele 2 9
Iemine 1 4 Pfefferse 1 4 S. John's 1 10 Petershanse of Constance 0 6 Pfrume 1 13
Camberg 1 13 Kaisheim 4 64 S. Ieromes of Ratisbone 2 18 Governor of
Buchtolgnade 2 20 Monasteries in Saint Gregory's vale 1 4 Mimchrode 1 8 S.
Cornelius Church 4 25 Werden in Westphalie 2 6 Psemine in the Bishopric of
Treuers. 4 30 Vrsbach. 0 10 Ectemarch. 2 18 Abbeyes of Monks and Nuns.
Coneldelburg with the City. 2 16 Essen with the City. 2 13 Lower Church of
Ratisbone. 2 6 Upper Church there. 0 6 39 34 Herwerd. 0 6 Kauffing. 1 10
Lindane. 0 5 Gringrodt. 1 7 Buchaw. 2 6 Roidenminster. 1 4 Heppach. 0 15
Guttendall. 0 5 Bundt. 0 3 Provinces. Confluence. 4 20 Assace. 3 13 Austria. 3
13 Etsech. 3 13 Earldomes and Baronies. Vlrike earl of Helfelstenie. 2 0 Owner
of Velnie. 1 4 Owner of Wirtenburg as Earl of 8 45 Tumsterburg and Charles
earl of Zollerie. 4 18 Earl of Lupsen. Earl of Montford. 3 20 Earl of
Furstenburg. 6 30 Baron of Zmimet. 2 9 Owners of Freiburg. 0 5 Baron of
Stemisling. 2 3 46 244 Gerard Earl of Gundesfling. 2 2 William Earl of
Elerstenie. 0 4 Barons of Gerolyeke. 1 2 Earls of Deting. 8 45 Barons of
Rapostein. 4 35 Barons of Staffen and Ernesselfe. 3 0 Henry Stuffin earl of
Stuffie. 2 6 Owner of Hosinkoingsperg. 2 9 Baron Hoenfelse and Renpolykrie. 2 6
Earls of Stulie. 2 9 Earls of Hockzotyre. 6 20 Baron of Brandise. 1 6 Lord of
Waldburg and Sumenburg. 12 45 Wolfgang Earl of Castile. 1 4 Michael earl of
Wertheim. 5 29 Philip earl of Rinedk. 2 10 Albert and Gerard earls of
Holenloch. 6 30 Earl of Wolfeheil. 1 4 Bishop of Wirtzburg for Kingelsperg. 2
10 Barons of Limberg. 2 7 Counties of Erbach. 2 8 William Baron of Limpurg. 3
10 Frederick earl of Schwartezenburg. 1 3 Earl of Leynning. 2 9 Earl of
Hannonie. 10 10 Philip of Hannonie Baron of Lichrenburg. 6 22 Earl of
Nastonie, Bread and Dilinger. 30 136 Philip earl of Nasson and Sarbruxken. 6
30 John of Nasson and Beilstein. 1 2 Philip earl of Nasson, Sarbruck, and
Welberch. 6 30 Lewis earl of Stelberg, Kuningstein and Baron of Epstein. 4 20
Earl Henburg the higher. 6 24 ^^rle Henburg the lower 2 8 Earl Henburg the
lower 2 8 Earl Vierneberg 2 4 Baron of Kinecksten and F^enike 1 3 Friderike
and Renard E. of Solm 4 24 Bernard Earl of Solme 4 8 Earl of Mete 4 12 Earl
of Rhene 4 12 Baron of Arusperge 4 27 Rich. Earl of Eborstein and Falkinstein
2 4 Philip of Eborstain and Ruxing his heir 1 1 Baron of Winiberg 1 0 Earl of
Newmarke and Morsie 2 4 Earl of Herme 2 8 Earl of Salnise 4 16 Richard Earl
of Richen 6 26 Earl of Tenge 1 12 Earl of Vapinie 3 12 Earl of Hardeck 3 11
78 446 Earl of Hohenstein 1 0 Ernestus Earl of Hohenstein 4 18 Barons of
Welkenstein 4 34 Earls of Schemberg and Gema^ 6 26 Earls of Stelburg 4 20
Baron of Benhirg 2 2 Earl of Barb and Malingen 1 2 Earl of Gluchen 3 13
Earls John and Henry of Schwartzenburg. 2 0 Gurter of Scwartzenburg with
John's heir 12 45 Baron of Geward 4 20 Baron of Bless 1 3 Earl of Wilden and
Baron Ringtheim 6 12 Earl of Leostine 2 9 Earl Rheuistein and Rhegistein 2 0
All the Earls of Frise 20 135 Earl of East Frise 6 30 Earls of Lip 4 18
Earl of Oldenburg 8 30 Earls of Heien 2 8 Earls of Leimig and Easterbuarg 2
4 Earl of Waldecke 4 18 Barons of Lazensteim 2 2 Earls of Disshohen 1 4
Barons of Stenifort 1 4 Earls of Wanfield 1 45 10 504 Earl of Gendt 120 20
Earl of Brinckhorst 6 20 Earl of Witgenstein 6 4 Earl of Spigelberg 1 8
Conrade Earl of Degeluburg 2 10 Baron of Winsdorf 3 1 Earl of Ottenberg 1 0
Earl of Reitenberg 2 0 Ladislaus Earl of Haghe 6 10 Baron of Rheismick 4 2
Oswald Earl of Bergen 2 10 Earl of Salme 8 9 Barons of Falkenstein 2 3 Barons
of Schonberg 1 10 Barons of Degenberg 4 7 Earl of Someranflie 2 0 Gerard and
Arnold Earls of Mandorscheiden 2 10 Earl of Riferscheiden 2 2 Earl of
Egnun^^cie and Helstun 10 45 Barons of Bergen and Wallia 10 67 Barons of Hewn
1 4 Barons of Windelfelse 1 2 Baron Schenckt in Tucebaih 1 2 Conrade Earl of
Tubing 1 1 Owner of Blankenberg and Westein 6 25 Barons of Bogenderff 0 10 John
Earl of Manderscheiden 0 4 86 256 John and James Barons of Konngsecken and
Allendroste 2 16 Baron of Eckenberg 0 5 Barons of Mindeline 4 14 Barons of
Mersburg 4 20 Barons of Kenissie 1 4 Barons of Pyrmentie 1 4 Barons of
Wolfenstemie 2 4 Knights of Sleskindberg 10 45 Barons of Fleckinstenie 3 6
Baron of Witterse 1 4 Cities Imperial. Ratisboone 10 50 Noremberg 40 250
Haidensteni and Alersperg 5 7 Rotenburg by Fanberin 10 65 Wissenburg in Norike
3 16 Werd of Swenia 3 30 Winde^heimie 4 30 Scheiwenifort 4 30 Wimp^eme 2 14
Hailprune 4 40 Hale of Sweuia 10 80 Norldling 5 50 Dinkelspiihel 4 40 Vlme 25
150 Augusta 30 200 Greng 1 12 192 1560 Bepsing 0 6 Alene ^ 16 Gemunde 3 35
Esling 5 4 Rentling 3 38 Weile 1 12 Psuuendorff 2 20 Kanfburne 2 34 Vberhing 6
60 Wangene 2 14 Isne 2 14 Lenkurch 1 14 Menning 8 50 Kemten 3 30 Buchorne 0 5
Lindaw 3 40 Rauenspurge 3 40 Biborach 4 46 Constance 3 50 Basile 10 180
Argentine 25 150 Keiserspurg 2 15 Colmarie 4 30 Celestade 4 24 Munise in
Alsatria 6 27 Rotweile 3 61 Hagenoe 6 30 Weistenburg of Alsaria and Wasgarle 2
22 110 1037 Oberlihenheim 2 14 Roshemie 1 31 Spire 3 60 Worms 3 60 Frankford
20 140 Fridberg 0 16 Geluhuse 2 15 Fritilaer 0 10 Collen 25 200 Aquisgraue 7 30
Mediomatrice 25 150 Tulle 5 15 Verdun 5 25 Offenburg 0 30 Laudamie 2 18
Gengenbach 0 15 Zelle 0 10 Schalhuse 7 45 Kan^fman and Sarbruck 2 9 Bizance or
Veruncie 7 50 Lubeck 21 177 Hamburg 20 120 Dortmund 7 30 Lower Wesel 5 50
Mulhuse of Thuring 0 40 Nordhuse 0 30 Iosser 0 120 Soist 20 120 Braskele 2 6
168 1618 Warburg 3 13 Lengau 2 12 Furckenhemie 6 5 Venden 0 15 Monastery in
Saint Gregory's valley 0 12 Thewerne 0 3 Heruerden 1 15 Camerich 2 18 Dinciberg
2 18 Dantisk 0 165 Elbing 0 82 Saint Galls 0 57 Daihaw at the first lake. 0 2

The sum of all the horsemen is three thousand five hundred and eleuene of
the footmen seventeen thousand four hundredth and sixteen.

The sum of the whole army so yearly to be in a readiness, is twenty thousand
nine hundred twenty and seven.

If they fail of thus setting forth soldiers yearly, they give for every
horseman twelve florines of Rhene, and for every footeman four.

So when none are set out against the Turk, there is given of florines
yearly, 1236222. which in sterling shillings is 23179. li. 6. s. 6. d.

Finis.
Laus Deo.

