THE ELDER BROTHER A COMEDY. Acted at the Black Friars, by his Majesty's
Servants. Printed according to the true Copy.

Written by John Fletcher Gent.

LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for I. W. and I. B. 1637.

The Speakers of the Play.
LEWIS, a Lord. MIRAMONT, a Gentleman. BRISAC, a Justice, brother to Miramont.
CHARLES, a Scholar. EUSTACE, a Courtier. Sons to Brisac. EGREMONT, COVVSY,
two Courtiers, Friends to Eustace. ANDREW, Servant to Charles. COOK, BUTLER,
Servants to Brisac. PRIEST. NOTARY. SERVANTS. OFFICERS. ANGELLINA, Daughter to
Lewis. SYLVIA, her Woman. LILLY, Wife to Andrew. LADIES.
Lectori.
Would thou all wit, all Comicke art survay?
Read here and wonder; FLETCHER writ the Play.
Prologue.
BUt that it would take from our modesty,
To praise the Writer, or the Comedy,
Till your fair suffrage crown it: I should say,
You Are all most welcome to no vulgar Play;
And so far we are confident; And if he
That made it, still lives in your memory;
You will expect what we present to night,
Should be judged worthy of your ears and sight.
You shall hear Fletcher in it; his true strain,
And neat expressions; living he did gain
Your good opinions; But now dead commends
This Orphan to the care of noble friends:
And may it raise in you content and mirth,
And be received for a legitimate birth.
Your grace erects new Trophies to his fame,
And shall to after times preserve his name.
The Elder Brother. A Comedy.
Actus I. Scoena I.
LEWIS, ANGELLINA, SYLVIA. NAy, I must walk you farther.

Ang. I am tired Sir,
And nere shall foot it home.

Lew. It Is for your health;
The want of exercise takes from your beauties,
And sloth dries up your sweetness: That you are
My only Daughter and my heir, is granted;
And you in thankfulness must needs acknowledge,
You ever find me an indulgent Father,
And open handed.

Ang. Nor can you tax me, Sir,
I hope, for want of duty to deserve
These favors from you.

Lew. No, my Angellina,
I love and cherish thy obedience to me,
Which my care to advance thee, shall confirm;
All that I aim at, is to win thee from
The practice of an idle foolish state
Used by great Women, who think any labor,
(Though in the service of themselves) a blemish
To their fair fortunes.

Ang. Make me understand Sir,
What it is you point at.

Lew. At the custom how
Virgins of wealthy families, waste their youth;
After a long sleep, when you wake, your woman
Presents your breakfast, then you sleep again,
Then rise, and being trimmed up by others hands,
You Are led to dinner, and that ended, either
To Cards or to your Couch (as if you were
Borne without motion) After this to Supper,
And then to bed; And so your life runs round
Without variety or action Daughter.

Syl. Here Is a learned Lecture!

Lew. From this idleness
Diseases both in body and in mind
Grow strong upon you; where a stirring nature
With wholesome exercise guards both from danger:
I Would have thee rise with the Sun, walk, dance, or hunt,
Visit the groves and springs, and learn the virtues
Of Plants and Simples: Do this moderately,
And thou shall not with eating chalk, or coals,
Leather and oatmeale, and such other trash,
Fall into the green sickness.

Syl. With your pardon
(Were you but pleased to minister it) I could
Prescribe a remedy for my Ladies health,
And her delight too, far transcending those
Your Lordship but now mentioned.

Lew. What is it Sylvia?

Syl. What is it? A noble Husband; In that word, a
Noble Husband, all content of Woman
Is wholly comprehended; He will rowse her,
As you say, with the Sun, and so pipe to her,
As she will dance, never doubt it, and hunt with her,
Upon occasion, until both be weary;
And then the knowledge of your Plants and Simples,
As I take it, were superfluous; A loving,
And but add to it a game some Bedfellow,
Being the sure Physician.

Lew. Well said Wench.

Ang. And who gave you Commission to deliver
Your verdict, Minion?

Syl. I deserve a fee,
And not a frown, dear Madam; I but speak
Her thoughts, my Lord, and what her modesty
Refuses to give voice to; Show no mercy
To a Maidenhead of fourteen, but off with 't:
Let her loose no time Sir, fathers that deny
Their Daughters lawful pleasure, when ripe for them,
In some kinds edge their appetites to taste of
The fruit that is forbidden.

Lew. It Is well urged,
And I approve it; no more blushing Girl,
Thy woman has spoke truth, and so prevented
What I meant to move to thee: There dwelles near us
A Gentleman of blood, Monsieur Brisac,
Of a fair state, six thousand Crowns per annum,
The happy Father of two hopeful Sons,
Of different breeding; The Elder, a mere Scholar,
The younger, a queint Courtier.

Ang. Sir, I know them
By public fame, though yet I never saw them;
And that opposed antipathy between
Their various dispositions, renders them
The general discourse and argument;
One part inclining to the Scholar Charles,
The other side preferring Eustace, as
A man complete in Courtship.

Lew. And which way
(If of these two you were to choose a husband)
Does your affection sway you?

Ang. To be plain, Sir,
(Since you will teach me boldness) As they are
Simply themselves, to neither; Let a Courtier
Be never so exact, Let him be blessed with
All parts that yield him to a Virgin gracious,
If he depend on others, and stand not
On his own bottomes, though he have the means
To bring his Mistress to a Masque, or by
Conveyance from some great ones lips, to taste
Such favor from the kings; or grant he purchase,
Precedence in the Country, to be sworn
A servant Extraordinary to the Queen;
Nay, though he live in expectation of
Some huge preferment in reversion; If
He Want a present fortune, at the best
Those are but glorious dreams, and only yield him
A happiness in posse, not in esse;
Nor can they fetch him silks from th'Mercer; nor
Discharge a Tailors bill; nor in full plenty
(Which still preserves a quiet bed at home)
Maintain a family.

Lew. Aptly considered,
And to my wish, but what is thy censure of
The Scholar?

Ang. Troth (if he be nothing else)
As of the Courtier; all his Songs, and Sonnets,
His Anagrams, Acrosticks, Epigrammes,
His deep and Philosophical discourse
Of natures hidden secrets, makes not up
A perfect husband; He can hardly borrow
The Stars of the Celestial crown to make me
A tire for my head; nor Charles Waine for a Coach,
Nor Ganimede for a Page, nor a rich gown
From Juno's Wardrobe, nor would I lie in
(For I despair not once to be a mother)
Under heavens spangled Canopy, or banquet
My guests and Gossips with imagined Nectar,
Pure Orleans would do better; no, no, father,
Though I could be well pleased to have my husband
A Courtier, and a Scholar, young, and valiant,
These are but gaudy nothings, If there be not
Something to make a substance.

Lew. And what is that?

Ang. A full estate, and that said, I Have said all,
And get me such a one with these additions,
Farewell Virginity, and welcome wedlock.

Lew. But where is such one to be met with Daughter?
A black Swan is more common, you may wear
Gray tresses ere we find him.

Ang. I am not
So punctual in all ceremonies, I will bate
Two or three of these good parts, before I Will dwell
Too long upon the choice.

Syl. Only, my Lord, remember
That he be rich and active, for without these,
The others yield no relish, but these perfect;
You must bear with small faults, Madam.

Lew. Merry Wench,
And it becomes you well, I Will to Brisac,
And try what may be done; in the mean time, home,
And feast thy thoughts with th'pleasures of a Bride.

Syl. Thoughts are but airy food Sir, let her taste them.

Actus I. Scoena II.
ANDREW, COOK, BUTLER. Unload part of the Library, and make room
For the other dozen of Carts, I Will straight be with you.

Co. Why has he more books?

And. More than ten Marts send over.

But. And can he tell their names?

And. their names? he has 'em
As perfect as his pater noster, but that is nothing,
'Has read them over leaf by leaf three thousand times;
But here is the wonder, though their weight would sink
A Spanish Carracke, without other ballast,
He carries them all in his head, and yet
He walks upright.

But. Surely he has a strong brain.

And. If all thy pipes of wine were filled with books
Made of the barks of trees, or mysteries writ
In old moth-eaten vellam, he would sip thy Celler
Quite dry, and still be thirsty; Then for's Diet,
He eats and digests more Volumes at a meal,
Than there would be Larkes (though the sky should fall)
Devowr'd in a month in Paris, yet fear not
Sons oth' the buttry, and kitehin, though his learned stomach
Cannot b' appeased; He Will seldom trouble you,
His knowing stomach contemnes your black Jackes, Butler,
And your Flagons, and Cook thy boiled, thy roast, thy baked.

Co. How lives he?

And. Not as other men do,
Few Princes fare like him; He breaks his fast
With Aristotle, dines with Tully, takes
His watering with the Muses, suppes with Livie,
Then walks a turn or two in via lactea,
And (after six hours conference with the stars)
Sleeps with old Erra Pater.

But. This is admirable.

And. I Will tell you more hereafter, here is my old Master
And another old ignorant Elder, I Will upon 'em.
Enter BRISAC, LEWIS. What Andrew? welcome, where is my Charles? speak Andrew,
Where did thou leave thy Master?

And. Contemplating
The number of the sands in the high way,
And from that, purposes to make a judgment
Of the remainder in the Sea; He is Sir,
In serious study, and will lose no minute
Nor out of 's pace to knowledge.

Lew. This is strange.

And. Yet he has sent his duty Sir before him
In this fair manuscript.

Bri. What have we here?
Pothookes and Andirons!

And. I much pity you,
It is the Syrian Character, or the Arabicke,
Would 'ee have it said, so great and deep a Scholar
As Master Charles is, should ask blessing
In any Christian Language? Were it Greek,
I could interpret for you, but indeed
I Am gone no farther.

Bri. And in Greek you can
Lie with your smug wife Lilly.

And. If I keep her
From your French dialect, as I hope I shall Sir,
Howere she is your Laundresse, she shall put you
To the charge of no more soape than usual
For the washing of your sheets.

Bri. Take in the knave,
And let him eat.

And. And drink too, Sir.

Bri. And drink too, Sir,
And see your Masters Chamber ready for him.

But. Come Doctor Andrew without Disputation
Thou shall commence in the Celler.

And. I had rather
Commence on a cold baked meat.

Co. Thou shall have it, Boy.

Exeunt. Bri. Good Monsieur Lewis I esteem my self
Much honored in your clear intent, to join
Our ancient families, and make them one,
And 'twill take from my age and cares to live
And see what you have purposed put in act,
Of which your visit at this present is
A hopeful Omen; I each minute expecting
Th'arrivall of my Sons; I have not wronged
Their Birth for want of means and education,
To shape them to that course each was addicted;
And therefore that we may proceed discreetly,
Since what is concluded rashly seldom prospers,
You first shall take a strict perusal of them,
And then from your allowance, your fair daughter
May fashion her affection.

Lew. Monsieur Brisac,
You offer fair, and nobly, and I Will meet you
In the same line of honor, and I hope,
Being blessed but with one daughter, I shall not
Appear impertinently curious,
Though with my utmost vigilance and study,
I labor to bestow her to her worth;
Let others speak her form, and future fortune
From me descending to her; I in that
Sit down with silence.

Bri. You may my Lord securely,
Since fame alowd proclaims her perfections,
Commanding all men's tongues to sing her praises;
Should I say more, you well might censure me
(What yet I never was) a Flatterer.
What trampling's that without of Horses?
Enter BUTLER. Sir my young Masters are newly alighted.

Bri. Sir now observe their several dispositions.
Enter CHARLES. Bid my Subsiser carry my Hackney to the Buttry,
And give him his bever; it is a civil
And sober beast, and will drink moderately,
And that done, turn him into the quadrangle.

Bri. He cannot out of his University tone.
Enter EUSTACE, EGREMONT, COVVSY. Lackey, take care our Coursers be well rubbed,
And clothed, they have outstripp'd the wind in speed.

Lew. I marry Sir, there is metal in this young fellow!
What a sheep look his elder brother has!

Char. Your blessing, Sir?

Bri. Rise Charles, thou have it.

Eust. Sir, though it be unusual in the Court,
(Since it is the Courtiers garb) I bend my knee,
And do expect what follows.

Bri. Courtly begged.
My blessing! take it.

Eust. Your Lordships vowed adorer:
to Lew. What a thing this brother is! yet I Will vouchsafe him
The new Italian shrug -- How clownishly
The book-worme does return it.

Chapter I Am glad y' are well.

reads. Eust. Pray you be happy in the knowledge of
This pair of accomplished Monsieurs.
They are Gallants that have seen both Tropicks.

Br. I embrace their loves.

Egr. which we will repay with servulating.

Cow. And will report your bounty in the Court.

Bri. I pray you make deserving use on it first:
Eustace give entertainment to your friends,
What Is in my house is theirs.

Eust. Which we will make use of;
Let Us warm our brains with half a dozen healths,
And then hang cold discourse, for we will speak fireworks.

Exeunt. Lew. What at his book already?

Bri. Fie, fie, Charles,
No hour of interruption?

Cha. Plato differs
From Socrates in this.

Bri. Come lay them by;
Let them agree at leisure.

Cha. Man's life Sir, being
So short, and then the way that leads unto
The knowledge of our selves, so long and tedious,
Each minute should be precious.

Bri. In our ca^e
To manage worldly business, you must part with
This bookish contemplation, and prepare
Your self for action; to thrive in this age,
Is held the palm of learning; you must study
To know what part of my land's good for the plough,
And what for pasture, how to buy and sell
To the best advantage, how to cure my Oxen
When they are oregrowne with labor.

Cha. I may do this
From what I Have read Sir; for what concerns tillage?
Who better can deliver it than Virgil
In his Georgicks? and to cure your herds,
His Bucolicks is a masterpeece; but when
He does describe the Commonwealth of Bees,
Their industry and knowledge of the herbs,
From which they gather honey, with their care
To place it with decorum in the Hive,
Their government among themselves, their order
In going forth and coming laden home,
Their obedience to their King, and his toward
To such as labor, with his punishments
Only inflicted on the slothful Drone,
I Am ravished with it, and there reap my harvest,
And there receive the gain my Cattle bring me,
And there find wax and honey.

Bri. And grow rich
In your imagination, heyday, heyday,
Georgicks, and Bucolicks, and Bees! Art mad?

Cha. No Sir, the knowledge of these guard me from it.

Bri. But can you find among your bundle of books,
(And put in all your Dictionaries that speak all tongues)
What pleasures they enjoy, that do embrace
A well shaped wealthy Bride? Answer me that.

Cha. It Is frequent Sir in story, there I read of
All kind of virtuous and vicious women,
The ancient Spartan Dames, and Roman Ladies,
Their beauties, and deformities, and when
I light upon a Portia or Cornelia,
Crowned with still flourishing leaves of truth and goodness,
With such a feeling I peruse their fortunes,
As if I then had lived, and freely tasted
Their ravishing sweetness; at the present loving
The whole sex for their goodness and example.
But on the contrary when I look on
A Clytemnestra or a Tullia,
The first bathed in her husbands blood; The later,
Without a touch of piety, driving on
Her Chariot ore her fathers breathless trunk;
Horror invades my faculties; and comparing
The multitudes of the guilty, with the few
That did dye Innocents, I detest, and loathe'm
As ignorance or Atheism.

Bri. You resolve then
Nere to make payment of the debt your owe me.

Cha. What debt, good Sir.

Bri. A debt I paid my father
When I begat thee, and made him a Grandsire,
Which I expect from you.

Cha. The children Sir,
Which I will leave to all posterity,
Begot and brought up by my painful studies,
Shall be my living issue.

Bri. Very well,
And I shall have a general collection
Of all the quiddits from Adam to this time
To be my grandchilde.

Cha. And such a one I hope Sir,
As shall not shame the Family.

Bri. Nor will you
Take care of my estate.

Cha. But in my wishes,
For know Sir, that the wings on which my Soul
Is mounted, have long since borne her too high
To stoop to any prey, that soars not upwards,
Sordid and dunghill minds composed of earth,
In that gross Element fix all their happiness;
But purer spirits, purged and refined, shake off
That clog of humane frailty; give me leave
To Enjoy my self, that place that does contain
My Books (the best Companions) is to me
A glorious Court, where howrely I converse
With the old Sages and Philosophers,
And sometimes for variety, I confer
With Kings and Emperors, and weigh their Councels,
Calling their Victories (if unjustly got)
Unto a strict account, and in my fancy,
Deface their ill placed Statues; Can I then
Part with such constant pleasures, to embrace
Uncertain vanities? No, be it your care
T'augment your heap of wealth; It shall be mine
T'encrease in knowledge -- Lights there for my study.
-- Exit.
Bri. Was ever man that had reason thus transported
From all sense and feeling of his proper good?
It vexes me, and if I found not comfort
In my young Eustace, I might well conclude
My name were at a period!

Lew. He Is indeed Sir,
The surer base to build on.

Bri. Eustace.

Enter Eust. Egre. Cow. and Andr. Eust. Sir.

Bri. Your ear in private.

And. I suspect my master
Has found harsh welcome, he is gone supperlesse
Into his study; could I find out the cause,
It may be borrowing of his books, or so,
I shall be satisfied.

Eust. My duty shall Sir,
Take any form you please, and in your motion
To have me married, you cut off all dangers
The violent heats of youth might bear me to.

Lew. It is well answered.

Eust. Nor shall you my Lord,
Nor your fair Daughter ever find just cause
To mourn your choice of me; the name of husband
Nor the authority it carries in it
Shall ever teach me to forget to be
As I am now her servant, and your Lordships,
And but that modesty forbids, that I
Should sound the Trumpe of my own deserts,
I could say my choice manners have been such,
As render me loved and remarkable
To the Princes of the blood.

Cow. Nay to the King.

Egre. Nay to the King and Council.

And. These are Court admirers,
And ever echo him that bears the bag,
Though I be dull eyed, I see through this juggling.

Eust. Then for my hopes.

Cow. Nay certainties.

Eust. They stand
As fair as any man's, What can there fall
In compass of her wishes which she shall not
Be suddenly possessed of? Loves she titles?
By the grace and favor of my princely friends,
I am what she would have me.

Bri. He speaks well,
And I believe him.

Lew. I could wish I did so.
Pray you a word Sir, He Is a proper Gentleman,
And promises nothing, but what is possible.
So far I will go with you, Nay I add,
He has woone much upon me, and were he
But one thing that his brother is, the bargain
Were soon struck up.

Bri. What Is that my Lord?

Lew. The heir.

And. Which he is not, and I trust never shall be.

Bri. Come, that shall breed no difference, you see
Charles has given ore the World; He undertake,
And with much ease, to buy his birthright of him
For a dry-fat of new books; nor shall my state
Alone make way for him, but my elder brothers,
Who being issuelesse, to advance our name,
I doubt not will add his; Your resolution?

Lew. I Will first acquaint my daughter with the proceedings,
On these terms I am yours, as she shall be,
Make you no scruple, get the writings ready,
She shall be tractable; tomorrow we will hold
A second conference: Farewell noble Eustace,
And you brave Gallants.

Eust. Full increase of honor
Wait ever on your Lordship.

And. The Gowt rather
And a perpetual Meagrim.

Bri. You see Eustace,
How I travail to possess you of a fortune
You were not borne to, be you worthy of it,
I Will furnish you for a Suitor; visit her
And prosper in it.

Eust. She Is mine Sir, fear it not:
In all my travailes, I nere met a Virgin
That could resist my Courtship.

Eust. If this take now,
We Are made for ever, and will revell it.

Exeunt. And. In tough welsh parsley, which in our vulgar Tongue
Is strong hempen halters; My poor Master cooz'nd,
And I a looker on! If we have studied
Our majors, and our minors, antecedents,
And consequents, to be concluded coxcombes,
We Have made a fair hand on it, I Am glad I h've found
Out all their plots, and their conspiracies,
This shall t'old Monsieur Miramont, one, that though
He cannot read a Proclamation, yet
Dotes on learning, and loves my Master Charles
For being a Scholar, I hear he is coming hither,
I shall meet him, and if he be that old
Rough teasty blade he always used to be,
I Will ring him such a peale as shall go near
To shake their belroome, peradventure, beat'm,
For he is fire and flax, and so have at him.
Exit.
Finis Actus primi.
Actus 2. Scoena 1.
MIRAMONT. BRISAC. NAy brother, brother.

Bri. Pray Sir be not moved,
I meddle with no business but mine own,
And in mine own it is reason I should govern.

Mir. But how to govern then, and understand Sir,
And be as wise as you are hasty, though you be
My brother and from one blood sprung, I must tell ye
Heartely and home too.

Br. What Sir?

Mir. What I grieve to find,
You are a fool, and an old fool, and that 'ts two

Bri. We Will part 'em, if you please.

Mir. No they are entailed to 'em,
Seek to deprive an honest noble spirit,
Your eldest son Sir, and your very Image,
(But he is so like you that he fares the worse for it)
Because he loves his book and doates on that,
And only studies how to know things excellent,
Above the reach of such course brains as yours,
Such muddy fancies, that never will know farther
Then when to cut your Vines, and cozen Merchants,
And choke your hide-bound Tenants with musty harvests.

Bri. You go too fast.

Mir. I Am not come to my pace yet,
Because h' has made his study all his pleasure,
And is retired into his Contemplation,
Not meddling with the dirt and chafe of nature,
That makes the spirit of the mind mud too,
Therefore must he be flung from his inheritance?
Must he be dispossessed, and Monsieur gingle boy
His younger brother? --

Bri. You forget your self,

Mir. Because h' has been at Court and learned new tongues,
And how to speak a tedious piece of nothing,
To vary his face as Seamen do their Compass,
To worship images of gold and silver,
And fall before the she Calves of the Season,
Therefore must he jumpe into his brothers land?

Bri. Have you done yet, and have you spoke enough
In praise of learning, Sir?

Mir. Never enough.

Bri. But brother do you know what learning is?

Mir. It is not to be a Justice of Peace, as you are,
And palter out your time in the penal Statutes,
To hear the curious Tenets controverted
Between a Protestant Constable, and a Jesuit Cobbler,
To pick natural Philosophy out of bawdry
When your Worship's pleased to correctifie a Lady,
Nor it is not the maine moral of blind Justice,
(Which is deep learning) when your worship Tenants
Bring a light cause, and heavy Hens before ye,
Both fat and feesible, a Goose or Pig,
And then you sit like equity with both hands
Weighing indifferently the state oth' question.
These are your quodlibets, but no learning Brother.

Bri. You are so parlously in love with learning,
That I Would be glad to know what you understand, brother,
I Am sure you have read all Aristotle.

Mir. Faith no,
But I believe, I have a learned faith Sir,
And that is it makes a Gentleman of my sort,
Though I can speak no Greek I love the sound on it,
It goes so thundering as it conjured Devils;
Charles speaks it loftily, and if thou were a man,
Or had but ever heard of Homers Iliads,
Hesiod, and the Greek Poets, thou would run mad,
And hang they self for joy thou had such a Gentleman
To be thy son; O he has read such things
To me!

Bri. And you do understand'm brother.

Mir. I tell thee no, that is not material; the sound's
Sufficient to confirm an honest man:
Good brother Brisac, does your young Courtier
That wears the fine clothes, and is the excellent Gentleman,
(The Traveiler, the Soldier, as you think too)
Understand any other power than his Tailor?
Or knows what motion is, more than an Horse-race?
What the Moon means, but to light him home from Tavernes?
Or the comfort of the Sun is, but to wear slash't clothes in?
And must this piece of ignorance be popt up,
Because 't can kiss the hand, and cry sweet Lady?
Say it had been at Rome, and seen the Relics,
Drunk your Verdea wine, and rid at Naples,
Brought home a box of Venice treacle, with it
To cure young wenches that have eaten ashes:
Must this thing therefore? --

Bri. Yes Sir, this thing must,
I will not trust my land to one so sotted,
So grown like a disease unto his study,
He that will fling off all occasions
And cares, to make him understand what state is,
And how to govern it, must by that reason,
Be flung himself aside from managing:
My younger boy is a fine Gentleman.

Mir. He is an ass, a piece of ginger-bread,
Gilt over to please foolish girls and puppets.

Bri. You are my elder brother.

Mir. So I had need,
And have an elder wit, thou'd'st shame us all else,
Go too, I say, Charles shall inherit.

Bri. I say no,
Unless Charles had a soul to understand it,
Can he manage six thousand Crowns a year
Out of the metaphysics? or can all
His learned Astronomy look to my Vineyards?
Can the drunken old Poets make up my Vines?
(I know they can drinke'm) or your excellent humanists
Sell 'm the Merchants for my best advantage?
Can History cut my hay, or get my Corn in?
And can Geometry vent it in the market?
Shall I have my sheep kept with a Jacobs staff now?
I wonder you will magnify this mad man,
You that are old and should understand.

Mir. Should, sai'st thou,
Thou monstrous piece of ignorance in office!
Thou that have no more knowledge than thy Clerk infuses,
Thy dapper Clerk larded with ends of Latin,
And he no more than custom of offenses;
Thou unreprieveable Dunce! that thy formal bandstrings,
Thy ring nor pomander cannot expiate for,
Do thou tell me I should? I Will pose thy Worship
In thine own Library and Almanacke,
Which thou art daily poring on to pick out
Days of iniquity to cozen fools in,
And full Moons to cut Cattle; do thou taint me,
That have run over story, Poetry,
Humanity?

Bri. As a cold nipping shadow
Does ore the ears of Corn, and leave 'em blasted,
Put up your anger, what I Will do I Will do.

Mir. Thou shall not do.

Bri. I will.

Mir. Thou art an Ass then,
A dull old tedious Ass, the art ten times worse
And of less credit than Dunce Hollingshead
The Englishman, that writes of snowes and Sheriffs.

Enter LEWIS. Bri. Well take your pleasure, here is one I must talk with.

Lew. Good day Sir.

Bri. Fair to you Sir.

Lew. May I speak w' ye.

Bri. With all my heart, I was waiting on your goodness.

Lew. Good morrow Monsieur Miramont.

Mir. O sweet Sir,
Keep your good morrow to cool your Worships pottage,
A couple of the worlds fools met together
To raise up dirt and dunghils.

Lew. Are they drawn?

Bri. They shall be ready Sir, within these two hours,
And Charles set his hand.

Lew. It Is necessary,
For he being a joint purchaser, though your state
Was got by your own industry, unless
He seal to the Conveyance, it can be
Of no validity.

Bri. He shall be ready,
And do it willingly.

Mir. He shall be hanged first.

Bri. I hope your daughter likes.

Lew. She loves him well Sir,
Young Eustace is a bait to catch a woman,
A budding spritely fellow, you are resolved then,
That all shall pass from Charles.

Bri. All all, he is nothing,
A bunch of books shall be his patrimony,
And more than he can manage too.

Lew. Will your brother
Pass over his land too, to your son Eustace?
You know he has no heir.

Mir. He will be flead first.
And horse-collers made of 's skin!

Bri. Let him alone,
A wilful man; my state shall serve the turn, Sir.
And how does your Daughter?

Lew. Ready for the hour,
And like a blushing Rose that stays the pulling.

Bri. Tomorrow, then 's the day.

Lew. Why then to morrow
I Will bring the Girl, get you the Writings ready.

Mir. But hark you Monsieur, have you the virtuous conscience
To help to rob an heir, an Elder Brother
Of that which nature and the Law flings on him?
You were your fathers eldest son, I take it,
And had his Land, would you had had his wit too,
Or his discretion to consider nobly,
What it is to deal unworthly in these things;
You Will say he is none of yours, he is his son,
And he will say, he is no son to inherit
Above a shelfe of Books; Why did he get him?
Why was he brought up to write and read and know things?
Why was he not like his father, a dumb Justice?
A flat dull piece of phlegm, shaped like a man,
A reverend I doll in a piece of auras?
Can you lay disobedience, want of manners,
Or any capital crime to his charge?

Lew. I do not,
Nor do not weigh your words, they bite not me, Sir,
This man must answer.

Bri. I have don't already,
And given sufficient reason to secure me:
And so good morrow brother to your patience.

Lew. Good morrow Monsieur Miramont.

Mir. Good nightcaps
Keep your brains warm, or Maggots will breed in 'm.
Well Charles, thou shall not want to buy thee books yet,
The fairest in thy study are my gift,
And the University Lovaine for thy sake,
Has tasted of my bounty, and to vex
The old doting fool thy father, and thy brother,
They shall not share a S^^^ of mine between them;
Nay more, I Will give thee eight thousand Crowns a year,
In some high strain to write my Epitaph.

-- Exit. Actus II. Scoena II.
EUSTACE, EGREMONT, COVVSY. How do I look now to my elder Brother;
Nay, it is a handsome Suite.

Cow. All courtly, courtly.

Eust. I Will assure ye Gentlemen, my Tailor has travailed,
And speaks as lofty language in his bills too,
The cover of an old Book would not show thus.
Fie, fie, what things these Academicks are,
These book-wormes, how they look!

Egr. The are mere Images,
No gentle motion nor behavior in 'em,
They Will prattle ye of primum mobile,
And tell a story of the state of Heaven,
What Lords and Ladies govern in such houses,
And what wonders they do when they meet together,
And how they spit snow, fire, and hail like a Jugler,
And make a noise when they are drunk, which we call Thunder.

Cow. They are the sneaking'st things, and the contemptiblest;
Such small beer brains, but aske'em any thing
Out of the Element of their understanding,
And they stand gaping like a roasted Pig;
Do they know what a Court is or a Council,
Or how the affairs of Christendom are managed?
Do they know any thing but a tired hackney?
And they cry absurd as the Horse understood'em.
They have made a fair youth of your elder brother,
A pretty piece of flesh.

Eust. I thanke'm for it,
Long may he study to give me his state.
Saw you my Mistress?

Egre. Yes, she is a sweet young woman,
But be sure you keep her from learning.

Eust. Songs she
May have, and read a little unbak'd Poetry,
Such as the Dablers of our time contrive,
That has no weight nor wheel to move the mind,
Nor indeed nothing but an empty sound;
She shall have clothes but not made by Geometry,
Horses and Coach but of no immortal race;
I will not have a Scholar in mine house
Above a gentle Reader, They corrupt
The foolish women with their subtle problems:
I Will have my house called Ignorance, to fright
Prating Philosophers from enterteinment.

Cow. It will do well, love those that love good fashions,
Good clothes and rich, they invite men to admire'm,
That speak the lispe of Court, Oh it is great learning!
To ride well, dance well, sing well, or whistle Courtly,
They Are rare endowments; that have seen far Countries
And can speak strange things, though they speak no truths,
For then they make things common. When are you married?

Eust. To morrow, I think, we must have a Masque Boys,
And of our own making.

Egre. It Is not half an hours work,
A Cupid and a fiddle, and the thing's done,
But let us be handsome, shall's be Gods or Nymphs?

Eust. What, Nymphs with beards?

Cow. That Is true, we will be
Knights then,
Some wandering Knights, that light here on a sudden.

Eust. Let Us go, let us go, I must go visit, Gentlemen,
And mark what sweet lips I must kiss to morrow.

Exeunt. Actus II. Scoena II.
COOK, ANDREW, BUTLER. And how does my Master?

And. Is at's book, peace Coxcombe,
That such an unlearned tongue as thine should ask for him!

Co. Does he not study conjuring too?

And. Have you
Lost any plate, Butler? But. No, but I know
I shall tomorrow at dinner.

And. Then to morrow
You shall be turned out of your place for it; we meddle
With no spirits oth' Buttry, they taste too small for us;
Keep me a pie in folio, I beseech thee,
And thou shall see how learnedly I Will translate him;
Shall's have good cheer to morrow.

Coo. Ex' Lent, good cheer Andrew.

And. The spite on it is, that much about that time,
I shall be arguing, or deciding rather,
Which are the Males and Females of red Herrings,
And whether they be taken in the red Sea only,
A question found out by Copernicus,
The learned Motion-maker.

Co. I marry, Butler,
Here are rare things; a man that looked upon him,
Would swear he understood no more than we do.

But. Certain, a learned Andrew.

And. I Have so much on it,
And am so laden with strong understanding,
I fear, they will run me mad, here is a new instrument,
A metamaticall glister to purge the Moon with,
When she is laden with cold flegmaticke humors,
And here is another to remove the Stars,
When they grow too thick in the Firmament.

Co. O heavens! why do I labor out my life
In a beefe-pot? and only search the secrets
Of a Sallad; and know no farther!

And. They are not
Revealed to all beads; These are far above
Your Element of Fire, Cook, I could tell you
Of Archimides glass to fire your coals with,
And of the Philosophers turfe that nere goes out;
And Gilbert Butler, I could ravish thee,
With two rare inventions.

But. What are they Andrew?

And. The one to blanch your bread from chippings base,
And in a moment, as thou would an Almond,
The Sect of the Epicurians invented that;
The other for thy trenchers, that is a strong one,
To cleanse you twenty dozen in a minute,
And no noise heard, which is the wonder Gilbert,
And this was out of Plato's new Idea's.

But. Why what a learned Master do thou serve Andrew?

And. These are but the scrapings of his understanding, Gilbert;
With gods and goddesses, and such strange people
He deals, and treats with in so plain a fashion,
As thou do with thy boy that draws thy drink,
Or Ralph there with his kitchen boys and scalders.

Coo. But why should he not be familiar and talk sometimes,
As other Christians do, of hearty matters,
And come into the Kitchen, and there cut his breakfast?

But. And then retire to the Buttry and there eat it,
And drink a lusty bowl, my younger Master
That must be now the heir will do all these,
I and be drunk too; These are mortal things.

And. My Master studies immortality.

Coo. Now thou talk
Of immortality, how does thy wife Andrew? My old Master
Did you no small pleasure when he procured her
And stocked you in a fame. If he should love her now,
As he has a Colts tooth yet, what says your learning
And your strange instruments to that my Andrew?
Can any of your learned Clerks avoid it?
Can ye put by his Mathematical Engine?

And. Yes, or I Will break it; thou awaken'st me,
And I Will peep in the Moon this month but I Will watch for him.
My Master rings, I must go make him a fire,
And conjure ore his books.

Coo. Adieu good Andrew,
And send thee manly patience with thy learning.

-- Exeunt. Actus II. Scoena IV.
CHARLES. I have forgot to eat and sleep with reading,
And all my faculties turn into study,
It Is meat and sleep, what need I outward garments,
When I can cloathe my self with understanding,
The Stars and glorious Planets have no Tailors,
Yet ever new they are and shine like Courtiers,
The seasons of the year find no fond parents,
Yet some are armed in silver Ice that glisters,
And some in gaudy green come in like Masquers,
The Silke-worme spinnes her own suite and her lodging,
And has no aid nor partner in her labors;
Why should we care for any thing but knowledge,
Or look upon the world but to contemn it?
Enter ANDREW. Would you have anything?

Cha. Andrew, I find
There is a stie grown ore the eye oth' Bull,
Which will go near to blind the Constellation.

And. Put a gold-ring in's nose, and that will cure him.

Cha. Ariadne's crown's awry too, two maine-starres
That held it fast are slipped out.

And. Send it presently
To Gallatteo the Italian Star-wright
He Will set it right again with little labor.

Cha. Thou art a pretty Scholar.

And. I hope I shall be,
Have I swept your books so often to know nothing?

Cha. I hear thou art married.

And. It has pleased your father
To match me to a maid of his own choosing,
I doubt her constellation's loose too, and wants nailing,
And a sweet farm he has given us a mile off Sir,

Cha. Marry thy self to understanding, Andrew,
These women are Errata in all Authors,
They Are fair to see to, and bound up in vellam,
Smoothe, white and clear, but their contents are monstrous;
They treat of nothing, but dull age and diseases.
Thou have not so much wit in thy head, as there is
On those shelves Andrew.

And. I think I have not Sir.

Cha. No, if thou had thould'st nere have married a woman
In thy bosom, they are Cataplasmes made oth' deadly sins,
I nere saw any yet but mine own mother,
Or if I did, I did regard them, but
As shadows that pass by of under Creatures.

And. Shall I bring you one? I Will trust you with my own wife;
I would not have your brother go beyond ye,
They Are the prettiest natural Philosophers to play with.

Cha. No, no, the are optics to delude men's eyes with.
Does my younger brother speak any Greek yet, Andrew?

And. No, but he speaks high Dutch, and that goes as daintily.

Cha. Reach me the books down I read yesterday,
And make a little fire, and get a manchet,
Make clean those instruments of brass I showed you,
And set the great Sphere by, then take the fox tail
And purge the books from dust, last take your Lilly,
And get your part ready.

And. Shall I go home Sir?
My wives name is Lilly, there my best part lies, Sir.

Cha. I mean your Grammar, O thou dunderhead!
Would thou be ever in thy wives Syntaxis?
Let me have no noise, nor nothing to disturb me,
I am to find a secret.

And. So am I too,
Which if I do find, I shall make some smart for it.

-- Exeunt. Actus 3. Scoena 1.
LEWIS, ANGELLINA, SYLVIA, NOTARY. THis is the day my daughter Angellina,
The happy, that must make you a fortune,
A large and full one, my great care has wrought it,
And yours must be as great to entertain it,
Young Eustace is a Gentleman at all points,
And his behavior affable and courtly,
His person excellent, I know you find that,
I read it in your eyes, you like his youth,
Young handsome people should be matched together,
Then follows handsome Children, handsome fortunes,
The most part of his fathers state, my Wench,
Is ti'd in jointure, that makes up the harmony,
And when you are married he is of that soft temper,
And so far will be chained to your observance,
That you may rule and turn him as you please.
What are the writings drawn on our side, Sir?

Not. They are, and here I have so fettered him,
That if the Elder Brother set his hand to,
Not all the power of Law shall ere release him.

Lew. These Notaries are notable confident Knaves,
And able to do more mischief than an Army:
Are all your Clauses sure?

Not. Sure as proportion,
They may turn Rivers sooner than these Writings.

Not. Why did you not put all the lands in, Sir?

Lew. It Was not conditioned.

Not. If it had been found,
It had been but a fault made in the Writing,
If not found all the Land.

Lew. These are small Devils
That care not who has mischief, so they make it;
They live upon the mere scent of dissension.
It Is well, it is well, Are you contented Girl?
For your will must be known.

Ang. A husband's welcome,
And as an humble wife I Will entertain him,
No sovereignty I aim at, it is the man's Sir,
For she that seeks it, killes her husbands honor:
The Gentleman I have seen, and well observed him,
Yet find not that graced excellence you promise,
A pretty Gentleman, and he may please too,
And some few flashes I have heard come from him,
But not to admiration, as to others;
He Is young, and may be good, yet he must make it,
And I may help, and help to thank him also.
It is your pleasure I should make him mine,
And't has been still my duty to observe you.

Lew. Why then let us go, and I shall love your modesty.
To horse, and bring the Coach out. Angellina,
To morrow you will look more womanly.

Ang. So I look honestly, I fear no eyes, Sir.

Exeunt. Actus III. Scoena II.
BRISAC, ANDREW, COOK, LILLY. Wait on your Master, he shall have that befits
him.

And. No inheritance, Sir?

Bri. You speak like a fool, a coxcombe,
He shall have annual means to buy him books,
And find him clothes and meat, what would he more?
Trouble him with Land? it is flat against his nature:
I love him too, and honor those gifts in him.

And. Shall Master Eustace have all?

Bri. All, all, he knows how
To use it, he is a man bred in the world,
TO other in the heavens: my masters, pray be wary,
And serviceable, and Cook see all your sawces
Be sharp and poynant in the pallat, that they may
Commend you, look to your roast and baked meats handsomely,
And what new kickshawes and delicate made things --
Is the music come?

But. Yes Sir, the are here at breakfast.

Bri. There will be a Masque too, you must see this room clean,
And Butler your door open to all good fellows,
But have an eye to your plate, for there be Furies:
My Lilly welcome, you are for the linen,
Sort it, and see it ready for the Table,
And see the bride-bed made, and look the cords be
Not cut a sunder by the Gallants too,
There be such knacks abroad; hark hither, Lilly,
To morrow night at twelve a clock, I Will suppe w' ye,
Your husband shall be safe, I Will send ye meat too,
Before I cannot well stip from my company.

And. Will ye so, will you, so, Sir? I Will make one to eat it,
I may chance make you stagger too.

Bri. No answer, Lilly?

Lil. One word about the linen; I Will be ready,
And rest your worships still.

And. And I Will rest w' ye,
You shall see what rest 'twill be: Are ye so nimble:
A man had need have ten pair of ears to watch you.

Bri. Wait on your Master, for I know he wants ye,
And keep him in his study, that the noise
Do not molest him: I will not fail my Lilly --
Come in sweet hearts, all to their several duties.

Exeunt. And. Are you kissing ripe, Sir? Double but my farm
And kiss her till thy heart ache; these smock vermin,
How eagerly they leap at old men's kisses,
They lick their lips at profit, not at pleasure;
And if 't were not for the scurvie name of Cuckold,
He should lie with her, I know she will labor at length
With a good Lordship. If he had a wife now,
But that is all one, I Will fit him: I must up
Unto my Master, he will be mad with study.
-- Exit.
Actus III. Scoena III.
CHARLES. What noise is in this house, my head is broken,
Within a Parenthesis, in every corner
As if the earth were shaken with some strange Collect,
There are stirs and motions, What Planet rules this house?
Enter ANDREW. Who Is there?

And. It Is I Sir, faithful Andrew.

Cha. Come near,
And lay thine ear down, hear'st no noise?

And. The Cooks
Are chopping herbs and mince meat to make pies,
And breaking Marrow-bones --

Char. Can they set them again?

And. Yes, yes, in brothes and puddings, and they grow stronger
For the use of any man.

Cha. What sque a king's that?
Sure there is a massacre.

And. Of Pigs and Geese Sir,
And Turkeys for the spit. The Cooks are angry Sir,
And that makes up the medly.

Cha. Do they thus
At every dinner? I nere marked them yet,
Nor know who is a Cook.

And. The are sometimes sober,
And then they beat as gently as a Tabor.

Char. What loades are these?

Andr. Meat, meat, Sir, for the Kitchen,
And stinking fowls the Tenants have sent in,
They Will nere be found out at a general eating,
And there is fat Venison, Sir.

Cha. What Is that?

And. Why Dear,
Those that men fatten for their private pleasures,
And let their Tenants starve upon the Commons.

Cha. I Have read of Dear, but yet I nere eat any.

And. There Is a Fishmongers boy with Caviar Sir,
Anchoves and Potargo, to make ye drink.

Cha. Sure these are modern, very modern meats,
For I understand 'em not.

And. No more does any man
From Caca merda or a substance worse,
Till they be greased with oil, and rubbed with onions,
And then flung out of doors, they are rare Sallads,

Cha. And why is all this, prithee tell me Andrew?
Are there any Princes to dine here to day?
By this abundance, sure there should be Princes;
I Have read of entertainment for the gods
At half this charge, will not fine dishes serve 'em?
I never had but one, and that a small one.

And. Your Brother's married this day, he is married,
Your younger brother Eustace.

Cha. What of that?

And. And all the friends about are bidden hither,
There Is not a dog that knows the house but comes too.

Cha. Married? to whom?

And. Why to a dainty Gentlewoman,
Young, sweet, and modest.

Cha. Are there modest women?
How do they look?

And. O you would bless your self to see them.
He parts with his book, he nere did so before yet.

Cha. What does my father for 'em?

And. Gives all his Land,
And makes your brother heir.

Cha. Must I have nothing?

And. Yes, you must study still, and he will maintain you.

Cha. I am his eldest brother.

And. True, you were so,
But he has leaped one your shoulders, Sir.

Cha. It Is well,
He Will not inherit my understanding too?

And. I think not, he will scarce find Tenants to let it
Out to.

Cha. Hark, hark.

Andr. The Coach that brings the fair Lady.

Enter LEWIS, ANGELLINA, Ladies, NOTARY, etc. And. Now you may see her.

Cha. Sure this should be modest;
But I do not truly know what women make of it,
Andrew; she has a face looks like a story,
The story of the Heavens looks very like her.

And. She has a wide face then.

Cha. She has a Cherubins,
Covered and veiled with modest blushes.
Eustace be happy whiles poor Charles is patient.
Get me my book again, and come in with me.

-- Exeunt. Enter BRISAC, EUSTACE, EGREMONT, COVVSY, MIRAMONT. Bri. Welcome
sweet Daughter, welcome noble brother,
And you are welcome Sir, with all your writings,
Ladies most welcome; What? my angry brother!
You must be welcome too, the feast is flat else.

Mir. I am not come for your welcome, I expect none,
I bring no joys to bless the bed withal,
Nor songs, nor Masks to glorify the Nuptials,
I bring an angry mind to see your folly,
A sharp one too, to reprehend you for it.

Bri. You Will stay and dine though?

Mir. All your meat smelles musty,
Your Table will show nothing to content me.

Bri. I Will answer you, here is good meat.

Mira. But your sauce is scurvie,
It is not seasoned with the sharpness of discretion.

Eust. It seems your anger is at me, dear Uncle.

Mir. Thou are not worth my anger, the art a boy,
A lump o'thy fathers lightness, made of nothing
But anticke clothes and cringes, look in thy head,
And 'twill appear a football full of fumes
And rotten smoke; Lady, I pity you,
You are a handsome and a sweet young Lady,
And ought to have a handsome man yoked to ye,
An understanding too, this is a Gincracke,
That can get nothing but new fashions on you,
For say he have a thing shaped like a child,
Twill either prove a tumbler or a Tailor.

Eust. These are but harsh words Uncle.

Mir. So I mean 'em
Sir, you play harsher play w' your elder brother.

Eust. I would be loath to give you.

Mir. Do not venture,
I Will make your wedding-cloathes sit closer to ee then;
I but disturb you, I Will go see my nephew.

Lew. Pray take a piece of rosemary.

Mir. I Will wear it,
But for the Ladies sake, and none of yours,
May be I Will see your table too.

Bri. Pray do, Sir.

Ang. A mad old Gentleman.

Bri. Yes faith, sweet daughter,
He has been thus his whole age to my knowledge,
He has made Charles his heir, I know that certainly,
Then why should he grudge Eustace any thing?

Ang. I would not have a light head, nor one laden
With too much learning, as they say, this Charles is,
That makes his book his Mistress: Sure, there is something
Hid in this old man's anger, that declares him
Not a mere Sot.

Bri. Come shall we go and seal, brother?
All things are ready and the Priest is here,
When Charles has set his hand unto the Writings.
As he shall instantly, then to the Wedding,
And so to dinner.

Lew. Come, let us seal the book first,
For my daughters Jointure.

Bri. Let Us be private in it, Sir.

Exeunt. Actus III. Scoena IV.
Enter CHARLES, MIRAMONT, ANDREW. Mir. Nay, you are undone.

Cha. hum.

Mira. Ha'ye no greater feeling?

And. You were sensible of the great book, Sir,
When it fell on your head, and now the house
Is ready to fall, Do you fear nothing?

Cha. Will
He have my books too?

Mir. No, he has a book,
A fair one too to read on, and read wonders,
I would thou had her in thy study Nephew,
And 'twere but to new string her.

Cha. Yes, I saw her,
And me thought 'twas a curious piece of learning,
Handsomely bound, and of a dainty letter.

And. He flung away his book.

Mir. I like that in him,
Would he had flung away his dullness too,
And spoke to her.

Cha. And must my brother have all?

Mir. All that your father has.

Cha. And that fair woman too?

Mir. That woman also.

Cha. He has enough then.
May I not see her sometimes, and call her Sister?
I will do him no wrong.

Mir. This makes me mad,
I could now cry for anger; these old fools
Are the most stubborn and the wilfullest Coxcombs.
Farewell, and fall to your book, forget your brother,
You are my heir, and I Will provide y'a wife:
I Will look upon this marriage though I hate it.
Exit. Enter BRISAC. Where is my son?

And. There Sir, casting a figure
What chopping children his brother shall have.

Bri. He does well; How do Charles? still at thy book?

And. He Is studying now Sir, who shall be his father.

Bri. Peace you rude Knave -- Come hither Charles, be
merry,

Cha. I thank you I am busy at my book, Sir,

Bri. You must put your hand my Charles, as I would have you,
Unto a little piece of parchment here,
Only your name, you write a reasonable hand.

Cha. But I may do unreasonably to write it,
What is it Sir?

Bri. To pass the Land I have, Sir,
Unto your younger brother.

Cha. Is It no more?

Bri. No, no, it is nothing, you shall be provided for,
And new books you shall have still, and new studies,
And have your means brought in without the care boy,
And one still to attend you.

Cha. This shows your love father.

Bir. I Am tender to you.

And. Like a stone, I take it.

Cha. Why father, I Will go down, an't please you let me,
Because I Would see the thing they call the Gentlewoman,
I see no women but through contemplation,
And there I Will do it before the company,
And wish my brother fortune.

Bri. Do I prithee.

Cha. I must not stay, for I have things above
Require my study.

Bri. No thou shall not stay,
Thou shall have a brave dinner too. And, Now has he
Orethrowne himself for ever; I will down
Into the Celler, and be stark drunk for anger.

Exeunt. Actus III. Scoena V.
Enter LEWIS, ANGELLINA, EUSTACE, Priest, Ladies, COVVSY, Notary, MIRAMONT.
Not. Come let him bring his sons hand, and all is done.
Is yours ready?

Pr. Yes, I Will dispatch ye presently,
Immediately, for in truth I am a hungry.

Eust. Do, speak apaco, for we believe exactly:
Do not we stay long Mistress?

Ang. I find no fault,
Better things well done than want time to do them.
Uncle, why are you sad?

Mir. Sweet smelling blossom,
Would I were thine Uncle to thine own content,
I Would make thy husbands state a thousand, better
A yearly thousand, thou have mist a man,
(But that he is addicted to his study,
And knows no other Mistress than his mind)
Would weigh down bundles of these empty kexes.

Ang. Can he speak, Sir?

Mir. Faith yes, but not to women:
His language is to heaven, and heavenly wonder,
To Nature, and her dark and secret causes.

Ang. And does he speak well there?

Mir. O, admirably,
But he is too bashful to behold a woman,
There Is none that sees him, nor her troubles none.

Ang. He is a man,

Mir. Yes, and a clear sweet spirit.

Ang. Then conversation me thinks --

Mir. So think I too,
But it is his rugged fate, and so I leave you.

Ang. I like thy nobleness.

Eust. See, my mad Uncle
Is courting my fair Mistress.

Lew. Let him alone,
There Is nothing that allayes an angry mind
So soon as a sweet beauty; he will come to us.

Enter BRISAC, CHARLES. Eust. My father's here, my brother too! that is a wonder,
Broke like a spirit from his Cell.

Bri. Come hither,
Come nearer Charles, 'Twas your desire to see
My noble Daughter, and the company,
And give your brother joy, and then to seal boy.
You do like a good brother.

Lew. Marry does he,
And he shall have my love for ever for it.
Put to your hand now.

Not. Here Is the Deed Sir, ready.

Cha. No, you must pardon me a while, I tell ye,
I am in contemplation, do not trouble me.

Bri. Come, leave thy study, Charles.

Cha. I Will leave my life first;
I study now to be a man, I Have found it.
Before, what man was, was but my Argument.

Mir. I like this best of all, he has taken fire,
His dull mist flies away.

Eust. Will you write brother?

Cha. No, brother no, I have no time for poor things,
I Am taking the height of that bright Constellation.

Bri. I say, you trifle time, son.

Cha. I will not seal, Sir,
I am your eldest, and I Will keep my birthright,
For heaven forbid I should become example;
Had y' only showed me Land, I had delivered it,
And been a proud man to have parted with it;
It Is dirt, and labor; Do I speak right Uncle?

Mir. Bravely my boy, and bless thy tongue.

Cha. I Will forward,
But you have opened to me such a treasure,
I find my mind free, heaven direct my fortune.

Mir. Can he speak now? Is this a son to sacrifice?

Cha. Such an inimitable piece of beauty,
That I have studied long, and now found only,
That I Will part sooner with my soul of reason,
And be a plant, a beast, a fish, a fly;
And only make the number of things up
Than yield one foot of Land, if she be tied to it.

Lew. He speaks unhappily.

Ang. And me thinks bravely,
This the mere Scholar?

Eust. You but vex your self brother,
And vex your study too.

Cha. Go you and study,
For 'ts time young Eustace, you want both man and manners,
I Have studied both, although I made no show on it,
Go turn the Volumes over I have read,
Eat and digest them, that they may grow in thee,
Wear out the tedious night with thy dim Lamps
And sooner loose the day than leave a doubt,
Distill the sweetness from the Poets Spring,
And learn to love, Thou know not what fair is,
Traverse the stories of the great Heroes,
The wise and civil lives of good men walk through;
Thou have seen nothing but the face of Countries,
And brought home nothing but their empty words:
Why should thou wear a Jewel of this worth?
That have no worth within thee to preserve her.
Beauty clear and fair,
where the air
Rather like a perfume dwelles,
Where the violet and the rose
Their blew veins in blush disclose,
And come to honor nothing else.
Where to live near,
and planted there,
Is to live, and still live new,
Where to gain a favor is
More than light, perpetual bliss,
Make me live by serving you.
Dear again back recall,
to this light,
A stranger to himself and all;
Both the wonder and the story
Shall be yours, and eke the glory.
I am your servant, and your thrall.

Mir. Speak such another Ode, and take all yet.
What say ye to the Scholar now?

Ang. I wonder;
Is he your brother, Sir?

Eust. Yes, would he were buried,
I fear he will make an affe of me a younger.

Ang. Speak not so softly Sir, it is very likely.

Bri. Come leave your finicall talk, and let us dispatch, Charles.

Cha. Dispatch? What?

Bri. Why the land.

Cha. You are deceived, Sir,
Now I perceive what it is that woes a woman,
And what maintains her when she is wooed. I Will stop here.
A wilful poverty nere made a beauty,
Nor want of means maintained it virtuously:
Though land and moneys be no happiness,
Yet they are counted good Additions.
That use I Will make, He that neglects a blessing,
Though he want present knowledge how to use it,
Neglects himself; May be I have done you wrong Lady,
Whose love and hope went hand in hand together,
May be my brother, that has long expected
The happy hour and blessed my ignorance:
Pray give me leave Sir, I shall clear all doubts.
Why did they show me you? Pray tell me that?

(Mir. He Will talk thee into a pension for thy knavery)

Cha. You happy you, why did you break unto me?
The rosy sugared morn nere broke so sweetly:
I am a man and have desires within me,
Affections too, though they were drowned a while,
And lay dead, till the Spring of beauty raised them,
Till I saw those eyes, I was but a lump,
A Chaos of confusednesse dwelt in me;
Then from those eyes shot Love, and he distinguished,
And into form he drew my faculties;
And now I know my Land, and now I love too.

Bri. We had best remove the maid.

Cha. It is too late Sir,
I have her figure here. Nay frown not Eustace,
There are less worthy souls for younger brothers,
This is no form of silk but sanctity,
Which wild lascivious hearts can never dignifie.
Remove her where you will, I walk along still,
For like the light we make no separation;
You may sooner part the billows of the Sea,
And put a bar betwixt their fellowships,
Than blot out my remembrance, sooner shut
Old time into a den, and stay his motion,
Wash off the swift hours from his downy wings,
Or steal eternity to stop his glass,
Than shut the sweet Idea I have in me.
Room for an elder brother, pray give place, Sir.

Mir. Has studied duel too, take heed, he will beat thee.
Has frighted the old Justice into a fever;
I hope he will disinherit him too for an ass;
For though he be grave with years, he is a great baby.

Cha. Do not you think me mad?

Ang. No certain, Sir,
I have heard nothing from you but things excellent.

Cha. You look upon my clothes and laugh at me,
My scurvie clothes!

Ang. They have rich linings Sir.
I would your brother --

Cha. His are gold and gaudy.

Ang. But touch'em inwardly, they smell of Copper.

Cha. Can ye love me? I am an heir, sweet Lady,
However I appear a poor dependant;
Love you with honor, I shall love so ever:
Is your eye ambitious? I may be a great man.
Is It wealth or lands you covet? my father must dye.

Mir. That was well put in, I hope he will take it deeply.

Cha. Old men are not immortal, as I take it,
Is it, you look for, youth and handsomnesse?
I do confess my brother's a handsome Gentleman,
But he shall give me leave to lead the way Lady,
Can you love for love, and make that the reward?
The old man shall not love his heaps of gold
With a more doting superstition,
Than I Will love you; The young man his delights,
The merchant when he ploughs the angry sea up
And sees the mountain billows falling on him,
As if all Elements, and all their angers
Were turned into one vowed destruction;
Shall not with greater joy embrace his safety.
We Will live together like two wanton Vines,
Circling out souls and loves in one another,
We Will spring together and weell bear one fruit,
One joy shall make us smile, and one grief mourn,
One age go with us, and one hour of death
Shall shut our eyes, and one grave make us happy.

Ang. And one hand seal the match, I Am yours for ever.

Lew. Nay, stay, stay, stay.

Ang. Nay certainly, it is done Sir.

Bri. There was a contract.

Ang. Only conditional,
That if he had the Land, he had my love too;
This Gentleman's the heir, and he will maintain it.
Pray be not angry Sir, at what I say;
Or if you be, it is at your own adventure.
You have the outside of a pretty Gentleman,
But by my troth your inside is but barren;
It Is not a face I only am in love with,
Nor will I say your face is excellent,
A reasonable hunting face to court the wind with;
Nor the are not words unless they be well placed too,
Nor your sweet Dam mees, nor your hired verses,
Nor telling me of Clothes, nor Coach and horses,
No nor your visits each day in new suites,
Nor your black patches you wear variously,
Some cut like stars, some in half Moons, some Lozenges,
(All which but show you still a younger brother.)

Mir. Gramercy Wench thou have a noble soul too.

Ang. Nor your long travailes, nor your little knowledge,
Can make me doat upon you. Faith go study,
And gleane some goodness, that you may show manly,
Your brother at my suite I Am sure will teach you,
Or only study how to get a wife Sir,
Y' are cast far behind, it is good you should be melancholy,
It shows likes a Gamester that had lost his money,
And it is the fashion to wear your arm in a skarfe Sir,
For you have had a shrewd cut ore the fingers.

Lew. But are y' in earnest?

Ang. Yes, believe me father,
You shall nere choose for me, y' are old and dim Sir,
And the shadow of the earth eclipsed your judgment,
Y' have had your time without controwle dear father,
And you must give me leave to take mine now Sir.

Bri. This is the last time of asking, Will you set your hand too?

Cha. This is the last time of answering, I will never.

Bris. Out of my doors.

Char. Most willingly.

Miram. He shall Jew,
Thou of the Tribe of Man-y-asses, Coxcombe,
And never trouble thee more till thy chops be cold, fool.

Ang. Must I be gone too?

Lew. I will never know thee.

Ang. Then this man will, what fortune he shall run, father,
Be It good or bad, I must partake it with him.
Enter EGREMONT. When shall the Masque begin?

Eust. It Is done already,
All, all, is broken off, I am undone friend,
My brother's wife again, and has spoiled all,
Will not release the land, has won the Wench too.

Egre. Could he not stay till the Masque was past? w' are ready.
What a skirvie trick's this?

Mir. O you may vanish,
Perform it at some Hall, where the Citizens wives
May see it for six pence a piece, and a cold supper.
Come let us go Charles, And now my noble Daughter,
I Will sell the tiles of my house ere thou shall want Wench.
Rate up your dinner Sir, and sell it cheap,
Some younger brother will take 't up in commodities.
Send you joy, Nephew Eustace, if ye study the Law,
Keep your great pippin-pies, they will go far with ye.

Cha. I Would have your blessing.

Bri. No, no, meet me no more,
Farewell, thou will blast mine eyes else.

Cha. I will not.

Lew. Nor send not you for Gowns.

Ang. I Will wear course flannell first.

Bri. Come let us go take some counsel.

Lew. It Is too late.

Bri. Then stay and dine, It may be we shall vex 'em.

Exeunt. Actus 4. Scoena 1.
Enter BRISAC, EUSTACE, EGREMONT, COVVSY. NEre talk to me, you are no men but
Masquers,
Shapes, shadows, and the signs of men, Court bubbles,
That every breath or breaks or blows away,
You have no souls, no metal in your bloods,
No heat to stir ye when ye have occasion,
Frozen dull things that must be turned with leavers,
Are you the Courtiers and the travailed Gallants?
The spritely fellows, that the people talk of?
Ye have no more spirit than three sleepy sops.

Eust. What would ye have me do, Sir?

Bri. Follow your brother,
And get ye out of doors, and seek your fortune,
Stand still becalmed, and let an aged Dotard,
A haire-brain'd puppy, and a bookish boy,
That never knew a blade above a penknife,
And how to cut his meat in Characters
Cross my design, and take thy own Wench from thee,
In mine own house too? Thou despised poor fellow!

Eust. The reverence that I ever bare to you Sir,
Then to my Uncle, with whom 't had been but sauciness
TO have been so rough --

Egre. And we not seeing him
Strive in his own cause, that was principal,
And should have led us on; thought it ill manners
To begin a quarrel here.

Bri. You dare do nothing.
Do you make your care the excuse of your cowardlinesse?
Three boys on hobby-horses with three penny halberts,
Would beat you all.

Cow. You must not say so.

Bri. Yes,
And sing it too.

Cow. You are a man of peace,
Therefore we must give way.

Bri. I Will make my way
And therefore quickly leave me, or I Will force you;
And having first torn off your flaunting feathers,
I Will trample on 'em; and if that cannot teach you
To quit my house, I Will kick ye out of my gates;
You gaudy glow-wormes carrying seeming fire,
Yet have no heat within ye.

Cow. O blessed travail!
How much we owe thee for our power to suffer?

Egre. Some spleenative youths now that had never seen
More than their Country smoke would grow in choler.
It would show fine in us.

Eust. Yes marry would it,
That are prime Courtiers, and must know no angers,
But give thanks for our injuries, if we purpose
To hold our places.

Bri. Will you find the door?
And find it suddenly, you shall lead the way, Sir,
With your perfumd' retinew, and recover
The now lost Angellina, or build on it,
I will adopt some beggars doubtful issue,
Before thou shall inherit.

Eust. We Will to council,
And what may be done by man's wit or valor
We Will put in execution,

Bri. Do, or never
Hope I shall know thee.

Le. O Sir, have I found you?
Exeunt. Ent. Lewis.
Bri. I never hid my self, whence flows this fury?
With which as it appears, you come to fright me.

Lew. I smell a plot, a mere conspiracy
Among ye all to defeat me of my daughter,
And if she be not suddenly delivered,
Untainted in her reputation too,
The best of France shall know how I am juggled with.
She is my heir, and if she may be ravished
Thus from my care, farewell Nobility,
Honor and blood are mere neglected nothings.

Bri. Nay then, my Lord, you go too far, and tax him
Whose innocence understands not what fear is.
If your unconstant daughter will not dwell
On certainties, must you thenceforth conclude,
That I am fickle? What have I omitted,
To make good my integrity and truth?
Nor can her lightness, nor your supposition
Cast an aspersion on me.

Lew. I am wounded
In fact, nor can words cure it: do not trifle,
But speedily, once more I do repeat it,
Restore my daughter as I brought her hither,
Or you shall hear from me in such a kind,
As you will blush to answer.

Bri. All the world
I think conspires to vex me, yet I will not
Torment my self, some spritefull mirth must banish
The rage and melancholy which has almost choked me,
TO a knowing man it is physic, and it is thought on,
One merry hour I Will have in spite of fortune,
To cheer my heart, and this is that appointed,
This night I Will hug my Lilly in mine arms,
Provocatives are sent before to cheer me;
We old men need'em, and though we pay dear
For our stolen pleasures, so it be done securely:
The charge much like a sharp sauce gives 'em relish.
Well honest Andrew, I gave you a farm,
And it shall have a beacon to give warning
To my other Tenants when the Foe approaches;
And presently, you being bestowed elsewhere,
I Will graffe it with dexterity on your forehead;
Indeed I will Lilly, I come, poor Andrew.
Exit.
Actus IV. Scoena II.
Enter MIRAMONT, ANDREW. Do they chase roundly?

And. As they were rubbed with soape, Sir,
And now they swear alowd, now calm again,
Like a ring of bells, whose sound the wind still alters,
And then they sit in council what to do,
And then they jarre again what shall be done;
They talk of Warrants from the Parliament,
Complaints to the King, and forces from the Province,
They have a thousand heads in a thousand minutes,
Yet nere a one head worth a head of garlic.

Mir. Long may they chafe, and long may we laugh at 'em,
A couple of pure puppies yoked together.
But what says the young Courtier Master Eustace,
And his two warlike friends?

And. They say but little,
How much they think I know not, they look rufully,
As if they had newly come from a vaulting house,
And had been quite shot through 'tweene wind and water
By a she Dunkirke, and had sprung a leake, Sir.
Certain my master was too blame.

Mir. Why Andrew?

And. To take away the Wench oth'sudden from him,
And give him no lawful warning, he is tender,
And of a young girls constitution, Sir,
Ready to get the green sickness with conceit;
Had he but taken his leave in travailing language,
Or bought an Elegy of his condolement,
That the world might have taken notice, he had been
An Ass, 't had been some savor.

Mir. Thou saift true,
Wise Andrew, but those Scholars are such things
When they can prattle.

And. Very parlous things Sir.

Mir. And when they gain the liberty to distinguish
The difference 'twixt a father and a fool,
To look below and spy a younger brother
Pruning and dressing up his expectations
In a rare glass of beauty, too good for him:
Those dreaming Scholars then turn Tyrants, Andrew,
And show no mercy.

And. The more's the pity, Sir.

Mir. Thou told'st me of a trick to catch my brother,
And anger him a little farther, Andrew.
It shall be only anger I assure thee,
And a little shame.

And, And I can fit you, Sir;
Hark in your ear.

Mir. Thy wife?

And. So I assure ye:
This night at twelve a clock.

Mir. It Is neat and handsome;
There are twenty Crowns due to thy project Andrew.
I Have time to visit Charles, and see what Lecture
He reads to his Mistress. That done, I Will not fail
To be with you.

And. Nor I to watch my Master.

-- Exeunt. Actus IV. Scoena III.
ANGELLINA, SYLVIA with a taper. I Am worse than ere I was, for now I fear,
That that I love, that that I only dote on;
He follows me through every room I pass,
And with a strong set eye he gazes on me,
As if his spark of innocence were blown
Into a flame of lust; Virtue defend me.
His Uncle too is absent, and it is night;
And what these oportunities may teach him --
What fear and endless care it is to be honest!
To be a maid, what misery, what mischief!
Would I were rid of it, so it were fairly.

Syl. You need not fear that, will you be a child still?
He follows you, but still to look upon you,
Or if he did desire to lie with ye,
It Is but your own desire, you love for that end;
I Will lay my life, if he were now a bed w' ye,
He is so modest, he would fall a sleep straight.

Ang. Dare you venture that?

Syl. Let him consent, and have at ye,
I fear him not, he knows not what a woman is,
Nor how to find the mystery men aim at.
Are you afraid of your own shadow, Madam?

Ang. He follows still, yet with a sober face;
Would I might know the worst, and then I were satisfied.

Syl. You may both, and let him but go with ye.

Cha. Why do you fly me? what have I so ill
About me or within me to deserve it?

Ang. I am going to bed Sir.

Cha. And I am come to light ye,
I am a maid, and it is a maidens office;
You may have me to bed without a scruple,
And yet I am chary too who comes about me.
Two Innocents should not fear one another.

Syl. The Gentleman says true. Pluck up your heart, Madam.

Cha. The glorious Sun both rising and declining
We boldly look upon, even then sweet Lady,
When like a modest bride he draws nights curtains,
Even then he blushes, that men should behold him.

Ang. I fear he will persuade me to mistake him.

Syl. It Is easily done, if you will give your mind to 't.

Ang. Pray ye to your bed.

Cha. Why not to yours, dear Mistress?
One heart and one bed.

Ang. True Sir, when it is lawful:
But yet you know --

Cha. I would not know, forget it;
Those are but sickly loves that hang on Ceremony,
Nursed up with doubts and fears, ours high and healthful,
Full of belief, and fit to teach the Priest;
Love should seal first, then hands confirm the bargain.

Ang. I shall be an Heretic if this continue.
What would you do a bed? you make me blush, Sir.

Cha. I Would see you sleep, for sure your sleeps are excellent:
You that are waking such a noted wonder,
Must in your slumbers prove an admiration:
I would behold your dreams too, if 't were possible;
Those were rich shows.

Ang. I am becoming Traitor.

Cha. Then like blew Neptune courting of an Island,
Where all the perfumes and the precious things
That wait upon great Nature are laid up.
I Would clip it in mine arms, and chastely kiss it,
Dwell in your bosom like your dearest thoughts,
And sigh and weep.

Ang. I Have too much woman in me.

Cha. And those true tears falling on your pure Chrystalls
Should turn to armelets for great Queenest' adore.

Ang. I must be gone.

Cha. Do not, I will not hurt ye;
This is to let you know, my worthiest Lady,
Y' have cleared my mind, and I can speak of love too;
Fear not my manners, though I never knew
Before these few hours what a beauty was,
And such a one that fires all hearts that feel it;
Yet I have read of virtuous temperance,
And studied it among my other secrets,
And sooner would I force a separation
Betwixt this spirit, and the case of flesh,
Than but conceive one rudeness against chastity.

Ang. Then we may walk.

Cha. And talk of any thing,
Any thing fit for your ears; and my language,
Though I was bred up dull I was ever civil;
It Is true, I have found it hard to look on you,
And not desire, Twill prove a wise man's task,
Yet those desires I have so mingled still
And tempered with the quality of honor,
That if you should yield, I should hate you for it.
I am no Courtier of a light condition,
Apt to take fire at every beauteous face,
That only serves his will and wantonness,
And lets the serious part of life run by
As thin neglected sand. Whiteness of name,
You must be mine; why should I rob my self
Of that that lawfully must make me happy?
Why should I seek to cuekold my delights?
And widow all those sweets I aim at in you?
We Will loose our selves in Venus groves of myrtle,
Where every little bird shall be a Cupid,
And sing of love and youth, each wind that blows
And curles the velvet leaves shall breed delights,
The wanton springs shall call us to their banks,
And on the perfumed flowers we will feast our senses,
Yet we will walk by untainted of their pleasures,
And as they were pure Temples we will ^^ke in them.

Ang. To bed, and pray then, we may have a fair end
Of our fair loves; would I were worthy of you,
Or of such parents that might give you thanks:
But I am poor in all but in your love.
Once more, good night.

Cha. A good night t'yee, and may
The deaw of sleep fall gently on you, sweet one,
And lock up those fair lights in pleasing slumbers;
No dreams but chaste and clear attempt your fancy,
And break betimes sweet morn, I Have lost my light else.

Ang. Let it be ever night when I lose you.

Syl. This Scholar never went to a Free-Schoole, he is so simple.

Enter a servant Ser. Your brother with two Gallants is at door, Sir,
And they are so violent, they will take no denial.

Ang. This is no time of night.

Cha. Let 'em in mistress.

Serve. They stay no leave; Shall I raise the house on 'em?

Cha. Not a man, nor make no murmur of 't, I charge ye.
Enter EUSTACE, EGREMONT, COVVSY. The are here, my Uncle absent, stand close to
me.
How do you brother with your curious story?
Have you not read her yet sufficiently?

Cha. No, brother, no, I stay yet in the Preface;
The stile's too hard for you.

Eust. I must entreat her,
She Is parcel of my goods.

Cha. She Is all when you have her.

Ang. Hold off your hands, unmannerly, rude Sir;
Nor I, nor what I have depend on you.

Cha. Do, let her alone, she gives good counsel; do not
Trouble your self with Ladies, they are too light;
Let out your land, and get a provident Steward.

Ang. I cannot love ye, let that satisfy you;
Such vanities as you are to be laughed at.

Eust. Nay, then you must go, I must claim mine own.

Both. Away, away with her.

Cha. Let her alone,
She strikes off eustace's hat. Pray let her alone, and take your coxeombe up:
Let me talk civilly a while with you brother,
It may be on some terms I may part with her.

Eust. O, is your heart come down? what are your terms, Sir?
Put up, put up.

Cha. This is the first and chiefest,
Snatches away his sword. Let Us walk a turn; now stand off fools, I advise
ye,
Stand as far off as you would hope for mercy:
This is the first sword yet I ever handled,
And a sword's a beauteous thing to look upon,
And if it hold, I shall so hunt your insolence:
It Is sharp IN me sure, and if I put it home,
It Is ten to one I shall new pinke your Sattins:
I find I have spirit enough to dispose of it,
And will enough to make ye all examples;
Let me toss it round, I have the full command on it:
Fetch me a native Fencer, I defy him;
I feel the fire of ten strong spirits in me.
Do you watch me when my Uncle is absent?
This is my grief, I shall be flesht on Cowards;
Teach me to fight, I willing am to learn.
Are ye all gilded Flies, nothing but show in ye?
Why stand ye gaping? who now touches her?
Who calls her his, or who dares name her to me?
But name her as his own, who dares look on her?
That shall be mortal too; but think, it is dangerous.
Art thou a fit man to inherit land,
And have no wit nor spirit to maintain it?
Stand still thou sign of man, and pray for thy friends,
Pray heartily, good prayers may restore ye.

Ang. But do not kill 'em Sir.

Cha. You speak too late, Dear,
It is my first fight, and I must do bravely,
I must not look with partial eyes on any;
I cannot spare a button of these Gentlemen;
Did life lie in their heel Achilles like,
I Would shoot my anger at those parts and kill 'em.
Who waits within?

Ser. Sir.

Cha. View all these, view 'em well,
Go round about 'em and still view their faces,
Round about yet, See how death waits upon 'em,
For thou shall never view 'em more.

Eust. Pray hold, Sir.

Cha. I cannot hold you stand so fair before me,
I must not hold 't will darken all my glories.
Go to my Uncle, bid him post to the King,
And get my pardon instantly, I have need on it.

Eust. Are you so unnatural?

Cha. You shall dye last Sir,
I Will talk thee dead, thou art no man to fight with.
Come, will ye come? me thinks I Have fought whole battles.

Cow. We have no quarrel to you, that we know on, Sir.

Egre. We Will quit the house and ask ye mercy too:
Good Lady, let no murder be done here;
We came but to parley.

Cha. How my sword
Thirsts after them? stand away Sweet.

Eust. Pray Sir,
Take my submission, and I disclaim for ever.

Cha. Away ye poor things, ye despicable Creatures!
Do you come post to fetch a Lady from me,
From a poor Schoole-boy that ye scorned of late?
And grow lame in your hearts when you should execute?
Pray take her, take her, I am weary of her;
What did ye bring to carry her;

Egre. A Coach and four horses.

Cha. But are they good?

Egre. As good as France can show Sir.

Cha. Are you willing to leave those, and take your safeties?
Speak quickly.

Eust. Yes with all our hearts.

Cha. It Is done them
Many have got one horse, I Have got four by the bargain.

Enter MIRAMONT. Mi. How now, who is here?

Ser. Nay now, you are gone without bail.

Mir. What, drawn my friends? Fetch me my two-hand sword;
I will not leave a head on your shoulders, Wretches.

Eust. In truth Sir, I came but to do my duty.

Both. And we to renew our loves.

Mir. Bring me a blanket.
What came they for?

Ang. To borrow me a while, Sir;
But one that never fought yet has so curried,
So bastinado'd them with manly carriage,
They stand like things Gorgon had turned to stone:
They watched your being absent, and then thought
They might do wonders here, and they have done so;
For by my troth, I wonder at their coldness,
The nipping North or frosts never came near them,
St. George upon a Sign would grow more sensible:
If the name of honor were for ever to be lost,
These were the most sufficient men to do it
In all the world, and yet they are but young,
What will they rise to? They Are as full of fire
As a frozen Glo-wormes tails, and shine as goodly;
Nobility and patience are matched rarely
In these three Gentlemen, they have right use on it;
They Will stand still for an hour and be beaten.
These are the Anagrammes of three great Worthies.

Mir. They will infect my house with cowardice,
If they breathe longer in it; my roof covers
No baffled Monsieurs, walk and air your selves;
As I live, they stay not here, white liver'd wretches!
Without one word to ask a reason why,
Vanish, it is the last warning, and with speed,
For if I take ye in hand I shall diffect you,
And read upon your flegmaticke dull carcases.
My horse again there: I have other business,
Which you shall hear hereafter and laugh at it.
Good night Charles, fair goodness to you dear Lady.
It Is late, it is late.

Ang. Pray Sir be careful of us.

Mir. It is enough, my best care shall attend ye.

Exeunt. Actus IV. Scoena IV.
Enter ANDREW. Are you come old Master? very good, your horse
Is well set up, but ere ye part; I Will ride you
And spur your reverend Justiceship such a question,
As I shall make the sides o'your reputation bleed,
Truly I will. Now must I play at Bo-peepe --
A banquet -- well, Potatoes and Eringoes,
And as I take it, Cantharides, -- Excellent,
A priapisme follows, and as I Will handle it,
It shall old lecherous Goat in authority.
Now they begin to bill; how he slavers her.
Gramercy Lilly, she spits his kisses out,
And now he offers to fumble she falls off,
(That Is a good Wench) and cries fair play above board.
Who are they in the corner? As I live,
A covey of Fiddlers; I shall have some music yet
At my making free oth' Company of Horners;
There Is the comfort, and a song too! He beckons for one --
Sure it is no Anthem nor no borrowed rhymes
Out of the School of virtue; I will listen --
A song. This was never penned at Geneva, the note's too spritely.
So, so, the musicke's paid for, and now what follows?
O that Monsieur Miramont would but keep his word,
Here were a feast to make him fat with laughter,
At the most it is not six minutes riding from his house,
Nor will he break I hope -- O are you come Sir?
The prey is in the net and will break in
Upon occasion.

Mir. Thou shall rule me Andrew.
O the infinite fright that will assa^e this Gentleman!
The quarterns, tertians, and quotidians
That will hang like Sergeants on his worships shoulders!
The humiliation of the flesh of this man!
This grave austere man will be wondered at.
How will those solemn looks appear to me,
And that severe face, that spoke chains and shackles?
Now I take him in the nicke, ere IN done with him,
He had better have stood between two panes of wainscot
And made his recantation in the market,
Than hear me conjure him.

And. He must pass this way,
To the only bed I have, he comes, stand close.

Bri. Well done, well done, give me my nightcap. So,
Quick, quick, untrusse me; I will trusse and trounce thee;
Come Wench a kiss between each point; kiss close;
It is a sweet Parenthesis.

Lil. You Are merry Sir.

Bri. Merry I will be anon, and thou shall feel it,
Thou shall my Lilly

Lil. Shall I air your bed, Sir?

Bri. No, no, I Will use no warming pan but thine, Girl;
That Is all; Come kiss me again.

Lil. Have ye done yet?

Bri. No, but I will do, and do wonders, Lilly.
Show me the way.

Lil. You cannot miss it, Sir;
You shall have a Cawdle in the morning, for
Your worships breakfast.

Bri. How, in the morning Lilly?
Thou Art such a witty thing to draw me on.
Leave fooling, Lilly, I am hungry now,
And thou have another K^ckshaw, I must taste it.

Lil. Twill make you surfeit, I am tender of you,
You Have all you are like to have.

And. Can this be earnest?

Mir. It seems so and she honest.

Bri. Have I not
Thy promise Lilly?

Lil. Yes, and I have performed
Enough to a man of your years, this is truth,
And you shall find Sir, you have kissed and tows'd me,
Handled my leg and foot, what would you more, Sir?
As for the rest, it requires youth and strength,
And th'labour in an old man would breed Agues,
Sciaticaes, and Cramps; you shall not curse me,
For taking from you what you cannot spare, Sir:
Be good unto your self, you have taken already
All you can take with ease; you are past threshing,
It is a work too boisterous for you, leave
Such drudgery to Andrew.

Mir. How she jeeres him?
Lil Let Andrew alone with his own tillage,
He Is tough, and can manure it.

Bri. You Are a queen,
A scoffing jeering queen.

Lil. It may be so, but
I Am sure, I Will nere be yours.

Bri. Do not provoke me,
If thou do, I Will have my Farm again, and turn
Thee out a begging.

Lil. Though you have the will,
And want of honesty to deny your Deed, Sir,
Yet I hope Andrew has got so much learning
From my young Master, as to keep his own;
At the worst, I Will tell a short tale to the Judges,
For what grave ends you signed your Lease, and on
What terms you would revoke it.

Bri. Whore, thou dare not.
Yield or I Will have thee whipped; How my blood boiles,
As if 'twere ore a furnace!

Mir. I shall cool it.

Bri. Yet gentle Lilly, pity and forgive me,
I Will be a friend to ye, such a loving bountiful friend --

Lil. To avoid suites in Law, I would grant a little,
But should fierce Andrew know it, what would become
Of me? And. A whore, a whore.

Bri. Nothing but well, Wench,
I will put such a strong bit in his mouth
As thou shall ride him how thou will, my Lilly:
Nay, he shall hold the door, as I will work him,
And thank thee for the Office.

Mir. Take heed Andrew,
These are shrewd temptations.

And. Pray you know
Your Cue, and second me Sir; By your Worships favor.

Bri. Andrew! And. I come in time to take possession
Of the office you assign me; hold the door,
Alas it is nothing for a simple man
To stay without when a deep understanding
Holds conference within, say with his wife a
A trifle Sir, I know I hold my farm.
In Cuckolds Tenure; you are Lord of the soil Sir,
Lilly is a West, a Stray, she is yours, to use Sir,
I claim no interest in her.

Bri. Art thou serious?
Speak honest Andrew since thou have ore heard us,
And wink at small faults, man; I Am but a pidler,
A little will serve my turn, thou wilt find enough
When I Have my belly full; will thou be private
And silent?

And. By all means, I Will only have
A Ballad made often, sung to some lewd Tune,
And the name of it shall be Justice Trap,
It will s^ll rarely with your Worships name,
And Lillies on the top.

Bri. Seek not the ruin
Of My reputation, Andrew.

And. It Is for your credit,
Monsieur Brisac printed in capital letters,
Then pasted upon all the posts in Paris.

Bri. No mercy, Andrew?

And. O, it will proclaim you
From the City to the Court, and prove sport royal.

Bri. Thou shall keep thy Farm.

Mir. He does afflict him rarely.

And. You trouble me. Then his intent arriving,
The vizard of his hypocrisy pulled off
To the Judge criminal.

Bri. O, I am undone.

And. He Is put out of Commission with disgrace,
And held incapable of bearing Office
Ever hereafter. This is my revenge,
And this I Will put in practice.

Bri. Do but hear me.

And. To bring me back from my Grammar to my Horne-booke,
It is unpardonable.

Bri. Do not play the Tyrant;
Accept of composition.

Lil. Hear him, Andrew.

And. What composition?

Bri. I Will confirm thy farm,
And add unto't an hundred acres more
Adjoining to it.

And. Umb, This mollifies,
But you are so fickle, and will again deny this,
There being no witness by.

Bri. Call any witness,
I Will presently assure it.

And. Say you so,
Troth there is a friend of mine Sir, within hearing,
That is familiar with all that is past,
His testimony will be authentical.

Bri. Will he be secret?

And. You may tie his tongue up,
As you would do your purse-strings.

Br. Miramont.

M. Ha, ha, ha.

And. This is my witness. Lord how you are troubled?
Sure, you have an ague, you shake so with choler;
He Is your loving brother Sir, and will tell no body
But all he meets, that you have eat a snake,
And are grown young, game some, and rampant.

Bri. Caught thus?

And. If he were one that would make jests of you,
Or plague ye with making your religious gravity
Ridiculous to your neighbors, Then you had
Some cause to be perplexed.

Bri. I shall become
Discourse for Clownes and Tapsters.

And. Quick, Lilly, quick.
He Is now past kissing, between point and point.
He swounds, fetch him some Cordial -- Now put in Sir.

Mir. Who may this be? sure this is some mistake:
Let me see his face, wears he not a false beard?
It cannot be Brisac that worthy Gentleman,
The pillar and the patron of his Country;
He is too prudent and too cautelous,
Experience has taught him to avoid these fooleries,
He is the punisher and not the doer,
Besides he is old and cold, unfit for women;
This is some Counterfeit, he shall be whipped for it,
Some base abuser of my worthy brother.

Bri. Open the doors, will y' imprison me? are ye my Judges?

Mir. The man raveal This is not judicious Brisac:
Yet now I think on it, a'has a kind of dog look
Like my brother, a guilty hanging face.

Bri. I Will suffer bravely, do your worst, do, do.

Mir. Why, it is manly in you.

Bri. Nor will I rail nor curse,
You slave, you whore, I will not meddle with you,
But all the torment that ere fell on men,
That fed on mischief, fall heavily on you all.
Exit.
Lil. You have given him a heat, Sir.

Mir. He will ride you
The better,

Lilly. And. We Will teach him to meddle with Scholars.

Mir. He shall make good his promise t'encrease thy Farm, Andrew,
Or I Will jeere him to death, fear nothing Lilly,
I am thy Champion. This jest goes to Charles,
And then I Will hunt him out, and Monsieur Eustace
The gallant Courtier, and laugh heartily
To see'em mourn together.

And. Twill be rare Sir.

Exeunt. Actus 5. Scoena 1.
EUSTACE, EGREMONT, COVVSY. Turned out of doors and baffled!

Egre. We share with you
In the affront.

Cow. Yet bear it not like you
With such dejection.

Eust. My Coach and horses made
The ransom of our cowardice.

Cow. Pish, that is nothing,
It Is Damnum reparabile, and soon recovered.

Egre. It is but feeding a suitor with false hopes,
And after squeeze him with a dozen of oaths.
You are new rigged, and this no more remembered.

Eust. And does the Court that should be the example
And Oracle of the Kingdom, read to us
No other doctrine.

Egre. None that thrives so well
As that, within my knowledge.

Cow. Flattery rubbes out,
But since great men learn to admire themselves,
It Is something crest-falne.

Egre. To be of no Religion,
Argues a subtle moral understanding,
And it is often cherisht.

Eust. Piety then,
And valor, nor to do nor suffer wrong,
Are there no virtues.

Egre. Rather vices, Eustace;
Fighting! What Is fighting? It may be in fashion,
Among Provant swords, and buffe-jerkin men:
But w'us that swim in choice of silks and Tissues;
Though in defense of that word reputation,
Which is indeed a kind of glorious nothing,
To lose a dram of blood must needs appear
As coarse as to be honest.

Eust. And all this
You seriously believe.

Cow. It is a faith,
That we will die in, since from the black guard
To the grimme Sir in office, there are few
Hold other Tenets.

Eust. Now my eyes are open,
And I behold a strong necessity
That keeps me knave and coward.

Cow. You Are the wiser.

Eust. Nor can I change my Copy, if I purpose
To be of your society.

Egre. By no means.
Eust. Honor is nothing with you?

Cow. A mere bubble,
For what is grown common is no more regarded.

Eust. My sword forced from me too, and still detein'd,
You thinke's no blemish.

Egre. Get me a battoone,
It Is twenty times more courtlike, and less trouble.

Eust. And yet you wear a sword.

Cow. Yes, and a good one,
A Millan hilt, and a Damasco blade,
For ornament, no use the Court allows it.

Eust. Will It not fight of it self?

Cow. I nere tried this,
Yet I have worn as fair as any man,
I Am sure I Have made my Cutler rich, and paid
For several weapons, Turkish and Toledo's,
Two thousand Crowns, and yet could never light
Upon a fighting one.

Eust. I Will borrow this,
I like it well.

Cow. It Is at your service Sir,
A lath in a velvet scabberd will serve my turn.

Eust. And now I have it, leave me, you are infectious,
The plague and leprosy of your baseness spreading
On all that do come near you, such as you
Render the Throne of Majesty, the Court
Suspected and contemptible, you are Scarabee's
That batten in her dung, and have no pallats
To taste her curious viands, and like Owls
Can only see her night deformities,
But with the glorious splendour of her beauties
You are struck blind as Moles, that undermine
The sumptuous building that allowed you shelter,
You stick like running ulcers on her face,
And taint the pureness of her native candor,
And being bad servants cause your masters goodness
To be disputed of; make you the Court
That is the abstract of all Academies,
To teach and practice noble undertakings
(Where courage sits triumphant crowned with Laurel,
And wisdom loaded with the weight of honor)
A School of vices.

Egre. What sudden rapture's this?

Eust. A heavenly one that raising me from sloth and ignorance,
(In which your coversation long has charmed me)
Carries me up into the air of action,
And knowledge of my self; even now I feel
But pleading only in the Courts-defence,
(Though far short of her merits and bright luster)
A happy alteration, and full strength
To stand her Champion against all the world,
That throw aspersions on her.

Cow. Sure he will beat us,
I see it in his eyes.

Egre. A second Charles;
Pray look not Sir so furiously.

Eust. Recant
What you have said, ye Mungrils, and lick up
The vomit you have cast upon the Court,
Where you unworthily have had warmth and breeding,
And swear that you like Spiders, have made poison
Of that which was a saving antidote.

Egre. We will swear any thing.

Cow. We honor the Court
As a most sacred place.

Egre. And will make oath,
If you enjoyne us to it, nor knave, nor fool,
Nor Coward living in it.

Eust. Except you two,
You Rascals!

Cow. Yes, we are all these, and more,
If you will have it so.

Eust. And that until
You are again reformed and grown new men,
You nere presume to name the Court, or press
Into the Porters Lodge but for a penance,
To be disciplined for your roguery, and this done
With true contrition.

Both. Yes Sir.

Eust. You again,
May eat scraps and be thankful.

Cow. Here Is a cold breakfast
After a sharp nights walking.

Eust. Keep your oaths,
And without grumbling vanish.

Both. We are gone, Sir.

Exeunt. Eust. May all the poorness of my spirit go with you,
The fetters of my thraldom are filled off:
And I at liberty to right my self,
And though my hope in Angellina's little,
My honor (unto which compared she is nothing)
Shall like the Sun disperse those lowering Clouds,
That yet obscure and dim it; not the name
Of brother shall divert me, but from him,
That in the worlds opinion ruined me,
I will seek reparation, and call him
Unto a strict account. Ha! it is near day,
And if the Muses friend rose-cheek'd Aurora,
Invite him to this solitary grove,
As I much hope she will, he seldom missing
To pay his vows here to her, I shall hazard
To hinder his devotions -- The door opens. --
Enter Charles. It Is he most certain, and by's side my sword,
Blessed opportunity.

Cha. I have oreslept my self,
And lost part of the morn, but I Will recover it:
Before I went to bed, I wrote some notes
Within my Table-booke, which I will now consider.
Ha! What means this? What do I with a sword?
Learned Mercury needs not the aid of Mars, and innocence
Is to it self a guard, yet since arms ever
Protect arts, I may justly wear and use it,
For since 't was made my prize, I know not how
I Am grown in love with it, and cannot eat nor study,
And much less walk without it: but I trifle,
Matters of more weight ask my judgment.

Eust. Now Sir,
Treat of no other Theme, I Will keep you to it,
And see y'expound it well.

Cha. Eustace!

Eust. The same Sir,
Your younger brother, who as duty binds him,
Has all this night (turned out of doors) attended,
To bid good morrow to ye.

Cha. This not in scorn,
Commands me to return it, Would you ought else?

Eust. O much, Sir, here I end not, but begin;
I must speak to you in another strain,
Than yet I ever used, and if the language
Appear in the delivery rough and harsh,
You (being my Tutor) must condemn your self,
From whom I learned it.

Cha. When I understand
(Be It in what style you please) what is your demand,
I shall endeavor in the self same phrase
To make an answer to the point.

Eust. I come not
To lay claim to your birthright, it is your own,
And it is fit you enjoy it, nor ask I from you
Your learning and deep knowledge; (though I am not
A Scholar as you are) I know them Diamonds
By your sole industry, patience and labor
Forced from steep rocks and with much toil attended,
And but to few, that prize their value granted,
And therefore without rival freely wear them.

Cha. These not repined at (as you seem t'enforme me)
The motion must be of a strange condition,
If I refuse to yield to it, therefore Eustace,
Without this tempest in your looks propound it,
And fear not a denial.

Eust. I require then,
(As from an enemy and not a brother)
The reputation of a man, the honor,
Not by a fair war won when I was waking,
But in my sleep of folly ravished from me,
With these, the restitution of my sword,
With large acknowledgement of satisfaction,
My Coach, my Horses, I will part with life,
Ere lose one hair of them, and what concludes all,
My Mistress Angellina, as she was
Before the musical Magic of thy tongue
Enchanted and seduced her. These performed,
And with submission, and done publicly
At my Fathers and my Uncles intercession,
(That I put in too) I perhaps may listen
To terms of reconcilement; but if these
In every circumstance are not subscribed to,
To the last gasp I defy thee.

Cha. These are strict
Conditions to a brother.

Eust. My rest is up,
Nor will I give less.

Cha. I Am no Gamester, Eustace,
Yet I can guess your resolution stands
To win or lose all; I rejoice to find ye
Thus tender of your honor, and that at length
You understand what a wretched thing you were,
How deeply wounded by your self, and made
Almost incureable, in your own hopes
The dead flesh of pale cowardice growing over
Your festred reputation, which no balm
Or gentle unguent ever could make way to,
And I am happy, that I was the Surgeon,
That did apply those burning corrosives
That render you already sensible
O the danger you were plunged in, teaching you,
And by a fair gradation, how far
And with what curious respect and care
The peace and credit of a man within,
(Which you were thought till now) should be preferred
Before a gaudy outside, pray you fix here,
For so far I go with you.

Eust. This discourse
Is from the subject.

Cha. I Will come to it brother,
But if you think to build upon my ruins,
You Will find a false foundation, your high offers
Taught by the masters of dependancies,
That by compounding differences 'tweene others
Supply their own necessities, with me
Will never carry 't; As you are my brother,
I would dispense a little, but no more
Than honor can give way to; nor must I
Destroy that in my self I love in you,
And therefore let not hopes nor threats persuade you,
I will descend to any composition,
For which I may be censured.

Eust. You shall fight then.

Cha. With much unwillingnesse with you, but if
There Is no evasion --

Eust. None.

Cha. Hear yet a word,
As for the sword and other fripperies,
In a fair way send for them, you shall have 'em,
But rather than surrender Angellina,
Or hear it again mentioned, I oppose
My breast unto loud thunder, cast behind me
All ties of Nature.

Eust. She detein'd, I Am deaf
To all persuasion.

Cha. Guard thy self then Eustace,
I use no other Rhetoric.

Enter Miram. Mir. Clashing of swords
So near my house? brother opposed to brother!
Here is no fencing at halfe-sword, hold, hold,
Charles, Eustace.

Eust. Second him, or call in more help,
Come not between us, I Will not know nor spare you;
Do You fight by the book?

Cha. It Is you that wrong me, off Sir,
And suddenly I Will conjure down the spirit
That I have raised in him.

Eust. Never Charles,
Till thine, and in thy death, be doubled in me.

Mir. I Am out of breath, yet trust not too much to it boys,
For if you pawse not suddenly, and hear reason.
Do, kill your Uncle, do, but that I Am patient,
And not a choleric old teasty fool,
Like your father, I Would dance a matachin with you,
Should make you sweat your best blood for it, I would,
And it may be I will, Charles I command thee,
And Eustace I entreat thee, thou art a brave Spark,
A true tough metal'd blade, and I begin
To love thee heartily, give me a fighting Courtier,
I Will cherish him for example; in our age
They Are not borne every day.

Cha. You of late Sir,
In me loved learning.

Mir. True, but take me w'ye, Charles,
It Was when young Eustace wore his heart in's breeches,
And fought his battles in Complements and Cringes,
When Is understanding waved in a flaunting feather,
And his best contemplation looked no further
Than a new fashioned doublet, I confess then
The lofty noise your Greek made only pleased me,
But now he is turned an Oliver and a Rowland,
Nay the whole dozen of peers are bound up in him;
Let me remember, when I was of his years
I did look very like him, and did you see
My picture as I was then, you would swear
That gallant Eustace, (I mean, now he dares fight)
Was the true substance and the perfect figure.
Nay, nay, no anger, you shall have enough Charles.

Cha. Sure Sir, I shall not need addition from him.

Eust. Nor I from any, this shall decide my interest,
Though I am lost to all deserving men,
To all that men call good, for suffering tamely
Insufferable wrongs, and justly slighted,
By yielding to a minute of delay
In my revenge, and from that made a stranger
Unto my fathers house and favor, one wholm'd
With all disgraces, yet I will mount upward,
And force my self a fortune, though my birth
And breeding do deny it.

Cha. Seek not Eustace,
By violence what will be offered to you,
On easier composition; though I was not
Allied unto your weakness, you shall find me
A brother to your bravery of spirit,
And one that not compelled to it by your sword,
(Which I must never fear) will share with you,
In all but Angellina.

Mir. Nobly said Charles,
And learn from my experience, you may hear reason
And never maime your fighting; for your credit
Which you think you have lost, spare Charles and swinge me,
And soundly; three or four walking velvet cloakes.
That wear no swords to guard 'em, yet deserve it,
Thou art made up again.

Eust. All this is lip-salve.

Mir. It shall be Hearts-ease, Eustace, ere I Have done;
As for thy fathers anger, now thou dare fight,
Nere feare't, for I Have the dowcets of his gravity
Fast in a string, and will so pinch and wring him,
That spite of his authority, thou shall make
Thine own conditions with him.

Eust. I Will take leave
A little to consider.

Cha. Here comes Andrew.

Mir. But without his Comicall and learned face,
What sad disaster, Andrew?

And. You may read Sir,
A Tragedy in my face.

Mir. Art thou in earnest?

And. Yes, by my life Sir, and if now you help not,
And speedily by force or by persuasion,
My good old Master (for now I pity him) is
Ruined for ever.

Cha. Ha, my father!

And. He Sir.

Mir. By what means? speak.

And. At the suite of Monsieur Lewis,
His house is seized upon, and he in person
Is under guard, (I saw it with these eyes Sir)
To be conveyed to Paris, and there sentenced.

Mir. Nay, then there is no jesting.

Cha. Do I live,
And know my father injured?

And. And what is worse Sir,
My Lady Angellina --

Eust. What of her?

And. She Is carried away too.

Mir. How?

And. While you were absent,
A crew of Monsieur Lewis friends and kinsmen
By force brake in at the back part of the house
And took her away by violence, faithful Andrew,
(As this can witness for him) did his best,
In her defense, but 't would not do.

Mir. Away,
And see our horses sadled, it is no time
To talk, but do: Eustace, you now are offered
A spacious field, and in a pious war
To exercise you valor, here is a cause,
And such a one, in which to fall is honorable,
Your duty and reverence due to a fathers name
Commanding it; but these unnatural jarres
Arising between brothers (should you prosper)
Would shame your victory.

Eust. I would do much Sir,
But still my reputation!

Mir. Charles shall give you
All decent satisfaction; nay, join hands,
And heartily; why this is done like brothers;
And old as I am, in this cause that concerns
The honor of our family, Monsieur Lewis
(If reason cannot work) shall find and feel
There Is hot blood in this arm, I Will lead you bravely.

Eust. And if I follow not, a Cowards name
Be branded on my forehead.

Cha. This spirit makes you
A sharer in my fortunes.

Mir. And in mine,
Of which ( Brisac once freed, and Angellina
Again in our possession) you shall know
My heart speaks in my tongue.

Eust. I dare not doubt it, Sir.

Exeu^^ Actus V. Scoena II.
Enter LEWIS, BRISAC, ANGELLINA, SYLVIA, Officers. Lew. I Am deaf to all
persuasion.

Bri. I use none,
Nor doubt I, though a while my innocence suffers,
But when the King shall understand how falsely
Your malice has informed him, he in justice
Must set me right again.

Ang. Sir, let not passion
So far transport you as to think in reason,
This violent course repaires, but ruins it;
That honor you would build up you destroy;
What you would seem to nourish, if respect
Of my preferment or my reputation
May challenge your paternall love and care,
Why do you, now good fortune has provided
A better husband for me than your hopes
Could ever fancy, strive to rob me of him?
In what is my Lord Charles defective, Sir?
Unless deep learning be a blemish in him,
Or well proportioned limbs be mulcts in Nature,
Or what you only aimed at large revenewes,
Are on the sudden grown distasteful to you?
Of what can you accuse him?

Lew. Of a rape
Done to honor, which thy ravenous lust
Made thee consent to.

Syl. Her lust! you are her father.

Lew. And you her Bawd.

Syl. Were you ten Lords, it is false,
The pureness of her chaste thoughts entertain not
Such spotted instruments.

Ang. As I have a soul Sir.

Lew. I am not to be altered, to sit down
With this disgrace would argue me a Peasant,
And not borne noble: all rigor that the Law
And that increase of power by favor yields,
Shall be with all severity inflicted;
You have the Kings hand for it; no Bail will serve,
And therefore at your perils Officers, away with 'em.

Bri. This is madness.

Lew. Tell me so in open Court,
And there I Will answer you.

Enter Mir. Char. Eust. Andrew. Mir. Well overtaken.

Cha. Ill if they dare resist.

Eust. He that advances
But one step forward dies.

L. Show the Kings Writ.

Mir. Show your discretion, 'twill become you better.

Cha. You Are once more in my power, and if again
I part with you, let me for ever lose thee.

Eust. Force will not do it nor threats, accept this service
From your despaired of Eustace.

And. And beware
Your reverend Worship never more attempt
To search my Lilly-pot, you see what follows.

Lew. Is the Kings power contemned?

Mir. No, but the torrent
O'your wilful folly stopped. And for you, good Sir,
If you would but be sensible, what can you wish
But the satisfaction of an obstinate will,
That is not indear'd to you? rather than
Be crossed in what you purposed, you will undo
Your daughters fame, the credit of your judgment,
And your old foolish neighbor; make your states,
And in a suite not worth a Cardecue,
A prey to Advocates, and their buckram Scribes,
And after they have plumed ye, return home
Like a couple of naked Fowls without a feather.

Cha. This is a most strong truth Sir.

Mir. No, no, Monsieur,
Let us be right Frenchmen, violent to charge,
But when our follies are repelled by reason,
It Is fit that we retreat and nere come on more:
Observe my learned Charles, he will get thee a Nephew
On Angellina shall dispute in her belly,
And suck the Nurse by Logic: and here is Eustace,
He was an Ass, but now is grown an Amadis;
Nor shall he want a Wife, if all my land
For a jointure can effect it: You Are a good Lord,
And of a gentle nature, in your looks
I see a kind consent, and it shows lovely;
And do you hear old Fool? but I Will not chide,
Hereafter like me, ever doat on learning,
The mere belief is excellent, 'twill save you;
And next love valor though you dare not fight
Your self, or fright a foolish Officer, young Eustace
Can do it to a hair. And to conclude,
Let Andrew's Farm b'encreas'd, that is your penance,
You know for what, and see you rut no more,
You understand me, So embrace on all sides.
I Will pay those Billmen, and make large amends;
Provided we preserve you still our friends.

-- Exeunt. Epilogue.
It Is not the hands, or smiles, or common way
of approbation to a well-lik'd Play,
We only hope; But that you freely would
To the Author's memory, so far unfold,
And show your loves and liking to his wit,
Not in your praise, but often seeing it;
That being the grand assurance that can give
The Poet and the Player means to live.
FINIS.

